The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Automated Generation of Schematic Network
Maps Adaptive to Display Sizes

Peng Ti, Zhilin Li & Zhu Xu

To cite this article: Peng Ti, Zhilin Li & Zhu Xu (2015) Automated Generation of Schematic
Network Maps Adaptive to Display Sizes, The Cartographic Journal, 52:2, 168-176

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1119464

Published online: 27 Nov 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1

View related articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [Central Michigan University]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 13:32

Vol. 52 No. 2
The Cartographic Journal
q The British Cartographic Society 2015

pp. 1

68

–17

6

International Cartographic Conference, Rio 2015 - Special Issue May 2015

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Automated Generation of Schematic Network Maps
Adaptive to Display Sizes

Peng Ti1,2,3, Zhilin Li3,4 and Zhu Xu1,2,3

1State-Province Joint Engineering Laboratory of Spatial Information Technology for High-speed Railway Safety,
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China; 2Collaborative Innovation Center for Rail Transport Safety,
Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China;
3Faculty of Geosciences and Environmental Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China;
4Department of Land Surveying and Geo-Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon,
Hong Kong, China
Email: peng_ti@hotmail.com

Schematic maps have been popularly used for the representation of metro (or underground) lines and nowadays have also been
used for the representation of other network maps. This paper presents a strategy for automated generation of schematic
network maps for different display sizes, based on a redistribution of line density. This strategy consists of three steps:
(a) estimation of spatial density of the network maps, (b) automated redistribution of line density in order to improve map
clarity, for different display sizes, and (c) automated generation of schematic representations. An experimental evaluation has
been carried out by using two sets of real-life network data. The results indicate that this strategy is able to generate schematic
maps with much improved clarity for different display sizes and well-preserved map recognition.

Keywords: schematic network map, adaptive, different display size

INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, transportation information is often represented
on portable devices (e.g. tablet PC and mobile phones) in
order to make people’s daily activities more convenient. One
type of such information is a map showing roads and/or
other transport networks. A schematic map is a type of map
widely used for the representation of Metro (or Under-
ground) lines, after the popularity of the London tube
map. Nowadays, schematic maps are also used for the
representation of other networks. To display schematic maps
on such devices, the major difﬁculty one faces is to keep high
clarity for the various small but different display sizes.
Hence,
it is of great interest to design some kind of
methodology for the automated generation of schematic
network maps with improved clarity, according to the given
display sizes.

Currently, a number of methods have been developed for
automated schematization. These methods follow basic
design principles, e.g. the preservation of topology while
modifying the shapes and orientations of
lines. These
methods can be divided into two types, according to the
basic unit used in the schematization process, i.e. segment-
based (Avelar and Mueller 2000, Cabello et al., 2005;

Ware et al., 2006; Anand et al., 2007) and stroke-based
(Li and Dong, 2010). The latter is able to produce higher
degree of simpliﬁcation so as to increase the clarity of the
schematized results.

All these methods are only suitable for a network with
relatively homogeneous line density. On the other hand, in
many cases, some areas on a map have higher line density
than other areas. Therefore, if clarity is of greater concern
than scaling, it is desirable to enlarge these dense areas.
Efforts have been made to improve map clarity through local
enlargement of congested areas (Ti and Li, 2014) or by
globally redistributing the line density to enlarge the dense
areas (Merrick and Gudmundsson, 2006; Noellenburg and
Wolff, 2011). However, no automated schematization
methods known to the authors have considered both display
sizes and enlargement of dense areas.

Such an approach has been considered in manual
products. Figure 1 shows two designs of Hong Kong
metro maps for different display formats. This study aims to
realize the automated production of such maps.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
A strategy for generation of display-format-adaptive
schematic network maps section proposes a strategy for

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1119464

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 Automated Generation of Schematic Network Maps

169

Figure 1. Two sets of Hong Kong metro maps, adaptive to display formats (mapa-metro.com/en/China/Hong%20-Kong/Hong%20-Kong-MTR-
map.htm)

the generation of display-format-adaptive schematic net-
work maps; Estimation of spatial density of network maps,
Line-density-based deformation and Automated generation
of schematic representation sections present the methodo-
logies and describe the implementation of the proposed
study; Experimental evaluations are
strategy in this
in
conducted in Experimental results section. Finally,
Conclusion section, some conclusions are given.

A STRATEGY FOR GENERATION OF DISPLAY-FORMAT-
ADAPTIVE SCHEMATIC NETWORK MAPS

The distributions of real-world data sets are often highly
non-uniform (Bak et al., 2009). To automatically realize the
designs of the Hong Kong metro map as shown in Figure 1,
the spatial density of lines is redistributed through shrinking
sparse (and empty) areas and dilating the dense areas in
order to achieve the clarity improvement, and the map area is
resized to ﬁt into the display format.

To achieve this, in this study, a strategy consisting of three

steps is proposed, i.e.

(1) estimation of spatial density of the network maps
(2) automated redistribution of line density in order to
improve map clarity for different display sizes, and

(3) automated generation of schematic representations.

These steps are described in more detail in the following
sections.

ESTIMATION OF SPATIAL DENSITY OF NETWORK MAPS

Some work (e.g. Merrick and Gudmundsson, 2006;
Frishman and Tal, 2009) has been done on the global
redistribution of line density to improve the map clarity.

However, these existing methods are based on vertices and
may be misleading the case where the lines are dense but the
number of vertices is not large. To overcome this problem,
in this study, the line density is used as a measure to describe
the density distribution.

For the estimation of line density, the use of a uniform grid is
a common approach due to its ease of implementation (Jansen
and Kreveld, 1998). The line density is deﬁned as the ratio of
the line lengths in a region to the area of the region

D ¼ L
A

ð1Þ

Where, A is an area; L is the total length of lines in the area
A and D represents the line density of the area.

However, the density estimation by a uniform grid is local
so that the spatial variation represented by the estimated
density values may be not smooth. In fact, a homogeneous
distribution density is needed in this study, as some small
sparse (and/or empty) places in dense areas cannot be
excessively compressed in order to preserve the map clarity
as much as possible. To solve this problem, this study adopts
a mean ﬁlter with the window size 3 £ 3, which can be
iteratively used until a smooth result can be obtained.

LINE-DENSITY-BASED DEFORMATION

This study aims to improve the map clarity by enlarging dense
areas and compressing sparse and empty areas on maps as well
as keeping the size of the resultant map the same as a given
display format. To achieve this, there are two ways. The ﬁrst
one consists of two steps: (1) simply scaling the original map
according to a give display format; (2) enlarging the dense
areas by deformation methods. The second way is to conduct
a density-based deformation, which can adaptively generate a
variable scale map for different display sizes.

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 170

The Cartographic Journal

For the ﬁrst way, ﬁsh-eye views have been often applied to
maps to represent the dense areas at larger scales. For the
implementation of the technique, focus points are pre-
deﬁned and the displacements of other points are
determined by a mapping function. A typical ﬁsh-eye view
technique is the polyfocal projection (Kadmon and Shlomi,
1978) which has the ease of implementation and has low
algorithm complexity. The formula for a single focal
projection is expressed as

0 ¼ x þ f ðRÞðx 2 x1Þ ¼ x þ Dx

x

0 ¼ y þ f ðRÞðy 2 y1Þ ¼ y þ Dy

y

Where (x, y) are the original coordinates of a point; (x 0, y 0)
are the transformed coordinates of the point; (x 1, y 1) are the
coordinates of a focus point; R is the distance from the point
to the focus point; Dx and Dy are the increments to x and y
coordinates; f(R) can be written as:

f ðRÞ ¼

A
1 þ CR 2

In equation (3), A and C are constants to control the
magniﬁcation degree and the rate of magniﬁcation change
with the distance R. The "magniﬁcation" effect of a grid (see
Figure 2a) is shown in Figure 2b. For multi-focus, there are
multi sets of Dx and Dy values and can be written as follows

0 ¼ x þ Dx1 þ Dx2 þ . . . þ Dxn ¼ x þ

x

Dxi

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

ð4Þ

0 ¼ y þ Dy1 þ Dy2 þ (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) þ Dy n ¼ y þ

y

Dy i

The magniﬁcation effect
Figure 2c.

for multi-focus is shown in

For the dense areas with different density values, the
enlargement degree should be not same. That is to say, the
denser areas should have larger magniﬁcation degrees than
the less dense areas. To achieve this by the polyfocal
it is necessary to carefully adjust the values
projection,
of A and C for each dense area in order to produce a
desirable result. However, this adjustment may be labour

Xn

i¼1

Xn

i¼1

and time consuming, especially for a large number of dense
areas on maps.

For the second way, as the transport in a city centre is
normally dense and the dense degree is reduced with an
increase in distance from the centre (Borchert, 1961),
a simply way is to shrink the non-centre areas as much as
possible when reducing the map size. A typical method is the
Bifocal display (Spence and Apperley, 1982), which is ease of
implementation and has high computation efﬁciency (see
Figure 3). However, for a part of a city map representing on
small displays, e.g. for personal navigation, there may be
several dense areas. Attention is thus shifted to a density-
based transformation, which can deal with the network maps
with more than one dense area.
cartogram
area
(e.g. Tobler, 1986; Gastner and Newman, 2004) is an
area-by-value deformation, i.e. accurately representing the
size of an area by its attribute value, and has the potential to
achieve the density-based deformation for the network maps
with multi-dense areas. However, in order to maintain the
map readability and clarity, small sparse areas between dense
areas cannot be excessively compressed while other sparse
and empty areas should be shrunk as much as possible. That
is to say, the desirable deformation expected to be obtained
in this study is not strict area-by-value. To achieve such
deformation, the deformation method of Li and Ti (2015) is
adopted in this study as follows:

The construction of

contiguous

(1) Grid deformation according to the density values of

grid cells, and

(2) map reconstruction according to the distorted grid.

For the ﬁrst step, an optimization method using convex
quadratic programming (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004) is
developed to automatically redistribute line density by a grid
deformation process. Each grid cell will be enlarged or
shrunk according to its density value while the grid cells with
low density values between dense areas cannot be excessively
compressed. The ﬁrst step is implemented as follows:
. The centre (or centroid) of each grid cell is selected as a
control point. Each control point is assigned a scale value,
which is determined according to the density value of its
grid cell.

Figure 2. Polyfocal projection, (a) original grid, (b) deformed grid with one focus, (c) deformed grid with multi focus

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 Automated Generation of Schematic Network Maps

171

Figure 3. Bifocal display (Leung et al., 1995)

. Then, adjacent control points to the given control point, in
the horizontal and vertical directions, are displaced relative
to the control point itself. In the deformation process,
the size of the deformed grid must ﬁt into a given
map frame.

In the second step, the interpolation technique is used for
the map reconstruction according to the deformed gird, as
the multiquadric interpolation is easy to implement and
usually yields pleasing and smooth results (Franke, 1982).
The multiquadric interpolation was ﬁrst used to the height
interpolation by scattered data on a contour map. In this
study, the interpolation is for the displacement of each
vertex on a network map, instead of height values. The
displacement of vertices can be achieved according to the
displacements of control points by the multiquadric
interpolation. The map reconstruction is implemented by
two steps:

(1) estimation of the parameters in the multiquadric
interpolation function according to the displacements of
control points (i.e. the centres of grid cells) obtained by
the location differences between the deformed and
original grids, and

(2) calculation of the displacements (to the new locations) of
vertices on the network maps according to these
parameters obtained by step (1).

AUTOMATED GENERATION OF SCHEMATIC
REPRESENTATION

As the stroke-based method (Li and Dong, 2010) is able to
produce a clearer
representation than segment-based
methods,
it is therefore adopted in this study. In the
method of Li and Dong (2010), the strokes are ﬁrst formed
from network segments and the shapes of the strokes are
then simpliﬁed in the generation of schematic network
maps. In fact, the schematic results based on strokes can
preserve the natural continuation at nodes so as to provide
better map cognition. In this study, it is implemented as
follows:

(1) The formation of strokes is according to the ‘good
continuation principle’ (see Figure 4) which has been
widely applied to the stroke formation in practice
(Thomson and Richardson, 1999).

(2) There are three possible schematization strategies
(see Figure 5) and the four primary directions strategy
shown in Figure 5c are adopted in this study in order to
achieve greater simplicity and clarity for schematic
resultant maps (Li and Dong, 2010).

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The Sydney metro rail network (see Figure 6) is used to
study. Two
evaluate the strategy proposed in this

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 172

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Formation of strokes based on the good continuation grouping principle (Li and Dong, 2010). (a) road network, (b) segments
concatenated into strokes

Figure 5. Three options for the schematization of strokes (Li and Dong, 2010). (a) Orientate and straighten strokes, (b) possible result 1: ﬁtted and
straightened, (c) possible result 2: with four primary directions, (d) possible result 3: eight primary

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 Automated Generation of Schematic Network Maps

173

Figure 6. Digitalized Sydney rail network

display formats have been considered. The deformed
grids for these two different display formats based on
line-density redistribution are shown in Figure 7a and d. The
corresponding resultant maps are shown in Figure 7b and e.
The corresponding simply-scaled results are shown in
Figure 7c and f.

Figure 8 shows the corresponding schematized results by
the stroke-based method (Li and Dong, 2010). Figure 8a

and c are the results produced by the strategy for the two
different formats. Figure 8b and d are the results produced
from simply-scaled networks.

A perceptual test has been conducted to examine the two
aspects, i.e. the improvement of map clarity and the ease of
recognition. The ﬁrst aspect is to check whether the method
proposed in this
study can improve map clarity by
comparing the resultant schematic maps with and without

Figure 7. Generation of variable scale and simply-scaled maps according to given output sizes. (a) Deformed grid of format 1, (b) deformed result 1
according to the deformed grid 1, (c) simply-scaled result, (d) deformed grid of format 2, (e) deformed result 2 according to the deformed grid 2,
(f ) simply-scaled result

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 174

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 8. Generation of schematic network maps according to given output sizes, (a) schematized result of deformed result 1, (b) schematized result
of simply-scaled result 1, (c) schematized result of deformed result 2, (d) schematized result of simply-scaled result 2

Table 1. The 5-grade marking system for the map clarity and cognition

Score

1

2

3

4

5

Clarity improvement
Recognition of the original shape

No improved
Very difﬁcult

A little improved
Difﬁcult

Improved
Normal

Much improved
Easy

Signiﬁcant improved
Very easy

consideration of the density redistribution. The second
aspect is to check whether it is easy to recognize the original
shape of the schematized result, which has been regarded as
a quality aspect of schematized results by Noellenburg and
Wolff (2011).

Forty participants (22 male and 18 female) were involved
in this test and were asked to give a score for the two aspects
according to a ﬁve-grade marking system (Table 1).
The results of the perceptual test are as follows:

. For the ﬁrst aspect, the average scores for the two pairs,
i.e. Figure 8a and b, Figure 8c and d, are 3.5 and 4.1,
respectively.

. For the second aspect, the average scores for Figure 8a

and c are, respectively, 4.3 and 4.1.

The results indicate that the improvement in map clarity for
the schematized results is quite obvious and a high similarity
with its original shape has been preserved.

To further validate the applicability of the method,
another data set, i.e. the rail network of Vienna, is used in
this study (see Figure 9a). The schematized results for
simply-scaled map and deformed mapping are, respectively,
shown in Figure 9b and c.

The results of the perceptual test are as follows:

. For the ﬁrst aspect, the average score for Figure 9b

. For the second aspect, the average score for Figure 9c is

and c is 4.8.

3.8.

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 Automated Generation of Schematic Network Maps

175

Figure 9. Generation of schematic network maps according to a given output size for Vienna rail network, (a) digitalized Vienna rail network,
(b) schematized result of simply-scaled result, (c) schematized result of deformed result

This again indicates that the result generated by the method
proposed in this study was well accepted.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

CONCLUSION

In this study, a strategy is proposed for the automated
generation of display-adaptive schematic network maps. It
consists of three steps, i.e. (a) to estimate the line density, (b) to
automatically conduct a line-density redistribution, (c) to
automatically generate a schematic representation of the
deformed network maps by a stroke-based approach (Li and
Dong, 2010).This new strategy has been tested with a real-life
dataset, the Sydney metro network. The results obtained by this
new strategy show improved clarity of the schematized results
and well-preserved map recognition. It may then be concluded
that this strategy is effective for the automated generation of
schematic network maps adaptive to the display format.

arising from the

The strategy proposed in this study can improve the
readability and clarity of schematized results. However,
larger distortions
scale
transformation may decrease the recognition of schematized
the reduction of distortions will be
results. Hence,
considered in future work. In addition, the display spaces
of other map symbols, e.g. the labels for rail stations and
landmarks, in schematized resultant maps is planned to be
considered in further research in order to improve the
practical applicability of schematized results.

variable

Peng Ti obtained his B.S.
degrees in Geodesy from
Wuhan University, China,
and M.Sc. in Surveying from
University of Applied Sciences
in Stuttgart, Germany, and
from the
Ph.D. degree
Department of Land Survey-
ing and Geo-Informatics of
the Hong Kong Polytechnic
University. He is now work-
ing at Southwest Jiaotong
University in China. His
research interest
includes
multi-scale, variable-scale and
represen-
schematization
tation of network maps.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This project
is supported by the Research Fund for
Nonproﬁt Industry of Surveying, Mapping and Geoinfor-
mation (Grant No. 201512028), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 41201475;
41471383),
the Program for New Century Excellent
Talents in University (Grant No. NCET-12-0942), the

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 176

The Cartographic Journal

Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research
Team in University (Grant No. IRT13092), the Funda-
mental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant
No. 2682015CX012).

REFERENCES

Anand, S., Avelar, S., Ware, J. M. and Jackson, M. (2007). ‘Automated
Schematic Map Production using Simulated Annealing and Gradient
in 15th Annual GIS Research UK
Descent Approaches’,
Conference, Dublin, Ireland (CD-Rom).

Avelar, S. and Mueller, M. (2000). ‘Generating Topologically Correct
Schematic Maps’, in 9th International Spatial Data Handling,
pp. 4a.28–35, Springer, Beijing, China.

Bak, P., Schaefer, M. A., Stoffel, A., Keim, D. A. and Omer, I. (2009).
‘Density equalizing distortion of
large geographic point sets’,
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 36,
pp. 237–250.

Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. (2004). Convex Optimization,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Cabello, S., de Berg, M. and Van Kreveld, M. (2005). ‘Schematization
of Networks’, Computational Geometry, 30/3, pp. 223– 238.
Franke, R. (1982). ‘Scattered data interpolation: test of some methods’,

Mathematics of Computation, 38, pp. 181–200.

Frishman, Y. and Tal, A. (2009). ‘Uncluttering graph layouts using
anisotropic diffusion and mass transport’, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15, pp. 777–788.

Gastner, M. T. and Newman, M. E. J. (2004). ‘Diffusion-based method
for producing density equalizing maps’, National Academy of
Science, 101, pp. 7499–7504.

Jansen, M. and van Kreveld, M. (1998). ‘Evaluating the Consistency of
Cartographic Generalization’, in 8th International Symposium on
Spatial Data Handling, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 668–678.

Kadmon, N. and Shlomi, E. (1978). ‘A Polyfocal Projection for
Statistical Surface’, The Cartographic Journal, 15/1, pp. 36– 41.
Leung, Y. K., Robert, S. and Mark, D. A. (1995). ‘Applying bifocal
displays to topological maps’, International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, 7/1, pp. 79– 98.

Li, Z. L. and Dong, W. H. (2010). ‘A stroke-based method for
automated generation of schematic network maps’, International
Information Science, 24/11,
Journal of Geographical
pp. 1631–1647.

Li, Z. L. and Ti, P. (2015). ‘Adaptive generation of variable-scale
network maps for small displays based on line density distribution’,
GeoInformatica, 19/2, pp. 277–295.

Merrick, D. and Gudmundsson, J. (2006). ‘Increasing the Readability
of Graph Drawings with Centrality-Based Scaling’, in Asia-Paciﬁc
Symposium Information Visualization, Japan, pp. 67– 76.

Noellenburg, M. and Wolff, A. (2011). ‘Drawing and labeling high-quality
metro maps by mixed-integer programming’, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17, pp. 626–641.

Spence, R. and Apperley, M. D. (1982). ‘Database navigation: An ofﬁce
environment for the professional’, Behaviour and Information
Technology, 1, pp. 43–54.

Ti, P. and Li, Z. L. (2014). ‘Generation of Schematic Network Maps
with Automated Detection and Enlargement of Congested Areas’,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
28/3, pp. 521–540.

Thomson, R. C. and Richardson, D. E. (1999).

‘The ‘Good
Continuity’ Principle of Perceptual Organization Applied to the
Generalization of Road Networks’, in 19th international carto-
graphic conference, pp. 1215–1225, ICA/ACI.

Tobler, W. (1986). ‘Pseudo-cartograms’, The American Cartographer,

13, pp. 43–50.

Ware, J. M., Anand, S., Taylor, G. E. and Thomas, N. (2006).
‘Automated production of schematic maps for mobile applications’,
Transactions in GIS, 10/1, pp. 25–42.

Downloaded by [Central Michigan University] at 13:32 07 December 2015 