GEOMATICS AND THE LAW

In Praise of Small Data: Survey Field Notes in Litigation

Dr. Brian Ballantyne
Surveyor General Branch, NRCan1
brian.ballantyne@nrcan.gc.ca

Introduction—
Shifting the Rhetoric

There  is  much  rhetoric  devoted  to
Big  Data.  According  to  pundits,  the
“growing  recognition  of  the  value  of
data  analytics  and  the  potential  for
exploiting ‘Big Data’ to drive business
innovation  is  particularly  relevant  in 
the geospatial market.”1 What of Small
Data?  Sadly,  there  is  little  attention
paid to Small Data, and in particular, to
the  value  of  survey  field  notes.  The
omission  is  all  the  more  glaring  given
that  field  notes  are—often—the  best
evidence  of  what  happened  on  the
ground  (i.e.,  what  was  observed  and
done at the time of the survey).

Determining what happened on the
ground  is  fundamental  to  ascertaining
the location and character of the bound-
ary  and  thus  the  spatial  extent  of  the
parcel.  Of  course,  it  goes  without  say-
ing  that  the  courts  have  long  praised 
the work on the ground:

• British Columbia: “It is a rule of law
… that where there is any doubt …
when  words  indicative  of  bound-
aries  are  used,  the  actual  work  on
the ground shall determine.”2

• New  Zealand:  “Neither  the  words
of a deed, nor the lines and figures
of a plan, can absolutely speak for

themselves.  They  must  in  some
way  or  other,  be  applied  to  the
ground.”3

To  forestall  accusations  of  over-
stating  the  importance  of  survey  field
notes,  there  have  been  some  40  deci-
sions  of  the  Canadian  courts  that  have
dealt  with  field  notes,  seven  alone 
since  2012.  Five  of  the  seven  were 
from  Ontario  and  used  field  notes  to
resolve  water  boundary  issues  that
arose  70  to  224  years  ago.  Two  of  the
seven were from British Columbia and
used  field  notes  to  resolve  rectilinear
boundary  issues  that  arose  60  to  120
years ago. What follows is a review of 
a few cases, selectively culled from the
mass  of  40  to  illustrate  that  they  are
used in litigation in four ways.4

Field Notes as
Pivotal

Field  notes  are  relied  upon  to 
illustrate  what  was  done  or  observed 
on the ground at the time. The court in
Ontario  granted  a  statutory  order  pro-
hibiting  the  defendant,  who  was  not  a
land  surveyor,  from  engaging  in  the
practice of cadastral surveying. He and
his  crews  used  “typical  survey  field
equipment  such  as  an  instrument,  a 

tripod, a shovel, a hammer and a device
to locate buried iron monuments.” The
field  notes  were  damning,  for  they
described lot lines and property bound-
aries:  “The  field  notes  indicate  that 
the … crew did much more than simply
locate  the  existing  iron  bars.”5
In
essence,  the  survey  work  was  “tanta-
mount to offering an opinion” as to the
boundary.

A  surveyor  in  Nova  Scotia  sub-
contracted  field  work  to  a  survey 
technician,  who  was  equipped  with 
“a  Leica  surveying  instrument  that 
he  had  ordered  from  Germany.”  The
technician  provided  field  notes  that
indicated  that  he  had  done  a  less  than
stellar  job.  To  wit,  the  ASCII  file
showed a driveway located partly across
the highway, some shed corners located
on the highway and other shed corners
labelled as topographical features. Such
faulty  field  notes  meant  that  the  sur-
veyor  was  not  required  to  pay  the 
technician for his services.6

A  surveyor  in  Ontario  was  sued 
on  the  basis  that  he  had  incorrectly 
surveyed house foundations, causing the
plaintiff  to  contravene  the  zoning  set-
back  requirements.  The  plaintiff  con-
structed  an  11 000  sq.  ft.  home  on  a
large  parcel;  indeed,  the  lot  was  of  a
“generous  size”  meaning  that  the  set-
backs  need  not  have  been  exceeded.
Field  notes  dated  August  1991  and

A New Perspective on the Value of Geospatial Information in Canada

1 HAL, 
2 Re: Ward and the Victoria Water Works
3 Equitable Building Supply v. Ross
, [1886] 5 NZLR 229 (NZSC).
4 The two culling criteria were: avoid cases that are discussed elsewhere; include cases with quirky facts.
5 AOLS v. Van Loon
6 K & B Survey Services v. Hunter Surveying Ltd.

, [2004] CanLII 8847 (ON CA), at para 17 and 30.

, [1874] 1 BCR 114, at 116 (BCSC).

(2014), at 12.

, [2007] NSSM 94, at para 5 and 13.

122 GEOMATICA                                                                                       dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2015-111

Vol. 69, No. 1, 2015

Geomatica Downloaded from pubs.cig-acsg.ca by CARLETON UNIV on 06/12/15For personal use only. March 1995 were pivotal in exonerating
the  surveyor  and  in  demonstrating  that
the home owner built contrary to staked
locations.  As  one  example,  the  field
notes  described  an  indoor  pool  with
dimensions  of  65.0  ft.  by  25.83  ft.  as
laid  out  on August  14,  1991;  and  with
dimensions  of  62.17  ft.  by  27.25  ft.  as
built  on  March  28,  1995.  The  Court 
thus  found  that  the  pool  that  was 
built  and  that  contravened  the  set-
back  requirement  did  not  conform  to
the dimensions that were staked out by 
the surveyor.7

Navigable watercourses in Ontario
vest  in  the  province,  and  thus  the 
nature of the watercourse (width, depth
and flow) at the time of parcel creation
is  critical  to  determining  ownership.
Title  to  a  small  watercourse  hinged  on
very  old  field  notes.  A  “small  creek”
having  a  width  of  12  links  (2.5  m) 
was  described  in  the  field  notes  of
Augustus  Jones  in  1791;  and  as  a
“brook”  in  the  field  notes  of  Samuel
Wilmot  in  1820.  Despite  the  narrow
width  and  the  absence  of  any  descrip-
tion in the field notes of depth or flow,
the  Court  concluded  that  the  water-
course was navigable.8

The final word in this section goes
to the Supreme Court of Canada, which
relied heavily upon field notes made in
1798  to  hold  that  no  road  allowances
had  been  established  on  the  eastern
boundary  of  the  township.  Some  106
years later, the SCC found that William
Fortune’s  field  notes  were  the  best
available  evidence;  that  they  reflected
the  absence  of  monuments  and  were
themselves  reflected  in  the  township
plan; and that they rebutted any presump-
tion “for  the  inference  that  there  was 
an intention upon the part of the Crown

to  establish  such  road  allowance.”  In
other words, the field notes trumped the
general instructions and the model plan
for similar surveys.9

the  land  differently  than  an  [Indian]
Reserve.”11

Field Notes as
Supportive

Field  notes  are  relied  upon  to
resolve  latent  ambiguities  in  the  plan 
or  description.  A  boundary  dispute  in
Nova  Scotia  hinged  on  the  location 
of a road, and on discrepancies among 
survey  plans  of  1915,  1989  and  2002. 
A  fourth  survey  plan  in  2003  showed
that the road as shown on the 1989 plan
was  plotted  south-east  of  its  actual 
location. However, the 1989 field notes
were  correct;  the  surveyor  had  located
the road well but there had been a draft-
ing  error  (i.e.,  in  transferring  the  field
notes to the plan). Thus, the Court held
that the 1989 plan location of the road
was  in  error  owing  to  the  evidence  of
the  1989  field  notes,  as  corroborated 
by the 2003 field notes.10

In  a  dispute  as  to  whether  a  First
Nations  Reserve  had  been  surveyed 
and confirmed in 1910, the field notes
were  somewhat  contradictory.  Reid 
was  instructed  to  survey  a  parcel  of
land with dimensions of 1/2 mi. frontage
by  1/4 mi.  depth,  but  his  two  sets  of 
field  notes  differed.  The  uncertified
copy  described  the  survey  posts  as
“IR,” meaning Indian Reserve; whereas
the  certified  copy  described  three  of 
the  four  survey  posts  as  “MR,”  mean-
ing Mission Reserve. The Court found
that  the  certified  field  notes  were
reflected  in  the  plan,  and  that  both 
were “indicative of an intention to treat

Field Notes as 
Revealing

Field notes are relied upon to reveal
the  character  and  diligence  of  the  sur-
veyor.  An  Ontario  dispute  over  how
much topsoil had been removed by the
defendant  from  the  plaintiff’s  parcel
hinged on the evidence of the surveyor.
Indeed, “the testimony, report and con-
clusions  of  the  surveyor  …  constitute
the fundamental linchpin” of the claim.
The Court held that “there were serious
shortcomings regarding this survey” and
that the field notes contained “numerous
calculation errors.” Thus, the field notes
revealed  much  about  the  “imprudent
practice”  of  the  surveyor  (e.g.,  the  dis-
crepancy  between  calculations  and
drawings  amounted  to  69 000  cu.  yds.
of topsoil).12

A  dispute  over  a  quarter-section
boundary  in  Saskatchewan  forced  the
Court  in  1910  to  examine  field  notes
from the 1870s. Unfortunately, the field
notes  were  rather  imaginative  in  that
they  reflected  neither  what  had  been
established  on  the  ground  nor  the
topography,  forcing  the  Court  to  con-
clude:  “I  must  say,  however,  I  place
very  little  confidence  in  Fafard’s  field
notes”  vis-à-vis  the  boundary  mound.
The  field  notes  described  an  incorrect
distance  north-south,  located  the  creek
“at utter variance with the true location
of  it”  and  showed  a  mound  where  no
mound had been established.13

7 Bishay v. Rabideau & Czerwinski Ontario Land Surveyors
8 O’Donnell v. Ontario (AG) and Obratoski v Ontario (AG)
9 Township of East Hawkesbury v. Township of Lochiel

, [2006] CanLII 42650 (ON SC), at para 54–56.
, [2013] ONSC 590, at para 17.

(1904), CanLII 2 (SCC), at 524. The inclusion of this case is a tribute to Erin,

who printed CanLII items.

10 Steffen v. Rhodenizer
11 Lac la Ronge Indian Band v. Canada
12 Arcand v. Gascon

, [2005] NSSC 42 (CanLII), at para 22 and 48.

, [2001] SKCA 109 (CanLII), at para 203 and 208.

, [2005] CanLII 34570 (ON SC), at 6.

Vol. 69, No. 1, 2015

GEOMATICA  123

Geomatica Downloaded from pubs.cig-acsg.ca by CARLETON UNIV on 06/12/15For personal use only. Field Notes as
Ambiguous:

Field  notes  are  sometimes  found 
to be irrelevant, because they are silent
as  to  the  issue  or  contrary  to  the  mass 
of  evidence.  As  to  being  silent:  in  a
beach ownership issue in Ontario, both
parties agreed that the field notes were
“inconclusive”  because  the  surveyor
did  not  traverse  the  shore  and  because
his survey was not used for the Crown
patent.14

As  to  being  contrary:  in  resolving 
a  fishing  dispute  (angling  without  a
licence) in Saskatchewan, the defendant
claimed  that  as  a  Métis  person  the
provincial  fisheries  legislation  was
inapplicable  to  him.  That  is,  his  right 

Constitution Act, 1982

to  fish  for  food  was  protected  by  s35 
. The Court
of the 
found,  however,  that  there  was  no 
Métis  settlement  at  the  lake  in  ques-
tion,  despite  DLS  field  notes  from 
1873  that  described  three  “Freeman’s
houses.”  The  rest  of  the  evidence 
was  to  the  contrary;  “various  sources 
argue  against  the  existence  of  a  Métis 
settlement ….”15

Conclusion—
The Languishing 
Ends Now

For  too  long  survey  field  notes, 
the  very  epitome  of  Small  Data,  have

to 

languished  in  the  shadow  of  Big  Data.
This  ends  now,  because  field  notes
often play a significant role in resolving
boundary  disputes  owing 
their
acceptance,  their  availability  and  their
comprehensiveness.  The  fundamental
reason  for  their  acceptance  is  the  pas-
sage  of  time;  they  answer  questions
about intention and action in the distant
past  whereas  the  dispute  typically
occurs  much  later.  Field  notes  are 
available  to  all  parties  (i.e.,  they  are 
not  privileged)  because  they  reveal
findings, opinions and conclusions that
are  relevant  to  the  material  issue.16
Such  findings  are  expanding  beyond
mere boundary evidence to information
that is fundamental to many land tenure
issues.17 q

14 Lanty v. Ontario (MNR)
15 Queen v. Langan
16 Award Developments v. Novoco Enterprises
17 Queen v. Jacobs et al, 1998 CanLII 3988 (BC SC), para 83; in which Wilson Duff’s field notes reveal that the Sto:lo people smoked

, [2006] CanLII 1452 (ON SC), at para 29.

, [1992] CanLII 7587 (ON SC).

, [2011] SKPC 125, at para 11.

tobacco mixed with Kinnikinnik or Hemlock.

UNB Engineering Design Project Symposium

UNB GGE News, University of New Brunswick—On 8 April, 24 2015, undergraduate students from the Department
of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering presented their projects in the UNB Engineering Design Symposium held at the
Fredericton Convention Centre. This is the inaugural year for the symposium, which is planned to be an annual event on
UNB’s calendar.

The purpose of the symposium is to showcase the designs of final-year engineering students in all of the disciplinary
capstone design courses throughout the Faculty of Engineering. The symposium featured a broad range of topics that span
the disciplines of chemical, civil, electrical and computer, geological, geomatics, mechanical, and software engineering.

The GGE projects covered a variety of geomatics engineering technologies such as unmanned aerial vehicles, global

navigation satellite systems, graph databases, social media, precise point positioning, and laser scanners.

A competition sponsored by the Canadian Institute of Geomatics was part of the GGE activity at the symposium. Three
prizes  were  awarded  for  the  best  presentations.  The  CIG  judging  panel  included  Jody  Blakely,  Sarah  O'Rourke,  Rémy
Regal, and Mike Wolfe. 

The $1,000 first prize, sponsored by CIG, went to Mike Bremner for his work on developing a mobile least-squares
adjustment  application  for  the Android  operating  system.  The  $700  second  prize,  sponsored  by  Midwest  Surveys,  was
awarded to Lukas Fraser for a project on mine modelling using hyperspectral imagery. And the $500 third prize, sponsored
by McElhanney, was given to Tianyu Liu for an analysis of GSM mobile phone data in conjunction with Twitter data for
understanding social behaviour in Senegal.

The program listing all of the presented GGE projects can be found at 

The abstracts of each of the presentations are also available at 

http://www2.unb.ca/gge/News/2015/STC/Program.pdf
.

http://www2.unb.ca/gge/News/2015/STC/Abstracts.pdf

.

The symposium was a great opportunity for the public, engineering alumni and future employers to see the design

capabilities of the senior engineering students and the potential that culminates four years of study at UNB.

Dept. of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering, University of NewBrunswick, 
is a Sustaining Member of the Canadian Institute of Geomatics.

124 GEOMATICA

Vol. 69, No. 1, 2015

Geomatica Downloaded from pubs.cig-acsg.ca by CARLETON UNIV on 06/12/15For personal use only. 