The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 0 No. 0
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

pp. 1–13 Month 2014

O B S E R V A T I O N P A P E R

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated
Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

Eva Hauthal and Dirk Burghardt

Institute of Cartography, TU Dresden, Helmholzstr. 10, 01069 Dresden, Saxony, Germany
Email: eva.hauthal@tu-dresden.de

Current location based services mainly provide objective information and collections of facts. Subjective components such
as emotions and opinions can provide additional alternative information useful in decision making, e.g. in tourism,
business, entertainment and the like. Therefore research on effect analysis was carried out by capturing and analyzing
georeferenced emotions from user-generated content. An approach was developed for extracting location-based emotions
from the written language in the metadata of georeferenced Flickr and Panoramio photos,
i.e. from their titles,
descriptions and tags. Within this extraction approach various grammatical issues were considered, like negations of
words or amplifications. Procedures were developed for modifying the affected emotions, for example for inverting or
intensifying them. The approach was applied to the study area of Dresden, Germany. The obtained emotions were
documented in emotional maps of geospace as well as in valence-arousal-space originating from psychology.

Keywords: affect analysis, emotional cartography, user-generated content

INTRODUCTION

Our motivation for this research is for tourism purposes.
Looking at travel guides – whether as a book or as a mobile
they contain merely factual
application – reveals that
information, like the address of a sight, the opening hours,
entrance fees, etc. If the travel guide comes in the form of a
mobile application, possibly it adapts
to the spatial–
temporal situation of the user. Our idea is to add an
emotional component because emotions and space are
fundamentally connected:
locations have an atmosphere
which can evoke strong and diverse emotions in people
(Mody et al., 2009); places can be sensed as boring,
attractive, calming, scary or dangerous and the loss of a
place can be an emotional experience (Korpela, 2002). Due
to this we want to develop approaches for an emotional
travel guide. The emotional base data are extracted from the
written language in the metadata of georeferenced Flickr
and Panoramio photos considering grammatical special
cases within this written language, for instance, negations.
The photos have a title and tags, Flickr photos also have a
description, and they are tagged with longitude as well as
latitude. The extracted emotions combined with the
coordinates of a photo result in a georeferenced emotion.

RELATED WORK

There are several projects dealing with georeferenced emotions.
The main difference between them is the method of acquisition

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000094

of the spatial emotional data. This can be distinguished into
biometric measurements, empiric surveys and extraction from
user-generated content (UGC) (see Table 1).

Since this work extracts georeferenced emotions from
UGC, projects of the same type are introduced more in
detail in the following.

‘Beautiful picture of an ugly place’ is a project applying
sentiment analysis to Flickr photo comments for extracting
emotions related to the photo quality and emotions related
to the place where the photo was taken. Both are graded on a
positive–negative-scale (Kisilevich et al., 2010). Four places
in Poland (Krakow, Warsaw, Wisla and Auschwitz) and one
in Germany (Dachau) were chosen for testing purposes.
Using linguistic features, a lexicon of adjectives with opinion
strength has been built. The two concentration camp
memorials, Auschwitz and Dachau, have generally a more
negative sentiment in contrast to the popular tourist cities of
Warsaw and Krakow which have high positive sentiments.
The neutral place Wisla lies between these extremes.

The web application Twittermood (Ahn et al., 2009)
extracts emotional information from georeferenced Twitter
messages of the last 24 hours for the USA and visualizes
them in coarse resolution. Twittermood distinguishes over-
and below-average moods based on the emotional word list
ANEW (Abdalla and Weiser, 2011). In another approach,
the
Twittermood uses georeferenced Twitter data of
previous 3 years and analyzes the mood changes of US
citizens over the course of the day and the week (Mislove

2

The Cartographic Journal

Table 1. Related work on georeferenced emotions grouped by method of data acquisition

Biometric measurements

Empiric surveys

Extraction from UGC

BioMapping (Nold, 2009)
Ein emotionales Kiezportrait
(Ho¨ffken et al., 2008)
EmBaGIS (Bergner et al., 2011)

Map of World Happiness (White, 2006)
WiMo (Mody et al., 2009)
Mappiness (MacKerron and Mourato, 2013)
EmoMap (Klettner et al., 2014)
ECDESUP (Couillet, 2014)

Twittermood (Ahn et al., 2009; Mislove et al., 2010)
Beautiful picture of an ugly place
(Kisilevich et al., 2010)
Emography (Palme´r et al., 2011)
Tweetbeat (Long, 2012)

et al., 2010). Findings include the fact that people are
happier in the morning and on the weekend.

Emography also analyses georeferenced Tweets and
focuses on Ekman’s six basic feelings (happiness, sadness,
fear, anger, disgust and surprise). The detected emotions
are displayed the in the form of donut charts on a world
map. The Emography application is designed for large
multi-touch screens which enable the user to move the
charts to places where they want to know the current
emotions (Palme´r et al., 2011).

The Global Twitter Heartbeat Project – Tweetbeat for
short – processes georeferenced tweets regarding sentiment
in real-time (Long, 2012).

Not all projects of Table 1 present visualizations of their
spatial emotional data. The ones that do are classiﬁed by
method of cartographic representation (Bollmann et al.,
2001) in Table 2. Additionally Table 2 contains an example
for each representation method.

Since all projects recording biometric measurements in
combination with the GPS position of the probands are
capturing route-related values, the tracks are visualised in
Google Earth in the form of linear signatures. In some cases
the line signature has a third dimension for representing the
level of the measured emotional arousal. Multiple projects
make use of point diagrams, primarily in the form of pie charts
varying in size and/or colour, however Emography utilizes
donut charts. The isoline method was applied when point-
related values have been interpolated for visualizing georefer-
enced emotions
continuum. Choropleth mapp-
ing was used for indicating a certain level of happiness
or emotional arousal for a certain region, for instance countries
or states. As several emotional city maps were published within
the project BioMapping, various methods of cartographic
representation were applied. Several of those maps include
sketches and comments of the probands. Beside choropleth
mapping, Twittermood makes also use of cartograms.

as

a

In the case of choropleth mapping for states or countries, it
is questionable if emotions can be summarized for such small
scales since other projects show that emotions occur and vary
within larger scales. Nevertheless the visualization of point or
route related emotions does not reveal the reason for the
occurrence of the respective emotions, except for the city
maps of the project BioMapping. These contain comments of
probands explaining the surrounding and thus the emotions
sensed there which make these maps particularly interesting.
Mappers of georeferenced emotions are almost exclu-
sively researchers from various sciences: social scientists,
urban planners and developers, cartographers, geomedia
technologists, media designers, GI scientists, computer
scientists, mathematicians and statisticians, and also psy-
chologists. Tweetbeat was developed by a company for high

performance computing and BioMapping is a project of an
artist and designer cooperating with psycho-geographers,
cultural scientists, futurologists and neuroscientists.

EMOTIONS

The often-cited statement of Fehr and Russell (1984: 464)
‘Everyone knows what an emotion is, until asked to give a
deﬁnition’ appropriately represents the comprehensive result of
literature research for ﬁnding such a deﬁnition. The enormous
number of deﬁnitions might be an indication for the fact that
the occurrence of emotions is not completely resolved although
scientiﬁc emotion research has been conducted for more than
100 years. Most deﬁnitions have in common that emotions are
a subjective occurrence, i.e. an inner excitement that is more or
less consciously experienced as pleasant or unpleasant, and occur
with neurophysiologic processes (Kroeber-Riel et al., 2009).
Another important aspect of emotions is a high ego-involve-
ment of the individual (Jahr, 2000).

The overall emotional reaction of humans consists of

electrodermal3);

several partial reactions (Battacchi et al., 1996):
N physiological reactions (cardiovascular1, respiratory2,
N tonic posture reactions (tension and relaxation of body);
N instrumental motoric reactions;
N expressive motoric reactions (gestures, countenance,
N expressive linguistic reactions (syntactic and lexical
N subjective experience components (emotions as such,
referencing to the feeling that everybody experiences
during having emotions).

selection, stylistic varieties);

paralinguistic events);

Our research builds on the linguistic reactions.

For gathering emotional data, emotions need to be
structured. In psychology different approaches for structur-
ing emotions exist and can be distinguished into dimen-
sional and differential approaches (Schimmack, 1999).
Differential approaches emphasize the distinguishable sub-
jectively experienced qualities of emotions (Izard, 1977). In
these approaches, emotions are structured according to
complex similarities. These similarities can be deﬁned by the
spectrum of emotional qualities in fundamental emotions or
by statistical methods based on subjective appraisal (Mau,
2009). Dimensional approaches try to reduce affective
states to a few dimensions. Thus each emotion can be
described as a combination of different severities of those
dimensions. We are working with the model proposed by
Russell (1980) involving the two dimensions valence and
arousal which can be described as ranging from positive/

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

3

Table 2. Visualizations of related work classiﬁed by method of cartographic representation

Point-related

Point Diagram

BioMapping, ECDESUP, Emography, Twittermood

Sketches

BioMapping

image source: http://www.twittermood.org/

Line-related

Linear signature

BioMapping, EmBaGIS, Ein emotionales Kiezportrait

image source: Nold (2007)

Area-related

Isoline method

BioMapping, EmoMap, Tweetbeat

image source: Nold (2009)

Choropleth mapping

EmBaGIS, Map of World Happiness, Twittermood

image soucre: Klettner et al. (2013)

Cartogram

Twittermood

image source: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/
shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/28_07_06_happiness_map.pdf

image source: Mislove et al. (2010)

4

The Cartographic Journal

pleasing to negative/displeasing and from arousing/intense
to unarousing/numbing (see Figure 1).

With the help of these two dimensions it is not difﬁcult to
locate emotions within valence-arousal-space. For instance
joy is a very positive emotion with high arousal whereas
anger also has a high arousal but a negative valence.

Emotions in language
Users of photo platforms usually do not write in the
description of their pictures whether they like or do not like
a place. Extracting emotions from the written language in
those metadata works more in an indirect way, because
single words can have an emotional content. Hayakawa
(1952) and Salomon (1966) call this phenomenon ‘affec-
tive connotation’. Hayakawa (1952: 83) deﬁnes affective
connotation as ‘the aura of feelings, pleasant or unpleasant,
that surrounds practically all words’. Similarly Salomon
(1966), who deﬁnes affective connotation as the emotional
reaction that is triggered in a person by using a given word.
However Nida (1964, 1975) uses the term ‘emotive
meaning’ for the emotional reaction of the participants of
the communication. These affective connotations of words
are based on personal memories and experiences. That’s
why a person has different emotions while hearing or

Figure 1. Two-dimensional
(1980)

structure of emotions by Russell

Figure 2. Simpliﬁed ﬂowchart of algorithm for extracting emotions from metadata of Flickr and Panoramio photos

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

5

Figure 3. Modiﬁcation of valence and arousal values in the case of negation for the example ‘not happy’

reading the word ‘garden’ in comparison to the word
‘factory’. Of course, those affective connotations do also
inﬂuence the word choice – therefore words such as
‘amazing’ or ‘great’ are used for describing something very
good instead of merely ‘nice’ or ‘ﬁne’.

The word lists ANEW (Affective Norms for English
Words; Bradley and Lang, 2010) and BAWL-R (Berlin
Affective Word List Reloaded; Vo˜ et al., 2009) used for our
research contain words that are weighted with a valence and
an arousal value and thus reﬂect affective connotations.
ANEW covers 2476 English words, while BAWL-R contains
2901 German words. Due to the fact that both emotional
word lists use different value ranges for valence and arousal,
we transferred the values of ANEW into the value ranges of
BAWL-R which we wanted to retain. Since valence is a
positive–negative-scale, the values reach from 23 to z3.
Arousal has a certain intensity but it cannot be negative, so
the value range comprises the values 1 to 5 (Vo˜ et al., 2009).

EXTRACTING EMOTIONS FROM PHOTO METADATA

Approach
For extracting emotions from the metadata of Flickr and
is
Panoramio photos we developed an algorithm that

depicted in a simpliﬁed form in Figure 2. To each
component of the photo metadata – title, description and
tags – a sentence segmentation is applied and to each
sentence language detection – German or English – is
applied. The next step is a POS Tagging (Part of Speech
Tagging) of each word, i.e. it is determined if a word is an
adjective, a noun, a verb, etc. Subsequently all the words are
reduced to their baseform, a process called ‘lemmatization’.
For example nouns are reduced from plural to singular or
verbs are reduced to inﬁnitive. Then each lemmatized word is
looked up in ANEW or BAWL-R, depending on the
detected language. If the word was found, it is stored in a
database together with the valence and arousal values from
the emotional word list and with the longitude and latitude
of the photo associated with the word. If the word was not
found, a synonym (for adjectives and adverbs) or respectively
a hypernym (for nouns) is determined to increase the
the
in the emotional word lists. After
matches
hypernym/synonym is looked up again in ANEW or
BAWL-R. If it is not found, it is skipped; otherwise the
word is also stored in a database with the emotional values
and the coordinates.

that

The following Java libraries were used within the
algorithm: Language Detection Library,
JWNL (Java
WordNet Library), tt4j (Tree Tagger for Java), GermaNet
Java API and Stanford JavaNLP API as well as the REST
API of Xerox Linguistic Tools.

Table 3. Grammatical special cases considered within the algorithm for extracting

Maximum4

Amplification5

Attenuation6

Minimum7

Negation

Amplified negation

Example

Absolutely happy

Very happy

A bit happy

Hardly happy

Not happy

Not happy at all

Indicators

Superlative
(happiest), Degree
Words (absolutely,
completely, extremely,
totally,…)

Comparative
(happier), Degree
Words (highly,
pretty, really,
so, very,…)

Degree Words
(a bit, kind of,
merely, not
really, slightly,…)

Degree Words
(barely, hardly,
less, scarcely,…)

Prefixes (unhappy),
Degree Words
(never, none,
not, nothing,
without,…)

Degree Words
(absolutely not,
not at all, no way,
really not,…)

6

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Modiﬁcation of valence and arousal values for different grammatical special cases

Grammatical special cases
The algorithm described previously also considers several
grammatical special cases within the written language of
photo metadata, e.g. in a sentence containing the word
‘happy’ it is not enough to consider only this one word but
rather the entire sentence because, for example, the full
statement could be ‘not happy’ which expresses
the
opposite. This would be a case of negation. Negations can
be also ampliﬁed, for example by a word combination like
‘not happy at all’, which means ‘unhappier than unhappy’.
Furthermore, words can be ampliﬁed, e.g. ‘very happy’.
Realizing that there is a comparative (‘happier’) as well as a
superlative (‘happiest’), reveals that there are two levels of
ampliﬁcation. Accordingly, in our approach, there are also
two levels of attenuation. For a summary see Table 3.

Besides comparatives, superlatives and negating preﬁxes,
grammatical special cases are especially indicated by ‘degree
words’ (see Table 3 for examples) which inﬂuence the
intensity of adjectives, adverbs, verbs and nouns. This is
according to different rules based on Downing and Locke

(2006), Givo´ n (1993), Helbig (1994), Helbig and Buscha
(2001), Hoffmann (2009), Huddleston (1984), Huddles-
ton and Pullum (2005), Kunkel-Razum et al. (2009) and
Payne (2011). When such a grammatical special case is
identiﬁed, the valence and arousal values of the affected
word have to be modiﬁed. In the case of negation we used
the following procedure: the centre of the respective value
range is used for ﬂipping the value horizontally. Figure 3
shows this procedure by taking the example of ‘not happy’.
The calculated values of ‘not happy’ are Vneg522.4075 and
Aneg52.255. In ANEW the word ‘unhappy’ exists which
corresponds
values
VANEW522.5725 and AANEW52.59,
so the distance
between these two pairs of values is only 0.37343, which
shows that this way of calculation is valid.

to ‘not happy’

and has

the

Figure 4 illustrates the procedures for the other gram-
matical special cases. The range between the centre and the
outer boundary of each value range is assumed as 100%.
Based on that, the distance of an emotional value to the
outer boundary is calculated in per cent. Ampliﬁcation cases

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

7

Figure 5. Distribution in valence-arousal-space of all words found within a dataset of Flickr and Panoramio photos of Dresden

are increased by this calculated percentage, attenuation
cases are decreased. For maximum and minimum this
procedure is applied two times sequentially to the respective
emotional value. Therefore, in the case of maximum and
ampliﬁcation, the emotional values are brought closer to
the outer boundaries of the respective value range whereas
in the case of attenuation and minimum the values are
brought closer to the centre. The reason for this procedure
is to stay within the deﬁned borders of valence and arousal.
For the ampliﬁed negation the values are ﬁrst negated and
ampliﬁed afterwards.

EMOTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DRESDEN

As a pilot region to test our approach we chose Dresden
since we live and work here and thus know the city well.

Data used
We applied the algorithm for extracting georeferenced
emotions from photo metadata to a dataset of 52,954 Flickr
and Panoramio photos of Dresden from 4,344 users covering
a period starting at the launch date of Flickr (February 2004)
and Panoramio (October 2005) until 2013/07/05. The data
were requested with the respective REST API.

Results
The photo metadata used altogether contained 792,089
words. Of those 116,780 words or the respective syno-
nyms/hypernyms of them were found in the emotional
word lists ANEW and BAWL-R. Figure 5 shows the
distribution of those found words in valence-arousal-space
which is widely spread. The average value of all valence
values is 0.691 and for arousal it is 2.689.

While analyzing the emotional data we realized that one
place is not necessarily connected with only one emotion.
This can have two reasons. The ﬁrst reason could be
personal preferences, experiences or memories. For example
a very scenic park might be admired by most of the people
but if someone remembers that their boyfriend or girlfriend
broke up with them in this park, then this person probably
does not like the park anymore because of this personal
experience. This
individual and collective
that
emotions need to be distinguished. The second reason
could be temporal aspects. Some years or even decades ago
a place might have evoked different emotions than it does
currently but these former emotions can still be detected
with the help of Flickr and Panoramio photos.

shows

To analyse the data with the help of visualizations we
divided the valence-arousal-space into four quadrants based
on the centre of each value range, so the origin for this
subdivision is the point consisting of the values V050 and
A053. The four resulting quadrants are combinations of
positive/negative valence and high/low arousal.

Figure 6 shows maps of the inner city of Dresden which
visualize the density of words of the respective quadrant
located in the inner city. The maps are arranged according
to the locations of the quadrants in valence-arousal-space
(compare Figure 1). Circle number 1 in Figure 6b shows
that many words that were used for describing the old town
of Dresden are located in the quadrant of positive valence
and high arousal, and indeed the old town of Dresden is
very impressive with all the baroque, renaissance, classical
and historic buildings. Yet at the same place negative
emotions with high arousal can be found (No. 2 in
Figure 6a). The reason for this is World War II because
during World War II in February 1945 Dresden was
bombed. A total of 39 km2 of the city centre was destroyed
which caused tens of thousands of civilian casualties and

8

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. Maps of the inner city of Dresden (including the districts A¨ ussere Neustadt, Innere Neustadt, Wilsdruffer Vorstadt/Seevorstadt-
West, Innere Altstadt, Pirnaische Vorstadt and Seevorstadt-Ost/Grosser Garten) showing the density of words located in the respective quad-
rants as well as phenomena indicated by numbers stated in the text

many users mention this event in the description of their
photos. Therefore they use words like ‘attack’,
‘war’,
‘damage’ or ‘death’ which are of course associated with
negative emotions of high arousal. This example illustrates
well that one place is not connected with only one emotion
and in this case the reason are temporal aspects.

Number 3 in Figure 6b and Number 4 in Figure 6d
indicate a district which has almost only positive emotions.
It’s the A¨ ussere Neustadt, an alternative hip district with
many bars, cafe´s and discos. The most frequently used words
found in the emotional word lists – ‘music’, ‘concert’, ‘art’
and ‘party’ – accurately convey a sense of this district.

A place that stands out clearly can be found in quadrant
of positive valence and low arousal (No. 5 in Figure 6d), so
this must be a very relaxing place. It is the so called Grosser
Garten, a huge park in baroque style where especially in the
warm seasons, citizens of Dresden spend a lot of free time.
To describe this place, users used many nature-related terms
like ‘garden’, ‘ﬂower’, ‘water’ or ‘tree’ which are associated
with calmness and relaxation.

Number 6 in Figure 6a is not an eye catching example
but represents another interesting case of temporal aspects:
each year a remembrance of the bombing in February 1945
takes place on one or two days but for the past 15 years

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

9

Figure 7. Changes in the distribution of the words found for Dresden in valence-arousal-space when considering grammatical special cases
(GSC)

more and more right-wing extremists use this event for
their own propaganda purposes. Out of this have grown
counterdemonstrations and in the most recent years there
have been confrontations and riots on both sides. These
events are described with words like ‘police’, ‘Nazi’, ‘attack’
or ‘damage’ but they are an extraordinary occurrence;
usually nothing negatively arousing can be found at this
place except on those one or two days in February.

Impact of considering grammatical special cases
When applying the algorithm for extracting georeferenced
emotions from the metadata of Flickr and Panoramio
photos, the grammatical special cases described in 4.2 have
to be considered. Figure 7 depicts the changes in the
distribution of the found words in valence-arousal-space
when considering these grammatical issues by comparing
the modiﬁed emotional values of words affected by a
grammatical special case with the unmodiﬁed original values
of those words as they are listed in ANEW and BAWL-R.
Figure 7 shows that by considering negations, ampliﬁca-
tions, etc., a more widespread distribution of emotions in
valence-arousal-space, i.e. a wider range of emotions, can be
obtained.

Figure 8 shows the modiﬁed values of words within the
dataset of Dresden that were affected by grammatical special

cases. It can be seen that attenuation and minimum cases
are concentrated along the centres of both value ranges
whereas ampliﬁcation and especially maximum cases can be
found close to the outer boundaries of valence-arousal-
space. Negations are spread all over valence-arousal-space
but the majority can be found in the section of negative
valence. The reason for that is that positive words prevail in
most languages. Thus positive words are often negated for
expressing something negative and consequently appear in
the area of negative valence in Figure 8. Examples for
negated negative words which result in a positive valence
are ‘not bad’ or ‘not unfriendly’.

Figure 9 shows a visualization that includes only words
that were affected by a grammatical special case within the
inner city of Dresden. The choropleth mapping uses two
colour scales: a scale from light to dark for arousal and a
‘trafﬁc light’ coloured scale for valence (see Figure 9c).
Figure 9a visualizes the modiﬁed values of words affected
by a grammatical special case whereas Figure 9b shows the
those words.
unmodiﬁed,
Comparing these two maps reveals that especially in the
old town of Dresden (in the centre of the maps) the
emotional values change signiﬁcantly. The mean values in
the old town are Vmean50.1504 (standard derivation sV5
0.7794) and Amean53.0115 (sA51.713) for Figure 9a,
for Figure 9b they are Vmean50.6621 (sV50.5323) and

the original values of

i.e.

10

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 8. Distribution of words in valence-arousal-space affected by grammatical special cases distinguished by cases

Amean52.9147 (sA51.1858). Therefore the emotional
values in this area become more negative and the arousal
increases from a modiﬁcation due to grammatical special
cases. The reason for such signiﬁcant modiﬁcations in the
old town of Dresden is again World War II, because in the
photo metadata of this place, word combinations like
‘totally destroyed’, ‘entirely destroyed’, ‘badly damaged’
and ‘completely destroyed’ are used quite often which
amplify the affected verbs ‘destroy’ and ‘damage’ and make
them even more negative and more arousing. These word
combinations refer to especially two objects: the Church of
Our Lady and the Catholic Church of the Royal Court of
Saxony – both buildings were completely destroyed in
World War II. The differences in the standard derivations
for Figure 9a and b also demonstrate that by considering
issues a more widespread distribution of
grammatical
emotions in valence-arousal-space can be obtained.

As mentioned, 116,780 words from the photo metadata
of our dataset of Dresden were found in the emotional
word lists. Of them 1,566 words were affected by a special
case. This is only 1.3% but it should be noted that this
number does not represent all grammatical special cases out
of the photo metadata because not all contained words and
thus not all affected words were found in the emotional
word lists. Therefore due to the fact that about 15% of all

words were found, it can be assumed that also only a low
percentage of all words affected by grammatical special cases
were found in the emotional word lists. Furthermore the
tags of a photo are simply keywords; the title of a photo is
most often a word group and rarely a sentence. Complete
sentences, and thus most probably also grammatical special
cases, are mainly contained in the description of a photo,
which is only one component of the three that we used for
emotional analysis. Although a small number of gramma-
tical special cases were inﬂuencing the results of
the
emotional analysis of Dresden, each case and its modiﬁca-
tions are signiﬁcant, especially for negations.

SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

Using the ‘wisdom of the crowd’ we extracted georefer-
enced emotions from the written language in the metadata
of user-generated Flickr and Panoramio photos. Within the
algorithm for this extraction several grammatical special
cases were considered, e.g. negations, ampliﬁcations, etc.
The application of this algorithm to a photo dataset of
Dresden results in an emotional portrait of the city which is
depicted in maps of valence-arousal-space as well as in maps
of geospace. Some excerpts are presented in the previous

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

11

Figure 9. Choroplethe map of the inner city of Dresden visualizing (a) the modiﬁed valence, (b) the original valence and arousal values of
words affected by a grammatical special case, and (c) the legend for the maps in (a) and (b)

sections of the paper. The emotional analysis of Dresden
reveals that not only one emotion is connected with a place
due to temporal aspects or differences
in individual
experience. Although consideration of grammatical special
cases a wider
range of emotion could be obtained.
Although not many grammatical special cases are contained
in the results of the emotional analysis of Dresden, they are
still signiﬁcant, especially in the case of negation.

The next step in our research will be a closer look at the
temporal aspects of georeferenced emotions: how to handle a
photo with one time stamp but containing emotions of several
dates? Furthermore, we plan to investigate the time-dependency

of emotions: are there places that are more attractive in the
summer or in the winter time/in the day time or in the night?
How can the distinction between individual and collective
emotions be performed? One possible solution could work
with the number of users having a certain emotion at a place.
Finally we need to develop visualizations covering space,
emotions and time.

Georeferenced tweets will serve as another data source for
an emotional analysis of Dresden and for comparing
sources Flickr/
the results
Panoramio and Twitter. Though tweets are restricted to
140 characters, they consist of sentences and not merely of

from these two different

12

keywords, so they are more likely to contain grammatical
special cases.

As for a use of the spatial emotional data that has been
derived, we have a mobile emotional travel guide in mind for
which we want to develop methodologies. This travel guide
could be adapted to the emotional state of the user, e.g.
whether the user desires adventure or relaxation. A kind of
emotional routing could be implemented and emotional
proﬁles of special places or sights could be offered showing all
the emotions that were detected there and explain the reason
for these emotions. This would be a totally new approach for
discovering a city, for exploring a region and especially for
conveying historical facts and background information.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Eva Hauthal studied carto-
graphy at Dresden Uni-
versity of Technology from
2005 to 2011. In her dip-
loma thesis she enlarged
upon mobile cartography.
Since
2011 Eva
Hauthal is a PhD student
at the Institute of Cartogra-
phy at Dresden University
of Technology and her
research interests are emo-
tional
and
cartography
content.
user-generated
Furthermore Eva Hauthal teaches students in map design
and mobile cartography.

July

NOTES

vessels.

1relating to the circulatory system, i.e. the heart and blood

2relating to respiration/breathing.
3pertaining to the electrical properties of skin.
4corresponds to the class ‘Maximizers’ by Quirk et al.

(1985) (for English language)

corresponds to the class ‘absolute Stufe’ by van Os
(1989) and to the class ‘absolute Stufe’ by Biedermann
(1969) and to the classes ‘u¨bertriebene Stufe’ and ‘absolute
Stufe’ by Heringer (1989) (for German language).

5corresponds to the class ‘Boosters’ by Quirk et al.

(1985) (for English language)

corresponds to the classes ‘extrem hohe Stufe’ and ‘hohe
Stufe’ by (van Os, 1989) and to the class ‘hohe Stufe’ by
Biedermann (1969) and to the class ‘hohe Stufe’ by
Heringer (1989) (for German language).

6corresponds

‘Com-
promisers’ and ‘Diminishers’ by Quirk et al. (1985) (for
English language)

‘Approximators’,

to the classes

corresponds to the classes ‘approximative Stufe’, ‘gema¨ssigte
Stufe’ and ‘abschwa¨chende Stufe’ by (van Os, 1989) and to the
classes ‘gema¨ssigte Stufe’ and ‘abschwa¨chende Stufe’ by
Biedermann (1969) and to the classes ‘gema¨ssigte Stufe’ and
‘schwache Stufe’ by Heringer (1989) (for German language).

The Cartographic Journal

7corresponds to the class ‘Minimizers’ by Quirk et al.

(1985) (for English language)

corresponds to the class ‘minimale Stufe’ by (van Os,
1989) and to the class ‘minimale Stufe’ by Biedermann
(1969) and to the class ‘niedrige Stufe’ by Heringer (1989)
(for German language).

REFERENCES

Abdalla, A. and Weiser, P. (2011). ‘Towards Emotional and Opinion-
Based Layers in City GIS’, in REAL CORP 2011. Change for
Stability – Lifecycles of Cities and Regions. The Role and
Possibilities of Foresighted Planning in Transformation
Processes: Proceedings of 16th International Conference on
Urban Planning, Regional Development and Information
Society, ed. by Schrenk, M., Popovich, V. V. and Zeile, P., Self-
publishing of CORP – Competence Center of Urban and Regional
Planning, Schwechat-Rannersdorf.

Ahn, Y. Y., Bagrow, J., Lehmann, S. and Pawling, A. (2009).
Twittermood: United States Map of Mood, http://www.twitter
mood.org/ (accessed on 25th February 2014).

Battacchi, M., Suslow, T. and Renna, M. (1996). Emotion und
Sprache: Zur Definition der Emotion und ihren Beziehungen
zu kognitiven Prozessen, dem Geda¨chtnis und der Sprache, P.
Lang, Frankfurt am Main, New York.

Bergner, B., Zeile, P., Papastefanou, G., Rech, W. and Streich, B.
(2011). ‘Emotional Barrier-GIS – A new Approach to Integrate
Barrier-Free Planning in Urban Planning Processes’,
in REAL
CORP 2011. Change for Stability – Lifecycles of Cities and
Regions. The Role and Possibilities of Foresighted Planning in
Transformation Processes: Proceedings of 16th International
Conference on Urban Planning, Regional Development and
Information Society, ed. by Schrenk, M., Popovich, V. and Zeile,
P., Self-publishing of CORP – Competence Center of Urban and
Regional Planning, Schwechat-Rannersdorf.

Biedermann, R. (1969). Die deutschen Gradadverbien in synchro-
nischer und diasynchronischer Sicht, Dissertation, Universita¨t
Heidelberg, Heidelberg.

Bollmann, J., Lipinski, A. and Koch, W. G. (2001). Lexikon der
in zwei Ba¨nden, Spektrum

Kartographie und Geomatik:
Akademischer Verlag, Heidelberg.

Bradley, M. and Lang, P. (2010). Affective norms for English Words
instruction manual and affective ratings,
in

(ANEW): Stimuli,
Technical Report C-2, The Center
Psychophysiology, University of Florida, Gainesville.

for Research

Couillet, A. (2014). ‘Applying Visual Analytics Methods for mapping
emotions felt along daily trips’, in Cartography from pole to pole:
Selected contributions to the XXVIth International Conference
of the ICA, Dresden 2013, ed. by Buchroithner, M. F., Prechtel,
N. and Burghardt, D., Springer, Heidelberg.

Downing, A. and Locke, P. (2006). English Grammar: A University

Course, Routledge, London.

Fehr, B. and Russell, J. A. (1984). ‘Concept of emotion viewed from a
prototype perspective’, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 113(3), pp. 464–486.

Givo´ n, T.

(1993). English Grammar: A Function-based

Introduction, John Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam.

Hayakawa, S. (1952). Language in Thought and Action, George

Helbig, G. (1994). Lexikon deutscher Partikeln, Langenscheidt

Allen & Unwin, London.

Verlag Enzyklopa¨die, Leipzig.

Helbig, G. and Buscha, J. (2001). Deutsche Grammatik: Ein
Handbuch fu¨r den Ausla¨nderunterricht, Langenscheidt, Berlin.
Heringer, H. (1989). Grammatik und Stil: Praktische Grammatik

des Deutschen, Cornelsen, Hirschgraben.

Ho¨ffken, S., Papastefanou, G. and Zeile, P. (2008). ‘Google Earth, GPS,
Geotagging und neue Mo¨glichkeiten fu¨r die Stadtplanung - Ein
emotionales Kiezportrait’, in REAL CORP 008: mobility nodes as
innovation hubs: Proceedings of 13th International Conference
on Urban Planning, Regional Development and Information
Society, ed. by Schrenk, M., Popovich, V. V., Eneglke, D. and Elisei,

Mapping Space-Related Emotions out of User-Generated Photo Metadata Considering Grammatical Issues

13

P., pp. 275–281, Self-publishing of CORP – Competence Center of
Urban and Regional Planning, Schwechat-Rannersdorf.

Hoffmann, L. (2009). Handbuch der deutschen Wortarten, de

Gruyter, Berlin.

Huddleston, R. (1984). Introduction to the Grammar of English,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. (2005). A Student’s Introduction to
English Grammar, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Izard, C. (1977). Human Emotions, Plenum Press, New York.
Jahr, S. (2000). Emotionen und Emotionsstrukturen in Sachtexten:
Ein interdisziplina¨rer Ansatz zur qualitativen und quantitativen
Beschreibung der Emotionalita¨t von Texten, de Gruyter, Berlin.
Kisilevich, S., Rohrdantz, C. and Keim, D. (2010). ‘Beautiful picture of
an ugly place, Exploring photo collections using opinion and
sentiment analysis of user comments’, in Proceeding of the 2010
International Multiconference on Computer Science and
Information Technology (IMCSIT 2010), ed. by Ganzha, M.,
pp. 419–428, IEEE, Piscataway.

Klettner, S., Huang, H., Schmidt, M. and Gartner, G. (2013).
‘Crowdsourcing affective responses to space’, Kartographische
Nachrichten, 63(2/3), pp. 66–72.

Klettner, S., Huang, H., Schmidt, M. and Gartner, G. (2014).
‘Acquisition and Cartographic Applications of Subjective Geodata’,
in Cartography from Pole to Pole: Selected Contributions to
the XXVIth International Conference of the ICA, Dresden
2013, ed. by Buchroithner, M. F., Prechtel, N. and Burghardt, D.,
Springer, Heidelberg.

Korpela, K. (2002).

in Handbook of
‘Children’s Environment’,
Environmental Psychology, ed. by Bechtel, R. and Churchman,
A., pp. 363–373, J. Wiley & Sons, New York.

Kroeber-Riel, W., Weinberg, P. and Gro¨ppel-Klein, A. (2009).

Konsumentenverhalten, Vahlen, Mu¨nchen.

Kunkel-Razum, K., Eisenberg, P., Peters, J., Gallmann, P., Fabricius-
Hansen, C., Nu¨bling, D., Barz, I., Fritz, T. A. and Fiehler, R.
(2009). Duden: Die Grammatik, Dudenverlag, Mannheim.
Long, M. C. (2012). Tweetbeat Shows Where Negative Tweeters Live,
http://www.mediabistro.com/alltwitter/tweetbeat-shows-where-
negative-tweeters-live_b31425#more-31425 (accessed on 25th
February 2014).

MacKerron, G. and Mourato, S. (2013). ‘Happiness is greater in
natural environments’, Global Environmental Change, In Press.
Mau, G. (2009). Die Bedeutung der Emotionen beim Besuch von
Online-Shops: Messung, Determinanten und Wirkungen. Gabler,
Wiesbaden.

Mislove, A., Lehmann, S., Ahn, Y. Y., Onnela, J. P. and Rosenquist,
J. N. (2010). Pulse of the Nation: U.S. Mood Throughout the Day
inferred from Twitter, http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/amislove/
twittermood/ (accessed on 25th February 2014).

Mody, R., Willis, K. and Kerstein, R. (2009). ‘WiMo: Location-Based
in Proceedings of the 8th International
Emotion Tagging’,
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, ed. by
Milic-Frayling, N., Ha¨kkila¨, J. and Crowcroft, J., ACM Press, New
York.

Nida, E. (1964). Toward a Science of Translating: With Special
Reference to Principles and Procedures Involved in Bible
Translating. Brill, Leiden.

Nida, E.

(1975). Componential Analysis of Meaning: An

Introduction to Semantic Structures, Mouton, The Hague.

Nold, C. (2007). Stockport Emotion Map, Softhook.
Nold, C. (2009). Emotional cartography: Technologies of the self,
http://www.emotionalcartography.net/EmotionalCartographyLow.
pdf (accessed on 25th February 2014)

Palme´r, D., Rundkvist, R. and Nagel, T. (2011). Emography: A multi-
touch enabled map to explore and discover patterns of how people
in the world are feeling at the moment, http://vmguld.se/
emography/ (accessed on 25th February 2014).

Payne, T. (2011). Understanding English Grammar: A linguistic

Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. and Svartvik, J. (1985). A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language, Longman,
London.

Russell, J. (1980).

‘A circumplex model of affect’, Journal of

Personality and Social Psychology, 39, pp. 1161–1178.

Salomon, L. (1966). Semantics and Common Sense, Holt, Rinehart

and Winston, New York.
(1999).

Schimmack, U.

Ru¨ckschau, Rundschau
Rundschau, 50(2), pp. 90–97.

und

‘Strukturmodelle

der

Ausschau’,

Stimmungen:
Psychologische

van Os, C. (1989). Aspekte der Intensivierung im Deutschen, Narr

Verlag, Tu¨bingen.

Vo˜, M. L.-H., Conrad, M., Kuchinke, L., Hartfeld, K., Hofmann,
M. F. and Jacobs, A. M. (2009). ‘The Berlin Affective Word List
Reloaded (BAWL-R)’, Behavior Research Methods, 41(2), pp.
534–538.

White, A. (2006). University of Leicester produces the first-ever ‘world
map of happiness’, http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/
2006-07/uol-uol072706.php (accessed on 25th February 2014).

