This article was downloaded by: [New Jersey Institute of Technology]
On: 26 August 2014, At: 02:15
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Spatially enabling governments through
SDI implementation
I. Masser a , A. Rajabifard a & I. Williamson a
a Centre for Spatial Data Infrastructures and Land Administration ,
Department of Geomatics , University of Melbourne , Victoria
3010, Australia
Published online: 05 Mar 2008.

To cite this article: I. Masser , A. Rajabifard & I. Williamson (2008) Spatially enabling governments
through SDI implementation, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22:1, 5-20,
DOI: 10.1080/13658810601177751

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810601177751

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 1, January 2008, 5–20

Research Article

Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

I. MASSER*, A. RAJABIFARD and I. WILLIAMSON
Centre for Spatial Data Infrastructures and Land Administration, Department of
Geomatics, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

(Received 17 June 2006; in final form 14 November 2006 )

Spatially enabled government requires the development of effective SDIs that will
support the vast majority of society, who are not spatially aware, in a transparent
manner. This paper addresses three strategic challenges arising out of the need of
creating this new environment. The first of these is the challenge for more
inclusive models of governance given that SDI formulation and implementation
involve a very large number of stakeholders from all levels of government as well
as the private sector and academia. The second concerns the promotion of data
sharing between different kinds of organization. In some cases, this may require
new forms of organization to carry out these tasks. The third challenge relates to
the establishment of enabling platforms to facilitate access to spatial data and the
delivery of data-related services.

Keywords: Enabling governments; SDI implementation; Spatially enabled
government

1.

Introduction

Governments can be regarded as spatially enabled ‘where location and spatial
information are regarded as common goods made available to citizens and
businesses to encourage creativity and product development’ (Wallace et al. 2006: 3).
Under such circumstances, the vast majority of the public are users, either
information. They generally lack an
knowingly or unknowingly, of spatial
awareness of spatial concepts and principles, while many are willing to transparently
embrace spatially enabled infrastructures such as Google Earth (e.g. Barr 2005,
Butler 2006). As a result, spatially enabled governments present a number of
important challenges for the small elite of spatially aware professionals who have so
far dominated the development of the spatial related fields of geography, land
administration, and environmental science, and particularly those who have an in-
depth scientific understanding of spatial concepts. The key challenge is how to
develop a spatial data infrastructure (SDI) that will provide an enabling platform in
a transparent manner that will serve the majority of society who are not spatially
aware as visualized in figure 1.

One of the most interesting developments in recent years has been the increasing
involvement of governments throughout the world in the development of spatial
data infrastructures (SDIs), which is an evolving concept and can be viewed as an
enabling platform linking data producers, providers, and value adders to data users.
The US Federal Geographic Data Committee Web site defines SDI’s as

*Corresponding author. Email: abbas.r@unimelb.edu.au

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810601177751

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 6

I. Masser et al.

Figure 1. Level of spatial-data users and expertise in society.

the technology, policies, criteria, standards and people necessary to promote geospatial
data sharing throughout all levels of government, the private and non-profit sectors,
and academia. [They] provide a base or structure of practices and relationships among
data producers and users that facilitates data sharing and use. [They are] a set of actions
and new ways of accessing, sharing and using geographic data that enables far more
comprehensive analysis of data to help decision-makers chose the best course(s) of
action (www.fgdc.gov)

SDIs have become a crucial tool in facilitating how spatial data and spatial
information systems are used. They allow the sharing of data, which enables users to
save resources, time and effort when trying to acquire new datasets. SDI is said to
comprise data, standards, access network, institutions and policies, and human
resources (Rajabifard et al. 2004). Such an entity can be enhanced so that it is
in addition to data, business goals, strategies, processes,
possible to share,
operations, and value-added products which can help to facilitate spatial enable-
ment across government and different jurisdictions.

There are many parallels between the thinking that underlies the development of
SDIs and the vision of spatially enabled government outlined above, but there are
also some important differences. SDI development, as it has emerged over the last
15 years (Masser 2005), has often been dominated by the concerns of central
governments usually without the participation of stakeholders from the subnational
levels of government, the private sector, and academia. SDIs have also been
developed in many cases as a tool for the professional elite, rather than the
population as a whole, who are the main beneficiaries of spatially enabled
government.

With these considerations in mind, this paper explores the challenges that must be
spatially enabling
overcome to make existing SDIs more appropriate for
government. It addresses three strategic challenges arising out of
this new
environment (figure 2). The first of these is the need for more inclusive models of
governance given that SDI formulation and implementation involve a very large
number of stakeholders from all levels of government as well as the private sector
and academia. The second concerns the promotion of data sharing between different
kinds of organization. In some cases, this may require new forms of organization to
carry out these tasks. The third challenge relates to the establishment of enabling
platforms to facilitate access to spatial data and the delivery of data-related services.

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

7

Figure 2. Strategic challenges.

2. A vision of spatially enabled government

Spatially enabled government consists of an overarching vision and a set of tools.
The vision is to establish an enabling infrastructure that will facilitate the provision
of place (or location) to all human activities, and government actions, decisions, and
polices. The enabling infrastructure provides the set of tools combining technical,
institutional, legal, and policy aspects, which can be used to assist the delivery of
sustainable development at all
levels of government and society. Such spatial
enablement allows business transactions to be linked to a place or location, and
further facilitates the evaluation and analysis of relationships between people,
business transactions, and government.

A spatial enabled government is one that plans to achieve three broad goals:
N more effective and more transparent coordination, where voters are able to
access the spatial information they require to evaluate the choices made by
elected decision-makers;
N the creation of economic wealth through the development of products and
services based on spatial information collected by all levels of government;
N the maintenance of environmental sustainability through the regular and
indicators distributed

repeated monitoring of a wide range of spatial
throughout the world as a whole.

The first and the last of these goals have been widely discussed in recent years,
coordination with particular respect to the potential of electronic government and
electronic democracy and sustainability in the context of the United Nations World
Summit on Sustainable Development and the realization of
its Millennium
Development Goals (Bell 2006). However, it is only relatively recently that the
economic potential of the information that is routinely collected by governments all
over the world for the information industry has become a part of this vision. The

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 8

I. Masser et al.

European Commission, for example, came to the conclusion that the European
information industry was at a significant disadvantage to its American counterpart.
Compared with the US, conditions for reuse of public-sector information in Europe
were opaque and uneven. Nor was it a straightforward matter to identify the
documents available for reuse in the various national member states. With this in
mind, the Commission proposed a minimum level of harmonization across the
European Union to facilitate the more effective exploitation of public sector
information as an economic resource to promote the development of pan-European
information products and services (Commission of the European Communities
2003).

Geographic information accounts for a significant proportion of this public
sector information. A study carried out by PIRA International (2000: 16) for the
European Commission estimated that over half the J68 billion economic value of
public-sector information in 1999 came directly from geographic information
sources and that this figure would have been considerably larger if indirect sources
such as the geographic dimensions of economic and social data were taken into
account.

Realizing this vision of spatially enabled government is dependent on the
development of appropriate mechanisms to facilitate the delivery of data and
services. These mechanisms should embody the following principles that are the
foundation of the INSPIRE initiative that is currently being implemented by the
European Commission (Commission of the European Communities 2004):

done most effectively.

and share it between many users and applications.

N Data should be collected once and maintained at the level where this can be
N It should be possible to combine seamlessly spatial data from different sources
N Spatial data should be collected at one level of government and shared between
N Spatial data needed for good governance should be available on conditions
N It should be easy to discover which spatial data are available, to evaluate its
fitness for purpose and to know which conditions apply for its use (http://
inspire.jrc.it).

that are not restricting its extensive use.

all levels.

The most highly developed mechanisms of this kind in operation for such purposes
are the SDIs that are currently being developed in more than 50 different countries
throughout the world (Masser 2005).

3. Governance of SDIs

It must be recognized that many of the SDI structures that have come into being
over the last 10 years are not appropriate mechanisms in their current forms for
realizing this vision of spatially enabled government. In many cases, the original
driving force behind these initiatives was narrowly focused around traditional
governmental surveying and mapping activities. Consequently, when looking at
specific national cases, it will be necessary to consider the extent to which current
SDIs are appropriate to operate as the delivery mechanisms for spatially enabled
government. A good example of a mismatch of this kind can be found in the US
NSDI initiative, which is essentially a federally driven programme (National
Academy of Public Administration 1998).

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

9

SDI development over the past 15 years has seen three main players emerge—
federal/national governments, sub-national governments, and the private sector—
but the role of each has been quite different (Rajabifard et al. 2006a). Current trends
and development within SDIs show that the roles of the three major players are
changing to meet the new large-scale focus of many SDIs, especially in the
developed world. The previous influence of national governments at both strategic
and operational levels has diminished, although there is still a strong case for a
strategic national government role in SDI through governance. This can be seen in
Europe through the development of the INSPIRE Directive establishing a European
environmental SDI that was approved by the Council of Ministers and the
the European
European Parliament
Communities 2004).
The operational

level of SDI that was originally undertaken by national
governments has now moved to the sub-national government level. It is at this
level that large-scale land-administration data are produced (the most common form
of spatial data is land-related data). This aids in collecting land taxes, land-use
planning, the operation of land markets, road and infrastructure development, and
day-to-day decision-making in order to meet sustainable development objectives.
The private sector’s operational role has also increased, and they are leading the
drive for greater access to ‘people-relevant’ data that are utilized to effectively
undertake their role within society.

in November 2006.

(Commission of

The flow of information between the three main players has also changed.
Building of infrastructure generally occurs at a sub-national, bottom-up level with
framework in which such
the national government providing the overall
infrastructure can operate (although national governments do play some role in
infrastructure building). This is what is beginning to occur within the development
of SDIs, particularly in Australia, Canada, and the US. Communication now flows
between these three players, rather than from a top-down national government
approach.

Under these circumstances, it is necessary to think in terms of more inclusive
models of SDI governance. Top priority must be given to the creation of
appropriate SDI governance structures which are both understood and accepted
by all the stakeholders. This is a daunting task, given the number of organizations
that are likely to be involved. In the US, for example, there are more than 100 000
organizations engaged in SDI-related GIS activities. It will not be possible in most
cases to bring all the stakeholders together for decision-making purposes, and
structures must be devised that keep all of them informed and give them an
opportunity to have their opinions heard.

One solution to this problem is to create hierarchical structures at the national,
state, and local level for this purpose (figure 3). The main features of these structures
can be seen in the administrative arrangements that have come into being in
Australia. The lead Commonwealth government agency for the Australia SDI is the
Australia New Zealand Land Information Council
the
members of ANZLIC represents a coordinating body within their jurisdiction (i.e.
the Commonwealth Office for Spatial Data Management, the relevant coordination
bodies at the state and territory levels, and Land Information New Zealand).

(ANZLIC). Each of

Similar types of body are now coming into being at the state level in Australia to
perform similar functions. For example, the state of Victoria set up the Victorian
in 2004 to oversee the implementation of the state’s Spatial
Spatial Council

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 10

I. Masser et al.

Figure 3. Hierarchical relationships between national, state, and local governments bodies
in SDI implementation.

Information Strategy (VSIS). Its role is ‘to provide a coordinated whole of industry
approach to spatial
information policy and development, management and
utilization in Victoria, by undertaking a spatial information management role,
and acting as a mechanism for cross-sectoral consultation and liaison’ (Department
of Sustainability and Environment 2004: 3). Its membership is set at a maximum of
local government (2), federal
13 members drawn from state government (3),
government (1), academia (2), the professions (2) and the private sector (2). Each of
the Council’s members is responsible for

N ensuring that

initiatives to be considered by the Council are discussed
adequately within their own sector prior to Committee meetings to the extent
required to enable the Council member to be able to speak on behalf of their
sector;
N briefing the members of their respective sectors on matters considered by the

Council and its response;

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation
11
N proactively supporting implementation of the VSIS within their sector (p. 10).
In this way, the Council provides a mechanism for involving all the stakeholders in
the State’s SDI.

Hierarchical governance structures are also beginning to emerge in other parts of
the world, particularly in countries where some administrative responsibilities
relating to geographic information are devolved to the state or provincial level. They
into the German national SDI (Lenk 2005) and the
are built, for example,
Malaysian MyGDI initiative (Ahmad 2004), and to some extent in the US 50 states
initiative that is backed by the FGDC and the National States Geographic
Information Council (Robinson and Burgess 2006). Elements of these structures can
also be seen at the regional level in the development of GIS Flanders in Belgium
(www.gisvlaanderen.be), the Catalonian SDI in Spain (Guimet 2004), and Northern
Ireland’s MOSAIC in the UK (Mason 2006).

It is important that these governance structures should be as inclusive as possible
from the outset of a SDI initiative so that all those involved can develop a shared
vision and feel a sense of common ownership. Otherwise, it may be difficult or even
impossible to bring new participants into a SDI initiative at a later stage. This is
likely to be a challenging task that may slow down the progress of the work in the
short-term, but building up a base for future collaboration is an essential
prerequisite for the long-term success of the SDI.

The findings of this analysis highlight the challenges that need to be faced in
developing inclusive governance structures
to facilitate more effective SDI
implementation for spatially enabled government. This represents a major departure
from existing practices in many of the countries that have embarked on SDI
development over the last 15 years.

4. Data sharing

Data sharing between organizations featured prominently in the initial discussions
about SDIs. The US Mapping Science Committee’s landmark report, ‘Towards a
coordinated spatial data infrastructure for the nation’, devoted a whole chapter to the
sharing of spatial data. The rationale for a spatial-data-sharing programme is ‘to
increase benefits to society arising from the availability of spatial data. The benefits will
accrue through the reduction of duplication of effort in collecting and maintaining of
spatial data as well as through the increased use of this potentially valuable
information’ (National Research Council 1993). It also argued that this programme
‘must do more than just disseminate spatial data collected by federal agencies. The
richness and utility of the program is substantially enhanced by having participation of
donors from state and local governments, academic, and the private sector’ (p. 104).
With this in mind, the Committee recommended that the ‘FGDC should establish a
data sharing committee with the objective of providing the policy making and
leadership to launch, maintain, and operate the proposed program’ (p. 104).

These proposals do not take account of the complexity of data sharing in practice.
The intricate nature of the relationships involved in organizational and inter-
organizational data sharing and the legal, economic, cultural and personal privacy-
related issues associated with these activities have been highlighted in the report of
an expert meeting convened by the National Centre for Geographic Information
and Analysis. The editors of this report, Onsrud and Rushton (1995), define the
issues involved in the following terms: ‘Sharing of geographic information involves

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 12

I. Masser et al.

more than a simple data exchange. To facilitate sharing, the GIS research and user
communities must deal with both the technical and institutional aspects of
integrating and
collecting,
maintaining spatial data.’

structuring, analysing, presenting, disseminating,

Subsequently, Wehn de Montalvo (2003) has explored spatial-data-sharing
perceptions and practices in South Africa in some depth from a social psychological
perspective. This study utilizes the theory of planned behaviour as a framework for
analysis. This theory suggests that personal and organizational willingness to share
data depends on attitudes to data sharing, social pressures to engage or not engage,
and perceived control over data-sharing activities of key individuals within
four domains: resources,
organizations. The attitude component consists of
organizational activities, the strategic position of an organization and social
outcomes. The social pressures component consists of five domains: GIS community
pressure, market pressure, institutional pressure, organizational pressure, and moral
norms. The perceived control over the data-sharing component takes account of
internal factors such as technical skills, interpersonal skills, and resource control as
well as external factors such as dependence on others and sharing opportunities.

The findings of Wehn de Montalvo’s research show how the beliefs underlying
these three components can be operationalized in a questionnaire and ranked by
respondents to gain a better understanding of the willingness of organizations to
share information. The outcomes of her quantitative analysis generally bear out the
relationships postulated in this theory and give valuable insights into the factors that
determine the willingness to share spatial data. They also show that there is only a
relatively limited commitment among those involved to promote data sharing in
high-profile initiatives such as South Africa’s National Spatial Information
Framework. The findings of this research are supported by a number of studies
of local-government data sharing in the US carried out by Harvey and Tulloch
(2006) which suggest that local-government data sharing is largely informal in
nature and is undertaken mainly to support existing government activities. In this
environment, NSDI principles are largely irrelevant for the majority of the surveyed
governments.

Notwithstanding these conceptual and operational problems, the SDI literature
contains many positive reports on inter-organizational data sharing in practice. A
study of more than 200 central and local government organizations commissioned
by the e-government unit of the UK Cabinet Office (2005) found that 49 per cent of
respondents claimed that they were participating in data-sharing projects but
provided only limited detail about the nature of such projects. One case that is cited
in the report is the Forth Valley GIS, which is a joint public-sector partnership unit
providing corporate GIS services to three neighbouring local authorities in
Scotland, Clackmannanshire, and Falkirk and Stirling Councils. Ad hoc arrange-
ments of this kind are not uncommon elsewhere in the UK and are particularly well
developed in the US. For example, the well-established New York State GIS data-
sharing cooperative has 584 members. More than 200 of these are from local
government, 111 from not-for-profit organizations, and 109 from academia, with
state- and county-level government organizations accounting for the bulk of the
remainder (www.nysgis.state.ny.us/coordinationprogram/cooperative/index.cfm).

Data sharing in the course of SDI implementation will often require a minimum
of a written agreement between the parties concerned and may also involve the
creation of new kinds of organizational structures. These can take various forms.

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

13

Masser’s (2005: chapter 5) analysis of the different kinds of organizational structures
that have already emerged in the US, Australia, and Canada to facilitate data
sharing during SDI implementation shows that at least five different types of
partnerships are already in operation. These range from the restructuring of existing
government agencies to the establishment of joint ventures involving different
combinations of the key stakeholders (table 1).

The simplest case is the merger of various government departments with
responsibilities for collecting geographic information. The driving force for this
restructuring is the perceived administrative benefits associated with the creation of
an integrated database for the agency as a whole. Western Australia’s Shared Land
Information Platform (SLIP) provides increased cross-governmental access to the
wide range of land and related spatial information within both the Department of
Land Information and other governmental agencies (www.walis.wa.gov.au). The
development and implementation of SLIP have both a horizontal and vertical focus,
with the horizontal being whole-of-government services, and access to data and the
vertical being a focused business model providing tailored services to an aspect of
government management. One of the major challenges in creating a SLIP is the need
for effective coordination across all government agencies involved.

An alternative strategy is to set up a special government agency outside the
existing governmental structure with a specific remit to maintain and disseminate
core datasets. Service New Brunswick in Canada is a good example of such a
strategy (www.snb.ca). It is a Crown Corporation owned by the Province of New
Brunswick. It was originally set up to deal with matters relating to land transactions
and topographic mapping for the Province as a whole. Since 1998, it has shifted its
position to become the gateway for the delivery of a wide range of basic government
services as well as national SDI implementation (see next section).

There are also some interesting examples of joint ventures between different
groups of the stakeholders in SDI implementation. The simplest case is a data-
producer-driven joint venture such as the Australian Public Sector Mapping
Agencies consortium (PSMA) that was set up in 1993 to create an integrated
national digital base map for the 1996 Census of Population (www.psma.com.au).
The driving force behind this partnership was the recognition that the whole is
worth more than the sum of the parts in that there are clear benefits for the nation to
be derived through the assembly of national data sets from data held by the
consortium members.

Table 1. Examples of organizational structures created to facilitate data sharing during SDI
implementation.

Type

Status

Driving force

Restructuring Within government structures

Creation and maintenance of an

integrated land-information database
External to government structures Delivery of wide range of eGovernment

Joint ventures

Consortium of data producers

Integration of datasets held by state

Joint venture by key data users Maintenance and dissemination of

and commonwealth agencies

Joint venture by wide range of
data producers and users

core datasets

Creation and sharing of core datasets

services

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 14

I. Masser et al.

The other two types of joint ventures involve more complex structures. The Large
Scale Base Map of the Netherlands (www.gbkn.nl) is a good example of a joint
venture to create and maintain key elements of a spatial data infrastructure. This
involves a continuing commitment to share the costs involved between a number of
public sector agencies from central and local government as well as the private-
sector utility companies. The national joint venture agency that manages the project
is consequently a case of a public private partnership of data users that has been
operating at the local, provincial, and national levels for more than 10 years.

Finally, initiatives such as the MetroGIS collaborative in the Minneapolis St Paul
metropolitan region of the US bring together a large number of data producers and
data users (www.metrogis.org). Such initiatives are both more ambitious and more
open-ended in their potential for development than either of the other joint
ventures. MetroGIS is a collaborative venture between the spatial-data producer
and user communities to assemble, document, and distribute geospatial data
commonly used by the more than 300 local and regional government units serving
the seven-county Minneapolis—St. Paul metropolitan area (Masser and Johnson
2006). It is a voluntary organization that provides an effective forum to identify
common geospatial-data-related needs, collectively define the organizational and
technical solutions needed to address those needs, and share geospatial-data
knowledge. MetroGIS has no legal standing and, as such, cannot own data, hire
staff, or finance projects. It relies on its stakeholder organizations to develop and
maintain all data, develop and support data-distribution tools, and finance its staff
and project needs.

The findings of this analysis indicate some of the challenges that need to be
resolved in order to promote inter-organizational data sharing on an unprecedented
scale for spatially enabled government. In many cases, this will require either major
changes in existing organizational structures or the creation of new structures to
facilitate data-sharing activities.

5. Creation of enabling platforms

Development of SDIs have played a major role in helping to form the concept of a
spatially enabled platform. Initially, SDIs were implemented as a mechanism to
facilitate access and sharing of spatial data hosted in distributed GISs. Users,
however, now require precise spatial information in real time about real-world
objects and the ability to develop and implement cross-jurisdictional and inter-
agency solutions to priorities such as emergency management; natural-resource
management; water rights; and animal, pest, and disease control.

In order to achieve this, the concept of an SDI is moving to a new business
paradigm, where SDI is emerging as an enabling platform to promote the
partnership of spatial-information organizations (public/private) to provide access
to a wider scope of data and services, of a size and complexity that are beyond their
individual capacity.

SDI as an enabling platform can be viewed as an infrastructure linking people to
data (figure 4) through linking data users and providers on the basis of the common
goal of data sharing. The benefits of SDI in enabling this sharing of information
have been documented, but an SDI does not necessarily break down the barriers
between jurisdictions. Just because different information can be gained about a
levels, does not mean that the
state, for example from different jurisdictional
information will necessarily be compatible (it may not be of the same accuracy or

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

15

Figure 4. Connecting people to data.

have the same specifications, utilize the same symbology, etc). There is now a need
to move beyond a simple understanding of SDI and create a common rail gauge to
aid in implementing initiatives that solve cross-jurisdictional and national issues.

The technical basis for delivery of enabling platform should be through an
interoperability architecture based on distributed, custodial data management and
open standards. This would provide uniform and consistently managed access to
distributed web services operated by authoritative custodians. This architecture
would allow initiatives to grow in an open environment that gives government and
agencies the ability to operate in an integrated manner (Rajabifard et al. 2005). This
creates an opportunity for a whole of government initiative to develop from the
often-fragmented developments at different levels.

The ability to deliver the concept of spatially enabled platform, however, will also
require an investigation of the way in which those data will be stored in the future.
The ability to allow massive consolidation of spatial data sets across all jurisdictions
may enable the creation of a seamless platform (which covers both land and marine
environments), although there is the need to look closely at the advantages and
disadvantages of both a distributed-data model and a consolidated model. It will be
important that the concept be based upon and take advantage of the latest
technologies,
to deliver an
standards, and metadata application in order
interoperable environment. One of the key objectives of SDI is to facilitate the
interoperable environment through the ability to integrate multi-source datasets.

With this in mind, it is acknowledged that new database-management software
and technology promise to change the way in which data are stored and the
underlying technology that will support and drive the enabling platform in general.
The benefits of such technology are already being seen in the development of the
Geocoded National Address File (GNAF), the concept of virtual libraries, the
emerging GRID computing technologies, and super servers throughout the world.
However,
in
implementing an enabling platform are not technical but institutional, legal, and
administrative in nature.

there is general acknowledgement

the major challenges

that

The enabling platform will be the main gateway to discover, access, and
communicate spatially enabled data and information about the jurisdiction. Such an
entity can be enhanced so that it is possible to share, in addition to data, business
In this
strategies, processes, operations, and value-added products.
goals,

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 16

I. Masser et al.

environment, all
types of organizations participating (including governments,
industries, and academic) can gain access to a wider share of the information
market ensuring more transparent and effective information coordination. This is
done through organizations providing access to their own spatial data and services
and,
in return, becoming a contributor and hence gaining access to the next
generation of different and complex services. The vision is to facilitate the
integration of existing government spatial-data initiatives for access and delivery of
data/information. This integration would be based on common standards and
business understanding and combines distributed functions provided by participat-
ing organizations to deliver services which are structured and managed in such a
way that they are seen by third parties as a single enterprise.

The benefits of such an environment will be more than just the representation of
feature-based structures of the world; it will also include the administration and
institutional aspects of such features, enabling both technical and institutional
aspects to be incorporated into decision-making (Rajabifard et al. 2005).

to access both spatial

Following this direction, in Australia for example, they have started to develop an
enabling platform called Virtual Australia. The concept and delivery of Virtual
Australia aim to enable government and other users from all
industries and
information sectors
information (generally held by
governments) and applications which utilize spatial information (developed by the
private sector and governments). According to Rajabifard et al. (2006b), Virtual
Australia is a vehicle from which both textual and spatial data are utilized to form a
range of supported functions for those within the industry as well as non-spatial and
non-technical user groups. Each state jurisdiction has a range of initiatives and
functions being both used and created often in isolation from one another. The
creation of Virtual Australia will help to modularize the development of SDI—
creating services and functions that can be utilized at further levels up the
information chain, including across jurisdictions.

With this in mind, Virtual Australia is an enabling platform that supports the
vision of spatially enabled government by providing a major point of discovery and
communication to complete, correct, and current information about the natural and
built environment and related affordable spatial information applications, in a
usable and readily available manner at anytime and in anyplace.

Another example is the Geospatial One-Stop (GOS) in the USA, which is one of
three major initiatives (Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC), Geospatial
One-Stop (GOS) and The National Map initiative) driving the development of a
National SDI (NSDI) for the US. The GOS is one of 24 e-Government priorities
that are aiming to make it easier, faster, and less expensive for all
levels of
government and citizens to access spatial information (Ryan et al. 2004). From a
policy perspective, it adds three unique benefits to the implementation of the NSDI,
including:

N raising the visibility of the strategic value of geographic information;
N increasing federal accountability for geospatial-data stewardship; and
N establishing a collaborative model for an intergovernmental initiative.

The establishment of the GOS also gives the implementation of an NSDI a sense of
urgency and importance. The GOS implements the basic elements of the NSDI by
providing an Internet portal to facilitate data sharing and encourage decision
support across all jurisdictional levels of the country. GOS will rely on the National

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

17

Map as the underlying provider of base content for all other GOS supplied datasets.
This gives the US a base layer of fundamental data from which all other
jurisdictional levels are able to work. This type of initiative is also important in the
creation of a seamless SDI between all jurisdictional levels as well as creating
spatially enabled government vision.

The development of Service New Brunswick (SNB) is also another example which
is very relevant to the concept of an ‘enabling platform’. SNB is the Canadian
Province of New Brunswick’s gateway for the electronic delivery of a wide range of
basic government services. Its mission is ‘to improve the accessibility of government
services and to be stewards for authoritative public information’ and provides
‘simple, fast and secure access to products, services and information’ (SNB 2005). It
is interesting to note that the Vision for SNB is ‘government services on time, every
time, everywhere’ (SNB 2004), a vision not dissimilar to that for the Australian
Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information (CRC-SI). SNB has four
main lines of business including Property Assessment (all land, buildings, and
improvements), Registries (real and personal property registries), Government
Service Delivery (more than 197 government services), and Geographic Information
Infrastructure (creation and maintenance of the control-survey network and base-
mapping data). Through a Web portal, individuals and business have access to a
range of services including property assessment, tickets for festivals and attractions,
driving and vehicle registration, Fredericton District Soccer Association registration
and a range of land and property services.

Based on these examples, the creation of an enabling platform would lower
barriers to access and use of spatial data, to both government and the wider
community within any jurisdiction, and particularly to the spatial-information
industry. If barriers are minimized, entities would be able to pursue their core
business objectives with greater efficiency and effectiveness. In particular, industry
would be able to reduce their costs, which would encourage investment in capacity
for generating and delivering a wider range of spatial information products and
services to a wider market.

Having said that, the development of a successful and functioning platform
requires a set of concepts and principles to enable the design of an integration
platform that facilitates interoperability and inter-working of functional entities
within a heterogeneous environment. The spatial-data communities within any
jurisdiction can benefit
from the various models and tools that have been
developed in other jurisdictions for integrated modelling, as well as the work of
the Open GIS Consortium (OGC) to develop standard,
interoperable access
interfaces, to facilitate access to GIS services over the Internet (Web Services,
Internet GIS).

6. Conclusions

This paper has considered a number of strategic issues relating to the implementa-
tion of SDIs to spatially enable governments. It reviewed and assessed current
information initiatives and activities within different
development of spatial
jurisdictions internationally outlining an overview of current practice and challenges
with the aim to help move the vision of enabling platform towards the creation of a
strategy and roadmap for the realization of SDI as a framework to spatially enable
governments through building institutional capacity among all sectors of the spatial
information community.

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 18

I. Masser et al.

Three strategic challenges that must be taken into account when implementing
SDIs to spatially enable government have been addressed in this paper. The first of
these indicates the need for new and more inclusive models of governance to enable
the very large number of stakeholders from all levels of government as well as the
private sector and academia to participate in the management of the processes of
SDI implementation. The findings of the analysis also suggest that the emphasis has
shifted away from the central government organizations that played a leading role in
the initial development of SDIs towards the local-government and private sectors in
terms of SDI implementation.

The second challenge considered the strategic questions associated with data
sharing between different kinds of organization. The findings of the analysis suggest
that data sharing on a massive scale will be needed for SDIs to become fully
operational in terms of spatially enabled government. This level of data sharing is
likely to require considerable changes in the organizational cultures of
the
participants and may require new organizational structures to effectively manage
this process in some cases.

The third challenge relates to the establishment of enabling platforms to facilitate
access to spatial data and the delivery of data-related services. It can be viewed as an
infrastructure linking people to data through linking data users and providers on the
basis of the common goal of data sharing. Further, this infrastructure would be a
vehicle from which both textual and spatial data are utilized to form a range of
supported functions for those within the industry as well as non-spatial and non-
technical user groups.

In summary, the paper has discussed three strategic challenges that must be taken
into consideration during the implementation of SDIs to support spatially enabled
governments. It shows some examples of the ways in which these challenges are
being addressed in both research and practice. However, the scale of the efforts that
will be required to overcome these challenges should not be underestimated.
Spatially enabled governments will bring with them considerable benefits to both
decision-makers and society at large but also require a high level of networking skills
and capacity building activities from those professionally involved to deliver these
benefits.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the members of the Centre
for SDIs and Land Administration at the Department of Geomatics, the University
of Melbourne, in the preparation of this paper and the associated research. They
would also like to acknowledge the support of the Department of Sustainability and
Environment, Government of Victoria, Australia in this research. However, the
views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of these groups.

References
AHMAD, M.H., 2004, MyGDI:

Development, September, pp. 34–37.

intelligent access

to geospatial

information. GIS@

BARR, R., 2005, Disruptive technologies, Geoconnexion, October. Available online at: http://
www.geoconnexion.com/magazine/article.asp?ID52409 (accessed 25 October 2005).
BELL, K., 2006, World Bank support for land administration and management: Responding
to the challenges of the millennium development goals. In FIG Congress 2006, 8–13
October, Munich, 2006.

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

19

BUTLER, D., 2006, Virtual globes—the web wide world. Nature, 439, pp. 776–778.
CABINET OFFICE, 2005, Geographic Information: an Analysis of

Interoperability and
Information Sharing in the United Kingdom (London: e Government Unit, Cabinet
Office).

COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, 2003, The reuse of public sector information,
Directive 2003/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council. Official Journal
of the European Union, L345, pp. 90–96.

COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, 2004, Proposal for a Directive of the European
Parliament and the Council Establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the
Community (INSPIRE), COM (2004) 516 final (Brussels: Commission of the
European Communities).

DEPARTMENT OF SUSTAINABILITY AND ENVIRONMENT, 2004, Terms of Reference for the
Victorian Spatial Council. Available online at: www.land.vic.gov.au (accessed 5
March 2006).

GUIMET, J., 2004, Four rules to set up a basic (local) SDI: the process of creation of the spatial
data infrastructure of Catalonia (CSDI/IDEC)—experiences and conclusions. In
Proceedings of GSDI 7, Bangalore, India.

HARVEY, F. and TULLOCH, D., 2006, Local government data sharing: evaluating the
foundations of spatial data infrastructure. International Journal of GIS, 20, pp.
743–768.

LENK, M., 2005, Coordination of national SDI in Germany. In Proceedings of the 11th EC-GI

and GIS workshop, Alghero, Italy.

MASON, N., 2006, Crossing boundaries—GIS for all in Northern Ireland. GEOinformatics, 9,

MASSER, I., 2005, GIS Worlds: Creating Spatial Data Infrastructures (Redlands, CA: ESRI

pp. 50–51.

Press).

MASSER, I. and JOHNSON, R., 2006, Implementing SDIs through effective networking: the

MetroGIS geospatial data collaborative. GeoInformatics, 9, pp. 50–53.

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, 1998, Geographic Information in the 21st
Century: Building a Strategy for the Nation (Washington, DC: National Academy of
Public Administration).

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL, 1993, Toward a Coordinated Spatial Data Infrastructure for
the Nation (Washington, DC: Mapping Science Committee, National Academy
Press).

ONSRUD, H.and RUSHTON, G. (Eds), 1995, Sharing Geographic Information (New Brunswick,

NJ: Centre for Urban Policy Research).

PIRA INTERNATIONAL LTD, UNIVERSITY OF EAST ANGLIA, AND KNOWLEDGE LTD, 2000,
Commercial Exploitation of Europe’s Public Sector Information (Luxembourg: EC DG
INFSO).

RAJABIFARD, A., MANSOURIAN, A., VALADAN ZOEJ, M.J. and WILLIAMSON, I.P., 2004,
In

Developing spatial data infrastructure to facilitate disaster management.
Proceedings of GEOMATICS’83 Conference, 9–12 May, Tehran, Iran.

RAJABIFARD, A., BINNS, A., MASSER, I. and WILLIAMSON, I., 2006a, The role of sub national
government and the private sector in future spatial data infrastructures. International
Journal of GIS, 20, pp. 727–741.

RAJABIFARD, A., BINNS, A. and WILLIAMSON, I., 2006b, Virtual Australia—concepts and
principles. Spatial Science Journal (Special Issue on Spatial Information and Spatial
Data Infrastructures), 51, pp. 63–78.

RAJABIFARD, A., BINNS, A. and WILLIAMSON, I.P., 2005, Creating an enabling platform for
information. In Proceedings of the Spatial Science 2005

the delivery of spatial
Conference, 14–16 September, Melbourne, Australia.

ROBINSON, M. and BURGESS, B., 2006, The fifty states initiative: building a strong NSDI.

GeoWorld, September.

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 20

Spatially enabling governments through SDI implementation

RYAN, B., DEMULDER M., DELOATCH I., CARIE, H. and SIDERELIS, K., 2004, A clear vision
of the NSDI. Federal Geographic Data Committee Newsletter, Winter, pp. 1–6.
SNB, 2004, Annual Report 2003–2004, Service New Brunswick. Available online at: http://

www.snb.ca (accessed 14 February 2006).

SNB, 2005, Service New Brunswick Home Page. Available online at: http://www.snb.ca

(accessed 14 February 2006).

WALLACE, J., WILLIAMSON, I., RAJABIFARD, A. and BENNET, R., 2006, Spatial information
opportunities for government. Spatial Science Journal (Special Issue on Spatial
information and Spatial Data Infrastructures), 51, pp. 79–99.

WEHN DE MONTALVO U., 2003, Mapping the Determinants of Spatial Data Sharing

(Aldershot, UK: Ashgate).

Downloaded by [New Jersey Institute of Technology] at 02:16 26 August 2014 