This article was downloaded by: [Florida Atlantic University]
On: 24 November 2014, At: 05:04
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Using process models to
improve spatial analysis
Shawn W. Laffan
Published online: 10 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Shawn W. Laffan (2002) Using process models to improve
spatial analysis, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16:3,
245-257, DOI: 10.1080/13658810110099107

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810110099107

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 3, 245± 257

Research Article

Using process models to improve spatial analysis

SHAWN W. LAFFAN
School of Resources, Environment and Society, Faculty of Science, Australian
National University, Canberra, Australia, 0200
e-mail: Shawn.LaŒan@anu.edu.au

(Received 13 March 2001; accepted 21 August 2001)

Abstract. This paper describes a method of improving spatial analyses by using
a process model to de(cid:142) ne the sampling window. This method allows the sample
to adapt to changing conditions as they occur in the dataset, rather than applying
the same geometric shape to all locations. Such a sampling method can be used
to reduce the noise in the sample, and thus generate more sensible results. The
general approach may be applied to other processes that in(cid:143) uence or control the
distribution of spatial variables, provided the processes are known and can be
modelled. The method also enables exploration of the degree to which a spatial
variable is controlled by an assumed driving process. In this study the sampling
windows for each location are de(cid:142) ned using uphill and downhill watersheds, and
are applied to geochemical variables across a 1100 km2 area in Weipa, Queensland,
Australia. The utility of the approach is assessed using variograms and the Getis-
Ord G*i
statistic. Results indicate an improvement over omnidirectional and
wedge-shaped sampling, with the most improvement where the variable is highly
mobile in solution. These areas are considered to be under modern hydrological
control. Most errors in the example are attributed to the eŒect of other landscape
processes, such as aeolian transport and marine incursions.

1.

Introduction
There is an extensive literature on spatial modelling and analysis, ranging across
the various (cid:142) elds of environmental modelling. Spatial approaches focus on the
characterization or modelling of geographical processes using the correlation of
dataset elements with their neighbours in geographical space, which can be local or
global, univariate or multivariate.

Semivariograms, Moran’s I and Geary’s c are examples of univariate analyses,
and covariograms are a multivariate case (Moran 1948, Goodchild 1986, Isaaks and
Srivastava 1989). Local adaptations to the univariate approaches attempt to identify
more local variation in a dataset, as such variation can be concealed by aggregation
into global statistics (Getis and Ord 1992, 1996, Anselin 1995, Ord and Getis 1995).
These local approaches have led to the development of Geographically Weighted
Regression (Brunsdon et al. 1996, 1998, Fotheringham et al. 1996, 1997a, b, 2000)
and the Geographical Analysis Machine and Geographical Explanation Machine
(Openshaw 1998).

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Informatio n Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110099107

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 246

S. W. L aVan

Regardless of the modelling and analysis approach used, be it local or global,
with one variable or many, all spatial models assume that the sampling scheme used
to de(cid:142) ne the analysis neighbourhood for each location is relevant to the investigated
process or response variable. This paper is concerned with a better method of
de(cid:142) ning the spatial neighbourhood using the underlying driving process to exclude
unrelated data, and thus reduce sample noise in the analysis. An example is shown
in which a simple hydrological process model is used to de(cid:142) ne the sampling window
for a set of geochemical variables for which the spatial variation is most controlled
by the movement of soil and surface water. The method also enables exploration of
the degree to which a spatial variable is controlled by an assumed driving process.

2. Spatial sampling schemes

Spatial analysis methods normally use geometric shapes to de(cid:142) ne the neighbour-
hood of locations used in the analysis. These neighbourhoods , also known as windows
and spatial weights matrices, are normally circular in the isotropic case, and ellipse
or wedge-shaped where anisotropy is investigated.

However, sampling using geometric shapes will only partly model spatial relation-
ships across a study area. Spatial variation is normally controlled by some underlying
causal process, the orientation, shape and extent of which will vary spatially.
Therefore geometric sampling windows may only be useful within small areas of a
dataset where they conform by coincidence to the orientation, shape and extent of
the spatial association controlled by the driving process. Where the sampling window
does not conform to the underlying causal process it is likely that some neighbouring
values used in the analysis will have a weaker relationship with the central location
as there are no links through the causal process. This will therefore reduce the utility
and relevance of any spatial analysis results.

If the underlying causal process is known and can be modelled then it can be
used to de(cid:142) ne a unique sample window for each dataset location. As this window is
based on the causal process, sampling is then able to adapt to changing conditions
of direction, shape and extent of association as they are encountered in the dataset.
This approach should thus improve the relevance of model results, since it considers
the cause of the spatial distribution (the driving process). The analysis should use
only those neighbours that have a causal connection with the central location.

Driving processes will vary with diŒerent applications, but might include geo-
logical fault lines controlling mineral haloes, wind directions controlling weed dis-
persal or (cid:142) re, soil moisture drainage controlling soil geochemistry, movement of
disease vectors in epidemiology, or migration pathways for social relationships. Any
spatial model or statistic may be calculated using such an adaptive approach as it
is merely a diŒerent sampling window. The main limitation with the approach is the
ability to model the driving process.

3. An application—sampling using watersheds

The movement of water in the regolith controls much of the variation in regolith
geochemistry, while overland (cid:143) ow controls mechanical reworking by erosion and
deposition. Consequently, the zones of in(cid:143) uence for locations in dominantly (cid:143) uvial
landscapes are the local uphill and downhill watersheds. The uphill watersheds are
contributing areas, while the downhill watersheds are areas of dispersal. Sampling
using these watersheds would therefore exclude those locations with no hydrological
connection to the central location because there is no connecting transport path (see

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 Improving spatial analysis

247

(cid:142) gure 1). The approach only needs to calculate the uphill and downhill watersheds
for each dataset location to use as the sampling windows.

One key point to note here is that this process-based approach to sampling is
not a method of strati(cid:142) cation, as a unique watershed is de(cid:142) ned for each dataset
location. Strati(cid:142) cation is one means to isolate regions of associated values for analysis
by geometric sampling window, for example by lithology, catchment, or administrat-
ive boundary, but it ignores the within-unit variation in process. By de(cid:142) ning a unique
watershed for each sample location, variation in the process-variable interactions
may be better investigated.

Figure 1 illustrates the concept discussed in this paper. The shaded areas denote
the uphill and downhill watersheds for a hypothetical sample area using a raster
data structure. The arrows denote the direction in which water will (cid:143) ow. In many
cases this shows no hydrological connection between the central cell and cells that
are included in the circular sample. Values from these unconnected cells will therefore
introduce noise to the spatial analysis of any hydrologically controlled variable. The
clearest example of no hydrological connectivity is where the uphill watershed sample
stops at the ridgeline. Cells on the other side of the ridge (cid:143) ow away from the central
cell, and so there can be no hydrological connection between these cells and the
central cell. Other neighbouring cells have (cid:143) ow lines that pass near to, but not
through, the central cell. These therefore also have no hydrological relationship with

Figure 1. Example of sampling using circular windows and uphill and downhill watersheds,
arrows denote direction of surface water (cid:143) ow. Note that many of the cells within the
circular sample, but outside the modelled watersheds, do not have connecting drainage
paths to the central cell. These therefore have no hydrologic association with the
central cell and will thus introduce noise to the analysis.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 248

S. W. L aVan

the central cell. The shape of the watershed sample also changes depending on the
landscape controls over drainage, notably in the downstream sample as the (cid:143) ow is
dispersed away from the central cell. Further from the central cell, the width of the
sample will reduce if convergent (cid:143) ow conditions are encountered. Geometric sample
windows do not properly model such variation.

3.1. Implementing the method

Using a raster digital elevation model (DEM), it is a simple process to determine
indices. In this case an
watersheds above and below a cell using hydrological
adaptation of the ‘upness’ index described by LaŒan (1996) and Roberts et al. (1997 )
is used, as it was devised to model the eŒect of subsurface drainage. This algorithm
de(cid:142) nes the set of contributing cells as those that are connected to the central cell by
a contiguous, monotonic, uphill path (see (cid:142) gure 1). The same approach may be used
to de(cid:142) ne the downhill sample area by using those cells connected by a down-
hill path. This approach allows subsurface watersheds to cross surface watershed
boundaries where neighbouring cells across divides have higher elevations.

To calculate spatial indices, a measure of contiguity is needed between the central
location and each sampled location within these contributing and distributing water-
sheds. Distance is used here to de(cid:142) ne a binary association where a cell is either
inside or outside the analysis window. A smooth weighting function that decays with
distance could be used to reduce the eŒect of sudden spatial inclusions of extreme
values (Brunsdon et al. 1996). However, the nature of the data used in this study
are such that there is generally smooth variation across geographic space. Such an
approach would prove useful where data are aggregate d into zones of unequal size,
such as with many socio-economic datasets, or where the sample density is lower
than in this study.

The binary neighbourhood may be measured in several ways, and surface drain-
age distance is used here. Euclidean distance will give inaccurate results where there
is a curved or meandering catchment, and subsurface drainage distance cannot be
easily calculated. Surface drainage distance may be estimated using any non-random
(cid:143) ow algorithm, and the D8 algorithm (O’Callaghan and Mark 1984) is used for
simplicity. The D8 algorithm uses the path of steepest descent (or ascent) to allocate
(cid:143) ow between a cell and its neighbours. The use of multiple (cid:143) owpath algorithms is a
subject warranting further investigation.

3.2. Statistics

Two univariate statistics are used to assess the utility of the watershed sampling
i statistic (Getis and Ord 1992, 1996,

method: the semivariance and the Getis-Ord G*
Ord and Getis 1995).

Semivariance (equation 1) is a global statistic and, when plotted as a variogram,
is used to investigate the degree of association in a dataset as it changes with lag
distance. It is calculated as the average squared diŒerence between dataset elements
and their neighbours. Semivariance increases as dissimilarity increases.

c(d ) 5

{Z(xi)Õ Z(xi+d )}2

1
2nd

nd

i=1

(1)

where c(d ) is the estimated semivariance; d is the lag distance; nd is the number of
samples at lag d; Z is the sample value at locations xi and xi+d .

i (Getis and Ord 1992, 1996, Ord and Getis 1995, equation 2) is a local statistic,

G*

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 (cid:158)
Improving spatial analysis

249

used to investigate spatial clustering of hotspots across a dataset. Hotspots are
locations where there is a clustering of values consistently greater than, or less than,
the mean. The implementation of G*
is as a z-score, calculated as the diŒerence
i
between the sum of the local sample and the weighted global mean, divided by the
weighted global standard deviation. G*i
is positive when a cluster is greater than the
mean, and negative when a cluster is less than the mean. More extreme values denote
greater clustering of similar values, and values of zero are not clustered.

G*

i (d ) 5

Sj wij(d )xjÕ W *
i x
i

s*S(nS*1i)Õ W *2

nÕ

1

(2)

where d is the lag distance; n is the number of samples within d of the central point;
W *
for a binary weights case; x* is the dataset
i
mean; s* is the standard deviation.

is the sum of the weights; S*

1i 5 W *
i

G*i diŒers from the local variants of Moran’s I and Geary’s c (Anselin 1995, Getis
and Ord 1996) as it is a comparison of a local neighbourhood with the dataset
mean, where Moran’s I and Geary’s c are comparisons of the central location minus
the dataset mean with the neighbourhood locations minus the dataset mean. By
excluding the central cell from G*
i to calculate the Gi statistic, the analysis becomes
analogous to the neighbourhood component of Moran’s I.

If the watershed sampling does provide a better model of spatial association,
then the degree of diŒerence between a cell and its neighbours will be reduced, and
the degree of spatial clustering will be increased. This will result in reduced semivari-
ance values and increased G*
i magnitudes away from zero. Simple diŒerences are
used here for simplicity, although future research could use statistical routines such
as Monte Carlo analysis to assess the degree of signi(cid:142) cance (Brunsdon et al. 1998 ).

3.3. Assessing the method

The statistics are applied to three geochemical variables from Weipa,
in
Queensland, Australia ((cid:142) gure 2 ): percentage abundance of oxides of aluminium, iron
and silica, sampled within a pisolithic bauxite layer at 38 928 drill locations ((cid:142) gure 3 ).
The distribution of these variables is known to be controlled by hydrological pro-
cesses, through both solutional and mechanical reworking (Tilley 1998). A DEM
with a 30 m cell resolution is used to de(cid:142) ne the watersheds.

increments from 0ß

To assess the utility of the method, the statistics calculated from the watershed
sampling are compared with omnidirectional (circular) and directional ( bi-directional
wedge) sampling schemes. For the semivariance, the wedge samples are oriented in
10ß
statistics use four directions aligned
north/south, north-east/south-west, east/west, and south-east/north-west. All direc-
tional analyses use a wedge angle of 45ß . Semivariance is calculated to a distance of
3000 m at 30 m increments, while G*
is calculated over 30, 120, 210 and 300 m
i
distances (1, 4, 7 and 10 cells).

to 170ß . The G*i

4. Results and discussion

The semivariance results show a general improvement for watershed sampling,
which is slight for aluminium and iron and strong for silica. The G*i results show
some stronger spatial clustering, the proportions of which decrease into spatially

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 250

S. W. L aVan

Figure 2. Location diagram.

Figure 3. Spatial distribution of the 38 928 sample points with 5 m elevation contours. Note
that the sampling density bears no relation to the patterns in (cid:142) gures 6 and 8. The box
is the display area used in subsequent (cid:142) gures.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 Improving spatial analysis

251

contiguous units as sample distance increases. The implications of these results in
the study area are discussed.

4.1. Semivariance

The variograms for aluminium and silica show an improvement of watershed
sampling over omnidirectional sampling ((cid:142) gure 4). This improvement is strong for
silica, which has a sill at 1200 m, and weaker for aluminium, which does not reach
a clearly de(cid:142) ned sill but is consistently lower than the omnidirectional response.
Comparison of the iron semivariance response shows it to have lower variance up
to 800 m, after which it is worse than the omnidirectional sample until 2700 m where
it converges with the omnidirectional response. The omnidirectional response for
iron also has a more evident sill structure than does the watershed sample, albeit
only up to a range of 1500 m.

The directional variograms ((cid:142) gure 4) show a wide variation of response around
the omnidirectional semivariance for aluminium and iron, indicating some directional
variation in response modelled by the bi-directional wedge shape. The lower variation
of the directional silica response around the omnidirectional response indicates there
is less association with a bi-directional wedge sampling window than with aluminium
and iron. Comparatively, the watershed sampled variograms for aluminium and
silica are often equal to or lower than those calculated using the directional samples.
Where the directional response is lower than the watershed response, it is only for
part of the sampling range. This indicates that the watershed sampling is a better
model of spatial association when the entire range is considered. Comparison of the
iron variograms using the directional and watershed samples shows a similar response
to that for the omnidirectional case. The watershed is therefore a better model of
the spatial association of iron only at short distances.

One additional point to consider is that the lowest directional variogram response
for each of the variables analysed conforms approximately to the dominant hillslope
orientation in the study area, which is approximately north-south (see (cid:142) gure 3). This
orientation is additional, albeit tentative, support for using watershed sampling, as
it can more directly model hillslope drainage processes than do geometric sampling
windows.

However, while the semivariance results provide some support for watershed
sampling, semivariance is a global statistic. It can thus obscure localized spatial
variation through the eŒects of aggregation. The G*i statistic analyses such local
variation and so provides more information about the degree of spatial variation in
the landscape.

4.2. G*i

A visual inspection of the G*i surfaces ((cid:142) gure 5) shows a similar response for each
of the sampling methods, although the directional surfaces are clearly oriented to
the sampling orientation. However, there is a consistent response where the watershed
sampling shows stronger clustering than geometric sampling. The spatial extent of
this stronger clustering decreases when compared with the omnidirectional response,
and increases when compared with the directional response, as the spatial range
increases ((cid:142) gure 6).

The relationships in (cid:142) gure 6 imply that, overall, the watershed sampling better
represents spatial relationships than omnidirectional sampling at 30 m, beyond which

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 252

S. W. L aVan

Figure 4. Variograms for omnidirectional, directional and watershed samples. Directional
variogram sample angles are 0ß –170ß
in 10ß
increments. Silica is the only response
with any obvious improvement of the watershed sampling method over the omnidirec-
tional and directional sampling method. This indicates that, globally, silica is under
modern hydrological control while this control is only partial, if at all, for aluminium
and iron.

it declines. Iron has a sharper decline after 120 m. While the decline against omnidirec-
tional sampling is rapid as the range increases, it is into spatially contiguous zones.
These diŒer for each variable considered ((cid:142) gure 7), are not related to sampling
densities, and appear to have geomorphically plausible explanations (see below).

The G*i

indices calculated using the watershed sampling method are consistently
stronger than the directional (wedge) sampling ((cid:142) gures 5, 6 and 7), generally increas-
ing with distance. From this it might be inferred that the watershed sampling is
modelling the spatial associations better because it adapts the orientation, shape and
extent of the sample window to the changing conditions around each cell.

Figure 5. G* results at the ten cell lag (300 m) for omnidirectional, watershed and directional
sampling schemes. Note the lower response for the directional samples. The similarity
of the omnidirectional and watershed responses indicates that the diŒerence surfaces
((cid:142) gure 7) represent subtle changes. Other sampling distances show a similar response,
but are spatially less extensive.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 Improving spatial analysis

253

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 254

S. W. L aVan

Figure 6. Proportion of sample dataset (38 928 data points) where watershed sampling
returns stronger clustering than omnidirectional and directional sampling. This indi-
cates how often the watershed sampling is a better model of spatial association than
are the omnidirectional and directional samples.

It is also possible to generate a simple watershed model by automaticall y adjusting
the orientation and shape of a directional geometric sample window to maximize
the G*i
response. For example, those areas where the directional samples return
stronger G*i responses than the omnidirectional samples are similar to those shown
in (cid:142) gure 7, although their spatial extents are smaller, owing to the orientation of the
sampling window. When combined, these areas have a similar extent to those shown
in (cid:142) gure 7. An automatic approach may therefore generate similar results to those
calculated using a watershed sample. However, this is computationally more intensive
than calculating the watersheds and does not adapt to changing conditions of
hydrologic convergence and divergence. Additionally, such an approach addresses
the symptoms of the analysis error, not the cause. Consequently, watershed sampling
is considered a better model of spatial association for these areas under modern
hydrological control.

4.3. Implications in the study site

Globally, the broad-scale hydrological control of silica is inferred to be due to
solutional mobility. Development of the bauxite is attributed to desilici(cid:142) cation (Tilley
1998), and this analysis identi(cid:142) es the global scale at which such processes operate
to be approximately 1200 m.

The smaller scale local variation ((cid:142) gure 7) is inferred to be the extent to which
modern hydrology controls the spatial variation of regolith properties at Weipa.
This is also largely through solutional redistribution, and occurs in spatially contigu-
ous units. Most of this reworking has a spatial scale of less than 120 m but in some
areas it extends to at least 300 m.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 Improving spatial analysis

255

Figure 7. Zones where watershed sampling returns stronger G*i clustering than omnidirec-
tional sampling. All variables show a degree of control by modern hydrology across
the dataset at the 120 m range. At the 300 m range this control has reduced into
distinct zones. The aluminium response is on ridges, iron is restricted to a long linear
zone in the south-east, while the silica response follows breaks of slope and local low
areas around waterbodies. Note also the lack of relationship with the sampling density
((cid:142) gure 3).

At longer ranges (210–300 m), the control of aluminium by modern hydrology is
restricted to ridges, most probably due to relative enrichment by removal of silica
in solution. The modern hydrological control of silica occurs at breaks of slope and
around streamlines and waterbodies, and is inferred to be a local topographic control
over regional groundwater (cid:143) ows. The cause of the modern hydrological control of
iron is more di(cid:141) cult to determine, and may be related to past landscape evolution
processes.

That the watershed results only sometimes appear better than the omnidirectional
and directional sampling is not entirely surprising. The landscape at Weipa is
extremely (cid:143) at (mean slope <0.5ß ), so the watershed model used here may not
represent the geomorphic relationships in all cases. The fact that results such as
these have been obtained using such a simple approach indicates that there are at
least some areas that are controlled by modern hydrology, and that the method has
application in locating such areas that do conform to an assumed driving process.
The landscape at Weipa has also been evolving continuously over at least the
last 40 million years. During this time it has undergone reworking by many geo-
morphic process in addition to (cid:143) uvial action, including marine incursions, storm
surges, and aeolian activity. In addition, there is evidence of subsurface drainage
controlled by piping, albeit below the bauxite layer from which the data are taken.
Such processes are not expected to conform to surface drainage paths. To model the

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 256

S. W. L aVan

eŒect of all of these processes would require a signi(cid:142) cant increase in analysis complex-
ity, although separate analyses using models of each process to drive the spatial
sampling may prove useful.

5. Conclusions

The watershed sampling method used in this study generates some improvement
over geometric sampling schemes. The degree of improvement is regulated by the
solutional mobility of the variables considered, and the degree to which the hydro-
logical sampling model represents the underlying spatial driving processes. The
degree of
is quanti(cid:142) able, and appears to occur in contiguous,
geomorphically plausible regions in the Weipa study area.

improvement

Using process models to de(cid:142) ne spatial sampling windows therefore provides an
additional method in the spatial analysis toolbox by which spatial variables may be
investigated, and spatial models devised and operated. The approach will not replace
geometric sampling, as there are too many cases where driving processes are not
known, and so it is best used in conjunction with geometric sampling windows.
Sampling using models of driving processes also enables statements about control
by such processes to be made with a greater degree of con(cid:142) dence.

There is thus some potential to improve spatial analysis and modelling when
using the underlying driving process to de(cid:142) ne the sampling window for a spatial
variable. Such an adaptive approach may be applied using any underlying driving
process, as long as it can be modelled. Where models cannot be de(cid:142) ned, geometric
sampling is the only device available, and the analyst must work in the knowledge
that results may actually be underestimates.

Acknowledgments

Comalco Aluminium Pty Ltd provided the geochemical data for this research.
Karl Nissen and Steve Leahy wrote various versions of the watershed sampling code.
Clive Hilliker drew (cid:142) gures 1, 2 and 6. Brian Lees, Kimberly Van Niel, Bruce Doran
and two anonymous reviewers provided valuable comments on the manuscript.

References
Anselin, L, 1995, Local indicators of spatial association— LISA. Geographical Analysis,

27, 93–115.

Brunsdon, C., Fotheringham, A. S., and Charlton, M. E., 1996, Geographically weighted
regression—a method for exploring spatial nonstationarity. Geographical Analysis,
28, 281–298.

Brunsdon, C., Fotheringham, A. S., and Charlton, M. E., 1998, Spatial nonstationarity

and autoregressive models. Environment and Planning A, 30, 957– 973.

Fotheringham, A. S., Charlton, M., and Brunsdon, C., 1996, The geography of parameter
International Journal of

spatial non-stationarity.

space —an investigation of
Geographical Information Systems, 10, 605–627.

Fotheringham, A. S., Charlton, M., and Brunsdon, C., 1997a, Measuring spatial variations
in relationships with geographically weighted regression. In Recent Developments in
Spatial Analysis: Spatial Statistics, Behavioural Modelling and Computational
Intelligence, edited by M. M. Fischer and A. Getis (Berlin: Springer), pp. 60–82.
Fotheringham, A. S., Charlton, M., and Brunsdon, C., 1997b, Two techniques for exploring

non-stationarity in geographical data. Geographical Systems, 4, 59–82.

Fotheringham, A. S., Charlton, M., and Brunsdon, C., 2000, Quantitative Geography,

Perspectives on Spatial Data Analysis (London: Sage).

Getis A., and Ord, J. K., 1992, The analysis of spatial association by use of distance statistics.

Geographical Analysis, 24, 189–206.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 Improving spatial analysis

257

Getis, A., and Ord, J. K., 1996, Local spatial statistics: an overview. In Spatial Analysis:
Modelling in a GIS Environment, edited by P. Longley and M. Batty (Cambridge:
Geoinformation International ), pp. 261–277.

Goodchild, M. F., 1986, Spatial Autocorrelation. CATMOG 47 (Norwich: GeoAbstracts).
Isaaks, E. H., and Srivastava, R. M., 1989, Applied Geostatistics (New York: Oxford

University Press).

Laffan, S. W., 1996, Rapid appraisal of groundwater discharge using fuzzy logic and topo-
graphy. In Proceedings of the T hird International Conference/Workshop on Integrating
GIS and Environmental Modelling, Santa Fe, New Mexico,
January, 1996.
http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/conf/SANTA_FE_CD-ROM/main.html.

Moran, P., 1948, The interpretation of statistical maps. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,

Part B, 10, 243–251.

O’ Callaghan, J. F., and Mark, D. M., 1984, The extraction of drainage networks from
digital elevation data. Computer V ision, Graphics and Image Processing, 28, 323–344.
Openshaw, S., 1998, Building automated geographical analysis and explanation machines. In
Geocomputation, A Primer, edited by P. A. Longley, S. M. Brooks, R. McDonnell and
B. MacMillan (Chichester: John Wiley and Sons), pp. 95–115.

Ord, J. K., and Getis, A., 1995, Local spatial autocorrelation statistics: Distributional issues

ad an application. Geographical Analysis, 27, 286–306.

Roberts, D. W., Dowling, T. I., and Walker, J., 1997, FLAG: A fuzzy landscape analysis
GIS method for dryland salinity assessment. CSIRO L and & Water T echnical
Report, 8/97.

Tilley, D., 1998, The evolution of bauxitic pisoliths at Weipa in northern Queensland. In
T he State of the Regolith, edited by R. A. Eggleton (Geological Society of Australia)
Special Publication, 20, pp. 148–156.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 05:04 24 November 2014 