The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 294–298 December 2003

294

S U R V E Y

Producing Tactile Maps Using New Inkjet Technology:
an Introduction

Don McCallum*, Jonathan Rowell* and Simon Ungar**

*Tactile Inkjet Mapping Project, Department of Geography, Anglia Polytechnic University, East Road,
Cambridge CB1 1PT, UK (address for correspondence).
Email: d.j.mccallum@apu.ac.uk
**Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK.
Email: s.ungar@surrey.ac.uk

Three common methods for producing tactile maps are mixed media, microcapsule paper and thermoform. This paper
describes a new method for producing tactile diagrams using piezoelectric inkjet. To produce diagrams a photo-curing
acrylic polymer ink is repeatedly printed onto a thermoplastic substrate and exposed to ultraviolet light which bonds the
ink to the substrate and cures it solid. The speed and precision of the process means maps with ®ne, easily discriminated
tactile features will be readily available to users. The new process will facilitate further psychological, psychophysical
and cartographic research.

BACKGROUND

There are many methods for manufacturing tactile diagrams.
Mixed-media, microcapsule paper and thermoform are
common methods (Rowell and Ungar, 2003). Assessments
of the advantages and disadvantages of these production
methods have already been made (Horsfall, 1997; Morley
and Gunn, 2002). Gardiner (2001) describes mixed-media
as bonding materials such as cloth, string, cardboard and
sandpaper to a substrate to create an image in the form of
a collage. The process can be partially regulated by using
materials from a common source. The Nottingham Map
and Euro-town kits (James and Armstrong, 1976; Kiefner,
1983) provided a set of shapes and textures, which pro-
mote consistency, some informal standardization and allow
potential reuse (Bentzen, 1997). Despite their simplicity
mixed-media approaches are considered effective as the
materials used often have excellent perceptual qualities. On
the downside they take a long time to produce and are
not appropriate if multiple copies are required (Horsfall,
1997).

Microcapsule (or swell) paper is considered the most
popular method of tactile map production (Pike, Blades
and Spencer, 1992). It comprises a thick paper covered by
a thin (cid:142)lm of temperature sensitive microcapsules upon
which an image is printed. When the paper passes through
a controlled heat source, only areas beneath the heat
absorbing ink exceed the critical temperature at which the
microcapsules expand. This swelling elevates the surface
of the paper suf(cid:142)ciently to be discriminated by touch. As
there is only minimal control over elevation, all features

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225013041

rise to a theoretically uniform height. Tactile maps on micro-
capsule paper are less robust than those produced by other
methods and are not suitable for repeated or outdoor use
(Horsfall, 1997). However they are cheap and quick to pro-
duce, factors contributing to their popularity (Rowell and
Ungar, 2003).

Thermoform maps are produced by vacuum forming a
PVC sheet over a model master. Typically masters are mixed-
media diagrams, less often milled from metal, plastic or
wood. As the master can be re-used it is possible to make
multiple copies of the same map. An ability to control
elevation means that thermoform output can be relatively
high (>10 mm). It is possible to vary the pro(cid:142)le shape and
dimension, meaning tactile symbols produced with thermo-
form have enhanced discriminability. Thermoform maps are
generally hardwearing, but do have disadvantages. Production
of masters is often laborious, and expensive. The facility to
produce many different tactile features, especially textures,
far exceeds the numbers most users would be able to
discriminate between (Nolan and Morris, 1963). There
is also some notional
loss of information between the
thermoform cast and master.

In order to incorporate the best aspects of current
tactile production methods in a single common technique
we felt it was necessary that new technology combine:

Speed and ef(cid:142)ciency, with maps generated by computer.

.
. An ability to produce symbols at different elevations.
. Robust output that can withstand repeated, heavy use

in many kinds of environments.

. Affordability.

Producing Tactile Maps Using New Inkjet Technology

295

This has led to applying the piezoelectric inkjet process to
tactile maps. An outline of the basic engineering concepts
of
inkjet actuators, and a brief description of a tactile
printing machine and the impact this will have on future
tactile map production follows.

THE PIEZOELECTRIC INKJET PROCESS

£

10£

The term inkjet describes processes of ejecting small
12 L) drops
(volumes are measured in picolitres, i.e. 1
of liquid ink to produce an array of dots composing an
image. The process is found in everyday desktop printer
cartridges. Historically inkjet
technology was thermally
driven. A resistor located in a chamber of ink would heat
as an electrical current passed through it. As the ink
boiled, bubbles would form forcing ink through a nozzle.
Newer piezoelectric inkjet technology offers more versatility.
Piezo ceramics like PZT (Lead Zirconate Titanate), distort
when electrical charge is applied to them. It is possible
to control this distortion, and by alignment of the piezo
crystals regulate the ejection of ink through the nozzles.
Thermal and piezo technologies receive their electrical signals
direct from a computer dictating when each nozzle should
be (cid:142)red. Thus it is possible to build up an array of dots to
replicate on paper, or other substrates, the image seen on
screen. This method is called drop on demand (Hudd and
Willis, 2001). The ability to change both the voltage and
pulse rate (waveform) of electrical signals means that inks

with variable properties can be jetted. It also enables grey-
scale printing (Pierron, Auboussier, Schlemer and Galley,
2000), an expression of the capacity of each nozzle to
deposit drops at a range of sizes.

The piezoelectric print cartridge used in making the
tactile diagrams contains an array of 500 nozzles linearly
spaced over 70 mm, giving a resolution of 180 dpi (dots
per inch). To save space adjacent nozzles share a PZT wall.
As a consequence each nozzle only (cid:142)res every third cycle,
but nevertheless (cid:142)ring frequency is still 5000 Hz. The
nozzle ori(cid:142)ce is 50 mm diameter, the ejected drop volume
1. Drops will maintain
70 pL and the drop velocity 5 ms£
an accurate (cid:143)ight path where the throw distance (distance
from nozzle to substrate) is under 2 mm.

INKS

Three common types of ink are used with inkjet; evaporating,
phase change and photo-cured. Evaporating inks contain
water or alcohol that evaporates after (cid:142)ring, leaving only
pigment and chemicals that bind to the substrate. As they
do not preserve mass, evaporating inks are inappropriate
for tactile diagram production.

Phase change inks become liquid upon heating, solidify-
ing after (cid:142)ring as they hit a surface and cool down. They
must possess unique material properties, low viscosity in
the liquid phase to comply with inkjet operating constraints

Figure 1. Substrate holder with tactile business cards on tactile printing machine

296

The Cartographic Journal

and robustness in their solid state. Phase change inks are
only useful if their melting point is higher than environ-
mental temperature. It has proved dif(cid:142)cult to maintain
their stability in both states and they are often soft and
waxy with poor adherence to substrates.

Photo-cured inks change from liquid to solid in reaction
to light of particular frequencies. Typically this is within
the ultraviolet range, wavelengths of 200 to 600 nm. Inks
consist of acrylic monomers, oligomers, photoinitiators,
pigments and additives. Photoinitiators change to a radical
state upon exposure to ultra-violet light, starting a chain
reaction in which the ink’s constituents bond to form a
solid polymer.

In order to enhance tactile discriminability ink must
be suf(cid:142)ciently high above a substrate surface. Photo-cured
inks achieve this in two ways:

. They conserve their mass,

losing no volume in the

printing process.

. They can be partially cured, permitting chemical bond-
ing between previous and subsequent layers of ink.

The height of the raised ink is thus dependant on the
volume of ink applied, the spread on the substrate surface
and the layers of ink used. Intense (cid:142)nal curing typically

leaves the ink feeling like hard shiny plastic that will not
deform,
irrespective of the levels or intensity of haptic
interrogation (Roffey, 1982).

RESEARCH ON A TACTILE MAP-MAKING MACHINE

£

We are currently developing a machine capable of support-
ing substrates of area up to 420 mm
290 mm. There is
essentially no restriction on the thickness of substrate,
though in a majority of trials we have used 720 mm PVC
sheet. Other materials such as MDF, aluminium, paper
and a range of plastics have also been successfully tested.
The print head has three axes of motion relative to the
substrate. An ultra-violet lamp used for curing sits atop
the substrate holder. A PC controls all machine operations.
Tactile designs are converted to a black and white bitmap.
The pixels in the black areas of the bitmap are transferred
as electrical pulses to the print head, signaling a nozzle
to (cid:142)re. This process is allied to rapid prototyping and
other industrial machines that use inkjet to create three-
dimensional features (Cooley, Wallace and Antohe, 2001;
Hayes, Cox and Grove, 1998). As a relatively young tech-
inkjet will develop. Smaller drop sizes, greater
nology,
resolutions and faster printing speeds are all expected.

Figure 2. Map produced by tactile printer, courtesy of the National Centre for Tactile Diagrams

Producing Tactile Maps Using New Inkjet Technology

297

TACTILE MAP PRINT CHARACTERISTICS

£

A3 (420
290 mm) in keeping with the recommended
two-hand span maximum is the practical maximum map
size produced on the printer (Edman, 1992). The polymer
composition of the substrate and ink mean our tactile
graphics are lightweight, hardwearing and waterproof.
They are suited equally well to both common (public) and
individual (private) use. Examples of tactile maps produced
by the process are already in use at Essex bus and train
stations, and in several government buildings. The adapt-
ability of the technology means ink can also be printed
onto paper or thin (125 mm) polyester sheet to make easily
portable tactile maps for independent mobility.

£

360 dpi

The ink drops have a diameter of 50 mm — a theoretical
minimum feature size, giving a current printing resolution
in layers 10 mm thick. As this exceeds
is 180
minimum touch discriminability (Phillips, Johansson and
Johnson, 1992) the process is not limited in what it can
achieve tactually. A facility to superimpose one symbol
upon another exists as the printing process builds an image
in a series of layers. The printer is thus able to produce
different categories of symbol types (point, line and area)
at different elevations. A useful recommendation made by
Edman (1992) for improving discriminability.

The (cid:142)ne resolution also enables us

to print many
potential textures. In this the tactile printer excels. Tradi-
tionally macro scale textures (patterns) have been used
on both black and white visual maps and tactile maps as
a substitute for colour (Bentzen, 1997). While it is still
possible to represent these, the tactile printer enables us
to go further and replicate micro scale textures (surface
(cid:142)nishes) of the kinds that cannot be differentiated by eye.

FURTHER BENEFITS OF THE PRINTER

Optimizing Psychophysical Conditions for Improved Tactile
Discrimination
A unique feature of the tactile printer is the potential
to differentiate between ink and substrate. Because it is
possible to print on a variety of substrates with different
ink (cid:142)nishes, haptic contrast between the two can be maxi-
mized. Improvements of the technology (controlling the
spread of ink) will enable the manufacture of symbols with
vertical walls. Sharper leading edges will have the advantage
of increasing the shearing action of the tactile feature on
the (cid:142)nger. They will also give us even more control over
the three-dimensional (3D) pro(cid:142)le of tactile symbols.

Figure 3. Detail of tactile map produced by new inkjet technology

298

The Cartographic Journal

As a result of these two factors we hope to reduce the
height of raised print in the long term. To do so without
measurable loss of discriminability will
lead to lower
production costs and increased production speeds.

REFERENCES

Optimizing Perception by Developing Technology
As the process is digital it is possible to exchange infor-
mation across computing platforms and different tactile
production technologies. Tactile symbols that are known,
through feedback, to have been useful to one designer can
be archived for future reference and use by another. There
are no restrictions on the source of this information as
modern CAD software can model 3D tactile symbols con-
verting them into bitmap layers for accurate reproduction
by the tactile printer. In this way it is possible to build a
collection of common symbols, whose repeated use makes
them more easily memorized.

An ability to store tactile images and symbols and
reproduce them identically each time also improves out-
put consistency. A facility also exists to include or exclude
different layers of labeling information (including Braille
or alphanumeric text) according to a users level of tactile
experience or visual impairment.

CONCLUSION

The potential of using inkjet printing for producing tactile
diagrams has previously been recognized (Jaquiss, 2001;
Peiffer). This study highlights the bene(cid:142)ts of developing
the technique in a way that combines the advantages of
existing methods. To achieve maximum bene(cid:142)t all improve-
ments in the manufacturing process will be underpinned by
psychophysical, psychological and cartographic research.
As these investigations will be as universal as possible they
should equally apply to all tactile map producers. In the
end all tactile map users will bene(cid:142)t.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research reported here was funded initially by the
Enterprise and Innovation Of(cid:142)ce of Anglia Polytechnic
University, and subsequently by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council. EPSRC Grant GR/
R94480/01. The authors would like to thank Steve Carey,
John Powell, Derek Sheldon and Stuart Speakman for their
input.

Bentzen, B. L. (1997).

in Foundations of
‘Orientation aids’,
Orientation and Mobility, ed by Blasch, B. B., Wiener, W. R.,
and Welsh, R. L., American Foundation for the Blind, New York.
Cooley, P., Wallace, D., and Antohe, B. (2001). ‘Applications of
inkjet printing technology to BioMEMS and micro(cid:143)uidic systems’,
Paper presented at the SPIE Conference on Micro(cid:143) uidics and
BioMEMS, Adelaide, Australia.

Edman, P. K. (1992). Tactile Graphics, American Foundation for

the Blind, New York.
Gardiner, E. A. (2001).

‘The role of

in environ-
mental education and recreation in areas of managed countryside’,
Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Manchester, Manchester
Hayes, D. J., Cox, W. R., and Grove, M. E. (1998). ‘Micro-Jet
printing of polymers and solder for electronics manufacturing’,
Journal of Electronics Manufacturing, 8, 209–16.

tactile maps

Horsfall, B. (1997). ‘Tactile maps: new materials and improved designs’,

Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 91, 61–65.

Hudd, A., and Willis, M. (2001). Ink Jet Academy: Theory of Ink
Jet Technology, Information Management Institute, King(cid:142)eld,
Maine, USA.

James, G. A., and Armstrong, J. D. (1976). In Handbook for
mobility maps, Mobility Monograph Number 2, Blind Mobility
Research Unit, Nottingham University, Nottingham.

Jaquiss, R. S.

(2001). Website http://www.nfbnet.org/weblist/

aebteam/msg00021.html. International Braille Research Centre.
Kiefner, H. E. (1983). ‘General report’, Paper presented at the First
European Symposium on Tactual Town Maps for the Blind,
Brussels, 29 September–1 October.

Morley, S., and Gunn, D. (2002). Website http://www.nctd.org.uk,
National Centre for Tactile Diagrams, University of Hertfordshire,
Hat(cid:142)eld, Herts.

Nolan, C. Y., and Morris, J. E. (1963). In ‘Tactual symbols for the
blind’, Final Report: OVR-RD-587, American Printing House for
the Blind, Louisville, KY.

Peiffer, R. (circa. 1999). Website http://www.rit.edu/~easi/easisem/
pfeiff.html, EASI: Equal Access to Software and Information,
PO Box 18928 Rochester NY 14618 (716) 244-9065.

Phillips, J. R., Johansson, R. S., and Johnson, K. O. (1992). ‘Responses
of human mechonoreceptive afferents to embossed dot arrays
scanned across (cid:142)ngerpad skin’, The Journal of Neuroscience, 12,
827–39.

Pierron, P., Auboussier, E., Schlemer, C., and Galley, N. (2000).
‘In(cid:143)uence of transducer control
in DOD printing’, Paper pre-
sented at the NIP 16: International Conference on Digital
Printing Technologies, Vancouver, Canada.

Pike, E., Blades, M., and Spencer, C. (1992). ‘A comparison of
two types of tactile maps for blind children’, Cartographica, 29,
83–88.

Roffey, C. G. (1982). Photopolymerisation of Surface Coatings,

John Wiley and Sons, Chichester.

Rowell, J., and Ungar, S. (2003). ‘The world of touch: an inter-
national survey of tactile maps’, The Cartographic Journal, this
volume.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

