Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6): 773–790

Research Articletgis_1233

773..790

Language-Independent Access to History
Textbooks: Utilizing GIS Functionality
with Spatiotemporal and Thematic
Metadata

Dieter Pfoser
Institute for the Management of
Information Systems
Research Center “Athena”
Athens, Greece

Thanasis Hadzilacos
Open University of Cyprus

Giorgos Vasiliou
Talent SA
Athens, Greece

Alexandros Efentakis
RA Computer Technology Institute
Patras, Greece

Sophia Karagiorgou
RA Computer Technology Institute
Patras, Greece

Abstract
Integrating and accessing structured textual content obtained from different sources
is a challenging task and becomes even more so when dealing with multiple lan-
guages. The objective of this article is to showcase the technological efforts towards
the creation of a digital European history textbook repository that integrates respec-
tive textbooks from various countries and publishers. The content integration is
achieved by introducing language independent metadata based on space (locations),
time (dates), and thematic categories (history gazetteer). Providing adequate inter-
faces such metadata can be used to offer language-independent access to Multi-
language history textbook content. The speciﬁc focus in this article will be on (1)
presenting the metadata, (2) the data management approach including indexing the
history textbook content and (3) the resulting textbook repository including its

Address for correspondence: Dieter Pfoser, Institute for the Management of Information Systems –
IMIS/RC “Athena”, G. Mpakou 17, 11524 Athens, Greece. E-mail: pfoser@imis.athena-
innovation.gr

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2010.01233.x

774 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

GIS-based interface, allowing for a combination of map, timeline and keyword
based search of the history content.

1 Introduction

The great number of languages in Europe (more than 20 ofﬁcial ones in the European
Union alone) often makes it very difﬁcult, from an individual’s point of view, to iden-
tify documents relevant to one’s search without adequate language skills. In the speciﬁc
context of this work and the project it relates to, the focus is on providing the means
to provide uniﬁed access to Multilanguage history content in a language-independent
way.

A digital European history textbook base will integrate and provide access to already
existing digital material from various European publishers. The integration is achieved
by introducing largely language independent metadata including (1) space (locations), (2)
time (dates), and (3) history concepts. These three metadata aspects represent essential
abstractions of the content and will be used to index and access the textbook content in
a largely language-independent way. The aim is to use the history concepts to deﬁne a
(near) language-independent thematic categorization of content (abstractions that can
more easily translated than the entire texts). In addition, to identify locations in arbitrary
textbooks, a multilingual dataset that includes historic place-names is needed. Finally,
temporal identiﬁers are used to create a timeline for the respective text portions.

While in theory the potential as an indexing means is substantial, a considerable
challenge is posed by the identiﬁcation, collection and integration of the said metadata.
This article focuses on creating a thematic ontology for history concepts and a multilin-
gual location corpus. The former will contain thematic categories used in country-speciﬁc
curricula to arrive at a history ontology covering all of Europe. The location corpus will
include place-name identiﬁers that can be used to reference text portions geographically.
Integration of metadata sources also entails the translation of each source into several
target languages. To make this process as efﬁcient as possible, a metadata translation tool
is created that utilizes the Wikipedia encyclopedia. Subsequent manual translation and
veriﬁcation provide for an overall semi-automatic translation tool.

The three metadata aspects will be used to tag the historic textbooks, i.e. relate
metadata entries to the respective text portions. Essentially, all textbook content and
metadata is stored by means of a relational database with the tagging software scanning
the textbook content and relating it to the metadata. As a result a Multilanguage index
based on temporal, spatial and thematic metadata is created that provides language-
independent access to the textbooks, i.e. searching or content using Greek metadata will
also produce results in other languages. Automatic translation tools will then be used to
translate the content into the target language, e.g. Spanish text into Greek.

The work presented in this article touches several research aspects that all belong
to the larger complex of digital library research. Foremost, the spatial and temporal
metadata-based access to content has been exploited in several projects and products.
The Centennia Historical Atlas (Centennia 2010) supports spatiotemporal exploration of
history by means of interactive maps and displayed relevant content. In a similar fashion,
HyperHistory Online (World History Online 2010) allows one to explore selected history
concepts by means of a simple temporal categorization and image maps of concept
visualizations.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

775

Work in the general area of Named Entity Recognition is manifold, having already
resulted in many research projects and products, many of them open-source. GATE
(Cunningham et al. 2002) is a general framework for information extraction tasks from
content. In our work, we will use this tool to perform the essential content tagging
task, i.e. automatically relating metadata to content. MinorThird (Cohen 2004) is an
open-source toolkit (collection of Java classes) for storing text, annotating text, and
learning to extract entities and to categorize text. As such its functionality is limited with
respect to GATE but would ﬁt the purposes of our project, i.e. relating metadata to
content in terms of annotations. However, a severe shortcoming of MinorThird is that it
does not support Unicode character encoding. Clearforest Gnosis (ClearForest 2010) is
a browser extension that performs categorization of terms for Web pages by annotating
(color coding) them. Gnosis is a free service from Clearforest, which provides commercial
solutions for text-driven business intelligence, i.e. text categorization and text analysis. A
similar product suite is LexiQuest (SPSS 2010) from SPSS providing text analysis func-
tionality such as concept and relationship discovery combined with visualization inter-
faces for the results. The tool supports several languages including German, Italian and
Spanish. LexiQuest has been evaluated and was found to provide limited ﬂexibility with
respect to storage of both metadata and content and provided no ﬂexibility with respect
to customizing the tagging solution. A limitation with most tools is that they focus on
English as a working language and typically lack Unicode support. Further, available
metadata for NER is limited and linked to supported languages.

In addition to general text mining tools, specialized approaches for geocoding
content are available. Metacarta (Metacarta 2010) offers a tool for the geocoding of Web
pages and texts in general. The tool recognizes geographic key words and relates them
to coordinates. In connection with a spatial content browser, e.g. Google Earth (Google
2010), this technology can be used as an additional powerful means to improve the
quality of keyword-based search results. In the scope of this project, we will develop
similar techniques that have a narrower content focus and are based on a general NER
approach.

The remainder of this work is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data
scenario. Section 3 details how a spatiotemporal-thematic index is created from respec-
tive metadata for history textbooks. Section 4 describes the CITER tool for searching
and accessing content. Finally, Section 5 provides conclusions and directions for future
research.

2 The Data

To better understand the motivation behind our work of using three distinguished
metadata aspects of index content, the following sections brieﬂy describe the nature
of history textbook content and subsequently introduce the used metadata in more
detail.

2.1 History Textbook Content

Digital educational content and constructive educational software are two key “instru-
ments” towards the essential introduction of new technologies in the learning process
and the achievement of the anticipated goals. For the history discipline, the multilingual

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

776 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

and multicultural digital content gains in particular importance as it allows comparative
approaches to the discovery and interpretation of the historical facts and the develop-
ment of a broader historic perspective by considering the existing multiple national views
in a comparative teaching approach.

The speciﬁc content used in this work comprises 55 history textbooks from a total
of eight publishers and seven countries, representing six languages (English, Spanish,
German, Italian, Greek and Slovenian).

The type of content will be mostly history textbooks available in digital form, but

will also include content from history CDs and picture libraries.

An important step towards the creation of the repository is the integration of
content sources by means of an efﬁcient storage mechanism. We achieved this by (1)
deﬁning an integrated data model and (2) a methodology for transforming the text-
books according to this model and entering them in a relational database (PostgreSQL
DBMS in our case). While all “textbooks” are available in digital form, an elaborate
process was designed to import into the database books prepared using desktop-
publishing software such as Adobe InDesign and Quark Xpress in the production
process. Here, a semi-automatic methodology was deﬁned that includes manipulating
the original content sources, i.e. improving the quality and correcting the original DTP
ﬁles, translating them to (structured) XML documents and ﬁnally importing them to
the database.

2.2 Metadata

Identifying and authoring proper metadata and indexing content
is a next-to-
impossible task when there are no restrictions on the scope of the content. Focusing
on the subset of history textbooks one can exploit speciﬁc metadata aspects of the
data that present adequate abstractions of the content and provide a simple indexing
means.

Space (locations), time (dates) and thematic metadata (history concepts) are used to
structure history content and to provide a general means for (largely) language indepen-
dent access and integration of content, i.e. comparatively little effort is needed to
translate the metadata. In our endeavor involving content in six different languages, we
use a combined approach involving manual as well as machine-based metadata collec-
tion. Sources of metadata are (1) already existing metadata for textbooks (indices, TOC),
(2) existing metadata collections (spatial feature name collections, datasets from pub-
lishers, ontologies), and (3) text mining tools that extract relevant concepts from text
analysis. The overall objective is to integrate all three sources to produce a comprehen-
sive metadata base.

The two fundamental aspects for the study of historical facts are space and time.
These two aspects have the advantage over classical semantic markups such as keywords
in that they are non-ambiguous, i.e. there is no doubt as to what an x and y coordinate
or a date mean! An important prerequisite to spatial metadata authoring is the identiﬁ-
cation of geographic feature names. Although simple at ﬁrst sight, this task poses a
challenge in that Multilanguage issues and historical naming also have to be considered.
Thus, we have to include Multilanguage mappings of locations as well as historical to
current mappings of locations. All these variations have to be captured in the geographic
feature name corpus so that place names in texts can be identiﬁed afterwards. Existing
datasets for feature names that include geographic coordinates are the Geographic

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

777

Ontology Creation 

Classes 

Allocation of 
Instances 

Instances 

Domain expert 

Manual, tool support 

Manual, tool 

Figure 1 History ontology creation overview

Names System (GNS) (GEONet; NGA 2010) and the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic
Names (TGN; Getty Trust 2010), with the latter comprising around 900,000 places and
related information. Place names may include names in the vernacular language, English,
other languages, historical names, names in natural order and names in inverted order.
Besides these content sources, we will evaluate and add any dataset that is available from
the partners in this project.

Given the fact that large metadata sources do exist, identifying appropriate spatial
metadata is simple when compared to the task of building a history ontology for thematic
metadata. Accessing content based on location and time might not yield the desired
results when trying to ﬁnd information related to speciﬁc topics that cut across time and
space. An example here would be the “age of enlightenment,” which affected all Euro-
pean countries in different ways. Hence, a thematic component is needed to better
discriminate and index history content. For the deﬁnition of a history ontology, we
followed a combined top-down/bottom-up approach. The CITER history ontology has
been deﬁned by an historian and history textbook author. The history ontology consists
of 300 classes, including three main categories (event, organization, and person), a
qualitative category (source), a time class, a location class and an attribute class (prop-
erties to additionally style instances). The maximum depth for each of the main classes
is three (e.g. three levels below the “event” class). At the same time, concepts (instances)
for this ontology are collected in a bottom-up fashion, i.e. collecting and integrating
existing textbook metadata as well as using text analysis techniques. Finally, the instances
are related to the respective classes of the ontology. Hence, while in a top-down fashion
candidate entries of the history ontology are deﬁned by domain experts such as histori-
ans, machine translation techniques and existing metadata sources provide concepts at
the instance level. Figure 1 illustrates this approach.

2.3 Metadata Translation – or – the Wikipedia Trick

Space, time and thematic metadata were chosen since (1) they represent a powerful index
for history information and (2) they need comparatively little effort to be translated.
However, this translation task for metadata is still a considerable challenge and our goal
was to provide automatic and high-quality means of translation as brieﬂy outlined in the
following.

Each metadata entry represents a speciﬁc “label” in its respective language. Any
automatic translation would require and be based on dedicated Multilanguage resources,
i.e. dictionaries. In case no dictionary entry is available, a manual translation is needed.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

778 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

Original 
article
(concept with 
English label)) 

In-other-
language bar

Articles in other 
languages (concept 
label translation)

Figure 2 Wikipedia “term” translation

Step 2a: Wikipedia 
Translation 

Step 3a: Wikipedia 
Translation 

EN  DE  E 

I  SLO  GR 

EN  DE  E 

I  SLO  GR 

Data 
Source 

Data 
Source

Data 
Source

Data 
Source

Data 
Source 

Step 2b: Manual 
Translation and 
Verification

Step 3b: 
Manual 
Translation 

Step 1: Multilanguage Data 
Sources 

Step 2: Translation of all to 
English (language of 
reference) 

Step 3: Translation to all 
target languages 

Figure 3 Metadata translation process

One such dictionary that is publicly available is Wikipedia (Wikipedia Foundation
(2010). In the present approach, the Wikipedia encyclopedia is viewed as a multi-
language resource based on concepts. Each Wikipedia article page has a column that
contains links to articles covering the same topic in another language. Figure 2 gives
an example of an English article page on “World War II”, where one can follow the “in
other languages” links, to ﬁnd respective articles in, among others, German, Italian,
Spanish, Greek, and Slovenian. What is of interest is not the actual content of the article
but its “label.” The label is a human translation, i.e. by the article authors, of the
respective concept into the various languages. Exploiting this fact, a Wikipedia transla-
tion tool was created that takes a label as input and tries to translate it into the various
target languages. Two versions of the tool are publicly available (Efentakis and Pfoser
2010), Java code for database-centered batch processing as well as an online interface.
Given the availability of the Wikipedia tool, the following procedure was adopted
to translate all metadata from and to the six target languages (see Figure 3). In Step 1 all
potential metadata is collected from respective sources. In Step 2, all concepts are
translated into English, which is adopted as a language of reference. Step 2a involves
an automatic translation approach and Step 2b a complementary translation step and
veriﬁcation of the automatic translation results. Step 3 then involves the translation into
the respective target languages, with again, Step 3a involving automatic translation and

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

779

Table 1 Concepts after translation

Concepts incl. organizations

Places

Orig.

3,123
611
191
327

4,253

German
Slovenian
Italian
English
Spanish
Greek
Total

After
WP
Transl.

3,317
733
1,592
3,690
1,451
464
11,247

After
Manual
Transl.

3,690
3,690
3,690
3,690
3,690
3,690
3,690

Orig.

473
352
327
1,789
148
206
3,294

After
WP
Transl.

After
Manual
Transl.

1,313
678
1,094
3,215
488
654
7,443

3,215
3,215
3,215
3,215
3,215
3,215
3,215

Step 3b manual translation and veriﬁcation of the automatic translation results. Using
English as a reference language has the advantage of improving the results in Step 3a
using the Wikipedia tool.

Using the Wikipedia translation tool and translating the metadata into all six
languages, the complete amount of available metadata is shown in Table 1. The columns
represent (1) the number of original metadata entries in their respective language as
collected from the various sources, (2) the number of automatically translated terms
(Wikipedia tool) and (3) the ﬁnal number of metadata entries available in all languages.
Essentially, using the Wikipedia tool, roughly half of all entries have been translated
automatically.

3 Spatiotemporal-Thematic Index

While creating spatial and thematic metadata involves a lot of work, tagging the actual
content with this metadata is even more challenging. Such a process is generally labeled
Named Entity Recognition (NER), i.e. assigning a (group of) words to a set of predeﬁned
categories. In our speciﬁc context it would mean to discover temporal, spatial and
thematic identiﬁers that can be linked to a timeline, locations recorded as spatial
metadata, and statements referring to concepts in the history ontology.

3.1 Software Framework

When faced with a large amount of content, the tagging content with metadata has to be
automated to the largest extent possible. Information extraction (IE) systems automate
tagging process and can be integrated as software infrastructure. In the speciﬁc context,
the software that is used is GATE (A General Architecture for Text Engineering; Cun-
ningham et al. 2002), a software framework for natural language processing and engi-
neering. In the context of this work, we assume that terms with a common stem will
usually have similar meanings. The performance of an information retrieval system will

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

780 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

be improved if term groups are conﬂated into a single term, e.g. “connect”, “connected”,
“connecting”, “connection”, and “connections” to the stem “connect” (Porter 1980). In
the speciﬁc context, we used Snowball (Porter 2001), a framework for writing stemming
algorithms. Out of our six target languages, stemmers for English, German, Spanish
and Italian were readily available. We developed a Greek stemmer based on Ntais (2006).
A Slovenian stemmer has been developed based on Popovic and Willett (1992). The
Snowball framework is available as a plugin for GATE.

3.1.1 Spatial and thematic tagging

For tagging content with metadata and considering the natural language processing
aspect, a workbench was created integrating GATE and speciﬁc Snowball stemming
functionality. Our approach of text processing is (1) word level oriented, uses (2)
stop-words (articles, conjunctions, etc.) and (3) stemming. In our framework, the text-
book content and the metadata are stored by means of a relational DBMS, in our case
PostgreSQL. This is in contrast to the original GATE implementation that uses ﬁles. The
Content Tagger is used to relate terms found in the content to terms contained in the
metadata.

The principal approach for tagging content (history textbooks) is illustrated in
Figure 4. The Content Tagger is used to relate terms found in the content to terms
contained in the metadata. The overall content tagging approach can be grouped in
the following phases. Phase 1, tokenization, represents a pre-processing step to extract
candidate words from text by removing stop words and punctuation and applying
stemming. Stemming is applied to metadata as well. In Phase 2, the tagging process,
content is loaded from the relational database in main memory. Each document is
represented by a sorted vector of tokens. To identify tokens in the content (among
complex words with dashes and punctuation) a Unicode tokenizer is used to account
for the variety of texts and languages. With metadata also loaded from the database into
a main memory data structure, in a ﬁrst pass, for each token in the vector of tokens,
a candidate list of metadata entries is created. In essence, the tagging process itself is
language independent and word level oriented, i.e. initially we do not search for complete
phrases but independent words (tokens). Consider the following example. For a token
“republic” that is found in the text, all metadata entries that contain the word “republic”

Content 
Tagger 
Gate + Snowball 

Metadata
Thematic 
Ontology, Spatial 
Metadata 

Content
50 History Textbooks 

PostgreSQL  DBMS  to  store  metadata  and content 

Figure 4 Content tagging: Linking metadata and content

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

781

Figure 5 Tagging example: Visualization

are identiﬁed. In a second pass, tokens prior and past “republic” are used to form
candidate phrases. One such example would be “Weimar republic.” Is any such phrase
contained in the candidate list of metadata entries for “republic”, the respective sequence
is tagged. In our case “Weimar republic” would be such a phrase.

The tagging result is stored in tables as relationships between metadata and content.
Figure 5 shows another tagging result. The concept “Second World War” was found in
various texts. The visualization of the result directly reﬂects the result table. Text portions
that were tagged are highlighted. Terms with the same number of words are highlighted
using the same color. The highlighting is primarily used as a debugging tool to verify
tagging results and improve the algorithm.

3.1.2 Temporal tagging

Temporal tagging, i.e. the discovery of temporal identiﬁers requires a different approach
since a priori temporal metadata is limited! A temporal identiﬁer in the respective
languages is composed of (1) numbers that may represent all dates such as month, years
and centuries, (2) metadata comprising labels for weekdays, month, seasons, decades,
centuries, etc. and (3) the respective rules forming valid temporal identiﬁers, e.g. dates.
A parser was developed to detect date, month and year numbers from the textual
representation of a temporal phrase. The implementation is based on Glowacki (2010).
Figure 6 gives some temporal identiﬁers that were detected in English, German and
Greek texts.

3.2 Resulting Spatiotemporal-Thematic Index

To assess the quality of the resulting spatiotemporal-thematic index, Table 2 shows
tagging results for some exemplary books covering topics of the 20th century. The results

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

782 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

Figure 6 Temporal tagging examples

Table 2 Thematic index coverage

Content

Lang. Words

Found all

Found % Found dist.

Concepts and organizations
Geschichte und Geschehen 4
Britain – World War II
OMNIA
20. stoletje
Ιστορ α(cid:2)

S(cid:2) Δημοτικο(cid:3) (History

5th Grade)

DE
EN
IT
SLO
GR

38,651
14,794
2,714,250
24,784
12,833

5,986
1,739
80,332
5,102
1,373

15.5%
11.8%
3.0%
20.6%
10.7%

921
185
1,188
597
223

given are in this order: Words – number of words in book with stop words excluded,
Found all – number of concepts found measured in terms of number of words, Found %
– number of concepts found in terms of percentage of total words, and Found dist. –
distinct number of concepts found.

Given the prominent examples of German and Slovenian textbooks it is shown that
a signiﬁcant part of the content is essentially related to metadata. In the case of only
considering thematic metadata, 15% of the content can be linked to metadata, while
when also considering spatial and temporal metadata the actual words in the content that
are linked to metadata increase to close to 30%!

3.2.1 Metadata analysis, content overlap

A more detailed metadata analysis was conducted in order to chart the semantic overlap
between books, i.e. given a speciﬁc metadata entry how often and in how many books
does it appear. The analysis focuses on the same textbooks also given in Table 2, i.e.
including German, English, Italian, Slovenian and Greek. All books focus on the 20th
century, i.e. an a-priori overlap is given. What needs to be established is whether this
overlap can be also found by examining the overlap in metadata as well.

Figure 7 shows the overlap among the discovered metadata concepts for sets of
textbooks. Consider the example of thematic metadata found for the German textbook
in Figure 7a, which is 921. This textbook shares 460 terms with the Italian book and 116

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

783

1188

5

3

223

1324

19

20

88 

IT

DE

921 

460 

116

7

101 

5

7

6

3

7

116

9

3

3

9

GR

IT

238

45

GR

DE

309

44

16

35

21

47

35

16

42 

26

22

17

185 

EN

597

SL

53

EN

27

1324 

SL

(a) Thematic metadata overlap 

(b) Geographic metadata overlap 

Figure 7 Metadata overlap

with the Greek book. The overlap of all three books is 91 terms. The overall of all ﬁve
textbooks results in 35 terms (center of Figure 7a). Similar ﬁgures are shown for geo-
graphic metadata. Temporal metadata differ in that here temporal overlaps are consid-
ered. For example if one books mentions March 1945 and the other March 25, 1945, this
is considered an overlap. The temporal overlap is largely similar to the numbers reported
for spatial metadata.

3.2.2 Overall content and index size

While the previous section showed some speciﬁc facts on the respective coverage
of the index, in the following we will give the overall statistics of the index and its
coverage.

History Textbook Content. The 55 history textbooks comprise a database consisting
of a total of 82,800 paragraphs, which constitute 8.5 million words, or an average
paragraph size of 103 words.

Metadata. The collected metadata comprises a total of 3,690 thematic metadata

entries 3,215 geographic metadata entries.

The temporal metadata is individually discovered, i.e. the number of hits correspond
to the actual size of the metadata. Temporal metadata is stored by means of time, i.e.
temporal queries such as range are supported.

Spatiotemporal-Thematic Index. An important measure for our spatiotemporal-
thematic index is its size. The following numbers give the total number of hits per
thematic category, i.e. number of occurrences in content.

• Total thematic hits: 757,536
• Total spatial hits: 195,546
• Total temporal hits: 159,161

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

It can be observed that while spatial and temporal metadata produce roughly the
same number of hits, the thematic metadata produces four times as many hits. The

784 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

reason is simply that thematic metadata was derived from the content itself using
indices, TOCs and text mining tools. The spatial metadata was derived from external
sources and was then actually “discovered” in the content. As such the number of hits
is astounding.

Consequently, the total number of paragraphs that have been indexed is 75,949 out
of total 82,791, corresponding to a coverage of the index of 92%. This means that at
least 92% of all paragraphs have been indexed at least once. Elaborating further on the
index characteristics, it can be observed that for the thematic metadata, on average each
entry has 223 hits, i.e. references to content; spread over 6.7 history textbooks; and 2.63
languages (out of 6). For the spatial metadata, on average each entry has 142 hits, i.e.
references to content; spread over 5.7 history textbooks; and 2.6 languages (out of 6).
Again, considering the fact that spatial metadata was simply compiled using external

sources, the actually hit rate when compared to thematic metadata is very good.

3.2.3 Summary

Given the correct metadata, a combined spatiotemporal-thematic index for history
content becomes feasible. The metadata gazetteer includes roughly 10,000 concepts.
Using such a gazetteer to tag history content results in up to 30% of the content (i.e. the
actual words not considering stop words) being related to metadata! The textbooks
further exhibit a considerable overlap with respect to the metadata they share. This
overlap is important when we consider the objective of the metadata, namely to ﬁnd
content sources in Multilanguage textbooks related to the same thematic, geographic and
temporal concept/metadata.

4 Accessing History Content – the Modiﬁed GIS Case

Tagging content with spatial, temporal and thematic metadata creates a formidable index
to access history textbook content. This section describes the CITER platform and
interface speciﬁcally supporting content search based on the three distinguished metadata
aspects.

The CITER platform is a client-server application resembling a somewhat peculiar
GIS desktop application. The application is based on and uses the Cruiser platform
(Talent 2010). The application has to be installed on a Windows XP/Vista computer with
continuous and preferably broadband Internet connection. As such, the application is
similar to, e.g. Google Earth. All the CITER platform data (books, photographs, indices,
etc.) are stored on a server. On the client side (desktop app), apart from the application,
map data is installed to achieve fast response time and to avoid overloading network
trafﬁc. In this guide we will have a look at the most useful and exciting platform features.
Figure 8 showcases the basic user interfaces to query the history textbooks. Prop-
erly indexed content based on space, time and thematic metadata is accessed using the
three respective querying mechanisms. The temporal parameter is ﬁxed using a tem-
poral slider that allows for the selection of time points as well as ranges. The spatial
scope is determined by a spatial range and thus selected landmarks and is alternatively
also based on keywords, e.g. Greece. This functionality is supported using a base map
of Europe to show important geographical
landmarks that the user can query. A
next step in the application will be to integrate historic maps (vector data with chang-

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

785

Figure 8 Integration of new functionality and existing e-content portal solutions

ing boundaries in time). The thematic range is determined by browsing/querying key-
words in the respective language, thus effectively identifying concepts in the history
ontology.

Query results are displayed on the right side using an embedded Web-browser (see
below for examples and explanation). The retrieved content is showed in various tabs,
each representing the content in its original form or a respective machine translation. Each
type of content is marked as such. The software used for the translation of the history
content to the various target languages is the ESTEAM Translator (ESTEAM 2010). The
interface allows temporal, spatial and thematic parameters to be used simultaneously to
query the textbook content. For example, given the spatial range of Greece, a temporal
range of the year 1923 and the thematic concept of “war”, the respective metadata entries
in the database are queried to follow their pointers to the respective text portions they
index. In this case, texts relating to the Greek-Turkish war will be retrieved.

In the following, the various query parameters are described in more detail.

4.1 Spatial Parameter

The user can add spatial parameters to the query (see Figure 9), thus indicating that
he/she wants to have results that are only related to the places that have been selected.
Spatial data is selected by dragging a place from the map and dropping it to the reserved
area. Range queries for selection are supported.

The timeline (see Figure 10) is an active component in the application that can zoom or
pan to select a respective timespan (point). It has a highlighted area, which can be moved,

4.2 Temporal Parameter

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

786 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

Figure 9 Spatial search parameter

Figure 10 Temporal search parameter

shrunk or expanded ﬁtting the query needs. This highlighted area restricts the query
results only to those that refer to the time-period represented by the area to retrieve
content referenced by the temporal index.

4.3 Adding Thematic Parameters

Thematic terms (history concepts) (see Figure 11) can be added by opening a dialog and
allowing the user to select one or many entities either by browsing the history ontology
or by using (keyword) search.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

787

Figure 11 Thematic search parameter

4.4 Results

The results are shown in a tree-like structure, in the panel at the bottom (see Figure 12).
The results are divided into main texts (and photos) and sources of the texts. The results
can be browsed freely and the user can see a paragraph (see Figure 13), or even a whole
section (chapter) containing the paragraphs that match the query (see Figure 14).

5 Conclusions and Future Work

Content integration involving multilingual sources poses an interesting challenge,
especially when coupled with the ambition of language-independent access. This
work demonstrates that given the appropriate content, speciﬁc metadata can be iden-
tiﬁed that (1) provide a sufﬁciently accurate abstraction of the content and can be used
as an index to provide for sufﬁciently accurate search and (2) at the same time
to be
are either language independent or require a comparatively small effort
translated.

In our case of history textbooks, such metadata include time, space and thematic
concepts. This article showcased (1) the data – history textbook content, (2) spatial,
temporal, and thematic metadata resulting in a multilingual history ontology and spatial

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

788 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

Figure 12 Search result: Tree structure

Figure 13 Individual paragraph view

metadata gazetteer and (3) the resulting largely language-independent spatiotemporal-
thematic index. This index covers the content adequately and also shows sufﬁcient
overlap between books and languages.

Directions for future work are manifold. As was expected for the geocoding of
content, i.e. performing NER for geographic features, disambiguation of geographic
terms is needed to avoid false hits. This task is challenging in that we have to deal with
a multitude of languages, i.e. taking into account context and grammar at the indi-

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

Language-Independent Access to History Textbooks

789

Figure 14 Book chapter view

vidual language level. The objective, however, should be to provide a language inde-
pendent approach for the disambiguation of such terms. An interesting approach when
deriving metadata is automatic ontology creation (Ogata and Collier 2004). Here, texts
related to the same topic are analyzed to automatically extract classes and relationships
to construct a domain ontology. While the history ontology has been created with the
speciﬁc purpose of indexing content in mind and a large number of instances were
available a priori, such an approach can be used to verify the current ontology structure
as well as to produce additional instances. Using GATE as the basic software frame-
work has led to using Snowball-based stemming algorithms. However, promising work
in the area of language independent stemming (Bacchin et al. 2005) needs to be evalu-
ated in the present context as it can signiﬁcantly reduce the effort needed for adding
new languages to the history textbook repository. Besides technological improvements,
an important effort will be to collect additional metadata to improve the coverage of
the repository index. In the context of content tagging, we want to experiment with
fuzzy matching of concepts to texts. Besides stemming, which relaxes the matching
words, we want to experiment with relaxing the word sequences of phrases themselves.
For example, instead of trying to identify the metadata concept “Treaty of Versailles”
in the text, we would search for occurrences of such a word sequence within some
proximity, thus also linking the text “the peace treaty, which was signed in Versailles,
France” to the above concept. Finally, we want to develop this project into a Wiki-
based annotation system that utilizes the history textbooks as core content and provides
a means for students, teachers, and other interested third parties to restructure content
so as to develop individualized teaching materials as well as additions to the content
itself.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

790 D Pfoser, A Efentakis, T Hadzilacos, S Karagiorgou and G Vasiliou

This work is partially supported by the CITER project (Creation of a European History
Textbook Repository – http://citer.cti.gr) funded by European Commission, eContentplus
programme, grant agreement number ECP-2005-EDU-038193. The authors would like
to thank the project partners for their contributions to this work.

Acknowledgements

References

Bacchin M, Ferro N, and Melucci M 2005 A probabilistic model for stemmer generation.

Information Processing and Management 41: 121–37

Centennia Software 2010 The centennia atlas. WWW document, http://www.clockwk.com/
ClearForest 2010 ClearForest gnosis. WWW document, http://www.opencalais.com/gnosis/
Cohen W 2004 Minorthird: Methods for identifying names and ontological relations in text
using heuristics for inducing regularities from data. WWW document, http://minorthird
Cunningham H, Maynard D, Bontcheva K, and Tablan V 2002 GATE: A framework and graphical
development environment for robust NLP tools and applications. In Proceedings of the
Fortieth Anniversary Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’02),
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: 168–75

Efentakis A and Pfoser D 2010 Wikipedia translation tool. WWW document, http://citer.cti.gr/

publications/wikipedia-phrase-translation-tool/

ESTeam AB 2010 Automatic translation solutions. WWW document, http://www.esteam.se
Glowacki D 2010 CalendarParser, a java object class. WWW document, http://icecube.wisc.edu/

~dglo/software/calparse/index.html

Google 2010 Google earth. WWW document, http://earth.google.com/
Metacarta 2010 MetaCarta platform. WWW document, http://www.metacarta.com/
NGA 2010 GEONet names server. WWW document, http://earth-info.nga.mil/gns/html/index.html
Ntais G 2006 Development of a stemmer for the Greek language. Unpublished M.S. Thesis,
Department of Computer and System Sciences, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden (avail-
able at http://www.dsv.su.se/~hercules/papers/Ntais_greek_stemmer_thesis_ﬁnal.pdf)

Ogata N and Collier N 2004 Ontology express: Statistical and non-monotonic learning of domain
ontologies from text. In Proceedings of the ECAI-2004 Workshop on Ontology Learning and
Population, Valencia, Spain (available at http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/w/w06/)

Popovic M and Willett P 1992 The effectiveness of stemming for natural-language access to Slovene

textual data. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 43: 384–90

Porter M F 1980 An algorithm for sufﬁx stripping. Program 14: 130–7
Porter M F 2001 Snowball: A language for stemming algorithms. WWW document, http://

snowball.tartarus.org/texts/introduction.html

SPSS 2010 LexiQuest mine. WWW document, http://www.spss.com/software/modeling/modeler-

Talent 2010 Cruiser platform. WWW document, http://www.cruiser.gr/
The J. Paul Getty Trust 2010 Getty thesaurus of geographic names. WWW document, http://

www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/tgn/index.html

Wikipedia Foundation 2010 Wikipedia: The free encyclopedia. WWW document, http://www.

premium/

wikipedia.org/

World History Online 2010 HyperHistory online. WWW document, http://www.hyperhistory.com/

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(6)

