International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Internet-based investment environment
information system: a case study on BKR of China

HUI LIN LI ZHANG

To cite this article: HUI LIN LI ZHANG (1998) Internet-based investment environment
information system: a case study on BKR of China, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 12:7, 715-725, DOI: 10.1080/136588198241626

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241626

Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 55

View related articles 

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [Weill Cornell Medical College]

Date: 28 July 2016, At: 10:55

int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 7, 715± 725

Research Article

Internet-based investment environment information system: a case
study on BKR of China

HUI LIN and LI ZHANG
Department of Geography, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT ,
Hong Kong
e mail: {huilin, zhangli}@cuhk.edu.hk

Investment environment (IE) analysis is a spatially oriented problem.
Abstract.
Although geographical information systems play an important role in dealing
with spatial problems, few e(cid:128) orts have used GIS for IE analysis. The traditional
standalone GIS limits the information ¯ ow between the end users and the informa-
tion providers, especially the feedback information from users. For local govern-
ment it is more important to understand the interests of the investors and their
expectations so that they can improve their local IE and attract more investment.
The Internet provides a means of direct and mutual communication for both
sides. This paper deals with issues related to the Internet-based investment envir-
onment information system (IEIS). A case study on the IE of cities along the
is given to illustrate the
recently completed Beijing-Kowloon Railway (BKR)
methodology of an Internet-based GIS approach.

1. Introduction
1.1. Information ¯ ow and capital ¯ ow

foreign direct investment ( FDI)

The last decade, especially the last ® ve years, saw the impacts of economic
globalization to regional development. Under the pressure of change in the global
economic structure, any government should adjust its plan for continuously attracting
in particular, and ensure economic
investment,
development. This is especially important for developing countries including China
because they need to improve infrastructure construction, education and management
mechanism and technology in order to attract more FDI. The trend of economic
globalization is promoting the ¯ ow of capital, and capital ¯ ow, to a great extent, is
leading the ¯ ows of material, energy and population. In this information era, informa-
tion ¯ ow has a strong in¯ uence on the capital ¯ ow in regional economic development.
This makes sense at least in two aspects:

1. The capital outside the region: The capital from investors can be directed to

regions with high returns, or withdrawn from the inappropriate areas.

2. The capital inside the region: Local government can allocate development
funds to the departments or projects with an optimal scheme based on the
information ¯ ow for leveraging competitiveness of the whole region.

The basic approach for government to attract FDI is to widely disseminate the
information favourable for capital injection, including holding conferences/exhibi-
tions, advertising on TV and in newspapers, distributing brochures and investigating
in the foreign countries. With the development of networking technology especially
the WWW, the activities for attracting investment also occur on the Internet. How
to apply Internet technology to assist such IE analysis and to better communicate

1365-8816 /98 $12.00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 716

H. L in and L . Zhang

between investors and local governments has presented new challenges in the area
of economic development.

1.2. Investment environment (IE)

IE is usually called investment climate or business environment or investment
environmental climate ( Robert 1969, Zhang 1993, Tuan and Ng 1995 ). For Asian
countries and areas, some IE indices have been proposed by evaluating such factors
as government stability, restrictions and red tape, corruption, communications,
labour force, human rights, progressive attitude, living conditions and costs, risk-
reward ratio, and receptivity to new ventures ( Rowan 1978, Ming 1987). Tuan and
Ng ( 1995 ) summarized IE factors and classi® ed them into four groups:

1. The size of the market and its potential growth ( Day et al. 1988 );
2. The compatibility of the host country in language, geographical proximity,

and the legal and bureaucratic system ( Kravis and Lipsey 1982 );

3. The supply and cost of resources ( Kravis and Lipsey 1982, Marshall 1983 ); and
4. The degree of political and business risks ( Kelly and Philippatos 1982,

Mascarenhas 1982, Chase et al. 1988).

Zhang ( 1993 ) proposed a conceptual research framework for investment environ-
ments. He emphasised that IE research should be accommodated to the research
framework of a regional economy.

1.3. Investment environment information

IE information is the form and method to represent and depict the elements in
an investment environment system. According to the source, representation form
and spatio-temporal characteristics, IE information can be classi® ed into the follow-
ing three kinds:

( 1) Political, legislative and ® scal regulations. This kind of information is usually
recorded in text, acquired from relevant government legislation institutions. These
political, legislative and ® scal regulations usually have a speci® c spatial scope to
which they apply and in most cases this spatial scope accords with the boundary of
an administrative district. Within a speci® c administrative district, there is no spatial
di(cid:128) erence with respect to these regulations. From the temporal point of view, the
fundamental government organization and the basic legislation system are stable
while the temporary policies and regulations may well change with time.

( 2) T he regional socioeconomi c development

level and structure. This kind of
information is usually recorded in the form of statistical reports. Government bureaux
and o(cid:129) ces take the responsibility to regularly gather and distribute these data.
Usually, these statistical data, such as population, growth of income, education, and
health care, represent the socio-economic development level and structure of statist-
ical units from which these data are surveyed and calculated. Compared with the
information, statistical units have
spatial scope of political, legislative and ® scal
smaller spatial scope that accords with a lower level of administrative district. It is
supposed that there is no spatial di(cid:128) erence in one statistical unit.

( 3) Physical environment, natural resources and inf rastructure. Physical environ-
ment (e.g. weather, natural disaster, landform), natural resources (e.g. land, water,
mines) and infrastructure (e.g. transportation and other facilities) are among the
elements that add value to investment capital. Political, legislative, ® scal regulations
and socio-economic development level and structure are the overall or general

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 Internet-based investment environment information system

717

descriptions of the IE. They are usually called `soft’ IE elements. However, the pro® ts
of investment capital is made through the process of producing and marketing which
directly depends on such elements as the physical environment and natural resources
usually called `hard’ IE elements. Aside from the quantity and quality of these
elements, their spatial distribution also a(cid:128) ects the IE. Two characteristics can be
identi® ed among these elements. First, at di(cid:128) erent locations these elements posses
di(cid:128) erent quantity and quality and therefore exert di(cid:128) erent in¯ uence on the IE.
Second, the spatial e(cid:128) ects of these elements change gradually and rarely accord with
the boundaries of administrative districts. Because of these two characteristics, these
elements are usually depicted using various kinds of maps.

1.4. Investment environment information system (IEIS)

An ideal IEIS may need to consider ® ve functions for IE assessment: IE elements/
factors analysis, current IE evaluation, IE change prediction, IE zoning, and IE
readjustment. To facilitate the assessment, it is necessary to reconstruct the regional
model, which employs a large amount of geographical information. Geographical
information systems (GIS) can play an important role in this process. In China,
several research projects have been conducted to develop GIS-based IEIS such as
the Ninbo system ( Shu 1994 ) and the NJIC system (Lin et al. 1995 ). Such systems
can provide various IE information and spatial analysis tools.

Generally, an IEIS can be deemed an application-speci® c and GIS-based informa-
tion system. It consists of databases storing IE information, analytical models for
IE analysis, and a user interface for operation. An IEIS may be classi® ed as one
kind of business oriented GIS ( BOG). A BOG anticipated by Openshaw ( 1995) can
create information (adding value) from an existing database, be used as a multi-
purpose enabling platform, and be developed into a speci® c business system that
includes relevant geoprocessing technology without any need for access to standard
GIS packages and the full range of GIS functionality.

Mostly, users of IEIS include investors, capital recipients and IE researchers. In
practice, it may include only one or all three kinds of users. For investors, IEIS
assists them to make decisions on investment; for capital recipients, it allows local
government to identify de® ciencies in the IE and to take measures to improve it;
and for IE researchers, it serves as a testbed to develop new models and evaluate
methods to support the IE analysis.

1.5. Changes of concepts about IEIS

The information ¯ ow in the activities of attracting investment should not be uni-
directional, i.e. only the information regarding the local government and the region
goes to investors. Investors and local government should have a valid means of
communicating so that local government can get feedback from the investors, e.g.
what the investors want to know and what is their evaluation about a region?

Just as credit card companies can evaluate the payment behaviour of customers,
and provide guidance for regional investment on businesses such as retailing and
wholesaling. Some chain stores assist their decision-making by inputting information
about customers including sex, age, spending, behaviour and spatio-temporal features
via its distribution system (spatial data collecting system). Using investment environ-
investors can search the relevant information.
ment information system ( IEIS),
Meanwhile they also provide useful
information to the local government such
as their comments on the relevant region, their evaluation about various factors

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 718

H. L in and L . Zhang

including infrastructure and natural environment. All these are very useful to local
governments.

With the development of telecommunication technology, IEIS is now experiencing

signi® cant changes:

Internet systems.

1. From single (stand-alone) computer system to multi-user networking and now

2. From one-way information ¯ ow to two-way or multi-way information system.
3. From simple question/answer systems to expert systems and/or user-oriented

information service systems.

These changes may lead to the following results:

1. The rate of information ¯ ow increases signi® cantly, and augments the require-

ment on the application for new methods and technology.

2. Regional competition enters a new area, and it becomes necessary to build a

new restriction mechanism.

3. The economic globalization presents new challenges to the standardization of

IEIS, such as the use of graphic symbols.

1.6. T he Internet-based IEIS

Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer serve as the most common-
in-use interface for interacting with a Web server. The hypermedia interface of Web
browsers has recently provided a better environment for GIS applications ( Li et al.
1997, Kearney et al. 1997, Dostie 1997, Dai et al. 1997). The Internet o(cid:128) ers a new
way for investors to expand their businesses. Companies, local governments, and
other agencies that seek investment can use the Internet as a point of contact. The
common interface for all users is the World Wide Web.

The Internet-based IEIS is a spatial information system built on top of the
Internet and GIS. Capital recipients use of this system to distribute information
about the investment environment while the investors use this system to retrieve
information that is of interest to them and to analyse the investment environment
according to their experiences and the methods embedded in the system. Unlike the
standalone IEIS, the Internet-based IEIS resides on a HTTPD server and is accessible
from any computer with a Web browser. Databases reside on the server machine or
are distributed over the Internet. Clients or servers can perform spatial operations
and investment environment analysis.

The advantage of an Internet-based IEIS is that it provides a mutual communica-
tion mechanism for both sides: investors can get information they are interested in
while the capital recipients can also get useful information from the investors about
their investment behaviour of most.

2. Background of the case study
2.1. Beijing-Kowloon Railway (BKR): the longest economic development zone in
China

The Beijing-Kowloon Railway ( BKR) is a recently completed large scale project
in China and has been recognized by investors as the longest economic development
zone in China (see ® gure 1). This transportation artery will bring increasing oppor-
tunities to the regions along it. Most of those areas are poorer than the coastal areas
of China. Currently, improving the investment environment for attracting investors
is a very important task for central and local governments. On the other hand, an

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 Internet-based investment environment information system

719

Figure 1. China and the BKR.

`information window’ for those areas will be of interest to investors, especially those
from other countries, to estimate population size and area long the `belt’.

2.2. Promotion and standardizati on

Currently, communication is not easy between investors and local governments
for the regions along the BKR. Local governments spent thousands of dollars in
participating in exhibitions in Hong Kong for the purpose of promotion. But
investors still ® nd di(cid:129) culty in comparing those areas; simply there was no standard
system, which can be easily accessed for comparison. Particularly, region-speci® c
and location-speci® c information related to IE is not standardized in terms of the

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 720

H. L in and L . Zhang

timeliness, di(cid:128) erent spatial scales, and irregular data items. A well-designed IEI
System is expected to reduce or avoid these problems.

2.3. Objectives and signi® cance of the case study

Basically, the broad goal of this study is to improve current decision-making
procedure for investment by upgrading the methods of data management, data
analysis, and data representation. Particularly, an Internet based system is under
development with the following functions:

1. a multi-media user interface for Internet access to the IEI;
2. a multi-criteria evaluation package for the IEI analysis;
3. a feedback system for the government agency’s IE policy making.

A completed system will allow investors in other countries, where Internet services
are available to browse related information and make comparisons on the regional
investment environment before they schedule trips to the area. Their input may
improve the information exchange between investors and developers in related
regions.

3. The Framework of the Internet-based IEIS

Based on the client/server model, the framework of the Internet-based IEIS is
illustrated in ® gure 2. There are three inter-connected components for di(cid:128) erent

Figure 2. Architecture of the Internet-based IEIS.

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 Internet-based investment environment information system

721

services: a GIS server, a modelling workbench, and a graphical user interface on top
of a web browser. The GIS server contains four components: the catalog server, the
geo-processing server, the data access server, and the computing visualization server
( Lin and Zhang 1997 a, 1997 b). The catalog server acts as an idle application on
the server-side for metadata management of the geographical information and model-
speci® c information; it provides access to a variety of heterogeneous data without
making any assumptions about its location and representation. The data access
package is a data access engine. The geo-processing server provides basic spatial
analytical operations. The computing visualization server is a graphic engine for
mapping the investment environment information. These four components are linked
together using inter-process communication technology. The modelling workbench
consists of the model object manager and a model base. It stores all of the application-
speci® c models for investment environment analysis and provides a management
tool for selection, modi® cation, and operations. The graphical user interface is based
on HTML and the web browser. Java applets are integrated into HTML documents
to access the GIS server and the modelling workbench.

As illustrated in the above ® gure, the computing visualization server is not part
of the GIS server. The reason is what we have tested is a Java applet for mapping
the investment environment information. It is a client-side method that is much
di(cid:128) erent from other components of the GIS server. The code runs on the client
machine instead of the HTTPD server machine. Information that will be visualized
will be transferred from the HTTPD server to the user machine. This helps users
handle data more easily.

4. M ajor functions
4.1. Information retrieval and mapping on the Internet

It is easy to use the Internet-based IEIS to retrieve and map the IEI. As we have
mentioned above, there are three kinds of information which are stored in an IE
database. Information about the political, legislative and ® scal regulations are stored
in multimedia format (text, audio, and video) and organized as HTML documents
by subjects, keywords, and contents. To retrieve this kind of information, the user
provides one or more keywords and starts the search engine.

The second information component is the statistical data re¯ ecting the socioecon-
omic development level and structure of the region concerned. As these statistics are
collected and surveyed according to a speci® c statistical unit, both attribute values
and the corresponding statistical unit, which usually accord with a speci® c level of
administrative boundary, are stored in the database. Users can retrieve both attribute
information and spatial information by composing complex query clauses. The back-
end GIS server residing on the HTTPD server can respond to the requests from the
users and send back dynamic HTML documents relating to the query results in
tables or maps or both (® gure 3).

The last is the information regarding the environment and resources. This kind
of information is usually derived from available maps and has two characteristics.
One is that this kind of information is usually generated from primary maps by
spatial modelling. For example, de® ning lines of equal travel time around service
centres can generate the map of accessibility. The other is that this kind of information
may change gradually across space and thus it is usually more appropriately repres-
ented as raster layers. To query this kind of information the user chooses from the

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 722

H. L in and L . Zhang

Figure 3.

Internet-based querying and mapping.

stored data layers and may need to do some spatial operations. The results are also
illustrated as images and sent back to the browser.

4.2. Internet-based IE analysis

The most important IE analysis method in our case study is the GIS-based
multiple criteria evaluation (MCE) method for IE evaluation. Other models are used
to support the analysis and decision-making on IE, for example, regional economy
analysis model, spatial interaction model, etc. In GIS the most commonly used MCE
method is the weighted linear summation of data layers representing the evaluation
criteria although variants are found ( Janssen and Rietveld 1990, Eastman 1995, Lin
et al. 1997 ). This model consists of several HTML documents for criterion de® nition
and Java applets for criterion management and scenario management. For the same
investment objective, di(cid:128) erent investors may use di(cid:128) erent criteria and assign di(cid:128) erent
weights for each criterion. Therefore, HTML documents are designed for criterion
de® nition and management in the Internet-based IEIS to manage the hierarchic
factor tree. By sending the factors and its weight values to the HTTPD server, the
MCE computation module residing on the HTTPD server will be launched by cgi-
bin programs and the selection and input of the user will be recorded on the HTTPD
server. The MCE computation module will call Arc/Info running in a LAN through
remote procedure calls to do spatial data transformation and analysis.

4.3. Users’ response studies

The most useful bene® t gained from the Internet-based IEIS is quick and mutual
communication between the investors (the end-users of the IEIS) and the capital

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 Internet-based investment environment information system

723

recipients. The investors’ response or attitude to the IE is very useful information
for the local governments to improve their IE. Information left by investors when
using the IEIS includes investment areas, investment ® elds, factors that impact on
the investment desire of the investors, factor weight values, etc. Plans call
for a
statistical package to be employed to research the investment desire of the investors
from di(cid:128) erent countries.

5. M ajor problems in system development and maintenance
5.1. T echnical issues

Li ( 1996) has addressed the factors that contributed to the slow development of
network functionality on most GIS software. Several products from di(cid:128) erent vendors
can be used as a supporting environment of the Internet-based IEIS, such as ESRI’s
Map Server and Intergraph’s GEOMEDIA. There is also Java-based mapping
software that can meet the same requirements of mapping on the Internet.

However, IE analysis and information retrieval usually needs a large volume of
spatial and non-spatial data. It is a time-consuming task even for a simple spatial
overlay analysis. So what kind of strategy should be employed to implement the
Internet-based IEIS based on the Web to reduce the CPU time and the data transfer
time across the Internet, server-side strategy or client side method or the combination
of the two? There is still some debate on this topic. Di(cid:128) erent techniques can be used:
plug-ins, ActiveX controls, Java applets, and CGI-launched programs to connect the
back-end GIS mapping server. In our case study, we use a combination of Java
applets and CGI-bin programs to launch a back-end GIS server.

Heterogeneous spatial data access on the Internet is also an important and
di(cid:129) cult problem. Users do not know the location of spatial data sets. Therefore,
catalog service should be provided in the Internet-based IEIS to have access to
heterogeneous data without assumptions about its location and representation.
Because Java applets cannot access local ®
le systems for security, users cannot view
their own data layers. All the data layers should reside on the HTTPD server in the
le format. A solution to this problem is to install a HTTPD server on the
SHAPE ®
local machine so that the applets can communicate with the machine as if it is a
remote server.

5.2. Non-technical issues

There are some non-technical problems that in¯ uence the use of the Internet-
based IEIS: accuracy and availability of the IE information published on the Internet,
and uncertainty feedback from the users.

The accuracy of the IE information ensures the reliability of the evaluation of
the IE. The availability of the IE information determines how much information the
investors can obtain from the system. Without enough information provided to
support the IE analysis, few investors would use the system.

So the non-technical problems in building the Internet-based IEIS are much

more di(cid:129) cult to solve than the technical ones.

6. Conclusion

IE analysis is not only an economic problem but also a spatially oriented problem.
Although geographical information systems have had great success in dealing with
many spatial problems, there are still few e(cid:128) orts to use GIS for IE analysis. The
traditional standalone GIS limits the mutual communication between the end users

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 724

H. L in and L . Zhang

and the information providers. For local governments it is better for them to
understand why the investors are interested and what they expect so that they can
improve their local IE and attract more investment. The Internet provides a site of
direct and mutual communication for both investors and capital recipients. The
hypermedia information published on the Internet and the easy to use environment
of the Internet-based IEIS provides more information than traditional GIS-based
IEIS does.

On 3 June, 1996 TIME reported `Investors rush the net. Customers are dropping
traditional brokers for the Internet’. More and more investors would like to use the
Internet to expand their business, good news for the Internet-based IEIS. In the near
future we may ® nd that investors will seek to use the Internet-based IEIS to initiate
their ® rst step in investment. To reach this goal, accuracy and accessibility of the IE
information are two important factors that will a(cid:128) ect the evaluation of investors.

Acknowledgments

This paper is based on work supported by the Research Grants Council of the
Hong Kong Government under RGC Earmarked Research Grant No. CUHK
150/96H. Any opinions, ® ndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily re¯ ect the views of the
Research Grants Council.

References
Chase, D., Kuhle, J. L. and Walther, C. H., 1988, The relevance of political risk in direct

foreign investment. Management International Review, 28, 31± 38.

Dai, Q., Evans, L. and Shank, M., 1997, Internet interactive GIS and public Empowerment.

In Proceedings of GIS’97, Vancouver ( Fort Collins: GIS World Inc.), pp. 555± 559.

Day, E., Fox, R. and Huszagh, R., 1988, Segmenting the global market for industrial goods:

issues and implications. International Marketing Review, 5, 14± 27.

Dostie, M., 1997, The landscape map viewer. Proceedings of GIS’97, Vancouver (Fort Collins:

GIS World Inc.), pp. 560± 562.

Eastman,

J. R., 1995, Raster procedure

for multi-criteria/multi-objective Decisions.

Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing, 61, 539± 547.

Janssen, R. and Rietveld, P., 1990, Multicriteria analysis and geographical

information
systems: an application to agricultural land use in the Netherlands. In Geographical
Information Systems for Urban and regional Planning, edited by H. J. Scholten and
J. C. M. Stillwell (Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 129± 139.

Kearney, A., Arsenau, B., Coleman, D. and Quek, S. H, 1997. Internet access to real property
information. Proceedings of GIS’97, Vancouver (Fort Collins: GIS World Inc.),
pp. 575± 579.

Kelly, M. W. and Philippatos, G. C., 1982, Comparative analysis of the foreign investment
evaluation practices by U.S. based manufacturing multinational companies. Journal
of International Business Studies, 13, 39.

Kravis, I. B. and Lipsey, R. E., 1982, The location of overseas production and production for

export by U.S. multinational ® rms. Journal of International Economics, 12, 201± 223.

Li, B., 1996, Strategies for developing network-oriented GIS software. Proceedings of

Geoinformatics’96, West Palm Beach, Florida, 1, 161± 171.

Li, H. L., Hu, N. C., Lin, L. C. and Shu, S. U., 1997, A design of Taiwan Internet GIS.
Proceedings of GIS AM/FM ASIA’97 & GeoInformatics’97, T aipei, 279± 285.
Lin, H., Su, Y. and Wan, Q., 1995, Developing a multimedia based investment environment
a case study in Nanchang-Jiujiang Industrial Corridor.

information system Ð
Proceedings of GeoInformatics’95, Hong Kong, 150± 158.

Lin, H., Wan, Q., Li, X., Chen, J. and Kong, Y., 1997, GIS-based multicriteria evaluation for
investment environment. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 24,
403± 414.

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 Internet-based investment environment information system

725

Lin, H. and Zhang, L., 1997 a, Pluggable computing strategy for integration of GIS and
environmental modeling. Proceedings of GIS AM/FM ASIA’97 & GeoInformatics’97,
T aipei, 299± 305.

Lin, H. and Zhang, L., 1997 b, A Web-based GIS catalog browser for distributed spatial data

retrieving. Proceedings of GIS’97, V ancouver, 571± 574.

Marshall, A., 1983,

International

facility planning emerging

industries.

Industrial

Development, 3, 23± 25.

Mascarenhas, B., 1982, Coping with uncertainty in international business. Journal of

International Business Studies. 13, 87± 98.

Ming, J., 1987, Methods of investment environment evaluation. In Investment Climate in
China: Problems and Prospect,. edited by H. Wang, J. Ming, P. Li, and F. Xue (Hong
Kong: Beijing-Hong Kong Academic Exchange Center), pp. 3± 21.

Openshaw, S., 1995, A review of GIS in Business application. Geographical Systems, 2, 153± 168.
Robert, B. S., 1969, How to analyze foreign investment climates. Harvard Business Review,

September ± October, 100± 108.

Rowan, R., 1978, Fortune’s view of Asia. Asian Business and Industry, 14, 54± 70.
Su, Y., 1994, Information System for China’s Coastal Port Cities (Beijing: China Science and

Technology Press).

Tuan, C. and Ng, L. F. Y., 1995, Hong Kong’s outward investment and regional economic
integration with Guandong: process and implications. Journal of Asian Economics,
6, 385± 405.

Zhang, D., 1993, China Investment Environment

(Beijing:Chemistry Industry Publishing

House).

Downloaded by [Weill Cornell Medical College] at 10:55 28 July 2016 