Transactions in GIS, 1999, 3(3): 239–258

Research Article

Using GIS to Assess the Environmental
Justice Consequences of Transportation
System Changes

Jayajit Chakraborty
Department of Geography
University of South Florida, USA

Lisa A Schweitzer
Public Policy Center
The University of Iowa, USA

David J Forkenbrock
Public Policy Center
The University of Iowa, USA

recent developments

toxic releases or waste sites,

Abstract
Although environmental justice research has typically focused on locations of
in GIS and
industrial
environmental modeling provide a foundation for developing measures designed
to evaluate the consequences of transportation system changes. In this paper, we
develop and demonstrate a workable GIS-based approach that can be used to
assess the impacts of a transportation system change on minorites and low-income
residents. We focus specifically on two adverse affects: vehicle-generated air
pollution and noise. The buffer analysis capabilities of GIS provide a preliminary
assessment of environmental justice. We integrate existing environmental pollution
models with GIS software to identify the specific locations where noise and air
pollution standards could be violated because of the proposed system change. A
comparison of the geographic boundaries of these areas with the racial and
economic characteristics of the underlying population obtained from block level
census data provides a basis for evaluating disproportionate impacts. An existing
urban arterial in Waterloo, Iowa, is used to illustrate the methods developed in this
research.

Address for correspondence: Jayajit Chakraborty, Department of Geography, University of
South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Avenue, SOC 107, Tampa, FL 33620, USA. E-mail:
jchakrab@chuma1.cas.usf.edu

(cid:223) 1999 Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

240

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

1 Introduction

The concept of fairness in the distribution of environmental risks on the basis of race
and income is commonly referred to as environmental justice or environmental equity.
The perceived inequity in the distribution and impact of environmental hazards in the
US has led to the rise of the environmental justice movement, an informal network of
different community organizations cooperating with regional and national public
interest groups. The proponents of this movement contend that racial minorities and
economically disadvantaged populations shoulder a disproportionate burden of the
nation’s environmental pollution problems. The issue not only has
received
considerable attention from the news media, environmental activists and academic
researchers, but also has played a substantial
role in the formulation and
implementation of national public policy in recent years. On February 11, 1994,
President Clinton signed Executive Order 12898 (President Proclamation 1994) that
required all federal departments and agencies to consider the impacts of their
programs, policies, and activities on environmental
In response to the
the US Department of Transportation (US Department of
Executive Order,
Transportation 1997) mandated that all
federally funded transportation-related
projects be evaluated to determine whether a proposed transportation system change
would have a disproportionately high and adverse effect on minority and low-income
populations.

justice.

justice impacts of

recent developments

releases and hazardous waste sites,

The US DOT order demonstrates the growing need for new techniques capable of
analyzing the environmental
transportation system changes.
Although most studies of environmental justice have focused on locations of industrial
toxic
in GIS and
environmental modeling provide a foundation for developing measures to assess the
implications of changes to a transportation system. The objective of this paper is to
develop and demonstrate a practical, workable approach for evaluating the impacts of
a transportation system change on racial minorities and economically disadvantaged
individuals. Two specific adverse effects emphasized in the US DOT order are
examined in detail: noise level and air quality. We effect a loose coupling of
environmental models that predict noise levels and air pollution consequences of traffic
movements with GIS software to estimate the geographic boundaries of areas where
pollution standards are exceeded. We then determine the socio-demographic
characteristics of these areas. Comparing the spatial
incidence of noise and air
pollution impacts with the locations of minority and low-income residents provides a
basis for evaluating whether these impacts have a disproportionate effect.

2 A GIS-based Framework for Environmental Justice Assessment

Geographic information systems have been used extensively in recent years for
assessing and evaluating environmental risk and analyzing environmental justice. A
GIS is particularly well-suited for this kind of research since GIS allows for the
integration of multiple data sources, the geographic representation of impacted areas,
and the application of analytical techniques for computing the demographic attributes
of such areas. Scholars have applied GIS and myriad spatial and statistical methods to
examine inequities in the spatial distribution of hazards such as landfills (e.g. GAO

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

241

1995), hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal (TSD) sites (e.g. Cutter et al
1996), and industrial facilities reporting toxic releases (e.g. Burke 1993, Glickman 1994,
Bowen et al 1995). The environmental justice implications of transportation system
changes, however, have not been investigated. In this paper, we address this limitation
by focusing on vehicle-generated noise and air pollution to describe a GIS-based
approach for analyzing the socio-demographic characteristics of the population likely
to be adversely affected by a proposed transportation system change.

The objective of environmental justice studies has been to examine the spatial
association between locations of environmental hazards and the residences of
minorities and low-income
justice
individuals. To assess
implications of a transportation system change, it is necessary to determine the spatial
extent and form of the area affected by the proposed change and the characteristics of
the population residing in this area. The two major objectives of the proposed GIS
framework (Figure 1), therefore, can be summarized as:

environmental

the

1.

identify the geometrical outline of the area impacted by the proposed system and
the magnitude of the impact in each part of the area; and

2. determine the relevant socio-demographic characteristics of the impacted area,
using data at the smallest level of aggregation or geographic resolution available.

Two different techniques are suggested to achieve the first objective:

1. buffer analysis to create an impact zone around a proposed highway alignment;

2.

and
integration of existing noise propagation and air pollution models to define
impacted regions with respect to specific locations, such as street intersections.

Figure 1 Conceptual framework for GIS-based evaluation of environmental justice.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

242

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

A common limitation of geo-demographic analyses is that information regarding
population and housing characteristics is available only at an aggregate level, primarily
to preserve the privacy of individuals. In the absence of individual or household level
data, the demographic composition of the population within impacted areas must be
estimated using pre-defined administrative units (i.e. census tracts, zip codes) that
contain such data. A major problem, however, is that the areas likely to be impacted by
proposed transportation projects or other environmental hazards have boundaries that
often are not the same as the areas for which demographic and socioeconomic data are
available. The socio-demographic characteristics of the population should be obtained
at the smallest geographic resolution, since a smaller unit of observation is more
effective in representing the shape of an impact area than a larger unit. The smallest
geographic unit for which census data are available in the US is the census block. The
US Census does provide detailed information on the demographic, socioeconomic,
employment, and housing characteristics of the population for larger geographic areas
(e.g. block groups, tracts, counties), but no income data are available at the smallest
level of aggregation (census block) to minimize violation of privacy problems. To
prepare estimates of income variables at this level, we have to rely on information from
a larger geographic unit, such as the block group. Forkenbrock and Schweitzer (1997)
developed a predictive regression model to estimate the percentage of low-income
households (those with annual incomes less than $25,000) in each census block, on the
basis of block group level data. The results from that study provided the block level
estimates of the proportion of low-income households used in this paper.

The methods and approaches developed in our research were applied to an existing
urban arterial in the city of Waterloo, Iowa. Information on the racial and economic
characteristics of the population were obtained from the 1990 Census of Population
and Housing. The corridor examined in the analysis is US Highway 63, which runs
through the center of Waterloo, connecting with Rochester, Minnesota, to the north,
and leading, through Interstate 380, to Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in the south. The following
sections of the paper focus on the two techniques for identifying the areas impacted by
transportation system changes and the methods for estimating the population
characteristics of these areas.

3 Using Buffer Analysis to Identify Impacted Areas and Populations

Most GIS software packages provide buffer creation capabilities. A buffer is an area of
a specified width that surrounds one or more map features. Buffer generation involves
the creation of new areas from point, line, or area features in an existing GIS database.
Buffer zones enable us to examine areas affected by activities occurring at or near the
justice (e.g. Glickman 1994,
map features. GIS-based studies of environmental
Zimmerman 1994) have typically relied on the use of circular buffer zones around
point features (e.g. industrial toxic release sites) to represent the shape and size of an
impacted ‘‘neighborhood.’’ The same methodology can be applied to generate, for
example, a half-mile buffer along a proposed highway alignment and examine the
characteristics of the population within this zone. In addition to simple buffers of fixed
widths, multiple buffers of varying widths can be created.

The width of the buffer also can be adjusted to reflect attribute values such as
noise levels on different segments of the proposed highway, computed on the basis of

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

243

expected traffic volume. The typical non-annoying sound level of 55 dBA, for example,
is commonly reached about 1,000 feet from a highway source (Hokanson et al 1981). A
preliminary evaluation of environmental justice can be made by examining the racial
and economic characteristics of people living in close proximity to the proposed
highway corridor, based on the assumption that they are likely to suffer the largest
impacts. The adverse effect on these populations can be examined by:

•

•

providing a visual display of
distribution in the vicinity of the highway corridor; and
computing the proportion of minorities or low-income households within a
specified distance of the highway.

the underlying racial or household income

3.1 Visual Examination of Underlying Racial/Income Distribution

An initial assessment of environmental
justice can be made by examining the
proportion of minority and low-income residents in census units adjacent to the
proposed highway alignment. This involves overlaying the road network on a thematic
map that depicts census block group or block boundaries. Most GIS software
applications provide a variety of thematic mapping options (e.g. choropleth, dot,
graduated symbol maps). Choropleth mapping is a common technique for representing
enumeration data. Census units (e.g. blocks) around a proposed highway (e.g. US
Highway 63) can be grouped into categories, based on the percentage of nonwhite
residents or on the percentage of low-income households associated with each unit. A
darker shade or color would typically represent a block with a higher percentage of
nonwhites or low-income households, and lighter shades lower percentages. One can
then examine the shading of the spatial units adjacent to the proposed highway
corridor to evaluate the environmental justice consequences. In the trial application,
for example, choropleth maps indicate that US Highway 63 runs through nonwhite
(Figure 2A) and low-income (Figure 2B) neighborhoods north of the city center in
Waterloo.

3.2 Estimating the Characteristics of the Population within a Buffer

The population characteristics within a specified distance of the proposed highway
alignment are estimated by superimposing the boundary of the buffer zone around the
highway on census block boundaries that contain socio-demographic information.
Chakraborty and Armstrong (1997) have suggested three methods for computing the
population within a buffer on the basis of census data units: polygon containment,
centroid containment, and buffer containment. The most common method (buffer
containment) uses areal interpolation (Goodchild and Lam 1980, Lam 1983) to transfer
information from one set of boundaries to another; these zones are called source zones
(e.g. census blocks) and target zones (e.g. highway buffer) respectively.

The method of areal interpolation supported by most GIS software packages, areal
weighting, assumes that the population in each source unit is evenly distributed across
the area of the unit. This implies that for spatial units partially contained within the
buffer zone, a fraction of the total counts is used, based on the proportion of the unit’s
area that is contained within the buffer. The number of nonwhites and low-income
households from each census unit within the buffer are summed to determine the

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

244

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

Figure 2 US Highway 63 and census blocks by percent nonwhite, Waterloo, IA.

corresponding attributes of the buffer zone. The percentages of nonwhite and low-
income households within the area enclosed by the buffer can be computed from these
totals. This provides a quantitative measure of the proportion of minority and
economically disadvantaged residents impacted by the proposed highway alignment.
This method was applied to examine the population within a specified distance of
a section of US Highway 63 that passes through downtown Waterloo (Figure 3). The
width of the buffer in this example (1,339 feet) was based on the approximate
relationship among traffic volume, noise, and distance from the road specified by

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

245

Figure 3
than 55 dBA.

Buffer zone around section of US Highway 63 representing noise levels higher

Hokanson et al (1981). The noise level within this distance (1,339 feet) is expected to
exceed the non-annoyance level (55 dBA or less) when the average daily traffic on the
highway is greater than 48,000 vehicles. The results of the analysis using block level
census data (Table 1) indicate that the proportion of nonwhites and low-income
households within this buffer is higher than the citywide proportions. When several
alternative scenarios for a proposed transportation system change are evaluated for
environmental justice, such estimates can be used to compare the disproportionate
impacts resulting from each scenario.

The areal interpolation method used in this example is based on the questionable
assumption that population is distributed uniformly and homogeneously within each
census unit. This assumption can be refined by incorporating local information on the
distribution of people or residential units in the study area. The dasymetric mapping
method (Robinson et al 1984, Flowerdew and Openshaw 1987) uses knowledge of the
locality to identify regions within source zones that have different population densities.
Monmonier and Schnell (1984), for example, have demonstrated how the identification
of areas of residential occupation in classified satellite imagery can be used to apply the
method. A variety of regression models (e.g. Flowerdew 1988, Flowerdew and Green
1989, 1991) and grid-based smoothing methods (e.g. Tobler 1979) have also been

Table 1 Characteristics of the population within 55 dBA buffer zone on US Highway 63

Number of
persons

Nonwhite

Percent
nonwhite

Number of
households

Low-income
households

Percent low-
income

3680

1646

1569

909

44.74%
(13.2%)*

57.98%
(52.6%)*

*Denotes percentages for the City of Waterloo, Iowa.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

246

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

suggested to improve the accuracy of areal interpolation. A more recent GIS-based
approach uses a street network to obtain information on the distribution of the
population within a source zone (Xiu 1995) by allocating the population of census units
to street segments extracted from TIGER/Line files. The simple areal weighting
algorithm used in this trial application, however, is relatively easy to implement, is
available in most commercial GIS packages, and has no data requirements except for
the boundaries of the source and target zones, and the source zone population.

4 Integrating Noise and Air Pollution Models to Identify Impact Areas

An important objective of environmental justice is to ensure that racial minorities and
economically disadvantaged individuals do not endure disproportionately high and
adverse exposure to health hazards caused by air pollution and noise. Given the
resulting from
existing federal and state standards
transportation facility operation, it is important to determine the locations where
these standards might be exceeded because of proposed changes to the transportation
system. The traditional approach of using isotropic buffers around a roadway or street
intersection may not be useful in identifying such locations, since physical processes
rarely operate in a symmetrical manner.

for most health hazards

In the remaining sections of the paper, we describe and illustrate the application of
currently operational environmental pollution models in conjunction with a GIS to
assess characteristics of the population that would be adversely affected by vehicle-
generated noise and air pollution. Comparing the geographic boundaries of the region
where pollution standards are violated to the locations where minority and low-income
populations reside enables us to assess the environmental justice consequences of the
system change being examined. In our example, air pollution and noise are modeled at
a typical major intersection on US Highway 63, north of the city center.

4.1 Modeling Air Pollution

Available evidence strongly suggests that transportation-related pollutants have health
effects and that some disadvantaged populations have higher rates of the health
problems that are aggravated by these pollutants. Exposure to most pollutants has
more severe consequences for persons with respiratory problems (Schwartz and
Dockery 1992, Balogh et al 1993, US Environmental Protection Agency 1997). Although
there are several categories of air pollution, it should be noted that researchers have yet
to gauge the synergistic health effects of simultaneous exposure to multiple pollutants
or from multiple, nonconcurrent pollution exposures (Cotton 1993, Head 1995). The
two kinds of transportation-related air pollutants analyzed in this research are carbon
monoxide and particulate matter.

Carbon monoxide (CO) is released during fuel combustion and interferes with
oxygen transport by forming carboxyhemoglobin in the lungs. CO is dangerous to
persons who have heart disease (US EPA 1993). According to the National Center for
Health Statistics (1995), African American men and women under 85 years of age both
have higher death rates due to heart disease than their white peers. American Indian,
Asian, and Hispanic populations, on the other hand, all have lower death rates from
heart disease than either whites or African Americans.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

247

Particulate matter consists of very small pieces of grit that come from fuel
combustion, brake and tire wear, and fugitive sources such as road dust raised by vehicle
movement. Fine particulates (less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter or smaller) can travel
deep into the lungs, unlike larger particles which are caught by the upper respiratory
system (Schwartz and Dockery 1992, Balogh et al 1993, US EPA 1997). Because
particulates interfere with breathing, they are more of a threat to people with respiratory
problems, especially children and persons with asthma. Asthma rates are negatively
correlated with income, and the asthma mortality rate for African Americans is six times
that of white Americans (US EPA 1997). According to Adams and Marano (1995), people
who belong to households earning less than $10,000 a year have a higher rate of reported
cases of asthma than do members of households with higher incomes.

Comparing and correlating pollutant concentrations with the presence of at-risk
populations is a common practice in epidemiology and public health planning. In fact,
most of the early studies of environmental justice conducted in the 1970s focused on the
distribution impacts of air pollution in urban areas (e.g. Council of Environmental
Quality 1971, Freeman 1972, Asch and Senaca 1978). To compare a set of highway
alignments, Wadden et al (1976) developed a methodology using average emission rates
of highway corridors weighted by proximity of susceptible populations.

Recent developments in GIS software have enhanced our ability to evaluate spatial
dispersion of air pollution from motor vehicles. Souleyrette et al (1991) found that GIS
enhanced EPA air quality models by integrating spatial and temporal aspects of
transportation and environmental conditions that influence air quality. Medina (1994)
formulated a framework for the integration of computer-aided design (CAD), GIS,
transportation and air quality models, and Collins (1996) combined dispersion models
with GIS to map air pollution. Hallmark and O’Neill (1996) conducted a series of case
studies integrating GIS software (TransCAD) and CAL3QHCR, a pollutant dispersion
model developed by the California Department of Transportation. These authors also
documented the incompatibilities between the coordinate systems used by current
dispersion models and most GIS software. None of these studies, however, compared
the spatial incidence of air pollution impacts with socio-demographic characteristics of
the affected areas.

The approach described in this paper combines an emission model and dispersion
model to obtain pollutant concentrations and identify impacted areas (Figure 4). An
emission model is used to estimate the amount of pollutants from vehicles on a
roadway under varying conditions. A dispersion model can then be applied to
determine the movement of the pollutants based on the flow of wind and rain. During
the course of our research, we use the following computer models:

• MOBILE5a for carbon monoxide emissions;
PART5 for particulate matter (PM10); and
•
• CAL3QHCR for dispersion of both carbon monoxide and particulates.

All models generally require traffic volume by separate vehicle class (e.g. cars, light-
duty vehicles, and heavy-duty vehicles).

The MOBILE5 model, developed by the US EPA Office of Mobile Sources, is used to
determine carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, and nitrogen oxide emissions from gasoline-
and diesel-powered vehicles. For a given road segment, this model estimates an aggregate
emission level, based on the emission rates of the types of vehicles of each model year
expected to operate on the road. The design of this model allows the analyst to change a

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

248

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

Figure 4 Air pollution modeling methodology.

variety of factors such as traffic speed, traffic mix, percentage of cold starts, temperature,
and the year of the analysis to account for demonstrated improvements in vehicle
emission rates (US EPA 1993). In addition to traffic volume information, MOBILE5a
requires local data on: (1) region (altitude) (2) ambient temperature, (3) calendar year, (4)
average flow speed, and (5) vehicle operating temperature.

The PART5 model, also developed by the US EPA Office of Mobile Sources, uses
region, year, and flow speed as described for MOBILE5a to model particulate matter.
PART5 requires additional local information on the type of road surface (paved or
otherwise) and the amount of silt coverage.

The most common method for dispersion modeling is Gaussian diffusion. The
Gaussian dispersion model is used to describe the movement and spread of a gas that
is neutrally buoyant
(approximately the same density as air), such as carbon
monoxide. Particle dispersion is an estimate of particle trajectory influenced by local
weather and terrain. Most dispersion models treat roads as ‘‘line sources’’ of pollu-
tants and assume that the level of pollutants is constant along the road segment. A
system of models developed by the California Department of Transportation
(CalTrans) and known as CALINE models are line-source models based on the
Gaussian diffusion principle. The dispersion model used in this
research,
CAL3QHCR, is a CalTrans model that computes carbon monoxide and particulate
matter concentrations generated by stop-and-go traffic at points near
street
intersections. This model uses vehicle emission estimates generated by MOBILE5a
and PART5 in combination with weather data and site geometry to predict dispersion
patterns of pollutants in a given area.

The likely trajectory of pollutant particles is influenced by local weather and
terrain. CAL3QHCR therefore requires information about the site geometry of the area

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

249

to be modeled and the prevailing wind conditions. Since CAL3QHCR is a model of
stop-and-go intersections,
it also contains a queue model for intersections that
determines the likely length of the queue at an intersection. The queue model requires
site-specific information on the volume and type of traffic and the timing of the
intersection.

An existing intersection on US Highway 63 was selected to apply these models.
The process involved two stages: collecting the information required for the emission
models, and then combining emission rates from the emission models with weather and
traffic data to estimate pollutant dispersion. When examining maps of air pollution, it
is important to remember that we are visualizing the distribution of the worst possible
emissions (based on the traffic) that would occur during the most frequently occurring
weather conditions for the area. Unlike maps, pollution is not static; also, the US
Environmental Protection Agency’s standards monitor overall pollution levels, as well
as number of times a certain pollution level can be exceeded.

4.2 Modeling Noise

Noise is defined as unwanted or detrimental sound, and every area or neighborhood
has some level of background noise (Stutz 1986). In surveys, residents list traffic noise
as the most disruptive indoor problem associated with nearby highways (Williams and
McCrae 1995). Traffic noise levels depend on composition, speed, and, to a lesser
degree, traffic volume. For example, one combination truck produces as much noise at
55 mph as 28 autos (Federal Highway Administration 1992). An absolute change in
noise levels or traffic may not predict annoyance because people’s responses to noise
vary greatly. Some individuals show great annoyance at 60 dBA (about as loud as an air
conditioning unit), while others remain unconcerned at 80 dBA (roughly as loud as a
medium truck) (Langdon 1985, FHWA 1992). Intermittent noise, even if noise levels are
low on average, also can be bothersome for people seeking to concentrate, rest, or
sustain tranquillity.

Although sound intensity is measured in decibels (dBA), noise models use a

descriptive noise exceedence scale to estimate the overall effects of noise over time.

The most commonly used sound intensity descriptors are:

•

•
•

L10: the noise level in dBA exceeded ten percent of the time during specified hours
of the day. The hours typically conform to daytime, evening, and night, with
standards becoming stricter during the night;
L50: the noise level in dBA exceeded 50 percent of the time during specified hours;
Leq: a composite descriptor that considers the variance in noise over time.

Using data on traffic volume, mix, and speed, noise propagation models such as
the MINNOISE model used in our analysis estimate noise levels at constant traffic
speeds. Modeling noise propagation is more straightforward than modeling air
pollution dispersion; thus it is possible to confidently model noise levels at much
greater distances from the road than are possible for air pollution. MINNOISE is
derived from the Federal Highway Administration’s STAMINA model that was
updated by the Minnesota Department of Transportation. This model calculates Leq,
L10, and L50 noise levels. For modeling stop-and-go traffic, the roadway is subdivided
into segments. Vehicles in each segment are assumed to be either accelerating,
decelerating, or cruising.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

250

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

The model was applied to the intersection on US Highway 63 to estimate the
magnitude of noise impacts based on a trial scenario. The goal was to identify the
geographic areas where federal or state noise-level standards were exceeded. Our
examples of noise propagation do not consider noise-mitigating barriers, such as
topography or structures. Barriers attenuate traffic noise. To consider the effects of such
barriers, we would need to account for the characteristics of possible barriers in the area
(such as barrier height, thickness, distance from the road and the noise receiver, height of
the noise emission, and orientation of the barrier relative to the receiver and the emission).
Our analysis presents a simple, worst-case scenario of noise propagation that we then
compare with socio-demographic characteristics. Although the scenario used in the
analysis did not incorporate the effects of adjacent topography and structures, it would be
possible to refine the evaluation of the intersection by including data on the position and
height of barriers and buildings as well as the elevation of the surrounding terrain. Heavy
truck traffic was added to US Highway 63, based on the assumption that a substantial
amount of industrial development eventually would occur along this route. At low traffic
speeds, most of the noise at the intersection would come from vehicle engines and brakes.

5 Representing Air Quality and Noise Pollution Levels in a GIS

The noise propagation and air pollution models used in this research provide
measurements of sound intensity and pollutant concentrations, respectively, at various
distances from the intersecting roads. These user-defined measurement locations are
referred to as receptors. A coordinate (x, y) is assigned to each receptor location and a
grid of receptors is required as input. The intersection being examined is modeled in all
four quadrants; the axes represent two perpendicular roads and the origin represents
the intersection. Using input information described previously, the models estimate the
concentration of pollutants or noise level at each receptor location. CAL3QHCR
allows for 60 receptor locations, while MINNOISE allows for 40 receptor locations.
Multiple model runs, however, allow the inclusion of additional receptors. Figure 5
illustrates the layout of a receptor grid relative to US Highway 63 (vertical axis) and the
intersecting street (horizontal axis) examined in the trial application. The figure depicts
an x-y plane where the points are separated by 20 feet.

The output from the air quality and noise models provides the (x, y) coordinates of
each receptor location and a data value that represents the corresponding noise level or
pollution concentration. To represent this information in a GIS and analyze the
impacts of pollution on minorities and low-income individuals, the following steps are
necessary:

transformation of receptor coordinates to latitude-longitude format;
isarithmic mapping to represent noise and air pollution contours; and

1.
2.
3. determination of the socio-demographic characteristics of the population residing

within pollution contours.

5.1 Coordinate Transformation for Receptor Locations

Most GIS software packages use a latitude-longitude coordinate system to reference
map features. The noise and air pollution models, however, rely on a local x-y

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

251

Figure 5 Grid receptor locations (feet).

planar coordinate system. The output from both CAL3QHCR and MINNOISE
provide the (x, y) coordinates of the receptors with respect to the intersection,
represented as the origin (0,0). Because of this incompatibility, a coordinate
latitude-longitude
transformation operation was performed to obtain the
coordinates of the receptor locations for each model. This enabled us to display
the receptor locations as a new map layer in the GIS database. The data file
associated with this map layer contained the noise level or pollutant concentration at
each receptor location.

5.2 Isarithmic Mapping to Represent Noise and Air Pollution Levels

Isarithmic mapping is particularly useful for depicting noise levels or air pollution,
because such phenomena are assumed to be continuous in nature. Several computer
mapping programs and GIS packages support isarithmic map production. The GIS
software used for this project (TransCAD for Windows, version 3.0) generates such
maps from irregularly spaced data points defined by their geographic location (longitude
and latitude) and a z value to represent an attribute. TransCAD uses a triangulation
procedure to interpolate surfaces between these data points and generate a triangulated
irregular network (TIN). The TIN is used as an input to other surface visualization and
analysis functions, which include contour mapping and profile drawing.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

252

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

The GIS software used for contour mapping supports the creation of contours as
both line features and area features. The noise level or pollutant concentration
contours can be visually displayed in the form of isolines labeled with corresponding
values, or contour areas, shaded in the form of a choropleth map. Figure 6A and 6B
show carbon monoxide (CO) and particulate (PM10) levels resulting from the trial
application in Waterloo. The pollution analyses, however,
the
concentrations of pollutants for the US Highway 63 intersection in Waterloo during
the heaviest traffic periods are below federal standards. The federal standard for CO is
35 ppm per one-hour maximum concentration, whereas the intersection examined
showed a maximum concentration of 31 ppm near the center. The maximum estimated
PM10 level of 12.5 (cid:22)g/m3 was well below the maximum allowable annual average of 50
(cid:22)g/m3 (Code of Federal Regulations 1995, US EPA 1997). The results obtained using
the noise model found that even if truck traffic on the road increased substantially,

indicate that

Figure 6 CO and PM10 contours for selecting intersection on US Highway 63.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

253

Figure 7 Noise level (L10) contours for selected intersection.

maximum noise levels during the day would remain just below the federal guidelines.
The noise level (L10) reaches its maximum value of 65 dBA at the center of the highway
(Figure 7), and at 1,000 feet
from the centerline the noise level decreases to
approximately 55 dBA.

5.3 Using Pollution Contours to Identify Residents Impacted by the Transportation
System Change

As in the case of buffer zones, an assessment of disproportionate impacts resulting
from vehicle-generated air pollution and noise can be made in two ways:

1.

2.

visual display of the underlying racial and income distribution within contours
representing pollutant concentrations and noise levels; and
estimation of the proportion of minority residents or low-income households
within a contour that represents a specific pollutant concentration or noise level
(typically where standards are exceeded).

To visually examine the racial and economic characteristics of persons residing
within the footprint of vehicle-generated noise or pollution, contour lines representing
specific noise levels or pollutant concentrations can be overlaid on a choropleth map
that depicts census units shaded according to the proportion of nonwhites or low-
income households in each unit. Isolines depicting high pollution levels can be
examined with respect to the nonwhite or low-income percentages of underlying census

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

254

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

Figure 8

PM10 contours and census blocks by percent nonwhite for selected intersection.

Figure 9 Noise level (L10) contours and census blocks by percent nonwhite for selected
intersection.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

255

Table 2 Census block population characteristics with noise pollution (L10) level

Census block
ID

L10

Number of
persons

Nonwhite
(Percent)

Number of
households

45
190130003 214
19013001701206 56
1901300016 109 60
190130001 416
62
19013001702107 65

53
39
78
104
61

3 (5.7)
13 (33.3)
2 (2.6)
82 (78.9)
25 (41.0)

27
13
26
40
24

Low-income
households
(Percent)

13 (48.6)
5 (35.2)
6 (24.2)
27 (68.2)
10 (39.7)

blocks. Figure 8, for example, shows pollution contours for particulate (PM10)
concentrations, superimposed on blocks depicting the percentage of nonwhites. Figure
9 presents another example with contours representing the estimated noise levels (L10)
at the intersection based on the trial scenario.

Most contour mapping programs provide the option of estimating the elevation
(e.g. noise level) at any specific geographic location within the contours. Using this
technique, the pollution level associated with the centroid of each census unit can be
computed. Assuming that this measure is representative of the entire unit, the pollution
level measure of each spatial unit and its nonwhite and low-income household
percentage can be tabulated (Table 2). The environmental justice implications can be
determined by examining the proportion of nonwhites and low-income households for
the census units (e.g. blocks) that exceed the threshold value based on the federal or
local pollution standard.

The numbers and percentages of nonwhites and low-income households within the
area enclosed by each contour can be estimated on the basis of census units that contain
socio-demographic data. The relevant characteristics of the population within contours
representing the maximum noise level (L10) for the trial application were computed
using census block level information and the areal weighting method of interpolation
described previously (Table 3). Racial and income equity in the distribution of noise
pollution can be tested by comparing the proportion of nonwhites and low-income

Table 3

Estimated characteristics of the population residing within noise contours (L10)

Noise Intensity
Exceeding (dB(A))

Number of
persons (cum)

Nonwhite
(Percent)

Number of
households

35
40
45
50
55
60
65

10,824
10,822
9,890
7,309
4,773
2,837
1,195

4557 (42.1)
4556 (42.1)
4207 (42.5)
3377 (46.2)
2259 (47.3)
1305 (46.0)
499 41.7)

4168
4167
3769
2747
1833
1092
461

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Low-income
households
(Percent)

1749 (42.0)
1749 (42.0)
1602 (42.5)
1248 (45.4)
833 (45.5)
496 (45.4)
204 (44.3)

256

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

households residing within contours exceeding federal standards to the respective
citywide percentages. Although the federal standards were not exceeded in our
hypothetical example, a disproportionately high number of minority and low-income
populations residing within such contours would indicate environmental injustice.

6 Conclusions

Environmental justice seeks to ensure that adverse human health or environmental
effects of government activities such as transportation system changes do not fall
disproportionately on minority or low-income people. There is a growing need to
develop new methodologies and models to assist decision-makers in achieving this
goal. Our paper contributes to this objective by describing a GIS-based framework that
can be used to assess adverse and disproportionate impacts
resulting from
transportation system changes.

The buffer analysis capabilities of a GIS can be used to examine the characteristics
of the population residing near a proposed transportation corridor, thus providing a
preliminary assessment of the environmental justice consequences. A more refined
assessment can be performed at the neighborhood level by integrating currently
operational environmental pollution models that are capable of predicting changes in
noise levels and air quality with respect to specific locations such as street intersections.
The inherently spatial nature of transportation-related noise and air quality analysis
makes a GIS particularly well suited to enhance such analysis. The output from these
models in the form of noise levels or pollution concentrations at specified receptor
locations can be used as input in a GIS. Isarithmic mapping can then be applied to
define contours of equal pollution levels that represent the geographic boundaries of
the areas where health standards are violated. A GIS provides several visualization (e.g.
for
choropleth mapping) and spatial analysis
determining the proportion of minorities and low-income households residing in these
areas. This enables us to determine whether transportation-related air pollution and
noise would create adverse and disproportionate impacts on the population.

interpolation)

(e.g. areal

tools

The approach described here can be used to aid decision-makers in evaluating the
feasibility of a transportation system change or in comparing the environmental justice
impacts of multiple alternatives. It has a few drawbacks, however, the first being that
the coordinate systems used by the GIS software and the environmental pollution
models are incompatible; some additional manipulation and conversion are required to
produce GIS-compatible inputs from the model outputs. New modeling applications
will facilitate a direct interface between GIS and pollution dispersion models and make
this analysis much more user-friendly. Another drawback is that the methodology
outlined in this paper requires accurate and specific data for each potential road
project, especially if the noise and air modeling use real-world topography and
cityscape. Such data gathering can be expensive and time-consuming.

As highway facilities become increasingly crowded and force the development of
new roads or increased capacity on existing roads, cities again will face the issue of
who bears the burden of increased noise and air pollution associated with highway
facilities. The visualization and analytical techniques described in this article can be
used to help answer the questions: how loud will traffic be, how much pollution will
there be, and who will have to deal with it?

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Assessing Environmental Justice of Transportation System Changes

257

Acknowledgements

The authors are extremely grateful to Professors Marc Armstrong and Gerard Rushton
of the Department of Geography at the University of Iowa for their comments and
guidance on this work. We must also thank Sharon Juon, Kevin Blanshan, and Jennifer
Fragt of the Iowa Northland Regional Council of Governments for their help
throughout this project. Ron Ridenour and Mel Rosene of the Iowa and Minnesota
Departments of Transportation were essential to our air and noise modeling efforts.
Teresa Lopes, our editor, helped us clarify our thoughts.

References

278–97

Adams P F and Marano M A 1995 Current Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey,

1994. Hyattsville, MD, National Center for Health Statistics

Asch P and Senaca J J 1978 Some evidence on the distribution of air quality. Land Economics 54:

Balogh M, Larson T and Mannering F 1993 Analysis of fine particulate matter near urban

roadways. Transportation Research Record 1416: 25–32

Bowen W M, Salling M J, Haynes K E and Cyran E J 1995 Toward environmental justice: Spatial
equity in Ohio and Cleveland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 85: 641–
63

Burke L M 1993 Environmental equity in Los Angeles. Santa Barbara, CA, University of
California National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis. Technical Report 936
Chakraborty J and Armstrong M P 1997 Exploring the use of buffer analysis for the
identification of impacted areas in environmental equity assessment. Cartography and
Geographic Information Systems 24: 145–57

Code of Federal Regulations 1995 Vol 40: Sections 50.650.10
Collins S 1996 Modeling Spatial Variations in Air Quality Using GIS. Unpublished Paper

presented at GISDATA Specialist Meeting on GIS and Health, Helsinki, Finland

Cotton P 1993 ‘Best data yet’ say air pollution kills below levels currently considered safe.

Journal of the American Medical Association 269: 3087–8

Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) 1971 The Second Annual Report of the Council on

Environmental Quality. Washington DC, US Government Printing Office

Cutter S L, Holm D, and Clark L 1996 The role of geographic scale in monitoring environmental

Federal Highway Administration 1992 Highway Traffic Noise. Washington DC, Government

justice. Risk Analysis 16: 517–26

Printing Office

Flowerdew R 1988 Statistical Methods for Areal Interpolation: Predicting Count Data from a
Binary Variable. Newcastle upon Tyne, Northern Regional Research Laboratory, Research
Report No 15.

Flowerdew R and Green M 1989 Statistical methods for inference between incompatible zonal
systems. In Goodchild M F and Gopal S (eds) The Accuracy of Spatial Databases. London,
Taylor and Francis: 239–47

Flowerdew R and Green M 1991 Data integration: Statistical methods for transferring data
In Masser I and Blakemore M (eds) Handling Geographic

between zonal systems.
Information: Methodology and Potential Applications. Harlow, Longman: 38–54

Flowerdew R and Openshaw S 1987 A review of the problems of transferring data from one set
of areal units to another incompatible set. Newcastle upon Tyne, Northern Regional
Research Laboratory, Research Report No 4

Forkenbrock D J and Schweitzer L A 1997 Environmental Justice and Transportation Investment

Policy. Iowa City, IA, University of Iowa, Public Policy Center

Freeman A M 1972 The Distribution of Environmental Quality. In Kneese A V and Bower B T
(eds) Environmental Quality Analysis. Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press for
Resources for the Future

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

258

Jayajit Chakraborty, Lisa A Schweitzer and David J Forkenbrock

General Accounting Office (GAO) 1995 Demographics of People Living near Waste Facilities.

Washington DC, General Accounting Office

Glickman T S 1994 Measuring environmental equity with geographic information systems.

Goodchild M F and Lam N S–N 1980 Areal interpolation: A variant of the traditional spatial

Renewable Resources Journal 12: 17–21

problem. Geoprocessing 1: 297–312

Hallmark S and O’Neill W 1996 Integrating geographic information systems for transportation
and air quality models for microscale analysis. Transportation Research Record 1551: 133–
40

Head R A 1995 Health–based standards: What role in environmental justice? In Bryant B I (ed)
Environmental Justice: Issues, Policies, and Solutions. Washington DC, Island Press: 45–56
Hokanson B, Minkoff M, Nichols S and Cowart S 1981 Measures of Noise Damage Costs
Attributable to Motor Vehicle Travel. Iowa City, IA, University of Iowa, Institute of Urban
and Regional Research

Lam N S-N 1983 Spatial interpolation methods: A review. The American Cartographer 10: 129–

49

Academic Press: 143–76

Langdon F L 1985 Noise Annoyance. In Tempest W (ed) The Noise Handbook. London,

Medina I C 1994 A Framework for integrating information systems in air quality analysis. WWW

document, http: //wwwsgi.ursus.maine.edu

Monmonier M and Schnell G 1984 Land use and land cover data and the mapping of population

density. International Journal of Cartography 24: 115–21

National Center for Health Statistics 1995 Health, United States, 1995. Hyattsville, MD, Public

Health Service

President, Proclamation 1994 Federal actions to address environmental

justice in minority
populations and low-income populations: Executive Order 12898. Federal Register 59:
7629–33

Robinson A H, Sale R, Morrison H, and Muehrcke P C 1984 Elements of Cartography (Fifth

Edition). New York, NY, John Wiley and Sons

Schwartz J and Dockery D W 1992 Increased mortality in Philadelphia associated with daily air

pollution concentrations. American Review of Respiratory Disease 145: 600–4

Souleyrette R R, Sathisan S K, James D E, and Lim L 1991 GIS for transportation and air quality

analysis. Transportation Planning and Air Quality 50: 182–94

Stutz F 1986 Environmental impact. In Hanson S (ed) The Geography of Urban Transportation.

Tobler W R 1979 Smooth pycnophylactic interpolation for geographical regions Journal of the

New York, NY, The Guilford Press: 329–43

American Statistical Association 74: 519–30

US Department of Transportation 1997 Department of Transportation Order to Address
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations. OST Docket
No OST95141 (50125), Federal Register 62: 18377–81.

US Environmental Protection Agency 1993 Automobiles and carbon monoxide. WWW

document, http: //www.epa.gov/omswww/03-co.htm

US Environmental Protection Agency 1997 Final Revisions to the Ozone and Particulate Matter
Air Quality Standards. WWW document, http: //www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/ozpmbro/
current.htm

US Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) 1992 Highway Traffic Noise. Washington DC,

Government Printing Office

Wadden R, Farleyn D O and Carnow B W 1976 Transportation emissions and environmental

health: an evaluatory planning methodology. Environment and Planning A 8: 321

Williams I D and McCrae I S 1995 Road traffic nuisance in residential and commercial areas.

Science of the Total Environment 169: 7582

Xiu Y 1995 The overlaid network algorithms for areal interpolation. Computers, Environment

and Urban Systems 19: 287–306

Zimmerman R 1994 Issues of classification in environmental equity: How we manage is how we

measure. Fordham Urban Law Journal 29: 633–69

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

