GeoInformatica 9:3, 253–268, 2005
# 2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc. Manufactured in The Netherlands.

Digital Terrain Model Computation from Contour
Lines: How to Derive Quality Information from
Artifact Analysis

OLIVIER BONIN AND FRE´ DE´ RIC ROUSSEAUX
Institut Ge´ographique National, COGIT Laboratory, 2-4 avenue Pasteur, F-94165, Saint-Mande´ Cedex, France
E-mail: {olivier.bonin, frederic.rousseaux}@ign.fr

Received June 17, 2004; Revised October 26, 2004; Accepted March 8, 2005

Abstract

Digital Terrain Models constructed from contour lines often contain artifacts originating from their construction
from irregularly spaced height measurements. We evaluate and illustrate these artifacts and their impact on
terrain parameters. We provide algorithms to correct them as much as possible, and propose a methodology to
predict areas where uncertainty still remains because of these artifacts. The analysis of these artifacts enables us
to derive qualitative parameters such as Blikely over-estimated,^ Blikely underestimated,^ and Bwith no
signiﬁcant bias^ on the DTM. Our method provides a qualitative description of local uncertainty, which is often
more relevant for geographical applications than global quality parameters.

Keywords:

digital terrain model, qualitative assesstment, errors, artifacts

1.

Introduction

Digital Terrain ModelsVDTMs are numerical models for the ground [7], [14]. The most
common models are the lattice model (or raster or grid) where each node of the lattice
bears an altitude, and the triangulated surface model. As numerical models, they are
computed from a set of height measurements generally irregularly scattered over the
ground, (in case of automatic image correlation, the DTM is directly acquired in a raster
format). To obtain a Triangular Irregular Network (TIN) representation, the set of
measurements is triangulated. To obtain a raster representation, altitudes of the lattice are
interpolated from the set of measurements. A triangulated surface model can also be
converted into a raster DTM.

In this paper, we address the case of DTM creation from contour lines using a
Triangular Irregular Network (TIN) representation. The location of height measurements,
and the method used to estimate the model cause well-known artifacts [8], and have a
great impact on the shape of the resulting relief [3]Y[5], [13]. These artifacts have
generally a greater impact on DTM quality than noise and imprecision in the
measurement process [11]. Moreover, the location of these artifacts can be somewhat
predicted. Though these artefacts are well known, most available software do not offer
algorithms to deal with them.

254

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

We propose in this paper a numerical illustration of these artifacts in case of high
resolution DTMs created from contour lines, by comparison with an extremely high
resolution DTM obtained by LIDAR. We focus on the impact of these artifacts on the
elevation, slope and aspect values computed from the DTM, as these terrain parameters
are useful for many geographical applications. We illustrate the gain of precision
obtained by the use of artifact correction algorithms such as [12], and by coherent
integration of exogeneous vector linear data [11]. Note that one of these artifacts is
related to inadequate sampling rate along the contour lines, whereas the second one can
only be corrected by interpolation of estimated ridge or thalweg line and exogeneous
data when available. The investigation of the origin of artifacts leads us to propose an a
priori characterisation of DTM quality through potential error maps. These potential
error maps deﬁne part of the semantics of the DTM (terrain shape, presence of artifacts),
and enable derivation of local qualitative descriptions of DTM’s quality. The com-
putation of potential error maps relies on morphometric parameters, which raises the
need for efﬁcient and robust morphometric parameter computation algorithms.

2. Are DTM computed from the same data source really different?

Contour lines from topographic vector data sets are readily available data to compute
medium to high resolution DTMs. In case of French BDTopo, contour lines have one
meter resolution and ﬁve to ten meter contour interval. The transformation of these
contour lines into a DTM involves a step of over-sampling, and a step of interpolation in
case of raster DTM model, or a step of tesselation in case of polygonal irregular network
model (usually Triangular Irregular Network TIN DTM). Newer techniques such as
LIDAR are also appropriate to compute medium to height scale DTM but no data
provider offers such products for France, and the cost of a LIDAR survey is still very
high compared to the cost of digitizing contour lines or buying the altimetric theme from
an existing geographical data set. Moreover, many users already have altimetric
information from contours lines available in their systems.

While triangulation offers few variations in results (the Delaunay triangulation
algorithm is most often used), many interpolation methods exist and produce different
DTMs [1], [2]. We investigate in this section if the interpolation or triangulation
method has a real impact on the resulting DTM. We focus on classical interpolation
algorithms with standard parameters to obtain typical DTMs. We exclude from this study
the search for improvements on interpolation algorithms, or on the parametrization of
these algorithms.

To perform this analysis, we rely on a very high resolution DTM obtained by LIDAR
and appropriate post-processing to remove vegetation. The area chosen for this study is
located near Avignon (France) (Figure 1). The airbone LIDAR point density is around 1
point per ﬁve square meter, and the computed DTM has better than 25 centimeters
horizontal and vertical accuracies. Control points measured by GPS were used to
evaluate the DTM accuracy. Then, this DTM has been interpolated on a 5 meter

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

255

Figure 1. Dentelles de Montmirail near Avigon (France).

resolution grid, to make it compatible with DTMs computed from contour lines. This
interpolation smoothes the LIDAR DTM but globally preserves its accuracy.

User DTMs are computed from construction points of contour lines. These con-
struction points are irregularly spaced and unhomogeneous in terms of density (Figure 2,
with light colors for high density). Contour lines from BDTopo generally have very good
horizontal and vertical accuracies (around 1 meter), and contour interval is chosen
accordingly to the terrain. So they usually give a good representation of terrain shape,
but cannot represent anthropic modiﬁcation of terrain such as roads. As contour interval
is 5 meters on the study area, ground shapes smaller than 5 meters can not be represented
by the contour lines, unless they intersect a contour line. DTMs computed from this
contour lines will have a resolution of better than 5 meters, and are represented on a
5 meter resolution grid.

Figure 2. Construction points from contour lines (left) and Kernel estimation of point density (right).

256

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

To evaluate the differences between a DTM and the reference DTM, we use a simple
difference instead of a complete DTM matching algorithm (see for instance [9]) because
there is no measurable planimetric bias between the LIDAR DTM and the contour lines.

2.1.

Interpolation methods

Three DTMs are computed by interpolation of construction points of contour lines with
GRASS 5 GIS [6]. The ﬁrst one (Bidw^ DTM) is obtained by Inverse Distance Weighted
and the second one (Brst^ DTM) by Regularised Spline with Tension [10]. The last one
(Bkrig^ DTM) is obtained by kirging. As these DTMs are visually different, they will
probably lead to different slope and aspect (direction of slope) computation results.

2.2. Triangulation

Two DTMs are computed by Delaunay triangulation of the contour lines. The ﬁrst one
(Btriang^ DTM) is obtained by standard triangulation, and the second one (Btriangpro^
DTM) by triangulation and several processing dedicated to the correction of well-known
artifacts of TINs (namely elimination of ﬂat triangles and of incorrect triangles, with the
algorithms presented in Section 3). These DTMs are visually more angled, but roughly of
the same precision level as interpolated DTMs. Differences are more obvious in terms of
slope and aspect. We observe in case of simple triangulation the classical over-
representation of contour lines (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Kernel density estimation of elevations in LIDAR DTM and Btriang^ DTM.

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

257

2.3. Comparison with a reference DTM and evaluation

DTM evaluation is performed quantitatively in terms of elevation, slope and aspect [15].
DTMs obtained by triangulation are better in terms of precision those obtained by
interpolation (Figure 4). The Btriangpro^ DTM does not show the over-representation of
contour lines. Note that the densities are more separated in the positive values (i.e., areas
where the DTM is above the reference). This correspond to errors in thalwegs, as will be
illustrated in Section 3. We give more reﬁned error estimations in Section 4 using the
artifact analysis found in Section 3.

Differences are quite the same in terms of slope. Let us emphasise that slope and
aspect parameters are as useful as elevation in many applications, though less frequently
taken into account when dealing with DTM quality. We notice that the Btriangpro^ DTM
is by far the best one in terms of slope, even if slopes are slightly over-estimated when
compared to the other DTMs (Figure 4). However, all DTMs are very similar in terms of
aspect (slope direction).

We have tested our DTMs on simple geographical applications to get an idea of their
suitability: visibility analysis by line of sight algorithm, and ﬂight at very low altitude.
Not surprisingly, the best DTM for the ﬂight at low altitude is the Btriangpro^ DTM.
However, the Bkrig^ DTM is better than the Btriangpro^ DTM for the visibility analysis
on several locations, highlighting the fact that quantitative global quality parameters are
not sufﬁcient to accurately describe DTM’s quality. Hence, we choose to focus on local
quality description, and to derive qualitative information to give users simple quality but
accurate enough quality description.

Observe that even if the enhanced DTM (Btriangpro^) is clearly better than the others,
imprecisions still remain in this DTM. The densities of elevation differences are far
from being Gaussian (Figure 5), suggesting that not all errors can be explained by

Figure 4. Kernel density estimation of elevation differences (left) and slope differences (right) between three
DTMs and the LIDAR DTM.

258

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

Figure 5. Quantile-quantile plot of the triangpro-LIDAR distribution against a normal distribution.

measurement noise. Figure 5 shows that the elevation difference distribution for our most
accurate DTM exhibits heavier tails than the Gaussian distribution, that is to say that
large elevation differences are likely to occur more often than in the Gaussian case.
These large elevation differences correspond to remaining artifacts in the DTM.

We discuss in the next section the origin of imprecision in terms of triangulation

artifacts, and expose how we can somewhat correct them.

3. Artefacts and artifact correction

We are concerned in this section with triangulation artifacts, and we describe how we
correct them to obtain the Btriangpro^ DTM. The analysis of the origin of artifacts is a
key point of our methodology, as this enables us to extract semantics for the DTM and to
propose qualitative description of the DTM’s quality.

Each triangle must be an acceptable approximation for the topographic surface. To this
aim, the three edges of triangles have to be close to the ground surface. So, we present in
the following section two types of triangle constructions that are forbidden.

3.1. Triangles joining two non-consecutive contour lines

The ﬁrst triangulation artifact concerns triangles joining two non-consecutive contour
lines. A triangle crossing a contour line is classiﬁed as forbidden because its construction
does not respect the ground shape (Figure 6).

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

259

Figure 6. Example of triangle joining two non-consecutive contour lines.

Such forbidden triangles have obviously wrong elevation and slope. To correct this
artifact, it is necessary to over-sample the contour line, that is to say to add nodes
localised on the contour line. The oversampling is performed with an algorithm that we
describe now.

Let us take the example of Figure 7. The AB circle is ﬁrst drawn. The algorithm
determines the closest point to A located inside the circle. In our example, it is point C.
This point is projected onto CNi and the projection is being attributed the Z of the
contour line. Then, this algorithm is applied to the next construction point of the contour
line, that is to say the DB circle is drawn and analysed. The triangulation of the densiﬁed
set of points does not exhibit forbidden triangles anymore, that is to say all summits of
triangles are only composed of points from two consecutive contour lines (Figure 8).
Thus, the computed DTM presents a better ground description and leads to better slope
and aspect computation (Figure 4).

Figure 7. Addition of one point on the contour line.

260

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

Figure 8. New triangulation without forbidden triangles.

3.2. Triangles made with a single contour line

The second artifact is called the ﬂat triangle problem. This is a well-known artifact when
triangulating contour lines. In the literature, it can be found under the name Btunnel and
ridge^ artifact. If a triangle is made with a single contour line, its three summits have the
same altitude. This creates horizontal
triangles. They give a very bad description
(altitude, slope and aspect) of the ground reality.

This artifact occurs in two conﬁgurations of contour lines. The ﬁrst conﬁguration
concerns areas that are hard to classify. In those areas, two or more construction points of
a same contour line happen to be closer each other than construction points of adjacent
contour lines (Figure 9).

In order to correct this artifact, an artiﬁcial ridge or thalweg line must be created in ﬂat
areas. We add new points with different altitudes on ﬂat triangles, so that the new
triangulation does not contain ﬂat triangles any more (Figure 10). The new points are
located on the middle of triangle edges, with the exception of edges that are part of a
contour line. The altitude of each point is computed by linear interpolation: the altitude is

Figure 9. Examples of ﬂat triangles.

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

261

Figure 10. Same area as Figure 9 after correction of ﬂat triangles.

interpolated between contour line CN and contour line line CN+1 for a ridge, and between
CN and CNj1 for a thalweg. The new DTM has new ridges and thalwegs. The accuracy
of this DTM is better than the accuracy of the initial DTM because

ZCNi (cid:1) 1 < ZInterpolated points < ZCNi þ 1

and the theoretical accuracy of a DTM computed from contour lines is equal the
equidistance of contour lines.

The second conﬁguration concerns identiﬁable areas. It occurs mainly in areas where
contour lines are not adjacent: for example, summit areas (highest contour line) or
thalwegs areas (lowest contour line). The Delaunay triangulation creates triangles in
these areas with construction points of the same contour line.

This artifact is responsible for two systematic error types (Figure 11):

(cid:2) Under estimation of altitudes in summit areas. The ﬂat shape of the TIN does not
always represent the ground reality. These summit areas are generally convex. This
shape is due to geomorphological phenomena such as erosion. In summit areas, three
types of ground shape can be found: sharp forms, round forms and more rarely ﬂat
forms. The problem with this artifact is that all summits are computed as ﬂat forms;
(cid:2) Over estimation of altitudes in thalweg areas. This is the inverse phenomenon. The
lowest contour line over estimates the thalweg area. At high scale, thalwegs are
generally dug by a watershed. The natural land form of a thalweg is rarely a ﬂat area.
However the Delaunay triangulation represents all thalwegs by ﬂat triangles.

In order to correct this artifact, it is required to use exogeneous data. It can be, for
example, peak points. They are often numerised on summit areas. This integration gives
to the summit area a rounder form, more natural (Figure 12). In case of really ﬂat areas,
peak points do not exist or are at the same altitude, so that areas stay ﬂat. It is possible to
ﬁnd in the literature other algorithms that can help to correct TIN ﬂat areas without other

262

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

Figure 11. Under and over estimation of DTM in ridges and thalwegs.

data sources (IDRISI software contains such an algorithm). For example, a parabolic
shape can be used to help to estimate the possible location of the highest point of the
summit (or the lowest point of the valley). Such an algorithm is not used here, because
some accurate data were available.

If the hydrographic network is available and bears a Z attribute, it is very helpful to

recreate more realistic thalwegs (Figure 13).

The localisation of these errors and their correction by TIN enrichment with altimetric
information (peak points, hydrographic network) enable to obtain a more realistic DTM.
This is useful for applications involving 3D visualisation, such as architectural studies.
This DTM is also more accurate in terms of altitude, slope and aspect (see Section 2).
In the following of this paper, we suggest that we can use the knowledge on the origin
and the localisation of classical artifacts to create semantics on the DTM and so predict
potential error areas.

Figure 12. Example of summit correction by integration of peak points.

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

263

Figure 13. Example of thalweg correction by integration of hydrographic network.

4. Potential error maps

The very nature of artifacts suggests that they are probably mainly located in thalwegs
and ridges, where the lack of initial information (i.e., contour lines) prevents from
correcting them totally by the algorithms described in Section 3.

We perform again kernel density estimation of elevation errors for the Btriangpro^
DTM, but for three populations: altitudes in high areas, altitudes in low areas, and
altitudes in transition areas (Figure 14).

Figure 14. Kernel density estimation of elevation differences between the Btriangpro^ DTM and the LIDAR
DTM in high areas, low areas and transition areas.

264

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

The densities of Figure 14 conﬁrm clearly that low areas are over-estimated and high
areas are under-estimated, whereas transition areas are globally free of bias. Hence, we
can propose a classiﬁcation of DTM’s area into three classes corresponding to qualitative
information: Blikely over-estimated,^ Blikely under-estimated,^ Bwith no signiﬁcant
bias.^

However, the determination of low and high areas has been performed by an expert.
We propose to use morphometric parameters to determine automatically areas of interest.
To this aim, the main morphometric parameter is convexity. We choose convexity over
elevation or slope because the perception of our expert of low and high areas is very
sensitive to the terrain’s shape and linked to geomorphological knowledge. Algorithms
for such a determination are hard to ﬁnd in the literature, and generally very complex
(see [16]). So our approach has been to focus on transition between those areas that are
generally typical in terms of convexity.

We analyse elevation difference maps and concavities and convexities computed by
r.param.scale from GRASS 5 GIS [16]. This GRASS module by Jo Wood extracts
terrain parameters from a DEM. It uses a multi-scale approach and quadratic polynomial
terrain approximation. We compute ﬁrst the following correlations for the elevation
differences of Btriang^ DTM (Btriang^-LIDAR).

Positive differences

Negative differences

concavities
convexities

41%
0.5%

For the Btriangpo^ DTM elevation differences, we obtain the following values.

Positive differences

Negative differences

concavities
convexities

15%
0.2%

We notice that the DTM enhancement mainly reduces the positive differences in
concavities, that is to say over-estimation in thalwegs areas. The under-estimation of
ridges can not be corrected efﬁciently without extensive exogenous data describing
summits.

Another way of investigating this assumption is to draw the map of important over-
estimation of elevation (errors greater than 2.5 meters) and important under-estimation
(Figure 15). We compare these maps to important concavities and important convexities
(Figure 16).

9%
33%

7%
34%

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

265

Figure 15. Large positive and negative elevation differences.

We measure now the link between those maps in terms of pixel overlay instead of

correlation. We obtain the following results.

Large positive
differences (12249 cells)

Large negative
differences (6719 cells)

large concavities (13754 cells)
large convexities (12035 cells)

5480
519

314
3116

It reads as follows: 5840/12249 = 44.7% of large positive differences are located in
concave areas, whereas 519/12249 = 0.04% of large positive differences are located in
convex areas. Moreover, 5840/13754 = 39.8% of large concavities have elevation
severely over estimated and 3116/12035 = 25.9% of large convexities have elevation
severely under estimated.

We deduce from these results that in very convex areas, elevations are likely to be

over-estimated, hence the idea of potential error maps.

To draw such a potential error map, robust and efﬁcient algorithms for the detection of
thalwegs (or concave areas) and ridges (or convex areas) are required. J. Wood’s
r.param.scale [16] can be parametrized to compute robust enough morphometric
parameter values. However, the parameter values depend on the landscape of the area

266

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

Figure 16. Large concavities and convexities.

and on the scale of the DTM. The methodology can probably be improved further by the
detection of geomorphologic areas. Note that our application does not require that
classiﬁed areas have smooth contours.

We have used the local quality characterisation for our visibility application and our
very low altitude ﬂight in the following way: altitudes in high areas (very convex areas)
have been raised, and altitudes in low areas (very concave areas) have been lowered. The
new DTM gives much better results for both applications.

5. Conclusion

We address in this paper the case of contour lines to DTM conversion. Whatever the
method used to densify irregularly spaced elevation measurements, the obtained DTMs
are quite similar in terms of elevation accuracy. However, in terms of terrain parameter
computation, the impact of artifacts in clearly visible because elevation errors are not
uniformly scattered. These artifacts come from the lack of elevation information in some
areas, and from interpolation or triangulation artifacts. They can be somewhat corrected
by appropriate algorithms, and the location of the remaining artifacts can be predicted,
leading to potential error maps. This methodology extracts semantics from the DTM and
transforms it into qualitative information. This qualitative information has proved to be
very effective to describe DTM’s quality. It enables to adapt algorithms according to the
predicted local quality. This qualitative errain characterisation provides a new application

DIGITAL TERRAIN MODEL COMPUTATION FROM CONTOUR LINES

267

for morphometric parameters, and raises the need for landscape characterisation
algorithms or geomorphologic area identiﬁcation. This approach enables local quality
prediction without the help of reference elevation sources.

References

Press, 1998.

1. R. Carla, A. Carrara, and G. Bitelli. BComparison of techniques for generating digital terrain models from
contour lines,^ International Journal of Geographic Information Science, Vol. 11(5):451Y 473, 1997.
2. P. Burrough. Principles of Geographical Information Systems for Land Resources Assesstment. Clarendon

3. J.R. Carter. BThe effect of data precision on the calculation of slope and aspect using gridded dems,^

Cartographica, Vol. 29(1):22Y34, 1992.

4. L. Eklundh and U. Martensson. BRapid generation of digital elevation models from topographic maps,^

International Journal of Geographic Information Science, Vol. 9:329Y340, 1995.

5. I. Florinsky. BAccuracy of local topographic variables derived from digital elevation models,^ International

Journal of Geographic Information Science, Vol. 12:47Y61, 1998.

6. GRASS 5. http://www.goeg.uni-hannover.de/grass/.
7. M.F. Hutchinson and J.C. Gallant. BGeographical information systems (second edition), Volume 1, Chapter

9: Representation of terrain,^ in Longley, Goodchild, Maguire, and Rhind (Eds.), Wiley, 1999.

8. O. Jaakkola and J. Oksanen. BCreating dems from contour lines: Interpolation techniques which save terrain

morphology,^ GIM International, Vol. 14(9):46 Y 49, 2000.

9. A. Koch and C. Heipke. BQuality assesstment of digital surface models derived from the shuttle radar

topography mission (srtm),^ in Proceedings of IGARSS, Sydney, 2001.

10. H. Mitasova and L. Mitas. BInterpolation by regularized spline with tension: I. Theory and implementation,^

Mathematical Geology, Vol. 25:641Y655, 1993.

11. F. Rousseaux. BEtude de l’impact de la repre´sentation du relief sur les applications,^ Revue Internationale

12. F. Rousseaux and O. Bonin. BTowards a coherent integration of 2d vector linear data into a dtm,^ in

de Ge´omatique, Vol. 13:4, 2003.

Proceedings of the 2lst ICC, 2003.

13. S. Wechsler. Effect of DE.M uncertainty on topographic parameters, DEM scale and terrain evaluation.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of New York, College of Environmental Science and Forestry, 2000.
14. R. Weibel and M. Heller. BGeographical information systems, Volume 1, Chapter 19: Digital terrain

modeling,^ in Maguire, Goodchild and Rhind (Eds.), Longman, 1991.

15. S.M. Wise. BThe effect of GIS interpolation errors on the use of digital elevation models in geomorphology,
in Landform monitoring, modelling and analysis,^ in Lane, Richards, and Chandler (Eds.), Wiley, 1998.
16. J. Wood, The geomorphological characterisation of digital elevation models. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of

Geography, University of Leicester, U.K., 1996.

268

BONIN AND ROUSSEAUX

Olivier Bonin
is a researcher at the COGIT laboratory (IGN), France. He has received a Ph.D. in Statistics
from Paris 6 University. His research interests include statistics applied to geographical information, data
quality, digital elevation models, and risk management.

Fre´de´ric Rousseaux
has received a Ph.D. in Geographical Information Science from Marne-La-Valle´e
University. He is specialized in digital terrain models and 3D data applied to hazard simulations. He is also a
junior lecturer at Orleans University. He now works as an engineer at EsriFrance.

