int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 8, 755± 773

Surfaces: tacit knowledge, formal language, and metaphor at the
Harvard Lab for Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

PATRICK McHAFFIE
Department of Geography, DePaul University, 990 West Fullerton, Parkway,
Chicago, IL60614, USA
e-mail: pmcha(cid:141) @wppost.depaul.edu

Abstract. The Harvard Lab for Computer and Spatial Analysis was one of
several sites in the early development of GIS where seminal innovations in the
processing and display of geographically referenced data took place. An early
area of concern at the lab were the mathematical and technical problems associ-
ated with the modelling of ‘surfaces’. This term, ‘surface’, came to take on new
and sometimes abstract meanings. The language used to describe ‘surfaces’ was
rooted in tacit knowledge and more formal mathematics. The mixing of diŒerent
forms of language, both verbal and written, allowed the passing of abstract and
sometimes di(cid:141) cult meanings. It may be that universal history is the history of a
handful of metaphors . .. It may be that universal history is the history of the
diŒerent intonations given a handful of metaphors (Borges 1964, p. 189 and 192).

1.

Introduction
Recent writings in the history of science have stressed the importance of language,
both written and spoken, formal and informal, as the principal vehicle for transmitting
and transforming ideas, understandings, explications and explanations between indi-
viduals and communities involved in the production of scienti(cid:142) c knowledge (see for
example Kuhn 1970; Lakatos 1976, 1978, Bloor 1991, Barnes et al. 1996 ). Within
language communities (Galison 1987, 1997 ) translations of meanings occur in many
ways including denotation, connotation, metaphor, metonymy, simile, allusion,
encoding, decoding, and intertextuality. Semiotics seeks to understand the ways that
these translations occur in communities that are both mundane and extraordinary.
Only recently have we come to recognize that scientists, engineers, and technicians
engage in constructive word play (written and spoken) as part of their day to day
work and, claims of detached objectivity notwithstanding, language in the scienti(cid:142) c
workplace serves as a powerful marker of the human character of research. Language
also can be the site of interchange and the synthetic forging of new understandings
and ideas for scientists and others engaged in processes of research and discovery.

One of the fundamental ways that language is used in communities of researchers
is to create new linkages between that which is broadly known of things in the world
(tacit knowledge) and new or unconventional understandings of these things.

We often surprise ourselves and others with what we know. We play a song at the piano
quite (cid:143) uently even though we thought we had long ago forgotten the right chords; we
suddenly know that Kant died in 1804 though we have just denied having any detailed
knowledge of pertinent dates in the history of philosophy.. . This is an innocent sense
of the term tacit, and taken in this way it is uncontroversially true that some of our
knowledge is tacit. (Samet 1980: p. 2).

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

756

P. McHaYe

In the (cid:142) eld of geography, where the object of knowledge is the world and
everything in it, any subject necessarily arrives in the research setting with layers of
pre-interpretation draped over its supposed true essence. Whether we speak or write
of terrain ( hills, valleys, slopes, etc.), the atmosphere (winds, temperatures, precipita-
tion), or populations (crowds, workers, children, the aged); all of these come with
pre-formed notions about their character and quality. Also, in the dynamics of day-
to-day life within research laboratories personnel change, bringing new understand-
ings of theoretical and practical entities into play as work progresses. This is one
way that new language can be brought into a particular localized setting, sometimes
producing what Galison (1997 ) has called ‘trading zones’ in describing the interaction
of experimental and theoretical physicists over the past several decades. In these
places ‘two dissimilar groups can (cid:142) nd common ground’, reaching local agreement
on theoretical or experimental diŒerences allowing work to go forward, while disag-
reeing on the signi(cid:142) cance of results or programmes within the broader discipline
itself (Galison 1997, p. 46). One such community was found at the Lab for Computer
Graphics and Spatial Analysis (LCGSA) in the Graduate School of Design at
Harvard University in the 1960s and 1970s. Here architects, planners, geographers,
and others concerned with producing representations of the physical and human
world came into close contact
through their participation in practical and
theoretical work.

Many types of phenomena present themselves to us as ways of knowing the
world. .. sounds, smells, tastes, etc. Perhaps no other, however, has the ‘master’
character of the surface. It is the ‘thing’ that separates material from immaterial,
made available to us through sight and touch, giving form to the world and all things
in it. We become adept at an early age in judging the many possible characteristics
of this type of thing, the surface, its smoothness or roughness, colours or shades,
temperatures, its relation to the pull of the Earth, transparent or opaque, (cid:142) xed or
in motion, hard or soft. As a phenomenon it has a strong although not necessary
relationship to the gaze, the sense of sight, and when combined with our experience
of surfaces through the sense of touch it becomes the master piece of evidence in
our making sense of the world. Something seen (given form through the illumination
of its surfaces) and touched (a test to make certain that the eyes do not deceive)
becomes real, irrefutable, incontrovertible, and ultimately believed. It serves as the
boundary between the real and the not real and, in its in(cid:142) nite variety, an understand-
ing of it and an ability to describe and model it becomes a principal objective of
those who seek to understand the world, geographers included.

Not only do we use surfaces as direct indications of things themselves, but also
we extend our knowledge of things sensed as surfaces to include that which lies
behind the surface, a certain indirect knowledge, intuited from our understanding of
forms in other contexts. Judgements about the interior character of forms, made
material through our experience of their surfaces, follow from our readings of the
surface characteristics of things. This tacit knowledge of surfaces, both simple and
complex, is made manifest through a rich set of verbal and written codes, passed
from one context to the next. In this paper I ask the question of the surface that
Barthes (1985: p. 22) asks of the image: how does meaning come to the surface, in
particular the surface as represented through the cartography of human and machine
and the descriptions of the researchers producing and explaining those representa-
tions. And how does our tacit knowledge of surfaces, real and virtual, colour our
understandings and our descriptions of these renderings.

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

757

Metaphor and its use in the practice of explanation (scienti(cid:142) c and otherwise) has
recently become of interest to scholars in the sociology of scienti(cid:142) c knowledge (SSK)
and the history of science and technology. In particular, economic geographers such
as Barnes (1996 ) have begun to explore the ontological function of metaphor in
de(cid:142) ning the landscape of major subdisciplinary areas such as economic and social
geography over the past several decades. Barnes draws on the work of philosopher
Richard Rorty to develop more fully the notion of metaphor as a powerful linguistic
device, useful in the construction of explanatory arguments:

Metaphors, precisely because they are patently false and absurd (truths), cause us to stop
and think and thereby possibly lead us to do diŒerent things than we have done in the
past. Furthermore, the reason that metaphors surprise us is not because they have some
special cognitive status but because they have none at all; if they had that status they
would not be surprising. (Barnes 1996: p.154).

A language community exists wherever local understandings of words and their
meanings become shared in a useful way between individuals and groups in particular
institutional or place-bounded settings. Focusing on metaphor alone may be seen as
reductive of the rich complex of meanings that evolve in any language community,
however here this example is intended to show the workings of a particular type of
speech and to consider how it ‘works’, i.e. how it serves as a conveyor of meaning.
To the extent that the use of metaphor and other syncretic linguistic forms go beyond
what Dalia Varanka has called scienti(cid:142) c ‘plain-speak’, then some indication of the
importance of language in constructing scienti(cid:142) c explanation is given. In scienti(cid:142) c
settings metaphor may often be deployed as exemplars within conversations as
diŒerent types of explanatory language are utilized to explain particular phenomena.
Barnes gives an example of this happening on a broad scale in the ways that William
Warntz, an early luminary at the Harvard LCGSA, imported concepts from physics
into the social sciences in a wholesale fashion.

By metaphorically redescribing geographical things in terms of physical models, they
(Stewart, Warntz, and Carrothers) found that they could use statistical methods, make
predictions,publish in scienti(cid:142) c journals, speak authoritatively about scienti(cid:142) c explanation,
and more besides. The more general point is that in hindsight the gravity model metaphor
was pragmatic, not cognitive. It did not reveal the Truth, but it enabled economic
geographers to look at the world in a diŒerent way and do many things that they could
not have done before (Barnes, 1996: p. 158).

I will show in this paper that both Howard Fisher, (cid:142) rst director of the LCG
(and his associates) and William Warntz used metaphor to great eŒect while they
were a(cid:141) liated with the lab. To the extent that the work produced there was in(cid:143) uential
and acclaimed is at least in part due to the successful mixing of formal and tacit
understandings of real and conceptual surfaces and their representations.

2. Setting the stage: histories of science

I will use a reading of parts of a correspondence course on SYMAP that was
promulgated by Fisher and his associates to explore the notion of metaphor, explana-
tion, and the surface. I am also interested in the addition of William Warntz to the
LCGSA staŒand the eŒects that his addition had on the ongoing work there. In
particular Warntz’s use of the surface construct and his way of speaking and writing
about that will serve as a major example of the eŒective use of metaphor in scienti(cid:142) c
geography during the 1960s. In many ways this paper was conceived as part of a
complement to the collection of essays recently compiled by Tim Foresman as a

758

P. McHaYe

history of GIS technology (Foresman 1998 ). Several of the chapters from this text
have proven useful and indeed the book itself makes a strong case for the importance
of histories of technology. While the Foresman book, in general, focused on the
technology and institutions involved in the early development of GIS, this work
explores the language that was used to explain work that was ongoing at the LCGSA,
as well as the context of this language and its use. This approach falls within the
mainstream of current research on the history of science and technology.

This has implications for me as an interpreter of historical things, as well as for
my interpretation of the events that produced those artefacts. In other words, if our
senses are open to penetration by previous experience, then scientists and researchers,
when viewed historically, must be considered to have been subject to the same sort
of in(cid:143) uence. The tacit understandings of things like maps, charts, terrains, or surfaces
must have conditioned the interpretations of representations such as these at the
lab. Without prior experience of topographic maps, contour mapping, the interpreta-
tion of terrain, etc., then the mess of line printed characters ((cid:142) gure 1) will make little
sense. Hence, events and the objects that resulted from those events at the LCGSA
must be considered as the product of a complex mixing of understandings.

I cannot stress enough the importance of language and local systems of language
in the construction of scienti(cid:142) c and technical explanation and knowledge. In post-
Kuhnian writing on the history of science and SSK, particularly that emanating
from the ‘strong program’ in SSK at the University of Edinburgh, what is most clear
is that scienti(cid:142) c technical practice, when concerned with the production of credible
truth claims, is ‘neither determined by rational rules nor the facts but is the result

Figure 1.

Illustration from the correspondence course mailed by the LCG to hundreds of

users at the beginning in 1967.

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

759

of speci(cid:142) c local conditions that take the form of particular metaphors and analogues
and various vested social interests’ (Barnes 1996: p. 118 ). In other words, scientists
move from ‘case to case, mediated by complex judgments of similarity and diŒerence,
(Bloor 1991: p. 164) carrying out classi(cid:142) cations of observation and experience
through the creative application of language. One of the most widely read historians
of science, Thomas Kuhn, in fact wrote that scientists infer theoretical relationships
neither inductively nor deductively but by metaphorical
leaps (Kuhn 1970 ).
Established relationships, both those established scienti(cid:142) cally or accepted as social
knowledge, become exemplars to be used as illustrations of general and generalizable
principles in new and diŒerent circumstances. The well-known case of the develop-
ment of spatial interaction theories through the application of Newtonian physical
models and other physical theories to the interaction of human bodies (Stewart’s
Social Physics Project and its in(cid:143) uence on Warntz and his work, detailed in Barnes
1996 ) is perhaps the best example of this principal at work in geography.

Perhaps the work of Fisher and others in creating the SYMAP program (as well
as the later programs produced by the LCGSA) then should be viewed as an attempt
to produce a system for visually recognizing similarities between renderings of points,
lines, polygons, and surfaces that were meant to represent vastly diŒerent phenomena.
In eŒect, the renderings become visual metaphors that allow the translation of one
understanding of a particular kind of surface into another context. The master cases
that exist as tacit currency (terrain, hydrology) appear time and again as examples
of how particular abstract surfaces work or how they should be interpreted. I would
argue that this work (that of Fisher and Warntz) carries immense importance in
quantitative geography for it tended to facilitate the passing of metaphorical systems
from one context to another by allowing the early visualization and rei(cid:142) cation within
a common visual reference system of what were then merely theoretical objects. To
the extent that the marks on the paper made by the fast line printers driven by
SYMAP code resembled renderings of other phenomena seen before, then the more
acceptable was the system of classi(cid:142) cation that Fisher had produced. Even though
Fisher was an architect by training, and was by the mid 1960s housed in the Graduate
School of Design at Harvard University, theoretical and numerical geographers, as
well as urban and regional planners quickly grasped the signi(cid:142) cance and power of
his system, and began putting it to use mapping human and physical phenomena
with a fervent zeal.

I move now to a discussion of two instances where the use of a particular
metaphorical example facilitated their easy understanding. By instances I mean
concepts and their deployment, classi(cid:142) cation systems, texts and textual strategies,
maps and graphics, institutions and their social context, and people and their active
practices in a particular historical-geographical context. I use a discussion of the
SYMAP program to illustrate several metaphors embodied within the documentation
and explanations of its operation. This will be followed by a discussion of William
Warntz and his work during the 1960s, in particular a metaphor-laden explanation
that was given in an early paper in the in(cid:143) uential ‘Harvard Papers in Theoretical
Geography’ series.

3. Howard Fisher and the SYMAP program

SYMAP was one of the earliest examples of a computer-mapping program that
was widely used in the developed world to produce thematic maps of diverse
phenomena. The program was the brainchild of Howard Fisher, a distinguished

760

P. McHaYe

architect who, in 1963 while at the Northwestern Technical Institute at Northwestern
University in Evanston Illinois, worked with a programmer, Mrs. O. G. Benson, to
complete the design. According to Chrisman (1988 ), Fisher, upon retirement from
Northwestern, became interested in developing a laboratory for the investigation of
practical ways of applying computers to problems of graphical representation. He
made inquiries to both Northwestern and the University of Chicago but eventually
returned to his alma mater, Harvard and the Graduate School of Design (GSD) with
his proposal. The Department of City and Regional Planning in the GSD established
the LCG in the spring of 1965. After the lab was established a proposal was made
to the Ford Foundation for funding which was granted in December 1965. From the
beginning he received help from a number of talented students, staŒ, and faculty in
the completion and testing of the program, in particular Carl Steinitz, Robert Russell,
and Donald Shepard. The initial version of the program produced crude (by today’s
standards) thematic maps using punched cards (or perhaps rarely magnetic tape or
disk) as input and high-speed line printers as output devices. The program was
written in FORTRAN IV. By 1967 the source deck consisted of 3000 cards —in later
versions this would expand to over 5000. The initial version of the program that
was made available to the public (1966 ) carried the warning:

In general, without extensive revision and curtailment of options, computers of less than
large scale capacity cannot be successfully used. (LCG 1967b)

By 1971 technology and the recommendations had changed signi(cid:142) cantly:

The program uses approximately 200-k bytes of core storage and assumes availability of
a full operating system. Other users have devised means for modifying the program to
run on systems as small as an IBM 360-40, 128k, and DOS. (LCGSA 1971 )

In order to use the program the user typically punched job control statements
that caused the machinery to produce one of three types of map. Boundaries were
coded using either primitive digitizing tablets or more commonly, engineering graph
paper overlain on paper maps or manuscripts ((cid:142) gure 2).

Figure 2.

Illustation from the 1971 edition of the SYMAP manual (LCG 1971 ).

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

761

Figure 3.

Illustration from the 1971 edition of the SYMAP manual (LCG 1971 ).

By 1967 the program had been modi(cid:142) ed to allow the production of three types

of maps:

Contour Map ((cid:142) gure 4)
Proximal Map ((cid:142) gure 5)
Conformant Map ((cid:142) gure 6).

A typical SYMAP job might contain several packages in the stack of punched
cards. These cards would contain co-ordinate locations of the map outline, the
locations of data points, legends, locations of barriers to interpolation, and the values
to be assigned to conformal regions or data points for surface interpolation. The
F-MAP module speci(cid:142) ed the type of map to be produced as well as several electives
such as size, content, number of class intervals, etc.

Many geographers and cartographers were trained in the use of the program
through a correspondence course sent out by the LCG beginning in 1967. The
lessons included several worked examples of mapping. The correspondence course
was intended by Fisher and his associates to present working models of how the
program might be applied to other spatial phenomena, and the examples that were
used give some sense of the developer’s perception of their clientele. They included
representations of corn production in the (cid:142) ctional Abbott County, Iowa, the estim-
ated percentage of coconut acreage suŒering from blight in Mantegna Bay (a mythical
place?)
((cid:142) gure 1), and the percentage of houses deteriorating in Lawrence
Conservation Area in the City of Chicago ((cid:142) gure 4). Correspondence courses came

762

P. McHaYe

SYNAP

0.10 MINUTES  FOR MAP

TIME  = 9:37.32

EXAMPLE 2.1

LEVELS OF EQUAL SIZE

PERCENTAGE  OF HOUSING IN DETERIORATED  CONDITION

Figure 4. Contour map which purports to show the condition of deteriorated housing in
Chicago’s Uptown neighbourhood (Dudnik 1971 ).

with a brief cover letter (‘Here is your (cid:142) rst lesson. We trust you will (cid:142) nd the course
list, instructions, sample punched cards,
interesting and challenging’), a material
coding forms, and an envelope for the return of the materials to the LCG. The
instructions and manuals for SYMAP are written in a straightforward technical
style —a style well suited to their purpose —ease of use by a non-technical clientele
of geographers, cartographers, architects, and planners. That the program was inten-
ded to be used in support of scienti(cid:142) c and other data intensive investigations,
however, was clear from the start:

SYMAP is a computer program for producing maps which graphically depict spatially
disposed quantitative and qualitative information. It is suited to a broad range of applica-
tions, and is provided with numerous options to meet widely varying requirements ...
Raw data of every kind (physical, social, economic, etc.) when given to the computer may
be related, manipulated, weighted, and aggregated in any manner desired (LCG 1967b).

Of the three types of maps that might be produced by the system, the Contour
map was anticipated to be the most widely applied. The contouring problem was
computationally intensive, and the manual solution of the problem was time consum-
ing and tedious. In case users were unfamiliar with the symbolic usage of contours
to delineate a surface, however, further explanation was needed:

Imagine that a model has been carved out of some solid heavy material—with the area
of its (cid:143) at base corresponding to the study area, and with the height of its upper variable
surface at every point proportional to the value or magnitude of the data. (LCG 1967a)

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

763

Figure 5. A proximal map (Peucker 1972 ).

Since the user’s imagination might not have been active enough to ensure the
understanding of the analogy—perhaps she was unfamiliar with vast carvings from
solid heavy materials (mahogany? marble?) and might not understand the need for
sculpture of this size—the explanation is supplemented with more vivid imagery:

By way of further explanation: Imagine the model is placed in a tank (cid:142) lled with water
just up to its highest point. If water were then removed from the tank until it was at 80%
of its original height, the level surface of the water would meet the variable surface of the
model along an uneven ‘shore-line’. This shore-line would conform to the highest contour
line on the map, that adjacent to the area formed out of black rectangles. (LCG 1967a)

The explanation goes on to remove successively more and more water from the

tank— eventually leaving the model high and dry.

By thinking of the contour lines as a series of shore-lines—or high water marks left by a
retreating tide—it is possible (with a little practice and experience) to visualize quite
accurately the shape of the statistical or quantitative surface represented by the symbolism
printed on the map. (LCG 1967a)

764

P. McHaYe

SYNAP

0.25 MINUTES  FOR MAP

TIME  = 8:59.81

TEL-AVIV, ISRAEL

1961

POPULATION  DENSITY BY QUARTER

Figure 6. A conformant map of Tel Aviv, Israel (Dudnik 1971).

Never mind that the ‘contour lines’ in the line-printed SYMAP graphic were not
lines at all but were blocky voids left between diŒerent classes of composite symbols
produced by the overprinting of alphanumeric characters. Returning to the exercise
at hand concludes the metaphorical explanation:

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

765

Thus, in the case of Abbott County, for the particular subject speci(cid:142) ed in the title,
there are ‘peaks’ of high value at the upper left and lower right—with the latter peak
somewhat less steep than the former. (LCG 1967a)

The use of scare quotes at the introduction of the term ‘peaks’ refers the reader
back to the recent (cid:143) ood, dropping the quotes later in the same sentence normalizes
the metaphor. One perhaps is left wondering if the corn crop was aŒected by the
unusually high water of recent times. The explanation goes on to discuss further
interpretation of the problem in more formal language that related directly to the
data and its representation by the computer system. This mixing of metaphorical
explanation here and the drawing upon tacit understandings of common objects like
carvings, basins of water, and peaks allows an unsophisticated user to rapidly grasp
the contour concept. Fisher’s previous professional background and his academic
training was in the (cid:142) eld of architecture —perhaps his explanations were sensitive to
the untrained users who might bene(cid:142) t most from the program. By some accounts
his understanding of cartography was unsophisticated at this time, although he did
go on to write extensively on maps and mapping. Woldenberg described Fisher’s
cartographic knowledge during the 1960s:

He (Fisher) was completely ignorant ... it’s easy to say he was ignorant of cartography
because he made up, he didn’t refer, he made up all these terms like proximal ... and by
the way he made up all those terms and that’s why I say he invented cartography again
... in his own mind. (Woldenberg 1997)

As you will see later, this particular extended metaphor might have been derived
from an explanation of a similar concept used frequently by William Warntz.
Metaphorical explanations such as that given above allowed the normalization of
this technology in a sense—particularly for users who had little experience with
maps, cartography, or contouring. At about the same time that the correspondence
courses were being circulated through the community of scholars, William Warntz
had joined the lab and initiated a new, more scienti(cid:142) c focus for the work that was
going on there.

4. William Warntz and the LCGSA

William Warntz came to the LCG with impeccable credentials in the small
community of scienti(cid:142) c and theoretical geographers and regional scientists. He made
no secret of his desire to come to Harvard as a way of beginning the ‘reintroduction
(of geography) as a discipline into the prestigious universities where it had been
strongly represented in two earlier ‘‘cycles’’ of geographic thought’ (Warntz 1983:
p. 147). It was shortly after his arrival that the decision was made to change the
name of the Lab to the Laboratory for Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis
(LCGSA), re(cid:143) ecting an expanded vision that his addition brought with it. His
writings on ‘macrogeography’ and social energy had been recently published (Warntz
1965 ) and he had served a year (1965–66) as the President of the Regional Science
Association. His presidential address gives some hint of his views of geography,
science, and the discipline’s role in society:

Space is a tyrant and distances enforce his rule. He militates against us, often disposing
of what we propose if our plans ignore his in(cid:143) uence. The revolution against him is already
well begun, however. Among the most disloyal of his subjects are geographers and regional
scientists. Their attack on space is premeditated, calculating and unremitting. They aim
to understand him completely the better to channel his in(cid:143) uences to their own ends, and
are willing to study long hours and hold frequent conferences to achieve this. They know

766

P. McHaYe

the rule of space is not whimsical or capricious. That it is systematic and orderly has been
glimpsed. When thoroughly understood, advantage will redound to mankind (Warntz
1966: p.1).

In this instance the ‘space is a tyrant’ metaphor establishes the context for a

cluster of related word usages. For example:

he militates against us
if our plans ignore his in(cid:143) uence
the revolution against him
the most disloyal of his subjects
the rule of space

Warntz was a visionary and a master of metaphorical explanation. In the same
address he used a brilliant example of a global scale prison to explain the ambiguity
of the spatial abstractions of ‘inside’ and ‘outside’ on a globe and described a system
of gravity-driven subterranean intercontinental trains in order to stress the impor-
tance of always accounting for the spherical nature of the Earth. The point here is
that while Warntz was certainly part of the vanguard of the quantitative revolution
in geography, and has been treated perhaps unfairly by other historians of science,
his visions of the discipline, and logical extension the world, were often thought
provoking.

When he reached Harvard after an extended period at the American Geographical
Society in New York Warntz set about continuing his work in spatial science and
the establishment of a presence for scienti(cid:142) c geography at the nation’s premier
university, where geography had been terminated as a program some time before.
He began an ambitious teaching program including a graduate course on ‘The
Theory of the Region’, and a team-taught course on ‘Physical Geographical Systems’.
His greatest satisfaction,
in a teaching sense, came from a freshman seminar he
oŒered, titled ‘Geography, Geometry, and Graphics’ (Warntz 1983 ).

During the winter of 1966–67 Warntz initiated what was to be his most in(cid:143) uential
contribution at the LCGSA, The Harvard Papers in Theoretical Geography. This
series, funded by the O(cid:141) ce of Naval Research, was a continuation of work begun
at the American Geographical Society in New York prior to his move to Harvard.
Carrying the subtitle ‘Geography and the Properties of Surfaces‘ and running from
1966 to 1971, it served as a vehicle for the theoretical and empirical writings of
Warntz and others that were associated with the LCGSA in some way. Of the 47
papers in the series, Warntz, Michael Woldenberg, or C. E. Lindgren authored 29.

The (cid:142) rst paper in the series, published in the spring of 1966 and co-authored by
Warntz and Woldenberg, bore the broad title ‘Concepts and Applications —Spatial
Order’ and it was divided into two sections. The (cid:142) rst, by Warntz, was an extension
of a discussion he had begun in his monograph Macrogeography and Income Fronts
(1965 ) that dealt with the topology of surfaces in a terrestrial context. The second
section, by Woldenberg, dealt with hierarchical systems and their growth. The preface
set the context for the series:

We intend that all of the papers taken together represent a discipline of geography that
is at once respectful and mindful of the remarkable tradition of that discipline and receptive
to and perhaps a moving force behind the grand advances currently being made within
geography that permit us now to attempt not only ’explanations’ of particular spatial
patterns, be they of social and economic or of physical phenomena, but also of the ‘patterns
of patterns’. (Warntz and Woldenberg 1967, p. iii )

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

767

Whether the contribution hoped for by the authors was achieved or not is an
open question. Certainly the papers were widely read in geography and regional
science in the 1960s and 1970s. Perhaps because of their theoretical focus, their
practical application has been limited, although I would argue that they set a
legitimizing and scienti(cid:142) c tone for the applied work that was occurring at the time
such as that evidenced at the early conferences facilitated by Roger Tomlinson
and others.

Warntz set the goal of this (cid:142) rst piece to begin a discussion of the theoretical

foundations of surface modelling and representation:

It is, in part, the purpose of this (cid:142) rst report to treat explicitly certain parts of the theory
of contouring land forms that have remained neglected through the years not only with
the hope of removing that confusion but especially with the aim of developing pertinent
ideas concerning certain properties of surfaces generally and demonstrating their signi(cid:142) c-
ance for a theoretical geography of spatial structure and spatial process, that is to say,
spatial form and spatial movement. The theory of surfaces is equally applicable in many
cases to phenomena generally acknowledged otherwise to be signi(cid:142) cantly diŒerent in terms
of their non-spatial properties. (Warntz and Woldenberg 1967, pp. 1–2)

This is the ontological

leap that allows the extension of mathematical and
representational logics, developed in one context, to be linked to others in a decontex-
tualized fashion. In eŒect the representational
logic of terrain mapping becomes
metaphorically connected to more abstract mathematical models meant to describe
ephemeral socio-economic phenomena that were capable of being represented in a
similar fashion. As shown later, this technique becomes legitimized in part through
the creative use of language. Warntz continues, setting the stage for what is to follow:

We now look upon maps not only as stores for spatially ordered information, but also as
a means for the graphical solution of certain spatial problems for which the mathematics
proves to be intractable, and to produce necessary spatial transformations for hypothesis
testing . .. The modern geographer conceives of spatial structures and spatial processes as
applying not only to such things as land forms, drainage patterns, temperatures, and the
like in physical geography alone but also to social, economic, and cultural phenomena
portraying not only conventional densities but other things such as (cid:142) eld quantity poten-
tials, probabilities, refractions, costs, times, etc. Always, however these conceptual patterns
may be regarded as overlying the surface of the real earth and the geometrical and
topological characteristics of these patterns, as transformed mathematically or graphically,
thus describe aspects of the geography of the real world (Warntz and Woldenberg 1967,
pp. 2–3).

So scienti(cid:142) c geography, combined with the computing power available at the
LCG, was poised to make the kinds of contributions to society dreamed of by the
spatial scientists since the early 1950s.

Of considerable promise here is the possibility of developing a logical computing program
for producing meaningful and operationally signi(cid:142) cant geographical regionalizations for
particular uses (planning, administration, etc.) based on mappings eŒecting programmed
compromises between spatial and non-spatial variances (Warntz and Woldenberg 1967,
p. 4).

Warntz seems here to hope for the construction of something much more applied
from the outcome of theoretical research being carried out at the LCG and at
other places.

After the programmatic statements of the (cid:142) rst few pages Warntz returns to the
object of his concern, the surface. He is very careful initially to establish its meaning
in a formal, mathematical sense:

768

P. McHaYe

Surface is a geometrical construct dealing with kind of space that may be regarded as
deriveable (sic) from a plane by a transformation that is reversible. If m and n are taken
as the two independent variables over the intervals a< m< b, c< m< d (sic) and u(m, n),
v(m, n) and w(s, t) are taken as three continuous functions of m and n in their given
intervals, there exists a point of space corresponding to each pair of values (m, n) as a
consequence of the equations x 5 u(m, n), y 5
v(m, n), and z 5 w(m, n). All of these points
considered at once constitute a continuous surface and the three equations immediately
above are called a parametric representation of the surface. This totality is regarded as a
surface-segment if,
in the above de(cid:142) nition, the intervals are bounded (Warntz and
Woldenberg 1967, pp. 6–7).

This mathematical-logical de(cid:142) nition of surface is consistent with understandings
of physical surfaces —those that can be observed, touched, or walked upon and
might even serve to describe more ephemeral physical surfaces such as continuous
atmospheric or hydrological phenomena. But to extend this understanding to non-
continuous human phenomena such as population, incomes, deteriorated housing,
or even corn production requires the case-by-case suspension of ‘that which is known’
about virtually any of these things. To extend the status of continuous surface to
discrete or even stepped things in the world, things that might even have been
measured at particular places that might be locationally identi(cid:142) able as a point in
some co-ordinate system, just because it is mathematically possible to interpolate
values for all of those locations in between might be viewed as an act of intellectual
fraud. The application of contour mapping to social data was—at this time —well
established in geography and cartography. The advent of high-speed computers and
the creation of programs like SYMAP, with its interpretation algorithm written by
Donald Shepard at the LCGSA (Shepard 1968 ), made simple continuous surface
mapping of any thing that could be measured and assigned to a Cartesian location.
Following Haggett (1966 ), Warntz gave a thumbs up to the use of this technique for
virtually any type of data, regardless of our understanding of process or pattern—
not without noting, however that ‘The history of the origin and development of such
conceptualization and its cartographic presentation is an interesting and involved
one’ (Warntz and Woldenberg 1967, p. 7).

Warntz went on to demonstrate some general properties of closed surfaces.
Almost immediately he launched into an extended allegorical description of a
spherical system that would illustrate a point:

Imagine in space any closed surface . .. Describe, with the point G as its center, a sphere
with a radius large enough to envelop the surface entirely. In order to represent these
things better, let us imagine that the sphere is formed from a mass of water surrounding
the surface, and that the water be submitted afterwards to continuous evaporation which
makes the volume of the sphere decrease progressively .. . If we conceive the given surface
as the exterior surface of a solid body of stone plunged into the interior of a liquid, the
point S (shown in an illustration) will be like the summit of an island which will rise and
grow in proportional increases. (Warntz and Woldenberg 1967, pp. 11–12).

The use of this example went on for some time. The liquid sphere gradually
evaporated entirely (one would assume creating an atmosphere, weather, climate)
eventually exposing the entire surface of the solid stone body inside, illustrating
various characteristics of contour lines (described as a ‘coast line’) along the way.
There were several important and interesting points to be made here, including the
possibility of crossing contour lines and a generalizable characteristic of the number
of pits, peaks, pales, and passes that describe the irregular stone object. At certain
points Warntz dips back into the description of the surface using formal mathematics,

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

769

only to return to the sphere and the (cid:143) ood of biblical proportions. All through the
illustration (10 pages long) he moves back and forth between (cid:143) ood and drought,
and formal mathematical
language. While the demonstration would have most
certainly been possible without appealing to the scriptural imagination of the reader,
it would most certainly have not been as understandable, convincing, or readable.

Warntz follows the discussion above with a long, graphic illustration of
the coastlines as they emerge from the

to reveal

his diluvian world, meant
all-encompassing ocean:

This (cid:142) gure and subsequent ones are meant to be regarded as geographical maps, in
particular as one point equi-distant azimuthal projections to the plane of the entire sphere
to the plane with that point being mapped as the center of the circle and with its antipodal
point on the sphere being depicted as the boundary circle of the map. ( Warntz and
Woldenberg 1967, pp. 23–24)

The series of thirty (cid:142) gures, when thumbed through like a (cid:143) ipbook, reveals the
emergence of a rectilinear continent with peaks, plains, valleys, and passes. Warntz
maps the contours of his continent ((cid:142) gure 7) but lest we think this is intended as a
dry theoretical exercise he reminds us:

Keep in mind that the features exposed by the diminution of the liquid sphere can be
taken literally as geomorphological features or as on a three dimensional surface model
(with an arbitrary but convenient vertical scale) of some phenomenon, real or conceptual,
geographically distributed, pertaining to social, economic, or physical realms. (Warntz
and Woldenberg 1967, p. 24).

Once again we see that, while not wholly relying on the use of metaphor and
allegorical description, these writings suggest that the researchers at the LCGSA,
like scientists everywhere, did build allegorical and metaphorical arguments that
helped to explain the abstract mathematical concepts they were constructing during
the ascendant period of scienti(cid:142) c and theoretical spatial science. Warntz, and his
work while at the LCGSA, served to underpin more practical work done by other
researchers at Harvard and at other locations through the late 1960s and the 1970s
with an aura of scientism and epistemological legitimization. Whether it was used
or not by workers at the ‘grand enterprise’ that has come to be GIScience in the
1990s, it is remembered as being part of the fabric, woven during the 1950s and
1960s, establishing the conditions for the development of modern GIS.

5. Final thoughts

My observations here, and what I’ve written about them are the more permeable
kind, drawn from my re(cid:143) ection on what I’ve seen, read, and discussed over the
course of this work. At several points in this paper I have used materials that were
produced by workers at the LCGSA during the 1960s as a way of explaining the
new techniques and technologies that were being developed there, in particular the
SYMAP program and the paper series on theoretical geography. They also served
as a source of income for the lab during these years where at Harvard research was
expected to ‘(cid:143) oat it’s own boat’. These were the materials that many GIS practitioners
of the present generation used as an introduction to what was then known broadly
as ‘computer cartography’ . As we use the descriptions of our early experiences with
SYMAP, SYMVU, and similar applications to illustrate to current students and
younger GIS users the progress that has been made over the past several decades,

770

P. McHaYe

Figure 7. The contours of an unnamed surface/form described by William Warntz
(Woldenberg and Warntz 1967 ).

the story of this early application and the works of Fisher, Warntz, and others is
reproduced, albeit as something of a straw man. To the extent that metaphors such
as the ‘solid object in water’ story allowed the easy understanding of abstract SYMAP

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

771

renderings, or the theoretical writings of Warntz and others then it is relevant to the
evolving historiography of GIS.

The work of Fisher and others at the LCGSA combined the emerging epistemo-
logy of quantitative geography, championed by Warntz and others, with the practical
technologies that were readily available through university research computing
centres. The application of the surface interpolation algorithm through the SYMAP
package’s CONTOUR module to practical and theoretical problems allowed geo-
graphers, planners, and other social scientists to visualize abstractions from the
physical and social worlds that had never been seen before. To the extent that these
renderings looked like other renderings of terrain surfaces, better known but not
derived through mathematical interpolation but rather analogical photogrammetric
modelling or (cid:142) eld mapping, the system was a success. The researchers at the LCGSA,
Warntz in particular, were prepared to extend the status of ‘surface’ to practically
any phenomena, so long as it was capable of being measured and (cid:142) xed to a point.
This work is a small part of an emerging literature that seeks to (cid:143) esh out the
ways that what we currently know as Geographical Information Science or
Geographical Information Systems came about. Examining disciplinary change in
core concepts such as surfaces and their properties raises epistemological and ontolo-
gical questions. What counts as acceptable technique or knowledge in GIScience
and how these things came to be embraced will always be relevant for practitioners,
as well as historians of science and technology. The work of Keith Clarke and John
Cloud on the CORONA program, supported by NSF, indicates the breadth of topics
that geographers and historians are beginning to examine. Another strand of interes-
ting work in this vein comes from the intersections of science and technology studies
and critical appraisals of GIS technology from within the disciplines of geography,
sociology, and the history of science and technology. This volume is a re(cid:143) ection of
the growing importance and relevance of this work. If GIS is to become GIScience
then we can expect (and welcome) an outpouring of richer and more complete
investigations of the intellectual genealogy of our discipline’s core concepts.

Several questions have been raised here and (at least) partial answers have been

proposed. At least two bear repeating:

E How do renderings of surfaces

such as those produced by computer

applications such as SYMAP take on meaning?

It should be clear from the examples given here that, at the critical moment when
computer mapping of continuous surfaces was placed within the grasp of a large
community of scholars, the interpretations of these renderings were aided by creative
uses of descriptive, metaphorical explanations. Because metaphor relies on the exist-
ence of broadly held, tacit understandings of things then tacit knowledge comes into
play as being an important facilitator of the transfer of scienti(cid:142) c knowledge. And
this moment is historically signi(cid:142) cant because for many this was our (cid:142) rst experience
of computer mapping technology.

E How are proposed theoretical explanations of cartographic renderings (such

as those given by Warntz) of surfaces made understandable?

Again, and interestingly in the same institutional context, they were normalized
at least in part through the creative use of language and the reliance on metaphorical
explanation (and hence the existence of broad tacit knowledge regarding particular
kinds of surfaces) in the writings of William Warntz. This is important for its location

772

P. McHaYe

in close institutional juxtaposition with the other more practical works being pro-
duced at the LCGSA, and for the legitimizing role that the Harvard Papers played
in the early development of GIScience. I hope that this work will spur reconsideration
of the role of language in the development of scienti(cid:142) c knowledge within GIScience
and the mapping disciplines in general.

Acknowledgments

The words and deeds of several others have contributed to the development of
this paper. The work was supported, in part, by a grant from the DePaul University
Research Council. Helpful critical comments were provided by Laurel Smith and
several other participants at the ‘Intersections: Society, Information, and Geographic
Thought’ workshop in May, 1999. Francis Harvey provided particularly useful
comments following the workshop. Amy Ahner read, listened, and spoke with timely
wisdom. Trevor Barnes provided several helpful critical comments late in the revision
process, and the comments and criticisms of three anonymous reviewers were
thoughtful, constructive, and bene(cid:142) cial.

References
Barnes, B., Bloor, D., and Henry, J., 1996, Scienti(cid:142) c knowledge: a sociological analysis.

Barnes, T. J., 1996, L ogics of Dislocation: Models, Metaphors, and Meanings of Economic Space

(London: Athlone).

(New York: Guilford).

Barthes, R., 1985, T he Responsibility of Forms: Critical Essays on Music, Art, and

Representation, translated by R. Howard (Berkeley: University of California Press).

Bloor, D., 1991, Knowledge and Social Imagery, Second Edition (Chicago: University of

Borges, J. L., 1964, L abyrinths: Selected Stories and Other W ritings (New York: New

Chrisman, N., 1988, The risks of software innovation: a case study of the Harvard Lab. T he

American Cartographer, 13, 291–300.

Dudnik, E. E., 1971, SYMAP user’s reference manual (Chicago: University of Illinois—

Foresman, T.,editor, 1998, History of Geographic Information Systems: Perspectives From the

Pioneers (Upper Saddle River, NJ.: Prentice Hall).

Galison, 1987, How experiments end (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Galison, 1997, Image and logic: a material culture of microphysics (Chicago: University of

Haggett, P., 1966, L ocational Analysis in Human Geography (New York: St Martin Press).
Kuhn, T., 1970, T he structure of scienti(cid:142) c revolutions, Second edition (Chicago: University of

Chicago Press).

Directions).

Chicago Circle).

Chicago Press).

Chicago Press).

LCG (Laboratory for Computer Graphics), 1967a, SYMAP correspondence course

(Cambridge: Harvard University).

LCG (Laboratory for Computer Graphics), 1967b, Introductory Manual for Synagraphic

Computer Mapping ‘SYMAP ’ (Cambridge: Harvard University).

LCG (Laboratory for Computer Graphics), 1971, SYMAP manual (Cambridge: Harvard

Lakatos, I., 1976, Proofs and Ref utations: T he L ogic of Mathematical Discovery (London:

University)

Cambridge University Press).

Lakatos I., 1978, T he Methodology of Scienti(cid:142) c Research Programmes, Philosophical Papers,

Volume 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Peucker, T., 1972, Computer Cartography, Commission on College Geography Resource Paper,

No. 17, (Washington: Association of American Geographers).

Samet, J., 1980, Tacit Knowledge. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation (New York: City University

of New York).

Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis

773

Shepard, D., 1968, A two-dimensional interpolation function for computer mapping of irregu-
larly spaced data. Paper Number Fifteen, Harvard Papers in T heoretical Geography,
Geography and the Properties of Surfaces Series (Cambridge: Laboratory for Computer
Graphics).

Warntz, W., 1965, Macrogeography and Income Fronts (Philadelphia: Regional Science

Research Institute)

Science Association.

Warntz, W., 1966, Global Science and the T yranny of Space, Presidential Address, Regional

Warntz, W., 1983, Trajectories and coordinates. In Recollections of a Revolution: Geography
as Spatial Science, edited by M. Billinge, D. Gregory, and R. Martin (New York:
St. Martin Press).

Warntz, W., and Woldenberg, M., 1967, Concepts and applications— spatial order. Paper
Number One, Harvard Papers in T heoretical Geography, Geography and the Properties
of Surfaces Series,
In Conjunction with the American Geographical Society
(Cambridge: Laboratory for Computer Graphics),

Woldenberg, M., 1997, Transcript of interview conducted 8 November, 1997 in BuŒalo,

New York.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of
Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted
to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may
print, download, or email articles for individual use.

