The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Geographical Names on Mercator’s Maps of
Croatia

Josip Faričić, Damir Magaš & Lena Mirošević

To cite this article: Josip Faričić, Damir Magaš & Lena Mirošević (2012) Geographical Names on
Mercator’s Maps of Croatia, The Cartographic Journal, 49:2, 125-134

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000004

Published online: 22 Nov 2013.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1

View related articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [Laurentian University]

Date: 23 February 2016, At: 08:03

The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 2

pp. 125–134 May 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Geographical Names on Mercator’s Maps of Croatia

Josip Faricˇic´, Damir Magasˇ and Lena Mirosˇevic´

Department of Geography, University of Zadar, Franje Tud–mana 24i, Zadar 23000, Croatia
Email: jfaricic@unizd.hr

Mercator depicted Croatia on several general maps. In accordance with the level of geographical knowledge, map scales
and technical possibilities of the time, Mercator provided a relatively detailed depiction of basic geographical features on
these maps. His interest in mapping Croatia was probably motivated by the fact that the Venetian Republic, the Habsburg
Monarchy and the Ottoman Empire had fought over this area in the sixteenth century, contributing to the fragmentation
of the medieval Croatian State, while at the same time facilitating economic, religious, linguistic, artistic and scientific
communication between Central, South East and Mediterranean Europe. Mercator paid special attention to toponyms
that enabled geographical objects to be identified and the decoding of cartographic contents. Research into Mercator’s
maps has shown that geographical names, among other things, clearly indicate the sources of spatial data that he used.
Additionally, geographical names on Mercator’s maps are significant indicators of the linguistic and cultural contacts that
were particularly prominent in border areas, for example, along the eastern Adriatic coast, or the courses of the Danube,
Sava and Drava.

Keywords: Mercator, cartography, Croatia, toponym

INTRODUCTION

Geographical names, or toponyms, as Helleland (2006)
claims, are the oldest living form of cultural heritage, because
they have been used and transferred by oral tradition from
generation to generation for thousands of years. This
is logical, because spatial orientation is concerned with
recognizing objects in an area and then naming them. Thus,
a geographical name is actually a concise linguistic descrip-
tion that most aptly replaces (redundant) description in
linguistic communication and spatial orientation. Naming an
area indicates the continuity of settlement of that area, as well
as its connection with a speciﬁc nation or linguistic group.
Additionally, due to historical and geographical changes, the
naming of places, i.e. the geographical world, is subject to
complex linguistic stratiﬁcation, marked by changes and
disappearances in toponyms, processes which can be traced
on old maps, among other things (Siderius and Bakker,
2003; Lago, 2009). Old maps are an important source for
investigating the process of naming a certain place, because
they represent the geographical world at different times in
history. Maps are based on the infrastructure of spatial data,
regardless of their type or purpose, so geographical names are
frequently considered a basic means of cartographic expres-
sion. This clearly indicates the great importance of old maps
in researching geographical names. However, old maps
should be analysed in accordance with the scientiﬁc and

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000004

cultural contexts of the area and time in which they
originated (Harley, 1987).

In accordance with the above, the aim of this paper is to
determine the general features of toponymy on Mercator’s
maps of the Croatian regions and the processes that led to the
selection of toponyms used on his cartographic depictions.
An analysis of Mercator’s cartographic depictions of the
Croatian regions focuses on cartographic depictions as
important sources of information on constantly changing
political and cultural relations in the territory of Croatia.
The maps analysed in this paper mirror the historical and
geographical changes that occurred in the territory of Croatia
in the Middle Ages and continued in the periods which
followed, ultimately affecting the extremely complex histor-
ical picture of this part of Europe. Most parts of Croatia
the hands of
experienced territorial
different European imperialistic powers (Figure 1). This
contributed to the interaction of different linguistic ele-
ments, e.g. Romance and Croatian linguistic elements on the
eastern Adriatic coast, or Germanic, Hungarian and Croatian
linguistic elements in Pannonia and Peripannonia.

fragmentation at

The cartographer Gerardus Mercator mapped Croatia on
several maps made in the 1580s, which were published in
Atlas sive Cosmographicae Meditationes de Fabrica Mundi et
Fabricati Figura (1595). More precisely, most of these
maps were compiled in the thematic section of the Atlas,
known as Atlantis Pars altera Geographia Nova Totius

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 126

The Cartographic Journal

altera Geographia Nova Totius Mundi, a copy of which is
kept in the Zadar State Archives (Sign. II. A 4).

GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES ON OLD MAPS OF CROATIA

The geographical framework of cultural development is
extremely important because it affects life and human
activity in different ways. In fact, geographical features and
geographical processes affect the way in which places are
valorized and used, and this
reﬂected in everyday
communication, primarily based on oral and written forms.
Accordingly, geographical names are of particular impor-
tance, because they chart the historical and geographical
dynamics of a place (Condera et al., 2007). In this context,
toponyms can be regarded as reﬂections of:

is

1. Migration and population circulation, and the inter-
action of different linguistic elements (e.g. Romance
and Croatian linguistic elements on the Adriatic coast,
etc.).
Political changes that directly or indirectly affected the
domination of a particular language used officially in
administration, the military, schools, etc.
Socio-economic transformation:

3.

2.

a. Changes in basic spatial functions resulting in the
disappearance of certain lexical elements and the
development of new forms (e.g. the transformation of
an agricultural area into a tourist or recreational area).
b. Depopulation (the dying out of native speakers of

local idioms)

c. Deagrarianisation (the abandonment of agriculture
as an economic activity, with the disappearance of a
rich agrarian glossary and the geographical names
of some micro-locations).

d. Urbanisation (the use of standard language as the
lingua franca in an area in which immigrants of
different origins reside).

4. Contacts and conflicts in border areas (between states,

civilisations, religions, etc.).

it

in analysing toponyms on old maps,

However,
is
necessary to take into consideration the fact they reﬂect
the geographical knowledge of the area, the artistic spirit of
the time in which they originated, and the cartographic
techniques used in mapmaking (Robinson et al., 1995).
Additionally, maps directly or indirectly reﬂect different
motives, primarily the need to record state and legislative
traditions, as well as the political and economic interests
that affected the selection and presentation of geographical
contents. The quality of presentation on old maps,
including toponyms, did not depend only on the author’s
choices, but also on the methodology used to collect and
process the data. The main reasons for errors and lapses
were the non-existence of geodetic surveying (i.e. a precise
geodetic foundation for a map) and compilation as the
method of gathering information, along with the non-
critical reproduction of old cartographic depictions.

Of course, when analysing toponyms on old maps,
attention must be paid to changes that characterize the
type of word. Toponyms are very important in everyday

Figure 1. Political-geographical division of Croatia in second half
of the sixteenth century

Mundi. There, Mercator systematized the maps in several
chapters. The maps which are relevant for this paper are
found in the chapter entitled Italiae, Sclavoniae, et Graeciae
tabule geographicae:

1.

2.

Forum Ivlivm, Karstia, Carniola, Histria, et Vinorvm
Marchia (Figure 2).
Sclavonia, Croatia, Bosnia cum Dalmatiae Parte
(Figure 3).

3. Graecia, continent praecipvs regiones, Albaniam,
Macedoniam, Epirum, Achaiam et Moream
(Figure 4).

4. Macedonia Epirus et Achaia (Figure 5).

Mercator also provided a detailed depiction of northern
Croatia on a map entitled Hvngaria (Figure 6), which was
included in the section Germaniae tabulae geographicae.
Croatia was also represented on the maps of certain
European regions and the whole of Europe. These maps
were made on a smaller scale and were more generalized, so
only a few geographical names were recorded on them.

Considering the quality of Mercator’s maps and his
personal inﬂuence on the European academic community
of the time (Hall and Carson Brevoort 1878; Bagrow and
Skelton, 1985; Karrow, 1993; Crane, 2002), in the late
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, other cartographers
and map publishers published many versions of them. These
reproductions were printed in colour, and the state, military
and political borders of battleﬁelds in South East and
Central Europe were marked. Mercator’s maps were also
those published in atlases made by Jodocus Hondius,
Hericus Hondius, Jan Jansson and Willem Janzson Blaeu
(Bagrow and Skelton, 1985; Markovic´, 1993; Kozlicˇic´,
1995; Slukan Altic´, 2003). However, in this paper, the
authors analyse only the maps published in Atlantis Pars

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 Geographical Names on Mercator’s Maps of Croatia

127

Figure 2. Segment of Mercator’s map Forum Ivlivm, Karstia, Carniola, Histria, et Winorvm Marchia (Zadar State Archives, Library, Zadar,
Croatia, Sign. II. A 4)

communication, which is prone to change caused by ethnic,
cultural and linguistic stratiﬁcation in a certain area.
Therefore, it is important to determine the historical period
to which a cartographer refers, i.e. whether the toponyms on
a map represent a historical or modern linguistic category.
However, this is also related to the way in which data are
collected. Toponyms change in different ways (they may be
translated or adapted to the language of a new population or
occasional visitors, factors which may contribute to wrong
pronunciation and misspellings). Additionally, original
toponyms disappear in the areas where there is no continuity
of habitation. However, it is possible to identify certain
regularities. For example, previous research on the toponymy
of the Croatian Adriatic coast (Skracˇic´, 1997; Sˇimunovic´,
2005; Faricˇic´, 2009) has shown that there was a consistency
in toponyms relating to the size (surface area, altitude,
length), importance, continuity of habitation and economic
valorisation of a geographical feature. Thus, the larger or
more important (unrelated to size) of a geographical feature,
and the longer its name is used for various purposes, the
older the linguistic stratum of the toponym used to identify
that feature.

its

states,

religions

cultures,

location at

Different geographical names are used for the same features
in border areas inﬂuenced by different countries, political and
economic climates, cultures, nations and languages (includ-
ing dialects of the same language). Croatia is a good, example,
because of
the
favourable geographical
convergence of the Adriatic Sea, Dinaric Mountains and
Danube area, which has contributed to a range of inﬂuences
by different
and languages
(Klemencˇic´, 1993; Magasˇ, 1997). This has resulted in
multiple place names (when one geographical feature has
two or more names), and this is reﬂected in the toponymy
recorded on old maps. Important features in Croatia were
given Italian1 exonyms (e.g. Pola – Pula, Fiume – Rijeka,
Zara – Zadar, Spalato – Split, Zagabria – Zagreb, etc.),
German exonyms (Agram – Zagreb, Karlstadt – Karlovac,
Walkowar – Vukovar, Zwischenmurgebiet – Med–imurje, etc.)
and Hungarian exonyms (Esze´k – Osijek, Csa´ kornya –
Cˇ akovec, Varasd – Varazˇdin, Za´ gra´ b – Zagreb, U´ jlak – Ilok,
etc.). Throughout history, other European nations adopted
these exonyms more frequently than their Croatian equiva-
lents. Croatian toponyms on maps made by Croatian authors
less commonly, by foreign cartographers who had
and,

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 128

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Mercator’s map Sclavonia, Croatia, Bosnia cum Dalmatiae Parte (Zadar State Archives, Library, Zadar, Croatia, Sign. II. A 4)

Figure 4. Segment of Mercator’s map Graecia, continent praecipvs
regiones, Albaniam, Macedoniam, Epirum, Achaiam et Moream with
presentation of southeastern part of Croatia (Zadar State Archives,
Library, Zadar, Croatia, Sign. II. A 4)

Figure 5. Segment of Mercator’s map Macedonia Epirus et Achaia
southeastern part of Croatia (Zadar State
with presentation of
Archives, Library, Zadar, Croatia, Sign. II. A 4)

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 Geographical Names on Mercator’s Maps of Croatia

129

Figure 6. Segment of Mercator’s map Hvngaria with presentation of northwestern and eastern part of Croatia (Zadar State Archives,
Library, Zadar, Croatia, Sign. II. A 4)

ﬁrst-hand knowledge of Croatia, were used more often from
the sixteenth century onwards. In contrast, European carto-
graphers only started using Croatian toponyms more fre-
quently in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
In the second half of the sixteenth century, i.e. at the time
when Gerardus Mercator was making his maps, present-day
Croatia was divided among three major powers: the Venetian
Republic, which ruled over most of the eastern Adriatic coast
(a fragmented area stretching from the Istria Peninsula and
Dalmatia to Boka Kotorska Bay), the Habsburg Monarchy,
which ruled over the western part of Croatia, including the
central part of the Istria Peninsula and the coast between
Rijeka and Karlobag, and the Ottoman Empire, which ruled
over most of eastern Croatia (Pavlicˇevic´, 1996). The only
independent region was the Republic of Dubrovnik that
stretched from Peljesˇac Peninsula to Boka Kotorska Bay.
However, according to the state and legislative traditions of
the triune Kingdom of Croatia, Dalmatia and Slavonia, the
territory of Croatia also encompassed western Bosnia (which
was often referred to as Turkish Croatia on maps), almost all
of Srijem (Syrmia, which is today almost completely located
in Serbia), and Boka Kotorska (most of which is today in
Montenegro). At the same time, in the sixteenth century,
most of Istria was outside the borders of Croatia, and
different
(Venice, Austria,
ruled over
Aquileia), while southern Baranja was part of Hungary
(Pandzˇic´, 1992; Sancˇevic´, 1992; Pavlicˇevic´, 1996; Magasˇ,
1997; Regan and Kanisˇki, 2003).

sovereignties

it

The complex political situation in Croatia in the sixteenth
century was the result of the trilateral confrontation of the
the Habsburg Monarchy and the
Venetian Republic,
Ottoman Empire, which succeeded the former bilateral
confrontation between the Hungaro-Croatian Kingdom

and the Venetian Republic, engendered by the aspirations
of both powers for domination of the eastern Adriatic coast.
In these confrontations, each power used military, political
and diplomatic activities to gain geostrategic and political
positions in the region in which the Mediterranean, Central
and South Eastern Europe intersected. Since the interests of
these powers overlapped in the heart of the Croatian state,
the area was subject to military clashes that resulted in many
casualties, population migrations, the destruction of towns
and villages, and the deterioration of economic systems. On
in peacetime, a variety of economic,
the other hand,
demographic, religious,
linguistic, artistic and scientiﬁc
contacts shaped the multiethnic, multi-linguistic and multi-
religious social landscape.

the most

including the names of

Information on the geographical features of the Croatian
important
regions,
geographical objects (towns, rivers, mountains,
islands,
etc.), reached European cultural centres from different
sources (Faricˇic´, 2007), which differed according to:
N country of origin (information on the Croatian Adriatic
area was mostly compiled and analysed in the Venetian
Republic, while information on the continental part of
Croatia was compiled and analysed in Hungary);
N language (Venetian Italian, German, Hungarian, and
Latin, which was the language of political and ecclesias-
tical administration);
N type of activity (political, ecclesiastical, maritime, mili-
N method of collection (field research, analysis of archival
sources, transcription from existing cartographic and
written sources);
N method of disseminating information to users (publica-
tion in scientific works and cartographic depictions in

tary, commercial, etc.);

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 130

The Cartographic Journal

administrative, ecclesiastical and military reports, naviga-
tion manuals, etc.);
N time of collection (current information and outdated
N purpose (general information, information for naviga-

information);

tion, or military operations, etc.).

The quality and quantity of the geographical information
compiled and later used in the production of cartographic
depictions depended on all these aspects.

GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES ON MERCATOR’S MAPS OF THE
CROATIAN REGIONS

As far as it we know, Mercator never visited Croatia, so he
compiled information on Croatia indirectly, mostly by
collecting maps made by Venetian, Austrian and Hungarian
cartographers. As a result of this, and since Croatia was
politically divided among its neighbouring, larger European
countries, Mercator’s maps of Croatia in fact formed a real
linguistic and geographical mosaic that
largely corre-
sponded to the political, cultural and geographical division
of Croatia at that time (Klemencˇic´, 1993; Pavlicˇevic´, 1996).
islands,
administrative and territorial units dominate on Mercator’s
maps of the Croatian regions. In comparison, names of
relief forms that largely determine the landscape are very
rare. That, however, was not only characteristic of
Mercator; other cartographers of the time rarely recorded
the names of relief forms.

In general, the names of settlements, rivers,

On Mercator’s maps, the Adriatic islands and narrow
coastal belt were characterized by Italian or Italianized
Croatian toponyms. Romance toponyms generally referred
to the largest or the most important geographical features in
Istria, the Kvarner Islands and the narrow coastal belt of
Dalmatia. Such toponyms included the names of towns and
islands (Table 1). On the one hand, this was the result of
ongoing historical and geographical developments, in which
Romance communities (i.e. the romanized,
indigenous,
classical Histrians, Liburnians and Delmatae) assimilated
with the dominant Croatian community. The Croats
adopted means for managing coastal and marine resources
from the indigenous population, but they also adopted the
names of the geographical objects directly connected to
those resources (e.g.
from maritime trade, ﬁshing, salt
production, etc.). In coastal and island settlements, particu-
larly in larger towns, ethnic Romance elements remained
along with the language, and the area was also populated by
Romance peoples from Venice and other parts of Italy, who
worked in state administration, ecclesiastical administration,
the military, maritime affairs, commerce, etc. This contrib-
uted to Romance linguistic elements related to the toponymy
of the eastern Adriatic being used in everyday speech. On
the other hand, dominant Italian toponyms reﬂected the
importance of the Croatian Adriatic in the Venetian political
and economic systems. The eastern Adriatic was an extremely
important region for Venice, because it formed a crucial
maritime and land transport axis that connected the Venetian
Republic with the eastern Mediterranean. This area was
frequently shown on portolan charts and geographical maps
of the Adriatic and neighbouring regions, produced in

Venice and in other Italian towns (Selva, 2009). The Western
European academic community received information on this
part of Europe via those maps. Among the most important
were the maps made by Pietro Coppo (Italia Illyricum Epirvs
Garetia et Mare Eagevm; Carta del Golfo Adrian; Istria,
1525), Mateo Pagano (Tvto el Contrado di Zara et Sebenicho,
1530), Giacomo Gastaldi (Vera descrittione di tutta la
Vngheria…, 1546) and Fernando Bertelli (Nova discrittione
dela Dalmatia et Crovatia, 1565)
(see reproductions
published in Lago, 1998). It is unlikely that Mercator used
Coppo, Pagano and Gastaldi’s originals from the early
sixteenth century. Instead, he may have used geographical
data from the ﬁrst versions of their maps published in
Abraham Ortelius’s atlas, Theatrum orbis terrarum (1570).
This conclusion is supported indirectly by the toponymy
Mercator used in northern Dalmatia. Certain toponyms
which he used (Banadego, Bergane roinata, Xuonigrat,
Diuescho, etc.) were also used by Pagano, and later by Natale
Bonifacio for the map Zara et Sebenici descriptio, published
by Ortelius in his atlas of 1570. Those toponyms are not
found on other maps of the Croatian Adriatic area published
by Venetian and other cartographers during the sixteenth
century. Moreover, it is obvious that that Mercator copied an
error from Ortelius’ edition of Bonifacio’s map of Zadar and
Sˇibenik (northern Dalmatia). The settlement of Melada
(Molat) was mapped on the island of Ugljan instead of the
island of Molat, which was wrongly named Zan Pontello
(after the village of Zapuntel on the island of Molat). This
error is not present on Pagano’s 1530 map of the same area.
Regardless of the cartographic sources Mercator used, the
Romance tradition and the mediating role of Venice were the
reasons for the domination of Italian or Italianized Croatian
toponyms on cartographic depictions of the eastern Adriatic
made by Mercator and other European cartographers. The
exception is northern Dalmatia, since Mercator mapped that
area by using Ortelius’s edition of Natale Bonifacio’s map.

Table 1. Examples of Italian and Italianized Croatian geographical
names on Mercator’s maps of Adriatic Croatia

Geographical
name recorded on
Mercator’s maps

Modern Croatian
geographical name

Type of geographical
feature

Parenzo
Pola
Osero
Arbe
Nona
Zara
Sebenico
Trau
Spalato
Ragusa
Cherso
Nia
Sansego
Arbe
Silua
Luibo
Pago
Melada
Incoronata
Bua
Brazza
Calamota

Porecˇ
Pula
Osor
Rab
Nin
Zadar
Sˇibenik
Trogir
Split
Dubrovnik
Cres
Unije
Susak
Rab
Silba
Olib
Pag
Molat
Kornat
Cˇ iovo
Bracˇ
Kolocˇep

Town
Town
Town
Town
Town
Town
Town
Town
Town
Town
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island
Island

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 Geographical Names on Mercator’s Maps of Croatia

Bonifacio was from Sˇibenik, a town in northern Dalmatia, so
he obviously knew the local toponymy very well. Therefore,
it is not surprising that Mercator used many Croatian
toponyms in mapping this part of the Adriatic coast. These
toponyms mostly related to rural areas in which agriculture
was dominant, such as, for example, Xemonigo – Zemunik
(from the Croatian zemunica, meaning turf-house), or
Xelengrat – Zelengrad, zelen – green and grad – town, etc.,
but they were also related to geographical features important
to the water supply (Vodice – Vodice; the Croatian word
vodica means a small well), to the political life of the medieval
Croatian state (e.g. Novigrad – Novigrad; Croatian novi –
new and grad – town) or in religious life (Vissouaz – Visovac;
an island with a Franciscan monastery on the River Krka near
Sˇibenik).

There are two main toponym zones on Mercator’s
cartographic depictions of Pannonian and Peripannonian
Croatia. He mostly used German or Germanized Croatian
toponyms in the areas bordering Slovenia and Hungarian or
Hungarianized Croatian toponyms in the zone bordering
Hungary (Table 2). In comparison with the centuries-old
relations between Croatia and Hungary, which were
particularly strong in Slavonia, formal state and legislative
relations with the German speaking region began only in
late 1526 and early 1527. At that time, the Hungaro-
Croatian army was defeated by the Ottomans at the Battle
of Moha´cs, and the Jagiellon Dynasty ceased to be the
so
ruling power
Croatia was annexed to the Habsburg Monarchy. The
former loose economic relations between Croatia and
Central Europe grew in strength, and German became an
important means of communication in the economy
(commerce, banking, etc.) and in the army. Besides the
social and economic circumstances that contributed to the
Germanisation and Hungarisation of toponyms in everyday
life in continental Croatia, the German and Germanized,
Hungarian and Hungarianized geographical names, along
with geographical names on Mercator’s maps of this part of
Croatia, must have been taken from maps made by Austrian

in the Hungaro-Croatian Kingdom,

131

and Hungarian cartographers, the most prominent of which
were the Tabula Hungariae ad quator latera, by the
Hungarian cartographer Lazarus and published by Petar
Apian in 1528 (Irme´di-Molna´r, 1964; Hrenko´ , 1974; Lotz
1988), the 1556 Regni Hungariae description vera, by the
Austrian cartographer Wolfgang Lazius, Ducatus Carniolae
et Histrae una cum Marchia Windorum and Principat
Goriciens: cum Karstio et Chaczeola Descriptio, also by W.
Lazius and published in the atlas Tvpi Chorographici
Provinciae Austriae in 1561 (To¨ro¨k, 2007), and Zu Ehr
der Ro¨mischen zu Hugern und Behaim Ku¨n. May.
Ertzhertzogen zu O¨ sterreich Ist dise Carta der Grafschafften
und Landen Hungern, Bossen, Crabaten, Dalmatien, wind-
isch lande, etc. made by the Austrian cartographer Augustin
Hirschvogel in 1565 (Markovic´, 1993). The contents of
Lazius’s maps were used as a template by the Hungarian
cartographer Ja´nos Zsa´mboky (Johannes Sambucus) who
made the maps Illyricum and Vngariae loca praecipva
emendata atque edita (Markovic´, 1993; Kozlicˇic´, 1995;
To¨ro¨k, 2007).

In Dinaric Croatia, which was isolated and less exposed
to the political and economic inﬂuences of the neighbour-
ing European states, the persistence of Croatian toponyms
was
recorded by the
previously mentioned Austrian and Hungarian cartogra-
phers, and later by Mercator (Table 3).

situation was

stronger,

so that

The maps already mentioned, by Lazius, Hirschvogel and
Sambucus, were published by Abraham Ortelius in the ﬁrst
edition of his atlas Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, and then in the
appendices (Additamenta) published in subsequent editions.
Consequently, along with the previously mentioned maps of
Adriatic Croatia, Ortelius collected cartographic depictions of
Croatia and the neighbouring countries made by different
authors. Those maps also became available to the wider
European cartographic community, including Mercator, who
was able to use them in making his maps. He used this
opportunity very well, so unlike Ortelius, who did not try to
integrate the contents of the maps of different European
regions and states made by different authors, Mercator

Table 2. Examples of German and Germanized, and Hungarian and Hungarianized Croatian geographical names on Mercator’s maps of

Pannonian and Peripannonian Croatia

German and Germanized Croatian geographical names

Geographical name recorded on Mercator’s maps
Agram
Carelstadt
Wihitsch
Creutz
S. Georg
Sisaken
Copranitz
Teufels garten

Hungarian and Hungarianized Croatian geographical names

Modern Croatian geographical name
Zagreb
Karlovac
Bihac´
Krizˇevci
Sv. Juraj
Sisak
Koprivnica
Vrazˇji vrt (Gorski kotar)

Geographical name recorded on Mercator’s maps
Valkowar
Ezekh
Walpo
Uylak
Czakhonturn
Pekericz
Berzawitz

Modern Croatian geographical name
Vukovar
Osijek
Valpovo
Ilok
Cˇ akovec
Pakrac
Brezovica

Type of geographical object
Town
Town
Town
Town
Village
Town
Town
Mountainous area

Type of geographical object
Town
Town
Village
Town
Town
Town
Village

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 132

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. Presentation of Zagreb on Mercator’s map Sclavonia, Croatia, Bosnia cum Dalmatiae Parte (Zadar State Archives, Library, Zadar,
Croatia, Sign. II. A 4)

introduced the innovation of cartographic synthesis. It is
quite clear that Mercator’s maps were the result of compiling
different cartographic sources that differed signiﬁcantly in
terms of the linguistic features of toponyms. However, on
these maps – i.e. syntheses of previous geographical knowl-
edge – Mercator depicted the Croatian territory as a whole
better than any other cartographer before him. Regardless of
the part of Croatia he depicted, Mercator particularly noted
toponyms that referred to regional units, larger geomorpho-
logic forms and major rivers. The names of these objects were
given in Latin. So, he recorded the names of Croatian regions;
Croatia, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, and of counties; Zagrabiensis
com., Posegiensis com., Sirmiensis com. Latin toponyms were
also used to designate large plains (Campus Cerbauius), hills
(Apatarro Mons.) and rivers (Danubius ﬂ., Dravus ﬂ., Savus
ﬂ., etc.). These Latin geographical names are a common

Table 3. Examples of Croatian geographical names on Mercator’s

maps of Dinaric Croatia

Geographical name
recorded on
Mercator’s maps

Modern Croatian
geographical name

Type of
geographical
object

Chnin
Xuonigrat
Gradac
Licha
Ribnic
Ottoschatz
Modrusch
Dobra
Mresnicza
Pocitel

Knin
Zvonigrad
Gracˇac
Lika
Ribnik
Otocˇac
Modrusˇ
Dobra
Mrezˇnica
Pocˇitelj

Town
Village
Town
River
Village
Town
Town
River
River
Village

feature in the work of different authors and on different maps,
in various languages, which Mercator compiled.

in order

toponyms

to different

Mercator also tried to go beyond mere compilation and
actualize geographical contents. So, for example, he added
certain attributes
to
emphasize the important features of the mapped area.
Accordingly, he differentiated dual settlements located on
the opposite sides of the River Sava according to whether
they were conquered by the Ottoman Turks or not. He
added the adjective Turkish to the southern settlements, but
he did not add any adjectives to settlements located on
free Croatian territory (e.g. Graidiskia versus Gradiskia
Turcicum, Kowacz versus Kowacz Turcicum).

Unlike the accurate amendments related to data that
recorded the extent of Ottoman conquest in Croatian
Posavina, Mercator made certain mistakes in his carto-
graphic synthesis. For example, the capital of Croatia,
Zagreb, was mapped twice on the same map (Sclavonia,
Croatia, …) (Figure 7). First, the dual town was mapped in
the correct location and named both Agram (Zagreb) and
Capithl (Kaptol), but the second time it was mapped
downstream of the River Sava, near Sisak, and named using
the Latin form Zagrabia (Zagreb). It is obvious that
Mercator compared the available sources of information,
but he probably did not have enough information about
Zagreb, including the fact that in the documents of that
time the town was named Zagreb (Croatian form),
Zagrabia (Latin form), Zagabria (Italian form), Zagrab
(Hungarian form) and Agram (German form).

In comparison, Abraham Ortelius used the Latin
toponym Zagrabia on his map Europae, published in the
atlas Theatrvm Orbis
and Ioannes
Sambucus (Ja´nos Zsa´mboky), a Hungarian cartographer,

terrarvm (1570)

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 Geographical Names on Mercator’s Maps of Croatia

133

used the Hungarianized toponym Zagrab on his map
Illyricum, which was also published in Ortelius’s atlas
Theatrvm Orbis terrarvm (1570). The same toponym,
Zagrab, was used on the map Illyricum (1583) made by the
German cartographer Michale Von Aitzing. The German
geographical name for Zagreb (Agram) was misspelled by
the Austrian cartographer Augustin Hirschvogel, who
wrote Aaram on the map Schlavoniae, Croatiae, Carniae,
Istriae, Bosniae, Finitmarvmque Regionum Nova Descriptio,
also published in Ortelius’s atlas. Zagreb was correctly
mapped by Mercator’s contemporary, Cornelis de Jode, on
the map Croatiae et circumiacentiu¯ Regionu¯ versus Turcam,
published in the atlas Speculum Orbis Terrae (1593). On his
map, de Jode used the German name (Agram).

However, when Mercator’s maps of Croatia are compared
to other maps made by European cartographers from Belgium,
The Netherlands, Germany, Austria, Hungary and Italy, we
can claim that, in spite of the mistake regarding Zagreb,
Mercator provided the most comprehensive cartographic
depiction of the Croatian regions in the sixteenth century,
characterized by many toponyms. In this regard, Mercator was
surpassed only a century later by two Italian cartographers –
Vicenzo Maria Coronelli of Venice and Giacomo Cantelli da
Vignola of Rome (Markovic´, 1993; Kozlicˇic´, 1995; Lago,
1998; Slukan Altic´, 2003). Therefore, in support of Ortelius’s
comment that Mercator was the ‘Ptolemy of our time’
(Bagrow and Skelton, 1985), we can emphasize his unique
importance in mapping the Croatian territories and argue that,
before him, only Claudius Ptolemy had a similar inﬂuence on
the geographical perception of Croatia, which he mapped on
his Fifth Map of Europe (Tabula Europae V).

CONCLUSION

In his cartographic depictions of Croatia, Mercator provided
an overview of the linguistic and geographical features of the
time, i.e. of the interactive cultural inﬂuences in this particularly
politically segmented part of Europe. These maps actually form
a toponymous thesaurus and an interesting research subject for
geographers, linguists and historians. However, considering
the different sources, many other problems in creating a
comprehensive geographical vision of Croatia (the inaccessi-
bility of certain areas affected by war, the lack of geodetic
surveying, unreliably compiled geographical data, etc.) and
many recorded toponyms, it would have been impossible to
map the Croatian regions without making some mistakes. In
spite of this, Mercator provided the most comprehensive
cartographic depiction of Croatia in the sixteenth century,
which was also extremely rich in toponyms. It is possible to
distinguish four toponymic areas: Adriatic Croatia, with
dominant Italian and Italianized toponyms; North West
Croatia, with dominant German and Germanized Croatian
toponyms; Eastern Croatia with dominant Hungarian and
Hungarianized Croatian toponyms, and Highland Croatia and
the Dalmatian hinterland, with dominant Croatian toponymy.
This linguistic mosaic was the result not only of the political
and geographical fragmentation of Croatia, but also of a variety
of ethnic, cultural and economic inﬂuences. In this context, the
toponyms recorded on Mercator’s maps, which can be re-
garded as the best cartographic achievements of the time, may
be viewed as a mirror of the multiculturalism of modern
Croatia.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Josip Faricˇic´ was born on
16 June 1976. In 1998,
he completed the graduate
study of geography and his-
tory at the Faculty of Philo-
sophy in Zadar, University of
Split. In 2003, he got his
MSc degree and in 2006
my doctoral degree at the
Faculty of Science, Univer-
sity of Zagreb. In 2011, he
was appointed as associate
professor at the Department of Geography, University of
Zadar. From 2009 to 2011, he was Head of the Department
of Geography, and currently he is the vice-rector of the
University of Zadar. As author or co-author, he have written
approximately 50 scientiﬁc papers published in journals and as
book chapters, and about 30 professional papers and reviews
dealing with cartography, historical and maritime geography
(for
list of papers visit: http://bib.irb.hr/lista-radova?
autor5238181). He actively participated at a number of
conferences in Croatia and abroad (Portugal, Great Britain,
Iceland, Chile, Austria and Slovenia). He was the editor-in-
chief of several scientiﬁc monographs, editor of Geoadria
scientiﬁc journal and of several proceedings. Currently, he
is the member of
the scientiﬁc
(Cartography and
journal Kartograﬁja i geonformacije
Geoinformation). He is a member of Croatian Geographical
Society and Croatian Cartographic Society. In 2011, he was
appointed president of Croatian Geographical Society in
Zadar

the editorial board of

In his career, he was awarded several awards and
acknowledgements for his work including three consecutive
Rector Awards of the University of Split (awarded to the
most successful students, in 1996, 1997 and 1998), Oscar
the
academicus
University of Zadar (in 2005) for the best teacher at the
Department of Geography, and University of Zadar Rector
Award (in 2010) for his scientiﬁc contribution. He is
married and have three children. In his leisure time, he
engage in sports ﬁshing and olive growing.

awarded by the Student Union of

NOTES
1 In this paper, the adjective Italian is used to describe
toponyms on maps made by different authors who worked in
Italy. In the period when the old maps discussed in this paper
originated, and up to the middle of the nineteenth century,
there was no state in Europe called Italy and there was no
consciousness of an Italian nation. Geographical and political
characteristics also contributed to the development of various
dialects, which are usually grouped into northern, central and
southern dialects. Modern standard Italian is derived from
the Tuscan dialect, which is signiﬁcantly different from the
Venetian and Genovese dialects used by the authors of most
geographical maps and nautical charts that originated in the
territory of present-day Italy. Therefore, in Romance studies,
the adjective Italo-Romance is used for older names, and the
word Italo refers to the Apennines. Sometimes, authors used
adjectives that corresponded exactly to the place where maps

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 134

The Cartographic Journal

(or other written works) were made, e.g. Genovese, Anconian,
Venetian, etc. A similar situation applies to the adjective
German, which is also used as an adjective in this paper to
designate geographical names on maps made in the territory
of present-day Germany and Austria, where the German
language is used.

REFERENCES

Bagrow, L. and Skelton, R. A. (1985). History of Cartography, 2nd

ed., Precedent Publishing, Chicago, IL.

Condera, M., Vassere, S., Neff, C., Meurer, M. and Krebs, P. (2007).
‘Using toponymy to reconstruct past land use: a case study of
bru¨sa´da’ (burn) in southern Switzerland’, Journal of Historical
Geography, 33, pp. 729–748.

Crane, N. (2002). Mercator – The Man who mapped the Planet,

Henry Holt and Company, New York.

Faricˇic´, J. (2007). ‘Geographical names on 16th and 17th century maps
of Croatia’, Cartography and Geoinformation, 6, pp. 148–179.
Faricˇic´, J. (2009). ‘La toponimia storica nelle antiche carte geografiche
della facciata orientale dell’Adriatico’,
in La toponomastica in
Istria, Fiume e Dalmazia, Vol. II, Parte 1: Aspetti cartografici e
comparazione geostorica, ed. by Lago, L., Selva, O. and Umek, D.,
pp. 217–245, Istituto Geografico Militare, Firenze.

Hall, E. F. and Carson Brevoort, J. (1878). ‘Gerard Mercator: his life
and works’, Journal of the American Geographic Society of New
York, 10, pp. 163–196.

Harley, J. B. (1987). ‘The map and the development of the history of
cartography’, in The History of Cartography, Vol. 1, Cartography
the
in prehistoric,
Mediterranean, ed. by Harley, J. B. and Woodward, D., pp. 1–
42, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

and medieval Europe

ancient,

and

Helleland, B. (2006). ‘The social and cultural values of geographical
for the National Standardization of
ed. by Kerfoot, H., pp. 121–128,

names’,
in Manual
Geographic Names,
UNGEGN, United Nations Publication, New York.

Hrenko´ , P.

(1974).
Kartogra´fia, 26, pp. 359–365.

‘A La´za´r-te´rke´p szerkezete’, Geode´zia e´s

Irme´di-Molna´r, L. (1964). ‘The earliest known map of Hungary from

1528’, Imago Mundi, 18, pp. 53–59.

Karrow, R. W. (1993). Mapmakers of the Sixteenth Century and

Their Maps, Speculum Orbis Press, Chicago, IL.

Klemencˇic´, M. (1993). ‘Croatia – past and present: location, position,
territory, borders, regions’, Acta Geographica Croatica, 28, pp.
23–38.

Kozlicˇic´, M. (1995). Kartografski spomenici hrvatskog Jadrana
(Cartographic Testimonies to the Croatian Adriatic), AGM, Zagreb.

Lago, L. (1998). Imago Adriae – La Patria del Friuli, L’Istria e La

Dalmazia nella cartografia antica, La Mongolfiera, Trieste.

Lago, L. (2009). ‘Il contributo del documento cartografico nella
ricerca toponomastica’, in La toponomastica in Istria, Fiume e
Dalmazia, Vol. II, Parte 1: Aspetti cartografici e comparazione
geostorica, ed. by Lago, L., Selva, O. and Umek, D., pp. 33–50,
Istituto Geografico Militare, Firenze.

Lotz, Gy. (1988). ‘A La´za´r-te´rke´pro˝l’, Geode´zia e´s Kartogra´fia, 41,

pp. 347–353.

Magasˇ, D.

(1997).

‘The development of

the geographic and

geopolitical position of Croatia’, Geoadria, 2, pp. 5–36.

Markovic´, M. (1993). Descriptio Croatiae – Hrvatske zemlje na
geografskim kartama od najstarijih vremena do pojave prvih
topografskih karata (The Croatian Lands on Geographical
Maps from the Earliest Times to the Emergence of the First
Topographic Maps), Naprijed, Zagreb.

Pandzˇic´, A. (1992). ‘Croatia and Its borders on old maps’, in Borders
of Croatia on Maps from the 12th to 20th Century, ed. by
Malekovic´, V., pp. 18–139, Museum of Arts and Crafts, Zagreb.
Pavlicˇevic´, A. (1996). ‘A review of the historical development of the

Republic of Croatia’, Geojournal, 38, pp. 381–391.

Regan, K. and Kanisˇki, T. (2003). Hrvatski povijesni atlas (Croatian
Historical Atlas), Leksikografski zavod Miroslav Krlezˇa, Zagreb.
Robinson, A. H., Morrison, J. L., Muehrcke, Ph. C., Kimerling, A. J.
and Guptill, S. C. (1995). Elements of Cartography, John Wiley
& Sons, London.
Sancˇevic´, Z. (1992).

‘Development of the boundaries of Croatia
through four cartographic periods’, in Borders of Croatia on
Maps from the 12th to 20th Century, ed. by Malekovic´, V., pp.
10–13, Museum of Arts and Crafts, Zagreb.

Selva, O. (2009). ‘La toponomastica nella cartografia dell’Istria, di
Fiume e della Dalmazia nella cartografia storica dalle prime
testimonianze alla fine del secolo XVIII’, in La toponomastica in
Istria, Fiume e Dalmazia, Vol. II, Parte 2: Aspetti cartografici e
comparazione geostorica, ed. by Lago, L., Selva, O. and Umek, D.,
pp. 31–60, Istituto Geografico Militare, Firenze.

Siderius, W. and Bakker, H. (2003). ‘Toponymy and soil nomenclature

in The Netherlands’, Geoderma, 111, pp. 521–536.

Skracˇic´, V. (1997). ‘Pravilnosti u jadranskoj nesonimiji (Regularity in
Adriatic nesonymy)’, Radovi Filozofskog fakulteta u Zadru, 36,
pp. 63–71.

Slukan Altic´, M. (2003) Povijesna kartografija – Kartografski izvori u
povijesnim znanostima (Historical Cartography – Cartographic
Sources in Historical Sciences), Meridijani, Zagreb.

Sˇimunovic´, P. (2005). Toponimija hrvatskoga jadranskog prostora
(The Toponymy of the Croatian Adriatic Region), Golden
Marketing, Tehnicˇka knjiga, Zagreb.

To¨ro¨k, Zs. G. (2007). ‘East-Central Europe’, in The History of
Cartography, Vol. 3: Cartography in the European Renaissance,
ed. by Woodward, D., pp. 1820–1828, The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL/London.

Downloaded by [Laurentian University] at 08:03 23 February 2016 