This article was downloaded by: [University of Sydney]
On: 01 May 2015, At: 01:25
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

A model for the automatic
improvement of colour contrasts in
maps: application to risk maps
Elisabeth Chesneau a b c
a University of Lyon
b Environnement-Ville-Société , CNRS UMR , 5600 , France
c Department of Geography , Université Jean Monnet , Saint-
Etienne , France
Published online: 18 Feb 2011.

To cite this article: Elisabeth Chesneau (2011) A model for the automatic improvement of colour
contrasts in maps: application to risk maps, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 25:1, 89-111, DOI: 10.1080/13658811003772926

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658811003772926

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 25, No. 1, January 2011, 89–111

A model for the automatic improvement of colour contrasts in maps:
application to risk maps

REVIEW ARTICLE

Elisabeth Chesneau*

University of Lyon; Environnement-Ville-Socie´te´, CNRS UMR 5600, France; Department of
Geography, Universite´ Jean Monnet, Saint-Etienne, France

(Received 8 April 2008; final version received 3 March 2010)

A map may be a useful tool for locating and analysing hazards (flood, landslide) and
elements threatened by these hazards (buildings, roads). However, on such a map, the
reading and understanding of information can be difficult, in particular because the
graphic signs, numerous and in superimposition, can be badly contrasted. More than
other parameters, colour seems important for the improvement of map legibility. In the
framework of a PhD at COGIT laboratory of Institut Ge´ographique National (IGN)
France (Chesneau 2006a), a model for the automatic improvement of colour contrasts
in maps was designed. A specific schema of data and rules to allow an automatic
improvement in colour contrasts are defined. The solution is iterative: through successive
cycles, the worst contrasts on the initial map are solved. A prototype for maps used in
emergency response efforts, ‘ARiCo’, has been developed and experimental tests carried
out with this model show an actual improvement of maps’ legibility.

Keywords: cartography; geomatics; semiology; legibility; colour contrast; risk

Introduction

1.
In geography of risks, a map is considered a major tool to itemise, analyse and synthesise
phenomena causing natural disasters and elements at risk as well as to assess risks. It has
three aims: information to sensitise the reader and improve knowledge, regulation to control
town planning and building and expertise to shed light on prevention and prediction (Ledoux
1994, p. 1). For example, a risk map can be daily used by firemen for emergency response
efforts to locate and intervene quickly on a disaster (fire), identify the closest elements at risk
and evaluate how they should be protected and find resources (water, vehicles, pumps) to
stop its spread. It is also very useful in particular kinds of crises (flood) to get an overview of
the current situation in order to anticipate the actions to be carried out.

In this context, data have to be clearly portrayed so that what is important for the user is
quickly and correctly perceived and understood. However, maps are not always readable,
generating poor decisions which might have some dramatic consequences: Figure 1 shows a
map portraying flood hazard areas after a storm, in the Mississippi State of the United States.
This map is used by firemen to evacuate threatened areas. Monmonnier (1997, pp. 84–85)
emphasises limits in the use of such maps, particularly because of graphic choices that are
not always relevant. For example, in Figure 1, colours do not correctly portray the order

*Email: elisabeth.chesneau@univ-st-etienne.fr

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
# 2011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658811003772926
http://www.informaworld.com

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 90

E. Chesneau

Figure 1. Hardly readable hurricane surge map.
Source: FEMA, http://www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/nhp/slosh_link.shtm

between the areas and the background is visually bland: lots of roads are portrayed and they
are barely readable in superimposition to colours.

The complexity of emergency maps arises from the high amount of information they
hold. Indeed, according to Propeck-Zimmermann et al. (2007, p. 10), one way of portraying
such data on a map is to ‘superimpose monothematic layers, becoming quickly illegible. The
only visual crossing of hazards and elements at risk involves interpretations that could vary
according to people’ (see Chesneau 2004, pp. 59–60).

Possible solutions to improve the readability of these maps are, for example, to reduce
the number of signs on the map, or to create bigger signs with more intense colours for data
that have to be quickly perceived. In this research, we assume that an improvement of colour
contrasts in maps would make them more readable and therefore more user friendly. Indeed
colours can portray many semantic relationships between data: contrast of hue to differ-
entiate or associate and contrast of lightness or saturation to sort. Also, it facilitates the
creation of different visual levels of data: dark or bright colours to portray information about
risks and light or greyed colours for the background. Finally, aesthetic and nice-looking
coloured contrasts can be conceived (Chesneau 2006a, pp. 144–153).

Furthermore, today anyone who owns a mapping software may create, use and distribute
a map even if he or she does not have any cartographic knowledge. The maps produced with
such software which does not include theoretical works on legibility like the one of French
cartographer Bertin (1983) may then be difficult to read and to understand (Muller 1992 p.
55, De Blomac 2008). Thus it seems relevant to integrate map design rules in cartographic
software to help create better maps.

This research work has been carried out for the purpose of designing readable and
correct digital maps best fitting the users’ needs and this article aims at developing a model
that will automatically improve colour contrasts in maps, especially in maps used in
emergency response efforts. This article starts with a background discussion about pre-
vious related studies (Part 2), then the selected methodology is described (Part 3) and
applied on a real-life example (Part 4), which will lead to an outlook of future work in this
field (Part 5).

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

91

2. Background

2.1. Map readability
In the 1960s, cartographers developed theories of communication in which the map appeared
as a message between its designer and its users. The assignment of the map designer is to create
a message which will be quickly and correctly read, analysed and interpreted.

Map design rules have been defined based on the main characteristics of visual percep-
tion. In his book The Semiology of Graphics (1983), Bertin introduces two kinds of map
design rules: grammar rules and legibility rules.

l Grammar rules connect the different types of information to the graphic ways in which
they are portrayed. For instance, very different hues (green and red) will be used to
differentiate two types of information (forest and hospital) whereas close hues
(yellow-green and green) will portray an association (grassland and forest).

l Legibility rules correspond to graphic criteria to improve the final look of the map.
Among those criteria retinal separation is of paramount importance to create a visual
hierarchy between information. ‘The eye must be able to separate significant signs
from non-significant signs’ on a map (Bertin 1983, p. 175). For example, on a risk
management map, rescue centres or roads will be quickly noticed because they are
useful pieces of information for the reader of the map whereas less significant
elements should be first overlooked and only noticed when analysing the map
thoroughly.

Apart from his own experiences, Bertin used works carried out in semiology and
psychology to define his cartographic theory. He particularly used the Gestalt theory of
German psychologists of the beginning of the twentieth century, which defines some
principles of organisation of a visual image, in a holistic way. Among them, the figure–
ground organisation, allowing the recognition of a coherent shape in front of its surround-
ings, is the most essential one in perception. The figure–ground organisation defines the
contrast, a major parameter of map signs’ legibility. ‘No graphic factor is as important as
contrast. Contrast is the basis of seeing. The critical eye seems to accept moderate and weak
graphic distinctions, passively and without enthusiasm, while it relishes greater contrasts’
(Robinson et al. 1995, p. 325).

Among elements building up contrasts, the choice of colour appears as a major para-
meter. According to Dent, ‘colour provides contrast, a necessary component in figure
formation’ (Dent 1999, p. 299). In this study, it is therefore proposed to focus on the
improvement of the map readability by creating a better retinal separation between carto-
graphic signs owing to colour contrasts.

2.2. Colour contrasts

Colour as a visual variable has been often used since the 1960s. The development of
computer-based tools and the ability to use a high number of colours speeded up this natural
trend. Cartographers rely on theories and experimentations made in other fields of knowl-
edge (colourimetry, psychology and painting) to better understand the visual meanings of
signs in a picture, and particularly colours. Some of those works that were used to develop
the model will be described.

First, the aim of colourimeters is to analyse how colours can be organised together. They
suggest different systems to describe those organisations. One of them, namely the Munsell

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 92

E. Chesneau

system (created in 1905 by the American painter Munsell), organises colours according to
visual perception: it sorts colours according to their hues (between red and green), their
lightness (between dark red and light red) and their saturation (between bright red and greyed
red). The numeric HLS system (hue, lightness, saturation) is similar to the previous one and
is used by cartographers to define a colour (Brewer 1989, MacEachren 1995, Robinson et al.
1995, Dent 1999). Moreover, colour schemes have been designed based on those systems in
order to correctly portray data on a map (Brewer 1989, 1994, Mersey 1990). Brewer et al.
also developed a tool (the ColorBrewer), available on the Internet, which helps map
designers to choose their colours from the information they want to portray (2003).

In the meantime, psychologists try to better understand the perceptive and cognitive
functioning of human beings. At the beginning of the twentieth century the behaviourist
way of thinking (Castner 1983) analysed human sensations after a visual stimulus. It was
opposed to the Gestalt way of thinking (mentioned above), relying on the fact that visual
perception of signs depends on their organisation in a picture. The Gestaltists then
conceptualise a display holistically. Since the 1960s and 1970s, psychologists have thought
that these theories are not comprehensive because they do not take into account the reader’s
knowledge. Thus a cognitive approach has emerged. In this approach, psychologists tend
to study variables (location, size, colour, shape) of a display in isolation from one another.
The objective is to better understand how human sensations are processed in the brain and
how they are connected to the knowledge structures of the reader. For instance, from a
coloured picture, a reader will gather and sort portrayed information not only according to
closeness or similarities (perceptive grouping rules) but also according to his memory,
personal experience and feelings (‘I like this green because it reminds me of my childhood,
hence I focus on this colour’). Cartographers carry out numerous experiments in visual
attention in order to better understand through which mechanisms the eyes look for
information (Castner 1983, Eastman 1985, MacEachren 1995, Belbin 1996, Lloyd 1997,
Fabrikant and Goldsberry 2005). For instance, Olson and Brewer (1997) compare the
colour perception for several maps between people who are colour blind and people with
normal colour vision.

Finally, painters also analyse the perception of colours. For example, the Swiss painter
Itten defined seven colour contrasts (1969): contrast of hue, complementary contrast,
warm–cold contrast, contrast of lightness, contrast of saturation, contrast of extension and
simultaneous contrast. All these contrasts will be further described in Section 3.3.

Cartography also studies coloured contrasts (e.g. Brewer 1996, who developed a model
to predict the simultaneous contrast in coloured maps). All these examples show that work is
still in progress in the field of visual perception of signs, and among them coloured signs. It is
a rather complex field and further research needs to be carried out to improve our knowledge
in this field. Nevertheless, these works are now reliable enough to be used in this research for
an automatic improvement of colour contrasts in maps.

2.3. Automating the process of improving maps

As mentioned in the introduction, mapping software or geographic information systems
(GISs) that are developed and more and more frequently used do not take into account
previous theoretical work on semiology of graphics and visual perception. This raises major
issues in the choice of cartographic representation. As a result the maps produced do not
always meet the users’ needs, partly because portrayed data are not readable or do not
comply with map design rules and partly because they do not take into account the individual
backgrounds of users.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

93

This research points at helping a user – who is an expert in a specific field (risks) but does
not have any knowledge of cartography – to enhance the readability of his or her original
map thanks to an automatic process. Map design rules on coloured contrasts will automa-
tically be taken into account, while preserving at the same time the knowledge and the initial
aims of the user.

3. Methodology
Several methodological choices will be made for the creation of a model that automatically
improves colour contrasts in maps. This part analyses where the contrasts will be seen
(Section 3.1) and which organisation of risk data and legends is suitable (Section 3.2). It
emphasises the correct map design rules linked to colour contrasts (Section 3.3) and the
process to be implemented to automatically improve contrasts (Section 3.4).

3.1. Where will the contrasts be analysed?
A cartographic document contains two elements: the map and its legend (Figure 2).

A legend is made up of legend lines. Each line contains a sign with its meaning. The set
of legend lines is implicitly organised according to their semantic relationships which
convey a difference, an association, or an order. There is a difference if two signs have
nothing in common in their meaning (‘river’ in blue, ‘house’ in grey); there is an association
when two signs have one or more similarities in their meaning but without any idea of
ranking between them (‘torrential hazard’ in blue, ‘river’ in greyed blue); finally, there is an
order when two signs may be sorted according to one or more parameters (‘low’ in light blue,
‘moderate’ in average blue, ‘high’ in dark blue).

An analysis of coloured contrasts may be carried out on the elements of the map legend:
on Figure 2, colours can be distinguished from each other in the legend. However, it can be
noticed that the same colours on the map, influenced by their coloured neighbourhoods and
their size, are not always legible. For instance, the grey of the houses is difficult to
distinguish from the blue of the low hazards, unlike the same grey on the white background.
Given the fact that the visual perception of colours depends on the neighbourhoods and
the spatial extension through the whole map, it seems appropriate to assess the contrasts in
the map itself by taking into account these factors of proximity and size of objects.

Figure 2. A map and its legend constituted of signs, meanings and relationships.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 94

E. Chesneau

3.2. Which organisation of risk data and legends?

An automation of the analysis and improvement of colour contrasts in a risk map leads to a specific
organisation of risk data and legends. Raw data may be the beginning of any kind of map, but they
need to be dealt with so as to be usable for an automation process, that is, they must be identified,
consolidated, differentiated and organised in order to create data classes. Only then can objects be
analysed. For instance, in Figure 4, frames correspond to classes within which specific data called
objects are set. In the phenomenon class, the objects may be flood, avalanche, and so on.

To sort out these objects three categories of classes can be distinguished: classes of
geographic objects for risk data, classes of cartographic objects for geographic objects
which are portrayed on the map and classes of legend objects which give a meaning to the
portrayal. The resulting schema organises these three categories of classes (Figure 3).

3.2.1. Classes of geographic objects related to risks

Geographic objects correspond to actual data which are not portrayed by the user. They are
fundamental since they carry information about the meanings and the semantic relationships
between real-world elements. Figure 4 shows their organisation in a context of risks. The
area to portray is the geographical area of study. It is defined by its location in (x, y).

In this area there are geographic entities. Here the word entity refers to a group of classes
with common characteristics (for example, risk and topography). Risk entities and topo-
graphic entities are defined as follows:

l Risk entities are classes that include hazards and exposures. A hazard is a phenom-
enon, a natural disaster such as a flood or an avalanche, that occurs with some
historical frequency through time (a 100-yearly or 10-yearly event). It is defined by
its geographical location and its intensity (low, moderate, high). An exposure is an
risk which are
area made of a synthesis between hazards and elements at

Figure 3. The three classes’ groups of the data schema and their relationships.

Figure 4. Classes of geographic objects adapted to risks.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

95

superimposed. It is linked to phenomena of some frequency and also characterised by
its geographical location and its intensity.

l Topographic entities are classes that include elements at risk and other topographic
elements. An element at risk is a topographic entity that can be threatened by a hazard.
It is characterised by its geographical location and its nature (crops, forest, emergency
service, decision-making establishment, public building, other building, energy trans-
portation network, road or rail infrastructure). It is also characterised by a value
depending on its sensitivity to risks: for example, the value of a hospital will be
high because it is very sensitive to risks whereas a forest, less sensitive, will have a
lower value. Finally, an element at risk has a value of vulnerability depending on the
number of hazards that could affect it and on their intensity. An ‘other topographic
element’ is a topographic entity supplementing the theme of risks. It has a geographi-
cal location and a nature (administrative limits, landscape).

Now the user can select the geographic objects he wishes to represent. He will then

portray them, which leads to the creation of cartographic objects.

3.2.2. Classes of cartographic objects

There are three categories of cartographic object classes (Figure 5).

A cartographic entity is a portrayed geographic entity. It is defined by its location in (x, y)

on the map and its cartographic portrayal (i.e. graphic sign).

Since the automatic analysis of colour contrasts will be achieved on these cartographic
entities, each cartographic entity has its own characteristics and methods that allow the analysis
of its contrast with each neighbouring cartographic entity on the map (cf. Section 4 with the
presentation of a scenario). However, an automated analysis of colour contrasts at the level of
the cartographic entity is not good enough: indeed, if a new colour applies to one cartographic

Figure 5. Classes of cartographic objects.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 96

E. Chesneau

entity, it should be applied to all other entities with the same meaning. But the likelihood that
the chosen colour is correct for all these entities on the map is low because their coloured
neighbourhoods on the map may be very different. Thus it is necessary to have higher levels of
analysis in order to select a colour which is acceptable for most of these cartographic entities.
For this purpose, two new classes of cartographic objects are defined:

l The cartographic family consists of cartographic entities with the same portrayal and

the same meaning.

l The cartographic area includes all the cartographic families on the map.

In this schema the cartographic objects use legend objects for their cartographic portrayal

and the integration of their semantic relationships.

3.2.3. Classes of legend objects
In a usual GIS, graphic libraries are used to portray layers of spatial information. However
such a GIS is unable to compare portrayals of objects of the same layer or from different
layers because it does not store the semantic relationships which link these objects to each
other. It is thus proposed to define legend objects in order to organise the different
components of the map legend. It has been previously shown that a map legend consists
of a set of lines where each line is made of a sign and its meaning. Moreover, each line is
related to the other lines of the legend (difference, association, or order relationships with the
other lines). The data organisation schema must be able to portray such relationships.

Figure 6 shows the choices that have been made for the organisation of the lines of the
legend and their semantic relationships. A line has a portrayal (sign) and a meaning (sign
legend) (circled in Figure 6).

Figure 6. Classes of legend objects.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

97

In classic graphic semiology (Bertin 1983), a sign is characterised by a graphic location
(point, line, area) and visual variables applied on it (colour, shape, size, texture, orientation,
position). To portray these characteristics in the schema a sign consists of a given style (point,
line, area) whose attributes are visual variables (outline thickness, position, orientation, size,
and so on). Regarding the colour and shape visual variables, object classes are used (colour
and shape) that are created from previously described libraries. For instance the sign
is made of a line style for the outline and an area style for the inside. The line thickness
(continuous or dotted) is specified with the attributes of the line style. The area style is described
by a point style repeated along a grid defined with the intervals of points in x and intervals of
points in y attributes. The point style itself is described by a shape object named ‘circle’. Finally,
the line style and the point style are linked to the same colour object whose name is ‘grey’.

The set of lines of the legend is the map legend.
To order the legend lines according to their semantic relationships, a new class, theme
legend, is created between map legend and sign legend. Each theme legend is linked to sign
legends that have an association or an order relationship and its relationship attribute specifies
the value of this relation. For instance the torrential hazard in Figure 2 is a theme legend with
three lines of legend meaning ‘low’, ‘moderate’ and ‘high’. The value of the relationship
attribute of this theme legend is ‘order’ (order being the semantic relationship between the three
levels of hazard).

3.2.4. Global overview of the organisation of data

Figure 7 is an overview of the data schema: cartographic objects (centre) are geographic
objects (left) portrayed by legend objects (right). With this schema it becomes possible to
analyse colour contrasts at the following three levels:

(1) At local level, each geographic entity is a cartographic entity portrayed by a sign,
itself bound to a meaning, sign legend. The contrast between each cartographic
entity and its neighbours will be assessed at this level.

(2) At intermediate level, cartographic entities with the same portrayal and the same
meaning are gathered to create a cartographic family. The local assessment of
contrasts is generalised to this level.

(3) Finally, at global level, the cartographic area is represented by a cartographic area
portrayed by a legend map. At this level the different cartographic families are

Area to portray

Cartographic area

Map legend

Theme legend

order,
association,
difference,
relationship,

Cartographic family

Sign legend

Phenomenon

Geographic entiy

Cartographic entity

Sign

Risk

Topo

Style

Color

Figure 7. Classes of geographic, cartographic and legend objects and their relationships.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 98

E. Chesneau

analysed and the one which is less well contrasted is selected. A new colour is then
proposed to portray the cartographic entities that belong to it.

Such organisation of data is required for the model. But other elements are also needed,

including map design rules related to colour contrasts.

3.3. Which map design rules should be used for the analysis of colour contrasts?
For the automatic analysis and improvement of colour contrasts in a map, information on
colours and their contrasts needs to be gathered. As already discussed before in Chesneau
(2006b), associated map design rules must be established. As a preliminary to the next
section, an outline of the method used to design the rules will be drawn with a description of
some aspects covered little or not at all in Chesneau (2006b).

3.3.1. Reference colours and a theory on colour contrasts
In a map used in emergency response efforts there are two kinds of data: risks and the
background of the map. This creates two categories of reference colours: saturated colours
that are held for the portrayal of risk data (hazards, exposures, strategic elements at risk in
crisis management like decision-making centres or emergency services) and coloured greys
that are used to portray the map background (less strategic elements at risk such as crops or
forests or other topographic elements such as administrative limit or relief).

Figure 8 shows the 163 reference colours in chromatic circles. The works of painter Itten
(1969), cartographer Brewer (1994, Brewer et al. 2003) and cartographer Mersey (1990)
were used to define these reference colours (Chesneau 2006a, p. 124–129).

These colours are used to analyse the proposed map signs: for example, if a user designs
his or her map with his or her own colours, our model will select the closest reference colour
for each of them. With these reference colours the model can now analyse the contrasts
between the colours of the map. The different existing types of contrasts are described in
Itten’s book The Art of Color (1969). ‘We speak of contrast when distinct differences can be
perceived between two compared effects’ (Itten 1969, p. 36). Itten introduces seven types of
colour contrasts (table 1 in Chesneau 2006b, p. 4):

3

4

1

2

Saturated colours

Coloured greys

Greys

Figure 8. Reference colours used for the analysis.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

99

Table 1. Extract of the values for the contrast of hue.

Usual name of colour

Light red

Light green

Very dark blue

Medium yellow

Light red
Light green
Very dark blue
Medium yellow

0
2
3
1

2
0
1
2

3
1
0
3

1
2
3
0

l The contrast of hue (red, green) is used to differentiate or associate cartographic signs.
For example, one can differentiate a forest from a hospital by choosing a green hue for
the former and a red hue for the latter. The complementary contrast and the warm–cold
contrast are particular cases of the contrast of hue. In the model, the contrasts of hue
will be studied through the parameter (cid:2) of the reference colours to portray difference
and association (Figure 8).

l The contrast of lightness (light, dark) and the contrast of saturation (bright or
saturated, dull or desaturated) are used to create order in the perception of colours.
Two types of order can be distinguished: between ordered cartographic signs (low,
high) the contrast of lightness creates order relationships, whereas the contrast of
saturation is used to create visual reading hierarchies between non-ordered carto-
graphic signs (difference or association). In the model, contrasts for the order of
ordered signs will be studied through the parameter Z of the reference colours and
contrasts for the order of non-ordered signs will be studied through the parameter j. In
Figure 8, colour 1 is used to portray the ‘low’ value whereas the darker colour 2 is used
to portray the ‘high’ value. Colour 3, more saturated than colour 4, is used for more
important information than that portrayed by colour 4.

l The contrast of extension will be studied in the model at two levels: First, the level of
the cartographic sign: ‘What is the contrast of extension between two coloured signs?’
In a map the improvement of the readability of point signs or line signs may be
achieved through an increase in their size or the creation of a higher contrast with their
neighbouring colours. For area signs only a better contrast of hue, lightness, or
saturation can be used since the size is fixed. Second, the level of the whole map:
‘What is the contrast of extension between two colours on the map?’ In this case the
extensions of colours of the map are considered and the resulting visual balance or
harmony of the picture is assessed.

l Finally, since the simultaneous contrast may create optical illusions between colours and
lead to confusion in the interpretation of the map, its use will be avoided in the model.

Not all those contrasts are yet taken into account in the prototype: only the contrast of hue
and the contrast of lightness have been implemented (cf. Section 4). Therefore, our analysis
below focuses on those two contrasts. From now on, it is possible to establish map design
rules on colour contrasts.

3.3.2. Map design rules related to colour contrasts
Rules for the assessment of contrasts aim to answer the following question: ‘What is the
contrast between two colours?’ Contrast values between each pair of reference colours and
each type of contrasts (contrast of hue, contrast of lightness) have thus been estimated. Each
contrast value li specifies a number between 0 and n, which is the contrast i between two
reference colours (Cj, Ck). If li is 0, there is no contrast; if li is equal to n, the contrast is

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 100

E. Chesneau

maximal. The assessment of the contrast values relies not only on computations based on
hue, lightness and saturation distances but also on experimental surveys of cartographers,
graphic artists and non-professionals of colour (Grelaud 2005 and Chesneau 2006a, p.
257–278). Those experimental surveys are essential to take into account the visual percep-
tion of contrasts: for example, it has been noticed that the contrast of hue between two light
hues (light red, light green) is perceived lower than the contrast of hue between the same two
hues of which one at least is darker (light red, dark green). The contrast values are then
gathered in matrices. Table 1 is an extract of values for the contrast of hue, with n being equal
to 5 (for example): there is a little contrast of hue between medium yellow and light red (1),
whereas this contrast is much higher between light red and very dark blue (3).

To use these matrices the colour of each cartographic sign is first picked up in the colour
class of the data schema (cf. Figure 6). Then the model compares the colours of both
cartographic signs and looks for their contrast in the matrices.

With the contrast values the model knows the contrast between two colours but it still
does not know whether or not this contrast is good to translate the semantic relationship
between the two cartographic signs. To answer the question ‘Does the contrast between two
colours portraying two cartographic signs correctly reflect their semantic relationship?’,
rules for the interpretation of contrasts are suggested. Ideal intervals of contrast values have
been defined to correctly portray a semantic relationship (difference, association, order). It is
based on theoretical works in graphic semiology such as Bertin (1983). An ideal value of
contrast mi specifies a number between 0 and n, which is the ideal contrast i between two
reference colours (Cj, Ck). For instance, if two objects are in a ‘difference’ relationship in a
map, their contrast of hue will be high, so the ideal values of the contrast of hue will be
around n. Their contrast of lightness will depend on their contrast of extension: if both
objects have the same size, their contrast of lightness will be low (close to 0); if one object is
smaller than the other, it should be portrayed with a darker colour in order to be seen within
the same interval of time (Itten 1969, p. 106, Keates 1996, p. 234).

Finally, rules to select and suggest a right colour for the worst-contrasted signs are
necessary. Thanks to them, the model will be able to identify and sort relevant solutions,
making the choice of a new colour less random. These rules are based on the search of
solution spaces in the matrix of reference colours. First, new solutions are suggested for
signs whose colours have to be changed with respect to the colours of their neighbours on the
map and their semantic relationship. Second, the model compares each solution to colour
conventions that reduce the choices to evocative colours (for instance, the portrayal of water
will be limited to colours containing blue). In the model, those colour conventions are stored
in a list of colours, each being associated to one or many thematics. This list is not exhaustive
since it only comprises conventions for French risk maps (cf. Figure 18). For example, let us
imagine a map with an area of water coloured in blue next to a hospital coloured in green.
Their relationship of difference is poorly portrayed and the model will change the hue of the
hospital. It retrieves the colour of water (blue) and the range of ideal values of the contrast of
hue to portray properly a difference with the hospital (3–5 on a scale ranging from 0 to 5).
New hues are suggested for the hospital (yellow, yellow-orange, orange, red and purple).
Then these colours are compared to the conventions and purple is removed from the list
because it is too close to blue.

This explains the rules on colour contrasts that have been implemented in the model. The
model can analyse and automatically improve colour contrasts in a map. There are different
methods to solve this problem and Section 3.4 describes the choice that has been made.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

101

3.4. Which automatic process for the improvement of the map?

The automatic improvement of colour contrasts in a map may be achieved in different
ways. Over a simultaneous approach aiming at improving the map as a whole but quite
difficult to implement, an incremental method was adopted here. It consists in changing the
colours several times in a progressive and iterative way. The model moves step by step to a
more satisfactory solution through successive cycles of improvement. Two methods can be
used:

l The global adjustment consists in slightly modifying all colours during a cycle. The
addition of cycles leads to a better legend. However, the number of colours to be
changed may be high and this method is therefore difficult to implement.

l The resolution of the worst contrasts consists in changing only those colours which
are the least well contrasted on the map. During a cycle, few colours are changed and
the addition of cycles leads to bigger changes and a satisfactory final legend.

In this research work the method of resolution of the worst contrasts has been chosen due
to its simplicity compared to other methods. Indeed, only a limited number of colours are
modified during each cycle; it is thus easier to follow and check the suggested modifications.
The worst problems of contrasts are solved step by step. The modifications which are
proposed during a cycle are minor: the aim is to respect the initial portrayal while suggesting
slight improvements for a better readability of the map.

Figure 9 explains how the process works: the initial state of the map is shown in
Figure 9a. If the model changes the colour of the ‘house’ family, such a family being
different from the other lines of the legend, this colour will be the only one to change
(Figure 9b). If the model changes the colour of the ‘moderate torrential hazard’ family (hue
changed from blue to green), its relationship of order with the ‘low torrential hazard’ and
‘high torrential hazard’ families involves changing the colours of these hazards (Figure 9c).
Moreover, its relationship of association with the ‘river’ family leads to hues of these two
themes being kept close to each other.

This method of cyclic resolution leads to different states of the map: the initial state is the
map created by the user. During a cycle, the state of the map at the beginning of the cycle is
called the last accepted state. It becomes the currently accepted state when the model starts
to analyse contrasts. If this currently accepted state is better than the previous (last accepted)
state, it becomes the new accepted state. To go from one valid state to the next, the model
carries out a series of successive operations during which it may have to test a set of choices.
For the model, only one possibility is given at a time. If it is better than the last accepted state,
it replaces it. Otherwise it is deleted from the list of possibilities and the next possibility is
tested. The same process is repeated until a tested solution is better than the current one. At
the end of all cycles the final state of the map is obtained. Since all pair colours are not tested
exhaustively during each cycle, the model can lead to a suboptimal choice of colours, but
which is nevertheless enough for the user.

4. Results with a scenario
During each cycle four tasks are executed as described in Chesneau (2006b, pp. 9–12). First
is the identification of the worst-contrasted cartographic family on the map. Second is the
suggestion of new colours to improve contrasts between the selected entities and their
neighbours on the map. Third is acceptation of the chosen solution: without acceptation

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 102

E. Chesneau

Figure 9. Changes of colours during two cycles of analysis.

the model goes back to the previous stage and tests another solution; if there is an acceptation
the model asks whether or not to go on: if the new state of the map is satisfying for the map
designer or if there is no significant improvement in the result after many cycles, the process
may be stopped. Otherwise, a new cycle begins.

In this part, these tasks are described by emphasising issues not yet mentioned and
referring to a scenario. During this research work a prototype has been developed to test the
model: ‘ARiCo’ (Automatic improvement of Risk maps by colour Contrast). This prototype,
implemented in Lamps2 GIS with the programming language Lull (like C) by the LaserScan
society and focusing on automatic improvements to the contrast of hue and the contrast of
lightness only, has enabled many experiments to be carried out that are sufficient to illustrate
the process (Chesneau 2006b, pp. 9–12). Other experiments on maps having more numerous
superimposed layers would be necessary to validate the model and to improve some of its
features (see Section 5). In this article, an imaginary scenario is presented, which the next
prototype should be able to solve. An emergency response scenario has been chosen
because, as shown in the introduction, this type of map has to have clearly differentiable
signs whose meaning can be quickly and efficiently extracted from the map without detailed
inspection of all map elements.

The initial map of the scenario is showed in Figure18a: the area to portray is made up of
hazards (landslide, torrential flood, flood, run-off on slope). Elements at risk (buildings,
roads) and other topographic elements (river, relief) are superimposed on those hazards. A
user expert in the field of risks chooses to portray hazards with different hues according to
the hazards’ types and different lightness according to the hazards’ intensities. Elements at

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

103

Cartographic area

map satisfaction

list map satisfactions

problem

list solutions

solution  choice

new map satisfaction

improve contrasts()
identify problem()

compute solutions list()
choose solution()
apply solution()
validate map improvement()

stop process()

Attributes:
Static characteristics of  the class

Methods:
Dynamic characteristics of  the class

Figure 10. Attributes and methods of the cartographic area used during the automatic process.

risk and other topographic elements are portrayed with more or less coloured greys accord-
ing to the importance of their theme (meaning) for the reader. Thus the city hall and the
rescue centres appear with a more saturated colour than the other objects because they are
more important for the reader.

The model aims at automatically analysing and improving the colour contrasts. The
cartographic area is used to run the cyclic process according to its attributes and methods
(Figure 10). The improve contrasts method is used to start the process. Then, the four
previously quoted tasks are executed.

4.1.

Identifying the family whose colour is to be changed

In this task the model selects the worst-contrasted family on the map using the identify
problem method. Figure 11 shows the actions to be processed.

Three levels of analysis are used:

l At local level the model picks up the neighbouring entities for each cartographic entity
on the map. Then for each type of contrasts (hue, lightness), it estimates their contrast
li to answer the question: ‘What is the contrast between the two colours?’ The model
uses contrast values defined in Section 3.3.2. Figure 12 illustrates the contrast analysis
between two neighbouring cartographic entities on the map: an ‘other building’
coloured in light grey and a ‘low torrential flood hazard’ coloured in light blue-
purple. Between these two objects the contrast of hue is high (4 on a scale from 0 to
5) and the contrast of lightness is nil (0).

Then, the model uses the ideal values of contrast mi defined in Section 3.3.2 to answer the
question ‘Is this contrast satisfying?’ In this example, the semantic relationship between the
‘other building’ and ‘low torrential flood hazard’ entities is a difference. According to
the rules for the interpretation of contrasts, a difference is portrayed by a high contrast of

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 104

E. Chesneau

Figure 11. The stages made during the first task of the process.

What is the
contrast of  the buliding with the low hazard?

Does this contrast portray their relationship
correctly?

Contrast
values

Hue
Lightness

4
0

Semantic
relationships

Association

False

Difference

True

Order

False

Ideal contrast
values

Hue
Lightness

> = 2.5
> = 3

Contrast
qualities

Hue
Lightness

5 (perfect)
2 (to improve)

Figure 12. Contrast values and qualities between a building and a low torrential flood hazard.

hue (between 2.5 and 5) and a contrast of lightness that is high enough so that a small other
building is clearly seen on a large area of low torrential flood hazard (between 3 and 5).
Thanks to these rules the model assesses the qualities of contrasts: the contrast of hue is
perfect (5) whereas the contrast of lightness could be improved (2).

l For each type of contrasts (hue, lightness) and for two cartographic signs neighbour-
ing in the map, a comparison is made between their contrast value and their ideal
contrast to measure a quality of contrasts (0 for bad contrast and n for perfect contrast).
These qualities of contrasts can be aggregated by the model at higher levels (a
cartographic entity with all its neighbours, then the cartographic families) thanks to
functions of aggregation as defined in Chesneau (2006a, pp. 216–221): for example,

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

105

Other buildings

Low torrential
hazards

Quality

Hue

Lightness

Average

4

2.5

3

4

4

4

Figure 13. Contrast qualities of the ‘building’ and ‘low torrential flood hazard’ families.

the model can evaluate the qualities of contrasts of an entity with all its neighbours by
picking up the worst of the local qualities computed between the considered entity and
each of its neighbours. It is also possible to compute the average of these local
qualities. This average can be weighted according to the importance of the theme of
each neighbouring entity for the user: the more important for the user a neighbouring
entity is, the heavier is its weight. In this case, the qualities of contrasts of the themes
that are important for the user and therefore essential to make the map readable
account for the greatest part of the final result. In the scenario, the latter function of
aggregation has been chosen to compute the qualities of contrasts between a carto-
graphic entity and all its neighbours and the qualities of contrasts within the carto-
graphic families. Figure 13 shows the qualities of contrasts of the ‘other building’ and
‘low torrential flood hazard’ families (intermediary level of analysis).

If it is assumed that the contrast of hue and the contrast of lightness have the same weight,
the model computes a synthesis quality that corresponds to the average of these two contrasts
(cf. Section 3.3.2). In our example, the qualities of contrasts of hue and lightness are
satisfactory for the ‘low torrential flood hazard’ family (4 on a scale between 0 and 5). For
the ‘other building’ family, the quality of contrast of hue is good (4) but its quality of contrast
of lightness should be improved (it is 2.5 but should be close to 5).

l Finally, at the global level of analysis, the model computes a map satisfaction as
an aggregation of the synthesis qualities of the families to answer the question ‘Is
the contrast of the map good?’ In the example, the global quality of the cartographic
area is the average of the qualities of families and it is close to 3 on a scale ranging
from 0 to 5.

All these data concerning values of contrast and semantic relationships are stored as
attributes of the objects. For example, the map satisfaction of the cartographic area is stored
in the map satisfaction and list of map satisfactions attributes (all the map satisfactions
computed at each cycle since the beginning of the process). After completing all these
analyses, the cartographic area is able to detect the worst-contrasted family on the map. The
cartographic area computes priorities for every family on the map to be changed according to
three parameters: the quality of contrast of the family (the lower the quality is, the higher is
the priority to change it), its theme (a very sensitive element at risk, such as a hospital ranks
higher than a waste parcel of land) and the importance of this theme for the user (the more
important for the user a theme is, the higher is its priority to be changed). When the
cartographic area selects the worst-contrasted family, the problem attribute is completed

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 106

E. Chesneau

Figure 14. The stages made during the second task of the process.

and the next task begins. In our scenario the ‘other building’ family is selected and the model
suggests changing its contrast of lightness.

4.2. Selecting and testing new colours

In this task, the model has to find better appropriated colours to improve the readability of the
selected family. Figure 14 shows the actions to be carried out.

The compute solutions list method of the cartographic area is used to execute this task.

Figure 15 shows how the model works.

First, the colours of the neighbouring families are picked up: the hazards and the white
background (white circles in Figure 15). Then the semantic relationship of each

Moderate landslide
hazard

Other
building

Low flood hazard

Moderate torrential
hazard

Low torrential
hazard

Low run-off  on
slope hazard

Figure 15. Position of colours of the family to be changed and of its neighbouring families on the
circles.

Background

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

107

neighbouring family with the family to be modified is picked up. Here ‘other building’ is
different from all its neighbouring families. Thanks to this information, the ideal values of
contrast are also picked up: here the ideal contrast of hue between ‘other building’ and its
neighbouring families should be higher than or equal to 2.5. The contrast of lightness
depends on the lightness of each neighbouring family so that it is easy to distinguish an
‘other building’ entity from its neighbouring entities in the map. As all the ‘other building’
entities are smaller than their neighbouring entities, it will be necessary for their contrasts of
lightness to be high enough.

With all these elements (colour of each neighbouring family and ideal values of
contrast), each neighbouring family is able to suggest new colours for the family to be
modified so that their semantic relationship remains well portrayed. Thus a list of possible
solutions is generated. Here, the neighbouring families can establish a new lightness for the
family to be modified using the chromatic circles along the axis Z (cf. Figure 8): darkening
the ‘other building’ family’s initial grey can be an option. Then a weight is computed for
each solution according to different criteria: the number of neighbouring families that
account for the solution (the lower this number is, the lower is the weight of the solution),
the state of use of the solution on the map (if the colour is already used elsewhere on the map
to portray another theme, its weight is decreased) and the way the solution is treated in the
conventions (if the solution is not recommended or is even forbidden, its weight is
decreased). The choose solution method then selects the one with the highest weight and
applies it to the map. The selected colour for the family to be modified corresponds to the
colour with the highest weight. In our example the neutral level of lightness (i.e. grey with
50% white and 50% black) is selected.

4.3. Accepting the solution
The assessment of the new state involves a new analysis of contrasts at all levels: local,
intermediate and global (Figure 16).

Figure 16. The stages made during the third task of the process.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 108

E. Chesneau

The accepted map improvement method assesses the new state by comparing the new map
satisfaction stored in the new map satisfaction attribute with the previous map satisfaction
stored in the map satisfaction attribute. If the value is higher, the state is accepted. Thus the
family whose colour has just been changed is portrayed with its new colour. If the value is
lower, the state is not accepted. In this case, the tested solution is removed from the list of
solutions (list solutions) and the model returns to the modified list to choose another solution.
The map after a first cycle of automatic analysis and improvement is showed in
Figure 18b. Here the new value for the map satisfaction is 3.5 on a scale from 0 to 5. The
comparison with the previous satisfaction (3) implies the acceptation of the cycle.

4.4.

Interrupting the process

The model decides whether or not to interrupt the process using the stop process method of the
cartographic area. If the value of the map satisfaction attributes is high enough or if it is close to
the last values added to list map satisfactions (i.e. if the differences from the last cycles are
minimal), the process will be interrupted. Otherwise a new cycle begins (Figure 17).

Figure 18c shows a final and more readable map after many cycles.
The lightness of the other buildings has again been darkened, the lightness of the high
torrential flood hazards has also been darkened, the hue of the floods has been modified in
green and the very light orange hue of the city hall and the rescue centres has been turned into
a darker yellow-orange.

Thus, after many cycles of the automatic process, the readability of the initial map of this
scenario has been improved. Many rules have been used to this purpose. First, the other
buildings, smaller than their neighbouring entities, have been darkened. Second, the high
torrential flood hazard, occupying a smaller area than the other torrential flood hazards on
the map, has been darkened to be better distinguished. Third, the hue of the floods has been
modified to be closer to the hue of the torrential flood on the chromatic circle (since they are
in association). Colour conventions have also been taken into account to propose this new
hue. Finally, elements that are important for the user in emergency response efforts (city hall,
rescue centres) have been emphasised to be seen first, using a darker colour.

5. Outlook

To answer the issues of map legibility in digital cartography, this research work develops a
model which is able to automatically improve the readability of risk maps and create better
colour contrasts.

During this research work the model has been implemented in ‘Lamps2’ GIS and the first
experiments made in ARiCo are encouraging (Chesneau 2006b, pp. 9–12). The improve-
ment of a map is made very quickly (less than 1 min), the longest stage being finding the

Figure 17. The stages made during the fourth task of the process.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

109

Figure 18. The tested area (a) at the beginning, (b) after a first cycle and (c) at the end of the process.

neighbours of each cartographic sign. However these experiments have been carried out on a
small portion of map and with not many superimpositions of monothematic layers, whereas
actual data represented on risk maps are much denser. It is thus necessary to carry out
experiments integrating more colours in superimposition and on wider portions of territory.
The prototype may be slightly slower. Finally, different map contexts could be tested since
less than five have been experimented at the moment.

This algorithm has now been integrated on an open-source platform named GeOxygene
(http://oxygene-project.sourceforge.net/), and could easily be translated for other GIS soft-
ware. Today, this new prototype, still in development, uses the base principles of ARiCo
with many improvements, for example the creation of new matrices about colour contrasts
(Buard and Ruas 2007). Henceforth, experimentation is taking place to validate the new
prototype: the studied portions of maps are now wider and different legends (portrayal
choices for the cartographic signs) are tested. The first experiments showed that the proto-
type has many difficulties in achieving a satisfying legend and then a readable map, due to
poor choices of new colours that do not always improve the readability of the map or that do
not improve the map enough (the map still does not attain a suitable state for visual
readability). These problems have yet to be studied and solved. Furthermore a comprehen-
sive user study will be made to verify the effectiveness of this approach.

After these first improvements more long-term work can be considered. Here are some

examples:

First it could be interesting to test other methods of resolution of the problem (cf. 3.4). At
COGIT laboratory of Institut Ge´ographique National (IGN) France, the approach based on
an automatic analysis of colour contrasts in the legend, without any link to the map, began in

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 110

E. Chesneau

2007. A first study, carried out at COGIT laboratory, concerns the development of a multi-
agent system applied to the improvement of the readability of maps used in emergency
response efforts. The objective is to implement a system of autonomous agents (colours) that
are located on a chromatic circle. During the process, each agent (colour) moves on the
chromatic circle according to the user specifications and some constraints integrated in the
system (map design rules, coloured conventions). The results obtained will be then compared
to our method based on an automatic analysis of colour contrasts on the map. In 2009 a student
of the Jean Monnet University of Saint-Etienne, France, also worked on this topic, developing
a module on GeOxygene platform, which automatically evaluates the semantic relationships
between lines of the legend according to their colours (Chesneau and Souvignet 2009). If the
relationships (that are automatically found) do not correspond to the real relationships between
data, an improvement in the colours of the map legend should be made.

It would also be relevant to take into account other types of contrast proposed by Itten
(1969) in the automatic improvement of the readability of a map. For example the analysis of
the contrast of saturation could allow more or less saturated colours to be selected according
to the importance of the portrayed themes on a map for the user. The proportions of colours
and their spatial position on a map also influence their readability: for the same extension of
colour a large coloured sign and many small coloured signs that have the same colour will be
differently perceived, and the choices of colours will probably be different. Moreover, it
would be interesting to develop rules based for example on Brewer’s study (1996) to reduce
the simultaneous contrast on risk maps.

A study on visual variables other than colour to improve cartographic readability could
be done: for example, the halo of signs to reduce simultaneous contrast with their neigh-
bours, or their transparency to improve their readability in the case of superimpositions.

Thus some research still needs to be carried out in the wide field of automation of
cartographic readability improvement. The main point is to answer a major need: how to
create user-adapted, correct and readable maps, with respect to map design rules established
according to the characteristics of our visual perception and taking into account the users’
needs concerning information, expertise and regulation.

Acknowledgements
Thanks are offered to Anne Ruas and Jacques Chesneau for their help in the writing of this article and to
Franc¸ois Hissel, Eric Beyrath and Lilian Bard for their English language corrections.

References
Belbin, J., 1996. Gestalt theory applied to cartographic text. In: C. Wood and C. Keller, eds.
Cartographic design: theoretical and practical perspectives. Chichester, UK: John Wiley &
Sons, 253–269.

Bertin, J., 1983. The semiology of graphics. In: W.J. Berg, trans. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin

Press, 415 p.

Brewer, C., 1989. The development of process-printed Munsell charts for selecting map colors. The

American Cartographer, 16 (4), 269–278.

Brewer, C., 1994. Color use guidelines for mapping and visualization. In: A. MacEachren and D.
Taylor, eds. Visualization in modern cartography. Chapter 7. Tarrytown, NY: Elsevier Science,
123–147.

Brewer, C., 1996. Prediction of simultaneous contrast between map colors with Hunt’s model of color

appearance. Color Research and Application, 21 (3), 221–235.

Brewer, C., Hatchard, G., and Harrower, M., 2003. ColorBrewer in print: a catalog of color schemes for

maps. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 30 (1), 5–32.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

111

Buard, E. and Ruas, A., 2007. Evaluation of colour contrasts by means of expert knowledge for on-
demand mapping. In: Acts of the 23rd international cartographic association, 4–10 August 2007,
Moscow, 10 p. Available online at http://icaci.org/documents/ICC_proceedings/ICC2007/html/
Proceedings.htm (accessed 25 April 2010).

Castner, H., 1983. Research questions and cartographic design. In: D. Taylor, ed. Graphic commu-
nication and design in contemporary cartography. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 87–112.
Chesneau, E., 2004. Propositions pour une cartographie du risque. Bulletin du Comite´ Franc¸ais de

Cartographie, 181, 50–70.

Chesneau, E., 2006a. Mode`le d’ame´lioration automatique des contrastes de couleur en cartographie –
application aux cartes de risque. Dissertation (PhD) in Geographic Information Sciences. IGN and
University of Marne-la-Valle´e, 372 p.

Chesneau, E., 2006b. Propositions me´thodologiques pour l’ame´lioration automatique des contrastes
de couleur – application aux cartes de risque [online]. Cyberge´o, 360. Available from: http://
www.cybergeo.eu/index2889.html [Accessed 26 May 2009].

Chesneau, E. and Souvignet, J., 2009. Evaluation automatique des relations se´mantiques dans une carte
a` partir des couleurs de la le´gende. In: Actes du colloque SAGEO’09, Saint-Mande´, 25–27
November, Paris, 21 p.

De Blomac, F. 2008, Peut-on encore parler de se´miologie graphique?, SIG La lettre, no. 93, 4–8

January.

(1), 1–20.

Dent, B., 1999. Cartography: thematic map design. 5th ed. Boston, MA: WCB McGraw-Hill, 417 p.
Eastman, J., 1985. Graphic organization and memory structures for map learning. Cartographica, 22

Grelaud, B., 2005. Ame´lioration des cartes de risque: Analyse des contrastes de colleur de´finis par Itten.

Internship report done at COGT Laboratory of IGN, 59 p.

Fabrikant, S. and Goldsberry, K., 2005. Thematic relevance and perceptual salience of dynamic geovi-
sualization displays. In: Acts of the 22nd International Cartographic Association 9–16 July 2005, La
Corunna, Spain, 10 p. Available online at http://icaci.org/documents/ICC_proceedings/ICC2005/
htm/pdf/oral/TEMA15/session%203/SARA%20IRINA%20FABRIKANT.pdf (accessed 25 April
2010).

Itten, J., 1969. The art of color. First pub. 1961 as Kunst Der Farbe; English trans. 1962, 1966, 1967,

1969. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 155 p.

Keates, J.S., 1996. Understanding maps. 2nd ed. Glasgow, UK: Longman, 334 p.
Ledoux, B., 1994. Editorial. Mappemonde, 4, 1.
Lloyd, R., 1997. Visual search processes used in map reading. Cartographica, 34 (1), 11–32.
MacEachren, A., 1995. How maps work: representation, visualization, and design. New York and

London: Guilford Press, 513 p.

Mersey, J., 1990. Colour and thematic map design: the role of colour scheme and map complexity in

choropleth map communication. Cartographica, 27 (3), Monograph 41, 157 p.

Monmonnier, M., 1997. Cartographies of danger: mapping hazards in America. Chicago and London:

University of Chicago Press, 363 p.

Muller, J.C., 1992. Se´miologie graphique dans et pour les SIG. Revue des sciences de l’information

ge´ographique et de l’analyse spatiale, 2 (1), 53–56.

Olson, J. and Brewer, C., 1997. An evaluation of color selections to accommodate map users with
color-vision impairments. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 87 (1), 103–134.
Propeck-Zimmermann, E., Saint-Ge´rand, T., and Bonnet, E., 2007. Probabilite´s, risques et gestion
territoriale: champs d’action des plans de pre´vention des risques technologiques. Ge´oCarrefour,
82 (1–2), 65–76.

Robinson, A., et al., 1995. Elements of cartography. 6th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 674 p.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 01:25 01 May 2015 