The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

A Brief Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases

István Klinghammer & José Jesús Reyes Nuñez

To cite this article: István Klinghammer & José Jesús Reyes Nuñez (2017) A Brief
Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases, The Cartographic Journal, 54:4, 333-342, DOI:
10.1080/00087041.2017.1400220

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1400220

Published online: 19 Feb 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 14

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 54 No. 4
© The British Cartographic Society 2017

pp. 333–342

2017

O B S E R V A T I O N S

A Brief Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases

István Klinghammer

and José Jesús Reyes Nuñez

Department of Cartography and Geoinformatics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary
Email: jesusreyes@caesar.elte.hu

The first part of this article is dedicated to the history of Hungarian school atlases to 1914. The publication of atlases for schools is
dated to 1800, when professor Ézsáiás Budai created his ‘New School Atlas for elementary pupils’. For almost 90 years the school
atlases were mostly translations and adaptations of foreign (e.g. German) atlases. In 1890, a talented cartographer, Manó
Kogutowicz founded the Hungarian Geographical Institute, which produced school atlases for the different types of schools in
Hungary. The professional quality of these school atlases was recognized by prizes won in international exhibitions. Kogutowicz
laid the foundations of the current Hungarian school cartography: three of his school atlases are presented in more detail in the
second part of this article, to give examples of how the pupils were introduced to the basic cartographic concepts as well as how
different innovative solutions were used on the maps.

Keywords: School cartography; school atlas; Manó Kogutowicz; Hungarian Geographical Institute

BRIEF HISTORY TO THE FIRST WORLD WAR

The beginnings of Hungarian school cartography can be
dated to 1781, when the book entitled ‘Introductio in geogra-
phiam Hungariae antiqui et medii aevi’ was published with
twelve historical maps. Its author was a Lutheran pastor,
János Tomka-Szászky, who probably made the maps in Bra-
tislava some years earlier,
in 1751 (Figure 1). Another
author of the same period was István Losonczi with his
‘Triple Mirror of Hungary’ that was a book on the history
and geography of Hungary and Transylvania. The first
edition of this work appeared in 1770 with two inset maps
without any reference to their author; however, based on
the similar characteristics of both maps, it can be supposed
that they were made by the same person.

The first Hungarian school atlas was printed in Debrecen
in 1800, a city placed in the East region of the country at a
distance of about 200 kilometres from Budapest. Its author
was Professor Ézsáiás Budai, who counted with the collabor-
ation of some of his togatus students to make the maps from
1797. The title of the atlas was ‘New School Atlas for elemen-
tary pupils’ and only had twelve pages with the following
maps: Earth globe, Europe, Asia, Africa, North America,
South America, Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Poland and
Hungary. A curious detail is that Hungary was not rep-
resented as a country map, but on a regional map. The
country was placed to the top left corner of the page,
because the map also contained the city of Kiev, Crimean
Peninsula on the East as well as the city of Thessaloniki on
the South.

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1400220

In the immediate years after this work, only a small, ten-
page school atlas was published in Hungary in 1817. From
today’s perspective, its title sounds interesting: ‘Hungarian
National Atlas’. Its author was a foreign-born soldier,
Eduárd Greipel.

Only almost 30 years later, in 1845 a new school atlas was
made by a talented Hungarian astronomer (Antal Vállas),
which was printed in Vienna with the title ‘New hand- and
school atlas with geographical and statistical notes. For news-
papers readers and pupils’. It contained 18 pages, represent-
ing the Earth divided into two hemispheres, the continents,
the European countries and Hungary with two inset maps
of Pest-Buda and Fiume (currently Rijeka in Croatia).
Vállas was the first to use a Hungarian nomenclature on
the maps; he also added statistical data to enrich and diversify
the content. Perhaps he worked with French sources to draw
his maps, because Paris is the prime meridian on them.

During the period between 1845 and 1890, foreign school
atlases were adapted and translated for use in Hungarian
schools. The majority of them were from German-speaking
countries. This situation began to change in 1891, when a
School Atlas Commission was set up within the Hungarian
Geographical Society. In their meeting in May of the same
the
year,
Ministry of Education describing the actual situation of
school cartography in the country and emphasizing the
erroneous and obsolete wall maps used in the Hungarian
schools, but without mentioning the lack of Hungarian
school atlases.

the commission addressed a document

for

334

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. One of the maps made by Tomka-Szászky: ‘Hungary in the Middle Ages’ (Peragovics, 2013)

In 1887, an experienced Hungarian cartographer, Manó
Kogutowicz (Figure 2) published a small school atlas
(‘Small Atlas with a county map for 3rd grade pupils
of Elementary Schools’). It had only five pages containing
maps
of Budapest, Pest
surrounds
County and an administrative map of Hungary. This
was completed with new maps in the following editions
and the number of pages grew to 13 in a period of
ten years.

of Budapest,

In 1890, Manó Kogutowicz convinced the Ministry of
Education of the pressing national need of a Hungarian car-
tographic institution. Kogutowicz established the Hungarian
Geographical Institute in the same year with the personal
support of the minister, Albin Csáky. During the first two
years, the institute was a subsidiary of the Hölzel Company
(based in Vienna). It became an independent firm under
the name Kogutowicz & Co. in 1892; however, Kogutowicz
continued the collaboration with Hölzel. One of the results
of this partnership was a Hungarian atlas using some maps
of the school atlases published by Hölzel in Vienna. This
atlas was entitled ‘Atlas for lower and upper classes of
Elementary Schools’, which contained 16 pages and was pub-
lished in 1896. A new and original map was also included,
which was planned and drawn by Kogutowicz: the two-
page physical map of Hungary. According to Klinghammer
(2002), it was the first physical map of the country totally

Figure 2. Portrait of Manó Kogutowicz (1851–1908)

A Brief Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases

335

made by a Hungarian cartographer after the era of Absolut-
ism in Hungary (1849–1867).

In the meantime, in the city of Debrecen, a book publisher,
Gyula Kozma made the Hungarian versions of the contem-
porary Diercke Atlases from Germany. The first one was
the ‘General Geographical Atlas’ in 1889, which was fol-
lowed by the ‘School Atlas’ and the ‘Systematic Geographical
Atlas’, both published in 1890 (Figure 3).

During these years, Kogutowicz also made maps of conti-
nents as well as county and country maps of Hungary. He
used these maps in school atlases published for different
types of schools in the Hungarian Educational System, e.g.
the series entitled ‘Small Atlas with a county map’ for the
Elementary Schools and the ‘Geographical School Atlas’ for
Higher Elementary Schools.

Years earlier, Kogutowicz recognized the importance of the
participation of scientists during the selection and edition of
the content to be represented on a map. Following his convic-
tion, he consolidated his company with the addition of
specialists, including the most renowned Hungarian geogra-
pher in this period, Jenő Cholnoky. The first result of this col-
the ‘Geographical Atlas
laboration was
for Secondary
Schools […] with the collaboration of Jenő Cholnoky […]
planned and drawn by Manó Kogutowicz’, which was pub-
lished in 1900. The atlas included 36 maps and four inset
maps. The majority of these maps were made especially for

them were adapted from
this atlas and only some of
foreign school maps. An innovative characteristic of this
atlas was that it surpassed the traditional brief presentation
of basic map concepts of former atlases by including astro-
nomical and mathematical concepts for the first time in
Hungary. It was also the first work that represented some
statistical data on maritime traffic on a world map. Another
acknowledged Hungarian geographer, Lajos Lóczy wrote
about this atlas: This is the first, totally original school atlas
made in our homeland.

The content and printing quality of this atlas competed
with the level of
its German equivalents (the Kozenn,
Diercke, Gaebler and Wettstein school atlases). It had numer-
ous editions up to the 1910s, reaching to include 48 main
maps and many inset maps.

Two maps

should be highlighted due

to their
significance: the ‘Geological Map of Hungary’ and the
‘Physical Map of Hungary’, both of them at the scale
of 1: 2.4 million. The thematic content of the geological
map was compiled by Cholnoky. The landforms in the
‘Physical Map of Hungary’ were represented using
hachures in the first edition of the atlas. Later the map
was changed and it became the first physical map in a
Hungarian school atlas on which the relief was drawn
lines. Kogutowicz’s
using contour
son, Károly also
worked on the later editions of this map (Figure 4).

Figure 3. World map from the ‘Systematic Geographical Atlas’ of Gyula Kozma (1890)

336

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Later version of the ‘Physical Map of Hungary’ with contour lines from the ‘Map booklet for the 4th, 5th and 6th grades of Elementary
Schools in Budapest’ (1906)

The Hungarian geographical nomenclature used before
this atlas was characterized by a total confusion provoked
by arbitrary decisions taken to name the landforms. Jenő
Cholnoky made a meritorious work to systematize and meth-
odize the writing of geographic names of the Carpathian
Basin, which became definitive on the ‘Physical Map of
Hungary’.

In short, the publication of this atlas has been considered a
milestone in the history of the Hungarian school cartography.
After the extraordinary success of this atlas, Kogutowicz’s
company was contracted by the Ministry of Defence in
1900 to supply the military schools with atlases; this task
was accomplished in the same year. In 1901, the company
was reorganized as the Hungarian Geographical Institute
Co. The maps used in the school atlas also were the sources
for the publication of the first Hungarian atlas, ‘Complete
Atlas’, specifically designed for the general public. The first
edition was published in 1902 and had 68 main maps. It
included new topics such as vegetation and industrial pro-
duction; Cholnoky collaborated in themes such as population
and climatology (Márton, 2002), while Károly Kogutowicz
also collaborated as a young cartographer making maps for
this atlas.

In 1906, Gyula Kozma in cooperation with other pub-
lisher, Lajos Toldi, printed a new school atlas under the title
‘Illustrated Geographical Atlas for the Elementary Schools’.
This work was also a Hungarian product, without any map

adapted from foreign atlases, but citing Klinghammer
(2002): it was made with more good will than knowledge.
Jenő Cholnoky expressed his opinion in the Bulletin edited
by the Hungarian Geographical Society: Its maps are inaccur-
ate, erroneous and wrong, the pictures are tasteless and artless,
they do not match the cartographic representation. The reason
of this professional fiasco is that Kozma was neither a carto-
grapher nor a geographer. He had no enough professional
formation (nor collaborators with enough cartographic or
geographic knowledge) to create a totally new atlas.

This regrettable incident re-affirmed the leading role
played by Kogutowicz and his institute in the publication
of cartographic materials for schools. In 1906, Kogutowicz
made the ‘Map booklet for the 3rd grade of Elementary
Schools in Budapest’ (Figure 5) in collaboration with Béla
Ágotai (school principal), which was followed by another
similar workbook for 4th, 5th and 6th grades (Rúzsa, 2008).
Manó Kogutowicz deceased in 1908 and his son, Károly
inherited the direction of the company. Manó Kogutowicz
has been remembered as the most significant figure of the
Hungarian Cartography in the final years of the nineteenth
and at the beginning of the twentieth century. He was
awarded the Great Medal of the Millennia by the Hungarian
Government in 1896. In 1900, in the World Exhibition of
Paris, his products received the Golden Medal, which
also
brought him international
awarded a prize.

recognition; he was

A Brief Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases

337

Figure 5. Presenting the classroom and its top-plan view in the pages dedicated to the basic map concepts in the ‘Map booklet for the 3rd grade of
Elementary Schools in Budapest’ (extract)

The number of publications grew to 160 by 1912. The
school atlases produced by Kogutowicz were used during
the First World War too. After the end of the war and the
signing of the Treaty of Trianon, Hungary lost 72% of its ter-
ritory and its frontiers changed considerably. The maps of
Hungary in the school atlases needed to be re-worked
(updated), but this is another chapter of the more recent
history of Hungarian school cartography.

SOME EXAMPLES OF SOLUTIONS USED IN OLD

HUNGARIAN SCHOOL ATLASES

Manó Kogutowicz laid the foundations of the Hungarian
school cartographic traditions. His institute periodically re-
edited their school atlases, even enriching its content with
new maps, following the practice of those countries (like
Germany or the United States) that counted with a longer
tradition in this relatively young area of cartography. In the
period between 1890 and 1918, he created atlases with
appropriate content for the different grades and the different
types of schools as well as for the different regions within
the country. The content of three of his atlases are detailed
below:

. ‘Geographical School Atlas’ (1896): Basic map and astro-
nomical concepts; Budapest; Budapest and surroundings;
Hungary (physical map, two pages); Hungary (political
map, two pages); Austro-Hungarian Empire (physical
map); Austro-Hungarian Empire
(political map);
Europe (physical map); Europe (political map); Central
Europe
(Germany/physical map); Central Europe
(Germany/political map); Balkans; Apennine Peninsula;
France; Iberian Peninsula; Switzerland, Belgium, Nether-
lands, Luxembourg and Denmark; Great Britain and
Ireland; Scandinavia; Russia; Asia; Near East; South and
South East Asia; Palestine; Africa; America; United
States, Central America and West Indies; Australia and
Polynesia; The hemispheres; World map. (This
list of
maps comes from the 2nd revised and extended edition of the
atlas published in 1900).

. ‘Map booklet for the 4th, 5th and 6th grades of Elemen-
tary Schools in Budapest’ (1906): Illustrations (pages 1
to 6); Budapest and surroundings (Visegrád); Basic map
concepts (2 pages); Typical
landscapes of Hungary (2
pages); Hungary (physical map); Hungary (political
map); Fiume (current Rijeka, Croatia); Hungary and
Austria (political map); Europe (physical map); Europe

338

Table 1. Basic cartographical (normal font) and astronomical (italic font) concepts in three school atlases

Geographical School Atlas (1896, 2nd edition)

Map booklet for the 4th, 5th and 6th grades of
Elementary Schools in Budapest (1906)

Horizon, Sun’s culmination and cardinal points
Curvature of the Earth, parallels and meridians
Compass Rose
Latitude and longitude
Geographical location, map and graticule, cardinal

points on the map

Bird’s-eye view of a house, top-plan view, scale

reduction

scale reduction

Bird’s-eye view of a group of houses, top-plan view,

Map scale reduction (from a bird’s-eye view and

1: 1 000 000 to 1:4 000 000)
Small county map and its legend
Cross-section of the land surface (sea level, absolute
and relative depth and height, lowland, highland,
plan, hills, mountain)

The Solar System and the size of the eight planets compared

with the Sun

Orbit of the Moon in a year and monthly orbit of the Moon
Earth’s translation movement Solar and lunar eclipses

The shape of the Earth
Latitude and longitude, graticule of Earth
Geographical location
Climatic zones
Cross-section of the land surface (sea level, absolute and

relative depth and height, lowland, highland, plan, hills,
mountain)
Most characteristic forms of the Earth’s surface
Comparison of two Alps maps (1: 2 500 000 and

1: 5 000 000, hachure maps)

North America (1: 55 000 000, contour line map)
Size of the planets compared with the Sun
The apparent motion of the sky around the Earth

and the apparent motion of the Sun around the Earth

Constellations
Illumination of the Earth on June 21
Earth’s translation movement
Monthly orbit of the Moon
The Earth and the Moon
Lunar landscapes with craters

The Cartographic Journal

Geographical Atlas with a county
map for Elementary Schools
(1909)

The classroom and its top-plan

view

The reduction of size
Compass Rose
Curvature of the Earth
Orientation with the Big Dipper

and the North Star

Bird’s-eye view of a house, top-
plan view, scale reduction
Bird’s-eye view of a building, top-
plan view, scale reduction
Image and top-plan view of a

district in Budapest

(political map); Asia (physical map); Asia (political map);
Africa (physical map); Africa (political map); America
(physical map); America (political map); Australia; Hemi-
spheres; basic astronomical concepts; world map of colo-
nies and world traffic; illustrations (pages 31–36).

. ‘Geographical Atlas with a county map for Elementary
Schools’ (1909): Basic map concepts (3 pages); Budapest;
Europe; Hungary (physical map); Hungary (political
map, 2 pages); Hungary and Austria (political map);
Asia; Africa; America; Australia; Hemispheres; Basic geo-
graphic concepts; county map in annex. This atlas was the
successor of the series entitled ‘Small Atlas with a county
map for Elementary Schools’ started in 1896. This series
had a special characteristic: the users received an annexed
map of their county together with the atlas.

of this branch of cartography. Fortunately, by historical, pol-
itical and societal reasons, the German influence was also felt
in the new-born Hungarian school cartography. This influ-
ence can be divided into three cycles:

. First cycle: the positive impact was noticeable in the trans-
lation and adaptation of these products to the Hungarian
language, as mentioned in the first part of this article.
. Second cycle: Hungarian cartographers adapted some
maps of the atlases made in German-speaking countries
to include them in their own school atlases.

. Third cycle: Hungarian cartographers began to use the
solutions developed by German-speaking cartographers
in the maps fully made by themselves for Hungarian
school atlases.

Many of the school atlases produced in German-speaking
countries during the nineteenth century has been recognized
by later specialists as scientifically very good quality products

It can be affirmed that in general that extension and
appearance of the school atlases printed in Hungary were
much more modest than their counterparts in Germany

Figure 6. Extract of the physical map of America with hydrography in black from the ‘Map booklet for the 4th, 5th and 6th grades of Elementary
Schools in Budapest’

A Brief Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases

339

Table 2. Thematic inset maps used in three atlases made by Manó Kogutowicz

Geographical School Atlas (1896, 2nd edition)

Map booklet for the 4th, 5th and 6th grades of
Elementary Schools in Budapest (1906)

Geographical Atlas with a county map
for Elementary Schools (1909)

Hungary (political, 1:2 400 000) – railway stations of

Hungary (political, 1:2 400 000) – railway

Budapest (1:300 000)

Austro-Hungarian Empire (physical, 1:5 000 000) –

stations of Budapest (1:300 000)
Europe (physical, 1:25 000 000) – large

Salzkammergut (1:1 000 000) and Bocche di Cattaro
(1:1 000 000)

Europe (physical, 1:25 000 000) – precipitation and

structures, precipitation and drainage inset
maps

Europe (political, 1:25 000 000) – ethnographic

Europe (political, 1:25 000 000) – ethnographic and

Asia (physical, 1:50 000 000) – precipitation

and religion inset maps

and riverside inset maps

Asia (physical, 1:50 000 000) – riverside and political

Africa (physical, 1:50 000 000) – large

drainage inset maps

religion inset maps

inset maps

Europe (physical, 1:25 000 000) –
ethnographic and religion inset
maps

Hungary (political, 1:2 400 000) –
railway stations of Budapest
(1:300 000)

Asia (physical, 1:50 000 000) – religion

and political inset maps

Africa (physical, 1:50 000 000) –

political (1:90 000 000) inset map

Near East (physical, 1:25 000 000) – density of
population in Asia (1:120 000 000 inset map
Palestine – ‘The twelve tribes of Israel’ (1:4 425 000)

Africa (physical, 1:50 000 000) – political (1:90 000 000)

inset map

inset map

United States, Central America and Western Indies
(physical, 1:25 000 000) – density of population

Colonies and maritime traffic world map (1: 150 000 000)

– Major railways in Europe inset map

structures inset map

America (physical, 1:55 000 000) – large
structures inset map (1:200 000 000)
Colonies and maritime traffic world map

(1: 150 000 000) –rail and cable network,
isochronous map of the Earth

and Austria; by the end of the nineteenth century, however,
their quality was similar to those works that inspired them.
The influence exerted by the German-speaking school car-
tography on Hungarian school atlases can be resumed in
three specific areas:

. The presentation of basic map and astronomical concepts
. The use of thematic inset maps to expand and diversify the

information represented on main maps.

. The use of inset maps of their own country or region to
help the pupils to understand better the territorial differ-
ences with other faraway countries or regions.

The Hungarian school atlases produced from the middle of
the nineteenth century included basic map concepts, and the
atlases published by Kogutowicz’s institute were not excep-
tions. He considered it important to dedicate at least a page
to this topic in his atlases. Some basic concepts were pre-
sented in almost all atlases made by him (e.g. the bird’s-eye
and top-plan view of a house,
the scale reduction).
However, the more specific content and the number of
pages for presenting the topic could be different according
to the type of atlas and target school as shown in Table 1.

Other characteristic of his atlases was that in their consecu-
tive editions the reader found innovative cartographic sol-
utions. Kogutowicz did not avoid daring (and sometimes
questionable) solutions like changing the colour for the rep-
resentation of hydrographic elements from blue to black in
the interest of more accurate printing (Figure 6). He did
not merely adapt solutions from German-speaking cartogra-
phers, but consulted other internationally recognized sources
too. One of the results of this openness to other cartographic
schools was the adaptation of the hypsometric scale devel-
oped by the Bartholomew firm in those years for its use in
the ‘Physical Map of Hungary’.

Kogutowicz also began to use consistently small inset maps
on the corners of the main maps to represent additional

themes as shown in Table 2. He included thematic maps as
inset maps first in Hungary, representing topics such as eth-
nography, religions or precipitation (Figure 7). He was also
the first cartographer to add a one-page thematic world
map to his school atlases, which was included in the ‘Geo-
graphical School Atlas’ of 1896; this map combined the rep-
resentation of colonies (differentiating them by colours) and
the maritime traffic (duration of journey in days between
continents).

Kogutowicz also took from German-speaking atlases a
very easy and practical solution to point out the territorial
differences between Hungary and countries or territories
placed far away from Europe, as well as to highlight the dis-
tinctness caused by the scales of maps. A small inset map of
Hungary was placed in a corner of the main map, using the
same scale for both maps. In this way the pupils had an
approximate idea of the real dimension of the territories rep-
resented on the main map in relation to the extension of their
country at the same scale (Figure 8). This method was used
very often in German-speaking school cartography, but was
not widespread in other European countries and continents.
This statement was confirmed after the study of the school
atlases stored on the web-based David Rumsey Collection
(Cartographic Associates, 2000–2016). Altogether 1648
images were found after a search with the ‘school’ keyword
in this period and 2033 images after looking for ‘school
atlas’. Only three European atlases (two German and one
Swiss) were found, which used this solution. A similar
search was also developed in the Library of the Department
of Cartography and Geoinformatics at Eötvös Loránd
University and only one school atlas was found: the ‘Atlas
de Géographie Physique, Politique et Historique’ published in
Belgium in 1908, as seen in Figure 8.

In his atlases the presentation of basic concepts is mainly
based on illustrations, and he also used illustrations, photos,
images, etc. on some interior pages of an atlas. He never
used them within the maps, and the number of pages

340

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. Thematic inset maps from atlases published by Kogutowicz

including illustrations was always much smaller than the
number of pages with maps. At most, he placed images
beside a specific map on the same page, which can be observed
on the two pages occupied by the political map of Hungary
(Figure 9) in his ‘Geographical School Atlas’ of 1896.

CONCLUSIONS

The authors had to limit this paper only to a brief back-
ground to the publication of geographical school atlases
by the Hungarian Geographical Institute led by Manó
Kogutowicz and his son, Károly. Their cartographic pro-
duction was much wider, covering virtually the entire spec-
trum of materials for the supporting of teaching activities.
Before he
institute, Manó Kogutowicz
worked on a series of county wall maps of Hungary and
completed a total of 35 by 1890. The Hungarian Geo-
graphical Institute also produced numerous wall maps for

founded his

the diameter of

schools. The institute also supplied the Hungarian edu-
institutions with Earth globes. Márton (2008)
cational
the globes was 25.5 or
specified that
them counted with some special
51 cm and some of
details, as a small compass built into the footpad of a
25.5 cm globe made in 1910. His first known globe is
dated to 1896, which had several editions (1897, 1901,
1905, 1908 and 1910). Finally, we cannot forget that
the
Kogutowicz
schools: one of the more popular ones was the ‘Historical
Atlas for Secondary Schools’ published in 1898.

also published historical

atlases

for

Resuming, Kogutowicz Manó and his institute produced
37 physical wall maps (and about 24 wall maps of counties),
13 historical world maps and ten Hungarian historical wall
maps, seven physical and three historical school atlases
(with numerous editions), as well as a series of outline
maps and globes for schools (Klinghammer, 2001). The
Hungarian Geographical Institute remained in the history
of the Hungarian school cartography as a pioneer leading

A Brief Retrospection on Hungarian School Atlases

341

Figure 8. Examples from Kogutowicz’s atlases and foreign atlases. From top left: Australia (Kogutowicz’s ‘Geographical Atlas with a county map for
Elementary Schools’, 1909); United States, Central America and West Indias (Kogutowicz’s ‘Geographical School Atlas’, 2nd edition); United States,
Mexico, Central America and West Indias (Debes’ ‘School Atlas’, Germany, 1912) and Physical Africa (Alexis’s ‘Atlas of Physical, Political and Historical
Geography’, Belgium, 1908)

Figure 9.

Images with the political map of Hungary from the ‘Geographical School Atlas’ (extract)

342

institution, which marked the guidelines for those cartogra-
phers who follow or in the future will follow the educative
activity developed by Kogutowicz and his colleagues.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

José Jesús Reyes Nunez is Associate
Professor at Eötvös Loránd University
in Budapest, Hungary. His
research
interests lie in cartography for children
(teaching of cartographic concepts and
map use in Elementary and Secondary
Schools), digital and GIS cartography,
Web cartography and geovisualization.
Author of more than 20 articles in scientific publications
and more than 50 papers in different events, he has collabo-
rated as cartographer in more than 40 textbooks and atlases.
He is responsible for the organization of the Barbara Petch-
enik Map Competition in Hungary from 1999, being Presi-
dent of the International Jury in 2005 and 2007. He was
Chair of the ICA (International Cartographic Association)
Commission on Cartography and Children from 2007 to
2015 and is currently Vice-Chair of the same Commission.
The ICA awarded him with the Diploma for Outstanding
Services to the ICA in 2015.

The Cartographic Journal

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7900-

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6080-

ORCID

István Klinghammer
6530
José Jesús Reyes Nuñez
8667

REFERENCES

Cartography Associates.

(2000–2016). David Rumsey collection.
[online]. Accessed 2 October 2016, http://www.davidrumsey.com/
Klinghammer, I. (2001). A magyar térképészet a kezdetektől napjainkig.
[pdf]. Accessed 27 September 2016, http://lazarus.elte.hu/hun/
tanterv/c57/cikk1.pdf

Klinghammer, I. (2002). ‘A földrajzi szemléltetés korai története - Iskolai
térképek, atlaszok, föld- és éggömbök az egykori magyar iskolákban’,
Geodézia és Kartográfia, 54(12), pp. 1–13.

Márton, M. (2002). Atlaszkartográfia. [online]. Accessed 27 September
2016, http://lazarus.elte.hu/hun/dolgozo/marton/atlasz/04b.htm
Márton, M. (2008). Kogutowicz Manó glóbuszai: Glóbusztérképek
gyu˝jteményekben.
és
[online]. Accessed 28 September 2016, http://slideplayer.hu/slide/
2229480/

különböző

Peragovics, F. (2013). Az első töri atlasz. [online]. Accessed 10 October
http://pera-graner.blogspot.hu/2013/10/az-elso-tori-atlasz.

állványra

gömbök

szerelt

2016,
html

Ruzsa, Á. (2008). Magyar iskolai földrajzi atlaszok tematikus térképeinek
vizsgálata, MSc thesis. [pdf]. Accessed 2 October 2016, http://
lazarus.elte.hu/hun/digkonyv/szakdolg/ruzsa/ruzsa.pdf

