INT. J. GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE
VOL. 18, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2004, 769–787

Research Article

GIS and genetic algorithms for HAZMAT route planning with
security considerations

BO HUANG, RUEY LONG CHEU
Department of Civil Engineering, National University of Singapore,
10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 119260; e-mail: cvehb@nus.edu.sg

and YONG SENG LIEW
Singapore Land Authority, 8 Shenton Way, #26-01 Temasek Tower,
Singapore 068811

(Received 24 July 2003; accepted 13 February 2004 )

Abstract. Singapore is the third largest oil-reﬁning centre in the world, with a
large petrochemical hub located at Jurong Island. In view of the increasing
concern for transportation security, there is an urgent need to improve the way
trucks carrying hazardous materials (HAZMATs) are being routed on urban
and suburban road networks. Routing of such vehicles should not only ensure
the safety of travelers in the network but also consider the risk of the HAZMAT
being used as weapon of mass destruction. This paper explores a novel approach
to evaluating the risk of HAZMAT transportation by integrating Geographic
Information Systems (GISs) and Genetic Algorithms (GAs). A set of evaluation
criteria that are used to route the HAZMAT vehicles was identiﬁed and assessed.
The criteria considered are related to safety, costs and, more importantly,
security. A GIS was employed to quantify the factors on each link in the
network that contribute to the evaluation criteria for a possible route, while a
GA was applied to efﬁciently determine the weights of the different factors in the
hierarchical form, allowing for the computation of the relative total costs of the
alternate routes. Therefore, each route can be quantiﬁed by a generalized cost
function from which the suitability of the routes for HAZMAT transportation
can be compared. The proposed route evaluation method was demonstrated on a
typical portion of the road network in Singapore.

1.

Introduction
Security issues have received increased attention after the terrorist attacks in
New York and Washington, DC on September 11, 2001. With this heightened
awareness, policy-makers are taking steps to improve the security of transportation
systems. Trucks transporting hazardous materials (HAZMATs) may be a form of
weapon of mass destruction if abused by terrorists (TRB 2002); hence, a more
comprehensive evaluation of their route planning is required to reﬂect the current
shift in the emphasis towards transportation security.

Route planning for trucks carrying HAZMATs has been in practice for decades.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810410001705307

770

B. Huang et al.

Traditionally, the main considerations include cost, safety in terms of risk of vehicle
collision and potential exposure of
the public to the HAZMAT substances
(Lepofsky and Abkowitz 1993, Turnquist and List 1993). Singapore is a small
nation with a high population density and is the world’s third largest oil-reﬁning
centre, behind Rotterdam and Houston. Owing to land constraints, petrochemical
vehicles are bound to pass through highly populated areas from Jurong Island, the
petrochemical hub, to the rest of the country. The destinations include not only
petrochemical-speciﬁc industries and airports but also the various petrol or gasoline
stations spread across the island, usually within or in close proximity to populated
areas.

Transportation of HAZMATs in Singapore is regulated by the National
Environment Agency’s (NEA) Pollution Control Department and the Singapore
Civil Defence Force (SCDF). The control is effected through the Environmental
Pollution Control (Hazardous Substances) Regulations under the Environmental
Pollution Control Act (GoS 2002), as well as the Fire Safety Act (GoS 2000). The
use of certain types of heavy vehicle (measured by the maximum laden weight) and
the goods being transported in public roads is also subject to additional regulations
set forth by the Land Transport Authority (LTA), according to the Road Trafﬁc
Act (GoS 1997). This Act requires the owners to indemnify the LTA in respect of
any damages that may be caused to any road or bridge by the movement of such
vehicles.

in addition to cost,

The existing regulations specify the allowable spots or links to be exact, rather
than the approved routes. Given a set of alternate routes between an origin and a
destination, the quantitative means of evaluating the possible routes remains
unknown. The rationale for deeming a link prohibited is also not made known to
the public. This research attempts to identify a set of evaluation criteria that can be
used to route trucks carrying HAZMATs, incorporating factors addressing the
safety and exposure. A Geographical
security aspect,
Information System (GIS) is used as a tool to quantify the identiﬁed routing
criteria, and a Genetic Algorithm (GA) is applied to efﬁciently determine the
weights of two levels of factors involved in each of the criteria. Eventually, the main
objective is to quantify each alternate route by a unique generalized cost to
determine its suitability for HAZMAT transportation, based on current conditions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the
relevant literature involving HAZMAT transportation. Section 3 introduces our
proposed methodology. Then, Section 4 describes in more detail the GIS analysis,
the determination of weights using the GA and the results. Finally, Section 5
provides our concluding remarks.

2. Route planning of hazardous material transportation

is

responsible

HAZMAT route planning has been a popular area of research in the United
States. The Ofﬁce of Highway Safety under Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA)
for HAZMAT
transportation. Its publication (FHWA 1994) outlines the routing process involving
HAZMATs. In addition to the exposed population, this guide also identiﬁes factors
such as the existence of facilities such as schools, hospitals, ﬁre stations and
reservoirs, which may inﬂuence a decision among alternative routes that may
otherwise present a similar risk. Emergency response capabilities can be a critical

regulating routing procedures

for

HAZMAT route planning

771

consideration in evaluating the consequences of an accident resulting in a release of
HATMATs. The guide also states that the evaluation of the likelihood of burden
on commerce is an intrinsic part of the selection process. In addition, the Level of
Service (LOS) of the highway collectively affects travel time, travel speed, safety
and also increases the probability of release accidents.

The above factors were evidently used by Turnquist and List (1993). They
concurred that multiple objectives must be incorporated in the analysis. They
argued that the existence of multiple criteria meant that it was usually not possible
to identify a single most preferred route between a given origin and destination.
Therefore, the focus should be on ﬁnding a set of non-dominated routes which
represents the trade-offs explicitly. In their analysis, they focused on the following
measures, namely operating cost, accident rate, population exposed and the number
of schools in the exposure area.

Abkowitz and Cheng (1988) proposed a risk/cost framework for optimizing
HAZMAT routing. In assessing the risks involved, they included the effects of
human exposure to a dose of chemicals, to yield human health risk. List and
Mirchandani (1991) introduced an integrated multi-objective model for routing and
storing HAZMAT wastes. In addition to risk and cost, they also considered risk
equity, which is measured as the maximum risk per unit population. Total risk,
however, is the sum of all zonal risks from transportation or treatment.

Erhan and Verter (1998) explored the different models of risk. The traditional
deﬁnition of risk is the product of both the probability and the consequence of the
undesirable event. They cited unit road segment risk, edge risk and path risk as
models of risk using the traditional deﬁnition. They also cited alternative risk
models involving perceived risk, the disutility of risk and conditional risk. They
suggested that the risk-minimization problem is a bicriterion optimization problem:
one of minimizing incident probability and population exposure. The consideration
of other criteria is also possible. As long as each criterion is additive to its edge
attributes, the weighting method can be used to generate a subset of efﬁcient points.
Goh et al. (1995) introduced a methodology for the risk analysis of hazardous
chemical transportation in Singapore. A case study involving the transportation of
Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas (LPG) in Singapore was reported, which addressed the
modelling of three hazard scenarios: instantaneous release, medium spill and small
spill. Risk assessment was also done for the off-road population and the road users.
Existing literature shows that the use of GISs to aid HAZMAT route planning
is not new. Lepofsky and Abkowitz (1993) demonstrated that GISs can be used
to integrate plume representation with population data and transport maps to
estimate consequences more effectively. They cited a case study of rocket-fuel
transportation in California. Using combinations of
routing criteria (e.g.
population exposure, accident likelihood and environmentally sensitive areas) in
a single analysis with varying weights on their importance, one can examine the
trade-offs between various alternatives. The GIS system allowed for
the
computation of the average emergency response time to any segment in the state
highway network. The GIS could also determine the most efﬁcient method for
evacuation and determining the most efﬁcient way to reroute trafﬁc.

Souletrette and Sathisan (1994) applied GISs

in the transportation of
radioactive materials. Like HAZMAT routing, key inputs include demographics,
environmental features and transportation system characteristics. They identiﬁed

772

B. Huang et al.

three methodologies, namely, comparative studies, worst-case assessment and
probabilistic risk assessment. Brainard et al. (1996) demonstrated the use of GIS to
route aqueous waste cargoes using four methods, namely: (1) routing by shortest
time only; (2) routing by motorway and dual-carriageway encouragement; (3)
routing to avoid population; and (4) routing to avoid accidents. The ﬁrst two
methods were used to identify the most probable routes used by tanker drivers to
deliver their consignments. The next two methods were risk-reducing scenarios.
Groundwater vulnerability was also considered in their study.

The vast collection of literature involving HAZMAT transportation reveals that
the main considerations are exposure and accident
likelihood. This is also
consistent with the current SCDF practice of avoiding densely populated areas in
Singapore. Brainard et al.’s consideration of groundwater vulnerability is also taken
by the SCDF. The need to include security considerations has only recently gained
greater attention. Abkowitz (2002) points out that transportation risk assessment
must accommodate terrorism scenarios that have previously been considered so
unlikely to warrant risk-management assessment. Likewise, emergency response
capabilities must be sufﬁcient to handle impacts beyond what was previously
imaginable in terms of number of casualties and the required resources.

Recently, Srinivasan (2002) suggests a framework for network-wide security and
vulnerability assessment. He identiﬁes the factors that affect link-level vulnerability
which include network attributes, threat attributes, ﬂow attributes and neighbour-
hood attributes. A thorough vulnerability assessment is described in AASHTO
(2002). It describes six steps for conducting a vulnerability assessment. They are (1)
identify critical assets; (2) assess vulnerabilities; (3) assess consequences; (4) identify
countermeasures; (5) estimate countermeasures cost; and (6) review operational
security planning. Therefore, it is apparent that there has been a shift in paradigm
towards concerns in security threat and vulnerability, and integrating security
considerations into the overall framework of HAZMATs transportation.

GA is a form of randomized-search optimization method mimicking the natural
evolutionary process of natural selection, or the ‘survival of the ﬁttest’ (Goldberg
1989). A more detailed description of GAs can be found in a later section. While
Xiao et al. (2002) employed GAs to generate alternatives for multi-objective site
search problems, the combined use of a GIS and a GA is not widespread, especially
in transportation and environmental studies. Two studies were found in the review
of the use of such hybrid technique. Matthews et al. (2000) applied GAs in rural
land-use optimization. The GIS provided spatial data and spatial analysis. The GA
was the core of an iterative system, generating alternative land-use plans in a
context set by the land manager. Vink and Schot (2000) developed a computer-
based procedure for multiple-objective optimization of drinking-water production
by combining a transport optimization procedure with a GA. The approach was
implemented in a GIS-based decision support system to handle all spatial relations
efﬁciently and to offer decision-makers access to the developed method. To the best
of our knowledge, no comprehensive studies involving the use of a GIS and a GA
have been attempted before in the ﬁeld of HAZMAT route planning.

3. Methodology

A number of

evaluation factors have been modiﬁed from those
recommended by FHWA (1994) and GoS (2002). Factors were added or adapted

the

HAZMAT route planning

773

to account for security. A scoring system was devised by classifying the identiﬁed
factors, each being given a score ranging from 1 to 5. Relevant data were gathered
and input into the GIS database. The scores can be considered as substitutes to
actual population counts or accident probabilities required in the traditional risk
analysis. Scores are a better surrogate to actual accident probabilities, which require
accident-rate data that are often insufﬁcient or unavailable. Generally, at least three
years of truck accident data are preferable to determine accident rates (FHWA
1994).

The relative importance of the respective criteria, together with their factors,
was then determined using a GA. The output of the GA is a set of weights
representing their relative importance. The cumulative weights and scores that
represent a generalized cost of each route are given by:

nc
Generalized cost of route R~ X
c~1

 

 

ncf
X

cf ~1

wc

wcf scf

!

!

ð1Þ

where c~criteria; nc~number of criteria; wc~weight of criteria c; cf~factor under
criteria c; ncf~number of factors under criteria c; wcf~weight of factor f under
criteria c; scf~score of factor f under criteria c. The aim of our approach is to
ensure that the recommended route has the lowest (or one of the lowest) generalized
cost.

To test the feasibility of the proposed evaluation method and criteria used, an
area of approximately 3 km by 3 km in Singapore was chosen. This encompasses
Clementi Road, West Coast Road and the National University of Singapore (NUS)
campus as illustrated in ﬁgure 1. In order to compare with the SCDF’s approved
routes comprehensively, three origin–destination (O–D) pairs were chosen, namely,
Routes 1, 8 and 15. In addition, a set of six alternative routes that deviate from
each of the three approved routes, respectively, were chosen for comparison.

By taking cost, safety and security into consideration, ﬁve criteria have been

identiﬁed:

1. Exposure. The population that is exposed, in the event of a chemical release
or explosion, is represented by the population density of the surrounding
land use. Exposed population is a key factor in determining the consequences
of a chemical release in risk analysis.

2. Socio-economic impact. This factor accounts for the direct and indirect costs
incurred from damages resulting from a HAZMAT accident, including a
terrorist attack.

3. Risks of hijack. The population density of the surrounding areas indicates the
ease which a hijack can take place. It is assumed that a hijack is more likely
to occur along a deserted stretch of road.

4. Trafﬁc conditions. The conditions of trafﬁc such as speed and ﬂow affect
travel time, road safety and operating costs. Congestion may also lead to a
higher risk of accidents.

5. Emergency response. Emergency response capabilities can be a critical
consideration in evaluating the consequences of an incident leading to a
chemical release or explosion. The locations of
the SCDF emergency
response teams as well as proximity to hospitals contribute to rescue
efﬁciency.

774

B. Huang et al.

Figure 1. Area of study and SCDF Route 8 and its six alternative routes.

4. Analysis using GIS

The use of GISs in vehicle route planning offers a number of advantages over
traditional methods. Using maps alone to determine impact area and to ﬁnd
features are tedious and time-consuming. GIS allows the addition of relevant layers
that can be used for such spatial analyses. GISs offer database capabilities that can
handle attribute data. Attribute queries are easy and relatively accurate. This
project uses ArcGIS (ESRI 1996) as the GIS platform to perform route analysis.
After the identiﬁcation of the criteria, a number of factors that are subsets of
each criterion were identiﬁed. These factors are quantiﬁable and each factor was
assigned a numerical score ranging from 1 to 5, depending on the attribute value.
Table 1 shows a fragment of the scoring system for the attributes.

Table 1. Scoring system for factors.

Emergency response

1

2

3

4

5

Nearby ﬁre station
Nearby police
Nearby hospitals
Nearby army camps
Network redundancy

0–0.5 km
0–0.5 km
0–1 km
0–0.5 km
–

0.5–1 km
0.5–1 km
1–2 km
0.5–1 km
–

1–1.5 km
1–1.5 km
2–3 km
1–1.5 km
3 or more lanes

1.5–2 km w2 km
1.5–2 km w2 km
3–4 km w4 km
1.5–2 km w2 km
1 lane
2 lanes

HAZMAT route planning

775

4.1. Exposure

In ArcGIS, a buffer zone is created to simulate the potential impact area. The
potential impact zone for ﬂammable or combustible hazardous materials was taken as
0.8 km in all directions (FHWA 1994). Therefore, a buffer of 0.8 km width was
generated for each of the 21 routes (including the recommended route). Figure 2 shows
the buffer zone of 0.8 km on both sides of the West Coast Highway. As the exposed
population was the main concern, the features taken include the type of residential land
industrial areas, number of school
use, commercial and government buildings,
buildings and Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) stations. Through ArcGIS, the appropriate
attributes were queried and the respective scores calculated.

4.2. Socio-economic impact

Based on the same buffer zones or impact area, the potential damage of a
HAZMAT incident may be estimated based on the physical damage to the

Figure 2. ArcGIS generating buffer zones.

776

B. Huang et al.

surrounding infrastructure. This may lead to negative socio-economic conse-
quences. The infrastructure under this consideration included the residential
housing, commercial and industrial buildings, waterbodies, petrol/gasoline stations,
bridges and major transportation terminals (e.g. mass rapid transit stations).

Routes involving tunnels were avoided. This is because tunnels are conﬁned
spaces, and any release or explosions within a tunnel will
lead to great
complications in the rescue effort. Since tunnels are often critical transportation
links, they are best avoided during the routing process (Polzin 2002).

4.3. Risks of hijack

Trucks may potentially be hijacked in sparsely populated areas. Areas with
thick foliage provide good cover and may be used as hiding places for terrorists to
ambush the trucks. Therefore, these two attributes were given higher scores that
deem them undesirable.

4.4. Trafﬁc conditions

Trafﬁc density, ﬂow or volume, average

signalized
intersections and the accident frequency are important considerations for cost,
safety and security. A high trafﬁc density implies that a higher population of road
users will be exposed to released chemicals or an explosion.

speed, number of

A high average speed leads to a shorter travel time. However, it also leads to a
higher possibility of accidents and makes it more difﬁcult for police interdiction
(Luedtke and White 2002).

The number of signalized intersections may also aid in police interdiction, since
the trafﬁc ﬂow may impede a rogue driver at a rate light. However, a higher
number of signalized intersections translates to a longer time taken for the trip and,
hence, higher costs.

4.5. Emergency response

The proximity of the routes from a particular location or link to a ﬁre station
and/or hospital improves the incident response time in rescue operations. Nearby
police stations and military bases may also respond to any request for interdiction
of rogue driver or road blockage. Their presence in the vicinity may also serve as a
deterrent to possible terrorist activity. Figure 3 shows the locational inﬂuence of a
hospital.

5. Determination of weights using genetic algorithms

The generalized cost is a weighted sum of the scores of the criteria and factors
under each criterion (equation (1)). However, as mentioned before, to what extent
and the relative importance the approving agency takes each criterion and factor
into consideration are unknown. Therefore, a method of determining the weights
for the ﬁve main criteria under consideration, and their respective factors, has to be
developed.

The use of GAs proves suitable in this case. GAs are directed random search
techniques used to look for parameters that provide a good solution to a problem.
GAs are a form of natural optimization method. Optimization is the process of
adjusting the inputs to, or the characteristics of, a device, mathematical process or

HAZMAT route planning

777

Figure 3. Buffer radiating from a hospital.

experiment to ﬁnd the minimum or maximum output or result (Goldberg 1989). In
this problem, the weights used in equation (1) were optimized. The inputs are scores
of the factors that made up the cost function, and the objective is to minimize the
generalized cost.

A population of strings, representing solutions to a speciﬁed problem,
is
maintained by the GA. In GA terms, a candidate solution is often referred to as a
chromosome or string, which is a sequence of encoded numbers. This is commonly
referred to as a bit string if the numbers are binary encoded.

The GA then iteratively creates new populations from the old by ranking the
strings and interbreeding the ﬁttest to create new strings, which are ideally closer to
the optimum solution to the problem. In each generation, the GA creates a set of
strings from the bits and pieces of the previous strings, occasionally adding random
new data (mutation) to keep the population from stagnating. The end result is a
search strategy that is tailored for vast, complex, multimodal search spaces.

778

B. Huang et al.

The idea of ‘survival of the ﬁttest’ is of great importance to genetic algorithms.
GAs use what is termed as a ‘ﬁtness function’ in order to select the ﬁttest string that
will be used to create a new, and conceivably better, population of strings. The
ﬁtness function takes a string and assigns a relative ﬁtness value to the string.
The method by which it does this and the nature of the ﬁtness value do not matter.
The only thing that the ﬁtness function must do is to rank the strings in some way
by producing the ﬁtness value. These values are then used to select the ﬁttest
strings. The concept of a ﬁtness function is, in fact, a particular instance of a more
general Artiﬁcial Intelligence concept, the objective function.

The implementation stages of GAs in general are summarized in ﬁgure 4. Two

optimization methods were used to determine the weights:

Method 1:

Minimum
½

3

(cid:1)~ X
cd~1

 

nc
X

 

!

!

wc

wcf scf r

ncf
X

cf ~1

where

Wc~1;

wcf ~1

nc
X

c~1

c~1

ncf
X

cf ~1

ð2Þ

Figure 4. General scheme of a genetic algorithm.

HAZMAT route planning

Method 2:

Maximum
½

3

(cid:1)~ X
cd~1

 

nc
X

 

wc

ncf
X

cf ~1

!

!

(cid:1)
wcf scf a

{scf r

(cid:2)

where

Wc~1;

wcf ~1

nc
X

c~1

c~1

ncf
X

cf ~1

779

ð3Þ

where c~criteria; nc~number of criteria; wc~weight of criteria c; cf~factor under
criteria c; ncf~number of factors under criteria c; wcf~weight of factor f under
criteria c; scf~score of factor f under criteria c (subscripts a and r depict alternative
routes and their corresponding approved routes, respectively); cd~approved route.
The minimization process in equation (2) is based on the assumption that the
three approved routes would incur the least costs. Therefore, just by minimizing the
three costs, the most optimum set of weights may be derived. Equation (3)
optimizes the differences between the costs of other routes compared with the
approved routes. By maximizing the difference, this should ultimately cause the
approved routes to incur the least costs. The GA programs used in this study were
coded in Visual Czz and run on a Pentium IV PC.

The nature of the problem can be represented by a hierarchical tree. Table 2 is
the criteria and factors, and ﬁgure 5 shows a hierarchical
a detailed list of
representation of the problem. In our problem, the ﬁrst level of consideration is the
ﬁve criteria. The weights determined for each criterion, wc, represent both the
global and local weights. The next level of the hierarchy consists of the factors. The
GA determined the local weights of all the factors, i.e. wcf. The global weight of

Table 2. Detailed list of criteria and factors.

Criteria

1. Exposure

2. Socio-Economic Impact

3. Risks of Hijack

4. Trafﬁc Conditions

5. Emergency Response

Factors

. Type of residence (A1)
. Commercial and government buildings (A2)
. Industrial buildings (A3)
. Schools and tertiary institutions (A4)
. Mass Rapid Transit stations (A5)
. Type of residence (B1)
. Commercial and government buildings (B2)
. Industrial buildings (B3)
. Waterbodies (B4)
. Petrol/gas stations (B5)
. Bridges (B6)
. Mass Rapid Transit stations (B7)
. Population density (C1)
. Vegetation/foliage cover (C2)
. Trafﬁc density (D1)
. Trafﬁc speed (D2)
. Number of signalized junctions (D3)
. Accident frequency (D4)
. Proximity to ﬁre stations (E1)
. Proximity to police stations (E2)
. Proximity to army camps (E3)
. Proximity to hospitals (E4)
. Network redundancy (E5)

780

B. Huang et al.

Figure 5. Simpliﬁed hierarchical representation of problem.

each factor, Wcf ’, is deﬁned by equation (4). Therefore, the weight of a criterion is
essentially the sum of the global weights of the factors under it, as shown in
equation (5):

W 0
cf

~wc|wcf

ncf

wc~ X
cf ~1

wcf

ð4Þ

ð5Þ

It is clear that the objective functions of the two methods are modiﬁcations of the
cost functions as stated earlier. Owing to the large number of unknown parameters,
i.e. the 31 weights to be determined, each optimization was done in two stages. The
ﬁrst stage was the unconstrained stage. Optimization was done only with the upper
and lower bounds allowable for the weight of each factor. The weights obtained for
the factors were then normalized to fulﬁl the second constraint, before the second
stage was carried out. Only the weights of the ﬁve criteria were left to be determined
in the second stage (known as the constrained stage).

In both cases, the chromosome string encoding was done using real numbers.
Figure 6 illustrates a simple GA using real number encoding. For the unconstrained
stage, a population size of 1200 was chosen, for a total of 8000 generations. As for
the constrained stage, the population size was set as 500, and a total of 8000
generations were executed.

Tournament selection was used to select parents for breeding, with a two-point
crossover of 0.8 probability applied to each pair of selected parents. This means
that there was an 80% chance of a crossover at the randomly chosen point. At each
generation, each bit of the genotype of every solution can be mutated (i.e. the NOT
operator is applied to that bit), with a 0.02 probability of mutation. The role of
mutation is to provide genetic diversity. However, the mutation probability was
kept small so as not to cause a big disruption in the evolution of solutions by
the end of every
reproduction. Elitism was chosen at 10, meaning that at

HAZMAT route planning

781

Figure 6. Simple example of a real number GA.

generation, the top 10 solutions are stored and used in the next generation without
modiﬁcations. Elitism can greatly enhance the performance of the algorithm,
because it ensures that the best solutions found are not lost. The maximization
process is represented graphically in ﬁgure 7 and the minimization process by
ﬁgure 8.

782

B. Huang et al.

Figure 7. Graphical representation of the maximization process.

Figure 8. Graphical representation of the minimization process.

HAZMAT route planning

783

However, given nine choices for each factor’s weight (i.e. 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, …, 0.9),
ﬁve factors on the upper level and 19 sub-factors on the lower level,
the
permutations in the enumeration method could be 924. In this sense, the GA is
much more efﬁcient.

6. Results

Based on the derived weights, the costs of the alternative routes can then be
evaluated, using equation (1) to determine their relative competitiveness. We will
ﬁrst compare the costs considering each of the ﬁve criteria ﬁrst, before comparing
the overall costs as determined by equation (1).

6.1. Exposure

In considering exposure alone, the approved Route 8 has the lowest cost
regardless of whether the weights obtained from maximization or minimization
it has a cost of 2.20 using the
processes were used. As shown in ﬁgure 9,
minimization and 2.24 using maximization. Likewise, the other two approved
routes, Routes 1 and 15, incur relatively low costs. It can be concluded that the
approved routes are consistent in minimizing the exposure or the consequences as a
result of a HAZMAT release.

6.2. Socio-economic impact

Route 8 also has the least cost considering socio-economic impact alone for
both optimization processes. It has a cost of 2.31 after minimization and 2.63 after

Figure 9. Costs of routes considering exposure only.

784

B. Huang et al.

maximization. Routes 1 and 15 also have low costs in comparison with their
corresponding alternatives. In summary, the three approved routes do well to
reduce the socio-economic impact that may potentially arise due to an accident.

6.3. Risks of hijack

Among all the routes, Route 21 has the least cost of hijack (1.61) based on
minimization of the overall generalized cost. Approved Routes 1, 8 and 15 have
relatively high costs of hijack. It can be deduced that as the current practice does
not take the risk of hijack into much consideration, alternative routes may be more
suitable in reducing the risk of hijack.

6.4. Trafﬁc conditions

When considering trafﬁc conditions alone, the least-cost route is alternative
Route 21. Routes 6 and 14 are the least-cost alternatives to approved Routes 1 and
8, respectively. The approved routes are ranked in the middle among all
alternatives. This may imply that trafﬁc conditions are currently not a main
consideration in the selection of the approved routes.

6.5. Emergency

Based on emergency response alone, Route 18 has the least costs at 3.00 and
3.65, respectively. It has the least cost because it passes by the vicinity of the only
hospital, ﬁre station and police station in the area. The corresponding approved
Route 15 has a relatively higher cost. The other two approved routes are found to
have rather high costs, although they have comparable costs to their corresponding
alternatives. It can be concluded that emergency was not a main priority in
designating the recommended route.

6.6. Overall cost

The overall costs are summarized in ﬁgure 10. The recommended routes have
the least costs due to both optimization methods. Based on the weights determined
for the ﬁve criteria, this further suggests that the main considerations are exposure
and socio-economic impact. The relatively low weights obtained for the security
considerations, i.e. risk of hijack and emergency response, suggest that if they were
to be given more substantial attention, the current approved routes may no longer
be optimal. In such a situation, a review of the recommended routes may be
warranted.

7. Conclusions

The use of GIS allowed for the factors to be quantiﬁed so that the right score
could be given efﬁciently. However, the drawbacks include the high dependency of
the results upon the quality and consistency of the input data in the GIS database.
This can be minimized by using the most reliable data sources available and
minimizing arbitrary assumptions. Highly accurate trafﬁc data obtained from
surveys would be time-consuming and expensive and potentially become out of date
quickly (Brainard et al. 1996). Although the study site is relatively small, the
criteria, factors and attributes used in this study are deemed representative, and the
objective is met with reasonable results.

HAZMAT route planning

785

Figure 10. Overall costs of routes considering all the factors.

A GA was applied successfully to determine the weights of the criteria and
factors in the complex hierarchical form. This gives an insight to the extent of the
considerations that had been used by the government agency in approving routes
that are suitable for transporting HAZMATs.

The results show that the current recommended routes are most effective if the
main considerations are exposure and socio-economic impact, which is believed to
be common practice before September 11, 2001. However, with the raging war
against terrorism and the need to step up security measures, these routes may no
longer be the best routes available. Based on the same cost functions and changing
the weights to give more emphasis on the security aspects, viz. risk of hijack and
emergency response, the more optimal routes that are relevant today can then be
determined. Therefore, a possible area of future research is to determine the best
routes that are not only safe to use, but also secure. New constraints can be added
to the weight search process by the GA to input the order of preference for the
various criteria. This could be done by the policy-makers, and they can decide on
whether emergency response is more important than socio-economic impact, for
example.

In addition, the methodology used can be extended to cover a much wider
extent of the road network in Singapore. This will require more extensive data
collection to ensure that
the GIS database is accurate and up to date.
Reclassiﬁcation of the scoring system is necessary to ensure that the appropriate
score will be given corresponding to the extent of study. The underlying
methodology, however,
the methodology offers
remains unchanged. Hence,
ﬂexibility regardless of the extent of study.

786

B. Huang et al.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded by National University of Singapore under Grant No.
R-264-000-133-112 and The Logistics Institute–Asia Paciﬁc under Grant No. R-
264-000-150-305. Their support is gratefully acknowledged.

References
AASHTO, 2002, A Guide to Highway Vulnerability Assessment

for Critical Asset
Identiﬁcation and Protection. National Cooperative Highway Research Program
Project 20-07/Task 151B, American Association of State Highway and Transporta-
tion Ofﬁcials.

ABKOWITZ, M., 2002, Transportation Risk Management: A New Paradigm. Security Papers
(Knoxville: Southeastern Transportation Center, University of Tennessee),
pp. 93–103.

ABKOWITZ, M., and CHENG, P., 1988, Developing a risk/cost framework for routing truck

movements of hazardous materials. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 20, 39–51.

BRAINARD, J., LOVETT, A., and PARFITT, J., 1996, Assessing hazardous waste transport risks
using a GIS. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 10, 831–849.
ERHAN, E., and VERTER, V., 1998, Modeling of transport risk for hazardous materials.

Operations Research, 46, 625–642.

ESRI, 1996, Using ArcGIS (Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute).
FHWA, 1994, Guidelines for Applying Criteria to Designate Routes for Transporting
Hazardous Materials. Report FHWA-SA-94-083, Federal Highway Administration,
USA.

GOH, C. B., CHING, C. B., and TAN, R., 1995, Risk analysis for the road transportation of
hazardous chemicals in Singapore—a methodology. Journal of Loss Prevention in the
Process Industries, 8, 35–39.

GOLDBERG, D. E., 1989, Genetic Alogrithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning

(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley).

GOS, 1997, Road Trafﬁc Act (Chapter 276), Government of Singapore.
GOS, 2000, Fire Safety Act (Chapter 109A), Government of Singapore.
GOS, 2002, Environmental Pollution Control Act (Chapter 94A), Government of Singapore.
LEPOFSKY, M., and ABKOWITZ, M., 1993, Transportation hazard analysis in integrated GIS

environment. Journal of Transport Engineering, 119, 239–254.

LIST, G., and MARCHANDANI, P., 1991, An integrated network/planar multiobjective model
for routing and siting for hazardous materials and wastes. Transportation Science, 25,
146–156.

LUEDTKE, J., and WHITE, C. C., 2002, HAZMAT Transportation and Security: Survey and
Directions for Future Research (Atlanta, Georgia, USA: Department of Ind. & Sys.
Engrg, Georgia Institute of Technology).

MATTHEWS, K. B., CRAW, S., ELDER, S., SIBBALD, A. R., and MACKENZIE, I., 2000,
Applying genetic algorithm to multi-objective land use planning. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computational Conference, Las Vegas.

POLZIN, S., 2002, Security Considerations in Transportation Planning. Security Papers
(Knoxville: Southeastern Transportation Center, University of Tennessee).

SOULETRETTE, R. R., and SATHISAN, S. K., 1994, GIS for

radioactive materials

transportation. Microcomputers in Civil Engineering, 9, 295–303.

SRINIVASAN, K., 2002, Transportation Network Vulnerability Assessment: A Quantitative
(Knoxville: Southeastern Transportation Center,

Framework. Security Papers
University of Tennessee), pp. 60–79.

TRB, 2002, Deterrence, Protection, and Preparation: The New Transportation Security
Imperative, Special Report 270 (Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board,
National Research Council).

TURNQUIST, M. A., and LIST, G. F., 1993, Multiobjective policy analysis of hazardous
materials routing. In Transportation of Hazardous Materials, edited by L. N. Moses
and D. Lindstrom (Boston: Kluwer Academic), pp. 103–116.

VINK, C., and SCHOT, P., 2000, Application of a genetic algorithm in a GIS-based decision
support system for multi-objective optimization of drinking water production. In 4th

HAZMAT route planning

787

International Conference on Integrating GIS and Environmental Modeling (GIS/
EM4): Problems, Prospects and Research Needs, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 2–8
September.

XIAO, N. C., BENNETT, D. A., and ARMSTRONG, M. P., 2002, Using evolutionary algorithms
to generate alternatives for multi-objective site-search problems. Environment and
Planning A, 34, 639–656.

