int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 6, 489± 522

Research Article

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

JOHN J. BARTHOLDI, III and PAUL GOLDSMAN
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0205 , USA; e-mail: john.bartholdi@isye.gatech.edu;
pgold@isye.gatech.edu.

(Received 10 February 2000; accepted 17 November 2000)

Abstract. We describe how to create a continuous global index of the surface of
the Earth. The index is based on a hierarchical subdivision of the surface into
triangular regions in which each region is assigned a numerical label according
to a space(cid:142) lling curve. Sequential labels are assigned to adjacent regions, so labels
can be sorted to create a continuous one-dimensional index. Bene(cid:142) ts of continuity
include the implicit preservation of adjacency information, and the ability to vary
resolution at diŒerent locations. Previously suggested schemes based on similar
models produce indices that are discontinuous. Unfortunately, discontinuities
degrade the usefulness of an index, as we show by comparing continuous and
discontinuous schemes based on performance criteria such as the ability to pre-
serve spatial adjacency. The best index appears to be the continuous one based
on the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve.

1.

Introduction
We describe how to construct a continuous index for geographic information on
the globe. Key features of the model include: 1. It is based on the hierarchical
subdivision of the surface of the earth into triangles. 2. Subregions are ordered in a
continuous way, so that sequential index values are given to adjacent subregions.
3. Subregions at a given level of the hierarchical subdivision are approximatel y
equivalent (in size and shape) and correspond to equal-length ranges of index values.
In one common model of the globe, the surface is initially divided into a spherical
octahedron (the spherical equivalent of an octahedron, where the surface of the
sphere is divided into eight equivalent spherical triangles). The base triangles are
then hierarchically subdivided as needed to capture local surface detail. In other
words, the subdivision is deeper where more detail is required. Our research is
concerned with (cid:142) nding continuous orderings of such triangle coverings of the sphere.
We review some proposed discontinuous indexing schemes for similar models.
We then show how to create a continuous index of the sphere, based on a spherical
space(cid:142) lling curve, and provide procedures for converting between coordinates and
position on the curve, and related operations of (cid:142) nding ancestors, descendants, and
neighbours of cells in the subdivision.

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110043603

490

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

1.1. Relevance of our research

Our research describes a continuous index of the surface of the earth based on
a hierarchical subdivision, though the index could also be used to index spatial data
structured according to a diŒerent model. This scheme has a number of useful
features.

Hierarchical organization. Hierarchical models have the inherent ability to reduce
data size, and vary resolution at diŒerent locations. This is useful since the density
of features of interest on the surface of the earth is not uniform; such models conserve
space by increasing resolution in dense areas, and decreasing it in sparse areas.

Weibel and Dutton (1999 ) discuss hierarchical tessellations in the context of GIS
data generalization problems. An example of such a problem is the need to increase
or decrease the level of spatial detail displayed in a map, when zooming in or out,
respectively. This problem is sometimes handled in GIS by storing multiple versions
of maps at varied levels of detail.

Continuous ordering. In our model, each cell in the subdivision receives a unique
numerical label. These labels are assigned in a spatially continuous way: cells with
consecutive labels are spatially adjacent, and spatially near cells tend to have close
labels. This is useful for operations that depend on clustering and spatial adjacency
in general. Spatial range searching is one example (Nulty 1993). Clustering is also
important when large data sets are stored on slower secondary storage devices such
as hard disks. A basic principle of spatial data is that spatially near points tend to
be more related than distant points. Such points will more often be accessed together,
so one can reduce the number of disk accesses by physically storing them near each
other. We ensure that nearby points tend to have nearly equal indices by ensuring
that adjacent cells tend to have adjacent ranges of index.

We consider cells to be adjacent if they have a common vertex. In the literature,
edge adjacency is often required (for example, between cells of rectangular grids
(Abel and Mark 1990)). Our slightly weaker form of adjacency allows us to get
much stronger results.

Equivalent subdivision. We show how to create a subdivision in which cells at a
given level of the hierarchy tend to be approximatel y equivalent (in size and shape).
As we shall see, the number of digits in the label of a cell equals its depth in the
hierarchy. The length of a cell label also gives an indication of the size of the cell,
and cells with labels of the same length tend be approximatel y equivalent. Thus,
label length can be thought of as a rough proxy for data precision (Dutton 1989,
1996 ).

2. Hierarchical subdivision of the sphere

A number of researchers have developed hierarchical data models to represent
the surface of the earth. These models partition the surface of the earth into spherical
triangles, and then hierarchically subdivide these triangles to increase detail at
diŒerent areas on the earth.

In practice, most researchers (cid:142) nd it more convenient to work with planes rather
than spherical surfaces. In their models, the earth is represented as a triangular-sided
polyhedron inscribed within a sphere. The faces of the polyhedron are projected
onto the surface of the sphere, to make a correspondence between the points on the
polyhedron and the points on the sphere. Increasing levels of detail are achieved by
hierarchically subdividing the triangular faces of the base polyhedron, and projecting
these onto the sphere, until su(cid:141) ciently small regions can be distinguished. In other

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

491

words, triangular subregions on a side of the polyhedron correspond to spherical
triangular regions on the sphere. Working directly with the sphere, or with the
corresponding polyhedron, is largely an implementation issue, the underlying ideas
are the same. However, speaking in terms of sides of polyhedrons often results in
plainer language (‘triangle’ versus ‘spherical triangle’), so we will in most cases adopt
that convention.

Suppose, for example, that the model is based upon an inscribed octahedron.
The octahedron is projected onto the sphere, creating a spherical octahedron, and
subdivided to create a triangular covering of the earth. Such hierarchical structures
can be subdivided to diŒerent depths at diŒerent locations on the globe, to account
for diŒering density of features of interest; for background, see Laurini and Thompson
(1992, pp. 244–246). The authors we discuss work with either the octahedron or the
icosahedron.

An important aspect of such subdivisions is a scheme for assigning labels to the
triangular cells. Such labels uniquely identify cells and, by extension, points within
cells. A point on the surface of the globe inherits the label of its enclosing cell. Labels
can be sorted to create a one-dimensional spatial index of the global surface.

A labelling of a subdivision is an assignment of unique codes (or ‘labels’) to each
cell of the subdivision. A continuous spatial index (or ordering ) is one in which cells
with sequential index values are at least vertex-adjacent. Indexing schemes thus far
proposed for hierarchical global subdivisions have been discontinuous.

Our discussion will focus on this aspect of global subdivisions. We review a
number of proposed discontinuous indexing schemes for hierarchical subdivisions of
the globe, and suggest two new indexing schemes that are continuous.

2.1. Spherical subdivisions

Hierarchical subdivisions of the sphere are in some ways the spherical equivalent
of planar quadtrees, and they share many of the advantage s of such hierarchical
data models—in data representation, storage and access, for example (Dutton 1989,
1996, Mark and Lauzon 1984, Samet 1989, 1990).

Hierarchical structures have mainly been discussed on the plane, but not exclus-
ively. For examples of hierarchical structures used to model triangulated irregular
networks, see Barrera (1989), Scarlatos and Pavlidis (1992), Sotomayor (1978 ).
Hierarchical subdivisions of the earth based on quadrilaterals have also been pro-
posed. Mark and Lauzon (1985 ) describe some attempts, as well as their own
quadtree-based approach. In some ways, global subdivisions with quadrilateral faces
are simpler to work with than those with triangular faces. Quadrilateral shapes are
more similar to the way we are accustomed to thinking about geography and maps,
and edges may map to parallels or meridians. But it is di(cid:141) cult with these structures
to approach equivalency in size and shape among cells at a given level in the
hierarchical subdivision. For example, models based on latitude and longitude suŒer
from the fact that as we approach the poles, cells become smaller and more triangular.
Important aspects of a hierarchical subdivision of the sphere based on triangles
are: 1. The initial division of the spherical surface into triangular domains. 2. The
process of subdividing the domains. 3. The process of labelling cells. One would
prefer a hierarchical subdivision of the sphere in which all cells at a given level of
the subdivision were equivalent
from re(cid:143) ection).
Unfortunately, the only known equivalent hierarchical subdivisions of the sphere
are those suggested by the way citrus fruits divide naturally into ‘lunes’. In the

in size and shape (apart

492

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

citrus-fruit family of subdivisions, cells become thinner and thinner, converging in
the limit to arcs of great circles ( geodesics), rather than to points, and for this reason,
such subdivisions are unlikely to be useful. Apart from these examples, there is no
known way to hierarchically subdivide the sphere into more than 120 equivalent
domains. The spherical icosidodecahedron (120 equivalent triangles) is obtained by
dividing each face of a spherical icosahedron (20 triangles) into six congruent scalene
spherical triangles by bisecting each angle (Davies 1967, Wenninger 1979, Croft et al.
1991, p. 90).

Therefore, the construction of a hierarchical global data structure is in part an
exercise in compromise. The cells at a given level will diŒer in size or shape or both
(White et al. 1998, for example), and perfect adjacency-preservatio n is also unobtain-
able (Sagan 1994).

2.2. Initial partition of the sphere

The Platonic solids are reasonable starting points for a spherical subdivision. Of
the (cid:142) ve Platonic solids, three have triangular faces: the tetrahedron (four faces), the
octahedron (eight faces), and the icosahedron (20 faces). The other Platonic solids
are the cube (six faces) and the pentagonal dodecahedron (12 faces). The icosahedron
has the greatest number of initial faces, and would therefore show the least distortion
in the subdivision, but practically speaking the larger number of faces makes it
somewhat harder to work with. The octahedron has more distortion, but has the
advantage that its faces and vertices map to important global features—meridians,
the equator, and the poles (Goodchild and Shiren 1989).

The triangles of the initial partition need not be equilateral. Distortion could be
decreased considerably by dividing each equilateral triangular side of an initial
Platonic (cid:142) gure into equivalent scalene triangles, to start with a partition of the
surface with a much greater number of equivalent base triangles. A spherical equilat-
eral triangle can be divided into a maximum of six equivalent spherical scalene
triangles. Therefore, a solution with minimal distortion could start with up to 120
equivalent domains by beginning with an icosahedron and dividing each of the
equilateral triangular faces into six equivalent scalene triangles.

We discuss regular partitions, but regularity is not necessary. The initial partition
of the Earth into spherical triangles could take other considerations into account,
such as speci(cid:142) c earth features: land masses, weather patterns, political subdivisions,
or mineral deposits, for example.

2.3. Subdivision of triangular cells

There are a number of ways to hierarchically subdivide an equilateral triangle.
All of these are subject to distortion when transferred to the surface of the sphere.
In other words, all eventually result
in non-equivalent subtriangles. DiŒerent
decisions will have diŒerent eŒects on the uniformity of shape and size of cells within
a given level of the hierarchy, as well as on the ease of calculation. The authors we
discuss favour the subdivision shown in (cid:142) gure 1, in which a triangle is subdivided
by joining the midpoints of each side with a new edge, to create four equivalent (on
the plane) equilateral subtriangles. We will refer to this as the quaternary subdivision.
The quaternary subdivision is a good compromise. It is relatively easy to work
with, and non-distorting on the plane—a planar equilateral triangle is divided into
four equivalent equilateral triangles. But it is distorting on the sphere, resulting

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

493

Figure 1. Quaternary subdivision.

in three non-equilateral , but equivalent, side triangles, and one larger equilateral
central triangle.

We show how to create a continuous index based on the quaternary subdivision.
We also show how to create a continuous index based on a binary subdivision that
is somewhat simpler to work with. In this subdivision, a triangle is subdivided by
adding a new edge joining one of the vertices with the midpoint of its opposing side,
to create two subtriangles ((cid:142) gure 2).

Starting from a partition of the sphere based on the cube, it is possible to make
up to three non-distorting binary subdivisions, resulting in a total of 48 equivalent
domains on the sphere: the (cid:142) rst subdivision divides each of the six spherical squares
into two equivalent spherical isosceles triangles; the second and third subdivisions
divide each of the triangles. In contrast, as we have seen, the very (cid:142) rst quaternary
subdivision of a spherical equilateral triangle is distorting. The quaternary subdivi-
sion, based on the usual octahedron, for example, never exceeds its initial eight
equivalent domains. In this case, the binary subdivision would result in considerably
less cell distortion.

Another partition often discussed is that of an equilateral triangle into nine
equivalent equilateral subtriangles (White et al. 1998 ). Though we do not address
this explicitly, our methods also apply.

2.4. L abelling and ordering hierarchical subdivisions

All of the labelling schemes we discuss, apart from one variation, construct the
label of a cell in the same basic recursive way. First, each side of the base polyhedron
is assigned a digit. Then the label of a subcell is created by right-appending a digit

Figure 2. Binary subdivision.

494

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

to the label of its parent cell. Where the labelling schemes diŒer is in how that digit
is chosen.

This continues at each stage of the subdivision. For example, suppose we are
starting with an octahedron and using the quaternary subdivision. Then each of the
eight base triangles is subdivided into four subtriangles, labelled: 0, 1, 2, and 3. (We
ignore any digit identifying the base triangle.) Each of these triangles may be further
subdivided. Triangle 1 would subdivide into triangles 10, 11, 12, and 13; triangle 2
would subdivide into triangles 20, 21, 22, and 23; triangle 22 would subdivide into
triangles 220, 221, 222, and 223, etc. This continues at each level, until ‘su(cid:141) cient
precision’ is reached.

The result is a tessellation of the sphere into triangular cells. Each cell has a
unique label. Each label is a string of digits that can be treated as a base 4 integer,
or in the case of a binary subdivision, a base 2 integer. The labels can be sorted to
create a spatial index of the surface.

2.5. Desirable characteristics of spatial orderings

A number of authors have discussed useful characteristics of spatial orderings
(Goodchild and Gran(cid:142) eld 1983, Goodchild 1989a, 1989b, Abel and Mark 1990,
Laurini and Thompson 1992, Nulty 1993, Samet 1995). We brie(cid:143) y review some of
the issues.

One of the most important characteristics of a spatial ordering is the preservation
of adjacency relationships: It is desirable that points that are near in space have
similar labels, and vice versa. This is useful in a variety of common spatial and
geographical operations, such as neighbour-(cid:142) nding, map-drawing, spatial searches,
range queries, and other operations that depend on good clustering characteristics.
Ideally, cells would be adjacent if and only if their labels were consecutive, but this
is not possible in general.

As many applications involve paths or circuits, it is often useful if an ordering
constitutes a reasonable path or a circuit through a space. For example, the Sierpinski
curve (Sierpinski 1912) leads to a reasonable heuristic for the Traveling Salesman
Problem. Bartholdi and Platzman (1988) review this and related results. Other things
being equal, short, continuous, smooth paths are desirable.

Certain orderings are easier to work with than others. The most basic computa-
tional operations are converting between index order and spatial position, but for
any practical application, there are a host of other operations to be implemented.
These may include operations related to handling spatial regions, such as (cid:142) nding
neighbors, ancestors, and descendants, as well as edge-(cid:142) nding, range queries, and
conversion between latitude and longitude.

An ordering is said to be stable if the relative order of individual points does not
change when the domain (that is, the space) is extended. This is less important in
global data models, since the size of the space is (cid:142) xed (Nulty 1993, Samet 1995 ). A
more useful kind of stability for our purposes relates to subdivision level. The order
of points on the surface should remain the same at diŒerent levels of the subdivision.
We shall refer to this property as order-consistency ; it is similar mutatis mutandis to
Abel and Mark’s (1990) concept of a quadrant-recursive ordering.

Nulty (1993) points out that symmetric orderings often have other desirable
characteristics, such as simpler implementations (in other words, better usability),
and in some cases better clustering and routing performance.

Continuity, like symmetry, is not an end in itself, but tends to imply other

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

495

desirable characteristics. For example,
in a continuous ordering based on the
Sierpinski or Hilbert curve (Hilbert 1891 ), adjacency is preserved in the sense that
adjacent points in the ordering are assigned to adjacent domains, and adjacent
domains tend to be near each other in the ordering. A continuous ordering of cells
also implies a path or a circuit, and all things being equal, such paths are likely to
be shorter than in discontinuous orderings.

3. Literature review

We discuss four proposed orderings of the sphere based on the hierarchical
subdivision of triangles, those of: Dutton (1984, 1989, 1990, 1996), Goodchild (1989b) ,
Goodchild and Shiren (1989, 1990, 1992 ), Fekete (1990), Fekete and Davis (1984 ),
and Otoo and Zhu (1993 ). Among the four approaches, we (cid:142) nd three distinct
labelling schemes, none of which is continuous. We follow by suggesting two new
schemes for continuous labelling.

3.1. Dutton’s ordering

Dutton’s Quaternary T riangular Mesh (QTM) is based on the hierarchical subdivi-
sion of an octahedron inscribed within a sphere. One of the advantage s of the
octahedron is that it can be aligned on the globe in such a way that its vertices and
edges line up with important global features such as the poles, the equator, and
meridians.

Figure 3 shows the (cid:142) rst two levels of subdivision of a triangle labelled according
to Dutton’s QTM. Each triangle is divided into four subtriangles: a central triangle,
a triangle pointing upward or downward, a left triangle, and a right triangle. Each
subtriangle is assigned a digit between ‘0’ and ‘3’, as shown, and the label of the
subtriangle is created by right-appending its digit to the label of its parent. This
makes for simple ancestor-(cid:142) nding and descendant-(cid:142) nding operations.

An interesting element of Dutton’s labelling is that cells surrounding certain
vertices all have the same terminating digits. He refers to these vertices as attractors,
and they are of some use in determining adjacencies, and other spatial operations.
Dutton’s ordering is discontinuous, but adjacency-preservin g to some extent:
Points near in space tend to be near in the ordering, and vice-versa. A path based
on the ordering would have many discontinuities (dashed lines in (cid:142) gure 3 ). Since
one end of the path is at the centre of the triangular space, and the other end is at
a vertex, a circuit or path based on the ordering would have additional
large
discontinuities between each of the initial triangles in the partition of the surface of
the sphere. Figure 4 shows such a path over an octahedral surface. The ordering is

Figure 3. Dutton’s Quaternary Triangular Mesh (QTM).

496

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

Figure 4. Dutton ordering over an octahedral surface.

order-consistent across levels of the subdivision. Many of these comments apply
equally to the orderings of Goodchild and Shiren (§3.2), and Fekete and Davis (§3.3).

3.2. Goodchild and Shiren’s ordering

Goodchild and Shiren developed a variation of Dutton’s QTM also based on
octahedrons ((cid:142) gure 5). The label of a subtriangle is likewise created by appending a
digit to the label of its parent, so ancestor and descendant-(cid:142) nding are simple. The
major change from Dutton is in simplifying the labelling scheme. Like Dutton, the
right-most digit of the central cell of a subdivided triangle is always ‘0’. But now,
the up or down triangle is always ‘1’; the right triangle is always ‘2’, and the left
triangle is always ‘3’. This scheme simpli(cid:142) es conversions between latitude and longit-
ude, and coordinates, as well as certain spatial algorithms.

Goodchild and Shiren’s ordering has many of the same characteristics as Dutton’s.
It is discontinuous, but adjacency-preservin g to some extent. It is order-consistent,
but paths and circuits based on the ordering are very discontinuous.

3.3. Fekete and Davis’s ordering

Fekete and Davis’s spherical quadtree (SQT) is based on an inscribed icosahedron.
The cell sequencing is the same as Dutton’s, except reversed, and the labels themselves
are slightly diŒerent in form. The ordering is discontinuous, but still adjacency-
preserving to some extent, and order-consistent across levels.

Starting with the 20-sided icosahedron reduces the diŒerences in size and shape
of cells in the subdivision. Cells are therefore much more regular than in Dutton’s
or Goodchild and Shiren’s schemes. However, most edges and vertices of the base
icosahedron cannot be aligned with useful global references. In addition, due to the
larger number of initial faces, computation is more involved.

Figure 5. Goodchild and Shiren’s version of the QTM.

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

497

3.4. Otoo and Zhu’s ordering

Otoo and Zhu’s semi-quadcode (SQC) ordering is based on an inscribed octahed-
ron. This interesting scheme starts with a quadtree-type labelling. (The quadtree is
a hierarchical subdivision of the square.) It then divides each quadtree cell into two
triangles, and uses just half of the resulting cells—hence, a ‘semi’ quadcode. Figure 6
shows how quadtree labels are derived and divided into semi-quadcodes. Figure 7
shows how the quadtree labels form the basis of an ordering of the quaternary
subdivision.

The SQC labelling simpli(cid:142) es neighbour-(cid:142) nding and certain other spatial opera-
tions. It has the disadvantage that the spatial ordering of certain regions may change
at diŒerent levels of the subdivision. That is, it is not order-consistent. For example,
cell 01 precedes 02 at Level 1 of the subdivision (not shown). But at Level 2, 012, a
child of 02, now precedes 021, a child of 01 ((cid:142) gure 7).

A related disadvantage is a more complicated relationship between the labels of
ancestors and descendants. In the other labelling schemes, one merely had to right-
remove digits from the label of a cell to generate a list of its ancestors. Similarly, the
descendants of a cell could be generated by right-appending digits to its label. The
relationship between ancestors and descendants in Otoo and Zhu’s scheme is no
longer so direct. For example, the children of 02 are 012, 031, 032, and 022. These
problems arise from the fact that the subdivision is based on the triangle, while the
labeling is based on the quadtree.

Otoo and Zhu’s ordering is discontinuous, but less so than the other schemes
discussed. In addition, since the ordering starts at one vertex of a triangle, and ends

Figure 6. Derivation of semi-quadcodes (SQC) from the quadtree.

Figure 7. Otoo and Zhu’s semi-quadcodes (SQC).

498

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

at another vertex, a circuit of the sphere can be created by properly linking triangles
of the initial spherical partition (in such a way that the path exits one triangle at
the same vertex where it enters the next triangle in the path). Recall that orderings
based on the other three labelings start (or end) at the center of a subdivided triangle.

3.5. Discontinuities of Dutton-type orderings

The labelling schemes of Dutton et al., and Fekete and Davis are close variations.
They lead to very similar orderings, with the same number and total length of
discontinuities. We will examine Dutton’s, as representative of the three.

Dutton’s scheme has 0 discontinuities between 4 triangles at Level 1, and 2
discontinuities between 16 triangles at Level 2 ((cid:142) gure 3). At Level 3 it has 11
discontinuities between 64 triangles ((cid:142) gure 8).

Proposition 1 T he number of discontinuities in Dutton’s ordering at L evel n is given
by

ddut(n) 5 3 4

nÕ 2 Õ

1, for nµ2

All proofs are found in the Appendix.
We can get a sense of how discontinuous Dutton’s ordering is by comparing
the number of discontinuities to the total number of sequential cell pairs at Level
nÕ 1 . Taking the limit of the expression in Proposition 1 yields the
n, given by 4
discontinuity rate.

Proposition 2 T he discontinuity rate of Dutton’s ordering is given by

ddut(n)
nÕ
1
4

lim
n(cid:129) 2

3
16

where ddut(n) is the number of discontinuities in Dutton’s ordering at L evel n.

In practice, convergence is rapid, so this is a good approximation even when n

is relatively small.

We can also compute the length of the jumps. We assume that the side of the
bounding equilateral triangle is of unit length. In addition, recalling that Dutton-
type orderings begin from the centre of a triangle and end at a vertex, we will

Figure 8. Dutton ordering: discontinuities up to Level 3.

5
Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

499

measure distances starting from highest vertex of the triangle at the start of the
discontinuity, and ending at the centre of the triangle at the end of the discontinuity.

Proposition 3 T he total length of the discontinuities in Dutton’s ordering at L evel n is
given by

Proposition 4 T he limiting proportion of the total length of discontinuities to the total
length of the curve corresponding to Dutton’s ordering is given by

ldut(n) 5

7 2

nÕ 3 Õ
Ó 3

2

,

for nµ2

ldut(n)

7Ó 3

lim
n(cid:129) 2

ldut(n)1

lcdut(n)

11Ó 31

12

# 0.39

where lcdut(n) signi(cid:142) es the total length of the continuous portions of Dutton’s ordering
at L evel n.

Dutton’s ordering of the sphere starts with the eight base triangles of an octahed-
ron. In addition to the discontinuities within each base triangle, there is a discontinuity
between each of the base triangles. This adds seven large discontinuities to the
ordering. (This also applies to Goodchild and Shiren’s ordering.) Fekete and Davis’s
ordering, based on the 20-sided icosahedron, adds 19 such discontinuities, but each
is much smaller.

3.6. Discontinuities of Otoo and Zhu’s semi-quadcode ordering

Otoo and Zhu’s semi-quadcode (SQC) ordering leads to fewer discontinuities
than Dutton’s ordering. Figure 9 shows discontinuities up to Level 3. Level 1 has 0
discontinuities among 4 triangles. Level 2 has 1 discontinuity among 16 triangles.
Level 3 has 5 discontinuities among 64 triangles. Level 4 (not shown) has 19
discontinuities among 256 triangles.

Recall that Otoo and Zhu’s SQC labelling scheme is based on a quadtree labelling.

We will use the term quadcode (QC) to refer to the quadtree labelling.

Proposition 5 T he number of discontinuities in Otoo and Zhu’s ordering at L evel n is
nÕ
2

for nµ2

dsqc(n) 5 4

1,

2 1

2 Õ

nÕ

Figure 9. Otoo and Zhu ordering—discontinuities up to Level 3.

5
500

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

Again, we can get a sense of how discontinuous the SQC ordering is by comparing
the number of discontinuities at some Level n to the number of sequential cell pairs
nÕ 1 . Taking the limit from the expression in Proposition 5
at that level, given by 4
yields the following proposition:

Proposition 6 T he discontinuity rate of Otoo and Zhu’s semi-quadcode ordering is
given by

dsqc (n)
nÕ 1 5
4

lim
n(cid:129) 2

1
16

where dsqc (n) is the number of discontinuities in Otoo and Zhu’s semi-quadcode ordering
at L evel n.

Therefore, Otoo and Zhu orderings have, in the limit, one-third as many discon-

tinuities as Dutton-type orderings.

We can also compute the length of the jumps in the ordering. We assume that
the side of the bounding equilateral triangle is of unit length. Recalling that Otoo
and Zhu orderings begin and end at triangle vertices, we will measure distances
starting from the highest vertex of the triangle at the start of the discontinuity, and
ending at the lowest vertex of the triangle at the end of the discontinuity.

Proposition 7 T he total length of the discontinuities in Otoo and Zhu’s ordering at
L evel n is given by

lsqc (n) 5 3 2

nÕ 3 Õ

1,

for nµ3

In addition to having fewer discontinuities than Dutton-type orderings, Otoo

and Zhu orderings have a smaller total discontinuity length. In the limit, we have
7Ó 3
9

# 1.35

ldut
lsqc

Proposition 8 T he limiting proportion of the total length of discontinuities to the total
length of the curve corresponding to Otoo and Zhu’s ordering is given by

lsqc (n)

lim
n(cid:129) 2

lsqc (n)1

lcsqc (n)

9
10Ó 31

# 0.34

9

where lcsqc (n) signi(cid:142) es the total length of the continuous portions of Otoo and Zhu’s
ordering at L evel n.

Otoo and Zhu’s ordering is the only one of the four orderings we have discussed
in which the lowest and highest points within a triangle are at distinct vertices.
Therefore, it is possible to link the eight base triangles of their initial octahedral
partition of the sphere in such a way that a circuit is created with no additional
discontinuities.

4. Continuous indices of the globe
4.1. Space(cid:142) lling curve on a sphere

We have developed continuous ordering schemes, based on space(cid:142) lling curves,
for the hierarchical sub-division of a spherical surface. A spherical space(cid:142) lling curve
is a continuous mapping from a one-dimensional interval, to the points on the
spherical surface. Continuous orderings based on space(cid:142) lling curves have proven
useful in heuristics related to a number of spatial, combinatorial, and logistical

(cid:129)
5
Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

501

problems (Bartholdi and Platzman 1982, 1988, Bartholdi et al. 1983, Platzman and
Bartholdi 1989, Nulty 1993, Sagan 1994, p. 30).

The global data models we have so far discussed have discontinuous spatial
orderings, and preserve nearness in tendency only: cells with similar labels tend to
be near each other. In a continuous spatial ordering, cells with sequential labels are
spatially adjacent, points with close index values are near on the sphere, and spatially
adjacent cells tend to have similar labels. Moreover, for an equal-area subdivision
of the sphere, each cell at the same level of a subdivision has the same area, and
equal one-dimensional intervals correspond to equal size, contiguous areas on the
sphere.

We are interested in space(cid:142) lling curves that begin at one vertex, and end at a
diŒerent vertex. We will refer to these vertices as entry and exit vertices, respectively.
The space(cid:142) lling curve is said (loosely speaking ) to visit all the points within the
triangle, starting from the entry vertex, and ending at the exit vertex ((cid:142) gure 10).

To create a continuous path on a sphere, we partition the surface of the sphere
into (spherical ) triangular regions and order the space within each region according
to a space(cid:142) lling curve. We sequence and orient the regions in such a way that the
exit vertex of one triangle matches the entry vertex of the next triangle in the
sequence. In this way, we create a continuous path through the surface. If, in addition,
the (cid:142) rst and last points coincide, it is a continuous circuit.

In common with the discontinuous orderings, spherical versions of the Platonic
solids are reasonable choices for initial partitions in the continuous orderings.
Figure 11 shows a space(cid:142) lling curve tracing a continuous circuit over an octahedral
surface. The curve shown is one of a number of possible curves that could have been
drawn. Figure 12 shows a space(cid:142) lling curve tracing a continuous circuit over a
tetrahedral surface. For (cid:143) attened views of all the Platonic solids, see Laurini and
Thompson (1992).

This is in the spirit of the earlier work on hierarchical global data models. It is
more general in the sense that we do not specify a particular initial partition of the
sphere (or equivalently, a base polyhedron), just that it be a triangular tessellation,
with no vertices appearing in the middle of edges. We impose only very loose
conditions on the way the subdivision itself is performed. Also, we use particular
space(cid:142) lling curves in our examples, but other possibilities exist.

Figure 10. How a space(cid:142) lling curve orders each triangle.

502

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

Figure 11. Space(cid:142) lling curve on an octahedral surface.

Figure 12. Space(cid:142) lling curve on a tetrahedral surface.

Cells within the hierarchical subdivision are labelled with codes indicating their
relative position on a space(cid:142) lling curve. Because we are using a hierarchical data
structure, these labels can identify arbitrarily small regions by matching points on
the space(cid:142) lling curve with suYciently small enclosing cells. For a map of cities on
the earth, for example, we might be satis(cid:142) ed with a one-square mile enclosing cell
around points representing cities. For a map of property lines, we would require
much (cid:142) ner resolution. Converting between coordinates and space(cid:142) lling curve posi-
tion is thus not completely reversible. We may not recover exactly the same point,
but it will be suYciently close. Conversions can be performed in such a way that
error does not accumulate. Of course, points expressed as (cid:142) nite-precision coordinates
also have this sort of uncertainty; the true location of the entity referred to is within
some region around the given point.

We present two examples in some detail. Both assume an initial partition of the
spherical surface into triangular regions. The (cid:142) rst example is based on a quaternary
subdivision, in which each triangle is hierarchically subdivided into four subtriangles.
The second is based on a binary subdivision, in which each triangle is hierarchically
subdivided into two triangles.

4.2. Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve

The quaternary subdivision refers to the hierarchical subdivision of a triangle into
four subtriangles, as in (cid:142) gure 1. Indexing schemes so far proposed for global
data structures based on this subdivision have been discontinuous. We present a
continuous scheme based on a space(cid:142) lling curve.

Figure 13 shows iterations of a space(cid:142) lling curve based on the quaternary subdivi-
sion. We will refer to this curve as the Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve (QSFC). The

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

503

Figure 13. Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve.

curve is drawn to explicitly show the entry and exit points of the curve within each
triangle. Figure 14 shows an alternate way to draw the same curve, emphasizing
instead the order in which the triangles are traversed. Assuming the globe is divided
into triangular faces, we order the space within each triangle according to the QSFC,
oriented appropriately, to create a spherical space(cid:142) lling curve.

Below we describe procedures to generate cell labels, to convert between spatial
coordinates and position on the QSFC, and to (cid:142) nd cell neighbours. These procedures
are based on an approach to creating algorithms for manipulating space(cid:142) lling curves
that we discuss in greater detail in Bartholdi and Goldsman (2001).

4.2.1. Ordering space according to the Quaternary curve

This procedure generates QSFC-based cell labels. We begin with a triangular cell
with vertices labelled a, b, and c ((cid:142) gure 15). The vertices imply a certain orientation
of the cell. In particular, vertex a will be the lowest point, according to the ordering,
and c will be the highest. We subdivide the cell into four subtriangles by choosing a
point on each side and drawing line segments connecting each pair of points. (Typical

Figure 14. Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve, alternate drawing.

Figure 15. Labelling cells in the (cid:142) rst level of subdivision.

504

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

choices are midpoints of each side, so that subcells are equivalent on the plane, and
approximatel y equivalent on the sphere.) The label of each subcell is constructed
as follows:

1. The cell containing vertex a: initialize its label to 0.
2. The cell containing vertex b: initialize its label to 2.
3. The cell containing vertex c: initialize its label to 3.
4. The central cell: initialize its label to 1.

Next label the nine unlabelled vertices of the four triangles as follows (see

(cid:142) gure 16):

1. Vertices between a and b are labelled (in order): bca
2. Vertices between b and c are labelled (in order): cba
3. Vertices between c and a are labelled (in order): bac

Continue by subdividing each triangle in the same way, adding a digit to the
right of the label of each cell, at each new level in the subdivision. Figure 16 shows
the second level in the subdivision, with its associated spatial ordering. At this point
each cell is identi(cid:142) ed by a two-digit label. This process continues until ‘su(cid:141) cient
precision’ is reached.

The labels de(cid:142) ne an ordering of the space within the entire triangular cell. The
ordering is continuous since cells with adjacent labels are adjacent in space; they
share an edge or a vertex. The converse also tends to be true: cells near in space
tend to have close labels. In the limit, every point in the space is ordered in this
way. Figure 17 shows the labelling of Level 4 of the QSFC.

4.2.2. Properties of Quaternary curve ordering

A labelling scheme based on the QSFC establishes a continuous ordering of the
space within a triangular region, and leads to a continuous circuit over the surface
of a sphere. QSFC ordering is not stable under extensions to its domain, but this
property is not important for global data structures. The index has the more import-
ant property of order-consistency across levels of the subdivision: regions are ordered
the same, relative to each other, at diŒerent levels of the subdivision.

In addition, ancestors and descendants of regions can be found directly, and it
is relatively simple to convert between QSFC labels and spatial coordinates (§4.2.4),
and to (cid:142) nd neighbours (§4.2.5).

4.2.3. Converting between Quaternary curve labels and coordinates

We determine the QSFC label corresponding to the spatial coordinates of a
point, to desired precision, by (cid:142) nding a suYciently small enclosing cell around the

Figure 16. Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve cells at Level 2.

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

505

Figure 17. Level 4 ordering of the Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve.

point. In (cid:142) nding the QSFC label of a point, we do not need to label all the cells in
the space, but just the ancestor cells enclosing the point, so the amount of work is
proportional to the precision of the result (in other words, the number of digits in
the resulting label). When a point lies on the border between two cells at some level
of the subdivision, we must choose one of the cells according to some rule, such as
‘always choose the smallest label’.

Figure 18 shows the steps in (cid:142) nding the label of point P. In this example, we
require precision to four quaternary digits, so we subdivide the triangle to four levels.
The initial step subdivides the triangular cell into four subcells labeled 0, 1, 2, and 3.
Cell 0 contains P, therefore the second step subdivides cell 0 into subcells 00, 01, 02,
and 03. The third step subdivides cell 01 into 010, 011, 012, and 013. The (cid:142) nal step
subdivides cell 013 into 0130, 0131, 0132, and 0133. From the (cid:142) gure, the label of P
is 0131.

4.2.4. Conversion procedure

a triangular region t :

vertex is b.

Given a point P, for which we wish to (cid:142) nd the corresponding QSFC label within

1. Label t so that the entry vertex is a, the exit vertex is c, and the remaining

506

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

Figure 18. The label of point P after four subdivisions is 0131.

2. Subdivide t, as in (cid:142) gure 15.
3. Find the subtriangle of t containing P. If su(cid:141) cient precision has been reached
then end. Otherwise, let this subtriangle now be called t ; label as in the
left-hand diagram of (cid:142) gure 16; and return to 2.

4. End: The label of P is the label of the smallest enclosing cell.

The reverse procedure, to generate the coordinates of a point given its label, is
similar to the procedure to generate the label. Vertex labelling proceeds as above.
At each level of the subdivision, the left-most remaining digit of the label identi(cid:142) es
the enclosing triangle at the current level of subdivision (that is, the triangle con-
taining the point). This digit is deleted, and we proceed until no more digits remain.
Again, the result is not a point, but a triangular cell of suYcient precision enclosing
the point. We are indiŒerent to exactly which point in the cell is the point. If needed,
some rule may be used to pick a particular point, such as ‘choose the average of the
vertices of the enclosing cell’.

4.2.5. Neighbour-(cid:142) nding

A useful operation is (cid:142) nding edge-adjacent neighbours of triangular cells. Most
cells have three neighbours; cells on edges of the bounding region have either one
or two neighbours. For example, in (cid:142) gure 17, Cell 2221 is interior and has three

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

507

neighbours: 2220, 2222, and 2223; Cell 2222 is on a boundary and has just one
neighbour: 2221.

Suppose we wish to (cid:142) nd all edge-adjacent neighbours of a particular cell A. We
start by choosing a point on the interior of each of the edges of A. For each of these
points, we search through the subdivision, as in the procedure of §4.2.4. Unless the
point is on the bounding triangle, we will eventually (cid:142) nd that the point lies on the
boundary between two cells: one of the two cells will be A, and the other will be
one of its neighbours. We continue by following the sequence of subdivisions to (cid:142) nd
the neighbour. Since no point on the interior of an edge can belong to more than
two cells, this will happen at most one time for each of the three points. Since the
work to traverse each path is proportional to the depth of the hierarchy, the work
to (cid:142) nd the neighbours is also proportional to the depth of the hierarchy. A somewhat
more e(cid:141) cient procedure is to search for all three cells simultaneously, searching for
cells that contain any of the points. The work is still proportional to the depth of
the subdivision.

A similar procedure can be created to (cid:142) nd all vertex-adjacent neighbours of A.

In this case, we search for cells containing any of the vertices of A.

In many cases, there is a direct way to generate the labels of edge-adjacent
neighbours, by observing certain label patterns. For example, a triangle whose label
ends in the digit ‘1’ is a central triangle within a group of 4. Therefore, its three
‘2’, and ‘3’,
neighbours can be found by exchanging the ‘1’ with the digits ‘0’,
respectively. Many such correspondences exist.

4.3. Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve

We present another continuous indexing scheme of the sphere based on the
recursive binary subdivision of triangular regions. We hierarchically subdivide each
triangle into two subtriangles, and then order triangles according to the Sierpinski
space(cid:142) lling curve, to create a continuous ordering. Again, we imagine the Sierpinski
space(cid:142) lling curve entering a triangle at an entry vertex, visiting every point in the
triangle, and then exiting at a distinct exit vertex. Figure 19 shows iterations of
the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve. The curve is drawn to emphasize how it enters and
exits each cell.

Figure 19. Sierpinski curve: Levels 1, 2, and 4.

508

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

We describe a procedure to generate cell labels, and touch on the related functions
of converting between spatial coordinates and position on the Sierpinski curve, and
(cid:142) nding neighbours of cells.

4.3.1. Ordering space according to the Sierpinski curve

We begin with a triangular cell with vertices labelled a, b, and c ((cid:142) gure 20, left).
The vertices imply a certain orientation of the cell. In particular, vertex a will be the
lowest point, according to the ordering, and c will be the highest. To subdivide the
cell into two subtriangles, we add a line segment from vertex b to some point on the
side across from b. We typically choose the midpoint of the side, so that the subcells
will be approximatel y equal, but this is not necessary. The label of the subtriangle
containing vertex a is set to 0. The label of the subtriangle containing c is set to 1.
The shape of the curve ((cid:142) gure 19) guides us in relabelling vertices. Within each
cell, the entry vertex is a, the exit vertex is c, and the intermediate vertex is b. This
leads to the following mechanical relabelling rules: Vertex b is relabelled a in the
triangle containing c, and c in the triangle containing a. The two remaining unlabelled
vertices (on line segment ac of the parent cell) are both labelled b, as in the (cid:142) gure.
Each iteration proceeds in the same way. When a triangle is subdivided, the label
of each of the subtriangles is created by adding a digit to the right of the label of
the parent triangle. If the subtriangle contains vertex a, the digit 0 is added to the
right of the label. If the subtriangle contains vertex b, the digit 1 is added to the
right of the label. This process continues until the cells are su(cid:141) ciently small, according
to the application. The length of the cell label equals its level in the subdivision.

When all the cells on one level are labelled, one can trace the path of the
underlying space(cid:142) lling curve. At any level of the subdivision, the triangular cells are
ordered continuously, and each cell shares an edge with its predecessor and successor
cells in the sequence. Figure 21 shows Level 5 of the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve.
The curve is drawn to emphasize how the cells are ordered.

Converting between labels and coordinates, and neighbour-(cid:142) nding proceed as in
the case of the Quaternary curve (§4.2.4 and §4.2.5). These functions are simple
variations on the cell
labelling procedure, with the amount of work required
proportional to subdivision level.

4.3.2. Properties of the Sierpinski curve ordering

A labelling scheme based on the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve establishes a continu-
ous ordering of the space within a triangular region, and leads to the implementation
of a spherical space(cid:142) lling curve. The Sierpinski curve in particular has been studied
in connection with a number of spatial and combinatorial problems (see §4.1).

The Sierpinski ordering has certain other advantages. It is easier to convert
between labels and spatial coordinates than any of the other orderings presented. It
is also the most symmetric ordering. Like the Quaternary curve, the Sierpinski curve

Figure 20. Labelling cells according to the Sierpinski curve.

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

509

Figure 21. Level 5 ordering of the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve.

is order-consistent across subdivision levels. This leads to direct ancestor- and
descendant-(cid:142) nding. Unlike the Quaternary curve, the Sierpinski label is stable in
domain extension, but this property is not of much importance on the globe. The
Sierpinski curve also has an advantage in neighbour-(cid:142) nding: cells with consecutive
labels are edge-adjacent. This means that two edge-adjacent neighbours of all but
the (cid:142) rst and last cells can be found directly. The third neighbour of cells can be
found as in §4.2.5.

An additional advantage of the Sierpinski curve is that, over a sphere, the binary
subdivision starting from a cube results in equivalent subtriangles for the (cid:142) rst three
levels of the subdivision: the (cid:142) rst subdivision divides the 6 spherical squares into 12
spherical isosceles triangles that are equivalent in size and shape. The second subdivi-
sion results in 24 equivalent spherical isosceles triangles. The third subdivision results

510

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

in 48 equivalent spherical scalene triangles. Therefore, this leads to a data model
based on 48 equivalent regions of the sphere. By contrast, a quaternary subdivision
based on an octahedral partition of the sphere is immediately distorting to its initial
eight spherical equilateral triangles. The binary subdivision thus makes it easier to
derive the bene(cid:142) ts of a (cid:142) ne initial partition, while starting from a simple initial
partition.

5. Comparison of continuous versus discontinuous orderings
5.1. L engths of curves based on the orderings

We have already derived expressions for the total length of the curves implied
by the discontinuous orderings (as a function of level number) (§3.5 and 3.6). We
also derive similar expressions for the orderings implied by the Sierpinski and
Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curves. For consistency with the discontinuous orderings, we
measure curve length between central points of cells, starting from the lowest vertex
of a cell and ending at the highest vertex ((cid:142) gure 22). Also, all the orderings, aside
from that based on the Sierpinski curve, are based on the subdivision of one triangle
into four subtriangles. The Sierpinski ordering is based on the subdivision of one
triangle into two subtriangles. In order to arrive at a similar basis for comparison,
we will, in this section and §5.2 only, count levels in the Sierpinski ordering in such
a way that two subdivisions count as a single level. Therefore, at each level, all the
orderings quadruple their number of triangular cells.

Finally, since we demonstrate the Sierpinski curve on an isosceles right triangle
with two sides of unit length, and the other orderings on equilateral triangles with
sides of unit length, we calculate a multiplicative factor for the Sierpinski curve, so
that all comparisons are on triangular regions of equal area.

Proposition 9 T he total length of the Sierpinski curve at L evel n is given by

1 s
6
where s 5 3Å /Ó 2 is the side length to equalize the area of the isosceles right triangle
with an equilateral triangle of unit side length.

lssfc(n) 5 2

2Ó 5 )

Ó 21

(41

nÕ

Figure 22. Level 1 Quaternary and Sierpinski orderings.

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

511

Proposition 10 T he total length of the Quaternary curve at L evel n is given by

We have derived expressions for the total length of a number of curves based on
discontinuous and continuous orderings. For the purpose of comparison, we de(cid:142) ne
normalized length N as

Proposition 11

lqsfc (n) 5 2

nÕ

1 A 2Ó 3

3

1

2B

N 5

lim
n(cid:129) 2

( length of curve)/2

n

NDutton-type # 1.29
NSemi-quadcode # 1.10
NSierpinski # 0.77
NQuaternary # 0.83

The continuous orderings lead to shorter curves. The Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve

performs best, and the Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve next best.

5.2. Average Data File Storage Distance metric

Given an ordering of the cells of a subdivision, the Average Data File Storage
Distance (ADFSD) is de(cid:142) ned as the average diŒerence between the rankings of cells
that share an edge (Goodchild and Shiren 1992). It is therefore a measure of
adjacency preservation. A low value for this measure indicates that neighbouring
cells tend to have similar rankings; in other words, adjacency tends to be preserved.
A high value indicates that neighbors tend to have very diŒerent rankings. Goodchild
and Shiren call the ADFSD ‘one of the important indices in data (cid:142) le structures
for large geographical information systems’, and cite its application to problems
involving data compression and the prediction of access time.

The ADFSD is calculated for a given ordering, at a given subdivision level, by
taking the sum of the absolute diŒerences in rank of all pairs of neighbouring cells,
and dividing by the total number of such pairs.

For example, Goodchild and Shiren’s Level 1 ordering has three pairs of neigh-
bouring triangles, with ranks of: (0,1), (0,2), and (0,3). The sum of the absolute
diŒerences in rank is 6. Therefore, the ADFSD at this level is equal to 2. Goodchild
and Shiren’s Level 2 ordering has 18 pairs of neighbouring triangles, with total sum
of diŒerences equal to 72. Therefore, the ADFSD at this level is equal to 4 ((cid:142) gure 23).
In general, the ADFSD of Goodchild and Shiren’s ordering at Level j is 2
(Goodchild
and Shiren 1992 ). In fact, all of the Dutton-type orderings we have discussed (those
of Dutton et al. and Davis) have the same ADFSD.

j

For completeness, we also derive the ADFSD for the semi-quadcode (SQC)
ordering of Otoo and Zhu. This was the one non-order-consistent discontinuous
ordering that we examined—that is, this ordering has the undesirable property that
the order of regions or points may change at diŒerent levels of the subdivision.

Proposition 12 For the semi-quadcode ordering

ADFSDsqc 5

34 8

nÕ
63 2

nÕ
21 4
nÕ
n
(2

nÕ

7 2
1)

6

1
512

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

Figure 23. Goodchild and Shiren’s Level 1 and 2 orderings.

We compare the ADFSD of our continuous orderings with the ADFSD of the
discontinuous orderings. Our Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve ordering and the discon-
tinuous orderings are all based on the same quaternary subdivision of one triangle
into four subtriangles, so it is straightforward to compare their ADFSD metrics
directly. Our Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve ordering is based on the subdivision of
one triangle into two subtriangles. As in §5.1, we count levels in the Sierpinski
ordering in such a way that two subdivisions count as a single level, in order to
arrive at a similar basis for comparison. This yields the same number of triangles
and adjacent neighbours for all the orderings, at each level.

Proposition 13 In the hierarchical subdivisions of the Dutton-type and the SQC
orderings, and the Sierpinski, and Quaternary curves, the number of pairs of cell
neighbours at L evel n is given by

p(n) 5 3 2

nÕ 1 (2

nÕ

1)

(1)

We derive the ADFSD for the Sierpinski and Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curves.

Proposition 14 For the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve ordering

Proposition 15 For the Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve ordering

ADFSDssfc 5

ADFSDqsfc 5

2

n

nÕ
(2
nÕ
3( 2

1 )

2Õ
1)

n

nÕ
(2
7 2
nÕ
12( 2

6)
1)

The ordering based on the Sierpinski curve performs best and the Dutton-type
orderings worst, according to this statistic; the ADFSD of Sierpinski approaches 1/3
that of the Dutton-type orderings, for large n. The SQC ordering does just slightly
better than the Quaternary curve ordering (see table 1, below).

5.3. Sequential-cell analysis

Two cells that have been ordered sequentially, according to some index, may be
spatially adjacent or spatially non-adjacent. For each of the indices we have discussed,
we measure how well an ordering preserves proximity information by determining
the proportions of such cell pairs that are: edge adjacent, vertex adjacent, and

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

513

Table 1. Comparison of orderings.

Sierpinski Quaternary Dutton-type Otoo-Zhu

Continuous
Order-consistent
Normalized curve length
Discontinuous proportion of curve length
(in limit)
ADFSD/2
Sequential-cell analysis
—Discontinuity rate
—Edge-adjacency rate
—Vertex-adjacency rate

(in limit)

n

yes
yes
0.77...
0

1/3

0
1
0

yes
yes
0.83...
0

7/12

0
2/3
1/3

no
yes
1.29...
0.39...

1

3/16
1/4
9/16

no
no
1.10...
0.34...

34/63

1/16
3/4
3/16

non-adjacent (and so comprise a discontinuity in the index). We earlier de(cid:142) ned the
discontinuity rate of an ordering as the proportion of non-adjacent pairs as Level
n (cid:129) 2 (§3.5). We similarly de(cid:142) ne edge-adjacency rate and vertex-adjacency rate as
the proportions of pairs that are edge-adjacent and vertex-adjacent, respectively.

Proposition 16 For the Sierpinski space(cid:142) lling curve ordering: T he edge-adjacency rate
is 1; the vertex-adjacency rate is 0.

Proposition 17 For the Quaternary space(cid:142) lling curve ordering: T he edge-adjacency
rate is 2/3; the vertex-adjacency rate is 1/3.

Proposition 18 For Dutton-type orderings at L evel nµ2: T he edge-adjacency rate is
1/4; the vertex-adjacency rate is 9/16.

Proposition 19 For Otoo and Zhu (SQC) orderings at L evel nµ2: T he edge-adjacency
rate is 3/4; the vertex-adjacency rate is 3/16.

The outcome for sequential-cell analysis is similar to that of the ADFSD metric:
the Sierpinski curve performs best; Dutton-type orderings perform worst; the SQC
ordering has slightly more edge-adjacencies than the Quaternary curve ordering, but
is discontinuous.

6. Conclusions

Table 1 summarizes our results. The continuous orderings in general outperform
the discontinuous orderings. The Sierpinski curve performs best by all of the meas-
ures. This curve produces the shortest orderings, has the lowest Average Data File
Storage Distance, and all of its sequential cells are edge-adjacent.

Our approach produces indices with a number of other desirable characteristics,
including order-consistency across levels of a hierarchical subdivision, and simple
ancestor and descendant (cid:142) nding. We have also described simple and e(cid:141) cient methods
for labelling subdivisions, converting between spatial coordinates and space(cid:142) lling
curve position, and neighbour-(cid:142) nding. These characteristics are useful in imple-
menting data structures and indices for storage, retrieval, and manipulation of
geographical and other surface data.

We have assumed certain regular initial partitions of the sphere, and regular
subdivisions, but many other possibilities exist. In principle, our approach is not tied
to any particular initial partition, and could be supported by a wide variety of

514

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

hierarchical subdivisions and space(cid:142) lling curves,
discussed.

in addition to those we have

In related work, we explore the creation of continuous indices (describing paths
and circuits) on general, irregular planar triangulations, and (cid:142) nd conditions for their
existence (Bartholdi and Goldsman, a, forthcoming) , and the creation of general
procedures for converting between space(cid:142) lling curve labels and coordinates, describ-
ing a family of procedures that are more (cid:143) exible and straightforward than current
procedures (Bartholdi and Goldsman, 2001).

Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1

We observe that Dutton’s Level n ordering can be decomposed into four Level
nÕ 1 ordering. When n>2, the total number of discontinuities at Level n is four
times the number of discontinuities at Level nÕ
1, plus three additional discontinuities
where the Level nÕ
3, for
nµ3. This is shown in (cid:142) gure 24; the dashed lines indicate the discontinuities between
the Level nÕ 1 orderings.

1 orderings link. In other words, ddut(n) 5 4ddut(nÕ

1)1

Using this recursive expression, and the fact that ddut (2 ) 5 2, the proposition may

be readily veri(cid:142) ed by standard induction arguments.

Proof of Proposition 3

The proof follows reasoning similar to that of Proposition 1. For any n>2, we
observe that the total length of discontinuities is four times the length of discontinuit-
ies at Level nÕ
1, shrunk by 1/2, plus three additional discontinuities where the Level
nÕ 1 orderings link. It is easy to verify that the total length of these three new
discontinuities is 2Ó 3/3 (measuring from vertex to centre point). In other words,
4 ldut(nÕ
2

2Ó 3
3

ldut(n) 5

1)

.

When n 5 2, Dutton’s ordering has 2 discontinuities, and it is straightforward to
show that ldut(2) 5

Ó 3/2. The proposition readily follows.

Proof of Proposition 4

We assume bounding triangle side length of 1. We measure curve lengths between
centre points, and we start at the lowest vertex of the bounding region and end at

Figure 24. Dutton ordering discontinuities, deconstructed: A Level n ordering shown as the
1 orderings; three new discontinuities are added where the

union of four Level nÕ
nÕ

1 ordering link (when n >2).

1
Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

515

the highest. Discontinuities start at the highest vertex of a region and end at the
Ó 3/3.
lowest of the next region ((cid:142) gure 25). It is simple to verify that lcdut(1) 5 11
Since each Level n is composed of four copies of the Level nÕ
1, each shrunk in half,
then it is straightforward to show that

lcdut(n) 5 2

nÕ

1A11

Ó 3

3 B
nÕ 3 Õ

The result follows directly from ldut(n) 5

(7 2

2)/Ó 3 (Proposition 3).

Proof of Proposition 5

We observe ((cid:142) gure 26) that at Level n, Otoo and Zhu’s ordering can be decom-
posed into two Level nÕ
1 Otoo and Zhu orderings ( labelled SQC ), and one Level
nÕ 1 quadtree ordering (labelled QC). The dashed lines in the (cid:142) gure indicate the
discontinuities between the Level nÕ

1 orderings.
For n>2, the number of discontinuities in the Level n SQC equals the sum of
the number of discontinuities in the three Level nÕ
1 orderings, plus two additional
discontinuities where the three nÕ
1 orderings link, as in the (cid:142) gure. (Note that the
number of discontinuities in a QC ordering is not changed when triangles are divided
to create a SQC ordering, as in (cid:142) gure 6.)

Figure 25. The continuous parts of Level 2 Dutton ordering.

Figure 26. Semi-quadcode (SQC) ordering discontinuities, deconstructed: A Level n ordering
1 quadtree; two new

shown as the union of two Level nÕ
discontinuities are added where the orderings link (when n >2).

1 orderings and one nÕ

516

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

Letting dqc (n) signify the number of discontinuities in a QC ordering at Level n,

we express this relationship as

dsqc (n) 5 2dsqc (nÕ

1)1

dqc (nÕ

1)1

2,

for nµ3

(2)

We seek an expression for dqc . We note that dqc(1) 5 0, dqc(2) 5 1, and dqc (3) 5 7

((cid:142) gure 27).

For the purpose of counting discontinuities, a Level n QC ordering can be
thought of as the combination of four Level nÕ
1 QC orderings. Then the total
number of discontinuities is the sum of the number of discontinuities within each of
the four Level nÕ
1 QCs, plus three additional discontinuities where the Level nÕ 1
orderings are linked ((cid:142) gure 28). In other words,

dqc (n) 5 4dqc (nÕ

1)1

3,

for nµ3

Using this recursive expression, and the fact that dqc (2) 5 2, we can show by

induction that

dqc (n) 5 22nÕ

3 Õ

1,

for nµ3

(3)

Using expressions (2) and (3), and the fact that dsqc (2) 5 1, then the proposition

itself may be readily veri(cid:142) ed by induction arguments.

Proof of Proposition 7

The proof follows reasoning similar to the proof of Proposition 5. For any n>3,
we observe that the total length of discontinuities is two times the total length of
discontinuities at Level nÕ
1, shrunk by 1/2, plus the total length of quadcode
discontinuities at Level nÕ
1)) shrunk by 1/2, plus two additional dis-
continuities where the Level nÕ
1 orderings link; it is easy to verify that the total

1 (that is, lqc(nÕ

Figure 27. Quadcode (QC) discontinuities, Levels 1, 2, and 3.

Figure 28. Quadcode (QC) ordering discontinuities, deconstructed: A Level n ordering shown
1 orderings; three new discontinuities are added where

as the union of four Level nÕ
the orderings link (when n >2).

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

517

length of these two new discontinuities is 1 (measuring from vertex to vertex). In
other words,

lsqc(n) 5

1)

2 lsqc (nÕ
2

lqc (nÕ
2

1)

1

It is straightforward to show (using an inductive argument,
lqc(n) 5 3 2
2. Substituting this expression into (4), we have

nÕ 2 Õ

for example) that

lsqc(n) 5

lsqc (nÕ

1)1

nÕ 4 ,

3 2

for nµ3

From (5) and the fact that lsqc (2) 5 1/2, the proposition is readily veri(cid:142) ed by

induction.

Proof of Proposition 8

We assume bounding triangle side length of 1. We measure curve lengths between
centre points, and we start at the lowest vertex of the bounding region and end at
the highest. Discontinuities start at the highest vertex of a region and end at the
lowest of the next region ((cid:142) gure 29).

Following similar reasoning to the proofs of Propositions 5 and 7, we start by
noting that the total length of the continuous portions of the ordering at Level n is
twice the length at Level nÕ
1, shrunk by 1/2, plus the total length of the continuous
1 (that is, lcqc (nÕ
portions of the quadcode ordering at Level nÕ
1)) shrunk by 1/2.
In other words,

It is simple to verify that

lcsqc (n) 5

2 lcsqc (nÕ
2

1)

1)

lcqc(nÕ
2

lcsqc (1) 5

2Ó 3
3

1
2

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

To (cid:142) nd the length of the continuous parts of the quadcode curve, we start by
determining that lcqc(1) 5 5Ó 3/3. Since each Level n curve is composed of four copies

Figure 29. The continuous parts of Level 2 Otoo and Zhu ordering.

1
1
1
1
518

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

of the Level nÕ 1 curve, each shrunk in half, then it is straightforward to show that

Substituting this expression and (7) into (6), we use standard induction arguments
to show that

The result follows directly from lsqc (n) 5 3 2

1 (Proposition 7).

Proof of Proposition 9

It is simple to verify that

lcqc (n) 5 2

n 5Ó 3
6

lcsqc (n) 5

5Ó 3
12

n1

2

Ó 3
6

1
2
nÕ 3 Õ

lssfc(1) 5

(41

Ó 21

2Ó 5)

s
6

where s is the length of the equal sides of the isosceles right triangle. We can also
readily con(cid:142) rm that the area of the isosceles right triangle is equal to the area of an
equilateral triangle with sides of unit length, when s 5 3Å /Ó 2.

When measuring curve length starting at one vertex and ending at another, as
we have indicated, the length of the curve at each Level n is four times the length of
the curve at Level nÕ 1, divided by two. The proposition follows directly.

Proof of Proposition 10

It is simple to verify that

lqsfc (1) 5

2Ó 3
3

1
2

Again, the proposition follows directly from the fact that the length of the curve at
each Level n is four times the length of the curve at Level nÕ 1, shrunk by half.

Proof of Proposition 12

This follows reasoning similar to the proofs of Propositions 5 and 7. That is,
begin by dividing a Level n SQC ordering into two Level nÕ 1 SQC and one Level
nÕ 1 quadcode (QC) orderings. Find a recursive expression for the ADFSD based
on the observation that the total number of neighbour pairs equals the sum of the
number of neighbour pairs in the three Level nÕ
1 orderings, plus the additional
neighbour pairs where these three meet. The sum of the rank diŒerences at Level n
will be equal to the sum of rank diŒerences of each of the two Level nÕ 1 SQC
orderings, plus that of the Level nÕ
1 QC ordering, plus the rank diŒerences across
the edges where the three Level nÕ
1 orderings meet. Given this recursive expression,
the proposition follows readily. For large n, this result is close to (34/63)2
Proof of Proposition 13

n

.

In all of the curves, each Level n subdivision is made up of four Level nÕ 1
subdivisions. The total number of pairs of cell neighbours at Level n is therefore
four times the number at Level nÕ
1, plus extra pairs at the three boundaries where
the four subdivisions link. We observe that each of these boundaries contains edges
nÕ 1 . From this recursive equation,
from 2
and the fact that p(1) 5 3, for both curves, the result follows by induction.

nÕ 1 subcells. Therefore, p(n) 5 4 p(nÕ

3 2

1)1

Õ
1
Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

519

Proof of Proposition 14

Level n of the Sierpinski curve can be divided into four Level nÕ

1 curves, or
quadrants. Let us call them Q 0, Q1, Q 2, Q3. The four quadrants meet at three
boundaries. The following pairs of quadrants have boundaries: (Q0, Q1), (Q1, Q2),
nÕ 1
and (Q2, Q3). In addition, it is easy to verify that, for each pair, edges from 2
subcells within each quadrant lie on the boundary.

Let S(n) stand for the total sum of the diŒerences across all shared edges at Level
n. Clearly, S (n) equals 4 S(nÕ
1), plus the sum of all the diŒerences across the three
boundaries between adjacent quadrants. We now look at each of these boundaries.
Q1 and Q2 are adjacent at their respective hypotenuses. Therefore, the same
relative sets of cells from each quadrant are adjacent. The only diŒerence is that the
nÕ 1 , the number of cells in a quadrant. (This is true by
cells from Q2 are oŒset by 4
the self-similarity of these structures.) Therefore, the sum of the diŒerences across
nÕ 1 (the number of adjacent cells, times the oŒset of the two
this boundary is 2
quadrants).

nÕ 1 4

The remaining two boundaries, (Q0, Q1) and (Q2, Q3), are equivalent cases. We
just look at the (cid:142) rst case. Q0 and Q1 are unfortunately not adjacent at their respective
hypotenuses. But if we further divide each into octants, we (cid:142) nd that we have two
octants adjacent at their respective hypotenuses (one octant from Q0 and one from
Q1). In this case, the same relative set of cells from each octant is adjacent, and the
/8, the number of cells in an octant. Therefore, the sum of the
cells are oŒset by 4
nÕ 1 4
diŒerences across this boundary is 2
/8 (the number of adjacent cells, times
the oŒset of the two octants). Now we have

n

n

S(n) 5 4S (nÕ

nÕ

2

1 4

nÕ 1 1

2 2

1)1

1)1

5 4S (nÕ

n

2

4

nÕ 1

n

nÕ 1 A 4
8 B

From this equation, and the observation that S(1) 5 3, we can (cid:142) nd the expression
1 (2

S (n) 5 4

n+1 Õ

1)

nÕ

by standard induction arguments.

Dividing by the number of pairs of neighbouring cells (Proposition 13), we (cid:142) nd
n

ADFSDssfc 5

2

nÕ
(2
nÕ
3( 2

1 )

2Õ
1)

This is close to (1/3)2

, for large n.

n

Proof of Proposition 15

Level n of the Quaternary curve can be divided into four Level nÕ

1 curves, or
quadrants. Let us call them Q0, Q1, Q2, Q3. The four quadrant meets at three
boundaries. The following pairs of quadrants have boundaries: (Q0, Q1), (Q1, Q2),
nÕ 1 subcells within
and (Q1, Q3). It is easy to verify that, for each pair, edges from 2
each quadrant lie on the boundary.

Let S(n) stand for the total sum of the diŒerences across all shared edges at Level
n. Clearly, S (n) equals 4 S(nÕ
1), plus the sum of all the diŒerences across the three
boundaries between adjacent quadrants. We now look at each of these quadrant
boundaries.

Each of quadrants Q1 and Q3 has the same set of cells (relatively speaking )

520

J. J. Bartholdi III and P. Goldsman

having edges on their boundary. The only diŒerence is that the cells from Q2 are
nÕ 1 , the number of cells in a quadrant. (In other words, by subtracting
oŒset by 2 4
nÕ 1 from the labels of each cell in Q3 that lie on the adjacent boundary, one
2 4
would arrive at the set of labels of Q1 cells on the boundary.) Therefore, the sum of
nÕ 1 ) (the number of adjacent cells,
the diŒerences across this boundary is 2
times the oŒset of the two quadrants) .

nÕ 1 (2 4

The remaining two boundaries, (Q0, Q1) and (Q1, Q2), are equivalent cases. We
just look at the (cid:142) rst case. Q0 and Q1 are unfortunately not adjacent at the same
relative sides. But if we further divide each quadrant into four subquadrants (that
is, sixteenths) , we have two subquadrants from Q0 adjacent to the two subquadrants
from Q1. Again, the same relative set of cells from each is adjacent. The oŒsets are
a little more complicated than in the case of the Sierpinski curve, where the two
octants were adjacent in the ordering. Now we have the 3rd sixteenth (from Q0)
adjacent to the 4th sixteenth (from Q1), and the 2nd sixteenth (from Q0) adjacent
2 ,
to the 7th sixteenth (from Q1). In this case, each sixteenth is oŒset by 4
the number of cells in 1/16th of the subdivision. Further, the number of cells along
nÕ 2 . Therefore, the sum of the
each of the boundaries between sixteenths is 2
nÕ
2
diŒerences across this boundary is 2

nÕ 2 (5 4

/16 5 4

nÕ 2 ).

2 (1 4

nÕ 2 )1

nÕ

n

Summing up, we have

S (n) 5 4S(nÕ

5 4S(nÕ

1)1

1)1

nÕ 1 4
nÕ 2 4

nÕ 1 1
nÕ 1

2 2

7 2

2(6 2

nÕ 2 4

nÕ 2 )

From this recursive equation, and the observation that S(1) 5 4, we can (cid:142) nd the sum
of rank diŒerences between neighbouring cells,

by standard induction arguments.

Dividing by the number of pairs of neighbouring cells (Proposition 13), we (cid:142) nd

S(n) 5 4

nÕ

1 (7 2

nÕ 1 Õ

3)

ADFSDqsfc 5

n

nÕ
(2
7 2
nÕ
12( 2

6)
1)

This is close to (7/12) 2

, for large n.

n

Proof of Proposition 18

For Dutton-type orderings at Level nµ2, there are 4

nÕ
nÕ 1 such pairs are edge-adjacent, and 9 4

1 sequential cell pairs. It
nÕ 2 are

is straightforward to show that 4
vertex-adjacent, and the proposition follows directly.

Proof of Proposition 19

For Otoo and Zhu (SQC) orderings at Level nµ2, there are 4

cell pairs. It is straightforward to show that 3 4
adjacent, and 3 4

1 sequential
1 such pairs are edge-
2 are vertex-adjacent, and the proposition follows directly.

nÕ 2 1

nÕ 1 Õ

nÕ
2

nÕ
2

nÕ

Acknowledgments

We appreciate the support of The Logistics Institute at the School of Industrial
and Systems Engineering at Georgia Tech; the O(cid:141) ce of Naval Research through
Grant #N00014-89-J-1571 ; and the National Science Foundation through Grant
#DMI-9908313.

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

521

References
Abel, D. J., and Mark, D. M., 1990, A comparative analysis of some two-dimensional
orderings. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 4, 21–31.
Barrera, R., 1989, A shortest path method for hierarchical terrain models. In Proceedings of
Auto Carto 9 (Bethesda, MD: American Congress on Surveying and Mapping),
pp. 156–163.

Bartholdi, III, J. J., and Goldsman, P., a (forthcoming), A continuous spatial index of a

triangulated surface.

Bartholdi, III, J. J., and Goldsman, P., 2001, Vertex-labeling algorithms for the Hilbert

space(cid:142) lling curve. Software—Practice and Experience, 31, 395–408.

Bartholdi, III, J. J., and Platzman, L. K., 1982, An O (n log n) planar travelling salesman
heuristic based on space(cid:142) lling curves. Operations Research L etters, 1, 121– 125.
Bartholdi, III, J. J., and Platzman, L. K., 1988, Heuristics based on space(cid:142) lling curves for
combinatorial problems in Euclidean space. Management Science, 34, 291–305.
Bartholdi, III, J. J., Platzman, L. K., Collins, R. L., and Warden, W. H., 1983, A minimal

technology routing system for meals-on-wheels. Interfaces, 13, 1–8.

Croft, H. T., Falconer, K. J., and Guy, R. K., 1991, Unsolved Problems in Geometry (New

York: Springer-Verlag).

Davies, H. L., 1967, Packings of spherical triangles and tetrahedra. In Proceedings of the
Colloquium on Convexity, 1965, edited by W. Fenchel (Kobenhavns University of
Materials Institute), pp. 42–51.

Dutton, G., 1984, Geodesic modelling of planetary relief. Cartographica, 21, 188–207.
Dutton, G., 1989, Planetary modelling via hierarchical tessellation. In Proceedings of Auto
Carto 9 (Bethesda, MD: American Congress on Surveying and Mapping), pp. 462–471.
Dutton, G., 1990, Location properties of quaternary triangular meshes. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, Vol. 2 of Lectere Notes in
Computer Science (Berlin: Springer-Verlag), pp. 901–910.

Dutton, G., 1996, Improving locational speci(cid:142) city of map data—a multi-resolution, meta-
data-driven approach and notation. International Journal of Geographical Information
Systems, 10, 253–268.

Fekete, G., 1990, Rendering and managing spherical data with sphere quadtrees. In
Proceedings of V isualization ’90, 23–26 October 1990, San Francisco, CA (Los Alamitos,
CA: IEEE Computer Society Press), pp. 176–186.

Fekete, G., and Davis, L. S., 1984, Property spheres: A new representation for 3-D object
recognition. In Proceedings of Workshop on Computer V ision Representation and
Control, 30 April–2 May 1984, Annapolis, MD (Silver Spring, MD: IEEE Computer
Society Press), pp. 192–201.

Goodchild, M. F., 1989a, Optimal tiling for large cartographic databases. In Proceedings of
Auto Carto 9, 1989 (Bethesda, MD: American Congress on Surveying and Mapping),
pp. 444–451.

Goodchild, M. F., 1989b, Tiling large geographical databases. In Proceedings of SSD ’89,
edited by G. Goos and J. Hartmanis, Vol. 409 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(Santa Barbara, CA: Springer-Verlag), pp. 137–146.

Goodchild, M. F., and Grandfield, A. W., 1983, Optimizing raster storage: An examination
of four alternatives. In Proceedings of Auto Carto 6, Vol. 2 (Bethesda, MD: American
Congress on Surveying and Mapping), pp. 400–407.

Goodchild, M. F., and Shiren, Y., 1989. A hierarchical spatial data structure for global
geographic information systems. Technical report, National Center for Geographic
Information and Analysis. Technical Paper 89-5.

Goodchild, M. F., and Shiren, Y., 1990, A hierarchical data structure for global geographic
information systems. In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Spatial Data
Handling, Vol. 2 (Zurich, Switzerland: International Geographical Union), pp. 911–917.
Goodchild, M. F., and Shiren, Y., 1992, A hierarchical spatial data structure for global
geographic information systems. CV GIP: Graphical Models and Image Processing,
54, 31–44.

Hilbert, D., 1891, Ueber die stetige abbildung einer linie auf ein (cid:143) achenstueck. Math. Ann.,

38, pp. 459–460.

522

Continuous indexing of hierarchical subdivisions of the globe

Laurini, R., and Thompson, D., 1992, Fundamentals of Spatial Information Systems (San

Diego, CA: Academic Press).

Mark, D. M., and Lauzon, J. P., 1984, Linear quadtrees for geographic information systems.
In Proceedings of International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling (Zurich,
Switzerland), pp. 412–430.

Mark, D. M., and Lauzon, J. P., 1985, Approaches for quadtree-based geographic informa-
tion systems at continental or global scales. In Proceedings of Auto Carto 7 (Bethesda,
MD: American Congress on Surveying and Mapping), pp. 355–364.

Nulty, W. G., 1993, Geometric Searching with Space(cid:142) lling Curves, PhD thesis, Georgia

Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.

Otoo, E. J., and Zhu, H., 1993, Indexing on spherical surfaces using semi-quadcodes. In
Advances in Spatial Databases—T hird Annual Symposium, SSD ’93, edited by D. Abel
and B. C. Ooi (Singapore: Springer-Verlag), pp. 510–529.

Platzman, L. K., and Bartholdi, III, J. J., 1989, Space(cid:142) lling curves and the planar travelling

salesman problem. JACM, 36, 717–737.

Sagan, H., 1994, Space-Filling Curves (New York: Springer-Verlag).
Samet, H., 1989, Heirarchical spatial data structures. In Proceedings of SSD ’89, edited by
G. Goos and J. Hartmanis, Vol. 409 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Santa
Barbara, CA: Springer-Verlag), pp. 193–212.

Samet, H., 1990, T he Design and Analysis of Spatial Data Structures (Reading, MA:

Addison-Wesley).

Samet, H., 1995, Spatial databases, tutorial. In SSD ’95, Portland, Maine.
Scarlatos, L., and Pavlidis, T., 1992, Hierarchical triangulation using cartographic coher-

ence. CV GIP: Graphical Models and Image Processing, 54, 147–161.

Sierpinski, W., 1912, Sur une nouvelle courbe qui remplit toute une aire plaine. Bulletin of

Academie Sciences Cracovie, Serie A, pp. 462–478.

Sotomayor, D. L. G., 1978, Tessellation of triangles of variable precision as an economical
representation for DTM’s. In Proceedings of the Digital T errain Models Symposium,
(Falls Church, VA: American Society of
May 9–11, 1978, St. L ouis, Missouri
Photogrammetry), pp. 506–515.

Weibel, R., and Dutton, G., 1999, Generalising spatial data. In Geographical Information
Systems, second edition, edited by P. A. Longley, M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire and
D. W. Rhind (New York: John Wiley & Sons), chapter 10.

Wenninger, M. J., 1979, Spherical Models (Cambridge: Cambridge University press).
White, D., Kimerling, A. J., Sahr, K., and Song, L., 1998, Comparing area and shape
distortion on polyhedral-based recursive partitions of the sphere. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 12, 805–827.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of
Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted
to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may
print, download, or email articles for individual use.

