This article was downloaded by: [University of Phoenix]
On: 13 February 2015, At: 03:43
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Modelling vague places with knowledge
from the Web
C. B. Jones a , R. S. Purves b , P. D. Clough c & H. Joho d
a School of Computer Science , Cardiff University , Cardiff, UK
b Department of Geography , University of Zurich , Zurich,
Switzerland
c Department of Information Studies , University of Sheffield ,
Sheffield, UK
d Department of Computing Science , University of Glasgow ,
Glasgow, UK
Published online: 19 Aug 2008.

To cite this article: C. B. Jones , R. S. Purves , P. D. Clough & H. Joho (2008) Modelling vague
places with knowledge from the Web, International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
22:10, 1045-1065, DOI: 10.1080/13658810701850547

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701850547

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 10, October 2008, 1045–1065

Research Article

Modelling vague places with knowledge from the Web

C. B. JONES*{, R. S. PURVES{, P. D. CLOUGH§ and H. JOHO"
{School of Computer Science, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
{Department of Geography, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
§Department of Information Studies, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
"Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

(Received 02 May 2007; in final form 09 November 2007 )

Place names are often used to describe and to enquire about geographical
information. It is common for users to employ vernacular names that have vague
spatial extent and which do not correspond to the official and administrative
place name terminology recorded within typical gazetteers. There is a need
therefore to enrich gazetteers with knowledge of such vague places and hence
improve the quality of place name-based information retrieval. Here we describe
a method for modelling vague places using knowledge harvested from Web
pages. It is found that vague place names are frequently accompanied in text by
the names of more precise co-located places that lie within the extent of the target
vague place. Density surface modelling of the frequency of co-occurrence of such
names provides an effective method of representing the inherent uncertainty of
the extent of the vague place while also enabling approximate crisp boundaries to
be derived from contours if required. The method is evaluated using both precise
and vague places. The use of
the resulting approximate boundaries is
demonstrated using an experimental geographical search engine.

Keywords: Gazetteers; Geographical information retrieval; Geo-parsing; Surface
modelling; Vagueness

1.

Introduction

importance in communicating geographical

Place names play an essential role in communicating geographically specific
information. We use place names in our everyday language when describing the
instructions, and they occur
location of places and when giving navigational
frequently in text documents when it is required to provide geographical context.
Despite their
little
attention has been paid to representing knowledge of place names in the context
of geographical information systems (GIS). Specification of location by users of GIS
has tended to be dependent upon graphical interaction with maps and the explicit
use of map coordinates. The prevalence of geographical information on the Web
and the need for more intuitive methods of referring to geography have led to an
increasing demand for automated understanding of place name terminology (Jones
et al. 2001, Schlieder et al. 2001, Hill 2006). The use of place names is also an aspect
of the broader requirement for GIS user interfaces to interpret vague concepts
(Kuhn 2001) and understand natural language (Wang 1994).

information,

*Corresponding author. Email: c.b.jones@cs.cf.ac.uk

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701850547

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1046

C. B. Jones et al.

There are several types of public information systems in which place names are
now used as the main method of specifying location. These include transport
timetables, routing systems for motorists, map-based websites and Web search
engines. Applications that provide information access via place names usually employ
gazetteer-based resources to recognize their presence and to resolve ambiguities in
names for which there are multiple occurrences. Simple digital gazetteers store the text
of the name itself and map coordinates, typically in the form of a representative point,
and some geographical hierarchy data such as the county and state, or nation
associated with the name. More detail is found in gazetteers such as that of the
Alexandria Digital Library (Hill et al. 1999), which makes it possible to encode
additional geometric and feature attributes, as well as relations between the place and
other places. The Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (Harpring 1997) is notable
for storing alternative historical names of places and recording geopolitical and some
topographic hierarchies. Gazetteers and geographical thesauri can be regarded as
types of geographical ontology which are now recognized as a necessary component
of systems for geographical information retrieval (Schlieder et al. 2001, Egenhofer
2002, Jones et al. 2003, Larson 2003, Vogele et al. 2003).

The content of such resources is often derived from standard map series produced
by national mapping agencies. As such, they reflect an official or administrative
view of geographic space dominated by administrative subdivisions. However, when
people employ place names in natural language, many of the names used refer to
places that do not coincide exactly with places of the same name referred to in
conventional gazetteers, or indeed are not referenced at all. Thus, there are many
vague or vernacular place names, such as the English Midlands, the South of
France, the Rocky Mountains, and the Midwest, for which no official boundary
exists. Equally, there are place names that have been adopted for administrative
purposes, but for which the administrative boundary differs from many people’s
perception of the extent of the place.

There is a need therefore to acquire knowledge of the common perception of the
extent of vague places so that they can be used intelligently in geographically
focused information systems. Even though any such extents will necessarily be
approximate, their presence will facilitate access to map-based and text-based
information. In this paper, we describe and evaluate a method that uses knowledge
acquired from the Web to model the extent of and generate approximate boundaries
for vague places. The method exploits the fact that when a vague place is mentioned
in a text document, it is often accompanied by references to other more precise
places that lie within the extent of the vague place. Density surface modelling
methods can then be used to identify regions corresponding to the most frequently
co-occurring places. Evaluation of the method on both precise and vague regions
shows promising results, though these are subject to variation in the quality of geo-
parsing and to the spatial distribution of the references on the Web to co-located
places. Its application is demonstrated here using a geographical Web search engine.
Some of the ideas on which this paper is based were introduced in Purves et al.
(2005) and in Arampatzis et al. (2006). The current paper explores the density
surface modelling approach in much greater depth, describes alternative Web-
harvesting techniques, and provides new experimental evaluation of the methods
presented including application to a geographical Web search engine.

In the remainder of the paper, we review related work on describing and
modelling vague places in section 2, before describing in section 3 our method for

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1047

Web harvesting and subsequent spatial modelling of vague places based on the
frequency of occurrence of co-located places. This includes a summary of the geo-
parsing and geo-coding methods required to retrieve the co-located places. In
section 4, we describe experiments to evaluate the methods using both precise target
places and inherently vague places. The use of resulting boundaries is illustrated in
the context of a geo-search engine (section 5) before discussing various aspects of the
approach and presenting some future research directions in section 6.

2. Related work

Previously, the Web has been used as a source of knowledge for applications such as
question-answering (Clarke et al. 2001, Kwok et al. 2001, Radev et al. 2002) and
studying language usage (Kilgarriff and Grefenstette 2003). The Web also provides a
rich source for geographic knowledge, as many Web pages contain references to
places on earth, and users often search with locations as part of their query (Zhang
et al. 2006). However, using the Web as a geographic knowledge source for deriving
region boundaries is not well researched. Most work so far on vague regions has
concentrated on two areas: (1) how vague places can be described, for example by
human subjects, and (2) how boundaries of vague places can be modelled or derived
from empirical data.

2.1 Describing vague places

One approach to eliciting knowledge of the extent of a vague place is to ask human
subjects to draw the boundary (Aitken and Prosser 1990). For example, in an
investigation of people’s perception of the vague place ‘downtown Santa Barbara’
Montello et al. (2003) asked pedestrians to draw the location on a map in various
ways, first assuming that there was a precise boundary and then making a
distinction between a 100% certain boundary and a 50% certain boundary. They
were also asked to place a point at a location that they regarded as the core of the
region.

Some place names are directly associated with topographic features, prime
examples being those of mountains, valleys, ridges, and passes. On most maps, place
names are associated with a location either purely by means of the placement of the
text, which may stretch across the relevant feature, or by associating the name with a
point or line, such as for mountain peaks and valleys. Fisher et al. (2004) show how
the extent of topographic features can be delineated automatically by analysing
terrain models. Although many locations were classified as more than one type of
feature, depending upon the scale of the analysis, some locations had a dominant
classification. A very strong correlation was found between the point references of
mountain peak place names on maps and the automatic categorization of the terrain
as either dominantly a peak or a ridge. These methods appear to have the potential
to be applied systematically to delineation of vague topographic features provided
that map names can be associated with locations on terrain models.

A method that depends heavily upon the text found on maps is described by Lam
et al. (2002) for the purpose of delineating neighbourhoods in the city of Los
Angeles. The extent of the neighbourhoods was represented by circular footprints,
centred on points based on the location of labels in a street guide. The city was
divided into regions according to the density of neighbourhoods and the radii of the
circles allocated to neighbourhoods varied, with smaller circles being used in the

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1048

C. B. Jones et al.

denser regions. This approach results in a non-exhaustive partitioning of space,
reflecting the fact that there were often regions of space without neighbourhoods.
Also, the circles often overlapped, reflecting the vagueness and variability in the
interpretation of neighbourhoods.

(1992) quotes Lawrence Clark Powell as saying that

When describing the extent of a vague place, it is common to explain its location
relative to other named places. In his discussion of the definition of the American
the
Southwest, Byrkit
Southwest included ‘the lands lying west of the Pecos, north of the [Mexican]
Border, south of the Mesa Verde and the Grand Canyon, and east of the mountains
which wall off Southern California and make it a land in itself’. Here Powell has
to
used external places of
Albuquerque as being at the core. Provided that some places internal and external
to the vague place can be identified then it will be possible to construct an
approximate boundary that lies somewhere between the two sets of places. Because
there will often be disagreements as to what is inside and what is outside, it is
possible to envisage compiling multiple boundary interpretations that could be input
to a vague region modelling method.

reference. On another occasion, Powell

refers

Empirical approaches based on interviews with human subjects are a powerful
means of exploring how vague places are conceptualized by subjects. However, such
experiments are time-consuming to conduct and analyse, and the question arises as
to whether published texts might provide an alternative data source. The most
readily available source of text for automated analysis is the Web. Web-harvesting
techniques to identify texts mentioning vague place names in association with other
precise place names provide a potential approach that has been subject to an initial
set of experiments by Arampatzis et al. (2006). Their method depends upon
employing Web queries that include so-called trigger phrases that may reveal the
relevant knowledge. For example, it is possible to search for the phrase ‘Midwest
cities such as’ and then retrieve place names that may follow the phrase, on the
assumption that they are regarded as being inside the named place. We pursue
related Web-harvesting methods in this paper (see section 3 onwards) and show that
alternative query methods may be more effective.

2.2 Modelling the boundaries of vague places with empirical data

By definition, a vague place cannot be expected to have a single precise boundary.
However, for the purposes of information retrieval, it may be highly desirable to
approximate a vague place by a sharp boundary which can then form the basis of
subsequent ordering or ranking of associated information content. In this section,
we consider some methods that might be employed to generate such approximate
sharp boundaries from different forms of acquired knowledge of the extent of vague
places.

Boundary drawing methods, such as those referred to earlier, generate multiple
sharp boundaries, but a method is required to decide on a single representative
boundary. Montello et al. (2003) propose a ‘frequentist’ probabilistic method for
modelling the vague region, whereby for each location in the region of interest, the
number of randomly chosen human subjects who consider that location to be in the
vague region is recorded as a proportion of the total number of subjects. These
values are obtained by overlaying the binary maps obtained from the boundaries
that were drawn. Having created such a probability surface, it would then be
possible to use it to generate an isoline boundary corresponding to a chosen level of

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1049

probability of inclusion. Montello et al. also indicate how a fuzzy model could be
derived by asking respondents to specify the location of boundaries with given levels
of confidence.

The supervaluation method of representing vague regions (Kulik 2001) is based
on the assumption that there exist precise (‘sharp’) interpretations of the boundary
of a vague region. Thus, a vague region can be defined by a set of sharp regions,
which are admissible interpretations of the extent of the region. They lie between a
definite (inner) core region and a maximal region, the hull, beyond which is
definitely external to the vague region. There is a minimum of two interpretations,
which provide the extent of the core and the extent of the hull. If there are only two
such interpretations, then the model is equivalent to the egg yolk model (Cohn and
Gotts 1996). The degree of vague region membership of a point lying between the
core and the hull can be quantified in terms of the number of sharp regions that
contain it. Kulik points out
this allows for a conversion to fuzzy-set
membership. A single boundary could be generated at a chosen alpha cut level.
Alternatively, a probabilistic interpretation could also be placed on the data, similar
to that of Montello et al., depending upon how the boundaries were acquired.

that

A qualitative approach to representing vague places has been presented by Vogele
et al. (2003). Vague places are described in terms of the topological relations to
neighbouring places, using the relations of containment, equivalence, and overlap
with existing regions such as administrative areas. Places defined in this way have an
upper and lower approximation. The lower approximation consists of the related
regions that are definitely inside or equivalent to the imprecise place, while the upper
approximation consists of these definite regions plus overlapping regions. Assuming
data exist for the boundaries of the related existing regions, then a boundary could
be created from either the lower or upper approximation. It may be noted that
rough sets can also be used to model upper and lower approximations of the extent
of imprecise regions, as described by Worboys (1998).

In the event of knowledge of a vague place being available as points classified as
either inside or outside, a simple interpolation procedure may be employed to
generate a precise approximation of the boundary. In Alani et al. (2001), a Voronoi
diagram is created from the internal and the adjacent external points, and the cells
then categorized according to whether they represent internal or external points. The
Voronoi cell edges that lie between these two sets constitute an approximate
boundary. A similar application of Voronoi diagrams to generate approximate
boundaries between imprecise regions, for the purposes of digitizing, was described
by Gold et al. (1996). Arampatzis et al. (2006) have adopted related techniques,
using Delaunay triangulations, which assume that there may be error in the
categorization of points as internal and external. Their methods modify the
boundary between the two sets to eliminate isolated points that can be regarded as
outliers or misclassified points. The techniques applied are based entirely on
geometric criteria and do not take account of actual measures of likelihood of a
point being inside the target region (though the authors point out that the methods
could be adapted to use such information).

If a set of candidate points for membership of an imprecise region exist, and they
are accompanied by measures of probability of inclusion within the region, it is
possible to derive a surface from these points through interpolation, where peaks in
the surface correspond to a high probability of membership of the imprecise region.
Sharp boundaries can then be generated if required by selecting a surface value that

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1050

C. B. Jones et al.

serves as a threshold. The resulting isoline on the surface then separates values
above the threshold from those below. Furthermore, it is possible to make multiple
slices of such a surface, corresponding to multiple sharp regions as described above.
This density surface modelling approach was adopted by Purves et al. (2005) and is
followed in the present work. Given an irregularly distributed set of points, a regular
grid of points can be generated by a process of interpolation. Points may also be
attributed with values that measure their importance in some way or the number of
times the place is referenced. A distance weighted interpolator may then be applied,
whereby for each interpolated point, the nearest-neighbouring sample points are
summed to create a weighted average. The reason for employing the approach in the
current work is that the modelling method is able to exploit statistical evidence for
inclusion of points within a candidate vague region and in doing so create a model
that reflects the variation in confidence of this inclusion. The resulting density
surface therefore stands in its own right as a representation of the vague region while
also facilitating generation of crisp approximations of the boundary of the region at
different levels of confidence if they are required.

3. Procedures for acquiring and modelling place name knowledge from the Web

Web pages often contain place names in order to provide geographic context. Some
place names refer to places that have well-defined boundaries, such as a county,
while others refer to vague regions, such as the South of France and the Midwest
that have vague boundaries. There are also variations in the granularity of the places
referred to in that a document that mentions a county or an extensive vague region
may also mention smaller places that lie within these larger regions. It has been
hypothesized that place names that occur frequently in association with the name of
a more extensive region can be expected to lie in the vicinity of, and often inside, the
latter region (Purves et al. 2005, Arampatzis et al. 2006). This introduces the
possibility of modelling vague places in terms of their expected contained places. To
test whether frequently co-occurring place names in Web pages can be used to
estimate the extent of a specified region, we have experimented using both precise
and vague places as the target (more extensive) regions. By experimenting with
precise target places, we can evaluate the efficacy of the method, before moving on
to consider how the method can be extended to vague target regions. To determine
the approximate boundary of either a precise or vague region from Web search, we
perform the following:

search the Web for pages containing a reference to the target region;

1.
2. extract all place names from the highest ranked 100 results;
3. assign spatial co-ordinates to extracted place names;
4. create a geometric model of the region and extract an approximate boundary

if required.

Simple application of this method is based on an assumption that the geographic
coverage of the Web is complete and unbiased, in the sense that there are actually
references on the Web to all known vague regions and to all associated places, and
that the spatial distribution of these references is random. In practice, there are
weaknesses in the assumption. Thus, there will tend to be many more references on
the Web to places with higher populations and in particular to places that are
popular, or of interest, for some reason, such as tourism. It is also the case that some

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1051

regions may have relatively few contained settlements, with most of their contained
places being other topographic features. As a consequence, it is necessary to give
careful consideration to the form of the Web queries, an issue that is discussed
further in section 3.1.

3.1 Searching the Web

To gather information about candidate contained places of an imprecise region,
queries containing a reference to a target region were submitted to the Google
search engine. The goal of searching is to find Web pages which are both rich in
geographical content and focused on the target region. Documents which do not
fulfil these requirements will contain few place names or locations which are unlikely
to fall within the target region.

Google is known to use an algorithm called PageRank (Brin and Page 1998) to
rank Web pages. PageRank is designed to analyse the link structure of Web pages,
where a hyperlink from a page to another page is seen as a vote. Those pages that
contain query words and have more votes from other pages are ranked higher than
those with fewer votes. The algorithm also considers the number of incoming links
of the voters so that a vote from a page that has more votes is weighted higher than a
vote from a less voted page. It is generally believed that the pages with many votes
tend to be popular and authoritative for a given topic. Thus, it enables us to
decrease the level of noise when extracting geographic references. It should be noted
that while there are search engines that allow a paid inclusion to their collection, to
the best of our knowledge this does not apply to Google except for the sponsored
links shown in the distinct sections of search result pages.

There are several forms of Web query that can be expected to return associations

between a place and its contained places including:

Rocky Mountains’;

N region only: a query containing a reference to the target region only, e.g. ‘the
N region and concept: a query containing a reference to the target region and
associated concept to select certain types of pages, e.g. ‘hotels in the Cotswolds’
tends to select directory-style pages;
N region and pattern: a query containing a reference to the target region that
includes or implies a spatial relationship, e.g. ‘*in the South of France’ and
‘Midwest towns such as *’ (this approach, based on lexical patterns, was used
in Arampatzis et al. 2006).

During initial experiments, queries based on region and concept appeared to find the
most geographically rich pages, e.g. directory listings. These pages also included
more fine-grained place names such as villages and postcodes. Although the first
and last types of query tended to find pages with place names more likely to be
related to the target region (e.g. contact-us pages), these approaches also generated
far fewer locations. Importantly, the approach of interpolating a surface from point
data is relatively insensitive to false positives obtained through the second query
type, as will be shown later.

All queries were submitted to Google and were of the form ‘,hotels [target
region]’ where the ‘,’ symbol is a synonym operator which will expand the query
automatically to search for synonyms of hotels such as ‘inn’ and ‘accommodation’.
Searches were restricted to UK pages only, and, having identified a set of Web

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1052

C. B. Jones et al.

documents, we removed all document markup to leave only formatted plain ASCII
text for further processing. This helped to reduce the number of false hits, e.g. names
within HTML tags.

3.2 Extracting place names (geo-parsing)

Given a set of Web pages, Named Entity Recognition (NER) methods were used to
the presence of place names and other geographical references (e.g.
detect
postcodes). This step is called geo-parsing and,
in our experiments, we used
ANNIE, the default Information Extraction (IE) system that comes with GATE
(General Architecture for Text Engineering) (Cowie and Lehnert 1996, Cunningham
et al. 2002). ANNIE was used to perform NER using both internal and external
evidence (McDonald 1996) in the form of gazetteers and proper name lists and
context rules to disambiguate between named entities, also called referent class
ambiguity (Smith and Mann 2003). For example,
if we found the sequence
‘,Forename. ,Location.’ where Location and Forename exist, respectively, in a
gazetteer and list of proper names, we would assume that ,Location. in this case
refers to a surname and is not being used in a geographical context.

The standard GATE gazetteer lists were enhanced in the present work by using
two main sources of UK data for lookup: (1) the SABE (Seamless Administrative
Boundaries of Europe) dataset and (2) the Ordnance Survey 1:50,000 scale gazetteer.
These two datasets contain a total of around 270,000 place names of which about
10% are ambiguous, i.e. not unique entries. In addition to the gazetteer lists, we
identified postcodes which could also be used to provide valuable spatial
information. The UK and European data gazetteer data were supplemented with
the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN), a hierarchical geographical
thesaurus of over 1 million names that provides global geographical knowledge.
Note that all of these resources contain geographic coordinates for the listed places.
Effective geo-parsing is a challenging task, and the methods employed in the
present work have scope for improvement. The emphasis here has been upon an
initial evaluation of the potential for using these methods for modelling vague
places. Improved geo-parsing would then result in improved results for co-locating
place names.

3.3 Assigning coordinates (grounding)

Once a place name has been identified, it is ‘grounded’, i.e. a map coordinate is
allocated to it using the place name resources described in section 3.2. To assist with
the disambiguation of places where the same name is used in different countries, we
used the Getty Thesaurus of Names (TGN), in addition to the UK place name
resources. The reason for this is that if we only have resources for the UK, and we
encounter the location ‘Lancaster’, it would be incorrectly grounded if the name
actually referred to ‘Lancaster’ in ‘Pennsylvania’. Having world knowledge enables
us to ignore this location rather than incorrectly assign it to the UK.

There are three main ambiguities in geo-references: (1) referent ambiguity—the
same name is used for more than one location (2) reference ambiguity—the same
location can have more than one name and (3) referent class ambiguity—place
names can be used in non-geographic contexts such as organization or person names
(Smith and Mann 2003). The simplest method for resolving referent ambiguity is to
assign ambiguous places a default position. This can be decided by, for example, the

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1053

most commonly occurring place (Smith and Mann 2003), by population of the place
name (Rauch et al. 2003), or by semi-automatic extraction from the Web (Li 2003).
The method we use to ground place names is based on matches in the text between
the local context of a location and the associated hierarchy provided by the
geographic resource, for example World . Europe . United Kingdom . England
. Lancashire. If matches between the local contexts are not found, then place names
are assigned a default sense (a coordinate). In these experiments, the default sense
corresponds to the ‘largest’ location that has the given name, based on feature types
and hierarchy depth as provided by the gazetteers. UK postcode data are
particularly useful, as they are effectively unambiguous and thereby introduce
less error.

3.4 Spatial modelling and boundary generation

We use spatial density estimation methods to represent the distribution of the co-
occurring point referenced places found in the geo-parsing and grounding stages.
These methods are relatively robust to false positives, so long as the data points are
randomly distributed in space.

Density estimation techniques allow us to interpolate a continuous density surface
from a point data set with numerical attributes. The resulting surface is usually
represented as a raster. The most basic approach to density estimation applies so-
called naı¨ve methods, where density is calculated by summing all the point values
within a circle and dividing by the area of the circle:

rq~

P pi[C q,r
pr2

ð

Þ

ð1Þ

where: rq is the density at some location q; C(q,r) is a circle centred on q with a
radius r; and pi are values at points contained within the circle C(q,r).

Kernel density estimation (KDE) methods add a weight to the values at points pi
according to their distance from q which smooths the influence of points with
distance so that points nearer to q have a greater influence on the density value
(O’Sullivan and Unwin 2003). This weighting often, and in this paper, takes the
form of a quadratic kernel function with a value of zero at radius r. Calculating
density surfaces requires the selection of the surface resolution (i.e. grid cell size) and
the kernel radius. Resolution of the surface must be sufficient to resolve the
boundaries of the region and will vary according to region size and kernel radius.
Kernel radius should ideally be small enough to represent local variation within the
region at a scale commensurate with the size of the region and large enough to
capture multiple point locations within the kernel radius. In general, kernel radii are
arrived at experimentally (O’Sullivan and Unwin 2003), and in our case values of
between a half, and an order of magnitude less than, the maximum estimated
diameter of the regions under investigation was used. Adaptive kernel density
estimation (Brunsdon 1995) varies the kernel radius as a function of the original
point distribution, but this was not done in this paper, as the results obtained were
considered to be reasonable with the methods applied.

Experiments were carried out to assess the effectiveness of density surfaces using
several different point attributes, including term frequency (the total number of
occurrences of a place name in the retrieved documents) and document frequency
(the number of documents a place name occurs in). Peaks in the resulting surface
correspond to clusters of places that occur frequently in association with the target

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1054

C. B. Jones et al.

place name. Ideally there will be a single major peak corresponding to the vague
region, but, as is shown in the experimental results and explained later, additional
spurious peaks may also appear.

If sharp boundaries are required to delineate the extent of the major peak(s) in the
surface, then they can be obtained by selecting threshold values for membership of a
region and retrieving the resulting contour-bounded regions. Threshold point
densities were selected interactively for precise regions. The initial density was set to
a value of one point-referenced place location per grid cell, and where this resulted in
multiple non-homogenous surfaces, the threshold was progressively halved until a
single, dominant region was identified. This selection of a threshold value removes
vagueness from the representation, and simply considers locations to be inside or
outside the vague region. This is a common weakness shared with many other
techniques that attempt to define an inherently vague object using some form of
threshold. Vague geographical objects are Sorites-susceptible (Fisher 2000) in that
there is no single threshold value that genuinely distinguishes the object from the
non-object.
indicated previously, an approximate
precisification can be very useful for purposes of information retrieval.

In practice, however, as

The key elements of producing approximate polygon boundaries from candidate

datasets of associated point place locations can thus be described as follows:

select appropriate kernel size and surface resolution;

1.
2. generate a density surface using KDE;
3.

identify relevant regions based on a threshold point density.

4. Experiments

Here, we present experiments to derive the boundaries of named places using
knowledge derived from the Web. In order to refine and evaluate the potential of the
method, it was applied initially to precisely defined places, namely four UK counties
of Leicestershire, Hertfordshire, Surrey, and Devon. The same methods were then
applied to find approximate boundaries of
the
Cotswolds, Mid Wales, and the Highlands of Scotland. Purves et al. (2005) describe
the evaluation of imprecise regions involving human participants in a study of the
Mittelland in Switzerland, showing a strong correlation between the human-
generated boundaries and the boundary generated by the methods described in this
paper. In this paper, we assess the vague regions by visual inspection.

three imprecise UK places,

4.1 Comparison of query methods

Before presenting results for particular target regions, we present the results of an
experiment to determine the most effective form of Web query, given the options
explained in section 3.1, using the English Midlands as the target region. A total of
1700 unique candidate locations were extracted from results generated using the
following queries:

N (Q1) ‘the Midlands’ [Region Only];
N (Q2) ‘hotels’ and ‘the Midlands’ [Region & Concept];
N (Q3) ‘places to visit’ and ‘the Midlands’ [Region & Concept]; and
N (Q4) 41 lexical patterns [Region & Pattern].

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1055

Table 1. Summary of extracted locations for each type of query, giving the numbers of unique
place names, the numbers of places judged to lie inside the ‘Midlands’ (‘Correct’) and the
numbers of these ‘correct’ places found in the top 10 and top 100 ranked lists of places, using
different ranking methods (see text for explanation of ranking methods).

Query Unique

Correct

TF

DF

TF

DF

Correct in top 100

Correct in top 10

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

291
549
655
205

116
285
308
51

41
62
48
23

50
62
40
31

F4

60
72
48
41

4
7
4
2

5
5
2
3

F4

10
10
7
8

One of the authors manually checked each location for containment within the
Midlands giving a binary score to indicate membership. Note we did not analyse the
Web pages themselves but only the ranked lists of retrieved place names and
therefore assume that extracted geo-coded places are used in the correct geographic
sense (e.g. Rugby the place and not the sport), and ambiguous place names all refer
to the same location. Table 1 summarizes the numbers of extracted place locations
that lay correctly within the imprecise region for each query. Column 2 shows the
numbers of unique place names found for the given query type, column 3 (‘Correct’)
shows the numbers of place names judged to lie inside the Midlands, while the
remaining columns show the numbers of place names judged to lie within the
Midlands that were found in the top 10 and top 100 ranked extracted place names,
using different ranking methods. The column headings TF, DF, and F4 refer to the
statistics that were used to rank the retrieved place names. TF (term frequency)
refers to the number of times that a given place name occurs within all the retrieved
Web documents. DF (document frequency) refers to the number of documents in
which a place name occurs. F4 (Robertson and Sparck-Jones 1976) takes account of
the frequency (CF) of a place name in the entire collection of documents resulting in
higher F4 values when a place name has a lower CF, i.e. if a place name occurs very
frequently irrespective of the query, then it should have less significance.

The most successful query types were Q2 and Q3, of the form ‘Region +
Concept’, which returned pages with the most extracted place names and generated
the most correct region members. The F4 ranking method provides the most correct
place names in the top 10 and 100 compared with ranking with term and document
frequency. This indicates that including collection statistics can help to increase the
rank position of correct place names.

Table 2 summarizes the set of documents collected using the Web search, and
from column 2 the table shows: the number of retrieved documents (web pages), the

Table 2. Summary of retrieved documents recording, for each query type, the numbers of
documents retrieved and the averages of, respectively, words per document, percentage of
words that are place names, numbers of place names per document and the percentage
of those (non-unique) place names judged to lie inside the ‘Midlands’.

Query

Docs

Words/doc

%Places

Places/doc

%Correct

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

100
100
100
47

630
1156
1528
1637

3.2
6.9
2.8
1.8%

22
81
42
28

51
57
41
35

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1056

C. B. Jones et al.

average document length in words, the average proportion of words which are place
names, the average number of place names per document, and the average
percentages of all the place names in a document that were judged to be correct in
the sense that they are inside the Midlands. Note that the latter percentages do count
multiple occurrences of the same name. Query 2 tends to find pages which (1) are
geographically rich, in that the highest proportion of words are place names and
they have the largest number of place names found; (2) are more fine-grained in that
there are for example villages and towns, not just cities; and (3) have a more precise
geographical extent, in that the focus of the entire Web page is the vague region. The
baseline approach (query 1) retrieves, on average, pages containing the fewest place
names. This is typically because personal or institutional home pages are returned
which are geographically sparse. The least successful query is 4, which tends to find
geographically sparse pages including personal pages, home pages, and discussion
lists.

4.2 Evaluation with precise regions

We now present results based on locations retrieved from Web pages resulting from
queries of the form ‘Region + Concept’ using English counties as the target region
and ‘hotels’ as the concept. The first set of tests measures the number of associated
place location points found within the borders of the target administrative regions.
Table 3 shows counts for unique associated points for each region and also gives
point counts taking repeated points into account (i.e. multiple references to the same
place). Between 30% and 50% of unique points retrieved in a Web search were found
to lie within the target region. Bearing in mind that possible locations are distributed
over the whole of the UK, this result suggests that the density of associated points
will be much higher within the regions being queried than over the whole of the UK.
Figure 1 shows the raw point data for Devon illustrating candidate points lying
within and outside the administrative borders of Devon. This result provides
support, therefore, to the hypothesis that place names that are within a specified
region occur in Web documents much more frequently in association with the region
name than do other names of places that are external to the region.

Surfaces were generated for these regions using a kernel radius of the order of
25 km and resolutions of the order of 1 km, commensurate with the relatively small
size of English counties (for example, Devon has a bounding box of approximately
756100 km). In order to generate boundaries for the regions, a threshold value had
to be selected for each surface. By choosing a number of values, it is possible to
generate polygons representing the regions as a multiple set of sharp regions. For the
precise regions modelled here, two threshold values were chosen, 0.25 and 0.5 points

Table 3. Evaluation of membership of associated points within administrative unitsa.

Region

Leicestershire
Hertfordshire
Surrey
Devon

Membership

Points inside region

Points outside region

310 (1425)
213 (1253)
225 (1109)
358 (3667)

653 (3189)
592 (2605)
660 (3469)
954 (5488)

aValues give count of unique place names (and counts multiplied by their frequency).

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1057

Figure 1. Point set retrieved for top 100 documents for query ‘,hotels Devon’. The
boundary of the administrative region corresponding to Devon is shown.

per square kilometre. Table 4 shows the area of the administrative units correctly
classified, with a threshold of 0.25 points per square kilometre. In every case, almost
the whole administrative unit is correctly classified, but, as is shown in figure 2, this
is at a cost of an overestimation of the total area of between 70% and 40%. However,
large areas of this overestimation are the result of falsely classified locations which
lie completely outside the region. Such outliers could be easily removed and are
discussed more in section 6. A further difficulty is shown in the case of Surrey and
to London. Very many British Web
Hertfordshire, which both lie adjacent

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1058

C. B. Jones et al.

Table 4. Percentage agreement between areas of derived boundaries and the corresponding
administrative boundaries.

County

Devon
Surrey
Leicestershire
Hertfordshire

Area of county classified

Area of county not classified

98%
100%
99%
99.9%

2%
0%
1%
0.1%

documents contain references to locations in London, and where the region being
derived is also adjacent to London, these will have the effect of smearing the region
over London. An approach to this problem is also discussed in section 6.

4.3 Evaluation with vague regions

The methods described for precise regions were applied to the three vague UK
regions of the Highlands (of Scotland), the Cotswolds, and Mid-Wales. In figure 3,
we present results which explore the sensitivity of the derived surface to different
point attribute values for the Highlands of Scotland, assuming the vague region for
this term rather than the precisely defined unitary authority of the same name. In
this case, since the initial region is considerably larger than the precise regions
previously discussed, a larger kernel with a radius of 50 km was used to identify the
surfaces. The surfaces shown in figure 3 are all thresholded with a value of 10% of
the maximum surface density.

Figure 2. Four precise regions and actual boundaries for two threshold values of derived
polygons.

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1059

Figure 3. Highlands using density surfaces generated with a value of 1 for each unique point
(a), a value according to term frequency (b), and a value of the document frequency (c).

Figure 3(a) shows the result of interpolating the surface based only on the density
of distribution of the point locations, i.e. locations per unit area. Thus, the attribute
value for each location is set to 1, and the peak of the surface corresponds to the
area where most place names occur. Figure 3(b) is based on interpolating with
the term frequency used as the point attribute value, while figure 3(c) illustrates the
result of using document frequency of place names as the point value. Figure 3(b)
also displays a spurious peak in the surface in the southerly Scottish county of Fife.
This is the result of a grounding error, whereby the surname of Cameron, which
often occurs with references to the Highlands, is also present in Fife (an example of
referent class ambiguity). Apart from this, the highest parts of the surfaces
correspond well with the authors’ understanding of the location of the Highlands.
The highest densities in all cases correspond with the city of Inverness, which is a
popular tourist centre for the Highlands. It is clear from these results that,
unsurprisingly, the use of the term frequency as a point attribute can significantly
bias results through a falsely assigned place name. The use of points without
associated attribute values (i.e. set to 1) or using document frequency as a value
gives broadly similar results, and the following regions are derived through the use
of document frequency interpolation.

The results for the Cotswolds are displayed in figure 4 which shows the extent in
2D for a surface based on a threshold value of 0.125 points per square kilometre.
The Cotswolds have been described in Wikipedia as running ‘through six counties,
particularly Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire and southern Warwickshire’ being
bounded by Oxford in the east. In the figure, the large central region corresponds
well with this description, as indicated by the administrative boundaries of these
counties on the figure. Furthermore, a number of features of the Cotswolds can be
detected—in particular the ridge in the surface which could be described as the heart
of the Cotswolds running from west to east in the figure. The smaller regions in the
figure are clearly beyond any coarse estimate of the location of the Cotswolds and
arise due to the presence of wrongly grounded ambiguous place names as well as a
prevalence of locations found in and around London.

The results for Mid Wales are presented in figure 5. The highest part of the
surface corresponds well with the heart of Mid Wales. There is a separate peak to

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1060

C. B. Jones et al.

Figure 4. Cotswolds and correspondence with three English counties.

the south-west of Wales which is located in Pembrokeshire and is not part of Mid
Wales. This is probably due to the common co-occurrence of references to
Pembrokeshire in tourist Web pages about Mid Wales. The other peak on the west
coast of Wales may be regarded as part of Mid Wales. The trough in the surface
between the highest peak and this region is due to the lower density of named places
in that area and suggests that, in this case, an approach focused on queries based on

Figure 5. Surface derived for Mid Wales with a threshold of 0.125.

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1061

co-occurrence of terms with ‘hotel’ is likely to fail, since this region is characterized
by a landscape where relatively few hotels are found.

5. Application to geographical information retrieval

The prime motivation of the techniques described in this paper is to generate
representations of vague regions that can be stored in digital gazetteers. It will then
be possible to process queries that name such vague places by associating them with
quantitative geographic regions.

Search engines such as SPIRIT (Jones et al. 2004, Purves et al. 2007) or Google
Local depend upon the use of gazetteers to recognize place names within queries,
and they would therefore be able to recognize the very large number of vague or
vernacular place names
that users commonly employ when searching for
geographically referenced information. For example, figure 6 shows the results of
a query sent to the SPIRIT search engine for ‘hotels in Cotswolds’, where the
Cotswolds is represented within the SPIRIT gazetteer as the core region shown in

Figure 6. Results of a search using the SPIRIT system for ‘hotels in Cotswolds’.

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1062

C. B. Jones et al.

figure 4. The figure shows how the titles of retrieved relevant documents are listed in
geographically and thematically relevance ranked order, along with map symboliza-
tion of their corresponding locations. The approximated boundary of the Cotswolds
can be used to identify places that lie inside and in the vicinity of that boundary, and
to rank the results geographically with respect to distance from the boundary.

6. Conclusions and future work

Place names are used commonly for purposes of information retrieval, yet many
place names are vague in the sense that they do not have precisely defined
boundaries. It is important therefore that these vague places can be recognized
within natural language queries and correctly interpreted with regard to their spatial
extent. In this paper, we have described and evaluated a set of techniques that model
the extent of such regions as a statistical density surface that can be used to generate
approximate sharp boundaries if required. The methods are based on retrieval of the
locations of places, the names of which are commonly associated with the target
region in text documents on the Web. An initial evaluation of the techniques was
carried out by thresholding the density surface to obtaining boundaries for precise
target regions and comparing these boundaries with the known borders for these
regions.

The resulting regions showed good agreement with known borders, though in
general they are somewhat larger than the known regions’ borders. These techniques
are similar to the empirical approaches described by Montello et al. (2003), but
crucially use the Web instead of human subjects as a data source. Such an approach
allows rapid collection of large datasets of candidate points for many vague regions,
which would in turn facilitate populating gazetteers with boundary information for
such regions.

When applied to vague regions, the method gave results that are in agreement with
the authors’ notion of these regions, and initial experiments with human subject
testing by Purves et al. (2005) suggest that extents calculated in this way are plausible.
The quality of the results produced is sensitive to the quality of geo-parsing of the
retrieved text and the subsequent grounding of detected place names. For some
places, this process can result in locally low confidence values of the modelled
surface even within locations that appear well within the confines of the target
region. This will occur when there are few references to places found in that part of
space, due for example to low population levels. In future work, the Web search
methods will address the problem of low population levels and low popularity of
locations by formulating queries that refer to topographic features in addition to
named populated places. Thus, the Web queries could use concepts such as hill and
river, rather than just ‘hotels’ as used in this study. Furthermore, certain locations,
such as a country’s capital city, are very likely to appear in very many documents,
even though they are not relevant to the vague region itself. Several other
approaches may improve results here. Place names that appear with similar
frequencies in the results of all queries for a specific country might be automatically
discarded. Improved identification of only those place names which are potentially
relevant to the vague region in the query phrase would enable automatic filtering of
the spurious locations. Thus, it would be possible to identify a prime region resulting
from the analysis and automatically remove relatively distant regions (outliers) that
had no topological connection to the primary region. This process could be
accompanied by a spatial window that restricted the extent of the surface model.

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1063

The methods described to interpolate surfaces are not fully automated in that
there is some interactive setting of relevant parameters such as kernel radius, surface
resolution, and threshold value, albeit based on guidelines developed from the study
of precise places. Future work will investigate higher degrees of automation of such
parameter setting, which might be based, for example, on machine-learning methods
using training data based on expert knowledge of vague places. It should be noted,
however, that the density surface model could be exploited in its own right as a
quantified vague model and used as such within geographical information retrieval
systems to assess spatial relevance to the given place.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the EU-IST Projects No. IST-2001-35047 (SPIRIT),
IST-FP6-045335 (TRIPOD), and the Swiss BBW. Ordnance Survey gazetteer data
were provided by Digimap.

References
AITKEN, S.C. and PROSSER, R., 1990, Residents’ spatial knowledge of neighbourhood

continuity and form. Geographical Analysis, 22, pp. 301–325.

ALANI, H., JONES, C.B. and TUDHOPE, D.S., 2001, Voronoi-based region approximation for
International Journal of

information retrieval with gazetteers.

geographical
Geographical Information Science, 15, pp. 287–306.

ARAMPATZIS, A.M., VAN KREVELD, M., REINBACHER, I., JONES, C.B., VAID, S., CLOUGH, P.,
JOHO, H. and SANDERSON, M., 2006, Web-based delineation of imprecise regions
Computers Environment and Urban Systems, 30, pp. 436–459.

BRIN, S. and PAGE, L., 1998, The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine. In
Proceedings of the 7th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW7), Brisbane,
Australia, pp. 14–18.

BRUNSDON, C., 1995, Estimating probability surfaces for geographic point data: an adaptive

kernel algorithm. Computers and Geosciences, 21, pp. 877–894.

BYRKIT, J.W., 1992, Land, Sky, and People: the Southwest Defined (Tucson, AZ: University of
Arizona Press). Available online at: http://digital.library.arizona.edu/jsw/3403/
index.html (accessed 26 February 2008).

CLARKE, C.L.A., CORMACK, G.V. and LYNARN, T.R., 2001, Exploiting redundancy in
question answering. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, New Orleans, LA,
pp. 358–365.

COHN, A.G. and GOTTS, N.M., 1996, The ‘egg-yolk’ representation of regions with
indeterminate boundaries. In Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries, P.A.
Burrough and A.U. Frank (Eds), pp. 171–188 (London: Taylor & Francis).
COWIE, J. and LEHNERT, W., 1996, Information extraction. Communications of the ACM, 39,

CUNNINGHAM, H., MAYNARD, D., BONTCHEVA, K. and TABLAN, V., 2002, GATE: A
framework and graphical development environment for robust NLP tools and
In Proceedings of 40th Anniversary Meeting of Association for
applications.
Computational Linguistics (ACL’02).

EGENHOFER, M., 2002, Toward the semantic geospatial Web. In Proceedings of ACM-

GIS’02, A. Voisard and S.-C. Chen (Eds), pp. 1–4.

FISHER, P., 2000, Sorites paradox and vague geographies. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 113,

pp. 80–91.

pp. 7–18.

FISHER, P., WOOD, J. and CHENG, T., 2004, Where is Helvellyn? Fuzziness of Multiscale
Institute of British Geographers, 29,

Landscape Morphometry. Transactions
pp. 106–128.

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 1064

C. B. Jones et al.

GOLD, C.M., NANTEL, J. and YANG, W., 1996, Outside-in: An alternative approach to forest
map digitizing. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 10,
pp. 291–310.

HARPRING, P., 1997, Proper words in proper places: The thesaurus of geographic names.

MDA Information, 2, pp. 5–12.

HILL, L.L., 2006, Georeferencing: The Geographic Associations of Information (Digital

Libraries & Electronic Publishing). MIT Press.

HILL, L.L., FREW, J. and ZHENG, Q., 1999, Geographic names. The implementation of a
gazetteer in a georeferenced digital library. Digital Library, 5. Available online at:
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january99/hill/01hill.html (accessed 26 February 2008).

JONES, C.B., ABDELMOTY, A.I. and FU, G., 2003, Maintaining ontologies for geographical
information retrieval on the Web. In On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems:
Proceedings of ODBASE’03, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2888 (Berlin:
Springer), pp. 934–951.

JONES, C.B., ABDELMOTY, A.I., FINCH, D., FU, G. and VAID, S., 2004, The SPIRIT spatial
search engine: architecture, ontologies and spatial indexing. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Geographic Information Science GIScience, M.
Egenhofer, C. Freksa and H. Miller (Eds), Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3234
(Berlin: Springer), pp. 125–139.

JONES, C.B., ALANI, H. and TUDHOPE, D.S., 2001, Geographical information retrieval with
ontologies of place. In Spatial Information Theory: Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, Proceedings of COSIT’01, D.R. Montello (Ed), Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2205 (Berlin: Springer), pp. 336–351.

KILGARRIFF, A. and GREFENSTETTE, G., 2003, Web as corpus. Computational Linguistics, 29,

pp. 1–15.

KUHN, W., 2001, Ontologies in support of activities in geographic space. International Journal

of Geographic Information Science, 15, pp. 613–631.

KULIK, L., 2001, A geometric theory of vague boundaries based on supervaluation. In
Conference on Spatial Information Theory, Spatial Information Theory: Foundations of
Geographic Information Science; Proceedings ofCOSIT’01, D.R. Montello (Ed),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2205 (Berlin: Springer), pp. 44–59.

KWOK, C.C.T., ETZIONI, O. and WELD, D.S., 2001, Scaling Question Answering to the Web.
In Proceedings of the 10th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW10), 1–5
May, Hong Kong, China (Hong Kong, China: ACM), pp. 150–161.

LAM, C.S., WILSON, J.P. and HOLMES-WONG, D.A., 2002, Building a Neighborhood-Specific
Gazetteer for a Digital Archive. Pap0300. ESRI User Conference. Available online at:
http://gis.esri.com/library/userconf/proc02/pap0300/p0300.htm (accessed 9 July 2008).
LARSON, R.R., 2003, Placing cultural events and documents in space and time. In Foundations
of Geographic Information Science, M. Duckham, M.F. Goodchild and M.F.
Worboys (Eds), pp. 223–239 (London: Taylor & Francis).

LI, H., 2003, InfoXtract location normalization: a hybrid approach to geographic references
in information extraction. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on
Analysis.

MCDONALD, D., 1996, Internal and external evidence in the identification and semantic
categorisation of proper names. In Corpus Processing for Lexical Acquisition, B.
Boguraev and J. Pustejovsky (Eds), pp. 21–39 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
MONTELLO, D., GOODCHILD, M.F., GOTTSEGEN, J. and FOHL, P., 2003, Where’s downtown?:
behavioural methods for determining referents of vague spatial queries. Spatial
Cognition and Computation, 3, pp. 185–204.

O’SULLIVAN, D. and UNWIN, D.J., 2003, Geographic Information Analysis (London: Wiley).
PURVES, R., CLOUGH, P. and JOHO, H., 2005, Identifying imprecise regions for geographic
information retrieval using the Web. In Proceedings of the GIS RESEARCH UK 13th
Annual Conference, R. Billen, J. Drummond, D. Forrest and E. Joa˜ o (Eds),
pp. 313–318.

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 Modelling vague places

1065

PURVES, R., CLOUGH, P., JONES, C.B., ARAMPATZIS, A., BUCHER, B., FINCH, D., FU, G.,
JOHD, H., SYED, A.K., VAID, S. and YANG, B., 2007, The design and implementation
of SPIRIT: a spatially-aware search engine for information retrieval on the internet.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 21, pp. 717–745.
RADEV, D.R., LIBNER, K. and FAN, W., 2002, Getting answers to natural language questions
on the Web. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
53, pp. 359–364.

ROBERTSON, S.E. and SPARCK-JONES, K., 1976, Relevance weighting of search terms. Journal

of the American Society For Information Science, 27, pp. 129–146.

RAUCH, E., BUKATIN, M. and BAKER, K., 2003, A confidence-based framework for
disambiguating geographic terms. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on
Analysis of Geographic References, pp. 50–54.

SCHLIEDER, C., VOGELE, T. and VISSER, U., 2001, Qualitative spatial representations for
information retrieval by gazetteers. In Proceedings of COSIT’01, D.R. Montello (Ed),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2205 (Berlin: Springer), pp. 336–351.

SMITH, D.A. and MANN, G.S., 2003, Bootstrapping toponym classifiers. In Proceedings of

HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Analysis of Geographic References, pp. 45–49.

VOGELE, T., SCHLIEDER, C. and VISSER, U., 2003, Intuitive modelling of place names for
spatial information retrieval. In Proceedings of COSIT’03, W. Kuhn, M.F. Worboys
and S. Timpf (Eds), Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2825 (Berlin: Springer),
pp. 239–52.

WANG, F., 1994, Towards a natural

language user interface. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 8, pp. 143–62.

WORBOYS, M.F., 1998, Imprecision in finite resolution spatial data. Geoinformatica, 2,

pp. 57–79.

ZHANG, V.W., REY, B., STIPP, E. and JONES, R., 2006, Geomodification in query rewriting. In
Workshop on Geographical Information Retrieval, ACM SIGIR 2006, Available online
at: http://www.geo.unizh.ch/,rsp/gir06/papers/individual/zhang_jones.pdf (accessed
26 February 2008).

Downloaded by [University of Phoenix] at 03:43 13 February 2015 