Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5): 671–688

Research Article

FloodwayGIS: An ArcGIS Visualization
Environment to Remodel a Floodway

Sivasankkar Selvanathan
Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University

Randel L. Dymond
Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University

Abstract
Floodway modeling has been performed extensively using HECRAS in ﬂoodplain
studies. The model output is typically exported in GIS format and the ﬂoodway
boundaries are overlaid on other spatial data to further edit or remodel the ﬂoodway
to meet FEMA and local development requirements. In this article, a tightly coupled
system comprised of a commercial GIS (ArcGIS) and HECRAS is presented. Flood-
wayGIS provides a comprehensive visual environment to edit, remodel, spatially
analyze, and map ﬂoodway boundaries. The environment uses the HECRAS execut-
able engine for every remodeling iteration. Four different encroachment editing
options are provided within FloodwayGIS, which eliminates the need for a modeler
to switch between HECRAS and GIS in the ﬂoodway modeling process, and results
in savings of modeling time. FloodwayGIS also provides a mapping algorithm based
on TIN intersection to produce smooth ﬂoodway boundaries that can be mapped in
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs) with minor editing.tgis_1225 671..688

1 Introduction

Floodway modeling involves an iterative process of delineating an area of a stream
channel to convey a given volume of water without exceeding a stipulated increase in
water surface elevations. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) regulates
ﬂoodway modeling and development by quantifying the allowable increase in the water
surface elevations. Floodways are modeled using a hydraulic model that identiﬁes ﬂood-
way boundaries satisfying FEMA requirements for a ﬂoodway.

Floodway modeling is preceded by hydrologic modeling that estimates the discharge
into a stream. The estimated ﬂow is input into a hydraulic model to determine the extent

Address for correspondence: Randel L Dymond, Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 200 Patton Hall, Blacksburg, VA
24061, USA. E-mail: dymond@vt.edu

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2010.01225.x

672

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

of ﬂooding along the stream. The modelers estimate the ﬂoodway limits by repeated
model runs until all FEMA ﬂoodway requirements are met.

There is a constant need to empower hydraulic modeling with spatial analysis
capabilities in order to adjust and remodel ﬂoodways based on actual ﬁeld conditions.
Hence, many hydraulic models have a simple visual interface that displays a map of the
study stream. However, the spatial analysis capabilities are very limited when compared
with a commercial Geographical Information System (GIS). A good GIS is important
because FEMA does not allow any form of land development inside a ﬂoodway and a
hydraulic modeling environment does not have the capability to perform overlay func-
tions to identify buildings in a ﬂoodway. A better spatial modeling environment would
provide more useful information for a modeler to estimate ﬂoodway extents.

This article deals with linking a commercial GIS package with a hydraulic model.
It enables the modeler to perform extensive spatial analysis before ﬁnalizing a ﬂoodway.
A visual interface with interactive tools has been developed to help the modeler perform
ﬂoodway adjustments from within the GIS. While the modeler interacts with the GIS, the
ﬂoodway extents are modeled by a hydraulic model on the back end. Thus, this interface
acts as a bridge for constant communication between the GIS and the hydraulic model in
modeling the ﬂoodway.

2 Background

Hydrologic and hydraulic (H&H) modeling estimates the amount and extent of ﬂooding
that may occur in the event of a rainfall. Singh and Woolhiser (2002) list and describe the
various hydrologic principles and methods that are used by water resources engineers.
These methods include, but are not limited to, Mulvany’s rational method, Green and
Ampt’s inﬁltration method, Muskingum ﬂow routing, Modiﬁed Puls method for ﬂow
routing, United States Geological Survey (USGS) regression equations and the Natural
Resources Conservation Service’s (NRCS) curve number method.

Hydraulic models like FLOODSIM, HECRAS, MIKE11, MIKE21, WSPRO,
FLO-2D and RMA-2 have been applied in channel routing and ﬂoodplain studies. The
majority of these models were initially developed as standalone applications, usually
without any user interface, requiring data to be in American Standard Code for Infor-
mation Interchange (ASCII) format following certain input rules set up by the developer.
In addition to modeling and calculating ﬂoodplain extents, some hydraulic models such
as WSPRO and HECRAS also have the capability to model ﬂoodways.

Floodplain delineation studies in the U.S. are managed by FEMA’s National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP, started in 1968, involves identifying special
ﬂood hazard areas and ﬂood risk, mitigating and managing the ﬂood risk, spreading
awareness about ﬂood risk, and mandating ﬂood insurance policies (Burby 2001). FEMA
also mandates a ﬂoodway model in certain special ﬂood hazard areas for ﬂood insur-
ance purposes. A ﬂoodway consists of the main channel of ﬂow and its adjoining
areas that are maintained to allow base ﬂood discharges without increasing the water
surface elevation beyond a designated height. For ﬂood insurance studies, the base ﬂood
is the 100 year ﬂood that has a one-percent probability of occurrence or exceedance
in any given year. The designated height is termed as surcharge, which is the increase in
the water surface elevation from the base proﬁle due to constricted ﬂow through a
ﬂoodway. Figure 1 shows a simpliﬁed schematic of the ﬂoodway concept in which the

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

673

Figure 1 A simpliﬁed schematic of a ﬂoodway. The designated height which is also
called the surcharge is the increase in the water surface elevation after the ﬂoodway has
been identiﬁed

ﬂoodway is shown as a constricted ﬂow area within the ﬂoodplain. In addition to using
qualiﬁed hydraulic models, ﬂoodway modeling is also subject to the interpretation of the
modeler.

The Hydrologic Engineering Center’s River Analysis System (HECRAS) is one of
the FEMA-approved software models under the NFIP. Hence, it has been extensively
used for estimating ﬂoodplain and ﬂoodway extents. HECRAS has served as a compre-
hensive hydraulic model for ﬂoodplain studies in the U.S. since 1995. HECRAS models
a study reach by partitioning the reach into smaller segments, placing cross-sections
at appropriate intervals. The placement of the cross-sections is dictated by the slope of
the terrain and the ﬂow along the reach. HECRAS iteratively employs one dimensional
gradually varied ﬂow equations to solve for water surface elevations at each cross section
(or river station) using the standard step method (Chow 1959, Dyhouse et al. 2003). It
should be noted that there is a strong spatial component to the hydrology and hydraulics
of water ﬂow.

GIS are increasingly being used to handle spatial data in ﬂood related studies
(Al-Sabhan et al. 2003, Dutta and Herath 2000, Maidment and Djokic 2000, Townsend
and Walsh 1996). In the past, ﬂoodplain mapping has been modeled using remote sensing
data (Bates et al. 1997, Wang et al. 2002), a raster-based one dimensional method (Bates
and De Roo 2000) and a two-dimensional ﬁnite element method (Bates and Anderson
1993). GIS has successfully been used to develop high resolution terrain models for
ﬂoodplain mapping (Tate et al. 2002). More recently, GIS data models have been devel-
oped to link H&H data with GIS (Whiteaker et al. 2006).

3 Coupling GIS with H&H models

GIS and H&H modeling have developed as parallel technologies since the 1960s. In the
1980s, researchers identiﬁed a need to utilize the spatial capabilities of GIS in H&H
modeling. Fotheringham and Rogerson (1994) and Goodchild et al. (1992) have docu-
mented efforts in the late 1980s to integrate GIS with hydrologic models with a focus on
improving the analytical capabilities. Demand for higher resolution terrain models

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

674

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

(Clark 1998, Singh and Fiorentino 1996, Tate et al. 2002) has inﬂuenced linking GIS
with H&H models.

GIS provides a good visualization and spatial analysis platform for H&H model
outputs. Most of the earlier research efforts (DeVantier and Feldman 1993, Maidment
1993, McDonnell 1996) were focused on linking GIS and hydrologic modeling pro-
cesses. GIS was extensively used for identifying topographic features in watershed
hydrologic models (Garbrecht and Martz 1999, Moore et al. 1988) in a raster grid
environment. Storck et al. (1998) describe a study in which GIS serves as a pre- and
post-processor in converting GIS data into ASCII format for input. Interfacing GIS
with hydrologic models has been accomplished by simple linking models like HEC-
GeoHMS. More complex standalone packages like US EPA BASINS, PRMS and WMS
contain a Graphical User Interface (GUI) that interacts between the GIS and the H&H
models (Martin et al. 2005). Commercial GIS packages like Environmental Research
Systems Institute’s (ESRI) ArcGIS have analysis functions for estimating ﬂows on a
watershed scale.

One of the earliest linking of GIS with hydraulic modeling was the development of
ARC/HEC2 (Beavers 1994). HEC developed ArcInfo Macro Language (AML) scripts in
1997 as a pre- and post-processor for HECRAS software. ESRI developed the AVRAS
processor (Griva et al. 2003) which linked HECRAS with ArcView software. The Center
for Research in Water Resources (CRWR) at Austin, TX developed the HECGeoRAS
geodatabase model, in which the researchers (Whiteaker et al. 2006) have used the
HECRAS modeling engine to generate ﬂoodplain extent output and export them into
GIS-compatible formats.

An Interface Data Model (IDM) serves the purpose of acting as a bridge between the
spatial component and the H&H component (Figure 2). Such a data model provides a
framework which allows for stored data to be accessed by both the spatial and modeling
H&H component. The main difference between an IDM and a GIS pre/post-processor
(Figure 3) is that the input-output variables of the H&H model are stored in a GIS
format.

Interface Data Models facilitate smooth data access between the spatial and multiple
modeling components. For example, an interface data model storing time-series HMS

Figure 2 A schematic sketch of an interface data model. The interface data model lies
within the GIS environment thereby providing easy translation of model data into GIS

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

675

Figure 3 GIS pre- and post-processing modeling scenario schematic. GIS pre/post pro-
cessing systems are examples of loose coupling that suffer due to tedious input-output
interchange functions

data (in GIS format) can be used as an input in any other hydraulic model. There is a
separate interface data model for each simulation model linked with GIS. Map-To-Map
is a good example that integrates HEC-HMS and HECRAS in an interface data model
(Robayo 2005). All these data models and programs limit themselves to delineating
ﬂoodplain boundaries as modeled by the governing equations in HECRAS.

Two fundamental principles of integrating GIS and H&H models are embedding and
coupling (Sui and Maggio 1999). Embedding consists of using either the GIS or the H&H
software as the host application, with the other software “embedded”. The two options
include embedding an H&H model in a commercial GIS package (extensive spatial
analysis capabilities, limited H&H capabilities) and embedding GIS in a commercial
H&H package (GIS mapping and sophisticated H&H modeling capabilities)

A coupling approach differs from an embedded approach, wherein the GIS and
H&H components are kept as separate entities and are linked (or coupled) by input-
output manipulation or a common GUI.

1. Loose coupling – Loose coupling is easy to achieve because the model and GIS are
independent without a common interface. It involves converting model data into
a GIS readable format and vice-versa (Karssenberg 2002). Loose coupling has the
advantage that it minimizes programming but it suffers from a cumbersome conver-
sion process. It also requires extensive knowledge of both the hydrological and
spatial models and their input-output formats. The loose coupling concept is very
similar to the GIS pre- and post-processing environment (Figure 3)

2. Tight coupling – Such systems consist of a shared data model in which the hydrologic
model output is stored in a common, shared database (Figure 4) which the GIS
accesses to perform spatial analysis. The GIS and H&H model are kept as separate
entities.

GIS coupling with H&H models has been used successfully to delineate ﬂoodplains
and store the spatial data in a GIS compatible format. However, development of
advanced automation and linking of GIS and H&H models for ﬂoodplain mapping
scenarios has not been matched by ﬂoodway modeling efforts.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

676

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

Figure 4 Tight coupling of GIS and H&H models schematic. Tight coupling systems are
typically characterized by a shared data model that bridges the GIS and modeling
environments

Figure 5 Schematic of the developed GIS-model coupling system. In this tight coupling
scenario, the absence of a shared data model is compensated for by dynamic link
libraries and functions that links GIS and modeling environments

We are introducing a tightly-coupled system called FloodwayGIS, in which the GIS
and hydraulic model are maintained as separate entities. The GIS contains libraries or
functions that facilitate executing the H&H model and reading model input-output from
within the GIS. A schematic of such a coupling scenario is shown in Figure 5. Sui and
Maggio (1999) categorize such an approach as a tightly coupled system, wherein macros
or functions are available to access model output while Werner (2004) categorizes it as
a loosely coupled system (due to the lack of a shared data model). However, it should be
noted here that the H&H model shares its input-output data with GIS and there is no
data conversion from one format to another.

Floodway modeling surcharges for NFIP studies should not exceed 0.3 m (1.0 ft).
Negative surcharges are not allowed at any cross-section along a study reach. In addition
to surcharge requirements, ﬂoodway extents are also governed by local criteria such as
zoning, land use patterns and buildings surrounding the reach. Such spatial criteria can

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

677

be handled effectively in a GIS environment which contains spatial analysis capabilities
and a visualization platform. The coupling system described here aims to provide such a
platform to remodel a ﬂoodway to meet FEMA speciﬁcations for ﬂood insurance
purposes. This visualization scenario enables the modeler to view a map in order to
alter ﬂoodway boundaries and then remodel the ﬂoodway to satisfy surcharge and
community-speciﬁc requirements.

4 Current Floodway Modeling Methodology

HECRAS uses one-dimensional steady ﬂow St.Venant equations (Chow 1959) to
estimate water surface elevations for a given ﬂow of water. A typical ﬂoodway model
in HECRAS consists of two water surface proﬁles – a base ﬂood proﬁle and a ﬂoodway
proﬁle. For the NFIP, a base ﬂood is the 1% annual chance ﬂood that has a one-percent
probability of occurrence or exceedance in any given year. A ﬂoodway proﬁle consists of
encroachments along each cross-section. HECRAS provides ﬁve different methods to
model a ﬂoodway. They are:

1. Specify left and right encroachment stations
2. Specify ﬁxed ﬂoodway top width
3. Specify percent conveyance reduction
4. Specify target surcharge with equal conveyance reduction
5. Specify target surcharge and maximum energy increase

A typical ﬂoodway modeling approach is to perform a Method 4 analysis, followed by
a Method 1 analysis to ﬁnalize the ﬂoodway. A Method 4 analysis allows the modeler to
specify a target surcharge to be attained. A Method 1 provides more ﬂexibility for the
modeler to manually adjust the left and the right encroachment stations to meet FEMA’s
surcharge requirements. USACE (2002) explains all the ﬂoodway encroachment methods
in detail. Typically, a modeler performs repeated Method 4 runs to produce an initial
ﬂoodway which is followed by ﬁne-tuning of the ﬂoodway using Method 1 runs in
HECRAS. In order to perform further spatial analysis, the modeler exports HECRAS
output data into GIS format and then uses a database model like HECGeoRAS to view
the output within the ArcGIS mapping environment. It should be noted that the export
and conversion process becomes tedious when the modeling involves repeated tweaking
of the ﬂoodway. This highlights a need for an efﬁcient GIS-Hydraulic coupling system
that would provide a visualization environment for mapping model output, thereby
minimizing the overall modeling time.

5 Relative Merits of a Tightly Coupled System in Floodway Modeling

Floodway modeling, with its iterative approach, is best served by adopting a tightly
coupled GIS-hydraulic modeling environment. The main advantage of a tightly-coupled
system in ﬂoodway modeling is its innate capability to communicate and exchange
parameter data quickly between the GIS and H&H model. In a typical ﬂoodway
modeling application, a loosely coupled application would have to allow for making the
modeling output “GIS aware” and vice-versa. The number of iterations for ﬂoodway
modeling may increase based on the complexity of the model and its spatial location in

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

678

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

the real world. Loose coupling suffers from performance loss arising due to repeated
input-output interchange functions between the two software.

In ﬂoodway modeling, to deliver quality output that would meet the demanding
standards of today, it is imperative that a modeler has access to the best available
technology in the modeling and visualization environments. A tightly coupled system
scores over an embedded system because it capitalizes on the advanced capabilities of
modeling (H&H) and mapping/visualization software (GIS). It is comparatively very
difﬁcult to design and implement an embedded system with extensive modeling and
visualization functionalities.

6 Software Used

FloodwayGIS links ESRI’s ArcGIS v9.3.1 spatial modeling software with HECRAS
v4.0 hydraulic modeling software. HECRAS software models a ﬂoodway by employing
an encroachment method approach (Dyhouse et al. 2003). The interface and linking has
been developed using Visual Basic 9.0 in a Visual Studio 2008 .NET environment. The
Visual Studio 2008 Integrated Development Environment (IDE) provides the means to
build ArcGIS tools and functionalities programmatically using ArcObjects, the ArcGIS
library of software components.

7 FloodwayGIS System Description

FloodwayGIS is an ArcGIS and HECRAS coupling environment consisting of a custom
user interface within ArcGIS, which aids in visualizing the HECRAS model output on a
map. It also equips the modelers with interactive tools to re-adjust the ﬂoodway. The user
interface is integrated into ArcGIS as a new “Floodway” tab in the table of contents in
addition to the display, source and selection tabs. The only input that the modeler has to
provide is the HECRAS project ﬁle (.prj) for the study area of interest. The program reads
the HECRAS plan ﬁle associated with the project for encroachments from the ﬂoodway
proﬁle and maps the encroachments, ﬂoodplain, and channel banks as point shapeﬁles
on the map.

The current encroachment stations along the cross-sections are marked as point
graphic elements on the map. The point graphics are joined together on each side to
indicate the current ﬂoodway boundary (similar to “Plot proﬁle reach bounds” in
HECRAS). Figure 6 shows the visual comparison between the HECRAS and Floodway-
GIS environments in displaying model data. The current ﬂoodway boundary is shown
as a graphic line on the map. The “Floodway” tab also displays a datagrid table of
the cross-sections with their encroachment and surcharge information. The records in
the table are color coded in such a way that cross-sections with surcharges between
-0.003 m and 0.3 m (-0.01 ft and 1.0 ft) are shown in green and the cross-sections with
excessive or negative surcharges are shown in red.

8 Salient Features of FloodwayGIS

FloodwayGIS consists of tools for editing ﬂoodway encroachments and smoothing the
raw HECRAS ﬂoodway output. A short description about each tool is provided below:

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

679

Figure 6 Comparison of ArcGIS (left) and HECRAS (right) showing model data.
The major difference between the two visuals is the capability of HECRAS to display
culverts and bridges. However, FloodwayGIS scores in the spatial analysis capabilities
it possesses backed by ArcGIS

1. Single encroachment editor – This tool enables a modeler to move an encroachment
station (left or right) along the cross-section. The modeler is allowed to move the
encroachment to a new position between the ﬂoodplain station and the channel bank
station at that cross-section.

2. Dual encroachments editor – This tool enables the modeler to move both the
encroachment stations at a cross-section without changing the ﬂoodway topwidth.
It facilitates orienting the ﬂoodway at a cross-section so that the conveyance can be
distributed on both sides of the main channel.

3. Floodway encroachments manager – FloodwayGIS employs an interactive encroach-
ments management approach in which the modeler is provided information about
encroachment stations and surcharges at each of the edited cross-sections. The
manager displays encroachment information for ﬁve previous trials performed at
a cross-section. It provides a means for the modeler to rollback to previous model-
ing scenarios in the event of a poor model response to the changes made at that
cross-section.

4. Floodway smoothing – FloodwayGIS also incorporates ﬂoodway smoothing algo-
rithms to translate the HECRAS encroachment output at each cross-section into a
smooth boundary along the entire reach. Smoothing involves identifying locations
(or points) on the map between two cross-sections by linearly interpolating the top
widths between any two cross-sections.

FloodwayGIS also provides other subtle interactive tools which help the modeler

with the remodeling process. They are:

• The encroachment information is available on the map (as a graphic) as well as in
tabular form. The table provides information about the surcharges at each cross-
section. The color coding helps in identifying the cross-sections with excessive or
negative surcharges.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

680

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

Figure 7 Dynamic encroachment label display (top) and the corresponding topwidth
change display (bottom). These interactive tools helps a modeler to readily identify
the changes being made while working on the model through FloodwayGIS. Here, the
modeler can see the new encroachment stations while moving them on the map

• When a record (cross-section) on the datagrid table is selected, the map zooms
to the corresponding cross-section extents on the map. It enables faster navigation
on the map to cross-sections at which the ﬂoodway encroachments need to be
altered.

• The environment provides a dynamic label display (Figure 7) for encroachment
stationing on the map as the modeler moves the mouse along a cross-section using
both the single and dual encroachment editors. It facilitates control of the distance the
encroachment station is shifted from the current position. The modeler can move the
encroachment by a speciﬁc distance by following the dynamic display.

• One of the FEMA guidelines in modeling a ﬂoodway is to maintain a consistent
ﬂoodway topwidth and minimize drastic changes in topwidth moving from one
cross-section to another. In order to keep an eye on the topwidth change as the
modeler alters the encroachment, a dynamic topwidth information display for the
previous and current modeling trials is provided (Figure 7).
In addition to using the single and the dual encroachments editor, a modeler can also
edit the ﬂoodway encroachment stations by manual input in the datagrid. It auto-
matically sets up a HECRAS input plan ﬁle to model based on the encroachment
input.

•

• Any form of encroachment change is reﬂected immediately on the datagrid table by
changing the row color to white. The color coding makes it easy for the modeler
to identify the cross-sections at which the encroachments have been altered during
that iterative trial. The map is also updated to reﬂect the change in encroachment
stationing.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

681

9 FloodwayGIS: A Walkthrough

FloodwayGIS requires a HECRAS project with an initial ﬂoodway, which is the result of
an iterative HECRAS encroachment modeling process. It also requires a cross-section
featureclass output from the HECGeoRAS schema after ﬂoodplain delineation. Flood-
wayGIS reads the selected HECRAS project and creates the encroachments, ﬂoodplain
limits and channel banks as point shapeﬁles on the map. It also creates map graphic
elements for the current encroachment stations and ﬂoodway boundary.

Plum Creek is a 4.1 mile long reach draining into New River in Montgomery
County, Virginia. The contributing watershed is categorized as rural based on the land
cover in this area (approximately 70% forested trees, brushes and pastures). The
HECRAS model was set up before it was brought into FloodwayGIS. Selvanathan and
Dymond (2009) have documented an algorithmic approach to automate the ﬂoodway
iterative process to produce an initial ﬂoodway. This initial ﬂoodway was imported into
FloodwayGIS for further ﬁne-tuning to produce the ﬁnal ﬂoodway for Plum Creek.
Figure 8 shows four cross-sections at the downstream end of the study reach. Table 1
gives surcharge and encroachment information for the four cross-sections as displayed in
the datagrid table.

FloodwayGIS provides four different ways to modify encroachment stations along a
cross-section: (1) single encroachment editor; (2) dual encroachments editor; (3) ﬂood-
way encroachments manager; and (4) manual input in the datagrid table. Cross-sections
156 and 179 have negative surcharges (Table 1). The ﬂoodway can be narrowed at
cross-section 45, which would increase the surcharge at that cross-section. The single
encroachment editor can be used to perform this operation at cross-section 45. The single

Figure 8 Downstream end of the reach showing the current encroachments and the
ﬂoodway boundary (red line) as modeled by HECRAS before any editing in FloodwayGIS

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

682

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

Table 1 Initial encroachments and surcharge information at the downstream end

Cross-section
ID

Left encroachment
station

Right encroachment
station

Surcharge
(m)

45
156
179
209

4,977.18
4,981.5
4,969.28
4,973.75

5,014.66
5,014.66
5,045.4
5,029.32

0.11
-0.008
-0.03
0.021

Figure 9 Updated map display after changes to cross-sections 45 and 179. It can be seen
that the ﬂoodway has been widened at both cross-sections

encroachment editor tool tracks the mouse movement on a selected encroachment (at a
cross-section) and automatically moves the encroachment graphic along the cross-section
line. Once the new encroachment station is ﬁnalized, FloodwayGIS updates the
encroachment station on the HECRAS plan ﬁle and re-runs the model to produce a
ﬂoodway based on the new encroachments. The map display is also updated with the
new encroachments. A similar operation is performed at cross-section 179 to narrow the
ﬂoodway width. Figure 9 shows the change in map after remodeling. Table 2 shows
the encroachment and surcharge information after this change. It can be observed that
the adjustments made to encroachments at cross-sections 45 and 179 resulted in accept-
able surcharges at all four cross-sections. The dual encroachments editor also works
in a similar fashion, the only difference being that it moves both the encroachments
maintaining the ﬂoodway topwidth.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

683

Table 2 Encroachments and surcharge information at the downstream end after editing

Cross-section
ID

Left encroachment
station

Right encroachment
station

Surcharge
(m)

45
156
179
209

4,980.36
4,981.5
4,977.96
4,973.75

5,014.66
5,014.66
5,045.4
5,029.32

0.14
0.013
0.006
0.023

Figure 10 Floodway encroachments manager. The manager lists the previous ﬂoodway
editing attempts made at cross-section 179. The user can select one from the list to
rollback any changes made at that cross-section

The ﬂoodway encroachments manager stores information about the ﬁve previous
iterations performed at a cross-section. The manager works on a single cross-section
basis at which the modeler has an option to pick from one of the previous trials at that
cross-section. The information is listed (Figure 10) when the modeler clicks on a cross-
section record in the datagrid table. In this example, four trials at cross-section 179
resulted in successive surcharges of -0.033 m (-0.1097 ft), -0.006 m (-0.0198 ft),
-0.0102 m (-0.0337 ft) and 0.0004 m (0.0013 ft). The ﬁfth trial produced a surcharge
of -0.007 m (-0.024 ft). The modeler can select the fourth trial that yielded a better
surcharge and rollback the changes made by the ﬁfth trial. It should be noted that the
changes made to this cross-section do not rollback change made at other cross-sections.
Manual datagrid table input also remodels the ﬂoodway based on the encroach-
ments table in the “Floodway” tab. The modeler can directly input an encroachment
station value in the datagrid and rerun the HECRAS model. After the cross-sections
have met FEMA’s surcharge requirements, the last step is to smooth the ﬂoodway
boundary to produce a cartographically aesthetic ﬂoodway to be printed on FEMA’s
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs).

The topwidth of a ﬂoodway is one of the important criteria that FEMA checks
during the QA/QC process before Digital FIRM (DFIRM) production. The ﬂoodway

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

684

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

Figure 11 Straight line ﬂoodway and TIN of the river buffer. The straight line ﬂoodway
is the output as modeled by HECRAS. HECRAS is not capable of producing smooth
ﬂoodway boundaries. The TIN intersection approach in FloodwayGIS aims at producing
a smoothed ﬂoodway boundary along the study reach

topwidth is published in the ﬂoodway data table in a Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
document. FloodwayGIS employs a smoothing algorithm that is based on interpolating
ﬂoodway topwidths between two cross-sections. Figure 8 shows the ﬂoodway mapped
as a straight line between two cross-sections (HECRAS method). We have developed a
TIN intersection technique to map (or interpolate) the ﬂoodway topwidths between
two cross-sections. The TIN intersection technique has been widely used for ﬂoodplain
delineations wherein the water surface TIN is intersected with the underlying terrain TIN
to produce the ﬂoodplain boundary. For ﬂoodway smoothing, however, the topwidths at
each cross-section are used as elevation inputs in the TIN creation process.

The algorithm creates multiple ring buffers of the river centerline. The buffer widths
are governed by the overall minimum and maximum topwidths along the reach. This
ensures that the coverage area of the buffers include all the encroachment stations on the
reach. A TIN is created using the multiple ring buffer layer (Figure 11). The buffer TIN
extends wider than the encroachment stations at each cross-section. Between cross-
sections 3336 and 3774, it can be seen that the straight line ﬂoodway crosses the river
centerline. The ﬂoodway mapped on DFIRMs should satisfy two technical criteria:

1. The ﬂoodway boundary should match the encroachments at the cross-sections.
2. The ﬂoodway boundary should not intersect with the river centerline.

It is a recommended practice to map ﬂoodways following the sinuosity of the river
centerline. The buffering of the river centerline is expected to help in maintaining the

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

685

Figure 12 Smoothened ﬂoodway boundary after TIN intersection. The smoothed
boundary produced by FloodwayGIS can be overlaid on other spatial
layers and
re-adjusted manually before being sent to the FEMA QA/QC process. The approved
ﬂoodway would be mapped in FIRMs as part of their NFIP program

river sinuosity to some extent. The second TIN used in the TIN intersection technique is
created using the cross-section features, each of which is elevated with the topwidth at
that cross-section. In order to produce a better TIN representation, each cross-section
was split into two and elevated accordingly using the left and the right topwidths.
In addition to that, the cross-section lines were densiﬁed to contain more vertices. The
densiﬁcation process improved the TIN triangulations between each cross-section pair
along the reach. The two TINs were intersected to produce the smoothed ﬂoodway
boundary (Figure 12).

The TIN intersection approach based on the topwidths provides a quick way to map
the ﬂoodway boundary across the entire length of the stream. It should be noted that
the generated ﬂoodway boundary does not match the encroachment stations at all the
cross-sections. The advantages of using the TIN intersection method are:

1. The river buffer helps to maintain the sinuosity of the river, especially at cross-

sections at which the topwidths are narrow.

2. The TIN intersection approach eliminates the problem of the ﬂoodway boundary

intersecting with the river centerline.

3. Since the cross-sections are elevated by their topwidth values (different width on
either side of the river centerline), the boundary would match the encroachments
for the majority of the stations. It also prevents the ﬂoodway boundary to be mapped
inside the encroachments at any cross-section.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

686

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

The limitations of the TIN intersection approach are:

1. The ﬁrst major limitation is that the ﬂoodway boundary would not match the
encroachment stations at all the cross-sections. Hence, some manual editing is
required to ﬁnalize the ﬂoodway.

2. The buffer rings are generalized moving farther away from the stream centerline.
Hence, at cross-sections with very wide topwidths, the boundary would be mapped
wider than necessary.

3. Long cross-sections with wings and curved cross-sections might adversely inﬂuence
the TIN interpolations between them. It might result in under- or over-estimating the
interpolated elevations which would affect the ﬂoodway mapped between those two
cross-sections.
In some cases, the topwidth variations between two consecutive cross-sections might
be high, resulting in complex triangulation patterns.

4.

10 Discussion and Summary

FloodwayGIS provides an improved tightly coupled system linking ArcGIS and HECRAS
for ﬂoodway remodeling and editing. FloodwayGIS can be used to identify a ﬂoodway
boundary starting from a bare minimum HECRAS plan ﬁle. The FloodwayGIS visual
environment combines HECRAS’s hydraulic modeling capabilities with ArcGIS’s
mapping and spatial analysis functionalities to aid the modeler to produce a ﬁnal
ﬂoodway boundary that meets FEMA requirements. FloodwayGIS produces an imme-
diate mapping visual of a ﬂoodway during repeated ﬂoodway modeling trials, thereby
eliminating the need to export HECRAS output to a GIS format. This results in savings
in the overall modeling time.

A manually modeled HECRAS ﬂoodway output can be brought in as an input into
the FloodwayGIS. FloodwayGIS is capable of reading modeled HECRAS ﬂoodway
output and translating it into the ArcGIS environment as spatial layers for ﬁne-tuning.
Within the ArcGIS environment, FloodwayGIS facilitates map overlay with building and
land use layers to help the modeler meet the community’s local requirements for ﬂood-
ways. Thus, FloodwayGIS can be used to model a HECRAS ﬂoodway proﬁle to generate
ﬂoodway boundaries. Conversely, it is also ﬂexible to take in a manually modeled
HECRAS ﬂoodway proﬁle and present the output for ﬁner manual adjustments within
ArcGIS. It should be noted that FloodwayGIS works with a HECGeoRAS cross-section
output featureclass, which enables the FloodwayGIS outputs (encroachments, ﬂoodplain
boundary, channel banks and the ﬂoodway boundary) to be combined into the existing
HECGeoRAS geodatabase schema.

The major limitations of FloodwayGIS are:

1. FloodwayGIS does not take into consideration the existing ﬂoodplain boundary
while mapping the ﬂoodways. Hence, the mapping output can go outside the
ﬂoodplain limits for the reach. However, at the cross-sections, the ﬂoodway bound-
ary is strictly on or within the ﬂoodplain limits.

2. FloodwayGIS maps the ﬂoodway boundary using the topwidth criteria and not the
topography in the area of study. Hence, it is left to a user to manually examine the
ﬂoodway mapping boundary for shape anomalies that are inconsistent with the local
topography.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

FloodwayGIS: Floodway Visualization Using ArcGIS

687

3. There is no capability in FloodwayGIS to add/delete/edit a cross-section that would
interact with the HECRAS parameters and immediately update the changes in the
HECRAS model. Any changes to the cross-sections and modeling parameters should
be done manually in HECRAS, then the model must be re-input into FloodwayGIS.
4. The smoothing algorithm, regardless of its drawbacks, provides a good starting
point to ﬁne-tune the ﬂoodway boundary to produce ﬁnal mapping output. There
are mapping issues involved in the process, such as the lack of sufﬁcient elevation
points for TIN triangulations and the scalloped shape of the boundary due to
buffering. These can be improved by densifying the data that participate in TIN
creation or by deﬁning smaller processing blocks for TIN creations.

5. FloodwayGIS cannot identify obstructions while placing the encroachments along a

cross-section.

6. FloodwayGIS does not have the capability to display hydraulic structures such as

bridges and culverts from the HECRAS model in the ArcGIS environment,

The water resources engineering community has constantly been driven towards
interfacing modeling and visualization components. Visualization has helped present the
output efﬁciently both for determination and outreach purposes. FloodwayGIS provides
a much improved visualization platform for HECRAS ﬂoodway modeling output. As the
abovementioned drawbacks get addressed, FloodwayGIS can evolve into a comprehen-
sive visualization environment for all HECRAS ﬂoodway modeling scenarios.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Mr. Kendrick Logsdon Jr. of Dewberry, LLC for his
invaluable technical and design inputs while developing FloodwayGIS. The authors
would also like to thank Dr. Janghwoan Choi, engineer/GIS developer, Dewberry, LLC
for providing feedback and algorithmic suggestions to improve the features and ﬁnal
output using the visual environment. Mr. Milver Valenzuela, engineer, Dewberry, LLC
and Mr. Xiaoyi Zhang deserve a special mention for their fundamental algorithmic
inputs to the mapping process.

References

Al-Sabhan W, Mulligan M, and Blackburn G A 2003 A real-time hydrological model for
ﬂood prediction using GIS and the WWW. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 27:
9–32

Bates P D and Anderson M G 1993 A two-dimensional ﬁnite element model for river ﬂow
inundation. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London: Mathematical and Physical Sciences
440(1909): 481–91

Bates P D and De Roo A P J 2000 A simple raster-based model for ﬂood inundation simulation.

Journal of Hydrology 236: 54–77

Bates P D, Horritt M S, Smith C N, and Mason D C 1997 Integrating remote sensing observations

of ﬂood hydrology and hydraulic modeling. Hydrological Processes 11: 1777–95

Beavers M A 1994 Floodplain Determination Using HEC-2 and Geographic Information Systems.
Unpublished M.S. Thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Texas at Austin
Burby R J 2001 Flood insurance and ﬂoodplain management: The US experience. Environmental

Hazards 3: 111–22

Chow V T 1959 Open Channel Hydraulics. New York, McGraw Hill

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

688

S Selvanathan and R L Dymond

Clark M J 1998 Putting water in its place: A perspective on GIS in hydrology and water manage-

ment. Hydrological Processes 12: 823–34

DeVantier B A and Feldman A D 1993 Review of GIS applications in hydrologic modeling. Journal

of Water Resources Planning and Management 119: 246–61

Dutta D and Herath S 2000 Flood inundation simulation in a river basin using a physically based

distributed hydrologic model. Hydrological Processes 14: 497–519

Dyhouse G, Hatchett J, and Benn J 2003 Floodplain Modeling Using HEC-RAS. Waterbury, CT,

Fotheringham A S and Rogerson P A (eds) 1994 Spatial Analysis and GIS. London, Taylor &

Haestad Press

Francis

Garbrecht J and Martz L W 1999 Digital Elevation Model issues in water resources modeling.

Proceedings of the Nineteenth ESRI International User Conference, San Diego, California

Goodchild M F, Haining R, and Wise S 1992 Integrating GIS and spatial data analysis: Problems
and possibilities. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 6: 407–23
Griva A, Baltas E A, Varanou A, and Mimikou M A 2003 GIS-based Floodplain Mapping in
Greece. In Proceedings of the International Conference Towards Natural Flood Reduction
Strategies, Warsaw, Poland

Karssenberg D 2002 The value of environmental modeling languages for building distributed

hydrological models. Hydrological Processes 16: 2751–66

Maidment D R 1993 GIS and hydrological modeling. In Goodchild M F, Parks B, and Steyaert L
(eds) Environmental Modeling with GIS. New York, Oxford University Press: 147–67
Maidment D R and Djokic D 2000 Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modeling Support with Geographi-

cal Information Systems. Redlands, CA, ESRI Press

Martin P H, Lebouef E J, Dobbins J P, Daniels E B, and Abkowitz M D 2005 Interfacing GIS with
water resource models: A state of the art review. Journal of American Water Resources
Association 41: 1471–87 Paper No. 03208

McDonnell R A 1996 Including the spatial dimension: Using geographical information systems in

Hydrology. Progress in Physical Geography 20: 159–77

Moore I D, Grayson R B, and Brursch G J 1988 A Contour-Based Topographic Model for
Hydrological and Ecological Applications. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 13:
305–20

Robayo O 2005 “to Map: Converting a NEXRAD rainfall map into a ﬂoodplain map. Unpublished

PhD Dissertation, University of Texas at Austin

Selvanathan S and Dymond R L 2009 An algorithmic approach to iterative ﬂoodway modeling

using HEC-RAS and GIS. Journal of Flood Engineering 1: 77–88

Singh V P and Fiorentino M 1996 Geographical Information Systems in Hydrology. Dordrecht,

Singh V P and Woolhiser D A 2002 Mathematical modeling of watershed hydrology. Journal of

Kluwer

Hydrologic Engineering 7: 270–92

Storck P, Bowling L, Wetherbee P, and Lettenmaier D 1998 Application of a GIS-based distributed
hydrology model for prediction of forest harvest effects on peak streamﬂow in the Paciﬁc
Northwest. Hydrological Processes 12: 889–904

Sui D Z and Maggio R C 1999 Integrating GIS with hydrologic modeling: Practices, problems and

prospects. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 23: 33–51

Tate E C, Maidment D R, Olivera F, and Anderson D J 2002 Creating a terrain model for ﬂoodplain

mapping. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering 7: 100–8

Townsend P A and Walsh S J 1996 Modeling ﬂoodplain inundation using an integrated GIS with

radar and optical remote sensing. Geomorphology 21: 295–312

USACE 2002 HEC-RAS User’s Manual Ver. 3.1. Washington, DC, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Wang Y, Colby J D, and Mulcahy K A 2002 An efﬁcient method for mapping ﬂood extent in a
coastal ﬂoodplain using Landsat TM and DEM data. International Journal of Remote Sensing
23: 3681–96

Werner M 2004 Spatial Flood Extent Modeling: A Performance-Based Comparison. Unpublished

PhD Dissertation, de technische Universiteit Delft

Whiteaker T L, Robayo O, Maidment D R, and Obenour D 2006 From a NEXRAD Rainfall map

to a ﬂoodplain map. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering 11: 37–45

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(5)

