 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4): 493–514

XXX 
© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1467-9671
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK

Research Article

Research Article
GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance
W Lin

GIS Development in China’s Urban 
Governance: A Case Study of Shenzhen

Wen Lin
Department of Geography
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee

Abstract
Government  agencies  have  been  an  important  actor  in  using  GIS  and  other
information  technologies  across  the  world.  However,  contextual  examinations  of
government GIS practices over time within non-Western contexts remain sparse in
the existing GIScience literature. In particular, little is known with respect to China’s
significant growth of using GIS in its urban government amidst its rapid urbanization
and enormous transformation. This article presents an in-depth investigation of the
case  of  Shenzhen  city,  one  of  the  China’s  leading  cities  in  urban  government  GIS
development. Drawing upon critical GIS research and GIS implementation studies,
a  synthesized  theoretical  framework  is  developed  to  interrogate  the  nature  and
evolutionary process of Shenzhen’s government GIS practices. The analysis is focused
on  examining  the  role  of  broader  social  conditions,  local  contextual  factors  and
organizational  characteristics  in  shaping  GIS  development  in  Shenzhen’s  urban
governance. Situated in this contextual analysis, this article also illustrates the three
major transformations of GIS development in Shenzhen’s planning agency over the
past decade. The findings show that GIS development in Chinese urban governance
has been influenced not only by the instrumental functions of GIS, but also by the
interactions and relationships among different actors and institutions with various
vested interests in the process of structuring and governing the urban spaces. This
study  will  contribute  to  the  ongoing  discussion  of  understanding  the  interwoven
relationship between GIS and society in GIScience research.

: GIS development, urban governance, Shenzhen, China
Keywords

1 Introduction

The use of GIS continues to grow exponentially across the world. In particular, public
agencies have been an important user group adopting GIS both in the industrialized and
developing  countries  (Foresman  1998,  Cavric  et  al.  2003,  Gilfoyle  and  Thorpe  2004).

Address  for  correspondence:
Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA. E-mail: wenlin@uwm.edu

  Wen  Lin,  Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Wisconsin-

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2008.01112.x

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

494

W Lin

Many scholars have argued that investigating the underlying processes of GIS practices
within  particular  social,  economic,  and  political  contexts  is  necessary,  which  forms  an
important  basis  for  evaluating  the  use  of  GIS  (Pickles  1995,  Nedovic-Budic  1998,
Schuurman 1999, Sheppard 2005). However, while there are various studies examining
GIS diffusion and implementation within a variety of social contexts (Fox 1991, Campbell
and Masser 1995, Sahay and Walsham 1996, Nedovic-Budic 1998, Cavric et al. 2003,
Gilfoyle  and  Thorpe  2004),  detailed  organizational  GIS  practices  in  urban  governance
within non-Western settings are still largely lacking. In particular, while GIS development
has  experienced  rapid  growth  in  conjunction  with  China’s  dramatic  economic  and
social transformation (Kong 2001, Chen et al. 2002), little is known with respect to the
nature and the evolving process of these urban GIS developments. Thus, this article as
part  of  a  larger  project  presents  an  initial  effort  to  contribute  to  GIScience  research
through  a  study  situated  in  urban  China.  Two  streams  of  GIScience  research,  critical
GIS research and GIS adoption and implementation studies, are drawn upon to interrogate
the  detailed  urban  government  GIS  construction  processes  in  China.  Specifically,  the
objectives  of  this  article  are,  first,  to  elucidate  the  role  of  the  broader  socioeconomic
transformations and the internal organizational characteristics in shaping China’s local
government GIS practices, and, second, to illustrate what kinds of GIS technologies have
been developed over time within these socio-political contexts.

An in-depth case study research method (Yin 2003) is employed because it is well
suited  for  exploring  the  relatively  unknown  evolving  process  of  GIS  within  specific
social  and  geographic  contexts.  The  methodology  is  also  informed  by  Burawoy’s
extended  case  method  (1991,  2000),  which  employs  a  situational  analysis  that  seeks
generalization  of  empirical  data  through  reconstructing  existing  theories  (Burawoy
1991, p. 279). Shenzhen in southern China is chosen as a case study for several reasons.
First,  Shenzhen  has  a  relatively  long  history  of  government  GIS  practices  in  China,
which have been widely perceived to be very successful. Second, while Shenzhen might
be  in  some  ways  distinctive  with  regards  to  its  significant  growth  and  relative  wealth
compared  to  other  Chinese  cities,  this  case  can  shed  important  light  on  understanding
urban GIS elsewhere in China since Shenzhen is often seen as a predecessor in govern-
ment  GIS  practice.  Moreover,  it  is  crucial  to  examine  the  role  of  GIS  in  Shenzhen’s
urban governance and planning activities amid its rapid urban growth and its increasing
involvement in the global economy. More specifically, the Shenzhen Urban Planning and
Land  Information  Center  (SUPLIC  hereafter),  a  subunit  of  the  land  management  and
planning  bureau,  has  been  a  critical  actor  in  Shenzhen’s  government  GIS  development
and  thus  is  investigated.  Empirical  data  were  drawn  from  five  months  of  fieldwork
undertaken in China in 2005 and 2006. Data sources include semi-structured interviews
with GIS practitioners, researchers and policy makers involved in Shenzhen’s GIS practices,
secondary  data  collection  of  written  documents  such  as  archival  reports,  newspaper
clippings,  website  postings,  and  related  policy  documents,  and  participant  observation
1
.
of the investigated organization during a four-month GIS internship

The  remainder  of  this  article  proceeds  as  follows.  First,  the  relevant  literatures  on
organizational GIS practices that inform the theoretical framework are reviewed. Second,
the  role  of  broader  social  conditions  influencing  SUPLIC’s  GIS  practice  is  analyzed.
Third,  the  local  contexts  including  the  socioeconomic  context  of  Shenzhen  and  the
internal  organizational  factors  are  examined,  followed  by  an  analysis  of  three  major
transformations  of  GIS  development  in  the  SUPLIC  over  the  past  decade.  Lastly,  the
conclusions  and  some  potential  future  research  are  presented.  The  findings  show  that

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

495

GIS development in Shenzhen’s urban governance has been influenced not only by the
instrumental functions of GIS technologies, but also by the interactions and relationships
among  different  actors  and  institutions  with  various  vested  interests  in  the  process  of
structuring and governing the urban spaces. In particular, the dynamics of central-local
state nexus and urban transformation in post-socialist China, along with local contexts
and  organizational  capacities,  have  significantly  influenced  city  government  GIS  develop-
ment in Shenzhen. Such contingencies, to a large extent, have led to government-centric
and  system-oriented  technological  developments  in  local  public  administration.  This
study will help form a basis for further examining and evaluating GIS developments in
China’s urban governance, thus enriching the ongoing discussion of the reciprocally
shaped relationships between GIS and society in GIScience research.

2 Theoretical Framework

2.1 Critical GIS: GIS as Social Constructions

During  the  past  decade,  a  burgeoning  literature  of  critical  GIS  has  emerged  within
GIScience  (e.g.  Sheppard  2005,  Chrisman  2005,  O’Sullivan  2006,  Schuurman  2006,
Elwood 2006). Critical GIS research argues that GIS, like other technologies, is socially
constructed because it forms an intricate part of society. As such, the development and
use  of  GIS  is  viewed  as  a  complex  process  highly  embedded  in  social,  economic  and
political conditions. This body of work has been largely stimulated by a heated debate
in  the  mid-1990s,  in  which  a  number  of  social  theorists  voiced  strong  concerns
regarding  the  epistemological,  social  and  political  implications  of  GIS  (cf.  Schuurman
1999,  Taylor  1990,  Lake  1993,  Sui  1994,  Pickles  1995,  Sheppard  1995,  Curry  1995,
Runstrom 1995).

While  confrontational  in  the  beginning,  the  critics  importantly  addressed  the  lack
of studies examining GIS technology changes in relation to the broader social transfor-
mations (Pickles 1995). These debates raise some critical questions, such as: Who develops
and who utilizes GIS technologies? What kinds of GIS are being developed and in what
ways are they used? How do we examine these applications (UCGIS 2002)? Consequently,
‘GIS and Society’ emerged as a distinct and broad research agenda concerned with the
mutual  constitution  of  GIS  and  societal  practices  (Sheppard  1995,  UCGIS  2002),
leading to the increasing critical engagement with GIS from various fields, also known
as  critical  GIS  (Schuurman  2000,  2006).  These  studies  have  provided  more  nuanced
analyses  concerning  a  range  of  topics  (O’Sullivan  2006),  such  as  ethical  and  legal
implications of GIS (e.g. Onsrud and Rushton 1995), intellectual evolution of GIS (e.g.
Foresman 1998, Mark 1997, Harvey and Chrisman 2004), ontologies in GIS (e.g. Smith
and Mark 2001, Schuurman 2006), and public participation GIS (PPGIS) (e.g. Ghose 2001,
Craig et al. 2002, Sieber 2004, Elwood 2006).

One key theme particularly relevant to the current study is examining how GIS have
emerged  from  particular  and  contingent  practices,  discourses,  and  knowledge,  which
can provide a basis for better understanding the role of GIS practices in society, and thus
possible  improvements  of  GIS  applications  (Sheppard  1995,  2005;  Schuurman  1999;
Chrisman 2005; O’Sullivan 2006). In particular, a number of scholars have investigated
the  nature  and  evolution  of  GIS  practices  that  have  shed  light  on  understanding
state  GIS  development  and  use  (Foresman  1998,  Roche  1999,  Harvey  2001,  Harvey
and  Tulloch  2006). For example, several scholars in Foresman’s (1998) edited volume

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

496

W Lin

discuss  the  shifts  of  policies  and  societal  trends  in  the  1950s  and  early  1960s  towards
land  use  management  that  had  greatly  influenced  the  early  stage  of  GIS  development,
such  as  the  Canadian  GIS  (Foresman  1998,  p.  10).  Apart  from  software  development
processes,  data  is  an  important  aspect  of  GIS  construction.  For  example,  Harvey  and
Tulloch  (2006,  p.  743)  examine  how  US  local  governments  have  implemented  the
National  Spatial  Data  Infrastructure  to  facilitate  data  sharing  at  various  scales.  Their
findings show that local-government data sharing is largely undertaken through informal
mechanisms and to support existing governmental activities (see also Nedovic-Budic et al.
2004).  While  the  above  discussions  have  primarily  focused  on  industrialized  countries
(Sheppard  2005),  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  field  of  information  system  research
presents various studies on developing countries (cf. Sahay and Avgerou 2002, Georgiadou
et  al.  2005).  For  example,  Georgiadou  et  al.  (2005)  propose  a  framework  to  study
spatial  data  infrastructure  (SDI)  through  a  case  in  India.  The  authors  analyze  the
implementation  dynamics  of  SDI  through  three  sets  of  concepts:  installed  base  and
lock-in effects, the self-reinforcing mechanism of standardization processes, and cultiva-
tion  strategies  of  information  infrastructure  design.  This  calling  for  attention  to  the
process
  of  how  SDI  is  being  built  and  its  path-dependence  echoes  the  critical  GIS
research.

The importance of contextual factors and the social relations shaping GIS development
has also been demonstrated in PPGIS studies, which investigate GIS use by traditionally
marginalized  social  groups  in  participatory  decision-making  processes  (cf.  Craig  et  al.
2002). These studies have analyzed the organizational capacities, institutional arrange-
ments, power relations among actors and institutes, and epistemological differences that
shape  types  of  GIS  technologies  and  spatial  data  used  by  grassroots  organizations
(Elwood 2008; see also Sieber 2006). While PPGIS research has not been mainly focused
on state GIS activities, it provides important insights into understanding the underlying
governing  structure  that  shapes  data  availability  and  grassroots’  employment  of  GIS.
For  example,  neoliberal  governance  and  policies  have  influenced  the  way  in  which  US
inner-city community organizations use GIS and spatial data and form scaled networks
with actors in the urban revitalization activities (Ghose 2005, 2007).

Together, these abovementioned studies have pointed to the importance of examining
societal  conditions  and  particular  underlying  processes  of  GIS  development.  These
acknowledge the political dimension of GIS development in social groups and the social
implications of these GIS practices. Such a process-based perspective acknowledging the
political dimension of GIS practices underpins this particular study. In addition, the GIS
implementation  research  reviewed  next  provides  complementary  insights  into  various
factors influencing organizational GIS development.

2.2 GIS Adoption and Implementation in Organizations

Numerous studies have examined GIS adoption and implementation in public agencies
(cf.  Obermeyer  and  Pinto  1994,  Campbell  and  Masser  1995,  Pinto  and  Onsrud  1997,
Gilfoyle  and  Thorpe  2004).  This  vast  literature  is  primarily  concerned  with  evaluating
the efficiency and effectiveness of GIS development within the examined organizations,
which provides important insights into a host of factors that either facilitate or constrain
GIS adoption and implementation. Influenced by studies on innovation diffusion (Rogers
1993), early work has examined the spatial extent and speed of GIS diffusion between
and within organizations (cf. Masser and Onstrud 1993, Wiggins 1993, Valpreda et al.

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

497

1994).  Subsequent  studies  have  paid  more  attention  to  the  management  issues  and
whether  effective  GIS  utilization  is  achieved,  drawing  upon  research  on  information
technology  and  management  science  as  well  as  organizational  behavior  studies  (e.g.
Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, Campbell and Masser 1995, Huxhold and Levinsohn 1995,
Gilfoyle and Thorpe 2004).

This body of work has demonstrated that successful adoption and implementation
of  GIS  depends  more  on  non-technological  issues  rather  than  technological  factors.  A
number of enabling or constraining contextual factors at various levels such as institutional,
organizational, and individual have been identified and examined (e.g. Campbell 1991,
Croswell  1991,  Onsrud  and  Pinto  1993,  Obermeyer  and  Pinto  1994,  Nedovic-Budic
and Godschalk 1996, Cavric et al. 2003). For example, Obermeyer and Pinto (1994,
pp. 71–85) suggest that institutional factors play a role in the adoption of GIS in plan-
ning agencies, such as organizational bias that favors existing tools and the status quo,
and  professional  bias  that  relies  more  on  traditional  tools  (e.g.  words  and  numbers)
rather  than  geographical  analysis  and  communication.  Nedovic-Budic  and  Godschalk
(1996) examine eight individual factors in GIS adoption and implementation within five
public agencies in the US.

Overall,  the  commonly  recognized  organizational  factors  that  influence  GIS
implementation process include the role of GIS champions, financial resources, training
and technology support, adaptable organizational culture, and the like (Obermeyer and
Pinto  1994,  Nedovic-Budic  1998,  Craig  2005).  In  a  similar  vein,  this  line  of  research
has  been  employed  in  studying  GIS  diffusion  in  developing  countries  (cf. Cavric  et  al.
2003),  which  has  identified  similar  key  obstacles  but  of  different  magnitude  to  GIS
development  (e.g.  Fox  1991,  Yeh  1991).  Yet,  much  of  this  literature  has  focused  on
providing prescriptive analyses, thus it tends to treat the process of developing and using
GIS  as  a  rational  decision-making  process  and  neglect  the  complex  and  even  messy
process of actual practice (Innes and Simpson 1993, Aitken and Michel 1995, Campbell
1996, Sahay and Walsham 1996, Nedovic-Budic 1998). In other words, this work over-
looks the roles of political, social and cultural processes within which such GIS activities
are  embedded.  These  wider  social  conditions,  as  the  critical  GIS  research  suggests,
shape  GIS  practices  and  in  turn  are  influenced  by  such  GIS  practices.  Second,  it  also
tends to neglect the role of inter-organizational relations in shaping organizational GIS
practices  (Martin  2000,  Neodovic-Budic  and  Pinto  2000).  More  recently,  there  have
been  a  number  of  studies  on  information  system  development  in  developing  countries
that  pay  particular  attention  to  the  dynamic  process  and  social  contexts  (e.g. Avgerou
and Walsham 2000, Sahay and Avgerou 2002). For example, Avgerou and Walsham’s
(2000)  edited  book  is  devoted  to  highlighting  the  importance  of  context  at  the  organ-
izational,  sectoral,  and  broader  levels  in  IT  development  through  the  perspective  of
developing  countries.  This  stream  of  research  resonates  with  some  critical  GIS  studies
reviewed  earlier.  Nonetheless,  relatively  little  research  has  been  conducted  with  regard
to detailed GIS construction processes in urban governance within non-Western contexts.
In  sum,  both  critical  GIS  and  GIS  implementation  research  have  suggested  the
important role of social conditions in GIS development and usage in organizations. The
former tends to pay more attention to broader societal conditions, institutional arrangements
and  social  implications  of  GIS  development,  while  the  latter  tends  to  focus  more  on
organizational  issues  to  ensure  GIS  implementation.  In  light  of  these  two  bodies  of
work, a synthesized framework is proposed to understand the nature of China’s urban
government  GIS  development.  First,  it  is  important  to  adopt  a  multi-scalar  analysis  of

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

498

W Lin

social  contexts  in  which  GIS  development  is  embedded.  Second,  it  is  necessary  to
unravel  the  process  of  GIS  constructions  in  relation  to  the  contextual  analysis.  In  the
following, the empirical case is examined through these two perspectives.

3 GIS Constructions in Shenzhen: Role of Broader Conditions

While earlier GIS practices in China were mainly focused on regional-level environmental
resource management issues (Zhong 1995, Chen et al. 2002), GIS applications in urban
areas  have  experienced  much  rapid  growth  since  the  mid-1990s  (Kong  2001,  Zhang
et al. 2003, Chen et al. 2004). In particular, Shenzhen has emerged as one of the leading
cities  in  Chinese  city  government’s  GIS  development  (He  and  Jiang  1995).  Among  a
number  of  municipal  government  agencies  in  Shenzhen,  SUPLIC  has  spearheaded  GIS
and other information technology developments that have received national recognition.
As illustrated later in greater detail, SUPLIC has developed a range of GIS technologies,
including earlier workstation GIS, subsequently desktop GIS applications, Internet mapping
and  more  recently  interdepartmental  data  management  systems.  Importantly,  these
developments in SUPLIC have, to some extent, echoed the broader technological evolution
of  the  GIS  industry.  For  example,  increasingly  powerful  desktop  GIS,  the  creation  of
large shared databases, and emerging Internet GIS technologies have facilitated greater
GIS usage (Elwood 2006, Goodchild 2006). It is argued that two broader social processes
situated  in  Chinese  transitioning  political  economy  have  also  played  an  active  role  in
shaping Shenzhen’s urban government GIS practices. One is the national promotion of
the so-called “informationization,” a process in which the central state has encouraged
and fostered IT implementation in various spheres of society (Hartford 2005). The other
is  the  urban  restructuring  process  taking  place  in  China  since  the  1980s,  which  has
important implications for urban governance and thus for GIS use in these state agencies
(Chung 2007).

Since  the  mid-1990s,  the  national  informationization  agenda  has  urged  not  only
the development of IT industries but also the applications of IT in the public agencies,
private  enterprises  and  families,  in  response  to  the  notions  of  the  “Information  Age”
and “New Economy” (see for example, Hartford 2003). While earlier informationiza-
tion  projects  often  had  a  strong  “system-building”  focus  and  were  carried  out  by
national  ministries,  Beijing  has  now  urged  local  actors  to  participate  in  this  process,
reflecting the broader rescaling strategy in China’s governance. As the central govern-
ment  has  asked  governments  at  all  levels  to  play  a  guiding  role  in  implementing  IT,
cities  in  particular  have  strived  to  integrate  this  national  policy  promotion  into  their
local  development  plans  and  strategies.  Consequently,  city  governments  have  shown
dramatically increased interest in investing in IT, including GIS to assist administrative
operations.

The  ascendance  of  cities’  active  role  in  enacting  the  national  informationization
strategies  is  in  conjunction  with  the  urban  transformations  in  China  under  economic
reform. Typically, China’s government structure can be characterized by a quite stable
and  hierarchical  structure  (Cartier  2005),  in  which  the  city  traditionally  served  mainly
an  administrative  role  (Chung  2007).  However,  cities  have  emerged  as  an  important
entity in China’s contemporary political economy, not only for the dramatic growth of
the  urban  population  and  the  transformations  of  urban  built  environments,  but  also
because cities have gained more decision-making power to foster economic growth and

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

499

capital  accumulation  (Cartier  2001;  Wu  2002,  2003;  Ma  and  Wu  2005).  This  urban
restructuring has substantial impacts on the lines of authority and the flows of popula-
tion, capital, and technology in China (Davis et al. 1995, Ma and Wu 2005). Several of
these are particularly pertinent to this study.

First,  in  contrast  to  previously  top-down  resource  allocations  from  the  central
government, cities are responsible for attracting capital investment and are increasingly
acting as an entrepreneur to promote local growth. Consequently, city governments are
increasingly competing with each other to participate in the globalization discourse (Wu
2002).  Developing  IT  industries  as  well  as  fostering  IT  usage  in  both  the  public  and
private  sectors  are  considered  important  strategies  by  many  cities  to  become  more
“innovative” in the keen inter-urban competitions (“Self-Innovation Improves Shenzhen”,
People’s  Daily  Newspaper,  10  March,  2006).  At  the  level  of  municipal  government,
urban planning increasingly plays an important role, not only in terms of spatial planning
for the city, but also with respect to devising strategic development (Wu 2007). It thus
is  not  surprising  that  Shenzhen’s  planning  agencies  have  gained  a  prominent  position  in
Shenzhen’s  urban  governance.  Second,  city  governments  face  significant  challenges  to
govern  the  increasingly  mobile  and  diverse  urban  spaces  and  population,  which  have
undergone enormous transformations resulting from market reforms and rapid urbanization
(Davis  et  al.  1995,  Sigley  2006).  While  former  state  institutions  of  direct  control  are
dissolving, state power reconsolidates itself through “thickening” the local-level of govern-
ing (Davis et al. 1995, Wu 2002, Bray 2006). It is believed that digital technologies and
GIS in particular are useful to obtain and manage more detailed sociospatial information
for  effective  urban  management  (Lai  2006).  Meanwhile,  as  a  legacy  of  state  socialism,
national  government  policies  and  plans  still  play  a  key  role  in  shaping  local  politics,
despite economic decentralization (Huang 2002, Ng 2005).

As  such,  the  promotion  of  informationization  intertwined  with  the  urban  governance
rescaling significantly constitutes the broader environments of adopting and developing
GIS  in  Chinese  city  governments.  Such  central-local  state  interactions  intersected  with
GIS  practice  can  be  reflected  in  the  following  two  interview  excerpts.  An  official  from
a national ministry stated that:

“In  many  cases,  a  province  doesn’t  know  what  should  be  done  at  a  national
level,  thus  the  city  departments  would  listen  to  the  [corresponding]  national
ministry” (Interviewee 1, official from Ministry of Construction, 2006).

This  statement  reflects  a  common,  if  not  typical,  view  held  by  many  national  policy
makers that the higher-level state guidance is important in local IT and GIS development
strategies. On the other hand, local actors, while recognizing the significant central-state
influence on GIS developments in local government, state that they themselves also play
an active role in shaping the national strategies. This is shown in the following articulation
by a senior GIS manager from SUPLIC:

“Umm . . . when  there  are  such  concepts  [like  digital  city]  internationally,  we
may attempt to catch these concepts, and extend more local concepts to a higher
level  to  respond  to  these  international  concepts.  The  national  ministry  saw  there
were some attempts, and they would promote these activities” (Interviewee 2,
senior GIS manager in SUPLIC, 2006).

Therefore,  social  relations  extending  beyond  organizational  boundaries  have  been
involved  in  and  influenced  Chinese  local  government  GIS  constructions.  This  central

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

500

W Lin

and  local  state  nexus,  an  important  force  influencing  local  government  technology
development,  is  quite  distinctive  from  many  Western  experiences,  in  which  the  local
state would have more autonomy (e.g. Roche and Humeau 1999, Harvey and Tulloch
2006).  In  the  next  section,  the  role  of  local  contexts  in  the  case  study  is  investigated
further.

4 GIS Constructions in Shenzhen: Role of Local Contexts

4.1 Sociospatial Context of Shenzhen

Before  looking  further  into  SUPLIC’s  GIS  practices,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the
sociospatial  context  of  Shenzhen.  As  the  first  Special  Economic  Zone  (SEZ),  Shenzhen
is China’s newest major city, located in the rapidly urbanizing Pearl River Delta region
and adjacent to Hong Kong. Shenzhen has emerged as a big player in this region, which
has been actively participating in the global economy, notably through its manufacturing
(Wu  1999).  Shenzhen  has  experienced  rapid  population  growth  from  around  310,000
in 1979 to more than 8 million in 2006 (Shenzhen Statistics Bureau 2007). The growth
and development of Shenzhen has been significantly shaped by local planning as well as
by central government’s plans and policies (Wu 1999, Ng and Tang 2004). The central
and local state connection is an important force influencing local government technology
development  as  well,  as  was  indicated  in  the  preceding  section.  Therefore,  the  rapid
urbanization  amid  globalization  and  its  associated  urban  governance  transformation
serve  not  merely  as  a  backdrop  of  Shenzhen’s  government  GIS  practices,  but  have
shaped these practices in one way or another.

Shenzhen  city  government  has  played  a  key  role  in  setting  up  strategic  plans  for
local development and undertaking administration reforms to boost its economic devel-
opment  (Ng  and  Tang  2004).  The  Shenzhen  SEZ  originally  served  as  an  industrial
manufacturing zone, granted by the central government with provincial-level economic
decision-making power. Since the late 1990s, the manufacturing industry has started to
spread from Shenzhen to other areas in the larger Pearl River Delta region due to rising
land and production costs (Ng and Tang 2004). Consequently, Shenzhen has attempted
to  transform  itself  to  a  center  for  the  business  services  industry  (Cartier  2002).  More
recently,  the  city  planners  have  set  up  a  strategic  goal  of  building  Shenzhen  into  a
“world  city”,  encouraging  the  development  of  high-tech  industries  as  opposed  to  the
earlier  emphasis  on  manufacturing  (Shenzhen  Planning  Bureau  2005).  On  the  other
hand, economic strategy and planning set by the local state is influenced by central plans
and policies (Ng and Tang 2004, Ng 2005). For example, Ng and Tang’s (2004, p. 207)
examination  of  the  planning  rhetoric  and  realities  in  Shenzhen  shows  that  the  central
government  regulates  local  development  through  Five-Year  Plans  from  the  national
down to the city level and by regulating the city’s master plan formation.

In this context, with increasing inter-urban competitions as noted earlier, Shenzhen
2
.  In  addition,  the  city  has
city  leaders  have  actively  fostered  IT  industry  development
called for more efficiency in its administration, and more detailed sociospatial information
at lower levels for its urban management. For example, the year of 2006 was named by
the Shenzhen government as the “Basic Level Management Year” to stress the need of
3
. Other cities have also expressed
strengthening the lower-level administration in the city
a  similar  emphasis  as  the  urban  space  becomes  increasingly  complex  in  China  (Shenzhen
City  Government  2006).  Meanwhile,  city  planners  have  strived  to  undertake  and

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

501

represent local planning in a way that fits national policy agendas, in order to gain both
material and discursive resources for local development. In these urban governance trans-
formations, GIS development and uses in urban planning have played an integral role.

4.2 Organizational Contextual Factors

The  establishment  of  SUPLIC  in  1993  marked  the  earliest  effort  in  developing  and
applying  GIS  in  Shenzhen’s  government  agencies.  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  SUPLIC  has
been a subunit of the Shenzhen Urban Planning and Land Management Bureau (SUPLRB)
for  more  than  a  decade.  SUPLRB  has  combined  the  functions  of  urban  planning,  land
management,  and  real  estate  management  since  1989.  As  such,  SUPLRB  has  had
monopoly  control  of  local  spatial  resources  until  2004  when  it  was  split  into  two
bureaus  by  the  city  government:  the  Shenzhen  Urban  Planning  Bureau  and  Shenzhen
4
.
Land Resources and Housing Bureau

The  motives  of  founding  SUPLIC  were  largely  derived  from  SUPLRB’s  needs  for
more efficient land management in the face of dramatically increased work flow in land
records  keeping  and  land  purchase  management.  The  traditional  manual  business
operation  of  the  land  lease,  according  to  many  staff  members,  was  not  efficient  and
sometimes even caused serious mistakes such as assigning the same parcel of land to two
different  developers.  GIS  technologies  were  considered  as  a  possible  solution  to  resolving
such problems. While at that time GIS technologies were still unknown to many people
in China, the then director of SUPLRB played a prominent role in supporting the idea
of adopting GIS, leading to the establishment of SUPLIC. The mission of SUPLIC is to
assist with the informationization of planning, land and real estate management for the
host  bureau  (SUPLIC  2003,  p.  66).  SUPLIC  has  grown  from  three  members  to  now
more  than  100  staff  members,  currently  the  largest  government  agency  implementing
GIS in Shenzhen. The center is led by an executive director who plays a significant role
in determining the development strategy for SUPLIC and oversees subordinate divisions
within SUPLIC, each focusing on specific tasks (Figure 1).

Figure 1 The organizational structure of SUPLIC (based on SUPLIC 2003)

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

502

W Lin

The  growth  of  SUPLIC  and  its  associated  technology  development  has  no  doubt
been influenced by its organizational context as well as by local sociopolitical conditions
in Shenzhen. First, SUPLIC has a strong financial base that enables the implementation
of  expensive  technology.  Its  financial  strength  is  largely  due  to  the  rapid  economic
growth of Shenzhen and the prominent position of the urban planning and land resource
sector in Shenzhen’s urban governance. As one staff member from SUPLIC noted, “As
long as you can provide some justifications, funding is not an issue for the technology
development”. For example, the investment in the early urban GIS systems in SUPLRB
was approximately 30 million RMB in the early 1990s, which was a great deal of money
at that time (Interviewees 3 and 4, GIS scholars, 2006). Second, SUPLIC has benefited
from  strong  leadership  that  has  played  the  influential  GIS  champion  role  identified  in
the planning literature, as will also be shown in the following section. Third, the strong
support from the host bureau’s senior leaders has been crucial for internal data sharing
in  the  bureau  and  the  training  program  carried  out  by  SUPLIC.  For  example,  the  role
Administration
of SUPLIC has been emphasized and even institutionalized through the 
,  a  document  released  by  the  bureau  in  1998  to  specify  a  set  of
By  Law  Brochure
business operations that need to be completed within a certain amount of time. In this
document,  it  is  mandated  that  other  divisions  within  the  bureau  have  to  submit  their
archival data to SUPLIC.

5 GIS Constructions in Shenzhen: Technological Transformations

The preceding analysis has focused on examining the role of broader social conditions
and organizational factors in shaping SUPLIC’s GIS practices. In this section, the process
of  SUPLIC’s  technological  developments  is  articulated  in  greater  detail.  Over  the  past
decade,  SUPLIC  has  developed  over  30  information  systems  along  with  a  wealth  of
spatial  and  non-spatial  data.  Yet,  these  technological  developments  have  evolved  over
time with stories of success and failure. These developments are illustrated through three
major  transformations  and  discussed  in  relation  to  the  sociopolitical  and  economic
5
.
conditions at various scales as analyzed earlier

5.1 Adopting GIS in the Early 1990s: “Scientific Management”

The  first  phase  of  SUPLIC’s  technology  development  was  marked  by  the  adoption  of
workstation  GIS  and  a  range  of  spatial  data  digitization  projects  in  the  early  1990s,
which initially was to deal with the increasing workload of land management. The goal
of  adopting  GIS  was  focused  on  automated  mapping  to  facilitate  land  management.
However,  it  was  shifted  to  develop  an  “intellectual”  system  based  on  GIS  that  could
provide decision-making assistance (Interviewee 5, official in SUPLRB, 2006, Interviewee
6,  former  GIS  engineer  in  SUPLIC,  2006).  As  such,  these  developments  were  mainly
driven  by  the  local  needs  of  the  city  planners,  in  which  “scientific  management”  had
been frequently stressed to enhance efficiency through computing technology.

This  project  was  outsourced  to  external  research  institute  teams  because  SUPLIC
with  only  three  major  members  at  the  time  lacked  internal  human  resources.  Three
project  teams  of  research  institutes  were  recruited,  which  have  been  recognized  as  the
pioneering  institutes  in  developing  GIS  in  China.  Multiple  research  institutes  got
involved in this project, partly because research institutes themselves also sought opportunities

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

503

to  develop  GIS  applications  outside  the  laboratory  (Interviewee  7,  GIS  scholar,  2006).
Indeed, GIS research institutes in China have been key participants in local government
GIS  development  including  that  of  Shenzhen,  particularly  when  the  GIS  industry  was
6
. Specifically, one team from Wuhan was
still in its infancy in China in the mid-1990s
in  charge  of  information  systems  of  cadastre  and  municipal  infrastructure.  The  other
two  teams  were  from  Beijing,  one  to  build  the  fundamental  geographic  information
system and the other the planning management and building management information
systems.  These  teams  all  adopted  workstation  GIS  technology  based  on  ArcInfo,  as  it
was  argued  that  the  personal  computer  version  of  GIS  was  not  well  developed  at  that
time. These workstation GIS systems were operated in a DOS environment to deal with
“background”  data  management,  which  thus  were  limited  to  those  who  had  specific
training  in  this  area  (Interviewee  8,  GIS  engineer  in  SUPLIC,  2006).  Meanwhile,  since
there were not much digital data available, large amounts of analog data such as paper
maps  were  digitized,  which  was  outsourced  to  another  public  agency  specializing  in
surveying and mapping from another province.

However, the overall outcome of this project, particularly with regard to the use of
GIS  software,  was  not  successful.  Some  have  addressed  the  technical  difficulty  as  a
major factor: no mature GIS software operated in Chinese was available in the market,
nor were the computers fast enough (Interviewee 5, official in SUPLRB, 2006). But the
management  issues  also  played  a  key  role.  First,  as  a  number  of  research  respondents
noted, not many people in SUPLIC and the bureau knew how to operate the workstation
GIS system. Meanwhile, the external project teams were quite far away from Shenzhen,
and were not able to respond to the constantly changing users’ needs in a timely manner.
In  addition,  the  presence  of  different  project  teams  focusing  on  their  specific  systems
also resulted in a fragmentation of the applications (see also Guo et al. 1998). Further,
several  interviewees  commented  that  these  workstation  GIS  applications  seemed  to  be
too “advanced” for the bureau at the time as most of the regular organizational business
operations did not require spatial analysis provided by the GIS software.

As  such,  while  there  was  strong  financial  support  and  leadership,  the  issues  of
internal  skilled  manpower,  user  satisfaction,  and  technology  adaptation  to  organizational
needs stood out as significant obstacles to successful GIS implementation for this project.
This resonates with the existing GIS literature as these issues have been identified as
important  for  successful  GIS  implementation.  Nonetheless,  this  GIS  development  has
several  implications.  First,  it  served  as  a  learning  experience  for  SUPLIC,  and  the  data
digitization and database development (such as the fundamental geographic information
system) laid an important foundation for SUPLIC’s later GIS development. Second, the
strong  support  from  the  then  SUPLRB  leaders  of  this  GIS  development  is  worth
noting. As one interviewee from SUPLIC addressed, “at that time, we were encouraged
to  try  things  out.”  In  this  sense,  this  is  in  contrast  to  some  GIS  implementation
studies,  suggesting  that  rational  cost-benefit  calculations  are  not  always  the  primary
evaluation  standard  for  public  administration.  The  encouragement  of  developing  new
and  expensive  technologies  in  Shenzhen  is  partly  because  of  the  city’s  SEZ  role  to
conduct reforms and to lead other Chinese cities in innovation (Li 1998). This reflects
the  local  authorities’  attempts  to  enhance  city  competitiveness  in  the  process  of
China’s  urban  transformation.  Thus,  while  the  demands  for  more  efficient  business
operations  through  digital  technology  at  this  stage  were  often  regarded  as  “internal
needs”  of  scientific  management  by  local  GIS  practitioners,  those  needs  also  spoke
to  the  broader  social conditions at that time.

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

504

W Lin

5.2 Document Processing Information Systems: “Office Automation”

The  second  phase  of  SUPLIC’s  GIS  development  is  characterized  by  an  emphasis  on
management information systems. As the earlier GIS project largely failed, the SUPLRB
leaders decided to recruit some experts from research institutes to manage GIS and other
information technologies. Consequently, a new director was hired, along with a number
of faculty members from a GIS education institute in Wuhan. During his five-year tenure
(1996–2001)  in  SUPLIC,  this  director’s  vision  and  management  greatly  shaped
SUPLIC’s  GIS  development.  Rather  than  focusing  on  modifying  the  workstation  GIS
applications, he switched the emphasis to developing office automation systems. Specifically,
a  document  processing  information  system  (DPIS)  was  developed  by  SUPLIC  to  facilitate
the  bureau’s  “One-Stop-Service”  reform  (Figure  2).  This  reform  aimed  to  restructure
SUPLRB’s public service provision, specifically, to integrate the previous scattered public
service provision through different divisions into only one spot. While such a switch can
be seen as a prompt response to the needs of the bureau, it also responded well to the emerging
national promotion of the “Office Automation” (OA) and “E-governance” agendas, which
called  for  administration  transformation  from  direct  governmental  intervention  to  a  more
indirect role of regulator and service provider under economic reform (Zhang et al. 2003).
This DPIS was designed to cover SUPLRB’s core business procedures such as land,
planning,  construction  management,  real  estate  registration,  and  so  on.  The  DPIS
was  developed  using  Oracle  Developer  2000,  a  suite  of  development  tools  released  by
Oracle  Corporation.  The  users  of  this  system  reached  1,000,  including  members  from
virtually every division of the bureau. In addition, SUPLIC continued to build the fundamental

Figure 2 Screenshot of the document processing system developed by SUPLIC (the column
with operating staff names is masked for confidentiality reasons)

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

505

geographic  information  system  established  in  its  earlier  GIS  adoption,  which  incorporated
land  use  data,  cadastre,  urban  planning  projects,  transportation  networks,  and  sewer
networks  in  Shenzhen.  Indeed,  this  database  has  been  frequently  used  by  other  local
government  agencies  and  private  enterprises  such  as  real-estate  developers  (SUPLIC
2003). Another important development was several real-estate information systems that were
used to manage, for example, the tax records from the real-estate sector (SUPLIC 2003).
As  compared  to  the  earlier  GIS  development,  the  DPIS  implementation  has  been
very successful, in which internal technology support and training played a key role. In
contrast to the earlier practice of outsourcing technical constructions, an internal project
team of around 10 people was established in SUPLIC to develop this DPIS, as more staff
members with computing technology backgrounds was recruited in 1996. A six-month
extensive  training  program  was  undertaken  in  the  bureau  in  1998  to  ensure  the  wide
use of this system. Everyone younger than 50 was required to participate in the training
for basic computer skills and/or more professional skills using information systems. For
each trainee, the training program lasted for about a week, followed by an exam to test
for  competency.  Those  who  did  not  pass  the  exam  had  to  take  the  training  again  and  re-
take the exam. But if s/he still failed the exam a second time, s/he would have to leave
7
.  Such  a  large-scale  training,  however,  did  not  take  place  without
their  work  position
resistance from the trainees. Taking up new technologies is challenging (particularly the
DPIS that would change the daily operations quite significantly), and was not embraced
by everyone in the bureau. Being a technical unit subordinate to SUPLRB, SUPLIC does not
have  administrative  power.  Thus  this  extensive  training  would  not  be  successful  if  not
for the firm support from the bureau’s senior leaders, such that SUPLIC was able to collaborate
with the bureau’s personnel department to enforce the staff’s participation in the training.
As  discussed  in  section  3,  the  informationization  agenda  has  played  an  important
role  in  the  technology  development  in  local  government  agencies  since  the  mid-1990s.
In this phase SUPLIC successfully merged their development of OA systems into the national
informationization  discourse,  which  has  gained  SUPLIC  fame  in  terms  of  government  IT
development  across  the  country  as  indicated  by,  for  example,  the  national  awards  it  has
received. SUPLIC has stood out as an important showcase for Beijing, because the government
staff’s increasing use of OA and GIS data fits well with the national informationization
discourse,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  role  of  digital  technologies  in  facilitating
8
. Consequently, many cities have followed a
the transformation of governmental operations
similar pattern of OA development in their administration (Zhang et al. 2003).

5.3 Desktop GIS, Internet GIS and the Spatial Information Platform: 
“E-governance” and “Digital Shenzhen”

Since  the  late  1990s,  there  have  been  stronger  national  policy  orientations  toward  “E-
governance” and “Digital City”, such as a series of “Golden Projects” and the national
Government Online Project (Zhang 2001). E-governance discourse in China has focused
on  the  transformatory  potential  of  IT  for  government  efficiency  and  public  service
delivery (Zhang 2001, Hartford 2005). Building digital cities means, from the perspective
of  the  urban  planning  sector  in  China,  “introducing  information  technologies  to  city
planning, administration, infrastructure construction and other public service facilities”
(“Official  Calls  for  More  Digital  Cities”,  China  Daily,  10  May,  2007;  see  http://
www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2007-05/10/content_869289.htm  for  additional  details).
At  the  municipal  level,  these  two  agendas  and  strategies  have  increasingly  been  integrated

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

506

W Lin

with each other, as well as with the national informationization ambitions. Specifically,
Shenzhen city leaders have actively promoted “E-governance” and “Digital Shenzhen”.
While  data  sharing  and  transaction  cost  reduction  have  been  acknowledged  in  the
efforts of constructing Shenzhen’s E-governance and building Digital Shenzhen, it is also
notable  that  these  technological  developments  have  attempted  to  equip  Shenzhen  with
the tools to compete at national and global levels, a crucial part of Shenzhen’s strategy
in becoming a “world city” as noted earlier.

SUPLIC has actively participated in these two agendas by setting up official websites,
9
,  developing  desktop  GIS  applications,  and
providing  online  databases  and  mapping
carrying out an ambitious plan for a city-wide interdepartmental spatial data platform
construction. In particular, in the early 2000s, while continuing to maintain its existing
information systems, SUPLIC has carried out several new projects, including the successful
implementation of desktop GIS applications initiated in 2001 (Figure 3). Similar to the
DPIS construction, an internal team was set up for this desktop GIS development. These
desktop  GIS  applications  were  based  on  ArcGIS,  and  were  customized  using  Visual
Basic scripts. For example, the most frequently used map layouts were generated so that
the operating staff from the planning bureau can apply them automatically. There were
around  60  users  of  these  desktop  applications,  including  personnel  from  the  planning
division, construction land use and some other offices that deal with spatial data frequently.
As such, this type of GIS development was geared more towards general staff members
for  their  routine  operations,  differing  from  the  earlier  workstation  GIS  application.  In
addition,  ArcSDE  was  adopted  for  the  massive  spatial  data  management  needs  in  the
bureau. Internet GIS has been developed. For example, an e-mapping application using

Figure 3 Screenshot of one desktop GIS application used in Shenzhen planning bureau

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

507

Figure 4 Conceptual model of the information systems in SUPLIC (as of 2006)

ArcIMS  was  developed  on  the  planning  bureau’s  official  website  with  layers  depicting
statutory  planning,  place  names,  buildings,  basic  ecology,  and  so  on.  With  increasing
numbers  of  information  systems,  there  are  issues  of  integrating  newly  developed  ones
with older ones. For example, the attribute information of the cadastral system developed
with  ArcInfo  in  the  early  1990s  was  transferred  to  the  Oracle  database  instead  of
ArcInfo database in the late 1990s. Similar re-construction also occurred in other information
systems, in order to integrate these systems with the DPIS that is Oracle-based (Figure 4).

In 2006 SUPLIC proposed a spatial information platform construction project that
has  been  highlighted  as  a  fundamental  part  of  the  Digital  Shenzhen  initiative  by  local
planners. This project with a budget of more than 100 million RMB, one of the biggest
investments from the city recently, would take three years. As it is often the case elsewhere
(e.g. Campbell and Masser 1995), interdepartmental data sharing is very difficult. With
the increasing needs of more sophisticated urban management at the “basic level,” the
city  leaders  have  increasingly  argued  the  integration  of  socioeconomic  data  with  the
spatial data from various municipal departments. Building through the technologies of
GIS,  GPS,  remote  sensing,  information  systems,  Internet,  etc.,  this  platform  aims  to
allow data sharing and exchange among different municipal bureaus. In order to better
facilitate  this  large-scale  project,  a  city-wide  committee  led  by  the  deputy  mayors  and
composed  of  a number of municipal bureaus was established. The planning bureau, as the
“dragonhead” of urban governance (Wu 2007), is playing a leading role in this project,
and SUPLIC is in charge of the detailed technological aspects.

Interestingly, with the increasing demands for digital data management and information
systems  in  urban  governance  more  recently,  SUPLIC  has  started  again  to  outsource  its
technology  constructions  to  research  institutes  and  private  firms,  while  continuing  to
specify and secure organizational users’ needs and system maintenance. This procedure
has  become  more  standardized,  reflected  in  the  various  project  proposals  by  SUPLIC
that are highly structured with similar headings. The growing domestic GIS industry and
IT firms also contribute to this trend. While more and more cities have started to engage

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

508

W Lin

production

in IT/GIS development, Shenzhen continues to be in the national spotlight. For instance, the
Third China International Conference on the Digital City was held in Shenzhen in 2007.
In  summary,  the  above  analysis  of  SUPLIC’s  technological  transformations  shows
the types of digital technologies being developed and how the focus of such development
has evolved over time in Shenzhen alongside a number of policy orientations. The early
GIS  development  and  its  associated  discourse  have  mainly  emphasized  the  role  of  GIS
  tool  including  automated  mapping  and  decision  support.  Such  an
as  a 
transformative
emphasis differs, to some extent, from the subsequent promotion of the 
role  of  GIS  and  IT  for  urban  governance  as  shown  in  the  two  subsequent  phases.  In
particular, there has been a major emphasis on increasing the efficiency of the govern-
ment  sector  with  digital  technologies.  The  recent  emergence  of  the  official  discourse
about “Digital Cities” and “E-governance” in China, as noted earlier, points to the goal
of facilitating the transformation of government from direct control to a regulator and
service  provider  through  digital  technologies.  Yet,  in  practice,  within  this  decade-long
process of GIS development much of the attention has been given to building up infor-
10
.
mation systems, while issues of data quality and availability have been largely neglected
One wonders then to what extent the GIS/IT development has contributed to these goals
of greater efficiency, transparency and citizen involvement. One can also ask what kind
of  efficiency  should  be  given  more  attention  when  evaluating  technology  development
in government agencies: should it focus (exclusively) on input / output ratios, or should
it  be  more  attentive  to  ways  of  delivering  information  to  the  public,  enhancing  citizen
involvement in urban management issues for example.

6 Conclusions

As Gilbert and Masucci (2006, p. 759) note, “it is important to understand how people
conceptualize technology as a step toward understanding how they might use and benefit
from a GIS system.” Similarly, it is important to unravel the nature of local government
GIS constructions to better understand the outcomes and implications of these practices
situated  in  particular  time  and  place-specific  situations.  This  article  aims  to  contribute
to  this  discussion  through  a  case  study  of  Shenzhen  in  China,  drawing  upon  insights
from research on critical GIS and GIS implementation processes.

This article focuses on analyzing the role of sociopolitical contexts at various levels
in shaping Shenzhen’s urban government GIS development and illustrating the GIS con-
struction process over time in relation to this contextual analysis. While Shenzhen is by
no  means  representative  of  the  entirety  of  China’s  urban  GIS  development,  this  study
can provide some insights into understanding GIS practices in China’s urban governance
that is undergoing significant transformation. First, with respect to broader sociopolitical
conditions, the critical GIS literature has analyzed the role of devolution of governance
in  local  government  GIS  developments  (e.g.  Foresman  1998,  Warnecke  1998,  Roche
and  Humeau  1999)  and  the  implications  for  local  decision-making  participation
through  GIS  (e.g.  Ghose  2007,  Elwood  2008).  This  study  shows  that  there  is  also
significant  decentralization  of  China’s  central  government  that  shapes  Shenzhen’s  GIS
constructions, yet, in a different and complex way. Shenzhen, like many other cities in
China,  has  actively  promoted  GIS  and  other  IT  in  its  administration  in  the  face  of
increasing inter-urban competition and the need to govern its urban spaces more effectively.
However,  the  central  government’s  policies  and  strategies  (such  as  the  informationization

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

509

discourse) have remained an important role in shaping local-government GIS development.
As such, the proactive engagement of the Shenzhen government in GIS and IT development
has  been  underpinned  by  the  transitioning  role  of  cities  in  China’s  political  economy:  the
somewhat  see-saw  power  struggles  between  the  central  and  local  state  in  governing
urban spaces and fostering economic development.

Second,  organizational  structure  and  management  issues,  such  as  GIS  champions,
financial support, training, skilled manpower and centralized leadership, have played
a  key  role  in  these  GIS  developments.  In  particular,  the  strong  support from senior
government leaders has been a very crucial factor throughout Shenzhen’s GIS implement-
ation, reflecting the hierarchical administrative culture in China. Together,  these socioe-
conomic and political contextual factors, as well as broader technological evolution have
influenced the specific types of geographic information technologies being developed and
used in SUPLIC and its parent bureau over the past decade. Specifically,  the GIS develop-
ment  process  has  been  transformed  dynamically  from  earlier  workstation  GIS  operations
with limited users, to document processing systems of wide use, and now to a variety
of database management systems and increasing interdepartmental applications. While
a large proportion of GIS use continues to be focused upon data processing in Shenzhen,
GIS-related  practices  have  been  increasingly  involved  in  decision-making  and  urban
management issues. Yet, effective usage of GIS in city planners’ decision-making can be
hampered  by  issues  of  data  quality  and  sharing.  As  discussed  earlier,  the  increasingly
sophisticated GIS development, while impressive, has been largely oriented toward system-
building while neglecting issues concerning data.

Such an in-depth investigation can provide a basis for understanding the social and
political implications of GIS use for Chinese urban governance. It has been claimed that
GIS  and  other  IT  development  have  increased  work  efficiency  and  transparency  in  the
case of SUPLIC. There has also been an increasing call for public participation through
digital technologies in Shenzhen’s official discourse. However, these transformative roles
of GIS, to some extent, have been limited. Significantly shaped by organizational char-
acteristics and broader social political conditions, these GIS and other IT developments
are  largely  government-centric  rather  than  citizen-centric.  Moreover,  in  addition  to  its
aforementioned functions, GIS also serves a symbolic role in local urban governance as
a representation of efficiency and modernization. A case in point is Shenzhen’s attempts
of  gaining  national  recognition  with  these  GIS  practices,  which  help  to  mobilize  both
material  and  discursive  resources  for  local  development.  More  research  is  needed  to
further  examine  the  implications  of  GIS  developments  for  urban  governance  in  post-
socialist China. In addition, comparative studies between Shenzhen and some other cities
within and outside China can potentially provide more comprehensive understanding of
GIS development processes in relation to urban governance.

Acknowledgements

This  research  has  been  partly  supported  by  a  Dissertation  Grant  from  the  Association
of  American  Geographers.  I  would  like  to  thank  my  advisor,  Rina  Ghose,  for  reading
through  the  draft  and  providing  helpful  suggestions.  In  addition,  I  wish  to  thank  the
people in China who assisted me by offering time for interviews and materials. Finally,
I am grateful for the detailed and thoughtful comments from the referees and the editor.
Any errors and omissions are my responsibility alone.

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

510

W Lin

Notes

1 I  worked  as  a  GIS  project  coordinator  at  SUPLIC  from  March  to  August  2006.  My  role
included  keeping  track  of  two  projects  responsible  for  building  the  ‘Information  Resource
Catalogue Systems’ for the planning department and the land resource and housing department,
respectively.  I  was  also  responsible  for  facilitating  and  organizing  communications  between
the two corresponding external project teams and SUPLIC.

2 Shenzhen  has  become  a  prominent  site  of  IT  manufacturing  in  China,  benefiting  not  only
from local policy support, but also significantly from its adjacency to Hong Kong for techni-
cal transfer and capital investment.

3 The  general  structure  of  the  Chinese  urban  structure  system  can  be  described  as  a  nested
hierarchy  of  spatial  units,  with  the  municipal  area  (shi)  divided  into  ‘urban  districts’  (qu),
which are further divided into sub-districts such as ‘street offices’ that include smaller official
layers such as ‘residence committees’ (Leaf 2005, p. 96). The “basic level” of administration
noted in the article refers to the spatial units subordinate to the municipal level, i.e. the urban
districts, street offices and residence committees.

4 Yet, after the split, SUPLIC continued to serve both bureaus. Thus for the sake of clarity, I identify
SUPLRB as SUPLIC’s host bureau here in most cases unless it is specifically noted otherwise.
5 It is important to note that this outline does not attempt to be an exhaustive list of technologies
being developed in SUPLIC. Rather, the main purpose is to highlight some notable trends and
transitions in the process of GIS development in the case study.

6 This  reflects  a  form  of  inter-organizational  connectivity  in  China’s  local  government  GIS

developments, which will be further investigated elsewhere.

7 According  to  several  interviewees,  there  were  a  few  trainees  who  did  not  pass  the  second
exam  and  had  to  leave.  But  overall  most  of  the  trainees  completed  the  program.  While  this
training  is  shaped  by  the  desire  of  local  authorities  to  implement  computing  technology,
utilizing exams as an evaluation measure in this case is also rooted in China’s historical legacy
of selecting civil servants through exams. Subsequent training was offered on a much smaller
scale when there were some function updates of the systems.

8 As  a  result,  from  2002  to  2003,  the  bureau  and  SUPLIC  have  drawn  more  than  200  visits

from other cities for their technology development.

9 For example, SUPLIC established a new Internet Division to deal with online applications. A
website  (http://www.szhome.com.cn)  was  set  up  in  1999,  which  included  contents  such  as
yellow  pages,  real  estate  on  sale,  house  purchase  mapping,  pre-sale  licenses,  land  supply
information,  city  planning  projects,  laws  and  regulations,  and  so  on.  While  this  network
application  was  intended  to  meet  the  bureau’s  needs  for  the  computerized  management  of
real estate enterprises (Interviewee 5, official in SUPLRB, 2006), it was also seen as part of
e-governance  functionalities,  such  as  disseminating  information  (SUPLIC  2003).  Subsequently,
the  bureau  provided  an  electronic  feedback  service  on  this  website  to  collect  responses
and questions on the bureau’s service from citizens, which has become a common feature of
e-governance construction in many Chinese cities (see Hartford 2005 for additional details).
10 This  system-oriented  approach  to  technology  development  has  generated  some  problems,
especially when there is more calls for informing the decision-making with digital data (e.g.
statistical information) in the planning bureau. Increasingly, there has been greater awareness
of  the  issue  of  data.  For  example,  SUPLIC  undertook  a  data-cleansing  project  to  deal  with
the data quality issue in the DPIS system in 2006.

References

Aitken S and Michel S 1995 Who contrives the “Real” in GIS? Geographic information, planning

and critical theory. 

Cartography and Geographic Information Systems

 22: 17–29

Avgerou  C  and  Walsham  G  (eds)  2000 
Perspective of Developing Countries

Information  Technology  in  Context:  Studies  from  the
. Burlington, VT, Ashgate Publishing

Bray D 2006 Building ‘Community’: New strategies of governance in urban China. 

Economy and

Society

 35: 530 – 49

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

511

Burawoy  M  1991 

Ethnography  Unbound:  Power  and  Resistance  in  the  Modern  Metropolis

.

Berkeley, CA, University of California Press

Burawoy M 2000 Grounding globalization. In Burawoy M, Blum J A, George S, Gille Z, Gowan T,
Global  Ethnography:
.  Berkeley,  CA,  University  of

Haney  L,  Klawiter  M,  Lopez  S  H,  Ó  Rian  S,  and  Thayer  M  (eds) 
Forces,  Connections,  Imaginations  in  a  Postmodern  World
California Press: 1– 40

Campbell  H  1991  Organizational  issues  in  managing  geographic  information.  In  Masser  I  and

Blakemore M (eds) 

Handling Geographic Information

. London, Longman: 259 – 82

Campbell  H  1996  Theoretical  perspectives  on  the  diffusion  of  GIS  technologies.  In  Masser  I,
GIS  Diffusion:  The  Adoption  and  Use  of  Geographical

Campbell  H,  and  Craglia  M  (eds) 
Information Systems in Local Government in Europe

. London, Taylor and Francis: 23– 48

Campbell  H  and  Masser  I  1995 

GIS  and  Organizations:  How  Effective  are  GIS  in  Practice?

Cartier C 2001 Globalizing South China. Oxford, Blackwell
Cartier C 2002 Transnational urbanism in the reform-era Chinese city: Landscapes from Shenzhen.

London, Taylor and Francis

Urban Studies 39: 1513 –32

Cartier C 2005 City-space: Scale relations and China’s spatial administrative hierarchy. In Ma L
and  Wu  F  (eds)  Restructuring  the  Chinese  City:  Changing  Society,  Economy  and  Space.
London, Routledge: 21–38

Cavric  B,  Nedovic-Budic  Z,  and  Ikgopoleng  H  2003  Diffusion  of  GIS  technology  in  Botswana:

Process and determinants. International Development Planning Review 25: 195–219

Chen  J,  Li  J,  He  J,  and  Li  Z  2002  Development  of  GIS  in  China:  Overview.  Photogrammetric

Engineering and Remote Sensing 68: 325–32

Chen  Z,  Wang  D,  Li  C,  Li  H,  and  Mao  D  2004  Digital  city  and  urban  information  system
development. Unpublished Paper Presented at the Tenth Anniversary Meeting of the Foundation
of the Chinese Association of GIS Professionals

Chrisman N 2005 Full circle: More than just social implications of GIS. Cartographica 40: 23–35
Chung H 2007 The change in China’s state governance and its effects upon urban scale. Environment

Craig  W  2005  White  knights  of  Spatial  Data  Infrastructure:  The  role  and  motivation  of  key

Craig W, Harris T, and Weiner D (eds) 2002 Community Participation and Geographical Information

and Planning A 39: 789–809

individuals. URISA Journal 16(2): 5–13

Systems. London, Taylor and Francis

success. URISA Journal 3(1): 43–56

Croswell P 1991 Obstacles to GIS implementation and guidelines to increase the opportunities for

Curry M 1995 Rethinking rights and responsibilities in Geographic Information Systems: Beyond

the power of image. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems 22: 58–69

Davis  D,  Kraus  R,  Naughton  B,  and  Perry  E  (eds)  1995  Urban  Spaces  in  Contemporary  China:
The  Potential  for  Autonomy  and  Community  in  Post-Mao  China.  New  York,  Cambridge
University Press

Elwood  S  2006  Critical  issues  in  participatory  GIS:  Deconstructions,  reconstructions,  and  new

research directions. Transactions in GIS 10: 693 –708

Elwood S 2008 Grassroots groups as stakeholders in spatial data infrastructures: Challenges and
opportunities for local data development and sharing. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science 22: 71–90

Foresman  T  (ed)  1998  The  History  of  Geographic  Information  Systems:  Perspectives  from  the

Pioneers. Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice Hall

Fox J 1991 Spatial information for resource management in Asia: A review of institutional issues.

International Journal of Information Systems 5: 59–72

Georgiadou  Y,  Puri  S,  and  Sahay  S  2005  Towards  a  potential  research  agenda  to  guide  the
implementation of spatial data infrastructures: A case study from India. International Journal
of Geographic Information Science 19: 1113 –30

Ghose  R  2001  Use  of  information  technology  for  community  empowerment:  Transforming
Geographic Information Systems into Community Information Systems. Transactions in GIS
5: 141– 63

Ghose R 2005 The complexities of citizen participation through collaborative governance. Space

and Polity 9: 61–75

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

512 W Lin

Ghose R 2007 Politics of scale and networks of association in PPGIS. Environment and Planning

Gilbert  M  and  Masucci  M  2006  The  implications  of  including  women’s  daily  lives  in  a  feminist

GIScience. Transactions in GIS 10: 751– 61

Gilfoyle  I  and  Thorpe  P  2004  Geographic  Information  Management  in  Local  Government.

A 39: 1961–80

London, CRC Press

Goodchild M F 2006 GIScience ten years after Ground Truth. Transactions in GIS 10: 687–92
Guo R, Wang Z, Can X, Cheng J, Zhang M, Li C, Peng F, Tan J, Liang Y, and Wen F (eds) 1998
Shenzhen  Planning  and  Land  Management  Information  System  Construction:  Theory  and
Practice. Guangzhou, China, Guangdong Map Publishing

Hartford  K  2003  Who  owns  informationization?  Unpublished  Paper  Presented  at  the  Critical
Policy  Studies  of  China  International  Workshop,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts  (available  at
http://web.mit.edu/chinapolicy/www/conference1/hartford.pdf)

Hartford K 2005 Dear Mayor: Online communications with local governments in Hangzhou and

Nanjing. China Information 19: 217– 60

Harvey F 2001 Constructing GIS: Actor networks of collaboration. URISA Journal 12(1): 29–37
Harvey F and Chrisman N 2004 The imbrication of geography and technology: The social construction
of  Geographic  Information  Systems.  In  Brunn  S,  Cutter  S,  and  Harrington  J  W  (eds)
Technoearth: A Social History of Geography and Technology. Boston, MA, Kluwer: 65– 80
Harvey  F  and  Tulloch  D  2006  Local-government  data  sharing:  Evaluating  the  foundations  of
spatial  data  infrastructures.  International  Journal  of  Geographical  Information  Science  20:
743– 68

He J and Jiang J 1995 General review of GIS in China and considerations for its further development.

Acta Geographica Sinica 50(Supplement): 13–23

Huang  Y  2002  Managing  Chinese  bureaucrats:  An  institutional  economics  perspective.  Political

Huxhold  W  and  Levinsohn  A  1995  Managing  Geographic  Information  System  Projects.  New

Studies 50: 61–79

York, Oxford University Press

Innes  J  and  Simpson  DM  1993  Implementing  GIS  for  planning:  Lessons  from  the  history  of

technological innovation. Journal of the American Planning Association 59: 230 – 6

Kong  Y  2001  GIS  Diffusion  in  China:  Theoretical  Considerations  and  Preliminary  Case  Studies.

Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Chinese University of Hong Kong

Lai M 2006 Improving the city’s functions and public service capabilities through informationization.
Unpublished  Paper  Presented  at  the  Second  China  International  Conference  on  the  Digital
City  and  the  China  International  Exposition  on  Digital  City  Construction  Technology  and
Equipment, Suzhou, China

Lake  RW  1993  Planning  and  applied  geography:  Positivism,  ethics,  and  geographic  information

systems. Progress in Human Geography 17: 404 –13

Leaf M 2005 Modernity confronts tradition: the professional planner and local corporatism in the
rebuilding  of  China’s  cities.  In  Sanyal  B  (ed)  Comparative  Planning  Cultures.  New  York,
Routledge: 91–112

Li G 1998 The comparative advantage of Shenzhen. In Urban Planning and Design Institute (ed)
Collection of Publications by Staff Members, Urban Planning and Design Institute of Shenzhen,
1990 –1998. Shenzhen, China, Urban Planning and Design Institute of Shenzhen: 8 –13
Ma L and Wu F 2005 Restructuring the Chinese city: Diverse processes and reconstituted spaces.
In  Ma  L  and  Wu  F  (eds)  Restructuring  the  Chinese  City:  Changing  Society,  Economy  and
Space. New York, Routledge: 1–20

Mark  D  1997  The  history  of  Geographic  Information  Systems:  Invention  and  re-invention  of

Triangulated Irregular Networks (TINS). In Proceedings of GIS/LIS ‘97, Cincinnati, Ohio

Martin E 2000 Actor-networks and implementation: Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

International Journal of Geographical Information Science 14: 715–38

Masser  I  and  Onsrud  H  1993  Diffusion  and  use  of  geographic  information  technologies:  An
introduction. In Masser I and Onsrud H (eds) Diffusion and Use of Geographic Information
Technologies. Dordrecht, Kluwer: 1–8

Nedovic-Budic Z 1998 The impact of GIS technology. Environment and Planning B 25: 681–92
Nedovic-Budic  Z  and  Godschalk  D  R  1996  Human  factors  in  adoption  of  Geographic  Information
Systems (GIS): A local government case study. Public Administration Review 56: 554 – 67

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

GIS Development in China’s Urban Governance

513

Nedovic-Budic Z and Pinto J 2000 Information sharing in an interorganizational GIS environment.

Environment and Planning B 27: 455–74

Nedovic-Budic  Z,  Pinto  J,  and  Warnecke  L  2004  GIS  database  development  and  exchange:

Interaction mechanisms and motivations. URISA Journal 16(1): 15–29

Ng  M  2005  Planning  cultures  in  two  Chinese  transitional  cities:  Hong  Kong  and  Shenzhen.  In

Sanyal B (ed) Comparative Planning Cultures. New York, Routledge: 113 – 44

Ng M and Tang W 2004 The role of planning in the development of Shenzhen, China: Rhetoric

and realities. Eurasian Geography and Economics 45: 190–211

Obermeyer N and Pinto J 1994 Managing Geographic Information Systems. New York, Guilford
Onsrud H and Pinto J 1993 Evaluating correlates of GIS adoption success and the decision process

of GIS acquisition. URISA Journal 5(1): 8–39

Onsrud H and Rushton G (eds) 1995 Sharing Geographic Information Systems. New Brunswick,

O’Sullivan D 2006 Geographical information science: Critical GIS. Progress in Human Geography

NJ, CURP Press

30: 783–91

Pickles J (ed) 1995 Ground Truth. New York, Guilford Press
Pinto  J  and  Onsrud  H  J  1997  In  search  of  the  dependent  variable:  Toward  synthesis  in  GIS
implementation  research.  In  Craglia  M  and  Couclelis  H  (eds)  Geographic  Information
Research: Bridging the Atlantic. London, Taylor and Francis: 129–45

Roche  S  1999  The  social  construction  of  Geographical  Information  Systems.  Unpublished  Paper
Presented  at  the  First  International  Conference  on  Geographic  Information  Science  and
Society (GISOC’99), Minneapolis, Minnesota

Roche S and Humeau J 1999 GIS development and planning collaboration: A few examples from

France. URISA Journal 11(1): 5–14

Rogers  E  1993  The  diffusion  of  innovations  model.  In  Masser  I  and  Onsrud  HJ  (eds)  Diffusion

and Use of Geographic Information Technologies. Boston, MA, Kluwer: 9–24

Rundstrom  R  1995  GIS,  indigenous  peoples,  and  epistemological  diversity.  Cartography  and

Geographic Information Systems 22: 45–57

Sahay  S  and  Avgerou  C  2002  Introducing  the  special  issue  on  information  and  communication

technologies in developing countries. The Information Society 18: 73– 6

Sahay S and Walsham G 1996 Implementation of GIS in India: Organizational issues and implications.

International Journal of Geographic Information Systems 10: 385– 404

Schuurman N 1999 Critical GIS: Theorizing an emerging discipline. Cartographica 36(4): 1–108
Schuurman N 2000 Trouble in the Heartland: GIS and its critics in the 1990s. Progress in Human

Geography 24: 569–90

Schuurman  N  2006  Formalization  matters:  Critical  GIS  and  ontology  research.  Annals  of  the

Association of American Geographers 96: 726 –39

Shenzhen  City  Government  2006  Study  Report  from  Shenzhen’s  Party  and  Government  Visiting

Group to Dalian, Qingdao, Shanghai, and Hangzhou. Unpublished Report.

Shenzhen  Planning  Bureau  2005  Shenzhen  2030  Development  Strategy:  Towards  a  Pioneering
Global  City  with  Sustainable  Development.  WWW  document,  http://www.szplan.gov.cn/
main/sz3/index.html

Shenzhen  Statistics  Bureau  2007  Shenzhen  Statistics  Yearbook.  Beijing,  China,  China  Statistics

Sheppard  E  1995  GIS  and  society:  Towards  a  research  agenda.  Cartography  and  Geographic

Sheppard  E  2005  Knowledge  production  through  critical  GIS:  Genealogy  and  prospects.

Publishing

Information Systems 22: 5–16

Cartographica 40(4): 5–21

Sieber R 2004 A PPGIScience? Cartographica 38(3/4): 1– 4
Sieber  R  2006  Public  Participation  Geographic  Information  Systems:  A  literature  review  and

framework. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 96: 491–507

Sigley G 2006 Chinese governmentalities: Government, governance and the socialist market economy.

Economy and Society 35: 487–508

Smith B and Mark D M 2001 Geographical categories: An ontological investigation. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science 15: 591– 612

Sui D Z 1994 GIS and urban studies: Positivism, post-positivism, and beyond. Urban Geography

14: 258–78

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

514 W Lin

SUPLIC 2003 Ten Years of Growing Road. Internal Publication
Taylor P J 1990 GKS. Political Geography Quarterly 9: 211–2
UCGIS  (University  Consortium  for  Geographic  Information  Science)  2002  GIS  and  Society
Research Agenda. WWW document, http://www.ucgis.org/priorities/research/research_white/
1998%20Papers/soc2.pdf

Valpreda E, Secondini P, Ravaglia E, Craglia M, and Ciancarella L 1994 GIS diffusion in Italian
local  government:  An  up-to-date  view  of  regions  and  provinces.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Fifth
European  Conference  and  Exhibition  on  Geographical  Information  Systems,  Paris,  France:
1471–9

Warnecke L 1998 State and local government GIS initiatives. In Foresman T (ed) The History of
Geographic  Information  Systems:  Perspectives  from  the  Pioneers.  Upper  Saddle  River,  NJ,
Prentice Hall: 265–90

Wiggins L 1993 Diffusion and use of Geographic Information Systems in public sector agencies in
the  United  States.  In  Masser  I  and  Onsrud  H  J  (eds)  Diffusion  of  Geographic  Information
Technologies. Dordrecht, Kluwer: 147–63

Wu F 2002 China’s changing urban governance in the transition towards a more market oriented

Wu  F  2007  Re-orientation  of  the  city  plan:  Strategic  planning  and  design  competition  in  China.

economy. Urban Studies 39: 1071–93

Geoforum 379–92

Wu W 1999 Pioneering Economic Reform in China’s Special Economic Zones: The Promotion of

Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer. Aldershot, UK, Ashgate Publishing

Yeh A 1991 The development and applications of geographic information systems for urban and
regional  planning  in  the  developing  countries.  International  Journal  of  Geographical
Information Systems 5: 5–27

Yin  R  K  2003  Case  Study  Research:  Design  and  Methods  (Third  Edition).  Thousand  Oaks,  CA,

Sage

Zhang J 2001 China’s “Government Online” and Attempts to Gain Technical Legitimacy. ASIEN, 80
Zhang  Q,  Liu  J,  Zhang  J,  Wang  L,  and  Zhao  R  2003  Government  Geographic  Information

Systems, Beijing, Science Press

Zhong E 1995 Application of GIS and the social background. Geographical Research 14: 91–97

© 2008 The Author. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

