International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Are prominent mountains frequently mentioned in
text? Exploring the spatial expressiveness of text
frequency

Curdin Derungs & Tanja Samardžić

To cite this article: Curdin Derungs & Tanja Samardžić (2017): Are prominent mountains
frequently mentioned in text? Exploring the spatial expressiveness of text frequency, International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2017.1418362

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2017.1418362

Published online: 26 Dec 2017.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 23

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES]

Date: 05 January 2018, At: 01:59

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE, 2017
https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2017.1418362

ARTICLE

Are prominent mountains frequently mentioned in text?
Exploring the spatial expressiveness of text frequency
Curdin Derungsa,b and Tanja Samardžićb

aDepartment of Geography, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; bURPP Language and Space,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 19 July 2017
Accepted 13 December 2017

KEYWORDS
Text frequency; Geographic
Information Retrieval;
geomorphometry;
multi-scale analysis

ABSTRACT
Data-driven GIScience shows a growing interest in making spatial
information from large text data. In this paper, we quantify and thus
evaluate the relation between text frequency and properties of the
outer-text, geographic setting by comparing text frequencies of
mountain names to the respective geomorphometric characteristics
We focus on some 2000 unique mountain names that appear some
50,000 times in a large compilation of texts on Swiss alpine history.
The results on the full data set suggest only a weak relation: only
5–10% of the variation in the text frequency being explained by the
respective geomorphometric characteristics. However, an analysis of
multiple scales, however, allow us to identify a Simpson’s Paradox.
What appears to be ‘noise’ in the analysis of all mountains in the
whole of Switzerland shows signiﬁcant local signals. Small spatial
extents, found all over Switzerland, can show considerably strong
correlations between text frequency and spatial prominence, with up
to 90% of the total variation explained. We argue that our ﬁndings
have practical
implications for data-driven GIScience. Retrieving
meaningful spatial information from text might only be possible if
the spatial scale of analysis reﬂects the spatial scale described in the
input text documents.

1. Introduction

The word ‘Matterhorn’ is used more than 1000 times in a compilation of 150 books on
Swiss alpine history. By contrast, the average number of occurrences of other mountain
names in these books is around 20. What does this relatively high frequency of
Matterhorn mean? Is the reason as simple arguing that the high number of this word’s
mentions in text means that the mountain Matterhorn is somehow special? If yes, how
can we tell what is special about it? In this paper, we introduce an approach to exploring
the relation between mountain toponym frequency in written language and spatial
mountain characteristics. Our approach relates to the state of the art in data-driven
GIScience (e.g. Miller and Goodchild 2015).

Digitized text has been extensively used in data-driven GIScience as an important
source of data. In particular, Geographic Information Retrieval (GIR, cf. Purves and Jones
(2011)) aims to retrieve novel spatial (and temporal) information automatically from social
media posts (Earle et al. 2012, Kamimura et al. 2017), described (Chesnokova et al. 2017)

CONTACT Curdin Derungs
© 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

curdin.derungs@geo.uzh.ch

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 2

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

and tagged images (Rattenbury et al. 2007), web pages (Jones et al. 2008) or digitized
books (Derungs and Purves 2016). It is usual practice in this ﬁeld to infer that mountains
are representative landscape objects for a studied region,
if, for instance, the word
mountain appears relatively frequently in text data (e.g. social media posts) collected in
a studied region, as compared to other regions. By following this reasoning, the frequent
occurrence of Matterhorn in the above example would lift Matterhorn into the position of
a particular representative Swiss mountain. Fundamental to these approaches is the
assumption that the outer-linguistic world, such as geography, functions as a stimulus
of word usage, represented by text frequency. Despite being intuitive, this assumption is
contested in linguistic research in which language production and thus word frequency
are considered to be generally independent of language external stimuli: We are not
constrained to talk about objects present in our immediate context.

In this paper, we would like to contribute to GIR by introducing an approach that
allows quantiﬁcation of the relation between physical properties of real-world objects
and the frequency of their respective text references. State-of-the-art approaches, such
as those mentioned above, proved to be successful
in characterizing landscapes or
regions by automatically retrieving representative descriptions from text. Our approach
is a natural extension by explicitly testing the link between text frequency of toponyms
and measurable characteristics of referenced mountains. We consider the following
bipartite research question:

To what degree does mountain toponym frequency in text relate to spatial prominence of
mountains, and how is this relation aﬀected by the scale of analysis?

Contributing to this question requires us to quantify spatial prominence of mountains.
This constitutes a methodological challenge as mountains are often discussed as proto-
typical examples of poorly deﬁned and vague geographic objects (Smith and Mark
2003). Consequently, we draw established approaches from geomorphometry (Pike
et al. 2009), which allow us to account for the lack of precise boundaries by applying
multi-scale approaches (e.g. Openshaw 1983).

2. Background

To set the background, we discuss the views of the two main components of our study:
word frequency distributions and spatial characterization of mountains.

2.1. Word frequency distributions in information retrieval and linguistics

It is generally assumed in information retrieval (IR) that the number of times a word is
used in a sample of text is a measure of the word’s representativeness of that text
sample and its content. Raw frequency, however, might be a weak indicator of the
content, as illustrated through the list of the most frequent words from the (British)
Alpine Club Corpus in Table 1.

The most frequent nouns, shown in the fourth column of the table,

indicate the
content of the corpus, but this is not the case with the most frequent words, which are
considerably generic. Transforming raw word frequencies into information requires
ﬁltering (such as selecting only nouns in Table 1) and/or normalization (cf. Kilgarriﬀ

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

3

1996). Normalization accounts for uninformative variation in raw frequency across words
by comparing the frequency of a word as observed in a sample to an a priori deﬁned
expected frequency. Expected frequencies are estimated from general, unspeciﬁc cor-
pora. Numerous measures for frequency normalization have been introduced, with tf–
idf, bm25 and log likelihood being prominent examples (e.g. Jurafsky and Martin 2014).
In GIR, observed raw frequency collected from text documents referring to a parti-
cular spatial extent is spatially normalized with expected frequencies, retrieved from a
broad collection of text documents, irrespective of spatial reference (e.g. Dykes et al.
2008, Derungs and Purves 2016). Further analysis of spatially normalized word frequency
relies on the assumption that variation in normalized frequency is related to or triggered
by real-world phenomena present in the context in which the text is created. In other
words, topics – spatially referenced topics, such as events or landscape characteristics in
GIR – trigger frequencies.

This assumption, however,

is contested in the theoretical study of

language.
linguistics in early 20th
Quantitative text analysis developed as part of theoretical
century with the goal of providing an empirical account of language use. This trend
resulted in the famous Zipf’s law (Zipf 1935), a formulation of a universal pattern in text
frequency of words that states that the ratio between the frequency rank of a word and
the number of other words belonging to the same frequency rank is a constant. Zipf’s
initial observation was later reﬁned by Mandelbrot (1953), but the quantitative research
remained on the margin of the study of language until the recent revival inspired by
developments in data and computer science.

The prevailing view in linguistics after the 1950s has been that linguistic behavior –
creation and use of linguistic expressions – cannot be explained in terms of stimulus-
response patterns. In other words, frequency of linguistic expressions has been seen as
independent of real-world phenomena, contrary to the view held in IR and, especially,
GIR. The linguistic take on the word frequency was strongly inﬂuenced by Chomsky’s
(1959) review of Skinner’s (1957) book Verbal behaviour. Arguing against the behavior-
istic account of linguistic production, Chomsky made the following claim: ‘It is obviously
untrue that the probability that a speaker will produce a full name is increased when its
bearer faces the speaker’ (p. 32).

Table 1. Top 10 most frequent nouns from the Alpine Club Corpus consisting of some 40 yearbooks.
ACC

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

All words
The
Of
Be
And
To
In
On
Have
We
By

Accessed from http://bncweb.lancs.ac.uk/.
ACC: Alpine Club Corpus.

Frequency (k)
412.9
186.6
179.5
176.2
136.6
113.6
63.7
57.9
39.8
39.0

Only nouns
Route
Summit
Ascent
Expedition
Mountain
Time
Face
Ridge
Snow
Rock

Frequency (k)
12.1
9.8
9.6
8.9
8.8
8.3
8.2
8.1
8.0
6.6

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 4

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

The views on word frequencies in texts and their relation to real-world phenomena in
(G)IR and in linguistics are interestingly opposed. Assumptions in both ﬁelds are sup-
ported by only little research dedicated to providing empirical evidence in or against
their favor. Our study addresses this gap explicitly.

2.2. Linking word frequency to real-world phenomena

There are examples that might be considered quantitative approaches to the text–reality
link, which usually apply predictive models that aim at relating events to word frequen-
cies retrieved from user-generated content. A well-known example is the Google Flu
Trend application (Ginsberg et al. 2009), in which the frequency of words in web queries
is compared to inﬂuenza contagion. Another example is the study by Earle et al. (2012),
who compared the frequency of the word earthquake used in Twitter to the occurrence
and intensity of earthquake events. An attempt at evaluating explicitly the text–reality
link was described by Derungs and Purves (2016), who compared regional frequencies of
landscape terms to information from land-cover and land-use classiﬁcations. All that
these approaches have in common is that the frequency of words is used for estimating
a measure of probability of occurrence of events or landscape objects and not for further
characterizing the objects, as is the goal of our study.

Most similar to our approach is the studies by Gschwend and Purves (2012), in which
diﬀerent geomorphometric classes – characterized by slope and convexity – are inter-
sected with georeferenced and spatially normalized word frequencies from Flickr
(https://www.ﬂickr.com/) and Geograph (http://www.geograph.org.uk/). A qualitative
analysis led to the conclusion that geomorphometry is well characterized by frequent
words, such that mountain, for instance, is used particularly often for steeper classes.
Gschwend and Purves’ approach takes a somewhat inverse direction of our approach
and, importantly, does not aim at quantifying the relation between the distribution of
words and geomorphometry.

2.3. Spatial characteristics of mountains

The second, less exhaustive, part of the background section is dedicated to the question
of how landscape objects are usually characterized in GIScience. There is a considerable
body of literature on technical and ontological challenges of characterizing landscape
objects (e.g. Agarwal 2005), with mountains being prototypical examples (e.g. Battig and
Montague 1969). Smith and Mark (2003), for instance, raised the question ‘Do mountains
exist?’ and thus initiated a philosophical debate on the nature of objects and how they
are perceived in landscapes. The authors concluded that if existence depends on sound
deﬁnitions, then mountains might fail to exist due to the presence of conceptual and
spatial vagueness. We do not further discuss such ontological issues but emphasize that
as a consequence of the vague nature of mountains, to date, no GIS data set exists that
deﬁnes spatial extents of (Swiss) mountains in a clear-cut manner, for instance, as
polygons with sharp borders.

The technical challenge in characterizing mountains, therefore,

lies in extracting
relevant information from the continuous elevation ﬁeld, i.e. incorporating uncertainty
on the spatial extent. Approaches for accomplishing this task are usually associated with

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

5

the broader ﬁeld of geomorphometry (e.g. Pike et al. 2009) and geomorphologic
classiﬁcation in particular. Wood (1996) distinguished geomorphological classiﬁcations
into approaches that classify the earth’s surface into homogeneous regions (e.g.
Iwahashi and Pike 2007) – for instance, used by Gschwend and Purves in the above
example (2012) – and approaches that extract information on individual
landscape
features such as peaks, ridges and passes (e.g. Fisher et al. 2004). Less frequent are
approaches that aim at delineating not only features but landscape objects as wholes,
such as mountains (e.g. Sinha and Mark 2010) and valleys (e.g. Straumann and Purves
2008).

In this paper, we apply two state-of-the-art measures for quantifying the prominence
of mountains as well as extracting associated features. Both measures are described in
detail in the following section. Thus, we address the methodological challenge discussed
above, namely retrieving mountain characteristics that not only allow mountains to be
vague but also represent information that can be used in quantitative comparisons
together with toponym frequency counts.

3. Data and methodology

In the following subsection, we describe the data and methodology used in this paper.
The methodology consists of three parts, namely (1) the extraction of mountain topo-
nym frequencies from our corpus, (2) the characterization of mountain prominence
using geomorphometry and (3) methods used for comparing mountain toponym fre-
quency to the prominence of the respective mountain. The data are described while the
ﬁrst of these three parts is discussed.

3.1. Corpus selection and mountain frequency extraction

We restricted our focus to the spatial extent of Switzerland and decided to use the
Text + Berg corpus (Bubenhofer et al. 2015) as a source of information. This openly
available corpus underwent comprehensive preprocessing, such as named-entity recog-
nition and part-of-speech tagging, and has already been used as input data in GIScience
(e.g. Derungs and Purves 2016). For more detailed information on word counts and
average article length, we would like to refer to these sources.

Text + Berg comprises 150 Alpine yearbooks dating from 1864 to the present and
consists of some 10,000 articles relating to mountaineering, climbing, hiking and other
topics of interest to the members of the Swiss Alpine Club. The yearbooks are edited
volumes, published initially in a mixture of German, French as well as, occasionally,
Italian and later in parallel
in all three languages. Earlier versions of the yearbook
underwent a rigorous editorial process, and their content was contributed by a relatively
small number of authors and dedicated to a specialized audience. Newer volumes have
a broader authorship and are published for some 130,000 active readers, mostly in
Switzerland. An article in an early yearbook would typically describe the ﬁrst descending
of a Swiss mountain in great detail (and ﬂowery language). More recent articles are
usually shorter and thus less detailed but cover a broader set of topics (snow shoe
hiking, ice and sports climbing, cultural characteristics etc.).

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 6

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

While the content of the articles is not limited to the area of Switzerland, we only
extract Swiss toponyms and then calculate mountain toponym frequency distributions
for each article. The extraction of mountain toponyms relies on an a priori manual
named entity annotation applied to the corpus.1

Swissnames

In total, more than 10,000 individual articles were processed, with an average length
of 1500 words. Extracted mountain toponyms are linked to an extensive Swiss gazetteer
[https://shop.swisstopo.admin.ch/en/products/landscape/names3D])
(i.e.
that contains some 156,000 unique toponyms, each of which has a common ID.
Swissnames contains all toponyms used on the oﬃcial Swiss topographic maps of the
scales 1:25,000 and 1:50,000. Each toponym is associated with its geographic location on
the map. The approximately 6500 mountain toponyms in Swissnames are usually
referenced to the location of the mountain peak.

The extraction of mountain toponyms from Text + Berg resulted in a total of 53,000
instances of more than 2000 unique mountain toponyms. Toponym reference ambigu-
ity, which usually is a major issue for this type of resource (Derungs and Purves 2014),
can be ignored due to the high precision of the manual named entity annotation.
Figure 1 (left) shows the geographic distribution of mountain toponyms and related
toponym frequencies in Text + Berg. There are regions where mountains with high
frequencies are clustered, such as around Jungfrau, Finsteraarhorn, Bietschhorn and
Matterhorn. The variogram computed from toponym frequencies (Figure 1, right), how-
ever, indicates that the distribution of frequencies does not follow a larger spatial trend
but is relatively constant over distance (‘pure nugget’). Interestingly, the variogram with
a smaller bin size (i.e. 2 km, gray line) shows a peak and abrupt decrease in variance for
mountains in immediate proximity,
indicating that high-frequency mountains might
typically be directly neighbored by mountains with lower frequencies and vice versa.

3.2. Computing spatial measures

Each of the 2000 unique mountain toponyms, extracted from Text + Berg and associated
with geographic coordinates, is associated with three spatial measures. The measures

Figure 1. Left: Spatial distribution of toponym frequencies (point size). The labeled mountains will
be referred to in the results section. Right: Spatial variogram computed from mountain toponym
frequencies. Black line: 5 km bin size. Gray line: 2 km bin size.

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

7

represent diﬀerent views on what might be considered mountain prominence (from a
purely geomorphometric perspective).

The ﬁrst measure is the absolute height of mountains, which is extracted from the
Swiss digital elevation model DEM25 (https://shop.swisstopo.admin.ch/en/products/
height_models/dhm25) at mountain peak locations as stored in Swissnames. DEM25 is
a raster data set, with a resolution of 25 × 25 m. Each grid cell contains the value of a
local height above sea level.

The second measure we use is the hill

index and results from an approach
described by Rodriguez et al. (2002), which is implemented in SAGA GIS (http://
www.saga-gis.org/en/index.html). The hill index is calculated for all DEM25 cells that
constitute local maxima, i.e. cells that are surrounded by eight cells of lower height.
The hill index is derived from the relative heights of these local maxima, as shown in
Figure 2(a)
(step 1). Relative heights are calculated from comparing each local
maximum to the heights of neighboring local maxima within a deﬁned distance
(set to 10 km in our experiments). Heights within the deﬁned distance are ordered,
and only the ‘relative’ height is retained that towers over the next smaller local
maxima (Figure 2(a), step 2). Additionally, a threshold value is applied to ﬁlter out
peaks of small relative height (Figure 2(a), step3). The hill index is then calculated by
Its values are then
ranking all relative heights for all
spatially joined to the mountain peak locations of the 2000 unique mountain
toponyms extracted from Text + Berg.

local maxima in Switzerland.

The third measure we coin is ridge detection. The measure is implemented as part of
the multi-scale morphometric feature extraction algorithm in the open source software
Landserf (http://www.landserf.org/) and described by Wood (1996). As visualized in
Figure 2 (right), ridge detection incorporates multiple spatial scales, which are imple-
mented as search windows. Search windows of increasing size are overlaid on each grid
cell of the DEM25. The elevation values within each search window (ranging from 3 × 3

Figure 2. (a) Visualization of the hill index approach by Rodriguez et al. (2002) and (b) the multi-scale
approach for ridge detection as discussed by Wood (1996) and sketched by Fisher et al. (2004).

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 8

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

[i.e. 75 × 75 m] to 51 × 51 [1275 × 1275 m] cells in our case) are used to classify the
respective spatial extent as being best represented as a plane, a ridge or a channel
(ignoring the infrequent classes pit and peak). The results of the approach consist of
three probability values for each grid cell. The probabilities relate to the number of times
each of the three morphometric classes (plane, ridge and channel) was classiﬁed over all
search windows as being best representatives. What we term ridge detection in this
study is the probability of the class ridge only.

Figure 3 (left) lists the 15 top-ranked mountains for toponym frequency and the three

prominence measures.

The lists have only little overlap, with the absolute height, hill

index and ridge
detection sharing, 2, 4 and 2 entries, respectively, with the list of the most frequent
mountain toponyms. The gray lines in the prominence plots represent toponym
frequencies of the respective mountains. None of the three prominence measures
shows a clear decrease of toponym frequencies with a decreasing spatial prominence
rank. This is most obvious for ridge detection, where most top-ranked mountains
gain a very low toponym frequency. Figure 3 might give us a ﬁrst impression that
the relation between toponym frequency and mountain prominence is not
straightforward.

The form of the four distributions varies signiﬁcantly, with toponym frequency and
the absolute height both resembling a linear decrease, whereas the hill index and ridge
detection are experiencing an exponential decrease, similarly to the aforementioned
Zipf distribution.

Figure 3. Top 15 Swiss mountains with respect to four diﬀerent measures. The gray line represents
the toponym frequency of the respective mountains (high frequency = high values/peaks).

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

9

3.3. Comparing toponym frequency to spatial measures

To compare mountain toponym frequencies to the three spatial prominence measures,
Pearson correlation values were calculated. We conducted a global comparison in
which spatial prominence and toponym frequency of all 2000 unique mountain
toponyms in Text + Berg are correlated. To account for the impact of spatial scale,
we also made regional comparisons, which only incorporate subsets of articles from
Text + Berg containing spatial references to a given region. In fact, the criterion for
creating subsets is to ﬁlter for articles that predominantly contain mountain toponyms
referring to a region of interest. The impact of spatial scale is explored by testing not
only regions at multiple locations but also of varying size. Details on how regions are
importantly, how articles are spatially ﬁltered are explained in the
deﬁned and,
remainder of this section.

3.3.1. Deﬁning regions
Regions consist of n mountains, whose names are selected from the list of all 2000
unique mountain names found in Text + Berg. Two parameters are important for
deﬁning the regional mountains, namely the n (i.e. number of mountains constituting
a region) and the seed mountain (i.e. the ﬁrst mountain added to a region). We used
two procedures to select seed mountains. One procedure is based on manual seed
mountain selection; the second procedure applies random selection. After a seed
mountain had been selected, n proximate mountains were grouped together with
the seed mountain, which constitutes a region. The selection of the n proximate
mountains is performed in two ways: (1) the n nearest neighbor mountains to a seed
are selected, independent of their absolute distances, or (2) n mountains are selected
based on an absolute threshold distance from the seed. The following values for the
number of nearest neighbors and threshold distances, respectively, are used in this
study:

The following mountains were taken as seed mountains in the informed manual
selection: Bietschhorn, Finsteraarhorn, Jungfrau, Matterhorn, Pilatus and Piz Bernina. These
are all well-known Swiss mountains that represent certain diversity in terms of height
and shape. We deﬁne regions for each of these mountains in terms of increasing
number of nearest neighbors and distance threshold, as represented in Table 2.

In the uninformed selection of seed mountains, 200 random picks of a seed
mountain (without replacement) are made for each number of nearest neighbors
or distance threshold. When seed mountains are randomly selected, we have no
control over the geographic context. In return, however, we can compute some 200
correlation scores per spatial scale and thus gain an insight into their summary
statistics.

From this description,
in such that

particular

it should now be clear that our deﬁnition of regions is
regions are deﬁned as lists of neighboring mountain

Table 2. Numbers of nearest neighbors and distance thresholds used to create spatial regions from
seed mountains.
Number of nearest neighbors
Distance in km

500
200

100
100

50
50

20
10

10
5

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 10

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

toponyms. The spatial representation of regions is a set of point coordinates of
mountain peaks.

3.3.2. Spatially ﬁltering articles
Regions as deﬁned in Section 4.1 are now used as input to ﬁlter for articles from the
Text + Berg corpus that contains relevant ‘regional’ descriptions. We determine the
relevance of an article for a given region using a standard spatial relevance ranking
approach from GIR (Larson 2011), with the diﬀerence of exclusively using mountain
toponyms as spatial references.

Figure 4 demonstrates how the relevance of an Articlei is evaluated for a Regionj.
The relevance measure incorporates the relative number of toponyms in articlei
that are inside regionj. Additionally, a logarithmic product is introduced to favor
articles that have larger numbers of mountain toponyms (i.e. longer articles) and
thus lower the chance of overlapping 100% with a given region. From all articles
with relevance >0, only 50 articles with the highest relevance are used to compute
toponym frequencies. Importantly, if less than 10 articles are available for a given
region or if all relevant articles contain less than a minimum of 6 mountain
toponyms, no correlation value is calculated. We introduced these thresholds to
avoid computing spurious correlations from very small sample sizes. We are aware
that the threshold values introduced in this section are of empirical nature and
might aﬀect our results.

4. Results and interpretation

Table 3 shows the global correlation scores for all 2000 mountain toponyms found in all
articles in Text + Berg. Correlations are signiﬁcantly weak, with only 3–8% of the total
variation in toponym frequency being explained by spatial prominence measures.

Figure 4. Example of how the relevance of articles is evaluated for regionj (gray area). Toponyms
belonging to one articlei are visualized using unique point symbols (point, square, star). The
is based on the relative number of toponyms of the article
relevance computation of articlei
overlapping with regionj (rel.Topo in Reg.j).

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

11

Table 3. Global correlation values (Spearman) between
mountain toponym frequency and spatial measures,
represented as % of variation explained (i.e. r2
s ).
Absolute height
Hill index
Ridge detection

5.68%
8.35%
3.38%

The weak global correlations reﬂect our preliminary observation with the four lists of
top-ranked mountains (Figure 3). There is only little overlap between the most frequent
mountain toponyms and the spatial prominence measures.

4.1. Well-known versus random seed mountains

The results of the regional comparison in which well-known seed mountains are used to
deﬁne the smaller regions (and subsets of the corresponding articles) are summarized in
Figure 5.

Figure 5 allows one to make the following observations:

(1) Correlation values can be highly signiﬁcant, with sometimes some 50–80% of the
total variation of mountain frequencies being explained through spatial
prominence.

(2) The correlation between toponym frequency and all spatial measures is often
high for small regions, incorporating 5–10 neighboring mountains or mountains
within the 10–20-km distance. This pattern can be observed for most well-known
mountains.

(3) All the three spatial measures show similar patterns.
(4) The decrease in correlation with increasing regional extents is comparable across
the two procedures for deﬁning regions, i.e. using nearest neighbors or distance
thresholds.

(5) The previous four observations are all prone to variations between individual
mountains, the three prominence measures or the two types of neighborhood
measures.

Figure 5. The relation toponym frequency: spatial measure tested for diﬀerent spatial extents and a
set of well-known seed mountains.

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 12

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

Figure 6. The relation toponym frequency: spatial measure tested for diﬀerent spatial extents
and some 200 random seed mountains. The horizontal
line in boxplots refers to the median
correlation.

Figure 6 shows the summary statistics of correlation values per region size in the
setting where 200 randomly selected seed mountains are used to deﬁne the
regions.

Median correlation values calculated for random seed mountains are lower than
correlation values of well-known mountains (Figure 5). Nevertheless, the decrease of
correlation with increasing region size can still be observed. Note that the random
selection procedure might often result in non-prominent mountains acting as seeds.
To cover the gap between the highly informed manual selection of well-known seed
mountains and the uninformed automatic random selection, we also tested a scenario
with an informed implementation of the random selection procedure, such that spatially
prominent mountains are more (or less) probable to be selected. These results, which
are not further covered in this publication, support the above-made observation: corre-
lation values of the informed random selection lie between those of well-known and
randomly selected seed mountains.

The aggregation of 200 random seed mountain values per region size allows
one to explore variation in correlation. We observe largest variations for small
spatial extents, with some random seed mountains showing correlation values
comparable to those of the well-known mountains, reaching r2 values as large as
0.7. This implies that not only the size of the neighborhood but also locational
particularities aﬀect the strength of relation between text frequency and spatial
characteristics. We, therefore, set out to explore the spatial distribution of correla-
tion values.

4.2. Mapping toponym correlation

In Figure 7, we map correlation values calculated for all 2000 mountain toponyms in
Text + Berg, for two region sizes (size represented as gray circles on the lower right) and
all three spatial measures.

Figure 7 allows one to reproduce some of the earlier observations, such as the
decrease of correlation with increasing region size and the lower correlations for ridge

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

13

Figure 7. Spatial distribution of correlation values, calculated for all toponyms, two diﬀerent
distance thresholds and all three spatial measures.

detection. By comparing the correlation values in Figure 7 with the mountain frequency
distribution, as represented in Figure 1, it can be observed that correlations are higher in
regions with high-frequency mountains
Finsteraarhorn and
Bietschhorn). Regions only attracting little attention in Text + Berg and thus gaining
low toponym frequencies show low correlations.

(e.g. Matterhorn,

4.3. Excluding a potential small-sample eﬀect

The high correlation values observed for small region sizes could be an artifact of small
sample sizes. To test this hypothesis, we conducted an experiment in which diﬀerent
numbers of Text + Berg articles were randomly selected (5–200 articles). Additionally,
from each random set of articles, we made a random selection of mountain toponyms.
Doing so, we tested if the number of articles or a combination of the number of articles
and the number of mountain toponyms might introduce high correlations for smaller
sample sizes, even though the selection process was not spatially informed.

Mountain toponym frequencies extracted from random articles were tested for
correlation with all three spatial prominence measures (Figure 8, upper graph). The
same was done for the random mountains from the random article selection process
(Figure 8, lower graph).

Correlation values in both graphs in Figure 8 are considerably low and comparable to
the global correlation values in Table 3. Neither the number of documents nor the
number of mountain toponyms, if randomly selected, can account for the signiﬁcant
correlations illustrated in Figures 5 and 6. Therefore, the hypothesis that high correlation
values for small spatial extents are an artifact of small sample size can be rejected.

5. Discussion

We started this paper with the observation that in data-driven GIScience, text is often
used as a source of novel spatial information, and in the following exclusively focused on
this strand, but the link between the frequency of words in text and its representative-
ness for real-world characteristics is often only assumed and rarely empirically tested.

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 14

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

Figure 8. First graph: Correlations computed from random compilations of articles and mountain
toponyms. Second line of graphs: The diﬀerent plots refer to the diﬀerent sizes of randomly selected
articles (number in the header), whereas the x-axis represents the number of randomly selected
mountain toponyms from these (randomly selected) articles.

Additionally, we found that word frequencies are often used for predicting the occur-
rence or representativeness of objects or events but rarely for further characterization of
these ‘items’.

We thus resolved a twofold research question that guided this paper, namely (1) to
what degree does the frequency of mountain toponyms reﬂect the spatial character-
istics of mountains?2 and (2) does this relation depend on the spatial scale of
analysis?

Before approaching these two questions in detail directly, the short answer is as
follows: Yes, there is a statistically signiﬁcant correlation between the frequency and
prominence. However, the link is not strong, prone to variation across regions in
Switzerland and, most importantly, dependent on the spatial scale of analysis. The
information is potentially
claim from data-driven GIScience that a wealth of spatial
available from the large amount of text in digital format (e.g. Purves et al. 2007) should,
therefore, be added to the cautery note that detailed information can only be extracted
from text if spatial scale is considered.

Miller and Goodchild (2015) broadly discussed data-driven geography by focusing on
questions as diverse as ‘What is knowledge?’,
‘How can spurious correlations be
resolved?’, ‘How much theory is needed?’ and ‘What is a good strategy to model large
spatial data?’. The study presented in this paper taught us a practical lesson that we
might add to this list of questions, namely ‘What are the spatial characteristics of the
input data?’.

In our case study, this translates into knowing the expected spatial scale of a typical
article published in the Text + Berg corpus. Exceeding this scale means overlaying
information from several regions and thus losing the statistical signal. This observation

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

15

might be best explained with the Simpson’s Paradox (Wagner 1982). The scattering in
the global distribution of
frequencies/prominence values from all mountains in
Switzerland, i.e. low correlations in Table 3, covers the high correlations that can be
observed on small spatial extents (Figures 5 and 6). Only ﬁltering for ‘suitable’ spatial
scales thus allows detection of the expected pattern.

The scale we found to result in highest correlation values is often referred to as
landscape scale in geography (e.g. Montello 1993). It is typically of the size of a ‘portion
of the earth’s surface that can be comprehended at a glance’ (Jackson 1984, p. 8). It is
reasonable to expect articles in our corpus (Text + Berg) to match this landscape scale.
From here, we set oﬀ to also explore where in space high correlations between
frequency and prominence occur (Figure 7). Interestingly, what we ﬁnd in these maps
adds another layer of complexity. The relation between frequency and prominence not
only depends on spatial scale but is also unevenly distributed over Switzerland. Some
regions show particular high correlations, whereas others – independent of scale – show
little evidence for a frequency–prominence relation. This observation suggests new
questions to be addressed in future research.

5.2. Limitations and outlook

Our approach is certainly prone to a number of limitations: most importantly, the focus
on one particular corpus, one country, one type of linguistic feature and one class of
spatial measures. It, therefore, remains an open question if ﬁndings in this study allow
generalization. Do the same patterns hold true for diﬀerent geographic settings, diﬀer-
ent types of geographic objects and descriptions from diﬀerently natured corpora?

One limitation worth discussing is the exclusive focus on toponyms. We are aware
that toponyms, as proper names in general, have a particular status in the lexicon
(Coates 2006). Our ﬁndings are, therefore, not directly transferrable to other lexical
categories, such as generic landscape terms that are used in many state-of-the-art GIR
approaches (e.g. Dykes et al. 2008). By contrast, toponyms allow linking word frequency
to individual instances of real-world objects; this is a prerequisite for our approach. Also,
toponyms, as proper names in general, are arguably used for referential purposes
exclusively and are thus associated with a less degree of ambiguity, as compared to
other lexical features (Coates 2006).

7. Conclusion

We would like to conclude this paper by pointing out two potential areas of impact of
our ﬁndings in a broader GIScience context.

First, our results indicate how important it is to know one’s corpus. Only a suitable
spatial scale – we use the established term ‘landscape scale’ (Montello 1993) – allowed
us to detect the hypothesized relation between the frequency of mountain toponyms
and the spatial prominence of referenced mountains. What sounds like a reasonable
claim,
in reality, often turns out to be questionable. Without having the means for
testing frequency–prominence relations quantitatively, as it often proves diﬃcult in
data-driven GIS, determining the best scale of analysis for a given corpus might prove

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 16

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

diﬃcult. We demonstrated that, without incorporating valid spatial scales, one might
take the risk of falling for the Simpson’s Paradox (Wagner 1982).

Second, some applications in GIS require one to go beyond the current state of the
art of generating general descriptions of landscapes from User Generated Content (UGC)
or text toward more quantitative characterizations. One such application is ecosystem
service assessments (Carpenter et al. 2006), in which diﬀerent aspects of landscapes are
evaluated and compared using quantitative measures. It has been argued that UGC and
text bear the potential of adding useful information to the often sensory and expert
driven data sources used in this ﬁeld (e.g. Fritz et al. 2009), for instance, for evaluating
the cultural or recreational value of landscapes.

The results of our approach are obviously not for straightforward use in ecosystem
service assessments. However, we would argue that we showed that text frequencies, in
combination with a multi-scale approach (Wood et al. 2008), allowed us to detect text–
reality links that not only allow for the description of landscapes by predicting the
occurrence of landscape objects but also the reproduction of quantitative characteristics
of landscape objects (namely mountain prominence). Applied to more and diﬀerent
landscape objects, our approach might be considered to be a valuable novel means for
the ‘quantiﬁcation’ of landscapes from text.

Notes

1. The details of the named entity recognition in the current version of the corpus are described
in the corpus documentation (in German), available at http://www.textberg.ch/ReleaseNotes/
README_Release_151_v01.htm.

2. We relate to these two measures as frequency (i.e. mountain toponym frequency) and

prominence (i.e. spatial mountain prominence) in the rest of this discussion.

Acknowledgments

We would like to express our special thanks to Ross S. Purves for his helpful comments to an early
version of the manuscript.

Disclosure statement

No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.

This research was supported by the University Research Priority Program ‘Language and Space’ at
the University of Zurich.

Funding

References

Agarwal, P., 2005. Ontological considerations in GIScience. International Journal of Geographical

Information Science, 19 (5), 501–536. doi:10.1080/13658810500032321

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

17

Battig, W.F. and Montague, W.E., 1969. Category norms for verbal
the connecticut category norms.

replication and extension of
Psychology Monographs, 80 (3), 1–46. doi:10.1037/h0027577

items in 56 categories: a
Journal of Experimental

Bubenhofer, N., et al., eds., 2015. Text+Berg-Korpus (Release 151_v01).
Carpenter, S.R., et al., 2006. Millennium ecosystem assessment: research needs. Science, 314 (5797),

257–258. doi:10.1126/science.1131946

Chesnokova, O., Nowak, M., and Purves, R.S., 2017. A crowdsourced model of landscape prefer-

ence. LIPIcs-Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics.

Chomsky, N, 1959. A review of B. F. Skinner’s verbal behavior. Language, 35 (1), 26–58.
Coates, R., 2006. Properhood. Language, 82 (2), 356–382. doi:10.1353/lan.2006.0084
Derungs, C. and Purves, R.S., 2014. From text to landscape: locating, identifying and mapping the
International Journal of Geographical

use of landscape features in a Swiss Alpine corpus.
Information Science, 28 (6), 1272–1293. doi:10.1080/13658816.2013.772184

Derungs, C. and Purves, R.S., 2016. Characterising landscape variation through spatial folkso-

nomies. Applied Geography, 75, 60–70. doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2016.08.005

Dykes, J., et al., 2008. Exploring volunteered geographic information to describe place: visualiza-
tion of the ‘Geograph British Isles’ collection. Proceedings of the GIS Research UK 16th Annual
Conference GISRUK, 256–267.

Earle, P.S., Bowden, D.C., and Guy, M., 2012. Twitter earthquake detection: earthquake monitoring

in a social world. Annals of Geophysics, 54, 6.

Fisher, P., Wood, J., and Cheng, T., 2004. Where is Helvellyn? Fuzziness of multi-scale landscape
morphometry. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 29 (1), 106–128. doi:10.1111/
tran.2004.29.issue-1

Fritz, S., et al., 2009. Geo-Wiki. Org: the use of crowdsourcing to improve global land cover. Remote

Sensing, 1 (3), 345–354. doi:10.3390/rs1030345

Ginsberg, J., et al., 2009. Detecting inﬂuenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature,

457 (7232), 1012–1014. doi:10.1038/nature07634

Gschwend, C. and Purves, R.S., 2012. Exploring geomorphometry through user generated content:
comparing an unsupervised geomorphometric classiﬁcation with terms attached to georefer-
enced images in Great Britain. Transactions in GIS, 16 (4), 499–522. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9671.2012.01307.x

Iwahashi, J. and Pike, R., 2007. Automated classiﬁcations of topography from DEMs by an
unsupervised nested-means algorithm and a three-part geometric signature. Geomorphology,
86 (3–4), 409–440. doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2006.09.012

Jackson, J.B., 1984. Discovering the vernacular landscape. New York: Yale University Press.
Jones, C.B., et al., 2008. Modelling vague places with knowledge from the Web.

Geographical

Information

Science,

22

(10),

1045–1065.

International
doi:10.1080/

Journal
of
13658810701850547

Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J.H., 2014. Speech and language processing. London: Pearson.
Kamimura, T., et al., 2017. On-line geospatial term extraction from streaming geotagged tweets.

2017 IEEE Third International Conference on Multimedia Big Data (Bigmm), 322–329.

Kilgarriﬀ, A., 1996. Which words are particularly characteristic of a text? A survey of statistical
approaches. In: AISB Workshop on Language engineering for document analysis and recognition.
33–40.

Mandelbrot, B., 1953. An informational theory of the statistical structure of language. In: Willis
jackson, ed. Communication Theory. London: Butterworths Scientiﬁc Publications, 468–502.
Miller, H.J. and Goodchild, M.F., 2015. Data-driven geography. GeoJournal, 80 (4), 449–461.

doi:10.1007/s10708-014-9602-6

Montello, D.R., 1993. Scale and multiple psychologies of space. In: Spatial information theory a

theoretical basis for gis. Springer, 312–321.

Openshaw, S., 1983. The modiﬁable areal unit problem. Norwich.
Pike, R.J., Evans, I.S., and Hengl, T., 2009. Geomorphometry: a brief guide. Terrain, 33.

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 18

C. DERUNGS AND T. SAMARDŽIĆ

Purves, R.S., et al., 2007. The design and implementation of SPIRIT: a spatially aware search engine
Information

International Journal of Geographical

for information retrieval on the Internet.
Science, 21 (7), 717–745. doi:10.1080/13658810601169840

Purves, R.S. and Jones, C.B., 2011. Letters on geographic information retrieval. SIGSpatial.
Larson, 2011. Ranking approaches for GIR. In: R. Purves and C. Jones, eds. Letters on geographic

information retrieval. ACM Sigspatial Special, 37–42.

Rattenbury, T., Good, N., and Naaman, M., 2007. Towards automatic extraction of event and place
semantics from ﬂickr tags. In: SIGIR '07 Proceedings of the 30th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information retrieval, 23–27 July 2007, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. New York, NY: ACM, 103–110

Rodriguez, F., Maire, E., and Courjault-Rade, P., 2002. The Black Top Hat function applied to a DEM:
a tool to estimate recent incision in a mountainous watershed (Estibe ` re Watershed, Central
Pyrenees). Holocene, 29 (6), 2–5.

Sinha, G. and Mark, D.M., 2010. Cognition-based extraction and modelling of topographic emi-
nences. Cartographica: the International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization,
45 (2), 105–112. doi:10.3138/carto.45.2.105

Skinner, B. F, 1957. Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton.
Smith, B. and Mark, D.M., 2003. Do mountains exist? Towards an ontology of

Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 30 (3), 411–427. doi:10.1068/b12821

landforms.

Straumann, R. and Purves, R.S., 2008. Delineation of valleys and valley ﬂoors. Geographic

Information Science, 320–336.

Wagner, C.H., 1982. Simpson’s paradox in real life. The American Statistician, 36 (1), 46–48.
Wood, J., 1996. The geomorphological characterisation of digital elevation models. Leicester, UK:

Wood, J., Slingsby, A., and Dykes, J., 2008. Using treemaps for variable selection in spatio-temporal

Zipf, G.K., 1935. The psycho-biology of language: an introduction to dynamic philology. Boston:

University of Leicester.

visualization. East, 3–6.

Houghton Miﬄin company.

Downloaded by [UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE LIBRARIES] at 01:59 05 January 2018 