The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

Brian Robson & David Bower

To cite this article: Brian Robson & David Bower (2016) The Town Plans and
Sketches of William Stukeley, The Cartographic Journal, 53:2, 133-148, DOI:
10.1080/00087041.2015.1112517

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1112517

Published online: 21 Jun 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 39

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [Ryerson University Library]

Date: 04 November 2016, At: 10:58

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 53 No. 2
© The British Cartographic Society 2016

pp. 133–148 May 2016

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

Brian Robson1 and David Bower2

1School of Environment, Manchester University, Manchester, UK. 2Independent Scholar, Leeds, UK
Emails: brian.robson@manchester.ac.uk, david@d.i.bower.co.uk

The eighteenth-century field archaeologist, William Stukeley, travelled widely throughout England to produce the
numerous sketches and plans that illustrated his Itinerarium Curiosum. His work has generally not been seen as having
made a serious contribution to the cartography or to the portrayal of the towns and landscape of preindustrial
England, but the quality of his sketches and the relative accuracy of his town plans are explored here to suggest that
this may be too harsh a view.

Keywords: eighteenth-century England; map evaluation; road conditions; town plans; views; town prospects

William Stukeley has long been a controversial figure. He
was very much a man of the eighteenth century when
Britain was firmly embarked on science and in the embrace
of the rationalism of the Enlightenment, and yet poised to
develop the romanticism symbolized by Wordsworth at the
end of the century. Stukeley’s life sat awkwardly between
these extremes. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society,
doctor of medicine, fellow of the College of Physicians, and
the distinguished father of field archaeology. Yet as his life
and work progressed he became increasingly preoccupied
with Roman and early British archaeology and a romanti-
cized fascination with Druids. He has rightly been seen as
caught between the two traditions, ‘transitional out of the
Neoclassicism of the Enlightenment and a harbinger of the
early Romantic Movement’ (Reinhartz, 1997, p. 153).

His great contribution to science was his recognition of
the significance of the stone circles of Avebury and Stone-
henge and his meticulous drawings and recording of these
and other archaeological relics at a time when many sites
were suffering destruction as their stones were pilfered. In
many cases, Stukeley’s sketches are the only record of
what had survived up to the early decades of the eighteenth
century. Yet his druidic preoccupation prompted Chippin-
dale to comment that ‘Stonehenge has never entirely recov-
ered from Reverend Stukeley’s vision … He set Stonehenge
under a fog-bank of mysticism which lasted a century’
(Chippindale, 1983).

Here we want to explore whether, as one of the products of
his extensive field work, Stukeley’s sketches and plans can be
considered as valuable a contribution to cartography and
geography as his measurements and sketches undoubtedly
were to his role in field archaeology. Certainly, it is not too
fanciful to see him as a cartographer manqué. He was well

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1112517

acquainted with the major map-makers and engravers of
the time, and throughout his life was fascinated by maps
and geography.1 His magnum opus, Itinerarium curiosum,
included his map of Roman roads in Lincolnshire and a
further map of Roman roads across the whole of England
and Wales (Stukeley, 1724). Moreover, he was clearly capti-
vated by the historic and contemporary cartography of
Britain. In Itinerarium he showed his familiarity with the
road maps of Ogilby, the county maps of Speed, and others
such as Plot’s Oxfordshire and Staffordshire, Lhuyd’s
Wales, and the ancient maps of Ptolemy. On his travels, he
drew attention to having seen an early plan of Exeter: ‘at
Mr Cole’s the goldsmith I saw an old ground plot of this
city in queen Elizabeth’s time; there has been since a vast
increase of buildings within and without the city … ’ (IC,
1.157).2 This was probably Richard Hooker’s plan of 1587
which Speed drew on for the Exeter inset on his map of
Devon. On one of his tours Stukeley took pains to visit
Henry Beighton, ‘an ingenious gentleman, who is making
a map of this county [Warwickshire] … ’ (IC, 2.20).3 In
Newcastle he noted that ‘there is a ground plot of this
town lately made by an artist’ (IC, 2.64) – probably the hand-
some 1723 plan by James Corbridge which was engraved by
Harris, who engraved many of Stukeley’s illustrations in Itin-
erarium. Even at school and university he showed an interest
in maps and cartography. As a schoolboy, he ‘went a journey
on horseback … where we passed thro’ Boston … I then drew
a Map (after a sort) of all my Journey … ’ (Surtees, 1.12)4;
and while a student, he bought a pair of globes from
Joseph Moxon together with Moxon’s Treatise on globes
(Surtees, 1.23).

The most notable of his cartographic friends was Herman
the early 1700s’

‘Britain’s premier mapmaker of

Moll,

134

The Cartographic Journal

Table 1. Engravers named on plates in the 1776 edition of Itinerarium

HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY

Plates in
volume I

Plates in
volume II

Total

Engraver

Kirkall, Elisha
Harris, John
Vandergucht, John
Toms, William Henry
Parker, Samuel
Vandergucht, Gerard
Sturt
Pine, John
Fletcher
Hulett, John
Thornton

16
10
8
0
4
2
0
2
0
0
1

29
9
2
9
2
3
4
0
2
1
0

45
19
10
9
6
5
4
2
2
1
1

Notes: Details of those with Christian names are in Worms and Baynton-
Williams (2011).

(Reinhartz, 1997, p. 6). The first map that Moll included in
his 1724 A set of fifty new and correct maps of England and
Wales was Stukeley’s Roman Britain; and Moll’s classical
atlas of 1721 was humbly dedicated to Stukeley. Stukeley
himself drew a portrait of Moll in 1724. Many of those
who engraved Stukeley’s drawings were leading prac-
titioners. In particular, they included Gerard and John Van-
dergucht who not only engraved for Stukeley but, as
enthusiastic antiquarians, accompanied him on some of his
tours. Other distinguished engravers whom he employed
included Harris, Pine, Kirkall and Toms (Table 1).

Many of his contacts amongst the scientists, literati and
antiquarians of his day were formed in the clubs and coffee-
house circles of the time. He was very active in joining and
indeed in founding societies. He was one of the founders
of the Society of Antiquaries in 1717 and acted as its first sec-
retary; he was a member of the Gentlemen’s Society of Spald-
ing; he helped found the Society of Roman Knights in 1722
whose aim was to preserve Roman antiquities and gave each
member a fanciful Celtic appellation; and in 1736 at Stam-
ford he founded the Brazen Nose Society for ‘the promoting
of useful learning sacred and civil, the knowledge of anti-
quitys and nature’; and of course his Fellowship of the
Royal Society and friendship with his fellow Lincolnshire-
born scientist Sir Isaac Newton, president of the Society
from 1703 to his death in 1727, opened a wide circle of
social and academic contacts. Eighteenth-century social and
professional circles were very close-knit with dense networks
of overlapping acquaintances. Stukeley and the two Buck
brothers, for example, were close acquaintances. Samuel
Buck accompanied Stukeley on his tours in 1724 and 1725,
and one of Stukeley’s sketches noted ‘Mr Saml. Buck now
with me whom I engaged to begin his drawings of Anti-
quitys’ (Hyde, 1994, p. 18). Samuel became a member of
the Brazen Nose Society and both he and his brother Natha-
niel were members of the Gentlemen’s Society of Spalding.
Stukeley, the Bucks and other map-makers also used many
of the same engravers: Harris engraved Samuel Buck’s per-
spective of Leeds, and Gerard Vandergucht (who had been
apprenticed to Toms) engraved York; Michael, the father of
Gerard and John, had engraved for Moll’s System of geography;
Pine engraved for Rocque; and Kirkall engraved Beighton’s
map of Warwickshire.

With this background Stukeley was well placed to make a
contribution to mapping. Yet in the history of cartography
he is generally dismissed as a maverick and charlatan.
Shirley, for example, saw him as ‘an acute but misguided
intellect with perceptions more related to the sixteenth
century than to his own more enlightened age’ (Shirley,
1990, p. 60). In part, this was due to his preoccupation
with druidism, but long after Stukeley’s death it also reflected
the notorious forgery in which he was unwittingly involved
through proselytizing what eventually turned out to be a
bogus map of Roman Britain that he had been sent.5 The
supposedly medieval manuscript contained place names and
locations of many more Roman sites than had hitherto
been known. Stukeley linked its origin to a genuine monk,
Richard of Cirencester, reproduced the map, and gave a
paper on the discovery to the Society of Antiquaries in
1756. For more than a century the map and manuscript
were generally accepted as genuine until they were compre-
hensively dismissed as forgeries in the second half of the nine-
teenth century. In fairness to Stukeley, before accepting their
authenticity he had taken considerable pains to explore their
genuineness – taking five or six years before he felt suffi-
the ‘discovery’. He was
ciently confident
reinforced in his conviction by the support of scholars
whose views he had sought. Nevertheless, the eventual revel-
ation of the fraud clearly cast doubt on Stukeley’s scholarship
and confirmed in the eyes of sceptics that he was swayed
more by his passion for antiquarian novelties than by solid
scientific evidence.

to broadcast

Given this contentious context, our interest here is to
explore whether Stukeley’s portrayals of the towns and land-
scape of early eighteenth-century England are genuine contri-
butions to cartography or are simply drawn from existing
surveys or hasty unreliable sketches. Stukeley’s itineraries,
or tours, were strongly influenced by advances in map-
making. The final decades of the seventeenth century had
seen two significant cartographic developments that helped
to excite greater interest in the landscape and history of
in 1675 John Ogilby published Britannia
Britain. First,
with its innovative strip maps which provided the first road
maps of Britain and were eventually followed by numerous
reduced versions copied by other cartographers.6 Second,
in 1695 Camden’s Britannia was translated into English by
Edmund Gibson and illustrated by county maps by Robert
Morden. Taken together, these two publications provided a
vade mecum to encourage and facilitate travel across Britain.
They led to a flowering of work on prehistoric and Roman
artefacts and fed Stukeley’s passion for his native county
and his native country. He constantly castigated those who
thought that only by travelling to Italy or Greece could
they satisfy an interest in culture, scenery and history. ‘We
export yearly our own treasures into foreign parts, by the
genteel and fashionable tours of France and Italy, and
import ship-loads of books relating to their antiquities and
history … whilst our own country lies like a neglected pro-
vince’ (IC, 1.2–3). Similarly, impressed by the sights of the
Lake District, he commented ‘nor need a painter go to
Italy for variety and grandeur of prospect’ (IC, 2.48); and,
travelling through Stilton, he wrote that its cheese ‘would

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

be thought equal to Parmesan, were it not too near us’ (IC,
1.81).

the

Such views were not simple chauvinism. They reflected his
genuine fascination with the history and geography of his
respected lawyer who
country. Maurice Johnson,
founded the Gentlemen’s Club of Spalding, advised the
young Stukeley on books to read and urged him that history
always needed to be studied in the context of geography.
During his travels, Stukeley continually commented not just
on archaeological sites, but on architecture, on the flora and
physical environment of areas through which he travelled.7
In Itinerarium he enthused about the architecture of Oxford
and the design of many of the noble houses he visited or at
which he stayed; he noted local plants such as bee orchids,
wild saffron, borage and cherry trees; and commented on
the local geology and soils. ‘I have often wished that a map
of soils was accurately made, promising to myself that such a
curiosity would furnish us with some new notions of geogra-
phy, and the theory of the earth’ (IC, 1.63); and on his visit to
Chesterford in Cambridgeshire he interpreted crop marks as
an indication of the outline of buildings in the buried
Roman town – ‘the poverty of the corn growing where the
walls stood, defines it to such a nicety, that I was able to
measure it with exactness enough’ (IC, 1.79) – thereby antici-
pating the subsequent use of a type of evidence now common
through aerial photography. Stukeley also ‘always tended to
think in terms of maps and plans and drawings rather than
of the written description’ (Piggott, 1985, p. 61). He had con-
siderable talent in drawing, a skill that he had first been taught
at age 5 in the Free School in Holbeach. He wrote that his
teacher ‘had a mighty knack of drawing with his Pen, which
Incited my natural Inclination that way, & I was ever after
endeavouring to divert myself in it, and generally carried the
bell from my Contempory [sic] Imitators’ (Surtees, 1.12).
This was a skill that proved invaluable for his portrayal of land-
scapes and town views.

THE TOURS

So Stukeley was well placed to contribute to a geographical
appreciation of Britain and to do this through the tours
that provided the material for Itinerarium. Tours in Britain
were not a complete novelty. Defoe’s A tour thro’ the whole
island of Great Britain was published in 1724, the same
year as Itinerarium. Earlier, Celia Fiennes had famously tra-
velled around England on horseback between 1684 and
1703. Nevertheless the idea of travel for its own sake was
still relatively novel, certainly within Britain. It was undoubt-
edly even more of a novelty for those aiming to produce maps
and sketches. Saxton had done so in the late sixteenth century
to produce the first comprehensive mapping of the counties
of England and Wales, and Kip and Knyff travelled fairly
extensively to produce their views of the country’s stately
houses in the early eighteenth century, but for urban cartogra-
phers it was an extraordinarily rare phenomenon since almost
all surveyors restricted their work to their local area.

Arguably, there are only four examples of early peripatetic
British urban cartographers who produced original surveyed
plans or sketches of towns. John Speed surveyed some 50

135

town plans in an impressive series of tours across England
and Wales between 1606 and 1608 (Bendall, 2002; Bower,
2014).8 The eighteenth century saw two peripatetic sketch-
ers: Stukeley made at least seven major tours between 1710
and 1725 to provide the material for Itinerarium; and the
Bucks produced detailed perspectives of over 70 towns, ‘the
outcome of a series of regular peregrinations to almost
every corner of England and Wales spread over a period of
thirty-four years’ (Hyde, 1994, p. 7). In the early nineteenth
century, John Wood produced almost 150 large-scale detailed
plans of towns in surveys across England, Wales and Scotland
between 1818 and 1846 (Robson, 2014).

All four of these cartographers/sketchers covered impressive
distances given that road travel remained primitive, slow and
sometimes dangerous. Even with the growth of turnpike
trusts, travel by coach was slow and expensive, with speeds
typically around 5 miles per hour.9 Writing of the Bucks,
Hyde suggests that ‘In the early years they probably journeyed,
as Stukeley had, on horseback.’ In later years, the main part of
their journey was probably by coach, hiring horses for local
journeys (Hyde, 1994, p. 25). Stukeley certainly relied primar-
ily on horses. Indeed he suggested that his riding started as a
way of helping him to recover from gout, from which he suf-
fered from the age of 16 and which laid him up during winters
(Surtees, 1.51–2). Many of his sketches show him with his
various collaborators alongside their horses. His friend and
admirer, the Earl of Winchilsea, talked of Stukeley and his
fellow antiquary Roger Gale charging round the country ‘in
my chaise, where that will go; and where not, upon our
horses’ (Piggott, 1985, p. 56). In many places road conditions
were atrocious. The growth of wheeled traffic caused huge
damage at a time when road surfaces were usually simply
beaten earth or loose gravel and stone, before the advent of
‘macadamization’
in the early nineteenth century and the
later use of tarmac. Stukeley frequently commented on the
traumas he experienced on his travels. On his journey to
explore the northern reaches of Ermine (Herman) Street in
north Lincolnshire, he crossed the River Ancholme where
the descent to the ferry took him ‘though a deep miry clay,
full of stones and stakes; nor is the ascent on the other side
any better, both difficult and dangerous … we then had
several clayey lakes to ride over, unpassable in winter’ (IC,
1.99–100). This route was a diversion from the Roman road
in order to get to Barton directly opposite Hull, but Stukeley
commented ‘the saving three miles riding does not compen-
sate for the time or hazard of so uncouth a passage’ (IC,
1.96). Parts of Watling Street he also found ‘very clayey and
bad, full of lakes and mires, through the intolerable negligence
of the inhabitants’ (IC, 1.111). Even more dramatically, on the
Fosse south of Leicester he:

travelled to Narborough on the west side of the river
[Stour], and a very wet journey under foot for one that
was resolved to keep upon the road; sometimes I rode
half a mile up to the horse’s belly under water upon the
Roman pavement. (IC, 1.110)

Likewise, Sir John Clerk wrote to Roger Gale in 1739 giving
an account of his travels from Carlisle to Whitehaven (a
journey which Stukeley had done in reverse during his

136

1725 tour to Hadrian’s Wall): ‘The miles were very long, 15
of them taking up 5 hours on a strong trot … a prodigious
bad road for 3 or 4 miles before we came to Whitehaven’
(Surtees, 2.90–1).10 Stukeley showed an atypical touch of
humour in describing a section of the Icknield Way near
Dorchester which had recently been mended ‘with a shame-
less sense of carelessness; so that we may well pronounce the
Romans worked with shovels, the modernisers with spoons’
(IC, 1.161).

Stukeley’s main tours, between 1710 and 1725, covered
the country, aiming to explore the principal
much of
Roman roads,
identify Roman remains and explore the
sites and routes of the ancient Britons. His principal tours
owed much to the 15 itineraries in the Iter Britanniarum of
the Antonine Itinerary, the register of distances and directions
of Roman roads in Britain. He also made many shorter trips.
The Stukeley memoirs, for example, record that during 1708
he made frequent summer journeys from his Lincolnshire
home in Holbeach to visit local towns such as Boston,
Lincoln, Spalding and Newark to meet fellow physicians;
in 1716 he travelled to Richborough in Kent (probably
staying with Lord Winchilsea); and in the years after 1725,
when his main itineraries had ended, he made numerous
visits to sites in East Anglia, Lincolnshire and Northampton-
shire. Details of these shorter trips are sketchy. For his major
tours, however, the Itinerarium does provide helpful details,
albeit more like a guide-book than a diary. Some of the
accounts are compilations of material from more than one
tour and some seem not to describe the whole of a single
tour. Moreover, the dates on some of his sketches do not
always accord with the sequence of his journeys in the text.
This leads to some difficulty in plotting his routes, particu-
larly where one tour is used for parts of two itineraries.
There is no unambiguous way in which such inconsistencies
can conclusively be resolved.

Figure 1 shows our best estimate of six of the major tours
recounted in Itinerarium. In constructing the map, the aim
has been to balance text, dated plate and the logic of connec-
tivity between places. Two of his eight ‘itineraries’ have been
excluded: the first, Iter Domesticum, rather than being a
chronological account of a single journey simply covered a
variety of local Lincolnshire sites which he would have
visited when he lived in Holbeach and Boston; and the
seventh, Iter Septimum Antonini, in 1724, appears to com-
prise a series of short tours aimed to provide details to incor-
porate into the accounts in Itinerarium.11 On this seventh
tour he explored parts of a Roman road that ran south-west
to north-east from Ramsey in Hampshire to Aldborough in
Suffolk, but noted that ‘I took in several other places by the
way which relate to the clearing of some parts of other jour-
neys’ (IC, 1.176).12

The six tours shown in Fig. 1 therefore comprise the fol-
lowing journeys recounted in Itinerarium and illustrated
with dated sketches:

. In 1710 he travelled to Coventry and Oxford from Boston

where he was then practising as a local GP.

. In 1712, prompted by his fascination with the Celts, he
went from Boston to Wrexham where he was able to
hear native Welsh spoken and noted various words
similar to those used in Lincolnshire.13

The Cartographic Journal

. In 1721, after one of his visits to Avebury and Stonehenge,
he went west to Hereford and returned via the West
Midlands.14

. In 1722, he followed the course of four great roads –
Ermine (Herman) Street from London through Lincoln
to the Humber; a diversion on parts of the Icknield Way
(Icening Street) where it crossed Ermine Street at
Royston; then back from the Humber south-west on the
Fosse Way to its junction with Watling Street which he
then followed via London to the Kent coast.15

. In 1723, as well as visiting Avebury and Stonehenge, he
travelled to the south-west as far as Exeter and returned
via the south coast.16

. His final tour, in 1725, was his longest and took him north

to see Hadrian’s Wall.

Whatever the precise details of the geometry of his tours, it is
clear that he travelled impressive distances and succeeded in
covering much of the country despite the awfulness of
many of the roads.

THE SKETCHES AND PLANS

His numerous illustrations relied on informal sketching.
Many of his drawings show examples of Stukeley with a
drawing board on his knees, often accompanied by his
friends. Yet he certainly knew how to make more formal
surveys using chains and compasses since he instructed
Lord Winchilsea on surveying techniques.17 Winchilsea, for
example, wrote in a letter to Stukeley about the Neolithic
barrow of Julaber’s Grave near Chilham in Kent, ‘I formerly
measured only by my paces but I have now taken it with my
measuring chain, and have all its dimensions very right; and I
took its bearings with my compass.’18 The suspicion is that
such formal measurement was restricted to Stukeley’s plans
of major archaeological sites (more especially at Avebury
and Stonehenge) and that the distances shown in his town
plans were based on pacing rather than formal on-the-
ground surveying. Only one of his sketches shows a measur-
ing chain being used, and significantly it is a view of a Roman
camp showing three men in the foreground holding a chain,
thus reinforcing the view that formal measurement was used
only for archaeological sites.19

The speed with which Stukeley produced his sketches and
plans must have precluded his having used other than rela-
tively casual methods to depict towns and landscapes. He
says in the preface to Itinerarium, ‘I own it is a work crude
and hasty, like the notes of a traveller that stays not long in
a place; and such it was in reality.’ Only rarely – as in
Lincoln or Oxford20 – did he stay in a place for more than
a day. More typically, he drew numerous sketches in a
single day. For example, he says of Portsmouth, where his
prospect covers a wide scene comprising Portsmouth itself
together with Portchester, Gosport, Southampton, Chiche-
ster and the Sussex coast, ‘I took a little sketch of it in
passing’ (IC, 1.195); and of Bath ‘[it] is a place so celebrated,
and is well known, that I need say but little upon it; nor can
much be expected from the small time I rested here’ (IC,
1.146). Even his town plans were often done in less than a
day; for example, he says of Ilchester ‘I staid but half a day’
(IC, 1.155), yet he produced a very credible plan of the town.

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

137

Figure 1. Stukeley’s major tours. The 1710 and 1712 tours were from Boston where Stukeley then had his GP practice. In 1717 he moved to London
from where his later tours were based. The Lincolnshire towns shown as not linked to itineraries were probably drawn during Stukeley’s many short trips
around the county. He probably visited Colchester in Essex when he lived in London. Map drawn by Graham Bowden

Itinerarium is full of sketches and plans. The second (post-
humous) edition of 1776 was greatly enlarged by including
drawings that Stukeley had not included in the first edition.
It includes over 200 plates. Many are views of individual build-
ings or landscapes illustrating the environs of various sites;

others show Roman inscriptions or statues or coins. Some,
however, are wider perspective views of towns, not unlike
those of the Bucks (although clearly much cruder since they
were sketched so rapidly). Nevertheless these ‘prospects’
offer good impressions of how the towns appeared in the

138

The Cartographic Journal

early eighteenth century. A good example is Winchester which
provides an idea of its shape and townscape with suburban
development beyond the walls and perspectives of the cathe-
dral, college and bishop’s palace (Figure 2).21 Other examples
include Warwick, Marlborough (Figure 3), Dover, Salisbury,
Bath, Exeter, Lyme Regis, and Thame. The sketches appear
to be fairly accurate representations of the towns and their
principal buildings. For example, his sketch of Boston has a
fine detailed view of St. Botolph’s Church (The Stump)
which shows accurate architectural details.22 Stukeley – with
characteristic immodesty – said of this sketch that he first
drew in 1708, ‘I have since compared it with the Original &
wonderd [sic] at its exactness considering I was not above
half an hour in sketching it out’ (Surtees, 1.42).

Of the six towns for which Stukeley and the Bucks both
produced prospects, there is generally a close agreement
between the two sets of views.23 Stukeley’s are clearly more
sketchy, although some of his details look more accurate
than those of the Bucks’; for example, Stukeley’s Exeter cor-
rectly shows the two Norman towers above the transepts of
the cathedral, whereas Buck appears to show a spire sur-
mounting one of the two towers.

The sketches also include one that bears a striking resem-
blance to Knyff and Kip’s views of stately houses. Stukeley’s
view of the Hertford house at Marlborough (then the home
of Isabella, Countess of Hertford, and now the nucleus of
Marlborough College) has all the strengths and weaknesses
of the Knyff/Kip views. Like theirs, it accurately portrays
the details of the house, yet is drawn with a stiff formality
that gives it a somewhat artificial appearance.

Many of Stukeley’s general prospects also provide striking
views of the rural English landscape before the widespread
that ended the era of open field systems
enclosures

(Figure 4). A further value is the clear evidence that they
provide of the small size of the towns of early eighteenth-
century England. In 1700 only 17 English towns had popu-
lations between 5000 and 9999, and only 11 had 10 000 or
more (Vries, 1984, Appendix 1). The visual evidence of this
is reinforced not only by Stukeley’s views of even the larger
towns, but even more so in the tiny settlements, dominated
by their churches, that sit in his perspectives of the landscapes
through which he journeyed (Figure 5).

THE TOWN PLANS

In addition to these sketches and prospects there are over 30
plates which consist of (or include) a vertical ichnographic
plan. Many of these are of archaeological sites,24 but 16 are
town plans and it is on these that we can focus to consider
how far they make a genuine contribution to urban cartogra-
phy. Ten are of towns that Speed included as insets on his
county maps, of which six show Stukeley’s strong reliance
on Speed. The final 6 plans are of towns that were never
mapped by Speed and appear to have had no other plans
on which Stukeley could have drawn. The 16 plans are dis-
cussed below, some being formally evaluated in terms of
their accuracy.25

Stukeley plans based on Speed
Sukeley’s plans of Chichester, Colchester, Canterbury, Bath,
Leicester
clearly drawn fairly
directly from Speed’s inset town plans. There are slight
the Roman
differences. For example, Stukeley names
‘Worth Gate’ on his Canterbury plan. On Bath he includes

and Dorchester were

Figure 2. Winchester prospect. But see footnote 21

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

139

new housing on Trim Street which had been built just
outside the town’s northern walls. On Leicester he reverses
the sites of the Black Friars and Grey Friars which were

shown incorrectly by Speed (the Greyfriars site has, of
course, recently become notorious as the burial place of
Richard III).

Figure 3. Marlborough prospect

Figure 4. View of Banbury

140

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. View of Newbury

Stukeley plans that differ from Speed
However, for four of the towns that Speed mapped Stukeley
based his plans on other sources or undertook his own surveys.
For Exeter, the first plan that did not rely on Speed was a
survey in 1709 by Ichabod Fairlove. This was the plan
copied in 1723 both by Sutton Nichols for Izacke’s Remark-
able antiquities of the City of Exeter, and by Stukeley in the
same year. The Nichols’ plan is a more faithful and more
detailed copy of Fairlove than is Stukeley’s, but neither
adds much that is original (Bennett and Batten, 2011).
However, Stukeley provides
some valuable descriptive
comment on the city, for example ‘the bridge over the Isca
is of great length, and has houses on both sides … there is a
church on it with a steeple’; and his separate prospect of
the city includes a perspective of the bridge that accurately
shows these now demolished buildings.

Gloucester is a crude sketch of the city that draws not on
Speed but on the 1712 plan by Kip engraved for Atkyns’
The ancient and present state of Glostershire. It has the same
east–west elongation of the city as Kip and the odd orien-
tation of the River Severn south of the city. Stukeley’s
sketch has only a single reference, ‘Sabrina fl.’, and it shows
perspective views of the cathedral and of four (un-named)
churches included in Kip’s plan – St Mary de Lode, St
Mary de Crypt, St Nicholas and St Michael. To the east, it
emphasizes the line of the Roman wall and three gates; to
the west it shows the four-arched Westgate Bridge.

Lincoln: Speed produced a plan of Lincoln, but Stukeley’s
plan represents a clear attempt to depict anew the Roman

elements of the city together with its medieval sites and build-
ings (Figure 6). The only earlier plans are both derived from
Speed. So, as Mills and Wheeler (2004) suggest, Stukeley’s is
only the second plan based on a new survey. The next surveyed
plan was produced only in 1817, nearly a century later. Stuke-
ley spent at least two days in the city and commented that ‘I
made [the plan]by pacing as I walked about the city, intended
to give the idea of the place as formed originally by the
Romans’ (IC, 1.88). With his Lincolnshire roots he would
have had ample opportunities to explore and depict the city.

The most obvious difference from Speed is its coverage of
the northern extension showing the ‘Saxon suburb’ of
Newport built in the eleventh century to replace houses dis-
placed by the building of the castle at the behest of William
the Conqueror. It identifies the churches of St John and St
Nicholas (which latter he simply calls ‘Newport church’).
Both have now been demolished but Stukeley shows St
John’s sitting in the middle of Ermine Street where a large
market was held. His plan also marks the site of the Augusti-
nian priory (friary) and, rather more fancifully, ‘Grantham’s
well’.26 Newport is not shown on Speed’s plan so Stukeley’s
coverage is a valuable original contribution.

The other clear difference between Stukeley and Speed is
that Speed correctly shows the southern extension of the
town along Ermine Street as being much longer relative to
the length of the main town, whereas Stukeley dramatically
foreshortens it.

The Speed and Stukeley plans were compared quantitatively
with the 1889 first edition 1:2500 OS plan using MapAnalyst

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

141

Figure 6. Lincoln plan

142

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. St. Albans (Verulamium) plan

to assess their accuracy.27 When Speed’s plan is considered as a
whole, using 53 comparison points with the OS, the standard
deviation is just over 40 m and the N–S scale factor exceeds the
E–W by about 9.5%. If the area south of the river is excluded,
the standard deviation reduces to about 32 m and the differ-
ence between the scale factors to about 7.5%. Ignoring the
region south of the river, the standard deviation for Stukeley’s
plan, analysed with 46 points, is about 33.5 m, very similar to
Speed’s. However, Stukeley’s plan is superior to Speed’s in the
more equal average scales N–S and E–W, which differ by only
2.3%. The plan is rotated about 7.5° anticlockwise from
having N at the top.

It is interesting to consider the main town and Newport
separately on Stukeley’s plan. For Newport, with 10 com-
parison points, the results show that the N–S scale factor is
about 21% higher than the E–W scale factor, a much larger
difference than for the overall fit excluding south of the
river. For the main town, the difference is only 4.2%. For
Newport the standard deviation is appreciably lower than
for the overall fit, whereas for the main town it is only slightly
lower. The separate fits show that Newport is oriented about
4° anticlockwise from where it should be with reference to the
main town, so that Ermine Street is shown leaving Lincoln
close to its correct direction. This is not the case for the
other main roads leaving the town. The roads to the north-
east should all be rotated anticlockwise. For the Fosse Way
and the road to Horncastle, the required rotation is about
19° and for the road to Fiskerton about 15°. The joint
Fosse Way/Ermine Street, leaving to the south, should be
rotated in a clockwise direction by about 12°.

Overall, Stukeley’s plan is something of a curate’s egg. The
Newport section attempts to be a scale plan and is fairly suc-
cessful in this. In parts, however, the plan is essentially sche-
matic, particularly in its depiction of the roads into and out of
the town and the foreshortening of the southern extension.
The main town is represented rather coarsely and is some-
what similar to Speed. The suspicion is that while Stukeley
may have measured the northern extension of Newport, he
used Speed’s plan of the main town as the framework on
which to show the principal Roman and medieval buildings,
but he improved the outline of the walls on the north and
west, emphasizing the overall rectangularity of the Roman
town. However, since he appears to have found no building
worthy of note in his foreshortened area south of the river, he
may have taken little care with this part of his plan. Neverthe-
less, in its depiction of Newport the plan makes a valuable
contribution.

St Alban’s: There are two quite different versions of Stuke-
ley’s plan of St Alban’s. The one in Itinerarium concentrates
almost entirely on the site of Verulamium, with only the most
cursory outline of St Alban’s itself. However, his other plan,
done in 1721 and published separately by the Society of Anti-
quaries, is both larger and shows far more detail of the town
and of the Roman site (Figure 7). It seems likely that Stuke-
ley measured the area of the Roman site, probably by pacing
rather than formally by chain, since the plan includes a scale
of paces. His plan was based not on excavations, but on
what remained of evidence above ground and it shows that
only a small fragment of the Roman wall still stood above
ground and only vestiges of other buildings.28 Nevertheless

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

143

Stukeley appears to have correctly outlined the approximate
overall shape of the site,
located most of the gates and
begun to identify the grid-iron pattern of roads. Stukeley’s
details of Verulamium were subsequently used by Cole and
Roper in their 1805 plan of St Alban’s.

Stukeley plans of towns not covered by Speed
Marlborough is essentially a sketch of the alignment of
Roman roads rather than a carefully measured plan. The
tumulus on which ‘Marlburgh Castle’ is shown dominates
the plan. The northern side of the High Street is shown in
perspective (in Stukeley’s usual ‘crenellated wall’ style), and
the market hall and Merchants’ House are shown in the
middle of the street. At the two ends of the street St Mary’s
and St Peter’s churches are depicted. The High Street is
somewhat straightened, as is the River Kennet to the south
east. The road labelled ‘To Corinium’ should branch off
much further out from the town, the block of buildings
below and to the right-hand end of the high street should
be much smaller, and the river should be further away from
it. The plan as a whole is rotated about 48° clockwise from
having north at the top. Overall it is a fair representation of
the town although the position errors are on average about
50 m, compared with the length of
the High Street
between the two churches of about 500 m.

Ilchester: Stukeley clearly took some pains with this plan
which is the first depiction of the Roman town. It is one of
his most ‘cartographic’ plans, with a compass rose orientated

with north-east to the top, and a scale of paces. It was engraved
by John Vandergrucht. The track of the Roman wall is the
most dramatic element together with the complex pattern of
channels of the Ivel (Yeo) River to the north-west. The some-
what straightened line of the Fosse is shown running through
the town with the road to Dorchester branching off to run
almost due south, and with the market cross at the open
space formed by the junction of roads. The two remaining
medieval churches are shown, St Mary Major (depicted in per-
spective with its rather clunky tower) and St Andrew’s (called
Northover church) outside the line of the Roman town. It also
shows the remains of two significant religious buildings, the
Dominican friary and the nunnery-cum-chapel (called White
Chapel on the plan), both of which had been dissolved in
the sixteenth century but some of whose buildings still
remained in Stukeley’s time.

Comparing Stukeley’s with the OS map, it is clear that the
area north of the walled town on Stukeley’s is to a different
scale from the walled town itself. Fourteen points of compari-
son were found on or within the walls, and with a simple
four-parameter fit the mean scale was found to agree well
with Stukeley’s scale if his pace is taken as 5 feet. The E–W
scale is larger than the N–S by about 9% if a five-parameter
fit is used. For the four-parameter fit the mean error is
about 23 m. The walls shown by Stukeley form a much
more symmetrical outline than that on the OS map, which
narrows to the east (Figure 8). The OS map shows the site
of the friary almost exactly on the line of the wall, whereas
Stukeley shows it outside the wall and ditch. Comparing

Ilchester plan. Detail of the area of the walled town on Stukeley’s plan. The line of the Roman wall is in black. The square ends of the 14 red
Figure 8.
markers show the location of control points on Stukeley’s plan, and the end of each pointer shows the ‘correct’ position according to the OS. The green line
shows the OS outline of the Roman wall. The superimposed grid indicates the degree of distortion in relation to the OS ‘standard’

144

The Cartographic Journal

Stukeley’s line of the wall with that on the OS map in this area
shows that the OS puts the wall much closer to Stukeley’ pos-
ition for the friary than does Stukeley. This suggests that, at
least in this area and probably elsewhere, there was not
much evidence for the wall and ditch in Stukeley’s time.

Horncastle: Like Lincoln, this must have been a town that
Stukeley knew well and which he would have been able to
spend some time in surveying. Like Ilchester, the plan
suggests that he actually measured distances on the ground.
It has a formal scale bar in feet, and the outlines of the build-
ings are shown in some detail (Figure 9). Yet, while he may
have measured distances it remains doubtful that he used
instrumentation to plot the orientation of the town’s streets
and walls which are shown as markedly more rectangular
than they are in fact. There might have been some street rea-
lignments before the OS map was made, but recent maps
show the general alignment of the streets as close to that of
the OS map. However, the plan does provide a valuable
outline of some of the significant elements of the town.
The market place (site of the internationally famous August
Horse Fair which continued to be held until the middle of
the twentieth century) is shown prominently, as are St
Mary’s Church and the seventeenth-century manor house,
both of which are drawn in perspective. There is a nice
touch of detail in the depiction of a maypole on what now
is the junction of West Street and Lincoln Way. Stukeley
depicts the shape of the walled town as a simple rectangle.
More recent maps show that the western end is narrower
than the eastern and that the east and west gates were set at
an angle to the general trend of the walls. The part of the

map within the walls is more accurate than the rest and the
mean E–W scale is about 10% smaller than the scale shown
by Stukeley. The mean N–S scale is about 6% smaller
again. The area west of the walled town is shown rather
crudely and to an E–W scale nearly a third that of the
walled town. The town outside the walls, mainly to the
east, seems to be shown at a somewhat smaller scale than
the walled town and to be rather distorted.

Newbury was a new Norman borough founded in the ele-
venth century. However, its interest to Stukeley was doubtless
the junction of Roman roads linking the site east–west to
Farnham and Bath, with the Icknield Way running from East
Anglia to Dorchester. Stukeley shows both roads in an essen-
tially diagrammatic fashion; for example, north of the main
crossing of the River Kennet, Bartholomew Street is shown
as running due north and then intersecting with the east–
west line of what are now the London Road to the east and
Oxford Street and the Old Bath road to the west. The relation-
ship of the roads is correct but all have been straightened to
form a simple geometric outline. The roads to the south are
depicted in similar fashion. Yet there are some useful details:
St Nicholas’ Church is shown just to the south of the bridge;
the market place with its cross is shown on the opposite side
of Bartholomew Street; and at Speenham Lands (subsequently
famous as the site where, at the end of the eighteenth century,
magistrates introduced the Speenhamland system linking poor
relief to the cost of bread) the medieval market cross is shown
in the middle of the main road junction.

Staines: The significance of Staines was likewise its role as an
important Roman river crossing of the Thames on the road

Figure 9. Horncastle plan

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

145

from London to Silchester. Stukeley drew both a prospect and,
below it, a plan of the town. The prospect shows the church of
St Mary’s standing proud on its mound between the Thames
and the Colne rivers and it portrays the linear town tumbling
down towards the bridge. The plan is essentially a rough
sketch indicating the pattern of housing with the long
market
street with various buildings along its centre.
However, if it is treated as an attempt at a true plan it is possible
to find a reasonable six-parameter fit with eleven points,
including the estimated position of the old bridge. The plan
is rotated about 40° clockwise from having south at the top.
The fit shows very little shear, but the scale in the roughly
E–W direction is approximately 1.6 times that
in the
roughly N–S direction. The mean error in placement of
points N-–S is about 34 m, compared with the E–W extent
of the plan of about 480 m. The church was omitted in this
fit, because it is shown much too far north.

Farnham,

like Staines,

is both a plan and a prospect
(Figure 10). Its interest for Stukeley was probably its importance
as the junction of Roman roads, one linking London to Winche-
ster and the second to Bath via Staines and Marlborough. Like
Staines, the plan straightens the streets and comprises a ruler-
straight E–W street with a foreshortened outline of the settle-
ment down to the river. The plan and prospect are rather difficult
to reconcile since the prospect shows a road going directly from
the bridge to the site of the castle whereas the plan shows a dog-
leg road pattern. Stukeley appears to have missed the fact that the
castle sat behind the Bishop’s Palace since the round shape of the
remains of the castle appears neither in the plan nor the pro-
spect.29 Buildings lining the streets are shown in his ‘crenellated

wall’ style, except for St.Andrew’s Church, which is shown in
plan, almost certainly incorrectly. The scale parallel to the main
road is approximately twice that of the scale at right angles to
it, with severe distortion near the centre of the plan. The
average position error is 77 m compared with a horizontal
range of about 1600 m.

Summary
Hence, six of Stukeley’s town plans were essentially copied
from Speed with only minor variations, and a further two
(Exeter and Gloucester) were copied from later surveys. In
this he was no different from the vast majority of cartogra-
phers in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries who
plagiarized shamelessly from each other. For four of the
towns for which there were no pre-existing plans (Staines,
Farnham, Marlborough and Newbury) he appears to have
aimed largely to depict the geometry of the Roman roads
for which they were important nodes. Since he focused on
the pattern of the Roman roadways, he simply sketched the
(straightened) geometry of the principal streets and roads
of the four towns. Of these, perhaps the most valuable are
Staines and Farnham where the plates include perspective
views that give useful indications of their townscapes.

However, the remaining four plans – St Albans (or Verula-
mium), Lincoln, Ilchester and Horncastle – are genuine
attempts to produce his own more accurate cartography. He
appears to have taken some pains to measure distances, probably
by pacing rather than by formal chaining – which latter seems to
have been restricted to significant archaeological sites. These
plans add genuinely new information about the four places.

Figure 10. Sketch and plan of Farnham

146

The Cartographic Journal

Table 2. The sources and characteristics of Stukeley’s town plans

Place

Derivation

Compass rose

Scale bar

Approximate orientation

Bath
Canterbury
Chichester
Colchester
Dorchester
Exeter
Farnham
Gloucester
Horncastle
Ilchester
Leicester
Lincoln
Marlborough
Newbury
Staines
St Alban’s (1721)a

Speed
Speed
Speed
Speed
Speed
Fairlove
Stukeley
Kip
Stukeley
Stukeley
Speed
Speed/Stukeley
Stukeley
Stukeley
Stukeley
Stukeley

x

x
x

x

aSt. Alban’s is taken as the separately published version.

CONCLUSION

There is no doubt that, as scientist and polymath, Stukeley
had an inquisitive and highly analytical mind that produced
invaluable work in recording details of archaeological sites,
most notably Avebury and Stonehenge. He clearly made mis-
takes in his interpretation of the archaeological evidence, and
much of his work was tainted by his determination to create a
noble and romanticized picture of British origins. He had
innumerable critics (although this was not unusual in the dis-
putatious years of the early period of the Enlightenment
when scientists were beginning to make forays to explain
the world around them). The Rev W. C. Lukis, editor of
the Stukeley family memoirs, commented that:

Allowances must be made for some of his mistakes and
guesses, arising partly from the measure of the scientific
knowledge of his day, and partly from self-confidence bor-
dering upon conceit, and the tenacity with which he held
to his own opinion. (Surtees, 2.ii–iii)

That seems a not unreasonable double-edged assessment.

Stukeley’s archaeological focus meant that he inevitably had
different aims from most ‘normal’ urban surveyors – theirs was
to produce accurate plots of the geometry of towns, whereas
Stukeley’s was to illuminate Roman and medieval townscapes
and to indicate the geometry of Roman roads. So he could feel
justified in using existing plans wherever possible to give him a
framework on which to plot Roman elements and significant
buildings of medieval origin. He could also feel justified in the
relatively informal nature of many of his plans, reflected in the
somewhat casual omission of customary cartographic prac-
tices; for example, of the 16 plans only four have compass
roses, 8 have scale bars showing either paces or feet, and
only 7 are orientated with north roughly towards the top
(Table 2). If many of his town plans lack cartographic accuracy,
it probably reflects the fact that he was as much concerned with
recording sites and buildings of historic interest as with ensur-
ing precise representations of the contemporary details of the
respective towns. This is perhaps nowhere clearer than in his
plan of Lincoln, which Hill (1966, p3fn), writing of his

Feet
Paces
Paces
Feet

Feet
Paces
Feet

Paces

West
West
North
East
North
West
North
West
North
North-east
North
North
South-west
North
East
South

own native city, considered to be ‘inaccurate in some details,
but gives a good general impression’. That is perhaps a reason-
able verdict on many of Stukeley’s town plans.

Nevertheless, his plans of towns that had not previously
been surveyed clearly represent valuable early representations
of the towns concerned. The formal evaluation of their accu-
racy suggests that they are far from perfect. However, few if
any early eighteenth-century plans would pass strict compari-
son with the surveyed plans of the Ordnance Survey of the
following century. Given that most of Stukeley’s plans were
of Roman towns in which, before formal excavations had
been undertaken, much of the Roman evidence was merely
vestigial, some degree of guesswork and extrapolation on
his part was inevitable. In this light, and despite the informal
surveying methods that he generally used, some of his plans
are reasonably accurate. Taken together with his landscapes
and town sketches, his (admittedly often flawed) town
plans offer a valuable image of early eighteenth-century
England only a few decades before industrial and agricultural
development were to transform fundamentally the face of
most of the country. A final verdict on Stukeley’s cartography
is likely to read ‘good in parts’.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are very grateful to Graham Bowden who drew the map
of Stukeley’s travels; and indebted to Google Books for their
provision in the public domain of copies of the two volumes
of the second edition of Itinerarium scanned from original
volumes held by the New York Public Library.

Notes

1 Thrower (1995) argued that throughout history medical
doctors have been disproportionately active in making or
writing about maps, pointing to distinguished examples
in the fifteenth century, Lhuyd and
such as Schedel

The Town Plans and Sketches of William Stukeley

147

Cunningham in the sixteenth, and Snow and Shapter in the
nineteenth, as well as Stukeley.

2 References to Itinerarium are shown as ‘IC’ with volume and

page numbers referring to the 1776 edition.

3 Beighton’s map was published in 1728.
4 The three-volume Stukeley family memoirs (Surtees Society,
1882–1887) are referred to as ‘Surtees’ with volume and
page number.

5 His biographer, Piggott provides a detailed account of the
saga (Piggott 1985, pp. 126–138, 1986). Shirley (1990)
drew on Piggott’s account to discuss the fraud in the
British Museum’s exhibition ‘Fake? The art of deception’.
6 Ogilby’s Britannia was revolutionary. It was based on his orig-
inal surveys of over 7000 miles of roads, was the first atlas to
use the statute mile of 1760 yards, and the first drawn at a
standard scale of one inch to a mile. However, being folio, it
was hardly portable. In 1718, Stukeley’s friend, Moll, had pro-
posed a smaller version but his scheme came to naught. Three
versions of Ogilby were then published in quick succession; by
Gardner and by Senex in 1719 and in a highly successful
‘handy’ pocket-book version by Bowen in his 1720 Britannia
depicta. Harley (1970, p. 7) saw Bowen’s atlas as the direct
successor to Moll’s earlier scheme.

7 Haycock (2002, p. 110) calls the accounts of the tours ‘chor-
ography’, broader and more inclusive than we would now
consider as travel writing.

8 Reproductions of all Speed’s county maps, with their inset
town plans, can be found for example in Nicolson (1988).
9 Even in the first half of the nineteenth century Wood had to rely
on horse and coach travel since in his early years there were no
railways and in his later years he worked in the south-west
which still lacked a network of railways (Robson, 2014).
10 Sir John Clerk, the distinguished Scottish lawyer and politician,
had an interest in antiquity, wrote a thesis on Roman sites, and
conducted a long-running correspondence with Roger Gale,
some of which appears in the Stukeley family memoirs.
11 This was, of course, the year that the first edition of Itinerar-

ium was published.

12 The sketches dated 1724 include material from places in
Hampshire, sketches of places in north Lincolnshire (to accom-
pany the text of his 1722 tour) and a variety of places in Kent
(no doubt where he stayed with his friend Lord Winchilsea).
13 ‘I had conceived great notions of the old Britons betimes,
and longed to hear at least a language spoke soon after the
deluge’ (IC, 1.51).

14 The text of this tour ends at Wolverhampton, but the 1721

sketches continue to Colsterworth in Lincolnshire.

15 The text and sketches for 1722 are somewhat at odds. There are
plates of Holbeach, Spalding, Horncastle and Boston (all in
east Lincolnshire) dated 1722 yet not included in the text as
part of the itinerary, and also plates of places in the north of

the county dated 1724 yet noted in the text as part of the
1722 tour. We know from Itinerarium (IC, 1.76) that he had
already ‘laid out’ Ermine Street from his earlier trips around
Lincolnshire, however in drawing the route map we have fol-
lowed his aim of exploring the lines of the four great roads.
16 His sketches of Winchester, Southampton, Portsmouth, Chi-
chester, Farnham and Staines are dated 1723, but the text
discusses them as part of the 1724 tour. We have assumed
they were part of the 1723 tour.

than Stukeley,

17 Winchilsea was an enthusiastic amateur antiquarian and,
despite being 30 years older
regarded
himself as a willing pupil and collaborator in accompanying
the younger man to explore and record archaeological sites.
18 Quoted by Piggott, 1985, p. 57. In Itinerarium Stukeley
refers to taking compass bearings along the line of Ermine
Street in Lincolnshire and of the Fosse. It seems unlikely
that he ever used plane tables or theodolites.

19 Ironically, the Roman camp was on Hounslow Heath, the
site of the initial measurement of a baseline for the Ordnance
Survey’s national triangulation.

20 Of Oxford he commented ‘so numerous are colleges and
halls, that one can scarce get a tolerable idea of them in the
three days I staid [sic] there’ (IC, 1.44).

21 However, Stukeley mistakenly suggested that the view was
from the south. In fact, as one of his trenchant critics pointed
out, it is from the east, with the road marked F leaving the
city by the west gate and hence to Salisbury (Surtees, 2.177).
22 The architectural details are confirmed by the view of the
church on the 1743 plan of Boston by Nichols and Hall.
23 The six views are of Bath, Dover, Exeter, Salisbury, Warwick
and Winchester, each taken from slightly different vantage
points in the two versions. Stukeley’s views are mostly dated
1723, the Bucks’s vary between 1731 and 1736. This accounts
for a significant difference between their respective views of
Bath: Stukeley’s view of 1723 predates the Georgian redeve-
lopment of the city, but the Buck prospect of 1734 just captures
the start by including ‘the New Square’ (Queen’s Square)
which began the elder John Wood’s architectural development
and in one of whose houses Wood chose to live until his death.
24 The plans include a somewhat fanciful reconstruction of the
Roman camp at London (Clark, 2008) as well as plans of
Avebury, Stonehenge and a number of hill-top forts. His
detailed plans and sketches of Stonehenge and Avebury
were later published by Stukeley in his Stonehenge (1740)
and Abury (1743).

25 Reproductions of the various town plans are readily available:
Stukeley’s are in Google Books’ scan of Itinerarium; Speed’s
are in Nicolson (1988); and the Bucks’ in Hyde (1994).

26 The naming and siting of

‘Grantham’s Well’ doubtless
reflects Stukeley’s romantic as opposed to his scientific side
(IC, 1.90). The Lincoln tale was that a small boy had been

148

The Cartographic Journal

murdered by Jews and his body thrown in a well. The tale led
to a popular ballad and to various differing re-tellings of the
story, but there is little solid evidence that there was sub-
stance to it – or to the location of the well, either within
the city near the castle or in the Newport suburb.

27 MapAnalyst (Jenny et al., 2007) allows a user to place two plans
side-by-side on a computer screen to compare them quantitat-
ively by choosing points that appear to correspond on the two
plans. One plan is taken as the ‘standard’ (here used as the first
edition Ordnance Survey (OS) 1:2500 or 1:10 560 plan), and
the other as the ‘test’ plan. The program effectively scales, shifts
and rotates the standard plan to get the best fit to the test plan. If
the scale of the standard plan is specified correctly, the scale of
the test plan is obtained and also a measure of the accuracy of
the placing of points in the test plan, assuming the standard
plan is ‘perfect’. This measure can be expressed as a standard
deviation, which may be thought of as the most probable dis-
tance of any point from where it should be. A four-parameter
fit uses only one scale factor, a five-parameter fit allows different
scale factors in two directions at right angles, and a six-par-
ameter fit also allows for shear distortion.

28 The first scientific excavations of Verulamium only started in
the 1930s with Sir Mortimer Wheeler, and then from 1955
with major excavations by Sheppard Frere.

29 Lying between Winchester and London, Farnham became a
stop-over site for successive powerful Bishops of Winchester.
The Bishop’s Palace was built in front of the remains of the castle.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Brian Robson was a Lecturer in
Geography at Cambridge for a
decade, and invited to a chair in
Geography at Manchester Univer-
sity in 1977. He established the
Centre for Urban Policy Studies at
Manchester through which he did
a wide range of research projects
on urban regeneration and regional policy for government
and other funders. He has published 7 books and over 100
articles. Now retired, he is pursuing a long-held interest in
historic urban cartography.

Archaeology
Woodbridge.

London.

REFERENCES
Bendall, S. (2002). ‘Draft town maps for John Speed’s “theatre of the

empire of great Britaine”’, Imago Mundi, 54, pp. 30–45.

Bennett, F. and Batten, K. (2011). The Printed Maps of Exeter 1587–

1901, Little Silver Publications, Exeter.

Bower, D. (2014). ‘Speed’s town mapping itineraries’, Imago Mundi,

66, pp. 95–104.

London.

Chippindale, C. (1983). Stonehenge Complete, Thames and Hudson,

Clark, J. (2008). ‘“Fanciful ichnography”: William Stukeley’s maps of
(?)Roman London’, in Londinium and Beyond, Research Report
156, ed. By Clark, J. et al. Council for British Archaeology, York,
pp. 4–10.

Harley, J. B. (1970). ‘Introduction’ in Britannia depicta, by Emanuel

Bowen 1720, Facsimile reprint, Frank Graham, Newcastle.

Haycock, D. B. (2002). William Stukeley: Science, Religion and
in Eighteenth-Century England, Boydell Press,

Hill, S. F. (1966). Georgian Lincoln, Cambridge University Press,

Hyde, R. (1994). A Prospect of Britain: The Town Panoramas of Samuel

and Nathaniel Buck, Pavilion Books, London.

Jenny, B., Weber, A. and Hurni, L. (2007).

‘Visualizing planimetric
accuracy of historical maps with MapAnalyst’, Cartographica, 42, pp.
89–94.

Mills, D. R. and Wheeler, R. C. (2004). Historic Town Plans of Lincoln

1610–1920, The Boydell Press, Woodbridge.

Nicolson, N. (1988). The Counties of Britain: A Tudor Atlas by John

Speed, Pavilion Books, London.

Piggott, S.

(1985). William Stukeley: An Eighteenth-century
Antiquary, Revised and Enlarged edition, Thames & Hudson,
London.

Piggott, S. (1986). ‘William Stukeley: new facts and an old forgery’,

Antiquity, 60, pp. 115–122.

Reinhartz, D. (1997). The Cartographer and the Literati: Herman Moll
and his Intellectual Circle, Edwin Mellen Press, Lewiston,
Queenston & Lampeter.

Robson, B. (2014). ‘John Wood I: the undervalued cartographer’, The

Cartographic Journal, 51, pp. 257–273.

Shirley, R. W. (1990). ‘The map that never was’, The Map Collector, 53,

pp. 8–13.

Stukeley, W. (1724). Itinerarium Curiosum or, an Account of the
Antiquitys and Remarkable Curiositys in Nature or Art,
Observ’d in Travels Thro’ Great Britain, Illustrated With
Copper Prints (2nd edition, 2 vols.), Baker & Leigh, London,
1776.

Stukeley, W. (1740). Stonehenge, a Temple Restor’d to the British Druids,

Innys & Manby, London.

Manby, London.

Stukeley, W. (1743). Abury, a Temple of the British Druids, Innys &

Surtees Society. (1882–1887). The family memoirs of the Rev William
Stukeley, M.D. and the antiquarian and other correspondence of
William Stukeley, Roger & Samuel Gale, etc., 3 vols. ed. Lukis, W.
C., Andrews & Co., Durham.

Thrower, N. J. W. (1995). ‘Doctors and maps’, The Map Collector, 71,

pp. 10–14.

Vries, J. (1984). European Urbanization 1500–1800, Methuen, London.
Worms, L. and Baynton-Williams, A. (2011). British Map Engravers: A
of Engravers, Lithographers and their Principal

Dictionary
Employers to 1850, Rare Book Society, London.

