A SURVEY OF SURVEYS: 
THE CANADIAN SPATIAL REFERENCE SYSTEM 
PRECISE POINT POSITIONING SERVICE

Calvin Klatt, PhD
Director and Chief Geodesist, Canadian Geodetic Survey
Surveyor General Branch, Earth Sciences Sector, Natural Resources Canada

Peter Johnson, MSc
Senior Consultant, Engine North Inc. 

Authors: Klatt, C.; Johnson, P. © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 
as represented by the Minister of Natural Resources, 2017

Introduction

Natural 

Resources 

Canada
(NRCan)  provides  a  service  known  as
Canadian  Spatial  Reference  System
Precise  Point  Positioning  (CSRS-PPP)
that  delivers  improved  positioning
using  Global  Navigation  Satellite
Systems (GNSS). NRCan has processed
more  than  2.05 million  GNSS  datasets
from around the globe with CSRS-PPP
since  it  was  inaugurated  in  late  2003,
maintaining usage records that serve as
the source for the analysis in this study.
This report assesses the nature and scale
of usage, including regional differences
and trends over time. 

The  surveys  processed  are  for
pro fessional (surveying, mapping, engi-
scientific  activities
neering)  and 
(glaciology,  plate  tectonics,  education)
from locations across the planet. 

This study illustrates one Canadian
contribution  to  the  international  com-
munity  in  light  of  the  recent  United
Nations  General  Assembly  resolution
related  to  geodesy  [United  Nations
General  Assembly 2015]  that  calls  for
improved  international  access  to  the
Global  Geodetic  Reference  Frame.
Maps  of  CSRS-PPP  usage  graphically
illustrate national and international eco-
nomic activity in a novel fashion. Some
usage maps are inspiring illustrations of
the  extent  of  geoscience  activities  on
this planet. 

If  you  were  wondering  how  many
users  have  benefited  from  CSRS-PPP
and  how  they  were  using  the  service,
read on. 

1. Preliminaries:
What is CSRS-PPP? 

CSRS-PPP is an online application
for  GNSS  data  that  allows  users  to
achieve  significant  improvements  in
position  accuracy  (metres  to  centime-
tres)  [NRCan 2017a].  The  application
is  a  post-processing  tool  that  uses
pre cise  GNSS  information  (satellite
ephemerides:  orbit  and  clock  informa-
tion) to process client data. CSRS-PPP
does not use local references for differ-
ential posi tioning as other systems do.
The precise GNSS data used by the
service  is  made  available  by  the
International  GNSS  Service  (IGS)
[Dow  et  al. 2009]  and  its  contributing
agencies.  This  precise  satellite  infor-
mation relies on open access to GNSS
tracking  data  from  stations  spanning
the  globe.  NRCan,  as  a  contributing
organization  in  IGS,  provides  data
from  GNSS  receivers  operated  in
Canada  to  this  col lective  effort,  and
benefits  very  sig nificantly  from  data
collected  by  organizations  around  the
world. Without this global partnership
and  sharing  of  data,  CSRS-PPP could
not function.

NRCan also processes GNSS data
from  the  global  IGS  network  to  deter-
mine  information  regarding  the  clocks
on  each  GNSS  satellite,  as  well  as
information  on  the  satellites’  locations
(i.e. orbits).  Armed  with  this  informa-
tion  in  near  real-time,  user  data  from
anywhere on earth can be processed to
obtain accurate position information.

Users have the option of accessing
the service via a link to a Government
of Canada website or through a desktop
application, preferred by frequent users.
With  both  options,  the  process  for
sub mitting data is brief and straightfor-
ward. Users upload the raw GNSS data
they have collected, and select the mode
(static  or  kinematic), 
the  desired
ref er ence frame and epoch.  
CSRS-PPP  will  use 

the  best
avail able  satellite  ephemeris  informa-
tion  available  for  the  time  period  at
which the user data was collected. The
service provides three levels of accuracy
for  these  ephemerides:  Ultra  Rapid,
Rapid and Final, with wait times of 90
minutes,  24  hours,  and  two  weeks,
respectively. The Rapid and Final solu-
tions benefit from more data and better
quality,  but  for  most  applications  the
Ultra Rapid solutions are of acceptable
quality (the choice of ephemerides is a
minor consideration for nearly all users)
[Donahue 2017]. 

Users may choose to obtain positions
in the International Terrestrial Reference
Frame  (ITRF)  [Altamimi  et  al. 2011]
or  in  the  NAD83  Canadian  Spatial
Reference  System  (NAD83(CSRS))
[Craymer  2006a,b].  NAD83(CSRS)
users  can  choose  an  epoch  other  than
that  of  observation  to  align  the  data
with  other  data  or  with  the  adopted
epoch  in  the  province  of  their  work.
Epoch  transformations  use  a  velocity
grid [Robin et al. 2016] that accounts
for  crustal  motion  in  Canada.  Users
may  also  obtain  orthometric  heights
by selecting a geoid model, such as the

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017                                                                                       dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2017-103

GEOMATICA  27

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.model  that  represents  the  Canadian
Geodetic  Vertical  Datum  of  2013
[Véronneau 2016]. 

CSRS-PPP  is  a  free-for-use  service
that is authoritative, accurate, reliable and
available globally. Furthermore, no user is
reliant on a specific local station that may
be  unstable,  or  an  active  network  with
limited coverage. As CSRS-PPP provides
direct  and  precise  access  to  the  national
standard  for  positioning  in  Canada,  it  is
accepted by all levels of government as a
tool of choice. The epoch transformations
and geoid model incorporated in the serv-
ice  also  ensure  that  coordinates  remain
consistent  between  different  realizations
of the national standards. 

CSRS-PPP  requires  considerable
data  collection  by  clients  to  achieve
cm-level  accuracies,  unlike  local  Real-
Time  Kinematic  solutions  that  provide
instant  accuracy.  Furthermore, 
the
laten cy for processing (90 min for Ultra
Rapid  solutions  to  be  computed)  is  a
con cern.  Users  may  design  projects  in
such a way as to minimize the impact of
these delays, but they are not negligi ble.
For example, a surveyor in the field may
be forced to verify the quality of data col-
lected  before  leaving  the  jobsite,  a  task
that would not be necessary if processing
could  be  done  immediately. The  CSRS-
PPP solution represents a compromise in
that  it  enables  accurate,  authoritative
positioning in all regions of Canada (and
the  world)  at  relatively  low  expense  to
the taxpayer, but does so in a manner that
is less efficient for some applications. 

Canada’s  large  geographic  extent
has made the provision of monumented
survey control to all users very difficult.
Historically, large regions of the nation
have  not  had  reasonable  access  to
sur vey  monuments.  It  is  only  with  the
advent  of  CRSR-PPP  that  the  entire
nation  has  had  effective  access  to
pre cise global positioning. 

Operating  CSRS-PPP 

involves
con siderable  investment  in  Information
Technology  (IT)  and  digital  communi-
cations (global GNSS observations and
client data in, client service results out).
Clients have come to rely on the service
and  Canadian  surveyors  in  the  field
would incur additional costs if they were
unable  to  process  data  soon  after  their

observations  are  complete.  CSRS-PPP
applications  in  disaster  response,  such
as during flooding events or after earth-
quakes occur, require high levels of reli-
ability.  Natural  Resources  Canada  is
considering  investments  to  ensure  that
current  and  future  computing  hardware
requirements  will  be  met,  including
additional  redundancy.  We  are  also
investigating  segmentation  of  some
related  network  traffic  from  the  main
Departmental  activity  to  improve  relia-
bility  of  the  applications  that  deliver
CSRS-PPP and enhance security for all
of Natural Resources Canada.  

2. Preliminaries: 
Data Used and Notes
on Presentation

NRCan  has  processed  over
2.05 million  GNSS  datasets 
from
around  the  globe  with  CSRS-PPP
since  it  was  inaugurated  in  late  2003.
A  record  has  been  kept  of  each  task
processed in order to monitor demand
and  compute  statistics.  The  record
includes  the  location  and  time  of  the
data  collection  and  several  technical
receiver’s
to 
details 
spec i fi cations and operating mode.

related 

the 

Of the 2.05 million survey data sets
processed,  a  significant  fraction  are
repeat submissions of the same data set.
The  majority  of  these  resubmissions
appear  to  have  occurred  to  take  advan-
tage of improved ephemerides for greater
accuracy. Of the 1.52 million unique data
sets,  an  estimated  5%  are  repeated
obser vations  of  the  same  location,  the
result of periodic validation of reference
stations,  monitoring  of  slow-moving
phenomena, or educational use.

At 

the 

this  writing,
time  of 
approx i mately  12 000  separate  user
accounts  represent  businesses,  institu-
tions  and  individuals  across  the  globe.
The Canadian share is 46% of the total.
Approximately  half  of  all  CSRS-
PPP usage is from only 15 user accounts
(which  may  represent  a  greater  number
of actual persons). High volume users are
believed  to  operate  GNSS  observing
net works  for  commercial  purposes

(e.g.  private  sector  RTK)  or  geoscience
(e.g.  seismic  monitoring,  glaciology).
Registered clients are mainly in the pri vate
sector (~50%) and academia (~20%). 

On the various maps that follow, all
positions processed by CSRS-PPP within
the map’s boundary are represented, but
in  a  decimated  form:  a  virtual  grid  of
15-  by  15-km  cells  is  superimposed  on
the map with one red point placed in the
cen tre of the cell if any survey observa-
tion  occurred  within  that  cell.  At  this
res olution,  sufficiently  detailed  patterns
emerge without disclosing actual survey
positions. We have excluded observations
conducted within the past year. 

3. Geographical
Distribution of 
PPP-CSRS Usage

Figure 1 illustrates the world-wide
usage  of  CSRS-PPP  (2.05 million  data
sets, of  which  1.52 million  are  unique).
The global reach of CSRS-PPP is impres-
sive:  files  have  been  processed  from
nearly  every  region  and  country  in  the
world.  Informal  discussions  with  clients
and  stakeholders  from  outside  Canada
have provided several potential explana-
tions for the varying international usage:  

・Some nations have highly effective
alternatives  (e.g.  widespread  real-
time  services)  and  thus  no  desire
among potential clients to use this
service (e.g. the USA).

・Some regions have little economic
or scientific activity requiring glob-
al positioning (e.g. Sahara Desert). 
・Professional bodies or government
agencies  may  not  consider  posi-
tioning  using  CSRS-PPP  to  be
acceptable  (e.g.  they  may  require
positioning ties to a local physical
monument or transformations from
ITRF  to  the  local  accepted  datum
may not be easily performed). 
・ The  service  may  not  be  well
known,  as  no  marketing  outside
Canada has been conducted. 

Figure  2 

illustrates  Canadian
usage  of  CSRS-PPP,  with  a  total  of

28  GEOMATICA  

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.Figure 1: Global CSRS-PPP usage.

Figure 2: Canadian CSRS-PPP usage.

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

GEOMATICA  29

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.Figure 3: South American CSRS-PPP usage.

Figure 4: African CSRS-PPP usage.

584 000 data sets processed containing
485 000  unique  observing  sessions.
As noted above for the international
serv ice,  usage  in  Canada  varies
spa tially  to  a  very  high  degree.  The
map of usage reflects national economic
(roughly  equivalent  to  popula tion
dis tribution), as well as geo scientific,
activity.  The  oil  and  gas  industry  is
particularly  reliant  on  geospatial
tools and this is reflected in the fact
that Alberta is the province with the
high est  usage.  We  see  similar  high
levels of activity in Venezuela (Figure
3), which we believe to be due to that
nation’s  oil  and  gas  industry.  High
levels  of  activi ty  in  the  Canadian
Prairie  Provinces  may  be  associated
with  precision  agri culture. An  inter-
esting  phenomenon  is  the  clustering
of PPP activity along roadways (see,
for  example,  Newfoundland  and
Labrador), indicating the correlation
of roads with economic activity (and
population).  This  correlation  may
support arguments in favour of road
construction as a means of enhancing
overall economic activity. 

Figures  3,  4  and  5  provide  more
detailed images of usage in South America
(315 000  sessions),  Africa  (71 000

Figure 5: South Asian CSRS-PPP usage.

ses sions), and South Asia (50 000 sessions).
A grid pattern covers the northern half of
Benin, Venezuela and the eastern Arabian
Peninsula  are  heavily  surveyed  (oil  and
gas  industry?),  and  we  see  a  surprising
amount  of  work  taking  place  in Yemen.

In South Asia we see clusters of work
in population centres such as Taiwan,
Shanghai  and  Hong  Kong.  We  also
observe considerable survey activity in
Nepal  and  Bhutan,  some  of  which  is
known to be scientific. Usage in Nepal

30  GEOMATICA

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.shows some correlation with the national
road network, as we have seen in regions
of Canada.

two 

requires 

(64 000  points)  and 

Figures  6  and  7  provide  more
detailed  images  of  usage  in  the  north
Atlantic 
in
Antarctica  (144 000  sessions). Activity
in  Greenland  and  Antarctica  is  domi-
nat ed  by  geoscience  (glaciology),  as
illustrated by the surveys across ice caps
and  the  monitoring  of  ice  shelves.
Canadian  glaciologists  have  informed
the authors that CSRS-PPP is the tool of
choice  for  their  community,  and  the
polar  images  are  evidence  of  this
[Thomson  2016].  Substantial  usage  is
seen on the island of Svalbard (perhaps
geoscience) and in the offshore (oil rig
positioning).  In  Canada,  oil  rig  posi-
tion ing 
independent
meas urements,  of  which  PPP  is  often
the primary method [Leighton 2016]. It
is unknown if North Sea oil rig survey-
ing uses CSRS-PPP as the primary or as
the backup system: in any case there is
substantial usage. 
In  an 

international  agreement
between the Government of Canada and
the Government of Brazil, the Canadian
PPP processing application software has
been  installed  and  is  being  operated  at
the  Instituto  Brasileiro  de  Geografia  e
Estatística (IBGE). IBGE has provided
the authors with statistics on their usage
[da  Silva  2016].  Between  2009  and
mid-2016, IBGE had processed approx-
imately 650 000 files, with geographical
coverage  shown  in  Figure  8  (note  that
this figure, provided by IBGE, includes
all observing sessions processed). 

4. Parsing Usage
(Modes and Duration)

CSRS-PPP  supports  both  dual
fre quency  and  single  frequency  data,
and works  in  two  modes,  static  and
kinematic. Collection of dual frequency
data is generally the domain of profes-
sionals  (land  surveyors  and  geoscien-
tists) for which the investment in more
expensive (dual frequency) receivers is
required.  Very  few  single  frequency
files  are  submitted  to CSRS-PPP.

Figure 6: North Atlantic CSRS-PPP usage.

Figure 7: Antarctic CSRS-PPP usage.

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017 

GEOMATICA  31

Figure 8: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE) PPP usage.

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.CSRS-PPP  is  being  used  by  clients
who  have  invested  in  expensive  pro-
fessional  dual-frequency  equipment
and who require cm-level positioning.
CSRS-PPP  is  primarily  used  for
determination  of  a  single  position,
based  on  an  extended  occupation  of
one  particular  point.  This  application
is referred to as “static.” A “kinematic”
mode also exists, in which the position
of a mobile user is estimated along its
trajectory  with  dm-level  precision.
Historically,  we  have  regarded  the
kinematic  mode  as  serving  clients
engaged in tasks such as airborne geo-
physical  surveys.  In  recent  years,
approximately 20 000 to 30 000 kine-
matic  files  have  been  processed  per
year,  with  a  Canadian  contribution  of
16%  on  average.  Levels  of  usage  are
highly  variable:  in  early  2014,  over
7700 kinematic files were processed in
one  month,  while  in  early  2015  there
was a month with as few as 390 kine-
matic files processed. We believe these
large  bursts  of  activity  are  due  to  the
mass  processing  of  data  collected  in
previous  years,  likely  to  improve  on
information  obtained  using  other
methods or to verify results. 

The  accuracy  available  from
CSRS-PPP  is  largely  dependent  on  the

duration of the data collected by the client.
In general, users must collect at least one
hour  of  data  to  ensure  ambiguity  conver-
gence  and  cm-  to  dm-level  precision  in
static and dynamic modes, respectively. A
surveyor will collect a sufficient amount of
data to obtain the accuracy required for the
task  at  hand,  and  typically  no  more  than
this. Time is money. 

We  have  assessed  the  duration  of
data  collected  for  static  and  kinematic
surveys. For static surveys prior to 2009,
the  median  duration  varied  between  2  h
and  24  h.  After  2009,  the  median  is
con sistently  24  h.  Given  that  24-hour
data  collection  is  largely  the  domain  of
geoscience, not land surveying, this very
likely indicates a growing dominance in
terms of client usage by geoscientists. 

A similar pattern is seen in kine matic
processing:  prior  to  2011,  the  duration
of data collected was variable, and gen-
erally  less  than  for  static.  Starting  in
2011  and  continuing  to  this  day,  the
median duration of data has been 24 h.
Our  notional  user  flying  airborne  geo-
physical surveys is not collecting data in
neat 24-hour slices: once again this like-
ly  reflects  the  growing  dominance  of
geoscientists  among  CSRS-PPP  users.
More specifically, this reflects the use in
applications  where  movement  is  fast

enough to be detectable with kine matic
pro cessing,  but  slow  enough  that  data
collection  over  peri ods  measured  in
24-hour  units 
(e.g.
is 
glaciol o gy, volcanology, etc.).

required 

Figures  9  and  10  illustrate  the
vary ing  durations  of  data  collection.
There  appear  to  be  two  separate
pop u la tions  of  users  in  each  case
(Canada  and  International,  Static  and
Kinematic),  which  we  believe  to  rep-
resent  the  distinct  types  of  work  con-
ducted  by  professional  users  (shorter
observing  sessions)  and  scientists
(observing sessions 24 h in length).

5.  Oh Canada:
Changes in Usage 
over Time

We now turn to temporal changes
in CSRS-PPP usage. Prior to assessing
trends, we have removed the usage of
one major client that occurred during a
short  period  of  time  and  that  would
cloud any effective trend analysis.  

There  are  a  number  of  private-
sector  Real-Time  Kinematic  (RTK)
service providers that operate dense net-
works in regions of Canada. NRCan has

Figure 9: Static observing session length (2003–2015).

Figure 10: Kinematic observing session length (2003–2015).

32  GEOMATICA

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.much  data  processed  by  CSRS-PPP  has
been  collected  in  the  peak  month  of  July
(over  40 000  points)  than  in  the  rather
colder months of December, January and
February (under 20 000 points).  

Usage  in  Canadian  provinces  and
ter ritories is shown in Table 1. As noted

above, a total of 584 000 data sets have
been  processed  containing  485 000
unique  observing  sessions.  The  total
number  shown  in  this  table  (325 000)
excludes  data  processed  for  RTK
serv ice  provider  compliance,  single
fre quency usage and offshore activity.

Figure 11: Data collection by month in Canada.

Figure 12: CSRS-PPP usage in Canada.

entered  into  formal  com pliance  agree-
ments  with  a  number  of  such  service
providers  to  ensure  the  integration  of
their  reference  stations  into  the  CSRS
standard  [NRCan  2017b].  NRCan
assesses stability of their reference sta-
tions  using  a  separate  instance  of  the
CSRS-PPP  software,  which  is  not
included  in  the  statistics  reported  here.
The volume of PPP processing to sup-
port  compliance  agreements  is  very
significant.  Previously  providers
monitored  reference  station  stability
themselves,  in  some  cases  with  the
public  version  of  CSRS-PPP  dis-
cussed here (5000 files processed per
month),  and  with  the  agreement  in
place, the usage suddenly ended. All
information  shown  below  excludes
this  processing.  Including  this  pro-
cess ing  would  incorrectly  suggest
that CSRS-PPP usage dropped at the
date when the methodology to moni-
tor compliance changed.

As  Canada  is  known  for  brief
peri ods  of  pleasant  weather  between
long spells of cold, we begin by consid-
ering  how  active  our  clients  are  on  a
monthly  basis.  Figure  11  indicates  that
over  the  period  1994–2015,  twice  as

Table 1: CSRS-PPP usage by province and territory.

Province/Territory

CSRS-PPP Usage 
2003-2015

Nunavut

Northwest Territory

Yukon

British Columbia

Alberta

Saskatchewan

Manitoba

Ontario

Quebec

New Brunswick

Nova Scotia

Prince Edward Island

Newfoundland and Labrador

Canada

62 373

4 377

17 396

42 891

88 660

24 957

12 273

35 992

16 896

11 961

2 510

189

4 380

324 855

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

GEOMATICA  33

Figure 13: CSRS-PPP usage outside Canada.

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.Professional  surveyors  process  data
immediately  and  proceed  to  the  next
task. Geoscientists are gen erally look-
ing  at  minute  and  long-term  motions.
They will therefore prioritize accuracy
and  are  able  to  wait  considerable
lengths of time to obtain final results. 
Trends  over  time  in  Canadian
provinces  and  territories  are  shown  in
Figures  15  and  16. We  have  separated
the  time  of  data  collection  from  the
time that the data is submitted for pro-
cessing. The large green spikes indicate
sudden processing of large amounts of
data  collected  previously.  Large  peaks
such as this are indicative of scientific
or educational work.1 Because we have
included  the  epoch  of  observation,
these figures start at an earlier date than
our  service  log  files,  2002.  Red  lines
indicating  processing  activity  begin  in
late 2003. Note also that each graph has
different vertical axes: Nunavut has the
the
because 
scale 
largest 
(geo s ci ence-related) peaks. 

of 

For  all  regions,  usage  of  PPP
starts  at  very  low  levels  and  signifi-
cantly  picks  up  at  approximately
2007.  In  most  provinces  we  see  a
rapid rise in usage with some fluctu-
ation, which is believed to be linked
to economic factors. We believe that
the  drop  in  activity  seen  in Alberta,
beginning in early 2015 and lasting at
least two quarters, is associated with
economic  challenges  faced  in  this
province  as  a  result  of  reduced  oil
prices.  Work  in  Yukon  and  Nunavut
show  a 
reduction  approximately
occurring  at  the  end  of  2010,  likely
linked to the end of major land claims
work [Gray 2016]. The introduction of
a  provincial  real-time  service  in
Nova  Scotia  is  expected  to  reduce
CSRS-PPP  usage  in  this  province,
although it is not yet seen here. 

In  Nunavut  we  observe  a  clear
seasonal  pattern:  unsurprisingly,
Nunavut surveyors are inactive dur ing
the  winter  months.  The  large  peaks
observed  in  Nunavut’s  CSRS-PPP
usage have been identified as resulting
from glaciology studies. 

Figure 14: Processing delay; surveys conducted in Canada and
outside Canada. 

As  noted, Alberta  is  home  to  the
largest  usage  of  CSRS-PPP,  likely
associated  with  geomatics  require-
ments  in  the  oil  and  gas  sector.  The
national  trend  over  time  is  shown  in
Figure 12. If we ignore the two largest
peaks  resulting  from  large  scale  proj-
ects,  an  approximate  linear  fit  to  the
quarterly observed totals gives a slope
of  1600  additional  sessions  processed
per year over the past decade.

Figure  13  shows  the  trend  over
time  for  CSRS-PPP  usage  outside
Canada. The number of files processed
(vertical  green  bars)  becomes  signifi-
cant in approximately 2007 and shows
large  spikes  of  file  submission.  The
data  being  processed  (red  dots)  is
spread  out  much  more  smoothly  in
time and dates back to an earlier year,
2001.  The  trend  in  observations  rises
smoothly  to  a  peak  in  2013,  then
rap id ly drops off.  

We  attribute  some  of  the  lag
between  observation  and  processing
in  CSRS-PPP  to  new  users  learning
about  the  benefits  of  using  CSRS-
PPP  and  submitting  files  collected

previ ously  (as  much  as  fifteen  years
previously).  

The  drop  in  observations  (Figure
13)  beginning  in  2013  could  reflect  a
genuine  reduction  in  field  activity,  or  it
could be an artifact resulting from the lag
between  data  collection  and  data  analy-
sis. We have no evidence to sug gest that
an actual decrease in data collection took
place.  To  assess  this,  we  have  graphed
(Figure  14)  the  processing  latency  for
Canadian  usage  and  for  usage  outside
Canada.  There  is  a  very  marked  differ-
ence in how rapidly data is submitted to
CSRS-PPP  between  Canadian  usage
(majority  of  files  submitted  within  the
first  month  after  observation)  and  work
conducted outside Canada (very signifi-
cant  amounts  of  data  submitted  four  or
more years after observation). 

Figure 12, which illustrates Canadian
activities,  does  not  show  a  drop-off  in
observed  data  in  2015,  supporting  the
conclusion that the lag between obser va-
tion  and  processing  is  much  smaller  in
Canada.  We  believe  that  this  reflects
greater  professional  surveying  usage  in
geoscience.
Canada 

relative 

to 

1 NRCan client support staff have significant anecdotal information about usage patterns.  Large spikes in service usage are associated

with geoscientists and/or academia. 

34  GEOMATICA

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.Figure 15: CSRS-PvPP usage over time in Canada’s provinces and territories (excluding Alberta).

6.  Conclusions

CSRS-PPP is the most popular of
several  services  offered  by 
the
Canadian  Geodetic  Survey  at  Natural
Resources  Canada.  The  Survey  sup-
ports  the  definition  and  maintenance
of global (ITRF) and national datums
(NAD83(CSRS))  and  provides  stan-
dards  for  gravity  measurement  in
Canada. The Survey supports work of
the  International  GNSS  Service,  the
International  VLBI  Service, 
the
International Association  of  Geodesy,
the  International  Earth  Rotation  and
Reference  Systems  Service,  etc.
Geoscience  efforts  utilize  precise

Figure 16: CSRS-PPP usage over time in Alberta.

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

GEOMATICA  35

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.posi tioning and gravity information and
contribute to research related to climate
change impacts, hydrology and ground-
water, earthquake and tsunami hazards,
etc.  The  division  is  also  engaged  with
partners across Canada to assess Canada’s
ability  to  effectively  utilize  mod ern
positioning,  navigation  and  tim ing
information derived from satellites. 

is 

CSRS-PPP 

authoritative,
accu rate,  reliable,  and  serves  clients
around the world in different modes for
a wide range of applications. Usage of
the  service  has  increased  very  signifi-
cantly since its introduction, with a very
rapid  trend  of  increase  beginning  in
approximately  2007  and  continuing
through 2015. Total usage now exceeds
two million data sets processed, with the
majority of these outside Canada. 

Variation of usage with geographic
location  provides  insight  into  overall
economic  activity  in  Canada  and  the
world. Spatial patterns show the extent
to which formal surveying work relies
on transportation corridors, and likely
illustrates  differing  national  reliance
on  geospatial  tools  as  a  result  of
dif fer ing  types  of  economic  activity.
As the service matures, usage statistics
may  serve  as  a  real-time  monitor  of
nation al or global economic activity. 

to 

Increase 

in  service  usage 

is
occur ring  rapidly,  both  within  Canada
and  in  other  regions.  The  service  con-
the  global  community
tributes 
through providing a means to access the
Global  Geodetic  Reference  Frame
(GGRF). Improved access to the GGRF
was specifically identified as an objec-
tive for the global community in a 2014
United  Nations  General  Assembly
res o lution.  The  service  relies  on  data
provided  through  the  International
GNSS  Service,  and  the  provision  of
geo detic services back to the community
is reasonable reciprocity. 

Among  the  different  types  of  usage,
there  is  a  notable  increase  in  our  support
for  geosciences.  Given  that  the  principal
alternative to a service such as this is use
of a local geodetic control network (mon-
uments  or  continuously  operated  GNSS
reference stations), the service is of par-
ticular importance where little or no local
control  exists.  Locations  such  as  Arctic
Canada,  Greenland  and  Antarctica  are
therefore  the  areas  where  the  service  is
most beneficial.

Use  of  the  service  for  kinematic
appli cations  is  growing.  Many  of  these
applications appear to be in the geo sciences,
monitoring  slow-moving  phenomena.
Some of the growth in kine matic usage is
known  to  be  in  LiDAR  data  col lection,
which  we  rec ognize  as  a  grow ing  and
very significant client com munity. 

Acknowledgements

The  authors  would  like  to  thank
col leagues  in  the  Canadian  Geodetic
Survey, in particular the staff of the client
support  group  and  those  involved  in  PPP
software  development  and  management.
Within  NRCan,  we  have  benefited  from
discussions  with  geoscientists  David
Burgess  and  Tom  James.  We  have  bene-
fit ed  from  discussions  or  exchanges  with
international and academic colleagues and
wish  to  thank  Demitris  Delikaraoglou
and Marcelo Santos. 

ESS  Contribution  number  /  Numéro  de
contribution du SST: 20160410.

References

Altamimi, Z., X. Collilieux and L. Métivier. 2011.
ITRF2008:  an  improved  solution  of  the
International  Terrestrial  Reference  Frame.
Journal of Geodesy. 85(8): 457–473. 

Craymer,  M.R.  2006a.  The  evolution  of
NAD83  in  Canada.  Geomatica.  60(2):
151–164.

Craymer,  M.R.  2006b.  The  evolution  of
in  Canada:  Addendum.

NAD83 
Geomatica. 60(4): 433.

da Silva, A.L. 2016. IBGE Brazil. Personal

communication. 

Donahue,  B.  2017.  Canadian  Geodetic
Survey,  NRCan.  Personal  communi-
ca tion. 

Dow, J.M., R.E. Neilan and C. Rizos. 2009.
The  International  GNSS  Service  in  a
changing  landscape  of  global  naviga-
tion  satellite  systems.  Journal  of
Geodesy. 83: 191. 

Gray, R. 2016. Deputy Surveyor General of
Canada  Lands,  NRCan.  Personal
com munication. 

Leighton,  S.  2016.  The  offshore  surveyor
(presentation).  National  Surveyors’
Conference. Edmonton. 

NRCan.  2017a.  Tools  and  applications.
Natural Resources Canada [viewed Jan.
2017].  Available  at  http://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/earth-sciences/geomatics/geodetic-
reference-systems/tools-applications/10925
NRCan. 2017b. RTK Network Compliance.
Natural  Resources  Canada  [viewed
Jan. 2017]. Available at https://webapp.
geod.nrcan.gc.ca/geod/data-donnees/
rtk.php?locale=en

Robin, C.M.I.R., M. Craymer, R. Ferland, E.
Lapelle,  M.  Piraszewski, Y.  Zhao  and
T.  James.  2016.  Improved  modeling
of  vertical  crustal  motion  in  Canada
for a new North American Reference
Frame.  AGU  Fall  Meeting.  Abstract
G21B-1002.

Thomson, L. 2016. Simon Fraser University
Glaciologist. Personal communication. 
United Nations General Assembly. 2015.  A
global  geodetic  reference  frame  for
sustainable  development.  Resolution
adopted  by  the  General  Assembly  on
26  February  2015.  UN  Session  69,
Agenda item 9. 

Véronneau M., J. Huang. 2016. The Canadian
Geodetic  Vertical  Datum  of  2013
(CGVD2013). Geomatica. 70(1): 9–19. q

36  GEOMATICA

Vol. 71, No. 1, 2017

Geomatica 2017.71:27-36.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Uni Western Sydney on 10/16/18. For personal use only.