Geoinformatica
DOI 10.1007/s10707-013-0183-1

Reconstruct street network from imprecise excavation
data using fuzzy Hough transforms

Cyril de Runz · Eric Desjardin ·
Frédéric Piantoni · Michel Herbin

Received: 28 September 2007 / Revised: 20 February 2013 / Accepted: 7 May 2013
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract This paper proposes an approach for handling multivariate data in an
archaeological Geographical Information System (GIS), providing a new tool to
archaeologists and historians. Our method extracts potential objects of known
shapes in a geographical database (GDB) devoted to archaeological excavations. In
this work, archaeological information is organized according to three components:
location, date and a shape parameter, in a context where data are imprecise and
lacunar. To manage these aspects, a three-step methodology was developed using
fuzzy sets modeling and adapting the fuzzy Hough transform. This methodology is
applied in order to define the appropriate tool for a GDB of Roman street remains in
Reims, France. The defined queries return an estimation of the possible presence of
streets during a fuzzy time interval given by experts on the Roman period in Reims.

Keywords Archaeology · Fuzzy representation · Fusion · GIS ·
Fuzzy Hough transform · Multivariate data handling

C. de Runz (B) · E. Desjardin · M. Herbin

CReSTIC EA-3804, IUT Reims Chalons Charleville, rue des Crayères,
BP 1035, 51687 Reims Cedex 2, France
e-mail: cyril.de-runz@univ-reims.fr

E. Desjardin
e-mail: eric.desjardin@univ-reims.fr

M. Herbin
e-mail: michel.herbin@univ-reims.fr

F. Piantoni
HABITER EA-2076, Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne,
57 rue Taittinger, 51096 Reims Cedex, France
e-mail: frederic.piantoni@univ-reims.fr

Geoinformatica

1 Introduction

Archaeology is the science of studying human cultures through the recovery, analysis
and interpretation of material remains and environmental data, such as stamps
and buildings. Archaeologists collect the majority of their information through
excavation and prospecting.

One peculiarity of archaeological information is that it generally does not cover
the entire possible space. Excavation information only represents fragments of a
scene (e.g. ruins) in time and space, involving much lost information. Archaeologists
aspire to reconstruct both past scenes and their dynamics from this lacunar information.
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are frequently used to analyze archae-
ological data [6]. Experts use these systems in order to both organize and handle
archaeological information, as well as performing spatial analyses.

Archaeological data are typically stored at the scale of an excavation site. Objects,
such as wall fragments, have thematic, temporal (activity period), and spatial prop-
erties that may be linked together. For instance, in order to determine the activity
periods of objects, experts can use absolute dating methods such as radiocarbon
dating [2], but will generally use relative dating approaches, such as the Harris
Matrix [21], which studies spatial relationships between objects such as overlapping,
neighborhood and adjacency, in order to derive relative dates. To exploit this
information and reconstruct the past, archaeologists need spatiotemporal analyses
methods that can be used at both local and larger scales.

Archaeological data result from interpretation and thus are, in essence, imperfect.
Such imperfection may occur in multiple ways such as: imprecision due to subjectivity
of interpretation processes, uncertainty, incompleteness, ambiguity.

The quality of spatial information, and thus the imperfection of data, should be
studied during both storage and analysis processes [11, 19]. The literature describes
many modeling approaches [3, 8, 17, 26, 28, 29] that use classical uncertainty theories.
In this context it seems logical to propose approaches for handling both the impre-
cision and the spatiotemporal incompleteness of information. Such approaches can
produce reconstruction scenarios based on the period studied and on a hypothesis
on past structures. We suggest extracting potential objects using shape knowledge in
an archaeological Geographical Information System (GIS). Our goal is not to infer
the presence of unexcavated objects but to furnish spatiotemporal configurations of
objects throughout maps.

This paper studies archaeological data from the SIGRem project [7], and high-
lights its imperfections. The goal of the project is to handle excavation data on
Durocortorum (the city of Reims, France, during the Roman period), stored at the
excavation site scale, and the subsequent analysis conducted at the city scale.

This paper uses a database named “BDRues”, which contains excavation infor-
mation on Roman streets in Reims. It focuses on the location, orientation and dates
of data gathered during excavation campaigns in the city of Reims. As only street
sections are excavated, information does not accurately represent the past situation.
The purpose of this work is to propose an approach that can simulate the existence
of simple spatial objects using imprecise, incomplete and multivariate data in an
archaeological GIS.

We propose a three-step methodology in order to manage these aspects of
archaeological information and apply it to the Roman roads in the city of Reims.
The methodology first models data using the fuzzy set theory [30] frequently used

Geoinformatica

in GIS [1, 12, 18, 25]. It then adapts a well-known pattern recognition method for
images, the Hough Transform approach (HT) [16, 20, 22]. It finally produces a GIS
layer building valued hypothesis of road presences.

Section 2 discusses the nature of archaeological data and their related uncertain-
ties. Section 3 proposes a methodology based on fuzzy Hough transforms that can
predict the location of linear archaeological features based on lacunar and imprecise
excavation data. Section 4 presents the configuration of the tool in order to visualize
potential reconstruction of Roman street networks in Reims (France) according to a
fuzzy period and Section 5 tests the method and analyze the results. The last section
(Section 6) concludes and discusses potential future work.

2 GIS, archaeology and uncertainty

Conolly and Lake [6] proposed methods for storing archaeological data in GIS.
Archaeological knowledge is typically multidimensional, multivariate, uncertain,
imprecise and lacunar. During excavation processes, experts record the location of
the excavated object, as well as their analysis of its functions and activity period.

Generally, the type of archaeological data collected depends on the tools and pro-
cedures used by archaeologists during excavation activities, as well as on their inter-
pretation. For example, locations data acquired using surveying tools from the 18th
century can be less precise than those acquired today with technologies such as GPS.
Likewise, GPS locations are subject to inaccuracy. Furthermore, objects’ coordinates
represent the current location, but not necessarily the past position of the object.
Over the years, objects buried can shift because of soil movements, movements that
can only be estimated. Thus, current locations are uncertain. Additionally, during
the archaeologists’ interpretation process, the activity periods of objects generally
depend on the excavation context, as relative dating is estimated from the relative po-
sition of objects found on site. In the 20th century, archaeologists often worked with
linguistic period codifications that could use different numerical representations. For
instance, the “middle of the 1st Century” may correspond to several intervals such as
[40, 60], and [30, 70]. Moreover, most numerical representations are estimations. The
estimation process may also concern other attributes such as proportion of materials
(rock, clay, straw, etc.). Finally, objects found during excavations are often portions
of a larger object for which characteristics are not always known.

Previous GIS studies have described the quality of information [11] as being
an important issue. Altman [1] proposed using fuzzy set theoretical approaches
to handle imprecision in spatial analysis. This approach is applied in order to
understand phenomena such as road traffic, dynamic processes, or the contamination
of soil [12–14, 25]. The fuzzy set theory could also be used to formalize and handle
the uncertainty or imprecision of the data.

3 Methodology

3.1 Fuzzification

This paper deals with the fuzzy representation of data. For instance, Fig. 1 presents
the fuzzy models which are based on excavation information about Roman streets in
Reims where ep represents an excavation point.

Geoinformatica

y

x

ep

a

b

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0

bd-a bd+a

ed-a

ed+a

t

c

Fig. 1 Fuzzy models for location, orientation and date

This paper uses at least one fuzzy model for each studied feature (location, date
and orientation). A standard way of representing the imprecision of an object’s
location is to define a fuzzy neighborhood. Fig. 1a proposes a membership function
( f Locep) for the fuzzy neighborhood of a 2D excavation point ep.

In a lacunar context, the shape being searched for could be recognized using a
combination of locations and a spatial representation of objects. In our case, the
shapes of Roman streets are lines, which combine location and orientation. The fuzzy
model associated with the orientation is presented in Fig. 1b. Some spatial fuzzy
models are proposed by Shi [29], in which locations are stored as polygons.

(cid:2)
b d, ed

Furthermore, the dates correspond to periods of activity and are stored as intervals
(cid:3)
time
, where b d is the start date and ed is the end date. To manage dates that
cannot be precisely established, we propose using fuzzy intervals (Fig. 1c) as a model
to obtain the fuzzy date for ep. The obtained fuzzy set is defined as (b d − a; b d +
a; ed − a; ed + a), where the value of a is by default equal to 0.1 ∗ |ed − b d| (10 % of
the periods’ duration).

The type of fuzzy model selected does not impact the methodology and other
fuzzy models could be used for location, activity periods and orientation. In our
application, such modeling allows representing data and their imprecision. This is a
simple fuzzy modeling example that could be defined more accurately by the experts.
By using fuzzy models on multivariate data, we obtain fuzzy multivariate data. The
features studied become fuzzy features. It should be noted that the modeled features
do not have the same dimensionality. For example, a fuzzy location is at least 3D data

(coordinates + membership), and the fuzzy date is a fuzzy interval (2D data: timeline
+ membership). In the next section, we present the use of the Hough transform.

Geoinformatica

3.2 Fuzzy Hough transform

The first step of the proposed method requires defining the spatial shape that should
be recognized. If the query searches for a Roman amphitheater, the shape to be
recognized using the Fuzzy Hough Transform (FHT) could be an ellipse or a circle.
For Roman streets, the shape to be recognized is a line. Some pattern recognition
methods allow for the recognition of simple shapes or natural shapes in images.
These methods generally work with binary images resulting from edge detection
techniques (gradient, Canny-Deriche, etc.), only dealing with points (pixels) repre-
senting object’s edges. These points are called points of interest and can be viewed
as being either 2D or 3D data, the set of points of interest composing either a 2D
or 3D dataset. In a GIS framework, a GDB only stores important data with their
coordinates, building a 2D or 3D dataset for the spatial situation. In this context, the
use of a pattern recognition method is a natural solution.

In the field of pattern recognition, one of the most powerful methods for detecting
a geometric shape is the Hough transform (HT). This method proposed by Hough
[22] for straight line detection was extended to other geometric shapes by Duda
et al. [16]. Illingworth and Kittler [23] and Leavers [24] proposed HT surveys. The
principle of HT accumulator building consists in mapping the image space to a
parameter space, which is represented by an accumulator array. In the case of straight
lines, the accumulator array dimensions (ρ, θ) are defined by the polar equation of a
straight line (Fig. 2). In other words, the cell at line ‘ρ ’ column ‘θ’ represents the line
defined by the polar equation:

x ∗ cos(θ ) + y ∗ sin(θ ) = ρ.

Each point of interest votes for each line l potentially going through it. The
vote increments the accumulator array cell corresponding to l. The value of the
cell at line ‘ρ’ column ‘θ’ in the accumulator represents the number of points of

Fig. 2 Hough transform
principle. Points increment all
the cells in the parametric
space (ρ, θ ) corresponding to
the lines going through them.
The higher the number of
points in the same line,
the higher the cell value
corresponding to the
line involved will be

y

o

x

... … … … …

… … … … …

.. … … … …

… … … … …

… … … … ..

HOUGH Accumulator

Geoinformatica

the line represented by this cell. If lines are present in the image they can be
identified by finding the cells with the greatest scores. Bonnet [4] proposed an
unsupervised generalization of the HT. This statistical approach, based on how shape
instances are represented, is useful for detecting shapes in uncertain environments.
Moreover, the shape instance equation corresponds to the coordinates of the cell. In
other approaches, such as linear interpolation, it is harder to obtain different shape
instances and define the level of trust we can have in it.

In the context of this paper, the desired recognition methods must deal with
lacunar and uncertain data. Han et al. [20] introduced the fuzzy Hough transform
(FHT) for detecting lines in images with noise, or quantization errors. FHT takes
individual points and their neighborhood into consideration. A fuzzy set is used to
build a neighborhood matrix of the point studied.

Thus, we propose adapting these methods to include the knowledge resulting from
the fuzzy step: the number of fuzzy features implies the number of FHT accumulators
to build. In this work, for each fuzzy feature, the membership function in the fuzzy
neighborhood corresponds to the fuzzy feature membership function involved. This
approach requires accumulators to be merged before the selection. In the next
section, the fusion of data is presented.

3.3 Fusion of the accumulators

Information carried by each of the accumulators generated in the FHT step is
different. Visualizing data requires the accumulators to be merged. This step de-
scribes both the selection of the merging function and its use.

First, a standard fusion function merges homogeneous quantities. The accumu-
lators could be seen as fuzzy sets when normalized by their maximum and thus
could be merged. Dubois and Prade [15] state that choosing a fusion mode depends
on the nature of the items to be merged and the representation framework, while
Detyniecki [10] reviews traditional fusion operators. With classical operators such as
t-norm or t-conorm (similar to Zadeh Min and Max) in a fuzzy context, the order of

Fig. 3 Structures of HT a,
of FHT b and of the
proposed methodology c

a

b

c

Geoinformatica

data is not considered as being important (symmetric function). Furthermore, t-norm
and t-conorm admit a neutral value and an absorbent element. This implies that the
value from at least one of the fuzzy set membership functions could be deleted during
the fusion process. For example, let there be N accumulators A1, . . . , AN, using the
t-conorm if we consider a pair (ρ, θ) with Ai(ρ, θ) = 1, then the membership value
of the obtained fuzzy set for (ρ, θ) is 1 in any case. Using Choquet integrals [5], the
fitness function allows us to define the relative value of each fuzzy set.

In conclusion, choosing a fusion function depends on the application goals and the
fusion result is called a final fuzzy set. In our methodology, we adapt the FHT process
so that it becomes a multi-criteria (multi-feature) FHT, as illustrated in Fig. 3.

The next section is devoted to configure the proposed methodology to build

Roman street configuration hypotheses based on known excavation data.

4 Configuration to Roman street study

4.1 Framework

The application uses a geographical database (GDB) named “BDRues” that con-
tains data on Roman streets in Reims. This GDB was created by the SIGRem project
[7, 9, 27]. BDRues data describes the street sections of Durocortorum. Sections are
stored as objects characterized by location (georeferenced 2D points), by orientation
(an angle) and by activity period (see Table 1).

In fact, orientations and locations (street centers in BDRues) and activity are
estimated according to materials (coins, stone orientation, house streetside foun-
dation, etc.) or relatively to other things and may not be clearly defined. Thus, all
the components of BDRues data are subject to imprecision and incompleteness.
The fuzzy models, illustrated in Fig. 1, were used to represent the data locations,
orientations and activity periods.

This section proposes a new tool defined using our methodology. This tool allows
estimating the possible presence of Roman streets in Reims during a specified
period, gp. During the Roman period, cities were built according to a regular grid
arrangement of streets, so Roman streets were typically linear in shape.

In this application, during the FHT processes, we have to reduce the possibilities
of votes for the lines combining a fuzzy location with a fuzzy orientation for each
ep. Thus, the neighborhood of each ep corresponds to the support – that is the set
of elements for which the membership function is not null – of the ep fuzzy location.
The only possible lines (ρ, θ) are the ones going through a point in the neighborhood
and where the θ is member of the support of the ep fuzzy orientation (the ep fuzzy

Table 1 Example of archæological data in BDRues

ID

Location Xa
723325
723240
723070

12
14
15
a Lambert II extended
b Degree

Location Ya
174361
174780
174730

Orientationb
30
120
120

Activity period

Gallo-Roman
3rd, 4th Centuries AD
High empire

Geoinformatica

orientation membership degree for θ is not null). The points of interest are the
excavation points.

The method builds three fuzzy Hough transform accumulators: the first FHT
accumulator (F HT Loc) is for to the location, the second one for the orientation
(F HT Orien) and the last one for the possible presence of streets at a given date
(F HT Date). As seen in the Algorithm 1, the values of the votes are:

f Locep(x, y) in the accumulator F HT LocAcc,
–
f Orienep(θ) in F HT Orien, and
–
– max(min(gp, f Dateep)) for F HT Date.
We use max(min(gp, f Dateep)) in order to define the confidence of the object’s
presence for the given date.

Algorithm 1 FHT for locations, orientations and dates

for all excavation point ep stored with (x, y, date, α) do

for all (x, y) where f Locep > 0 do

for all θ where f Orientheta−PI/2 > 0 do

ρ = icosθ + jsinθ;
F HT LocAcc(ρ, θ)+ = f Locep(x, y);
F HT OrienAcc(ρ, θ)+ = f Orienep(θ );
F HT DateAcc(ρ, θ)+ = max( f Dateep ∩ gp);

end for

end for

end for

To generate maps based on fuzzy multivariate data, these three FHT items
have to be merged. To become fuzzy sets, the three FHT accumulators (F HT Loc,
F HT Orien and F HT Date) are normalized by their maximum value. In the appli-
cation’s tool, each feature corresponds to a different potential and importance. In
fact, F HT Date cell values could be more important than F HT Loc. Thus, the fusion
should not define a neutral value or annihilator. Furthermore the function cannot
be symmetric. In classical merging, by extending the arithmetic mean, the weighted
mean respects the whole. In a fuzzy context, the fusion function corresponding to
the weighted mean is a specific Choquet interval [5]. With this function, the merging
function could be simplified as follows:

f inal = λ ∗ F HT Loc + μ ∗ F HT Orien + ν ∗ F HT Date,

where the weights λ, ν and μ are non-negative and λ + ν + μ = 1.

The weight values (λ, μ, ν) are defined by users in the query parameters, and the
three FHT accumulators are reduced to one fuzzy set called Final (with its f inal
membership function). Thus, we apply an α-cut – the set of points of which the
membership value is greater than α – to select the lines that represent the potential
presence of streets. Only the lines with higher potential should be selected. This is
the goal of the next section.

4.2 Visualization

The archaeological context, with its inherent uncertainty, implies the utilization
of both the HT classical selection method and ad-hoc selection approaches for

Geoinformatica

59

72

73

18

14

52

53

15

38

16

39

20

17

24

12

4

49

48

74

68

27

21

47

25

6

37

7

30

32
31

60

2
2

36

40

1

41

58

57

28

42

69

4645
44

56
55

29

35

71

51

Fig. 4 Illustration of a simulated map with streets as lines for a period gp: the darker the line, the
stronger the confidence in the street presence during gp

particular applications. In classical HT, the shape extraction is based on maxima
selection. The use of this method in the queries allows visualizing the most relevant
results. If the goal is to obtain areas of high potential, the use of an α-cut could be
a solution. After selecting the shape instances to visualize, we suggest reducing the
shape (a line in our case) to fragments, with the length depending on real excavation
points near that shape. This is especially meaningful in the case of Roman streets.

In our application, the tool displays lines that are possible reconstructions of
streets, which were potentially present at the given period. It does not identify
unexcavated extracts of streets. As explained in the description of our methodology,
choosing an α-cut of Final to select the lines allows us to obtain the areas of potential
streets. The result is shown in Fig. 4.

Streets are not infinite lines but line segments. Moreover, excavation data give us
information on local positions. A function is applied to determine fuzzy segments of
lines. The membership function of the fuzzy segments decreases with the distance

Fig. 5 Simulated maps of
Reims defined with (λ, μ, ν) =
(5/6,1/12,1/12) during : a - the
3rd Century, and b - the 4th
and 5th Centuries

a

b

Geoinformatica

a

b

Fig. 6 Simulated maps of Reims defined with (λ, μ, ν) = (1/12,5/6,1/12) during : a - the 3rd Century,
and b - the 4th and 5th Centuries

to excavation points, which in turn validates the street: the higher the possibility of
presence, the darker the display of the line. The map that is generated can be used as
a new layer in a GIS.

The tool proposed in this application was applied to simulate Reims street map
configurations according to periods defined by users. The query results for Reims,
in the 3rd Century AD or the 4th or 5th Centuries AD, allow estimating where the
potential street areas were during the given periods.

As stated in the previous section, varying the fusion weights produced different
results, which are studied next. In order to visualize the query results, the selection
was made using an α-cut value of 0.95.

For example, in both Fig. 5a and 5b, the maps are the same and show only one
street because the influence of the dates and orientations is minimized compared to
the locations. Thus, the query using these weights and our α-cut displays the street
with the highest number of excavation points.

When the locations and dates are minimized in comparison to the orientation
(Fig. 6a and 6b), the maps are also similar for all dates. In this case, the tool’s
objective is to display the main direction of the streets.

a

b

Fig. 7 Simulated maps of Reims defined with (λ, μ, ν) = (1/12,1/12,5/6) during : a - the 3rd Century,
and b - the 4th and 5th Centuries

Geoinformatica

a

b

Fig. 8 Simulated maps of Reims defined with (λ, μ, ν) = (1/3,1/3,1/3) during : a - the 3rd Century,
and b - the 4th and 5th Centuries

If the importance of dates is maximized (Fig. 7a and 7b), then the maps change
according to the reference date. Here the goal is to visualize the influence of the
dates on the process.

In Fig. 8a and 8b, a classical mean is applied. Thus, the tool allows visualizing the
streets, but we cannot visually determine which element has the highest value. With
the α-cut, using our GDB, the only streets displayed are those where the possibility
of the location, date correspondence and orientation are maximum.

The next section presents the results of the queries defined using our methodol-
ogy, and programmed to estimate the potential presence of streets during the 3rd
Century and during the 4th and 5th Centuries.

5 Application and results

In the following examples, the weights (λ, μ, ν) used to obtain the f inal membership
function are empirically evaluated as 3/13, 1/13, 9/13. These settings consider that the
date is three times more important than location, which in turn is three times more
important than orientation. They allow defining areas of streets, as the orientation
and location are minimized, but these areas are more restricted than in Fig. 7
because the location is considered more important than the orientation. The weight
associated with the dates, which is higher than that for the locations, provides an
estimation of streets’ presence during a given period.

The comparisons between the simulated maps (Fig. 9a and 9c) and the maps
defined by experts (Fig. 9b and 9d) imply that the queries are interesting for archae-
ologists. The simulated streets and the streets defined by experts are similar most of
the time, but with some visible differences. The differences could be explained by
the fact that maps given by experts are old and creating a new map each time new
information is added into the GDB is expensive. Moreover, when experts draw a
map, they evaluate the aspects relative to each element and do not consider the less
interesting aspects. Using our application’s tool, the relevant aspects are defined by
the accumulator values. A quantitative comparison between the two maps is thus not
relevant because the simulated streets and experts’ streets are not always defined in
the same way and do not cover the same sets of information.

Geoinformatica

a

c

b

d

Fig. 9 a: A simulated map of Reims during the 3rd Century; b: A map of Reims during the 3rd
Century defined by experts; c: A simulated map of Reims during the 4th and 5th Centuries; d: A map
of Reims during the 4th and 5th Centuries defined by experts

The main function of the proposed tool is to define areas where Roman streets
may possibly be present, according to a reference date and remains data. These areas
are important in helping archaeologists form their conclusions.

6 Conclusion

The proposed methodology allows managing multivariate data in an archaeological
GIS. Objects are searched for using queries based on shape models. The parameters
of the shape model are estimated using the fuzzy Hough transform. In this context,
queries are built by defining the parameter values corresponding to the desired type
of objects. So, using FHT, the query uses the values selected in an accumulator, and
those values lead to the visualization of detected objects. The modeling of the object’s
shape through the fuzzy Hough transform is new in the context of archaeological
GIS. Therefore, FHT is a way of taking into account expert knowledge of the object’s
shape.

The main benefit of this approach is that it takes into account the imprecision,
uncertainty and incompleteness of data when querying GIS. If data can be defined
through fuzzy sets, then we can use the fuzzy Hough transform (FHT). The use of
FHT allows considering the accumulator as a fuzzy set, and thus the selected values
become fuzzy values that generate a visualization of fuzzy objects. In the proposed

Geoinformatica

application, selections correspond to the use of classical α-cuts. The contribution of
the fuzzy set theory is not limited to managing uncertainty and incompleteness as we
use a fuzzy set fusion operator to merge multivariate data.

In our application, data are structured along three components: location, orien-
tation and date (activity period). Each component is defined by a fuzzy set, leading
to three fuzzy accumulators when querying GIS. The fusion of multivariate data is
obtained by merging these fuzzy accumulators. Selecting a set of shape instances in
the final merged fuzzy accumulator allows visualizing the detected fuzzy objects. This
visualization technique can help GIS users explore the amount of data by displaying
fuzzy objects.

This kind of query, based on shape modeling through FHT, was applied to the
geographical database “BDRues” in order to simulate and estimate the potential
presence of Roman streets in the city of Reims. This can allow historians and
archaeologists to evaluate and confirm their map hypotheses. This new tool can help
them analyzing urban management during a given period, using vague data found
during excavations. The objective is not to automatically identify sites for future
excavations but to help experts for by furnishing street configuration scenarios. A
generalization for other shapes will be studied in the future.

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the Archaeological service of
the
Champagne-Ardenne Region and the National Institute for Preventive Archaeological Research
of Reims for providing access to their data and expert knowledge. We also thank Dominique Pargny
(GEGENA lab, University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne) for his contribution to the SIGRem
project. We kindly thank Rodolphe Devillers, Jean-Michel Nourrit and Gilles Valette for helping
revising the paper.

References

1. Altman D (1994) Fuzzy set theoretic approaches for handling imprecision in spatial analysis.

2. Arnold J, Libby W (1949) Age determinations by radiocarbon content: checks with samples of

Int J Geograph Inf Syst 8(3):271–290

known age. Science 110(2869):678–680

3. Bejaoui L, Bédard Y, Pinet F, Salehi M, Schneider M (2007) Logical consistency for vague
spatiotemporal objects and relations. In: International symposium on spatial data quality—
ISSDQ’07. Enschede, Netherland

4. Bonnet N (2002) An unsupervised generalized Hough transform for natural shapes. Pattern

5. Choquet G (1954) Theory of capacities. Ann de l’Inst Fourrier 5:131–295
6. Conolly J, Lake M (2006) Geographic information system in archaeology. Cambridge University

Recogn 35(5):1192–1196

Press

7. De Runz C, Desjardin E. Herbin M, Piantoni F (2006) A new Method for the comparison of
two fuzzy numbers extending fuzzy max order. In: Information processing and management of
uncertainty in knowledge-based systems - IPMU’06. Editions EDK, Paris, France, pp 127–133
8. De Runz C, Desjardin E, Piantoni F, Herbin M (2008) Toward handling uncertainty of exca-
vation data into a GIS. In: 36th Annual conference on computer applications and quantitative
methods in archaeology. Budapest, Hungary, pp 187–191

9. De Runz C, Pargny D, Desjardin E, Herbin M, Piantoni F (2006) Aide à la décision en
archéologique préventive : Les rues de la Cité des Rèmes. In: Conférence Francophone ESRI.
Issy-Les-Moulineaux, France

10. Detyniecki M (2000) Mathematical aggregation operators and video querying their application

to video querying. Ph.D. thesis, Université Paris 6, France

11. Devillers R, Jeansoulin R (eds) (2006) Fundamental of Spatial Data Quality. ISTE Publishing

Company

Geoinformatica

12. Dixon B (2005) Groundwater vulnerability mapping: a GIS and fuzzy rule based integrated tool.

13. Dou C, Wolt W, Bogardi I (1999) Fuzzy rule-based approach to describe solute transport in the

Appl Geogr 25(4):327–347

unsaturated zone. J Hydrol 220(1–2):74–85

14. Dragicevic S, Marceau DJ (2000) An application of fuzzy logic reasoning for GIS temporal

modeling of dynamic processes. Fuzzy Set Syst 113(1):69–80

15. Dubois D, Prade H (2004) On the use of aggregation operations in information fusion processes.

16. Duda RO, Hart PE (1972) Use of the Hough transform to detect lines and curves in pictures.

Fuzzy Set Syst 142(1):143–161

Comm ACM 15(1):11–15

17. Fisher P (1991) First experiments in viewshed uncertainty: the accuracy of the viewable area.

Photogramm Eng Rem S 58(3):345–352

18. Fisher P, Comber A, Wadsworth R (2006) Approaches to uncertainty in spatial data. In: Devillers

R, Jeansoulin R (eds) Fundamentals of spatial data quality, GIS. ISTE, pp 43–60

19. Goodchild M, Jeansoulin R (eds) (1997) Data quality in geographic information, from error to

20. Han JH, Koczy LT, Poston T (1994) Fuzzy Hough transform. Pattern Recogn Lett 15(7):649–648
21. Harris E (1989) Principles of archaeological stratigraphy, second edn. Academic Press
22. Hough PVC (1962) Method and means for recognizing complex patterns. Tech. rep. US 3 069

uncertainty. Hermes

654

23. Illingworth J, Kittler J (1988) A survey of the Hough transform. Inform Control 44(1):87–116
24. Leavers VF (1993) Which Hough transform. CVGIP 58:250–264
25. Mitra B, Scott HD, McKimmey JM (1998) Application of fuzzy logic to the prediction of soil

erosion in a large watershed. Geoderma 86(3–4):183–209

26. Navratil G (2007) Modeling data quality with possibility-distributions. In: International sympo-

sium on spatial data quality - ISSDQ’07. Enschede, Netherland

27. Pargny D, Piantoni F (2005) Méthodologie pour la gestion, la représentation et la modélisation

des données archéologiques. In: Conférence Francophone ESRI. Issy-Les-Moulineaux, France

28. Rolland-May C (2000) Évaluation des territoires. Hermes
29. Shi W (2007) Four advances in handling uncertainties in spatial data and analysis. In: Interna-

tional symposium spatial data quality—ISSDQ’07. Enschede, Netherland

30. Zadeh LA (1965) Fuzzy sets. Inform Control 8(3):338–353

Cyril de Runz is a PhD in computer science from the University of Reims Champagne Ardenne
(France) in 2008. Associate professor at the same university, he works at the computer science lab
CReSTIC. His research interests span imperfection in geographic and archaeological information,
spatio-temporal data modeling and representation, and spatio-temporal data mining.

Geoinformatica

Eric Desjardin is a PhD in Computer Science from the University of Reims (France-1993). He
worked on character recognition and ancient text understanding until 2000. His current interest
focuses on AI approaches to geographical information system.

Frédéric Piantoni
is a PhD in geography from Poitiers University in 2002. He worked on interna-
tional migrations and political geography using GIS to formalize data. Lecturer in the Geography
Department of Reims University, he still working on GIS methodology and teach it. His actual
research deals with modelisation of human flowses in global economy.

Geoinformatica

Michel Herbin is a PhD in Biomathematics and Biostatistics from the University of Paris 7 (France)
in 1989. From 1990 to 1993, he worked in Research & Development in the Medical Imaging Industry.
Since 1999, he has worked at the University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne (France). He is now
Professor at the “Institut Universitaire de Technologie”. His research interests include computer
vision, image processing and data analysis.

