 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4): 425–441

XXX 
© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1467-9671
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK

Research Article

Research Article
A Space-Time GIS Approach to Exploring Large Individual-based Spatiotemporal Datasets
S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

A Space-Time GIS Approach to Exploring 
Large Individual-based Spatiotemporal 
Datasets

Shih-Lung Shaw
Department of Geography
University of Tennessee

Leonard S Bombom
Department of Geography
Oklahoma State University

Hongbo Yu
Department of Geography
Oklahoma State University

Abstract
The increasing number of large individual-based spatiotemporal datasets in various
research fields has challenged the GIS community to develop analysis tools that can
efficiently  help  researchers  explore  the  datasets  in  order  to  uncover  useful
information.  Rooted  in  Hägerstrand’s  time  geography,  this  study  presents  a
generalized  space-time  path  (GSTP)  approach  to  facilitating  visualization  and
exploration  of  spatiotemporal  changes  among  individuals  in  a  large  dataset.  The
fundamental idea of this approach is to derive a small number of representative
space-time  paths  (i.e.  GSTPs)  from  the  raw  dataset  by  identifying  spatial  cluster
centers  of  observed  individuals  at  different  time  periods  and  connecting  them
according  to  their  temporal  sequence.  A  space-time  GIS  environment  is  developed
to  implement  the  GSTP  concept.  Different  methods  of  handling  temporal  data
aggregation  and  the  creation  of  GSTPs  are  discussed  in  this  article.  Using  a  large
individual-based  migration  history  dataset,  this  study  successfully  develops  an
operational space-time GIS prototype in ESRI’s ArcScene and ArcMap to provide a
proof-of-concept study of this approach. This space-time GIS system demonstrates
that  the  proposed  GSTP  approach  can  provide  a  useful  exploratory  analysis  and
geovisualization  environment  to  help  researchers  effectively  search  for  hidden
patterns and trends in such datasets.

: time geography, generalized space-time path, space-time GIS, individual-based dataset, geovisualization
Keywords

Address for correspondence: 
304 Burchfiel Geography Building, Knoxville, TN 37996-0925, USA. E-mail: sshaw@utk.edu

Shih-Lung Shaw, Department of Geography, University of Tennessee,

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2008.01114.x

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

426

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

1 Introduction

Recent advancements in information and location-aware technologies have made collections
of large individual-based spatiotemporal datasets feasible and affordable. Such datasets
include,  for  example,  GPS  tracking  data  of  individual  vehicles  or  wild  animals,  credit
card transactions history of individual cardholders, and migration history derived from
the records of residential address changes of individuals. It is evident that these individual-
based spatiotemporal datasets present unique and valuable opportunities for researchers
to gain insights of their changing patterns and trends over time. While the data availability
has become less of an issue, how to effectively represent, analyze and visualize these large
spatiotemporal  data  presents  major  challenges  to  the  research  community.  First,
although  geographic  information  systems  (GIS)  have  become  increasingly  capable  of
analyzing  various  spatial  problems  over  the  past  few  decades,  additional  functions  of
representing  and  analyzing  both  space  and  time  dimensions  for  individual-based
spatiotemporal  datasets  are  needed.  Second,  large  individual-based  spatiotemporal
datasets  present  challenges  to  researchers  who  attempt  to  comprehend  the  observed
phenomenon  and  discover  the  hidden  patterns  and  relationships  in  the  dataset.  A
space-time GIS that can facilitate the exploration of spatiotemporal patterns, trends
and  relationships  in  a  large  and  complex  individual-based  spatiotemporal  dataset  will
be  very  useful  to  many  application  fields  that  have  increasing  access  to  such  datasets.
This  article  presents  a  space-time  GIS  approach  that  is  capable  of  representing  and
analyzing  the  data  in  both  spatial  and  temporal  dimensions  in  order  to  derive  a
simplified  representation  for  visualizing  and  exploring  the  spatiotemporal  patterns  and
relationships hidden in large individual-based datasets.

Representations of an individual-based spatiotemporal dataset require a framework
that can manage both spatial and temporal dimensions. Hägerstrand’s time geography,
which  includes  an  integrated  space-time  system  to  investigate  human  activities  with
various constrains in a space-time context (Hägerstrand 1970), has been suggested as a
useful conceptual framework to represent and analyze individual-based spatiotemporal
datasets. In particular, its space-time path concept, which represents the spatial movements
of an individual over time, presents a logical and promising form to model spatiotemporal
characteristics  of  such  datasets.  Although  time  geography  offers  an  elegant  conceptual
framework,  its  applications  have  been  limited  partly  due  to  the  lack  of  an  operational
environment  to  effectively  implement  its  framework  (Yuan  et  al.  2004).  We  have  seen
significant progress of implementing the time geography concepts in a GIS environment
over the years (e.g. Miller 1991, Kwan and Hong 1998, Kwan 2000, Yu 2006, Yu and
Shaw 2008). These efforts have demonstrated that GIS provide a powerful platform to
represent and analyze individual activities in a space-time context. This study proposes
(GSTP) concept, which is used to simplify the representation
a 
and visualization of general spatiotemporal changes, to tackle the challenge of exploring
hidden  patterns  and  trends  in  large  individual-based  spatiotemporal  datasets.  A  space-
time  GIS  is  developed  to  represent,  analyze,  and  visualize  the  generalized  space-time
paths  and  to  provide  a  geovisualization  environment  to  facilitate  the  exploratory  data
analysis of a large individual-based dataset.

generalized space-time path 

The remainder of this article is organized into four sections. The next section discusses
research related to the development of a space-time GIS for exploring large individual-based
spatiotemporal  datasets.  In  section  3,  we  address  the  research  challenges  when  large
individual-based datasets are involved and propose an approach of using the generalized

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

427

space-time path concept to tackle the challenges. We also discuss the pros and cons of
several  methods  that  can  be  used  to  create  the  generalized  space-time  paths.  A  large
individual-based  migration  history  dataset  is  presented  in  the  fourth  section  as  a  case
study to illustrate how the proposed approach works. The final section offers concluding
remarks and future research challenges related to the space-time GIS approach and the
generalized space-time path concept.

2 Related Research

An  individual-based  spatiotemporal  dataset  stores  both  spatial  and  temporal  informa-
tion of individuals’ movements and offers a valuable source to shed light on understand-
ing individual and aggregate movement patterns in space and over time. As the size of
such  an  individual-based  dataset  increases,  uncovering  the  aggregate  spatiotemporal
changes among the individuals in the dataset becomes increasingly difficult. Exploratory
data analysis often becomes a necessary and useful first step for researchers to comprehend
the data. This section discusses selected concepts related to time geography, developments
of a space-time GIS, and geovisualization for exploratory data analysis that are relevant
to this study.

Time geography was first proposed by Torsten Hägerstrand in the 1960s to study
human  activities  and  their  constraints  under  the  context  of  space  and  time.  Different
from the conventional historical approaches, which often treat time as an external factor
in  the  study  of  human  activity  and  behavior,  time  geography  suggests  an  integrated
space-time system to help researchers investigate individual behaviors in a spatiotempo-
ral  environment  (Hägerstrand  1970).  This  space-time  system  is  represented  as  a  three-
dimensional  (3D)  orthogonal  system,  which  consists  of  two  spatial  dimensions  and
another  temporal  dimension  (see  Figure  1).  The  spatial  dimensions  keep  track  of  the
locational  changes  of  an  individual,  while  the  temporal  dimension  organizes  the
sequence of events and synchronizes human activities. Therefore, time geography offers
a  simple  but  elegant  framework  for  researchers  to  examine  human  activities  within  an
integrated space-time context.

Figure 1 Space-time system and space-time path of time geography

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

428

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

A  space-time  path,  which  is  defined  as  a  trajectory  that  records  an  individual’s
movements in space and over time, is a critical concept in time geography. In the space-
time system of time geography, a space-time path takes the form of a three-dimensional
line  that  is  composed  of  a  sequence  of  tracking  points  (Figure  1).  Since  time  can  only
move  forward,  a  space-time  path  always  moves  upward  in  the  system.  The  space-time
path  concept  provides  an  efficient  form  to  represent  an  individual’s  movement  history
in  an  integrated  environment  of  space  and  time  (Miller  2004).  A  space-time  path  not
only  records  the  locations  visited  by  an  individual,  more  importantly,  it  maintains  the
temporal sequence of those visits. Such information is essential to the understanding of
various spatiotemporal relationships among moving individuals and the trends of their
movements.  The  space-time  path  concept  has  been  applied  in  a  number  of  studies,
including gender studies (e.g. Kwan 1999a, b), diffusion of health risks (e.g. Mark et al.
1999, Sinha and Mark 2005), transportation studies (e.g. Miller 1991, 1999; Shaw and
Wang 2000), geography of the homeless (e.g. Rollinson 1998), everyday life of individuals
(e.g.  Ellegård  1999,  Adams  2000),  among  others.  An  individual-based  spatiotemporal
dataset,  which  stores  data  of  locational  changes  of  individuals  over  time,  is  a  typical
example  of  tracking  datasets.  Therefore,  the  space-time  path  concept  offers  a  useful
approach to the representation and visualization of such datasets.

Time geography has been recognized mainly as a conceptual framework rather than
an  operational  framework.  This  is  partly  attributed  to  the  lack  of  a  computational
environment  that  can  effectively  support  the  implementation  of  the  time  geography
framework (Yuan et al. 2004). Due to the heavy influence of cartography on GIS development,
mainstream  GIS  have  focused  on  the  representation  and  analysis  of  static  geographic
phenomena.  Representation  of  time  has  been  missing  since  the  formative  years  of  GIS
(Spaccapietra  2001,  Peuquet  2002).  Representation  and  visualization  of  space-time
paths require the support of an integrated space-time system in GIS. Conventional GIS
design falls short in providing such support. A time dimension must be included to make
GIS  capable  of  supporting  the  time  geography  framework.  Several  recent  studies  have
made exciting progress in implementing the space-time path concept in GIS (e.g. Kwan
2000, 2003; Kwan and Lee 2004; Buliung and Kanaroglou 2006; Yu and Shaw 2004;
Yu 2006). In these studies, a three-dimensional GIS environment is used to simulate the
space-time system of time geography and support an interactive visualization of space-time
paths. A set of analysis tools, which can help researchers investigate various spatiotemporal
relationships  among  space-time  paths,  also  have  been  realized  in  a  3D  GIS  design  (Yu
2006). These studies prove that a 3D GIS environment, or better called a space-time GIS
since  it  is  composed  of  two  spatial  dimensions  and  one  temporal  dimension,  can  offer
an effective platform to support the visualization and analysis of space-time paths. Such
a  system  opens  up  many  new  possibilities  for  researchers  to  explore  individual-based
spatiotemporal data and gain better insight of their patterns, trends and relationships.
Most  existing  studies  have  used  relatively  small  datasets  to  visualize  space-time
paths  in  GIS.  With  the  advancements  of  information  and  location-aware  technologies,
it has become increasingly feasible and affordable to collect large volumes of individual-
based  spatiotemporal  data  in  various  application  fields.  Such  large  individual-based
datasets present a challenge for researchers to explore and discover useful information
hidden in the large datasets (Miller and Han 2001, Guo et al. 2003). In addition, as the
number of tracking records and the number of space-time paths grow in size, the display
can be cluttered with too many space-time paths, which makes it very difficult to recognize
any  patterns  or  trends.  Therefore,  we  need  to  develop  innovative  methods  to  help

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

429

researchers  explore  the  patterns,  trends  and  relationships  hidden  in  large  individual-based
spatiotemporal datasets.

As  the  size  and  complexity  of  datasets  are  becoming  increasingly  overwhelming,
data  visualization  has  become  a  necessary  and  useful  tool  for  data  mining  and  knowl-
edge  discovery.  Geovisualization  is  widely  used  in  exploratory  analysis  of  geographic
data. Gahegan (2000) argues that it is necessary for a paradigm shift in geocomputation
from  statistical-based  techniques  to  more  inductive  techniques  that  generalize  known
examples or visual techniques (geovisualization) where the observer is accorded greater
latitude to analyze the data. Generally speaking, geovisualization is the use of graphical
representations  to  display  and  identify  complex  patterns  in  large  datasets  in  ways  that
may  stimulate  visual  thinking  and  suggest  explanations  or  understanding  of  inherent
problems  and  generate  hypotheses  for  further  analysis  (Hearnshaw  and  Unwin  1994,
Kraak 2003, Guo et al. 2005). Gahegan (2000) summarizes the major goals of visualization
as assisting the discovery of inherent structure and pattern, prompting the generation of
research  questions  and  hypotheses,  and  enabling  the  study  of  particular  dimensions  of
the data.

Limited geovisualization and GIS-based exploratory analysis tools have been developed
for dealing with large individual-based spatiotemporal data so far. Several recent studies
have  proposed  methods  to  explore  patterns  in  individual-based  datasets  by  computing
similarity  measures  among  individual  space-time  paths  (e.g.  Laube  et  al.  2005,  Sinha
and  Mark  2005,  Shoval  and  Isaacson  2007).  The  similarity  approach  focuses  on  the
measures  of  selected  characteristics  of  individual  space-time  paths  (e.g.  sequence  of
moving speeds, moving directions, and locations) to investigate whether different paths
share  similar  characteristics  and  can  be  grouped  together.  This  approach  is  useful  to
compare the similarities or differences among individual space-time paths. For example,
space-time  paths  that  are  similar  to  each  other  according  to  their  computed  similarity
measures  can  be  grouped  together  and  identified  as  a  subset.  However,  each  subset  of
individual space-time paths could spread over various time periods and/or cover differ-
ent locations. As a result, it is not very useful to explore how the general patterns among
all  individuals  change  from  one  time  period  to  the  next  time  period.  A  new  method
therefore is needed to examine the general change patterns and trends over time among
all individual space-time paths in a dataset.

3 Generalized Space-Time Paths for Exploring Spatiotemporal Trends

In this study, we propose an approach based on a generalized space-time path (GSTP)
concept to facilitate the exploration of general trends hidden in a large individual-based
spatiotemporal  dataset.  The  fundamental  idea  of  this  approach  is  to  derive  a  small
number  of  representative  space-time  paths,  which  are  named  as  GSTPs,  from  the  raw
dataset. These GSTPs are used to provide an effective and efficient visualization that can
help researchers search for general patterns and trends embedded in the dataset. Similar
to the use of classical space-time paths for visualizing the changes of individual movements
across space and over time, GSTPs show the generalized spatiotemporal changes of the
population. Therefore, a GSTP consists of a sequence of spatiotemporal points, each of
which  represents  the  center  of  a  subgroup  of  the  population  at  a  specific  time  period.
However, the GSTPs do not track the same subgroup of individuals over time. Instead,
we take a cross-sectional approach of finding the spatial clusters of individuals for each

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

430

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

time  period.  Centers  of  these  spatial  clusters  for  each  time  period  are  then  connected
according to their temporal sequence to form GSTPs.

Two  major  steps  are  involved  in  the  generation  of  GSTPs:  (1)  identification  of
representative locations to portray the spatial distribution patterns of individuals at each
time period, and (2) connection of the representative locations according to their temporal
sequence  to  create  generalized  space-time  paths.  The  same  number  of  representative
location  points  must  be  generated  for  each  time  period  so  that  each  GSTP  will  consist
of one point from each time period. This study uses cluster analysis to derive the repre-
sentative spatial distribution centers of individual movements for each time period. Before
performing cluster analysis to identify the representative centers of each time period, we
need  to  choose  a  time  interval  in  order  to  divide  the  data  into  time  periods.  Since
different types of data may show interesting change patterns at different temporal resolution
levels, the best approach is to provide users with a system that allows them to explore
the  data  at  various  temporal  resolution  levels.  This  article  presents  two  different
approaches  of  dividing  the  data  into  time  periods:  a  fixed  time  interval  method  and  a
moving time window method.

The fixed time interval method divides the data into several time periods based on
a time interval specified by a user. Cluster analysis is then performed on the data points
of  each  fixed  time  period  to  identify  the  spatial  cluster  centers.  While  the  fixed  time
interval  method  is  easy  to  implement,  it  faces  the  problem  of  choosing  an  arbitrary
boundary between two adjacent time periods. The moving time window method, on the
other hand, starts with a time window chosen by a user (e.g. a three-year time window)
and performs cluster analysis on all data points falling within this time window. It then
replaces the data of the earliest year in the current time window by the data of the year
following the last year in the current time window to create the next time window. For
example, we start with a three-year time window of 1990–1992. The next time window
will be 1991–1993. This moving time window method addresses the arbitrary boundary
issue  embedded  in  the  fixed  interval  method  and  creates  smoother  transitions  between
the adjacent time periods.

The  second  step  of  generating  GSTPs  is  to  connect  the  cluster  centers  of  one  time
period to the cluster centers of the next time period. A challenge here is how to pair up
the cluster centers between the two adjacent time periods. Many methods could be used
to make the connections. This article reports the assessments of three different methods,
which  are the nearest neighbor method,  the  Thiessen  polygon method,  and the  assign-
ment  problem  method,  for  connecting  spatial  cluster  centers  between  adjacent  time
periods.  First  of  all,  the  nearest  neighbor  method  attempts  to  connect  a  spatial  cluster
center of a given time period to the nearest spatial cluster center of the following time
period (Figure 2a). This method is simple to implement and appears to be a logical and
effective solution to the problem. However, there is a major shortcoming of this method.
On  a  2D  plane,  a  point  can  be  the  nearest  neighbor  to  more  than  one  other  point.  As
shown  in  Figure  2b,  center  2-1  in  time  period  2  is  the  nearest  neighbor  to  both  center
1-1  and  center  1-3  in  time  period  1.  In  this  case,  both  centers  1-1  and  1-3  will  be
connected to center 2-1 and center 2-3 will be left unconnected with any of the GSTPs.
As a result, the nearest neighbor method is not a robust method of connecting the spatial
cluster centers to form GSTPs.

Another approach is to create Thiessen polygons around the spatial cluster centers
of each time period. We then perform a polygon overlay operation between the Thiessen
polygons of every pair of adjacent time periods. If the Thiessen polygons of two centers

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

431

Figure 2 Connecting spatial cluster centers using the nearest neighbor method

Figure 3 Connecting spatial cluster centers using the Thiessen polygon method

from  two  adjacent  time  periods  overlap  more  than  they  do  with  other  centers,  it  indi-
cates that these two spatial cluster centers share a larger common area than other pairs
and they are the best candidates to be connected with each other to form GSTPs. As a
result, the two centers whose Thiessen polygons have the largest overlap area are con-
nected first. The two centers whose Thiessen polygons have the second largest overlap
are  connected  next.  This  process  proceeds  until  all  cluster  centers  are  paired  up.  This
Thiessen polygon method overcomes some situations that the nearest neighbor method
cannot handle properly. For example, the case shown in Figure 2b can be solved using
the Thiessen polygon method (Figure 3a). In Figure 3a, dash lines represent the Thiessen
polygon  boundaries  for  the  spatial  cluster  centers  of  time  period  2  and  the  thin  solid
lines are the Thiessen polygon boundaries for the spatial cluster centers of time period
1. Since the Thiessen polygons of centers 1-2 and 2-2 have the largest overlap, the two
centers  are  connected  first.  Centers  1-3  and  2-3  are  connected  next  because  their
Thiessen  polygons  have  the  second  largest  overlap.  Finally,  centers  1-1  and  2-1  are
connected.  Although  the  Thiessen  polygon  method  overcomes  some  of  the  problems
encountered by the nearest neighbor method, it again is not robust enough to guarantee
a  solution  to  every  situation.  Figure  3b  shows  that  centers  1-2  and  2-2  are  connected
first,  followed  by  a  connection  between  centers  1-3  and  2-1  according  to  the  Thiessen
polygon method. Since there is no overlap between the Thiessen polygons of centers 1-1
and 2-3, they are left disconnected in the creation of GSTPs.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

432

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

The assignment problem method, on the other hand, does not suffer the problems
encountered  by  the  nearest  neighbor  and  Thiessen  polygon  methods.  The  assignment
problem,  also  known  as  the  bipartite  weighted  matching  problem,  is  a  fundamental
combinatorial optimization problem in operations research (Yves and Laburthe 1997).
The  objective  of  the  assignment  problem  is  to  minimize  the  total  length  or  cost  of  the
connections  between  two  sets  of  equal  numbers  of  objects.  It  guarantees  that  each
spatial cluster center of a given time period will be connected to one and only one unique
spatial cluster center of the next time period. Since the objective of the assignment problem
method is to minimize the total length of all connections, spatial cluster centers of one
time period are not always connected to their nearest spatial cluster center of the next
time  period.  Due  to  the  robustness  of  the  assignment  problem  method  for  connecting
the spatial cluster centers between adjacent time periods, it is the method chosen in this
study to generate GSTPs.

It should be noted that the generalized space-time paths are similar to the classical
space-time paths in terms of their visual representations in a space-time GIS. The generalized
space-time paths can help us explore the changes of spatial cluster centers over time. In
this  respect,  it  serves  the  same  purpose  as  the  classical  space-time  paths  that  illustrate
the  changes  of  individual  locations  over  time.  However,  there  also  is  an  important
difference between the generalized space-time paths and the classical space-time paths.
While a classical space-time path represents the spatial movements of the same individual
over time, a generalized space-time path does not necessarily represent the location changes
of the same subgroup of individuals over time. In other words, a classical space-time path
tracks  the  same  individual  over  time  and  maintains  its  unique  identity.  A  generalized
space-time path shows the changes in spatial distribution patterns of distinct subgroups
of  individuals  between  different  time  periods.  The  composition  of  each  subgroup  of
individuals  could  change  from  one  time  period  to  the  next  time  period.  Generalized
space-time  paths  therefore  do  not  imply  that  the  same  subgroup  of  individuals  moves
from the spatial cluster center of one time period to the spatial cluster center of the next
time period. Although generalized space-time paths do not keep track of the subgroup
identity, they offer a useful geovisualization of changing spatial patterns and trends over
time that can facilitate the exploration of hidden spatiotemporal patterns and trends in
large individual-based datasets.

4 A Prototype Space-Time GIS with a Large Individual-based Migration Dataset

This study applies the GSTP concept to a large individual-based migration history dataset
and  develops  a  space-time  GIS  prototype  to  provide  a  proof-of-concept  study  of  the
approach.  The  individual-based  migration  history  dataset  contains  a  total  of  7,212
migration  records  of  2,185  individuals  over  the  period  of  1940  to  2001  across  the
contiguous  United  States.  This  dataset  was  derived  from  a  survey  of  migration  history
of  sampled  residents  in  the  Northern  Great  Plains.  Each  record  in  the  dataset  includes
information such as the individual’s ID, the migration year, and the migration destination.
The migration destination is recorded at the county level in the dataset. Such a dataset
presents a valuable source for understanding the spatial and temporal aspects of population
migration patterns and changes.

We extend our previous work (Yu 2006; Yu and Shaw 2004, 2008) by creating an
operational  space-time  GIS  to  represent  and  visualize  the  migration  dataset.  We  take

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

433

advantage  of  the  existing  three-dimensional  (3D)  representation  in  commercial  GIS
software  and  convert  the  third  spatial  dimension  (z)  into  a  temporal  dimension  (t).
Consequently, a 3D line is adapted to represent a space-time path. Instead of a sequence
of <x, y, z> triplets, a 3D line in our space-time GIS consists of a sequence of <x, y, t>
triplets that are used to record the shape of a space-time path. This design is implemented
in  ArcScene,  which  is  a  3D  extension  of  ArcGIS  desktop  developed  by  Environmental
Systems  Research  Institute  (ESRI,  Inc.,  Redlands,  California).  Custom  functions  are
created using Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) code with ArcObjects to manage the
time  dimension  in  ArcScene  such  that  it  can  support  the  space-time  path  and  other
important concepts of time geography.

4.1 Visualizing Space-time Paths of Individuals

We first create a space-time path for each individual in the migration history dataset to
organize and represent an individual’s complete migration history in the space-time GIS.
Figure 4a shows the space-time path of one sample individual selected from the migration
history dataset that is visualized in ArcScene. The vertical dimension (t) in this display
represents  the  migration  years  and  the  spatial  dimensions  (x,  y)  are  represented  at  the
county  level.  A  space-time  path  consists  of  two  types  of  line  segments:  horizontal
segments and vertical segments. The horizontal segments in a path represent migration
movements from one county to another county in a particular year. The “from” end of
a  horizontal  segment  is  the  origin  location  and  the  “to”  end  of  the  same  horizontal
segment  is  the  destination  location  of  a  migration  made  by  an  individual.  The  vertical
segments indicate that an individual stays at the same residential location between two
migration  movements.  The  length  of  a  vertical  segment  shows  how  long  an  individual
stays  at  a  particular  residential  location.  This  space-time  path  approach  provides  an
efficient method of organizing individual migration histories in an integrated space-time
environment. Furthermore, the space-time path offers an intuitive way of visualizing an
individual’s migration history and establishes a powerful framework for the development
of  GIS  analysis  functions  to  investigate  and  explore  the  spatiotemporal  characteristics
of an individual’s migration behavior or aggregate migration patterns.

When the number of space-time paths is relatively small, it is easy to visualize and
explore  spatiotemporal  patterns  with  the  standard  GIS  functions.  However,  as  the
number  of  space-time  paths  increases,  visualizing  and  exploring  the  spatiotemporal
patterns hidden in a dataset can become a challenging task. Figure 4b shows the result
of  visualizing  a  large  number  of  migration  space-time  paths  at  the  same  time.  The
display  becomes  so  cluttered  that  it  is  difficult  to  identify  any  obvious  patterns  of  the
spatiotemporal migration patterns and trends among all of the individuals. In this case,
the generalized space-time paths can help overcome the problem and facilitate the search
for those patterns and trends hidden in a large individual-based spatiotemporal dataset.

4.2 K-mean Cluster Analysis

As  the  first  step  to  generate  GSTPs,  we  need  to  derive  representative  spatial  locations
for each time period by summarizing the individual migration destinations at a selected
temporal resolution level. The migration dataset used in this study contains more than
7,000  points  that  represent  the  migration  destinations  of  2,185  individuals  over  62
years. The spatial distribution of these points covers every state in the contiguous U.S.,

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 

434

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

Figure 4 Visualization of individual space-time paths of migration history in ArcScene

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

435

with  Delaware  having  the  lowest  number  of  cases  at  one  and  Colorado  having  the
highest  number  of  cases  at  802.  The  temporal  distribution  of  the  points  also  varies
greatly across the years, with 1944 having the lowest number of cases at 29 and 1989
having the highest number of cases at 195. In this study, we choose the k-mean cluster
analysis to aggregate the data. The cluster centers are then used to represent the generalized
spatial  distributions  of  individual  migration  destinations  in  each  time  period.  After
several  experimental  runs  of  hierarchical  cluster  analysis  of  the  migration  dataset,  we
find that five clusters are the best number to use in the k-mean cluster analysis (i.e. k = 5).
In addition, we perform the k-mean cluster analysis using three different temporal aggrega-
tion  methods,  which  include  five-year  interval,  individual  year,  and  three-year  moving
time window methods.

Under  the  five-year  interval  approach,  we  group  the  migration  locations  into  12
five-year periods (i.e. 1940–1944, 1945–1949, 1950–1954, . . . ) and a two-year period
for  the  last  two  years  in  the  survey  data  (i.e.  2000  and  2001).  For  each  five-year  time
period, we apply the k-mean (k = 5) cluster analysis to derive five spatial cluster centers
for the time period. The outcome includes 13 sets of five spatial cluster centers. Under
the  individual  year  approach,  we  apply  the  k-mean  (k  =  5)  cluster  analysis  to  all  the
migration  points  in  each  individual  year.  This  generates  62  sets  of  five  spatial  cluster
centers. The three-year moving time window is implemented in this study for the following
reasons.  First,  the  moving  time  window  approach  can  reduce  the  influence  of  spatial
outliers  in  a  particular  time  period  on  the  derived  spatial  cluster  patterns.  Second,  we
recognize that the change of migration trend is likely to be a continuous and transitional
process.  An  arbitrarily  selected  boundary  between  two  time  periods  therefore  cannot
properly  reflect  the  transitional  changes.  Migration  movements  of  adjacent  years  are
likely  to  share  some  common  trends  and  patterns.  The  moving  time  window  method
allows  us  to  partially  account  for  the  transitional  process  by  including  the  migration
data  points  of  the  years  immediately  before  and  after  the  time  period  under  analysis.
This  study  applies  the  three-year  moving  time  window  method  to  the  migration  data
from 1941 to 2000. As a result, 60 sets of five spatial cluster centers are derived from
the k-mean cluster analysis. The spatial cluster centers derived from each of the above
three methods are then connected to form generalized space-time paths using the assignment
problem method discussed in the previous section.

4.3 Visualization of GSTPs

Figure  5  shows  the  visualization  of  GSTPs  generated  from  each  of  the  three  different
temporal  resolution  levels.  The  shapes  of  the  three  sets  of  GSTPs  are  quite  different
from  one  another.  Among  them,  the  five-year-interval-based  GSTPs  have  the  fewest
spatial  jumps  along  the  paths  because  the  data  are  highly  aggregated  along  the  time
dimension  (Figure  5a).  The  GSTPs  from  both  the  individual  year  method  and  the
three-year moving time window method contain significant spatial jumps. However, the
moving-time-window-based GSTPs contain fewer jumps and the extent of these jumps
is significantly shorter than those in the individual-year-based GSTPs. For example,
the  individual-year-based  GSTPs  include  a  big  spatial  jump  across  the  contiguous
U.S.  (highlighted  by  an  arrow  pointer  in  Figure  5b).  This  big  jump,  however,  is  not
present  in  the  moving-time-window-based  GSTPs  (Figure  5c).  This  suggests  that  the
moving time window method does generate smoother transitions between the adjacent
time periods.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 

436

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

Figure 5 Visualization  of  GSTPs  generated  at  different  temporal  resolution  levels:  (a)  five-
year-interval-based GSTPs; (b) individual-year-based GSTPs; and (c) three-year-moving-time-
window-based GSTPs)

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

437

The examples presented above demonstrate the potential contributions of general-
ized  space-time  paths  to  the  visualization  and  exploration  of  possible  spatiotemporal
changes and trends hidden in large individual-based datasets. For example, we can easily
notice that, among the five GSTPs derived from the five-year interval method, two of them
have relatively stable spatial extent over the years, with one located in the Northeastern
region of the U.S. and the other centered in the Northern Great Plains region. This could
suggest that, examined at five-year intervals, these two regions are the consistent migra-
tion  choices  of  the  residents  who  participated  in  this  migration  history  survey.  The
jumps shown in the individual-year and the moving-time-window GSTPs, on the other
hand, highlight possible major changes of migration destination choices from one time
period  to  the  next  time  period.  Researchers  can  use  the  generalized  space-time  paths
derived from different temporal aggregations to explore migration pattern changes over
short versus long periods. By varying the number of spatial clusters (i.e. the k value used
in the k-mean cluster analysis), researchers also can examine the migration patterns and
changes at different spatial resolution levels. Socioeconomic and demographic variables
of  the  individuals  also  could  be  incorporated  into  the  data  aggregation  and  cluster
analysis  to  examine  the  differences  between  different  population  groups.  Possible
change  patterns  and  trends  suggested  by  the  exploratory  analysis  and  visualization  of
the GSTPs can be used to formulate hypotheses for further analyses.

To provide additional exploratory analysis functions for researchers to examine the
spatiotemporal changes across space and over time, this study also develops a 2D-based
animation  tool  in  ArcMap  to  facilitate  the  search  for  changing  patterns  and  trends
embedded  in  the  GSTPs.  This  ArcMap  animation  tool  can  be  combined  with  the  3D
space-time GIS implemented in ArcScene to provide powerful exploratory analysis tools
to examine potential patterns and trends in large individual-based spatiotemporal datasets.
Figure  6  shows  an  example  of  using  these  two  GIS  implementations  to  support  the
investigation of spatiotemporal changes among the GSTPs. The 3D visualization of the
moving-time-window-based  GSTPs  shows  a  major  spatial  jump  from  the  Southeastern
region to the Northern Great Plains region between the cluster centers of 1955 and 1956
(see Figure 6a). The 2D ArcMap animation tools not only confirm this spatial shift but
also  show  the  number  of  individuals  that  belong  to  each  of  the  spatial  clusters  using
proportional circles at each spatial cluster center (see Figure 6b). Users of this 2D Arc-
Map  animation  application  also  can  control  the  animation  through  a  set  of  custom
functions such as pause, play, advance, rewind, adjust display speed, etc.

5 Conclusions

The increase in the number of large individual-based spatiotemporal datasets has pushed
the  GIS  community  to  develop  analysis  tools  that  can  help  researchers  manage  and
explore such data in order to uncover useful information hidden in these large datasets.
This  raises  a  major  research  challenge  of  designing  and  developing  a  GIS  environment
that  can  effectively  and  efficiently  represent,  analyze,  and  visualize  both  spatial  and
temporal dimensions of such large individual-based datasets. This study presents a gen-
eralized  space-time  path  approach,  which  is  based  on  a  concept  of  Hägerstrand’s  time
geography, to exploring and visualizing the spatiotemporal changes among many indi-
viduals in a large dataset. A space-time GIS environment is developed to implement the
concept  of  generalized  space-time  paths.  Different  methods  of  handling  temporal  data

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 

438

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

Figure 6 An example of migration pattern changes revealed by the GSTPs

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

439

aggregation and the creation of generalized space-time paths are discussed in this article.
This  article  then  uses  a  large  individual-based  migration  history  dataset  to  implement
and assess the proposed generalized space-time path approach and its associated methods
in  a  GIS  environment.  An  operational  space-time  GIS  prototype  system  is  successfully
implemented within ESRI’s ArcScene and ArcMap modules. This space-time GIS system
demonstrates  that  the  proposed  generalized  space-time  path  approach  can  provide  a
useful exploratory analysis and geovisualization environment to help researchers effectively
search for hidden patterns and trends in large individual-based spatiotemporal datasets.
Several aspects of the current research can be enhanced and expanded in the future.
First of all, this study takes a time-slice approach of aggregating individual data along
the  time  dimension.  This  data  aggregation  approach  is  based  on  some  pre-determined
time  periods  that  do  not  handle  the  space  and  time  dimensions  in  a  truly  integrated
manner. We are currently examining alternative ways of performing cluster analysis that
considers  both  spatial  and  temporal  data  simultaneously.  Secondly,  this  study  applies
the  principle  of  spatial  proximity  to  the  cluster  analysis  and  the  process  of  connecting
the spatial cluster centers between the adjacent time periods. Clusters could be formed
in  various  ways  and  factors  beyond  spatial  proximity  (e.g.  socioeconomic  and  demo-
graphic characteristics of individuals) can be useful variables to be considered in future
studies of identifying clusters. One possible solution to this issue is to first cluster indi-
viduals  into  subgroups  based  on  some  user-specified  non-spatial  criteria.  We  can  then
create generalized space-time paths for each subgroup based on the approach presented
in this study. This solution allows us to consider both spatial and non-spatial variables
in  order  to  identify  clusters  and  to  track  the  aggregate  changes  of  each  subgroup  over
time. Finally, the generalized space-time path approach focuses on the changes of spatial
clusters between different time periods. It does not attempt to keep the same identity
of  each  GSTP  by  requiring  the  same  subgroup  of  individuals  to  be  associated  with  a
particular GSTP over the entire study period. When we examine migration patterns over
different time periods, this does not present a problem since people who make migration
moves  in  different  time  periods  (e.g.  2000–2002  vs.  2003–2005)  are  very  likely  to  be
different  individuals.  Therefore,  it  is  not  necessary  to  maintain  identity  of  individuals
associated with each GSTP. On the other hand, if we want to maintain the identity of
individuals  associated  with  each  GSTP,  we  can  first  compute  similarity  measures
among  individual  space-time  paths.  Subgroups  of  individuals  can  be  derived  based  on
the  similarity  measures.  We  then  create  a  generalized  space-time  path  for  each  of  the
subgroups  derived  from  the  similarity  measures.  Each  GSTP  therefore  represents  the
unique identity of the same subgroup of individuals. In sum, this article presents the power
as well as the future potential of a space-time GIS developed from the time geography
concepts for managing and analyzing large individual-based spatiotemporal datasets.

Acknowledgements

This  research  is  supported  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  Grant  BCS-0616724.
The survey data of individual-based migration histories used in this research was funded
by  a  congressional  appropriation  secured  by  Senator  Byron  Dorgan  of  North  Dakota.
This  survey  was  conducted  by  the  Bureau  of  Business  and  Economic  Research  (BBER)
at  The  University  of  Montana.  Access  to  the  data  was  granted  by  Christiane  von
Reichert,  Department  of  Geography,  and  James  T.  Sylvester,  Bureau  of  Business  and

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

440

S-L Shaw, H Yu and L S Bombom

Economic  Research,  at  The  University  of  Montana.  We  also  thank  the  constructive
comments and suggestions from anonymous reviewers.

References

Adams P 2000 Application of a CAD-based accessibility model. In Janelle D and Hodge D (eds)

Information, Place, and Cyberspace Issues in Accessibility

. Berlin, Springer: 217–39

Buliung R and Kanaroglou P 2006 A GIS toolkit for exploring geographies of household activity/

travel behavior. 

Journal of Transport Geography

 14: 35–51

Ellegård  K  1999  A  time-geographical  approach  to  the  study  of  everyday  life  of  individuals:  A
 48: 167–75
Gahegan  M  2000  The  case  for  inductive  and  visual  techniques  in  the  analysis  of  spatial  data.

challenge of complexity. 

GeoJournal

Journal of Geographical Systems

 2: 77–83

Guo D, Gahegan M, MacEachren A M, and Zhou B 2005 Multivariate analysis and geovisualization
Cartography and Geographic

with an integrated geographic knowledge discovery approach. 
Information Science

 32: 113–32

Guo  D,  Peuquet  D  J,  and  Gahegan  M  2003  ICEAGE:  Interactive  clustering  and  exploration  of

large and high-dimensional geodata. 

GeoInformatica

 7: 229–53

Hägerstrand T 1970 What about people in regional science? 

Papers of the Regional Science Asso-

Hearnshaw  H  M  and  Unwin  D  J  (eds)  1994 

Visualization  in  Geographic  Information  System

.

ciation

 24: 1–12

London, John Wiley and Sons

Kraak M 2003 The space-time cube revisited from a geovisualization perspective. In 

Proceedings

of the Twenty-first International Cartographic Conference (ICC)

, Durban, South Africa

Kwan M-P 1999a Gender and individual access to urban opportunities: A study using space-time

measures. 

Professional Geographer

 51: 210 – 27

Kwan  M-P  1999b  Gender,  the  home-work  link,  and  space-time  patterns  of  nonemployment

activities. 

Economic Geography

 75: 370 – 94

Kwan  M-P  2000  Interactive  geovisualization  of  activity-travel  patterns  using  3D  geographical
Transportation

information  systems:  A  methodological  exploration  with  a  large  data  set. 
Research Part C

 8: 185–203

Kwan  M-P  2003  Geovisualization  of  activity-travel  patterns  using  3D  geographical  information
,
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Travel Behaviour Research

systems. In 
Lucerne, Switzerland

Kwan M-P and Hong X 1998 Network-based constraints-oriented choice set formation using GIS.

Geographical Systems

 5: 139–62

Kwan  M-P  and  Lee  J  2004  Geovisualization  of  human  activity  patterns  using  3D  GIS:  A  time-
Spatially  Integrated  Social

geographic  approach.  In  Goodchild  M  F  and  Janelle  D  G  (eds) 
Science: Examples in Best Practice

. New York, Oxford University Press: 48– 66

point objects. 

Laube P, Imfeld S, and Wiebel R 2005 Discovering relative motion patterns in groups of moving
International Journal of Geographic Information Science
Mark D M, Egenhofer M J, Bian L, Rogerson P, and Vena J 1999 Spatio-temporal GIS analysis for
Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Geography and
, Paris, France

environmental health. In 
Medicine (GEOMED’99)

 19: 639 – 68

Miller H 1991 Modeling accessibility using space-time prism concepts within geographic informa-
International Journal of Geographical Information Systems
Miller  H  1999  Measuring  space-time  accessibility  benefits  within  transportation  networks:  Basic

tion systems. 

 5: 287–301

theory and computational procedures. 

Geographical Analysis

 31: 187–212

Miller  H  2004  Activities  in  space  and  time.  In  Hensher  D,  Button  K,  Haynes  K,  and  Stopher  P
. Amsterdam, Elsevier: 647–60
. New York,

Handbook of Transport Geography and Spatial Systems

Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery

Miller H and Han J (eds) 2001 

(eds) 

Peuquet D 2002 
Rollinson  P  1998  The  everyday  geography  of  the  homeless  in  Kansas  City. 

Representations of Space and Time

. New York, Guilford

Geografiska  Annaler

Taylor and Francis

B

 80: 101–15

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

A Space-Time GIS Approach

441

Shaw S-L and Wang D 2000 Handling disaggregate spatio-temporal travel data in GIS. 

GeoInfor-

matica

 4: 161–78

Shoval  N  and  Isaacson  M  2007  Sequence  alignment  as  a  method  for  human  activity  analysis  in

space and time. 

Annals of the Association of American Geographers

 97: 282–97

Sinha  G  and  Mark  D  M  2005  Measuring  similarity  between  geospatial  lifelines  in  studies  of

environmental health. 

Journal of Geographical Systems

 7: 115–36

Spaccapietra S 2001 Spatio-temporal data models and languages. 
Yu H 2006 Spatio-temporal GIS design for exploring interactions of human activities. 

GeoInformatica

 5: 5–9

Cartogra-

phy and Geographic Information Science

 33: 3–19

Yu  H  and  Shaw  S-L  2004  Representing  and  visualizing  travel  diary  data:  A  spatio-temporal
GIS  approach.  In 
Proceedings  of  the  2004  ESRI  International  User  Conference,  San  Diego,
California (available on CD-ROM and at http://www.esri.com/library/userconf/archive.html)
Yu H and Shaw S-L 2008 Exploring potential human activities in physical and virtual spaces: A
spatio-temporal GIS approach. International Journal of Geographic Information Science 22:
409–30

Yuan M, Mark D, Egenhofer M, and Peuquet D 2004 Extensions to geographic representations.
In McMaster R and Usery E (eds) A Research Agenda for Geographic Information Science.
Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 129–56

Yves  C  and  Laburthe  F  1997  Solving  various  weighted  matching  problems  with  constraints.  In
Smolka G (ed) Principles and Practices of Constraint Programming. Berlin, Springer-Verlag:
17–31

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

