GeoInformatica
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10707-020-00396-w

Influences of different underground station map
designs on map-reading and wayfinding

Meng-Cong Zheng 1

Received: 6 June 2019 / Revised: 26 October 2019 /Accepted: 7 January 2020

# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract
Map-reading and wayfinding form one continuous and indivisible process; however,
numerous studies have only focused on one of the two. This study focused on the
relationship between map-reading and wayfinding to understand how map users read
and acquire information from maps. Thirty Participants were divided into three groups of
ten on Shibuya Station in Tokyo. The first group used mounted maps, the second group
used a printed handheld copy of the station map, and the third group used a digital map
provided by Ekipedia. All participants were allocated the same starting point and
destination, and were required to perform map-reading and wayfinding to the destination
as well as fill out an evaluation questionnaire. The results showed that the absolute
accuracy scores (AASs) of digital-map users were far lower than those of handheld map
users. The number of landmarks mentioned in the route planning of different map types
and number of stopping times during the wayfinding process were significantly correlat-
ed. Digital-map users had the highest frequency of landmark use and longest map-reading
times, but the shortest stopping times when wayfinding. The task results indicated that
digital users had the lowest errors among the three groups; however, the evaluation
questionnaire suggested that participants considered digital maps to be the least effective.
Seemingly easy-to-understand maps might not be reflected in participants’ wayfinding
behavior. Overall, this study suggested that only the successful matching of maps with the
actual environment can enable successful wayfinding and create useful spatial
knowledge.

Keywords Map design . Map-reading . Wayfinding . Route description

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10707-020-
00396-w) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

* Meng-Cong Zheng

zmcdesign@gmail.com

1 Department of Industrial Design, Graduate Institute of Innovation & Design, National Taipei

University of Technology, 1, Sec. 3, Chung-hsiao E. Rd., Taipei 10608 Taiwan, Republic of China

GeoInformatica

1 Introduction

An underground station is a large underground space and a node in the mass public transpor-
tation system. Numerous passengers enter underground stations to depart for their destinations.
Such a transportation system consists of several complex routes and generally have several
underground floors that mainly consist of platforms, passageways, and stairs. Designers plan
gates, stairs, ticket vending machines, toilets, lockers, information centers, and stores for the
convenience of passengers. Compared with spaces above ground, underground artificial
environments have relatively few recognizable spatial features and landmarks and their spaces
look similar or lack signage; thus, individuals can easily lose their direction. Therefore,
developing a highly effective wayfinding method for underground stations has become a
popular topic in the field of design. Regardless of the type of map used, signages are the most
frequently used landmark for people to find their way. Therefore, the designers of these
signages and map designers should unify their content for each signage. Specifically, these
signages must appear in maps as they do in the actual environment. Only then can map users
determine their direction by matching maps with the actual environment, and thus make
correct wayfinding decisions.

The whole process of using a map and walking toward a destination can be divided into two
parts: map-reading and wayfinding. Passini [1] indicated the three operations characterizing
that type of map-reading can be summarized as: 1)to identify one’s position and to establish the
spatial relation between the map and the physical reality of the setting; 2)to find informational
leading to the location of destination on the map; 3)to figure out a route and to memorize the
decision plan necessary to its execution. Among communication models, Koláčný [2] indi-
cated the process from map-maker’s encoding to map-user’s decoding. Map makers take the
trouble of translating geographic reality into cartographic symbols, because maps are the most
effective and efficient way of transferring data to users and of providing insight into, and an
overview of, these data [3]. To convey particular spatial information, makers create a map
based on their cognized reality mixed with their professional knowledge and cartographic
rules. Map readers then derive specific information based on their needs via cartographic rules
and prior knowledge, forming another type of reality they recognize. Eventually, these two
types of reality might differ. Map-reading studies have shown that after users read a map, they
construct a cognitive map; however, differences exist between users’ perceived image and that
of the map makers [2, 4], and such differences must be investigated. Orientation is a type of
behavior employed to solve spatial problems. Wayfinding decisions involve map users
matching the actual environment with their perceived map. Understanding how map users
find their direction using their cognitive map is crucial, and this is particularly true when they
are using different types of map.

This study considered the diversity of passengers and their wayfinding needs under various
situations. People’s wayfinding process in an underground station differs from their usual
wayfinding method. For example, ticket gates and barriers limit the scope and directions in
which passengers can move about, thereby influencing their movement. Passengers can only
pass through gates to enter or exit the station; therefore, how such gates are presented on maps
will influence the smoothness of movements in and out.

For example, stairs in a building are usually in the same location on each floor, and thus
people can move up or down to other floors; they only need to search for a stairway on the
floor they are on and descend to reach the ground floor. Therefore, the maps of most buildings
are two-dimensional. However, in underground stations, the location of stairs on each floor

GeoInformatica

differs and passengers must usually spend time walking on each floor to reach them. They
must use two types of routes to reach their destination, namely vertical and horizontal, which is
far more complex than in ordinary buildings.

The provision of spatial information enables underground transport users to enjoy a highly
effective wayfinding service. Every underground station has maps, but their usage rate is low,
and hence they might be easily ignored. Different to directional signs, maps provide knowl-
edge on space measurements, indicating that the amount and content of information provided
by maps have different effects on wayfinding. Reconsidering the effects and functions of maps
is a topic that requires considerable attention. This is particularly true for public designs where
needs of different users must be supported. This study focused on the relationship between
map-reading and wayfinding to understand how users read and obtain information from
different kind of maps, including mounted maps inside underground stations, paper maps,
and digital maps on smartphones, as well as possible misunderstandings and confusion that
spatial information provided by maps may cause. This included how users reach their
destinations through the help of maps and potential problems that may occur during their
wayfinding process. In addition, the researchers sought to understand and compare users’ map-
reading and their actual displacement, as well as missed information and the reasons for it. This
empirical study aimed to design a map that was easy for users to use and understand; its
findings can serve as a reference for future map designs.

2 Related works

An underground station is a public space and its purpose is to provide services to varying
numbers of passengers. Various types of wayfinding method must be considered when
designing and planning underground stations. One study on orientation suggested that indi-
vidual differences in factors such as sex, cultural background, familiarity with an environment,
experience, and spatial ability influence people’s orienting behavior [5]. For example, com-
muters would choose a fixed route according to their personal experiences, whereas first-time
travelers would search step by step according to their initial wayfinding plan. Designers design
spatial information such as maps and directional signs to assist passengers in reaching their
destinations regardless of whether they are familiar with their surrounding environment.

There is significant evidence that maps are a mental aid to navigation. Numerous environ-
mental and spatial cognition studies have examined how maps work in the mind, and it is
accepted that maps help people to create o a spatial mental model as a “cognitive map.” Maps
can help passenger locate where they are, construct a cognitive map, and build spatial
knowledge. Although passengers use directional signs more frequently than maps, directional
signs and maps play different roles in self-orientation. Research on wayfinding is increasing
gradually with advancements in building technology and upscaling of indoor spaces. The map
is often held basically to be a means of communication [4]; the map-maker is attempting to
communicate information to the map-user [6]. Morrison [7] thought that selecting, categori-
zation and simplification of map symbols are three cognitive displays of cartographers, and the
interpretation of maps needs to be constructed by readers’ prior knowledge mixed with the
cognition generated during map-reading. The process of examining a map generates some
image in the mind of the viewer. As map designers, we hope that this image is a reasonable
approximation of the data sample (which was used in making the map) and, by extension, of
the real world from which the sample was derived. There are, however, a number of variables

GeoInformatica

which act to prevent this image from being the replica we desire; symbolically, the variable
resistance represents this loss or imperfection, one which may change from task to task [8].
Maceachren [9] proposed that, when our vision are processing maps, we will firstly start from
those marginal or discontinuous regions on the map and then further do visual description and
arrangement in terms of size, depth, brightness among different symbols. Secondly, on a higher
level, we will evaluate what we have acquired in the previous steps. At this moment under the
knowledge schema, the visual description then transmits, questions, and adjusts with knowl-
edge in long-term memory, deriving certain meaning from maps. That is, via the visual
cognition, information is being recreated, and redefined again and once more. Therefore, a
model is continually developed through the processes of reading, understanding, and modify-
ing maps into actions.

Pocock’s [10] model was an elaboration of the proposal put forward by Downs. It was
divided into three main sections, each consisting of inter-related components. The first section
was the environment and comprised three sets of stimuli: previous information, present
context, and the actual environment. The selection from these sources influenced the infor-
mation reaching the second, perceiver, stage, which included four sets of factors: basic
physiological make-up, basic psychological organization, cultural characteristics, and the
current state of the individual. These factors, in combination, acted as filters-selecting which
aspects of received information were processed-and the output from this processing contrib-
uted to the ‘image’ [11].

Observations of map-reading behavior exhibited by the wayfinding subjects as well as their
assessment of the maps encountered will again constitute the basic data for discussion [1].
Golledge [12] mentioned SIRN (Synergetics inter-representational network) model, internal
input and external input. As long as input occurs, new output is produced, and decisions are
then influenced. Hence, the opportunity to read maps and the form, the quantity, the location of
maps will impact on decision-making. Golledge [12] suggested that maps can be used to
measure spatial knowledge. For example, travelers can use maps to plan their routes and walk
to their destination. Maps also provide knowledge on space measurements and enhance users’
understanding of their surrounding environment. Furthermore, they can obtain navigation
knowledge and form a cognitive map in their mind that enables them to find their direction.
Making maps consisted mainly of first gathering the precious geographic data and then
applying expertise to visualize these data. In visualizing the data, important choices had to
be made. The most important of these was how to represent the originally spatial, spheroidal
information on the flat surface.

Fujimori et al. [13] shows cartographers also make use of points, lines, and areas to
illustrate the spatial relationships. These spatial relationships are divided into four types:
Connectivity, Near, Intersection, and Containment. Hence, cartographers make use of these
symbols (point, line, area) to display objects in the real world and further show the spatial
relation between these objects by reflecting the relation within these symbols on the map.
Cartographers describe the 3D space on a 2D map by “symbols”. Generally speaking,
cartographer make use of visual variables, which include size, hue(color), value, texture,
orientation, and shape to show the difference among symbols [14]. Landmarks usually act
as anchor points for organizing other spatial information into a layout. Landmarks also act as
organizing features in a wayfinding context [12]. Judging from landmark-checking, we can
know where we need to turn. Landmark-checking also helps us identify where we are and
whether we are on-route or not. People rely on a variety of architectural cues (atriums,
elevators, variations in floor, and wall color, visual access to outside landmarks, plan

GeoInformatica

configuration, etc.) to find their way through buildings. These architectural features form a
system of landmarks [15] and should therefore be included in the list of items that need to be
considered when encoding diagrams [16].

Nelson [17] took map with two variables to conduct experiments, finding that having a
notable bottom-shaping and a vivid color contrast is an important technique; too much
symbols or colors would prolong the time for cognizing, and a low degree of similarity in
symbols would then shorten it. The proposed methods are applied to the assessment of four
commonly used visual variables for designing 2D maps: size, color value, color hue, and
orientation. The empirical results suggest that the visual variable size is the most efficient
(fastest) and most effective (accurate) visual variable to detect change under flicker conditions
[18]. Tang et al. [16] in evacuation diagrams study indicated the relationship between diagrams
and reading interpretation. This communication process consists of encoding and decoding
steps. This communication process consists of encoding and decoding steps. Encoding can be
done in the form of architectural floor plans, but the diagrams need to have commonalities
such as “convention and use” and “explicit agreement” in John Fiske’s [19] communication
theory.

People view maps as effective and desirable sources of information when traveling to new
destinations [20]. For passengers, finding their way inside the indoor space is the most
important consideration for optimizing their experience [21]. Map was found to significantly
reduce backtracking in a hospital setting [22]. Maps also have proven to be effective in other
ways. Subjects who used a schematic map were able to find the most efficient routes to a
destination [23], and handout maps in museums were able to successfully orientate visitors
[24].

Individual difference is a common viewpoint of map designstudies as wayfinding perfor-
mance or the individual wayfinding strategy. Passini [25] selected hospitals as an example for
their wayfinding experiments and found that most patients had problems decoding symbols
and abbreviations on graphic displays. Hölscher et al. [26] investigated horizontal and vertical
wayfinding strategies in several buildings, and Lawton [27] examined indoor and outdoor
wayfinding strategies. Later studies have focused on comparing the efficiency of different
types of markers. Some studies have used virtual environments to examine wayfinding
situations in the real world; however, spatial knowledge transfer depends on numerous factors,
and such designs may be counterproductive [28]. Regarding wayfinding information, O‘Neill
[15] suggested that using a floor plan to conduct wayfinding was far less efficient than using
landmarks in a complex indoor space. Zheng found that 2D map subjects’ wayfinding
performance was superior to that of 3D map subjects. 2D map subjects had problems with
stairway connections, but 3D map subjects were confused by the incompleteness of symbols.
2D map subjects used wall and action-based information to construct their route knowledge,
but 3D map subjects tended to rely on landmarks. [29]

These studies are to understand the difference between map makers and map users.
Ottosson [6] observed that experiments featuring map-reading and wayfinding required real
in-depth investigations.

Maps are not equally helpful to all travelers, because map reading is an acquired skill that
varies in the population [30, 31] In terms of user behavior, map-reading and wayfinding form a
continuous and indivisible process, yet most studies have only focused one of the two. Scant
studies have focused on the effectiveness of underground station maps. A printed, paper maps
can indeed assist visitors in finding their way through complex buildings, but that there are
limitations to their ability to overcome architectural barriers [32]. We have no idea about what

kinds of maps might be more effective or cause different wayfinding problems. Therefore, this
study focused on the relationship between map-reading and wayfinding to understand how
users read and obtain information from different kinds of maps, as well as possible misunder-
standings and confusion that spatial information provided by different maps may cause.

GeoInformatica

3 Method

To understand how maps can help wayfinders reach their destination, the present investigation
was divided into three parts: map-reading, actual wayfinding, and an evaluation questionnaire.
The objective was threefold: to gain knowledge of (1) how wayfinders plan their routes after
reading maps; (2) how they use maps and markers of the surrounding environment to aid the
wayfinding process; and (3) their evaluation of the maps after they completed the wayfinding
task. Three types of commonly seen underground maps exist: mounted maps inside under-
ground stations, paper maps, and digital maps on smartphones. Because users of each
encounter different problems, this study compared the three map types. The opportunity to
read map is divided into three categories in this study, (1) read the map at the starting point and
then walk to the goal without reading again. For example: in subway evacuation, one cannot
read the map one more due to the limitation of the eyesight or current surroundings. (2) read
the map at the starting point and then read again at some specific locations en route (e.g., the
mounted map on the wall). (3) read the map anytime anywhere from the starting point to the
goal (e.g., the paper map, and the digital map on mobiles).

The researchers focused their investigation on Shibuya Station in Tokyo. It is one of the
busiest stations in Japan, with hundreds of thousands of commuters passing through each day.
The researchers recruited 30 participants and divided them into three groups of 10 participants.
Among the participants, 15 were men, 15 were women, and their average age was 22.8 years.
They were all overseas students who had stayed in Japan for less than 3 months and this was
their first time in Shibuya Station. The first group read the station’s mounted maps (Fig. 1).
The second group used the paper version of the station map from the JR official website
(Fig. 2). The third group used a digital map of the station provided by ekipedia (Fig. 3). All
participants were allocated the same starting point and goal. The investigation had three parts:
map-reading, wayfinding, and an evaluation questionnaire.

The size of the mounted map was 160 × 160 cm and the map featured a You-are-here
(YAH) symbol. Additionally, the view angle of the map was determined by the actual location
where the map was positioned. The map was a 3D perspective image. Orange lines were used
on the map to distinguish and connect with stairs and escalators at different floors.The size of
the paper map was 29.7 × 21 cm and it was a printable version of the Shibuya Station map
from the official website of a station operator. The sample map was a typical perspective
drawing printed on A4-size paper and YAH information was not provided anywhere. Partic-
ipants held the map when performing the wayfinding task.The digital map was installed on a
smartphone with a 4-in. screen and provided by the Japanese Underground Station app found
on the Apple App Store. The digital map was drawn to be two-and-a-half-dimensional (2.5D),
but no orientation service was provided in the underground space. Consequently, no YAH
information was provided, and participants had to locate themselves unaided.

All participants’ destination was designated as locker B on the B1 floor. No signage exists
in the routes for the participants to locate their goal. The starting point was Fukutoshin Line
platform on the B5 floor. For the map-reading part of the investigation, the participants were

GeoInformatica

Fig. 1 Mounted maps of Shibuya station (Copyright © East Japan Railway Company. Photo by the author at
Shibuya station)

required to complete four tasks: (1) a YAH task, in which they determined their own location;
(2) a direction judgment task, in which they pointed out the direction of the destination; (3) a

Fig. 2 Hand-held paper map of Shibuya station. (Copyright © Tokyo Metro Co., Download from https://www.
tokyometro.jp/station/shibuya/yardmap/index.html#adjacent)

GeoInformatica

Fig. 3 Digital map of Shibuya station (Download form iOS app store. http://ekipedia.jp/services/iphone3.html)

route planning task, in which they planned a route from the starting point to the destination;
and (4) a distance estimation task, in which they estimated the distance of the planned route.
The proposed model is based on the three main components of a route description
previously identified by Michon and Denis [28]: action, landmark, and spatial entities. An
action represents the displacement behaviour of a human acting in the environment. A
landmark is the most salient feature used in human navigation. Spatial entities denote two-
dimensional entities on which moves are executed (e.g., a street) or non-salient and non-
punctual entities used in navigation (e.g., a forest). The approach is first experimented in the
context of a natural environment. In order to do route description analysis, David Brosset et al.
[33], based on this theory, develops a model for route description, turning the description into a
symbolized procedure. He employs various symbols to replace those actions, landmarks, and
spatial entities in description. This transformation is very helpful in the analysis and data-
compiling of route description.

Following completion of the map-reading part, participants moved to the wayfinding task in
which they had to walk to their destination. After they had done so, they were asked to evaluate
three types of map of Shibuya Station. The content of the survey questionnaire was divided into
two parts: (1) evaluating Shibuya Station, in which items were adapted from the six items of
underground space evaluation by Durmisevic [34]; and (2) evaluating the three types of map,
which featured five evaluation items (Impression, Practicality, Design, Precision, and Comprehen-
sion). Finally, the researchers interviewed the participants regarding their thoughts about the
process according to their wayfinding experience during the investigation. Camera glasses were
used to record participants’ behavior and think-aloud protocols throughout the whole process.

The think aloud method involves the analysis of recorded verbal (and action) protocols that
result from asking subjects to voice their thoughts when executing particular problem-solving
tasks. The thinking aloud is recorded by means of audio and / or video techniques, and these

GeoInformatica

recordings may be used to derive protocols. Think aloud method leads to valid, and the most
complete, data on cognitive processes [35]. In many cases, the think aloud method is a unique
source of direct and in-depth qualitative information on cognitive processes [36].

Downs’ wayfinding model demonstrated that people receive information, evaluate it, trans-
form it into images, and finally make a behavioral decision. This study used Downs’ wayfinding
model as its foundation and conducted coding for words and terms that the experimental process
required. Concurrently, suitable new coding were added according to the research purpose. To
ensure the accuracy of coding, two experts were asked to perform coding on the researchers’
words and terms. Cohen’s kappa coefficient was required to be generally greater than 0.7, which
ensures coding reliability [35] and verbatim coding credibility.

Three main standards of coding (Table 1):

1. Perceptual Receptors: Information inputs: When wayfinders walk, they read maps and
signs and simultaneously pay attention to facilities such as front gates and toilets within a
field, and spatial characteristics. These objects serve as the foundation for receiving spatial
information.

2. Value system: order parameters: In this stage, wayfinders start to evaluate their spatial
information and match it with their actual environment. If the match is successful, images
are exported from within, whereas if the match is unsuccessful, a conflict occurs. For
example, participants may consider a map to be incongruent with their actual environment
after reading it.

3. Decision: output: The final stage concerns making an action decision. The optimal
scenario is if wayfinders can decide their direction and displacement strategy and suc-
cessfully walk their planned route. If problems occur, the wayfinders can seek assistance.
The worst-case scenario is if wayfinders become lost because they are unable to make
decisions and find landmarks.

4 Results

4.1 You-are-Here task

The mounted maps featured YAH symbols, and therefore, the group using them did not need
to find their location. By contrast, the paper maps and digital maps did not have YAH symbols;
therefore, the groups using them were required to indicate their location on the maps. Nine

Table 1 Criteria for coding wayfinding verbalization

Perceptual receptors(P) External
inputs

Value system (V) Order parameters

Decision (D) Out-
puts

*Map (PM)
*Sign (PS)
*Facilities (PF)
*spatial characteristics (PSC)
*others (PO)

*Internal output (VI)
*Conflicts between internal image and actual

environment (VCI)

*Conflicts between map and actual environment
(VCM)

*Action (DA)
*Search (DS)
*Lost (DL)

GeoInformatica

digital-map users and five paper map users correctly indicated their location. The digital-map
users’ mean distance error (distance between the location they indicated and their actual
location) was far lower than that of the paper map users (p < 0.05) (Table 2). Furthermore,
the time that digital-map users required was less than half that of the paper map users
(p < 0.04). These initial results suggest that the digital map was more effective in conveying
YAH, compared with the paper map.

However, how did the participants determine their location in the underground station?
Why was the performance of the digital-map users superior to that of the paper map users?
Was the difference in performance related to information provided on the map? According to
the decision model of Passini [1], users use the corresponding relationship between their
expected image and perceived image to make decisions. Landmarks on the map were the
users’ expected image whereas landmarks in the actual environment were the users’ perceived
images. Positioning and searching is hierarchical and gradually decreases from a broad scope
to a small scope. The researchers discussed landmarks that successfully corresponded to users’
expected and perceived images.

To understand users’ orientation process, the researchers analyzed participants’ speech
through the camera glasses, which showed that two types of map users mentioned landmarks
on the map and landmarks in the actual environment. Targets in the actual environment
included landmarks (e.g., Fukutoshin Line, platform no. 3, Wako city, and signs on the B5
floor), facilities (escalators and trains), and spatial characteristics (edges and skylights). The
accumulated frequencies of landmarks are illustrated in the Fig. 4. The investigation results
indicated that both paper and digital-map users knew that the starting point was the platform of
the Fukutoshin Line and they saw the signage for the Fukutoshin Line on the map (Fig. 4).
However, they failed to realize where they were on this line. A total of seven digital-map users
successfully used platform 3 as a cue for orientation, but no paper map users did the same. This
was because even if the three paper map users attempted to use platform 3 as a cue, they could
not find the signage for it on the map. Their failure to verify platform 3 rendered the cue
useless. The cues that the paper map users used the most was the “To Wako City” sign on the
map. However, Shibuya Station is the terminal station of the Fukutoshin Line, trains on
platforms 3 and 4 travel in the same direction, and the users did not know what platform they
were on.

Based on the actual environment, using the signage for platform 3 was obviously more
useful for orientation than using the “To Wako city” signage because there was only one
platform 3. Moreover, the signage for platform 3 on the digital map was larger and more
visible than that on the paper maps. Directly marking them on the color blocks of the platform
made them correspond more effectively with the actual platform, which enabled simpler and
intuitive understanding. In addition, six digital-map users successfully used the cue of the edge
of the terminal station platform. Landmarks on the edges of the 2.5D digital maps were clearer
than those on the paper maps.

Table 2 The results of You-Are-Here task

Map

Paper map

Digital map

Time (sec)*
Error of distance (m)*

Mean

113.8
34.86

Std. D

Mean

88.53
43.13

46.7
8.134

Std. D

27.54
25.72

Total

Mean

80.25
21.49

GeoInformatica

Fig. 4 The landmarks-checking of hand-held paper map users and digital-map users

4.2 Judgment of direction task

The absolute accuracy score (AAS) represents the average percentage difference between the
objective direction values (ODV) and the cognitive direction values (CDE) [37].
(cid:1)

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

AAS ¼ ∑n

i¼1

ODV−CDE

180

(cid:5)
(cid:2) 100

(cid:3) n:

The average AAS values of the three types of map users were 17.6° for digital-map users,
40.4° for mounted-map users, and 73.6° for paper map users. Map type was significantly
correlated with directional errors (p = 0.036 < 0.05).

The following figure presents the AAS values of all 30 participants (Fig. 5). Evidently, the
standard deviation in AAS values between digital-map users was relatively small and that
between paper maps users was relatively large. That is, digital-map users could judge the
direction of the destination more effectively than could paper map and mounted-map users.
The mounted maps and paper maps featured view angles and might be incomplete in users’
cognitive maps. Perspective drawings usually cause a distortion in the angle of an image; for
example, a 90° crossroad may be converted into a 120° one. Consequently, mounted-map and paper
map users must consider such angle distortions to understand what they are looking at. By contrast,
the digital map was drawn from a top-down perspective and the visual angle was the same as the
actual environment, which facilitated participants judging the direction of the destination.

4.3 Route planning task

4.3.1 Results of planning route task

The results indicated that map type did not influence the time required to plan routes (Table 3).
However, individual time differences in digital-map users were smaller than those in paper
map and mounted-map users.

GeoInformatica

Fig. 5 Three map users’ estimations of goal directional

4.3.2 Verbalization of planning routes

The numbers of landmarks and times participants stopped were strongly correlated (p = 0.039
< 0.05). Those who used more landmarks found their way more smoothly and had almost no
stops. Table 4 analyzes the information these participants used when planning their routes. The

Table 3 Results of route planning route task

Map

Mean/N/Std.D

Distance (m)

Time (sec)

PAO

Mounted

Paper

Digital

Total

Mean
N
Std. Deviation
Mean
N
Std. Deviation
Mean
N
Std. Deviation
Mean
N
Std. Deviation

229.9100
10
37.77743
231.5700
10
34.35469
247.1800
10
30.15268
236.2200
30
33.96990

176.50
10
90.467
162.40
10
100.062
134.00
10
41.593
157.63
30
80.668

1.1639
10

.19123
1.1723
10

.17395
1.2513
10

.15257
1.1958
30

.17195

GeoInformatica

Table 4 The frequency of actions and landmarks

Map

Action

Landmarks*

Specific landmarks**

Non-specific landmarks

Total

Mounted map
Paper map
Digital map

119
109
120

37
24
55

24
28
26

61
52
81

researchers recorded the frequency of participants’ actions and the number of landmarks they
used along their planned routes by listening to their speech through the camera glasses.

Regarding the planned routes, the frequency of landmark use differed significantly among
the three groups (p = 0.028 < 0.05). Digital-map users had the highest frequency of landmark
use, whereas paper map users had the lowest frequency. Although the paper maps featured the
most landmarks among the three map types, the results indicated that paper map users were
unable to use the maps effectively. These users mentioned that they could not comprehend the
meaning of the landmark symbols, and some even showed an unwillingness to read the
landmarks on the map because of how difficult they were to comprehend.

For example, various 3D views of landmarks were shown on the paper maps.
However, in the map key that explained the landmark symbols, some had similar designs,
making them difficult to comprehend. Some participants stated that they could not understand
the meaning of the icons (Fig. 6). This indicated that similar designs for landmarks should be
avoided and explanations should be provided in several languages.

Map type was significantly correlated with the use of specific landmarks (p = 0.005 < 0.01),
which were usually names or codes. Specific landmarks in the station included exits, floors,
lines, train directions, and platforms. These were marked on the three maps; however, their
different layouts resulted in different usage rates. Specific landmarks should have the highest
importance. As the YAH task demonstrated, the identification of specific landmarks was more
effective than that of nonspecific landmarks.

Digital-map users had the highest frequency of using specific landmarks, which on digital

maps were clearer and considerably larger than those on mounted and paper maps.

Fig. 6 Various 3D views and symbols of landmarks (Copyright © Tokyo Metro Co., Download from
https://www.tokyometro.jp/station/shibuya/yardmap/index.html#adjacent)

GeoInformatica

Normally, a map features numerous icons, which help readers to recognize and understand
the map. Different types of landmark are exhibited differently according to their importance.
The most crucial sign should have the strongest visibility. Visibility and hierarchy can often be
presented using different design techniques, such as size, color, images, and lines of varying
thicknesses. A stratified presentation can accelerate readers’ comprehension and information
acquisition.

4.3.3 Incorrect and confusion in planning route

Map type and frequency that participants expressed confusion were strongly correlated (p =
0.036 < 0.05). When mounted-map users planned their route, their confusion was twice that of
hand-help map and digital-map users (Fig. 7). This indicated that mounted maps were the most
difficult to comprehend.

Notably, mistakes made by participants were mainly related to the ticket gates and stairs.
Users of the three types of map ignored the restriction of the gates on their movement. This
was particularly true for digital-map users because 9 participants ignored this restriction.
Different colors were used to indicate the areas restricted and not restricted by the ticket gates
on the maps and specific explanations of the signages for the ticket gates were provided on the
paper map. However, these efforts were insufficient for attracting the participants’ attention.
The digital-map users mentioned that they could not comprehend the meaning of the ticket
gate signages. Therefore, to enable a smoother wayfinding experience in the station, a
reminder to wayfinders on the map regarding the restriction posed by ticket gates is necessary.
Specifically, the visibility of the images and the division of areas restricted by the ticket gates
should be enhanced.

Mounted-map and paper map users often misjudged the location of stairs and expressed
confusion several times. This indicated that how stairs were presented on these two maps was
misleading. Mounted-map users mentioned encountering difficulties in understanding the map

Fig. 7 The part of conflict report

GeoInformatica

several times. The mounted map was the largest of the three, and thus, it should be able to
present information clearly. However, to avoid the overlapping of floors, the mounted map was
presented using an exploded view. However, the signboard users were highly confused about
the thin line leading to the stairs, and they were unsure of the relationship between floors. Even
though the paper maps had the most information and most detailed content, the overlapping of
floors made the location of stairs unclear, which caused users to lose their direction.

4.3.4 Distance estimation task

Although the estimated distance between all groups did not differ significantly, it was longer
than the actual distance (Fig. 8). This result revealed that the maps did not feature a map scale,
causing the participants difficulty in determining the time required to move from one point to
the next.

4.4 Wayfinding task

The results indicated that map type did not have a significant relationship with wayfinding.
However, map type did affect the amount of time required to read the map when participants
were walking (p = 0.003 < 0.01). Digital-map users spent the most time reading the map but
the shortest time stopping (Table 5). This showed that digital-map users tended to read the map
while walking. Mounted-map users had the shortest reading time even they had to stop to read
the map. Another notable finding was a strong relationship between walking time and AAS
value (p = 0.005 < 0.01, r = 0.5); furthermore, a strong relationship also existed between
stopping time and AAS value (p = 0.027 < 0.01, r = 0.56). Users with smaller deviations were
estimated to have shorter walking and stopping times. This suggested that users with superior
comprehension of spatial relationships and greater knowledge acquisition had a smoother
wayfinding ability.

The verbalization in wayfinding of users of the three kinds of maps are analyzed in Fig. 9.

Fig. 8 Map users’ distance estimation

GeoInformatica

Table 5 Results of wayfinding

Map

Mean/
SD

Wayfinding
distance (m)

Wayfinding
(sec)

W/P Total time
(sec)

Stop
(n)

Stop time
(sec)

Read time
(sec)

R/
W

Mounted Mean

Paper

Total

Digital Mean

295.14
69.51
299.64
73.32
296.99
31.42
297.25
58.97

SD
Mean
SD

SD
Mean
SD

660.00
222.933
803.20
270.700
593.40
125.358
685.53
225.762

1.30 836.50
.35 234.98
1.28 965.60
.18 277.21
1.21 727.40
.15 120.98
1.26 843.17
.24 235.23

7.50
3.68
9.10
3.84
5.60
3.74
7.40
3.90

136.20
135.17
254.20
150.26
67.70
47.025
152.70
139.65

84.40
113.11
192.50
134.90
260.40
145.61
179.10
147.08

.108
.109
.226
.101
.443
.229
.259
.207

W/P=Wayfinding distance/Planning route distance

Total time = route planning time + wayfinding time

R/W = reading map time/wayfinding time

1) perceptual receptors

2) value system

Mounted map users pay less attention to sign information (PS) than other users do.

Digital map users have more map verbalization (PM) than other users do.

Paper map users have more Vis than other users do. Digital map users have fewer (VI)
and (VCI) than other users do. They seldom contrast the map in their minds with real
surroundings and have much more (PM) verbalizing. They spend so much time reading
while walking. These all show that digital map users tend to directly contract the map with
surroundings. The portability of the map and its 2.5D plan view together has resulted in
this new wayfinding model.

3) decision

Mounted map users have more goal-searching verbalizations (DS) than other users do,
and the goal here is mostly the map itself. This shows the problem that users cannot get
the information they need when they have to read it. On the contrary, digital map users

Fig. 9 Verbalization in wayfinding. *Map (PM), Sign (PS), Facilities (PF), spatial characteristics (PSC), others
(PO); Internal output (VI), Conflicts between internal image and actual environment (VCI), Conflicts between
map and actual environment (VCM); Action (DA), Search (DS), Lost (DL)

have much fewer goal-searching verbalizations. Although paper map users take the map
with them, they have the most number of (DL) verbalizations. Many paper map users
showed that they were not able to orientate and lose their way. Some even did not use the
map anymore and only follow the directional sign of the exit.

GeoInformatica

4.5 Questionnaire

Once all 30 participants had completed all their tasks, they were asked to fill out two
questionnaires: one evaluated Shibuya Station and the other evaluated the three types of maps.
The results revealed that participants provided positive feedback for five out of the eight
criteria and negative feedback for the remaining three in the first questionnaire. The three
negative factors were shelter, visibility, and orientation, which were most strongly linked to
wayfinding activity. Regarding the three types of maps, participants all evaluated paper maps
positively and digital maps negatively. Mounted maps also received largely positive evalua-
tions, but not for factor of impression. Paper map users thought that mounted maps had high
usability, which could be because of the absence of YAH symbols in paper maps. Moreover,
paper map users considered their map to have relatively low usability, but mounted-map and
digital-map users considered their own maps to have high usability. Different from the other
two groups, digital-map users considered paper maps to have high precision but considered
mounted maps to be difficult to comprehend.

Evaluations of the station indicated that adding several aspects of wayfinding support is

necessary to move effectively and freely in its underground spaces.

Evaluation of the maps showed that differences between groups were comprehensive. For
example, paper map users considered mounted maps to have the highest usability, but
mounted-map and digital-map users considered paper maps to have the highest usability.
They all considered digital maps to be the worst (Fig. 10). However, the results of the task
showed that digital-map users had the fewest errors, including YAH judgment and direction,

Fig. 10 Evaluation of map design

GeoInformatica

and they also spent the shortest time on wayfinding on average. This indicated that users were
unable to estimate the necessary information when actually walking by merely reading maps.
Although digital-map users provided less negative feedback, they were still unsatisfied with
their map. A total of 17 participants selected mounted maps as their next wayfinding tool. This
showed that participants preferred the large scale of the mounted map, which was because they
did not need to prepare maps in advance or locate themselves again.

5 Discussion

Successfully matching the maps with the actual environment can enable successful wayfinding
and create useful spatial knowledge.

Participants in the YAH task could effectively ensure their own direction using specific
landmarks, such as train routes, station platforms, floors, and exits. Compared with paper map
users, digital-map users had more precise and rapid judgment of exactly where they were. This
was because platforms signs on digital maps could be read accurately, whereas those on paper
maps were relatively difficult to find and understand. Therefore, the visibility of specific
landmarks on the maps such as platforms should be enhanced. Moreover, adding the number
of specific landmarks, including public art, special spatial patterns, and facility codes can help
users reorient themselves in the correct direction in a timely manner. Exclusive landmarks
should be chosen and marked on maps, and landmarks should use be identifiable with
numbers, code, names, or in the form of public art.

In the direction judgment task, the standard deviations of AAS values of digital-map users
were smaller than those of other users. The paper and mounted maps were made using
perspective drawings, which featured distortion in angles and were susceptible to being
misinterpreted. The digital maps were made using 2.5D drawings, which retained the advan-
tages of a floor plan, facilitating directional judgment.

In the route planning task, participants who used more landmarks stopped less and had
smoother wayfinding processes. Even though paper maps had the highest number of land-
marks, these landmarks were the least used by participants. This was because their signage
lacked a stratified presentation according to their importance (see the following figure). In
addition, their designs were not clearly distinguishable. In terms of route planning, the
problems participants encountered most occurred at stairs and ticket gates. For example, some
stairs could not be completely shown on perspective maps (see the following figure). Partic-
ipants who used mounted maps found it difficult to comprehend the lines connecting to the
stairs. Stairs on paper maps overlapped with elements of other images. Passengers must pass
through ticket gates to reach outside areas, which is a crucial node point during the wayfinding
process. However, the results revealed that participants easily ignored the restrictions posed by
the ticket gates. Therefore, the visibility ticket gates on maps must be enhanced to distinguish
between different areas (Fig. 11).

Fig. 11 Stratified presentation of landmark icons (Copyright © Tokyo Metro Co., Download from https://www.
tokyometro.jp/station/shibuya/yardmap/index.html#adjacent)

GeoInformatica

In the wayfinding task, digital-map users spent the most time reading the map, and
according to their speech, they acquired the most information from the map. However, they
spent less time speaking when wayfinding, which showed that they tended to match the
information they acquired from the map with the surrounding environment immediately when
walking. The mobility of digital maps supports this new wayfinding model.

Participants who used paper maps lost their way most frequently; several mentioned that
they were unsure where they were when they checked the map again. Eventually, they walked
in the direction of the exit closest to the target without reading the map and failed to locate
themselves.

Mounted maps were mounted on the walls and had YAH symbols. Participants were unable
to read the map immediately when they encountered difficulty and required more information.
They detoured to read other mounted maps and paid the least attention to direction signs.

Overall, digital-map users had higher precision in terms of locating themselves than paper
map users. This was mainly because digital-map users successfully matched platforms in the
physical environment with platforms on the map. Conversely, paper map users did not
examine or recognize platform symbols on the map. When asked to indicate the destination
on the map, digital-map users demonstrated a clearly stronger sense of direction than did other
map users. Additionally, mounted-map users clearly expressed greater confusion than did other
users when reading mounted maps.

Users of the three map types easily ignored the restriction posed by ticket gates. This was
particularly true for digital-map users, nine of whom planned routes outside the area of the
ticket gates and two of whom could not comprehend the symbol for the ticket gates. They
could not plan a reasonable route by only reading maps. By contrast, the mounted-map and
paper map users experienced considerable problems and confusion when attempting to locate
the stairs. Mounted-map users expressed that they could not determine the location of stairs
using the thin lines on their maps. Paper map users mentioned that they could not find stairs
with the same symbol. Notably, some participants in all groups used distance as their cue for
making a turn or ascending stairs. They estimated the distance, which was 20% longer than the
actual distance.

No significant difference existed between the three maps in terms of wayfinding efficiency;
however, significant differences existed in terms of application method. Mounted-map users
detoured because they wanted to find other mounted maps and spoke the most about searching
for the destination. Paper map users had to follow on-site directional signs because they could
not locate themselves, and furthermore, they spoke most frequently about being lost and
reading directional signs. Digital-map users spent more than 40% or their time reading while
moving and spoke the most about information on the map. Compared with other map users,
digital-map users spoke the least about searching for targets and being lost. (Table 6)

The task results enhanced the researchers’ understanding of the problems encountered by
participants when using maps. These problems stemmed from the differences between the
perceived images of participants, the actual environment, and the maps. As previously
mentioned, during map-reading, differences existed between the perceived image of readers
and those of designers. The researchers found two additional differences after observing the
on-site wayfinding: the first was a difference between the actual environment and the image of
wayfinders, and the second was a difference between the actual environment and the maps.

1) Difference between perceived image of readers and image of designers

The investigation results showed that even for the same spatial information, map

GeoInformatica

Table 6 Results of three groups

Tasks

Mounted- map

Paper map

Digital map

You-Are-Here task
Judgment of direction
Route planning task

Distance estimation
Wayfinding task

Evaluation

40.4 degree
Ignorance of the gate
restriction (4 users)
Mistakes of stairway
location (7 users)
21% specific landmarks
80% longer
Detour 31%
Stop time 136 s
Reading map time 11%
Lost report (4 users)
The use of the sense of
distance (2 users)
Mounted map users

detoured a lot in order
to find one map.

Expect impression item,
positive feedback

5 users out of 10
73.6 degree
Ignorance of the gate
restriction (5 users)
Mistakes of stairway
location (8 users)
15% specific landmarks
21% longer
Detour 28%
Stop time 254 s
Reading map time 23%
Lost report (8 users)
The use of the sense of
distance (2users)

Paper map users need to

follow directional signs
because of failing to orient
themselves.
Positive feedback

9 users out of 10
17.6 degree
Ignorance of the gate
restriction (9 users)

0 users

27% specific landmarks
60% longer
Detour 21%
Stop time 68 s
Reading map time 44%
Lost report (3 users)
The use of the sense of
distance (1user)

Digital map users reading
map while walking.

Negative feedback

readers will have a different understanding of the spatial information if the spatial
dimensions and visual variables differ. For map designers, examining the types of symbol
that may confuse readers or adding necessary information is critical.

The researchers found during the investigation that users struggled to distinguish the
location of staircases on the different floors. When one was marked separately on two
floors, users could only match the two floors through guessing or examining lines in the
image. Therefore, the connections between floors and the location of stairs were crucial.
To make stairs visible, designers can use different colors or codes to enhance the
difference between symbols. However, subway stations may have many staircases, and
thus presenting them with different colors on the map could be highly difficult. Another
method is to use specific numbers to code each staircase, which would help to ensure the
location of the stairs.

In addition, the results indicated that digital-map users had superior direction judging
ability than did other map users. Digital-map users could understand the spatial relation-
ship between different floors. Designers can incorporate orientation labels on perspective
images, which could prevent readers misunderstanding that each angle in the image is
90°.

In the YAH task, the platform symbols were not sufficiently large on the paper maps
and readers did not notice this key cue, and thus, were unable to locate themselves.
Therefore, specific landmarks are a crucial piece of information and should be sufficiently
clear on a map. Ticket gates in subway stations are unique; for example, although Shibuya
Station uses three different colors to indicate areas inside and outside ticket gates for the
three types of map, this effort was in vain because these differences failed to attract the
attention of users. Digital-map users even indicated that they could not understand the
oversimplified gate symbol. This was particularly true for perspective images where
designers did not draw separation barriers and readers more readily ignored this restric-
tion. Therefore, enhancing the visibility of ticket gate symbols and even adding symbols

GeoInformatica

for barriers could attract readers’ attention. Furthermore, in the digital maps, the color of
each floor was similar to that of other floors, and thus, users were unable to distinguish
between colors of different floors, which resulted in the lack of a memorable stratified
spatial structure. Therefore, a more apparent structure can help users to construct their
perceived map image and reduce the time required to read the map.

Finally, maps usually feature a scale, but the maps in the present investigation did not
have one. The results indicated that when making a turn, the wayfinders usually used
distance as a reference, and their estimated distances were usually 20% longer than the
actual one. Some users doubted whether thin passageways on the maps were accessible,
which suggested that the provision of a map scale is necessary. They can help people to
use distance as a cue, estimate the distance, and support their strategy.

2) Difference between the environment and images of the wayfinders

Regarding orientation, paper map users could not determine their own direction
because the information they acquired from the maps was incompatible with the actual
environment. Some participants returned to landmarks that they had examined previously
to relocate themselves. A lack of specific landmarks and spatial characteristics in under-
ground stations is a prevalent problem. Route description results showed that these users
usually used stairs as their landmark but were unable to distinguish which stairs were the
one they wished to find in the actual environment. By contrast, exits with numbers were
specific landmarks and they were not confusing to participants. Therefore, stairs should be
coded on maps and coding symbols placed at the location of stairs. This will enable map
readers to see the actual coding on stairs, match them with the information on the map,
and determine where they are. In this manner, stairs in an underground station can be used
as reference and even as specific landmarks, enabling repeated successful matching.

Through investigating the maps, the researchers found that users were unable to obtain
information from maps anytime and anywhere, and users’ images of the maps weakened
gradually in their wayfinding process. When they no longer remember the image, they
detoured to find another map. Therefore, map information should be provided in places
where decision-making problems occur, such as adjacent stairs, gates, and crossroads.

3) Difference between the actual environment and maps

This difference was actually caused by inconsistencies in the maps. The map designers
ignored some factual information when making the maps. For example, digital-map users
discovered two staircases on site, but only one was shown on the map. Such inconsistent
images reduce the reliability of the maps and influence map users’ decisions. To reduce
inconsistency, map designers must devote their best efforts to providing complete infor-
mation. For example, if one single staircase is marked on a map, all staircases should be
marked by clear symbols. Stairs, escalators, and elevators are unique. Therefore, expla-
nations should be provided for adjacent stairs and escalators. Another problem was that
the 3D perspective view was incompatible with the actual environment. Consequently,
users were unable to compare the route they saw at a complex intersection with the same
one on the map. Therefore, perspective images with angles that matched closely with that
of the actual environment can be selected when drawing and designing maps. Alterna-
tively, the map-reading direction can be indicated by the YAH symbol. This will enable
users to determine the direction they are facing and use it as a basis for comparing
passageways in the actual environment and passageways on the map.

GeoInformatica

6 Conclusion

The view angle of 3D maps differs from that of the human eye. Therefore, errors may occur
during the acquisition of information from an environment after reading maps. The wayfinding
task revealed that most erroneous decisions arose from participants’ overestimation of the
environmental information they obtained. Although 3D maps can show a full view of spaces,
the results showed that areas on 3D maps often overlap. Consequently, the participants were
unable to recognize the spatial relationship between floors, and thus struggled with judging the
location of stairs. Stairs were frequently used as landmarks, but they were not featured as
specific landmarks on the maps. Participants struggled to differentiate between stairs and failed
to do so in their wayfinding process. Coding stairs on maps can help map readers to correctly
locate them. Furthermore, in the actual environment, signage should be created for stairs,
transforming them into specific landmarks.

Exits were one of most frequently used landmarks. However, the distance between
platforms in the underground station as well as its exits were extremely long. Additionally,
almost no obvious landmarks existed between platforms and entrances and exits during the
wayfinding process; hence, no wayfinders knew where they were. Similarly, participants easily
ignored the restriction posed by ticket gates when using paper maps to plan routes. They often
felt confused when they encountered ticket gates during the actual wayfinding process.

Therefore, regarding stairs, exits, and ticket gates in the underground station, designing
stronger, clearer signs on maps is necessary. Specifically, this includes enhancing the visibility
of ticket gate signage and providing further explanations of areas inside and outside the ticket
gates. By coding ticket gates on the map as specific landmarks and adding spatial features such
as signages to the actual environment, the number of effective landmarks can be increased;
these are extremely helpful for people to locate themselves and recognize routes.

Edges on maps are usually considered a type of landmark or spatial characteristic for
orientation. Therefore, if maps can clearly show these spatial characteristics, misunderstand-
ings can be effectively avoided. Moreover, the results showed that users were required to zoom
between the map and the actual environment. Some participants used distance as a cue that
indicated where they should make a turn, and thus, the ability to estimate distance is crucial in
wayfinding. Having a compass on the map will help show precise directions and remind
readers to pay attention to distortion in angles. The view of map readers should match the map
drawing direction. Furthermore, more maps should be placed at the crossroads near the ticket
gates as well as at the stairs.

The ideal digital map is one with a global positioning system (GPS) equipped; however,
GPS technology that can be applied to basements and other underground spaces is not mature.
Alternately, 3D interactive maps can be used to provide users with enhanced information.
Current functions provided by digital maps include starting points, destinations, and route
planning. Because of size limitations, the most considerable disadvantage of digital maps is
difficulty with panoramic views. Users can only view part of a map on their mobile device.
Therefore, problems such as the timing of zoom-in/out when reading digital maps must be
reconsidered.

The use of paper maps is more time-consuming in terms of understanding the correspond-
ing relationships between symbols, signs, and current environments than digital maps. Most
importantly, what is needed is a wayfinding program that systematically integrates multiple
wayfinding elements into a consistently applied design program. Playback and analysis of
participant videos did allow us to identify specific information that was missing, including

critical landmarks and the locations of common route errors. Following this effort, we plan to
revise the map accordingly and conduct additional user testing evidence-based design.

Acknowledgments The author disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article: The author expresses his special thanks to the Ministry of Science and
Technology of the Republic of China, Taiwan, and Japan - Taiwan Exchange Association for financially
supporting this study.

GeoInformatica

References

1. Passini R (1992) Wayfinding in architecture. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York
2. Koláčný A (1977) Cartographic information—a fundamental concept and term in modern cartography.

Cartogr J 14(1):39–45. https://doi.org/10.3138/N587-4H37-2875-L16J

3. van Elzakker CPJM (2004) The use of maps in the exploration of geographic data. Koninklijk Nederlands

4. Robinson AH, Petchenik BB (1976) The nature of maps: essays toward understanding maps and mapping.

Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, Utrecht, p 19

University of Chicago Press, Chicago

5. Kato Y, Takeuchi Y (2003) Individual differences in wayfinding strategies. J Environ Psychol 23(2):171–

188. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0272-4944(03)00011-2

6. Ottosson T (1987) Map-reading and wayfinding. Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis, Göteborg
7. Morrison JL (1976) The science of cartography and its essential processes. Int Yearb Cartogr XVI:84–97
8. Castner HA (1979) A model of cartographic communication: practical goal or mental attitude? Int Yearb

Cartogr XIX:34–39

9. Maceachren, A. (1995). How maps work: representation, visualization and design. In how maps work:
representation, visualization and design Guilford press, NY, distributed by Longman outside N. America
10. Pocock DC (1973) Environmental perception process and product. Tijdschr Econ Soc Geogr 64:251–257.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9663.1973.tb00091.x

11. Kitchin R, Blades M (2002) The cognition of geographic space. I.B. Tauris, London
12. Golledge RG (1999) Wayfinding behavior: cognitive mapping and other spatial processes. Johns Hopkins

13. Fujimori F, Arikawa M, Morita T (2003) Extraction of spatial relations on SVG maps and its applications,

University Press, Baltimore

proceedings of the IEICE DEWS 2003. Japan

14. Bertin J (2010) Semiology of graphics: diagrams, networks, maps. ESRI Press, Redlands
15. Oneill MJ (1991) Effects of signage and floor plan configuration on wayfinding accuracy. Environ Behav

23(5):553–574. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916591235002

16. Tang C, Lin C, Hsu Y (2008) Exploratory research on reading cognition and escape-route planning using
building evacuation plan diagrams. Appl Ergon 39(2):209–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apergo.2007.05.001

17. Nelson ES (1994) Colour detection on bivariate choropleth maps: the visual search process. Cartographica

31(4):33–43

15(1):23–38

18. Garlandini S, Fabrikant SI (2009) evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency of visual variables for
geographic information visualization. International conference on spatial information theory lecture notes
in computer science, pp. 195–211. France, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03832-7_12

19. Fiske J, Jenkins H (1990) Introduction to communication studies. Routledge, London
20. Devlin AS, Bernstein J (1995) Interactive Wayfinding: use of cues by men and women. J Environ Psychol

21. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2016) Guidelines for improving airport
Services for International Customers. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.17226/23683

22. Wright P, Hull AJ, Lickorish A (1993) Navigating in a hospital outpatients’ department: the merits of maps

and wall signs. Journal of Architectural and Planning Research 10(1):76

23. Bartram DJ (1980) Comprehending spatial information: the relative efficiency of different methods of

presenting information about bus routes. The Journal of Applied Psychology 65(1):103–110

24. Hayward DG, Brydon-Miner M (1984) Spatial and conceptual aspects of orientation: visitor experiences at

an outdoor history museum. J Environ Syst 13(4):317–332

GeoInformatica

25. Passini R (1998) Wayfinding: backbone of graphic support systems. In: Zwaga HJG, Boersema T,
Hoonhout HCM (eds) Visual information for everyday use: design and research perspectives. Taylor and
Francis, London, pp 241–256

26. Hölscher C, Meilinger T, Vrachliotis G, Brösamle M, Knauff M (2006) Up the down staircase: wayfinding
strategies in multi-level buildings. J Environ Psychol 26(4):284–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvp.2006.09.002

27. Lawton CA (1996) Strategies for indoor wayfinding: the role of orientation. J Environ Psychol 16(2):137–

145. https://doi.org/10.1006/jevp.1996.0011

28. Michon P, Denis M (2001) When and why are visual landmarks used in giving directions? International
conference on spatial information theory lecture notes in computer science, pp. 292–305. California, USA,
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45424-1_20

29. Li P-Y, Hibino H, Koyama S, Zheng M-C (2012) Tailoring map design based on map-Reading and way-

finding behaviour in Subway stations. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 42:466–476

30. Carlson L, Hölscher C, Shipley T, Dalton RC (2010) Getting lost in buildings. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 19(5):

284–289

31. Hölscher C, Meilinger T, Vrachliotis G, Brösamle M, Knauff M (2006) Up the down staircase: Wayfinding

strategies in multi-level buildings. J Environ Psychol 26(4):284–299

32. Wang C, Chen Y, Zheng S, Liao H (2019) Gender and age differences in using indoor maps for Wayfinding

in real environments. ISPRS Int J Geo-Inf 2019(8):11

33. Brosset D, Claramunt, C, Saux, E (2007) a location and action-based model for route descriptions.
International conference on GeoSpatial semantics lecture notes in computer science, 146–159. Mexico
City, Mexico, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-76876-0_10, 2007

34. Durmisevic S (2002) Perception aspects in underground spaces using intelligent knowledge modeling

35. van Someren MW, Barnard YF, Sandberg J (1994) The think aloud method: a practical guide to Modelling

Proefschrift. Delft University Press, Delft

cognitive processes. Academic Press, London

36. Brian McGuinness, (1994) The Philosophy of Michael DummettMcGuinness, Brian. & Oliveri, Gianluigi.
& International Philosophy Conference of Mussomeli. (1994). The philosophy of Michael Dummett.
Dordrecht ; Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers

37. Jacobson R (1998) Cognitive mapping without sight: four preliminary studies of spatial learning. J Environ

Psychol 18(3):289–305. https://doi.org/10.1006/jevp.1998.0098

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Meng-Cong Zheng , obtained my doctorate in design science from Chiba University in Japan in 2008 and
engaged in design related work for nearly ten years. Currently, he is an associate professor in the Department of
Industrial Design, Taipei University of Science and Technology, and chairs the Design Psychology Laboratory.
Also, as a member of design competitions, design journals, and government subsidy schemes program review
committee. His research focuses on users’ External behavior and Internal Psychology to interpret design
phenomena and attempts to help designers understand users’ minds and behaviors as well as improve the
designers’ ability to promote public design. His lab team has been working with the enterprise on some product
design projects for a long time. The content of the projects extends from the hardware appearance design to the

GeoInformatica

UI/UX design of the user’s internal experience. The project results also won many awards in design competitions.
His research interests include evidence-based design, universal design, post-occupancy evaluation, and environ-
mental psychology. He still keeps exploring the relationship between users, products, and environment, and
provide a complete design solution for various industries. (https://zmcdesign.webnode.tw)

