The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 2
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 117–119

ICA Special Issue 2003

117

S E C T I O N 1

Changes in Commercial Cartography in the UK and
Prospects for the Future

Mary Spence

Global Mapping Ltd, 6 Banbury Road, Brackley, Northants NN13 6AU, UK

INTRODUCTION

For some time the discipline of cartography has been
increasingly relegated to the shadows, often considered the
poor relation of GIS with its nouveau technology and chic
acronyms. In some quarters the subject is perceived as
tiresome and its function surplus to requirements, a passe´
discipline in which the quintessential skills of the carto-
grapher are considered to be on a par with Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder and its practitioners perceived as
cheerless functionaries clinging to fond memories of a lost
art. Thankfully, this unfortunate stereotype is redressed in
part by an apposite view that recognizes the unique skills
of cartographers as being a vital
ingredient in the link
between GIS data and cartographic output. The fusion of
the different disciplines is changing not only the role of
cartographers and what they achieve but is also rede(cid:142)ning
the pro(cid:142)le of those who are undertaking it.

do not notice the shortcomings in the presentation of the
information, maybe they are not adroit in appreciating a
good map, or it may be they simply do not care what the
map looks like provided it shows them something of what
they wish to see. Whatever the explanation, its manifestation
is the nub of the challenge.

In order to prepare the best possible maps it is vital
that understanding and cooperation exist between the data
provider who captures the information and the carto-
grapher who can de(cid:142)ne the content and representation to
satisfy user requirement. We may (cid:142)nally have reached the
stage where cartographers are comfortable in the world of
GIS and the world of GIS is at last beginning to appreciate
the value of cartographic input. For their part the carto-
graphers need to communicate their expertise and work in
collaboration with GIS experts to establish good carto-
graphic practice before the worrying acceptance of inferior
mapping becomes the norm.

GIS AND MAPS

There is a distinct difference between a map and a
GIS product. GIS data is just as its term implies —
data, and usually lots of it. It may be attributed with an
acceptable cartographic speci(cid:142)cation but unless the data
is ordered, selected and interpreted to the bene(cid:142)t of the
user the end product will not necessarily be a good map.
Examples abound of GIS products devoid of content
selection or appropriate generalization to suit scale. Yet it
is the cartographer who is able to consider the whole,
review the purpose of the map and decide what to show
and, more importantly, what not to show as well as how to
represent everything in the clearest, most informative way.
Implementation of the basic principles of map design can
turn mountains of otherwise meaningless data into a useful
and desirable cartographic product. In terms of pure data,
more does not necessarily mean better.

Nevertheless, despite there being GIS products in the
market place that have not bene(cid:142)ted from the selection
and interpretation processes applied by a cartographer, it
is a fact that such products do sell. Ipso facto, one might
assume that the public is happy with what is on offer. One
may also conjecture as to why this is; perhaps the public

DOI: 10.1179/000870403235001467

THE ROLE OF THE CARTOGRAPHER

The role of the cartographer has changed signi(cid:142)cantly in
recent times. Although many traditional cartographers have
been retrained in digital skills there are many more people
engaged in the work of producing maps who have little or
no formal cartographic training. There may be a back-
ground of a college course or similar but speci(cid:142)c training
is usually given on the job, applying the precise house-
style and production techniques of the company. How-
ever, commercial considerations and speed of production
can prevent a full and thorough implementation of true
cartographic techniques, even for the trained cartographer.
No longer is the cartographer the person who creates a
new map from scratch. Much more nowadays is he likely
to be (cid:142)nding a source for base data that is closest to his
requirement and then pulling together different skills and
expertise to add the missing elements. The cartographer
is the project manager, one could say, the person with the
skills to integrate all the different processes and to foresee
how everything will come together. Data capture is no longer
the preserve of the cartographer but it is the cartographer
who can guide the processing of that data and turn it into

118

The Cartographic Journal

a useful map that sits comfortably within the broader GIS
framework. It is the cartographer who can provide solution
and implement procedures that can be inherited and carried
on by the clients themselves in the future. Cartography is
more about providing comprehensive mapping information
services rather than simply supplying cartographic products.

THE MAP MAKERS

More and more small niche publishers have arrived on
the scene — and not necessarily from cartographic back-
grounds. Their success comes from applying expertise in a
particular area of interest to create a small range of specialist
maps. They may have picked up on a clever design idea
that catches the public’s imagination or been fortunate to
spot a gap in the market which larger publishers are not
interested in. Sales of such titles would be too few for a
mass producer to entertain but with lower overheads and
production costs the niche publisher can survive on the
smaller margins and develop an exclusive little business on
a few select titles.

Technology provides the tools for anyone to produce
maps but it does not determine whether the resulting map
is good or bad. Lack of formal training in cartography
does not necessarily mean the maps will be poor and, con-
versely, a surfeit of training will not guarantee the perfect
map. Even expert cartographers may be hard pressed to
identify a top-selling street map that was prepared by
someone with no cartographic training but who had the
entrepreneurial zeal to produce a different product from
those already on the market.

Maps produced by design agencies can offer totally fresh
ideas on presentation. The graphic designer is free from
the constraints that years of disciplined map-making have
instilled in the experienced cartographer. Although carto-
graphers choose the speci(cid:142)cation for the constituent parts
of the map there is often reluctance, or perhaps even an
inability, for them to release themselves from the straight-
jacket of conventional map-making to produce something
fresh and radical. Formerly cartographers would design the
maps while the covers, layouts and general presentation
would be passed to the designer. But it is now becoming
increasingly prevalent that publishers employ the services
of design agencies to specify the ‘look and feel’ of the
maps themselves for preparation by the GIS team.

THE MARKET PLACE

The travel-publishing sector is experiencing a downturn in
fortunes following the terrorist attacks of 11 September
2001. Long-haul travel has declined as a result and the
possibility of a repeat threatens its recovery for some time
to come. However, travel guide publishers continue to
develop their guides in the face of uncertainty by creating a
diversity of presentations, focusing on quality of production
and introducing themed series such as travel guides written
with a particular enthusiast in mind.

Ever cheaper air travel means more weekend travel to
cities but in order to succeed publishers must think laterally

in an already saturated short-break market. There is a core
of independent adventurous travellers who are not deterred
by political unrest as well as those who want to go to places
because they are dif(cid:142)cult to get to and off the beaten track.
A signi(cid:142)cant portion of guides is sold to the armchair
traveller who is interested in a place but may never want to
visit it. There is con(cid:142)dence in the industry that the down-
turn will be short lived since travel is an essential part of
many people’s lives. Meanwhile, the cartographers engaged
in the travel business (cid:142)nd themselves out of work. The
freelance sector has suffered particularly as a result and,
sadly, many excellent cartographers have been forced out
of the industry to seek alternative employment.

EMPLOYMENT

Over recent years there has been a fundamental change in
the way both niche and mainstream publishers operate.
The era of of(cid:142)ces full of cartographers creating new maps
is now consigned to memory. The larger commercial
organizations will outsource entire projects for preparation
by smaller agencies or freelance workers. Permanent staff
levels are set at a minimum to reduce overheads and addi-
tional personnel brought in on short-term contract as
work levels demand. The services purchased can range from
research and editorial to production and full project manage-
ment. In this way publishers have experts at their disposal
when they need them without the commitment of a salary
bill when incoming work is not suf(cid:142)cient to support full
time staff. But ultimate (cid:143)exibility for the publisher is not
ideal
for the contractor who may experience feast or
famine depending on the good fortune or otherwise of the
publisher. The contractor will always be the (cid:142)rst to suffer
when work becomes scarce and, as with many other
industries, security of employment in cartography is no
longer assured.

Large contracts for data capture are now (cid:142)nding their
way to companies in India and Eastern Europe where pro-
duction costs are a fraction of UK prices. Even the smaller
publishers are (cid:142)nding it viable to transfer their old manually
prepared maps to digital format. It is no longer practical
to handle piles of intermediate materials, carrying out the
same amendment to layer after layer of (cid:142)lm. In addition,
reprographic services are virtually obsolete with the range
of materials and chemicals rapidly declining. Although the
skills for tackling the process of manual revision are still
available the time-consuming nature of the work makes it
an expensive process. It is far more ef(cid:142)cient to have the
map digitised, thence requiring straightforward maintenance
of the digital database and permitting associated product
derivation.

Cartography may not be the mass employer in UK that it
used to be but government agencies still take school leavers
and train them to capture and process data. Traditionally
the commercial world would inherit experienced carto-
graphers who had been trained by one of the government
agencies. Nowadays few apprenticeships are offered and
small publishers are teaching new employees to do precisely
what the company requires, often with little or no speci(cid:142)c
cartographic training. Graduate cartographers are making
their way into commercial production as the (cid:142)rst step to

Section 1: Changes in Commercial Cartography

119

a career in cartography but as the formal degree courses
disappear it is inevitable that the lack of cartographic
awareness in the work place will lead to a decline in the
quality of cartographic output.

THE FUTURE

WEB MAPPING

The last two years have seen a growth in the number of
maps available free on the internet. For example, several
websites provide search facilities for streets and places
where users can download small extracts of a map for free.
Other sites offer trip-planning facilities where a map can be
printed to illustrate the chosen route. The strategy behind
the delivery of free mapping is that the Internet may be
the ideal medium used to locate a place but the printed
map will give more information about the surrounding
area for further exploration. The printed sheet map is
‘sold’ on this basis.

Free maps on the Internet do not spell the end of the
paper map yet but publishers are aware of the threat and
are careful with what they make available online. Street
maps sales are the most vulnerable since an A4 print of a
small portion of a town is all that is needed for location
purposes but road atlases are still required for getting to
the area. The data itself provides an additional source of
revenue for publishers who supply their datasets for use on
other sites and charge an annual
license fee. Interactive
sites can be created linking to a client database with the
facility to select an item, view its characteristics and (cid:142)nd
its location on the map — and vice versa. Many cities
are available on CD-ROM complete with facilities for the
user to add their own database details, store information,
measure distances and plan routes.

For the future of cartography to be secure in the UK
it is imperative that we address the problems within the
discipline before the word cartography disappears from
our vocabulary. Education is the key on several fronts. We
must continue to teach cartographers about cartography;
we must teach the GIS community about the need for
cartographic input; we must inform the public to recognize
the difference between a good and a bad map to such an
extent that they will no longer accept a lesser product. But
such education is lacking on all fronts. With university
little in the way of teaching map
courses being axed,
appreciation at school and a general
ignorance of the
subject there is much to be done to redress the balance.

However, cartography has much to offer. Radical new
concepts are being introduced to represent the earth’s
surface with stunning digital terrain visualization images
being created adding different perspectives, different seasons
or different atmospheric conditions to change the mood
of the image. A modern atlas page will incorporate such
techniques to enhance the basic map and the cartographer
will always be there to contribute with ever more imaginative
ideas.

We are just beginning to see the re-emergence of
cartography as an exciting discipline in its own right. It is
not cartography as we once knew it but it is cartography
nonetheless, in that it will provide numerous interpretations
and representations of whatever topic is under review.
A partnership is developing between data providers and
cartographers and the end result
is an overwhelming
endorsement for the merging of skills. We are now entering
a phase of building on this fresh start and I am optimistic
that the future is looking bright for UK cartography.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

