 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Transactions in GIS

, 2003, 7(3): 393—410

731000
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
June 2003
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2003
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Oxford, UK

Research Article

C Williams and C E Dunn
GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

GIS in Participatory Research: Assessing 
the Impact of Landmines on Communities 
in North-west Cambodia

Craig Williams 
UN Of(cid:222)ce for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)

Christine E Dunn
Department of Geography 
University of Durham

Abstract
The view of GIS, adopted by many, as an undemocratic and divisive technology is
perhaps  most  poignant  in  settings  where  (cid:222)nancial  and  skills-based  resources  are
limited, notably in lower-income countries. Where those countries are also recovering
from a period of military con(cid:223)ict there would at (cid:222)rst sight seem to be little oppor-
tunity for employing GIS as part of a socially-sensitive approach to (cid:212)development(cid:213).
This paper explores the potential for using GIS in participatory approaches to gather-
ing and analysing geographical information on human-environment interactions in
post-con(cid:223)ict settings. We discuss empirical work from northwest Cambodia where
GIS  and  participatory  methods  have  been  integrated  to  assess  risk  to  local  com-
munities  from  landmines  and  to  develop  priorities  for  landmine  clearance.  In
know-
data
juxtaposing (cid:212)of(cid:222)cial(cid:213), spatially-referenced 
 in this study we seek to privilege meaningful geographical understandings over
ledge
conventional notions of spatial (cid:212)accuracy(cid:213). In so doing we carry out a Participatory
Mine  Impact  Assessment  (PMIA)  to  explore  spatial  activities  among  local  popula-
tions  in  mine-contaminated  communities  and  to  help  identify  improved  strategies
for returning refugees in re-establishing livelihoods.

 with indigenous geographical 

1 Introduction

The  1990s  witnessed  unfolding  debates  between  GIS  scholars,  (cid:212)critical(cid:213)  human  geo-
graphers and social theorists about the nature and social implications of GIS. The details
of  these  debates  are  now  well  rehearsed  and  their  chronological  progress  was  recently
summarised  by  Schuurman  (2000).  After  initially  antagonistic  and,  perhaps,  unhelpful

Address for correspondence: 
Christine E Dunn, Department of Geography, University of Durham,
Science Site, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom. E-mail: c.e.dunn@durham.ac.uk

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003. 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

394

C Williams and C E Dunn

exchanges in the early part of the decade it could be argued that, ten years on, we have
entered a more mature and promising phase in terms of reaching some common ground
and mutual understanding between some of the participants in these debates. That said,
those  expecting  a  major  shift  in  terms  of  the  role  of  GIS  in  society  must  remain  dis-
appointed. As da Cruz (1999) notes, in commenting on Sheppard(cid:213)s earlier (1995) hopes
for  the  development  of  GIS  as  a  social  technology,  (cid:212)the  transformation  of  geographic
information  systems  has  not  occurred(cid:213)  (p.  119).  This  may  be  explicable  in  terms  of  a
number of fundamental and more speci(cid:222)c reasons. First, da Cruz (1999) maintains that
the  positivist  assumptions  implicit  in  GIS  and  its  users,  and  the  inherent  limitations  of
GIS  as  a  computer-based  technology  mean  that  (cid:212)it  is  unlikely  that  even  an  attempt  to
incorporate  the  assumptions  of  other  epistemologies  will  allow  the  representation  and
empowerment of [alternative] ways of knowing the world(cid:213) (p. 124). Second, Schuurman
(2000) cites the lack of common language as a key reason behind the failure of critiques
to engage the GIS community and expresses concern that (cid:212)sociotheoretical critics of GIS
will create a self-reinforcing world framed in a discourse unrecognizable by practitioners
and scholars of GIS(cid:213) (p. 587). Flowerdew (1998) similarly remarks upon the impenetr-
able  nature  of  some  of  the  language  of  social  theorists  which  can  therefore  fail  to
convince, while Goodchild (Schuurman 1999) regards the language of social theory, as
opposed to that of GIS as (cid:212)the more general language(cid:213) (p. 4). Third, there remains a large
band of GIS users, particularly, but by  no  means exclusively,  in non-academic  settings
who  use  GIS  in  an  uncritical  way  and  who  remain  unaware  of,  or  unconcerned  with,
the debates referred to above. A negative view for the future then would be one where
the broad reach of GIS within academic settings, and the continuing involvement (perhaps
dominance)  of  an  undiscriminating  commercial  world,  are  set  to  ensure  that  visions
of  GIS  as  a  social,  let  alone  (cid:212)community-integrated(cid:213),  technology  (Harris  and  Weiner
1998) remain a minority and even idealist, interest.

We remain convinced, however, that (cid:212)GIS with a social conscience(cid:213) is not an unreal-
istic goal and we argue here that  in  order  to  move  towards some  kind  of  (cid:212)transforma-
tion(cid:213), those GIS practitioners who use the technology in a (cid:212)critical(cid:213) way can help bring
about this change by engaging more closely both with (cid:212)conventional(cid:213) GIS practitioners
who regard GIS as a means of providing single, objective (cid:212)solutions(cid:213), and with corporate
software  developers  who  hold  much  of  the  power  in  terms  of  technological  develop-
ments.  In  order  that  recent  strides  made  at  a  theoretical  level  can  inform  mainstream
practice we argue that  one  way  to build  on  the  spirit  of cooperation  is the  production
of a set of convincing examples.

In  adopting  this  standpoint  we  support  the  need  to  use  GIS  as  a  more  inclusive
means  of  gathering  and  analysing  geographical  information  on  human-environment
interactions, seeking the  active  involvement  of  local  people in the  creation  of  informa-
tion that can subsequently inform spatial decision-making. This type of approach, which
can be loosely referred to as (cid:212)participatory GIS(cid:213) (Harris et al. 1995) or (cid:212)public participa-
tion  GIS(cid:213)  (Obermeyer  1998)  takes  up  the  challenge  of  integrating  in  a  single  frame-
with  of(cid:222)cial,  (cid:212)expert(cid:213),
work  (a  GIS)  local,  indigenous,  (cid:212)non-conventional(cid:213) 
. This juxtaposition of information types raises important ques-
spatially-referenced 
tions about interpretations of (cid:212)accuracy(cid:213) in geographical information and, in particular,
how  notions  of  spatial  accuracy  and  precision  are  privileged  by  GIS  developers  and
users.  Whilst  indigenous  knowledge  may  not  be  spatially  accurate  in  a  conventional
geometrical  sense  it  more  appropriately  represents  geographical  understandings,  behavi-
our and activity. An effective (cid:212)participatory GIS(cid:213) then is one which confers importance

knowledge 

data

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

395

on all types of geographical information and uses this approach to reveal contradictions
and similarities in spatial thinking and activity.

This paper presents the results of a speci(cid:222)c empirical case study in which a public
participation  GIS  approach  is  developed  in  conjunction  with  local  people  and  with
representatives from an of(cid:222)cial, (cid:212)expert(cid:213) organisation, the United Nations, for which one
of us (CW) worked as a GIS consultant both prior to and after carrying out the empir-
ical  research  described  here.  The  setting  for  the  work  is  a  post-military  con(cid:223)ict  lower-
income  country,  Cambodia,  in  which  we  explore  the  role  of  public  participation  GIS
both in assessing risk to local populations from landmines and in developing priorities
for  landmine  clearance.  We  (cid:222)rst  outline  some  of  the  key  issues  inherent  in  adopting
two  contrasting  techniques  in  the  context  of  landmine  action  (GIS  and  participatory
methods) and then go on to discuss the possibilities for combining them through descrip-
tion of the speci(cid:222)c case study.

2 Landmines and Geographical Information

Complete  eradication  of  the  tens  of  millions  of  landmines  world-wide  has  long  been
considered an insurmountable task with available resources and techniques. Humanitarian
demining  or  (cid:212)Mine  Action(cid:213)  recognises  that  total  clearance  is  not  only  unrealistic  but
also unnecessary and that by concentrating resources on clearing only those landmines
which  pose  a  direct  threat  to  human  life  or  livelihood,  while  limiting  their  impact
through mine awareness education, mine(cid:222)eld marking and victim-support, the time and
resources  required  to  overcome  the  most  serious  problems  could  be  signi(cid:222)cantly
reduced.  Central  to  this  concept  is  the  effectiveness  of  prioritisation  to  ensure  that
demining  addresses  urgent  needs  and  that  cleared  land  will  directly  bene(cid:222)t  the  most
vulnerable  by  minimising  casualties  and  contributing  to  the  recovery  and  economic
viability of communities.

The effectiveness of prioritisation depends on two key factors: accurate assessment
of  priorities  through  understanding  of  the  location  of  landmines  and  their  impact  on
af(cid:223)icted  communities,  and  the  ability  to  successfully  translate  those  priorities  into
action.  However,  understanding  the  relationships  between  landmines,  the  terrain  they
occupy  and  the  coping  strategies  of  communities  is  dif(cid:222)cult  in  post-con(cid:223)ict  environ-
ments.  Initial  assessment  of  mine  threats  is  often  hampered  by  insecurity,  logistical
dif(cid:222)culties and information scarcity and inaccuracy. Furthermore, the evolution of mine
action philosophy into a community-oriented discourse has not been matched by similar
developments in the mechanisms used to implement it, which remain strongly in(cid:223)uenced
by  techniques  inherited  from  military  demining.  Initial  assessments  of  the  mine  threat
seek to evaluate the nature and extent of mine contamination in broad terms only and
have in the past:

(cid:212). . . tended to consist of a small team of military munitions experts making a brief
visit to a country they were not familiar with, arriving at a very approximate (cid:222)gure
on  the  estimated  number  of  mines  in  the  whole  country  [and]  indicating  the  geo-
graphic areas most severely affected(cid:213) (UNDHA 1997a, p. 44).

Applications of GIS technology have thus far remained similarly de(cid:222)cient in re(cid:223)ect-
ing human needs issues that are central to mine action philosophy. To date GIS use has
largely  served  to  re(cid:223)ect  and  reinforce  the  military-driven,  top-down  and  technocratic
agenda in which data are viewed as simple objects of which the social, cultural, political

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

396

C Williams and C E Dunn

and organisational complexities are obscured
 This approach deserves to be challenged
.
particularly because lives and livelihoods are directly at stake.

In  the  early  stages  of  a  mine  assessment  operation  when  information  is  limited,
priorities  are  often  restricted  to  (cid:212)major  axes  of  communication,  ports,  air(cid:222)elds,  aid-
supply  routes,  areas  speci(cid:222)c  to  [peacekeeping]  needs,  refugee-return  routes  . . .(cid:213)
(UNDHA  1997c,  p.  34).  This  level  of  assessment  may  meet  immediate  operational
needs, but later targeting requires an understanding of issues and events in which new
high-risk  areas  or  population  groups  become  the  focus  and  a  potentially  diverse  range
of  issues  that  affect  the  economic  viability  of  communities  and  their  interaction  with
mined areas.

For the military, prioritisation is a function of strategic primacy, and analysis of
the  mine  threat  may  be  limited  to  speci(cid:222)c  geographical  locations  and  directly  relevant
information.  For  humanitarian  deminers,  information  needs  are  geographically  and
thematically  wider,  requiring  means  of  analysis  at  ever  increasing  scales  to  allow
deployment and targeting from country level down to individual mine(cid:222)elds. In emergency
situations, however, relief organisations face pressure upon deployment to show immedi-
ate results in reducing casualties and addressing urgent humanitarian needs. In such an
environment every need is paramount, creating an atmosphere in which detailed collec-
tion and analysis of information may seem a life-threatening form of procrastination.

Processes for obtaining and analysing locally relevant information to provide con-
textual (cid:212)priorities(cid:213) agreed by deminers and communities alike are often missing and the
result  is  sometimes  the  crude  application  of  priorities  without  due  consideration  of
conditions unique to each community. Clearing mines alone may not resurrect a village
where the resources and facilities that allowed the village to prosper are no longer viable
and increasing importance should be placed on integrating mine action with other develop-
ment activities so that cleared land can be used productively.

For  mine  action  properly  to  address  the  issues  facing  it,  alternative  techniques  are
needed that will facilitate effective prioritisation from country level to community, using
the  knowledge  and  opinions  of  affected  villagers.  These  techniques  must  facilitate  the
collection,  analysis  and  integration  of  socio-economic  information  with  that  on  land-
mines,  current  with  historical  data,  and  quantitative  with  qualitative  information.  The
importance  of  analysing  socio-economic  data  was  recognised  by  the  UN(cid:213)s  Department
of  Humanitarian  Affairs  in  their  study  reports  on  Afghanistan  and  Angola  (UNDHA
1997b, p. 31; 1997c, p. 34).

What  prevents  the  use  of  such  data  within  mine  action  is  arguably  the  lack  of
appropriate institutional experience and techniques in participatory and unconventional
knowledge  analysis.  In  this  paper,  we  call  on  developments  in  participatory  methodo-
logies as one route to addressing the scarcity, and/or poor quality, of spatially-referenced
socio-economic  data  in  landmine  assessments.  Participatory  methods  allow  rapid,
simple and cheap collection of relevant and insightful geographical information, which
more  accurately  represents  the  complexities  at  work  in  situations  such  as  mine  assess-
ment and clearance.

3 Applying Participatory Techniques to Mine Action

(cid:212)The  use  of  socio-economic  data  to  identify  priorities  is  not  well  developed  in  any
setting.  The  information  and  expertise  necessary  for  such  prioritisation  is  not

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

397

readily  accessible  by  mine  action  agencies  who  are  increasingly  aware  of  the  need
for a simpli(cid:222)ed methodology to facilitate effective prioritisation(cid:213) (UNDHA 1997c,
p. 34).

The evolution of humanitarian demining discourse from operation-led, infrastructure-
based  and  systematic  to  socio-economic,  community-based  and  prioritised,  creates
demands  for  information  on  issues  more  related  to  rural  development  than  military
demining.  Poverty,  landlessness,  economic  coping  strategies,  historical  land-use,  local
culture and demographics affect the movement of people between different (cid:212)risk zones(cid:213)
and in(cid:223)uence their use of contaminated land and their own priorities for clearance.

Since  their  conception  in  the  1970s,  participatory  methodologies  have  become
standard fare in rural development. Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) recognised the
fundamental  importance  of  involving  local  people  in  the  development  of  their  com-
munities,  and  of  their  participation  in  the  construction  of  data  and  information  in
development projects (McCracken et al. 1988; Chambers 1994a, b, c). Through a wide
range  of  techniques,  local  people  can  identify  and  voice  their  priorities  while  outside
experts take on the role of facilitator, learning about local conditions and helping rural
dwellers to envisage and realise strategies and solutions to their problems. Participatory
techniques  offer  greater  (cid:223)exibility  in  collecting  and  analysing  hidden  and  unconven-
tional  information.  Through  group  exercises  and  (cid:212)visual(cid:213)  techniques  such  as  mapping,
transects and ranking, important spatial and temporal knowledge can be obtained and
used  to  shape  subsequent  development  activities.  Recognition  of  the  world  as  diverse,
complex  and  chaotic,  and  consisting  of  multiple  realities,  encourages  formulation  of
more appropriate responses.

Participatory  appraisal  is  grounded  in  the  idea  of  using  simple,  inexpensive  and
rapid  methods:  this,  at  (cid:222)rst  sight,  seems  anathema  to  a  technology  such  as  GIS.  The
suggestion that GIS and participatory appraisal can be somehow brought together in a
(cid:212)participatory GIS(cid:213) (Harris et al. 1995) presents an uncomfortable and awkward mix
of  approaches,  styles  and  information  types.  It  is,  however,  the  very  nature  of  this
juxtaposition  which  helps  to  expose  the  complexities  of,  and  contrasts  between,  local
and  (cid:212)of(cid:222)cial(cid:213)  understandings  of  geographical  information,  as  well  as  the  bene(cid:222)ts  and
constraints  inherent  in  the  two  methodological  approaches.  This,  therefore,  is  where
the opportunities, challenges and excitement lie in applied research terms.

Participatory GIS is (cid:212)an attempt to utilise GIS technology in the context of the needs
and capabilities of communities that will be involved with, and affected by, development
projects and programmes(cid:213) and (cid:212)involves communities in the production of GIS data and
spatial decision-making(cid:213) (Abbot et al. 1998, pp. 27—28). It attempts to integrate of(cid:222)cial,
(cid:212)expert(cid:213)  sources  of  spatial  data  and  local,  (cid:212)unconventional(cid:213)  geographical  knowledge.
This  integration  exploits,  in  particular,  the  concept  of  visual  spatial  representation,
including, but not exclusively con(cid:222)ned to, mapping as a common technique.

The  present  case  study  represents  an  approach  based  on  (cid:212)GIS  in  participatory
research(cid:213) (Abbot et al. 1998) through a Participatory Mine Impact Assessment (PMIA),
rather than a true participatory GIS. We see our approach as a small step towards using
GIS  to  provide  access  to  geographical  information  (if  not  GIS  per  se)  (cid:212)for  the  lower
circuit(cid:213)  of  knowledge:  the  rural  (and  urban)  poor,  rather  than  merely  for  the  (cid:212)upper
circuit(cid:213)  domain  populated  by  hi-tech,  information-  and  capital-rich,  (cid:212)experts(cid:213)  (Dunn
et al. 1999). We now describe the study area in more detail before discussing the meth-
odological approach that we adopted.

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

 
 

398

C Williams and C E Dunn

4 Case Study: Treng Commune, north-west Cambodia

4.1 Background to Study Area

Treng  Commune,  in  Rattanak  Mondul  district,  Battambang  Province,  northwest
Cambodia  formed  the  setting  for  empirical  data  collection  with  a  particular  focus
on  four  settlements:  Chisang,  Kilo,  Chea  Montrey  and  Kilo  38  (Figure  1).  Treng  is

Figure 1 Study area in north-west Cambodia

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

399

heavily  contaminated  with  landmines,  having  one  of  the  highest  historic  casualty  rates
in Cambodia and accounting for about one-quarter of all mine incidents in Battambang
Province  according  to  data  compiled  by  the  Cambodia  Mine  Incident  Database
Project  (CMIDP).  Caught  between  two  provincial-sized  towns  controlled  by  different
factions,  Treng  was  an  active  frontline  for  thirty  years  during  which  the  population
was  repeatedly  displaced  and  most  buildings,  roads  and  infrastructure  destroyed.
Most current residents of the study villages returned in the mid-1990s to claim ancestral
land.

4.2 Developing Participatory Mine Impact Assessment (PMIA)

PMIA  seeks  to  reveal  information  which  is  normally  hidden  to  conventional  landmine
surveying  methods,  in  particular  the  knowledge,  perceptions  and  opinions  of  villagers.
The empirical research was conducted with participant groups each representing a cross-
section of age, sex and occupation. An interpreter was used during data collection and
two  members  of  the  Cambodian  Mine  Action  Centre(cid:213)s  (CMAC)  socio-economic  team
were  also  present  as  observers.  Two  main  participatory  research  techniques,  group
mapping  and  activity  ranking  exercises,  were  adopted  to  derive  information  on  village
features,  economic  activities  (notably  land-use),  and  landmine  location,  incidents  and
priorities for clearance. A pilot study was conducted in the village of Chisang to test and
re(cid:222)ne aspects of the  techniques in the  (cid:222)eld.  Participatory  mapping and actvity ranking
were  then  conducted  in  the  three  villages  of  Chea  Montrey,  Kilo  and  Kilo  38.  The
information and perceptions revealed through participatory exercises were subsequently
integrated  with  (cid:212)of(cid:222)cial(cid:213)  sources  of  geographical  information,  including  aerial  photo-
graphs, topographic maps, literature sources and vector GIS data to reveal (cid:212)alternative(cid:213)
or (cid:212)multiple(cid:213) views of reality.

An  aerial  photograph  at  1:10,000  scale  was  used  as  the  main  base  for  PMIA  to
provide  a  basic  geographical  framework  for  exploring  and  representing  local  know-
ledge.  To  overcome  errors  induced  by  the  photograph  (panchromatic  1:25,000  scale,
dated  February  1992,  which  was  not  geo-corrected)  and  the  nature  of  participatory
knowledge, GIS was used to triangulate these data with conventional data to investigate
and  verify  results.  A  scale  of  1:5,000  has  been  noted  as  more  appropriate  for  RRA
(Chambers  1994b),  while  others  have  successfully  used  photographs  at  scales  of  up  to
1:30,000 (Neefjes 1993).

4.1 Group Mapping Exercises

The  participatory  mapping  exercises  sought  to  elicit  local  knowledge  on  a  range  of
socio-economic issues. Using the aerial photograph as a base (Plate 4), information was
recorded  by  participants  using  coloured  pens  on  clear  plastic  overlays  which  had  the
bene(cid:222)t of allowing ongoing triangulation both among themes and between themes and
the photographic base map. This on-the-(cid:223)y analysis revealed cross-thematic issues dur-
ing the exercise rather than during subsequent analysis, allowing each issue to be raised
and  discussed  by  the  group  and  resulting  information  to  be  included  in  the  ongoing
discussion. Group mapping involved four main components which were carried out in
sequential order and which are discussed in more detail below: map and area familiar-
isation; village features; land-use; and landmine locations and incidents.

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

400

C Williams and C E Dunn

4.1.1 Familiarisation
Local topography underwent signi(cid:222)cant change during thirty years of con(cid:223)ict, including
the complete destruction of the market town of Treng and abandonment of settlement
areas along Route 10. Fields became overgrown, irrigation channels choked with vegeta-
tion  and  buildings  destroyed.  The  ease  with  which  people  have  commonly  interpreted
aerial photography (Chambers 1994a, Neefjes 1993) was complicated by these changes,
with villagers trying to reacquaint themselves, via a photograph, with an area that they
have been unable to visit for decades. Transects would clearly be dangerous and villagers
had  explored  only  as  far  as  economic  necessity  forced  them.  The  pilot  study  demon-
strated how loss of familiarity hindered villagers(cid:213) estimation of area and distance, with
distortion increasing the further they moved from points of reference close to the road.
To  overcome  this,  distance  and  area  scales  were  drawn  on  separate  transparent  sheets
and were used to reinforce spatial proportion. At the beginning of each mapping exer-
cise  participants  were  asked  to  estimate  distance  between,  and  area  size  of,  features,
using  the  scales  to  check  their  accuracy.  As  well  as  acting  as  a  humorous  ice-breaker,
the  exercise  was  successful  in  prompting  participants  to  consider  distance  and  scale  in
subsequent exercises.

4.1.2 Boundaries and Features
The  (cid:222)rst  overlay  sought  to  verify  familiarity  with  the  area  in  relation  to  the  aerial
photograph.  Villagers  drew  prominent  features  and  landmarks  with  which  they  were
familiar,  including  rivers,  mountains  and  the  main  road.  As  the  relation  between  fea-
tures became clear the villagers became animated, arguing over the names of creeks and
spotting  small  paths  or  topographic  features  long  forgotten.  They  were  soon  able  to
draw features such as the chief(cid:213)s house and a nearby clinic. While de(cid:222)ning the boundary
of the village, the residents also noted that an area which historically belonged to them
had been recently appropriated by Chea Montrey, whose residents were (cid:222)rst to resettle
the  area  but  who  discovered  that  their  own  agricultural  land  was  deep  inside  mined
territory to the north. This redrawing of areas-of-in(cid:223)uence (Carson 1987) made possible
by  decades  of  abandonment  meant  that  Kilo  had  lost  much  of  its  former  agricultural
land,  and  villagers  were  sceptical  that  the  land  would  be  returned  due  to  the  in(cid:223)uence
of Chea Montrey(cid:213)s village chief.

4.1.3 Land-use
On  the  second  overlay,  villagers  divided  the  land  into  broad  categories  according  to
current land-cover as well as its economic potential (Figure 2(a) and 2(b), and Table 1).
Although  the  area  had  once  supported  a  diverse  range  of  agricultural  activities  it  was
currently  limited  to  rice,  corn,  beans  and  fruit  (banana,  mango  and  coconut).  One
signi(cid:222)cant  issue  raised  during  mapping  was  that  of  a  chilli  farm  in  Chea  Montrey,
originally  demined  by  CMAC  to  provide  resettlement  land  for  several  dozen  returning
Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDP)  families  but  con(cid:222)scated  by  a  senior  military  of(cid:222)cer
immediately  following  clearance.  Failure  by  CMAC  and  the  authorities  to  resolve  the
issue  and  to  return  ownership  to  the  intended  bene(cid:222)ciaries  encouraged  further  land
con(cid:222)scation, often of areas targeted for imminent clearance. Concerned that their land
would be lost, returning families built housing on land which they knew to be mined in
order to reduce the likelihood of con(cid:222)scation. Whilst acknowledging the risks involved
in living in a mine(cid:222)eld, villagers claimed that they had little choice. Thirty years of war
had left of(cid:222)cial land entitlement in turmoil and local soldiers insisted that land that they

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

401

Figure 2a Villagers(cid:213) map of current land use

had  protected  should  belong  to  them.  The  result  is  growing  disputes  between  former
villagers, returnees, local soldiers and powerful of(cid:222)cials. In the absence of a mandate for
CMAC  to  ensure  that  land  entitlement  went  to  the  poor,  it  was  the  elite  that  were  in
the best position to exploit cleared land for their own bene(cid:222)t.

Triangulation and temporal comparison of PMIA-derived land-use data were made
with digital spatial data derived from a 1971 1:50,000 scale topographic map and the
aerial  photograph,  from  which  two  coverages  were  produced  from  stereo  pairs:  land-
use and elevation. The former was compared with data from the topographic map and
PMIA  to  evaluate  temporal  change  in  land-use  and  to  assess  the  spatial  (cid:212)accuracy(cid:213)  of
PMIA  data,  while  the  elevation  coverage  was  used  to  relate  proposed  land-use  with
slope  data  to  provide  insight  into  why  certain  areas  were  categorised  by  villagers  as
unusable  for  agriculture  (steep  slope  or  heavy  undulation)  and  to  cross-check  land-use
categorisations made by villagers. The results were positive, with areas of steep elevation

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

402

C Williams and C E Dunn

Figure 2b Villagers(cid:213) map of potential land use

closely matching areas classi(cid:222)ed as unsuitable for cultivation by villagers, while (cid:223)at areas,
regardless of current land-use, were mostly categorised as having agricultural potential.

4.1.4 Mine Locations and Incidents
The  third  overlay  revealed  local  perceptions  of  the  extent  of  landmine  contamination.
Firstly, areas cleared by CMAC were identi(cid:222)ed. As the villagers knew the distance either
side  of  the  road  that  CMAC  had  cleared,  they  used  the  distance  templates  to  draw  a
buffer.  Secondly  they  identi(cid:222)ed  military  bases  and  other  strategic  features  which  they
knew  to  be  heavily  mined,  including  the  banks  of  rivers  which  had  formed  front  lines
between  government  and  Khmer  Rouge  forces.  When  asked  for  information  on  areas
which they considered to be (cid:212)probably mined(cid:213), one villager laughed and with a sweeping
gesture  indicated  the  remainder  of  the  photograph.  Their  long  absence  and  the  indis-
criminate nature of mining convinced villagers that nowhere was safe and a number of
injuries away from obvious danger-zones reinforced this.

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

403

Table 1 Current and potential land-use in Treng commune

Current 
land use 
(ha)

Proposed 
land use 
(ha)

Demined 
(ha)

Demined 
by locals 
(ha) 

Believed 
still mined 
(ha)

Forest
Forest/bamboo
Rice
Mixed crop
Settlement
Military base
Chilli farm
Forest/grass
Grassland
Total

1,630
628
482
289
134
41
40
109
45
3,398

1,512
612
753
289
147
45
40
0
0
3,398

20
0
274
17
125
30
32
0
0
498

7
0
227
203
4
0
0
0
0
441

1,485
612
252
69
18
15
8
0
0
2,459

Comparison of land-use and mine contamination overlays showed that cultivation
was  taking  place  on  land  considered  to  be  mined.  Villagers  explained  that  as  CMAC
were not clearing suf(cid:222)cient land for cultivation, they had begun to clear land themselves.
This was often done by burning off the vegetation, ploughing and then destroying any
exposed  mines.  In  excess  of  400  ha  of  land  had  been  cleared  in  this  manner (Table  1)
resulting in a small number of casualties. Heavily forested areas south of the river were
avoided,  although  villagers  acknowledged  that  as  the  forest  to  the  north  became
denuded they would be forced to enter even higher-risk areas in search of income.

In Figure 3(a) and 3(b) PMIA mine contamination data are compared with of(cid:222)cial
data produced by CMAC. CMAC(cid:213)s conventional threat assessment map provides only
partial geographical coverage and includes information only on the boundary and status
of  known  mine(cid:222)elds.  PMIA  provides  complete  geographical  coverage,  shows  areas
demined by local groups and individuals as well as by CMAC and acts as a base for the
integration and analysis of other themes.

4.2 Activity Ranking

Ranking  exercises  were  carried  out  by  groups  of  about  20  people,  comprising  equal
gender  representation  and  a  broad  mix  of  ages  and  vocations.  The  groups  were  asked
to  identify  the  main  domestic  and  economic  activities  in  which  they  engaged,  which
were  represented  pictorially  on  small  cards.  Separate  groups  of  men  and  women  then
);
ranked these activities  under four categories: (1) amount of time spent (
);  (3)  risk  posed  by  land-
importance
(2)  importance  of  the  activity  to  their  livelihood  (
).
demining priority
mines (

); and (4) priority for clearance (

frequency

risk

Clearance  of  settlement  land  was  the  (cid:222)rst  priority  for  all  surveyed  villages.  The
experience  of  the  chilli  farm  led  many  families  to  risk  building  homes  in  active
mine(cid:222)elds  to  claim  a  piece  of  land  and  to  minimise  the  risk  of  con(cid:222)scation.  Although
, families were worried
locally cleared settlement land was not considered high-risk 
by the possibility of injury, especially to children. Although no-one had been injured by
landmines or unexploded ordnance on land used for settlement, landmines continued
to be found and disposed of on an ad-hoc basis.

per-se

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

404

C Williams and C E Dunn

Figure 3a

Levels of landmine contamination from CMAC data

Clearing  agricultural  land  was  a  common  priority,  especially  in  Chea  Montrey
which has access to a large area of potential rice land but less so in other villages where
less  land  is  available.  Villagers(cid:213)  categorisation  of  farming  as  high-risk  is  largely  due  to
the  danger  of  locally  demining  land  for  cultivation.  In  most  villages,  the  highest  risk
activities  are  grazing,  travel  and  the  cutting  of  wood,  bamboo  and  grass.  While  travel
on Route 10 and main paths was considered safe, smaller paths to the river and into the
forest  had  not  been  completely  cleared.  Of  recorded  injuries  in  Treng  commune  since
1979,  66%  had  occurred  in  the  forest  and  47%  on  a  villager(cid:213)s  (cid:222)rst  visit  to  an  area
according to the CMIDP.

Crude interpretation of the incident data might suggest that clearance of the forest
was  the  most  effective  means  of  reducing  casualties.  However,  PMIA  exposed  a  more
complicated  cause  of  such  high  levels  of  injuries.  Villagers  felt  compelled  to  enter  the
forest  because  of  a  lack  of  agricultural  land  but  would  reduce  their  visits  to  the  forest

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

405

Figure 3b Levels  of  landmine  contamination  from  Participatory  Mine  Impact  Assessment
(PMIA) of landmine contamination

were  more  land  available  for  farming.  PMIA  thus  revealed  an  indirect  way  to  address
both the main cause of casualties as well as the socio-economic needs of the village by
focusing not on the forest but on land suitable for cultivation.

In  the  (cid:222)nal  exercise,  which  was  intended  to  reveal  spatial  priorities  for  demining,
villagers were asked to identify speci(cid:222)c areas of the map they wished to see demined and
ranked  them  in  order  of  priority  (Figure  4).  Settlement  and  agricultural  land  were  the
greatest  priorities  for  clearance,  con(cid:222)rming  CMAC(cid:213)s  own  criteria.  Indeed,  it  has  been
estimated  that  without  landmines  agricultural  land-use  in  Cambodia  as  a  whole  could
be increased by about 135% (Andersson et al. 1995). However in both Kilo and Chea
Montrey  the  highest  speci(cid:222)c  spatial  priorities  were  clearing  paths  leading  down  to  the
river  south  of  the  villages  to  improve  safety  for  collecting  water  and  (cid:222)shing  and  to
provide access to water for irrigation. One path also leads to a part of the river formerly

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

406

C Williams and C E Dunn

Figure 4 Local priorities for landmine clearance

popular  with  tourists,  and  villagers  believed  that  its  clearance  could  provide  renewed
opportunities  for  tourism  and  hence  economic  bene(cid:222)ts.  Paths  were  used  every  day  by
most  villagers  and  yet  fell  outside  CMAC  criteria  and  while  villagers  were  willing  to
clear agricultural land for their own use, nobody was willing to properly clear the paths
because of the hazardous nature of clearing in dense vegetation.

5 Discussion

GIS in participatory research in lower-income countries presents some awkward juxta-
positions in terms of knowledge types (conventional digital data and local knowledge);
representations of knowledge (raster/vector data and mental maps); theoretical frameworks
and  approaches  (positivist  and  quantitative  alongside  qualitative  and  (cid:212)low-tech(cid:213));  and

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

407

researchers with little history of working together (development studies and GIS practi-
tioners).  It  is  these  uncomfortable  relationships,  however,  which  are  most  likely  to
generate  exciting,  valuable  and  appropriate  uses  of  GIS  technology  and  to  be  most
successful  in  exposing  and  celebrating  alternative  spatial  representations  of  place  and
reality.

processes

Ultimately  in  the  application  discussed  here  we  have  attempted  to  uncover  some-
 at work and not just the spatial distributions; traditional GIS are
thing of the 
strong  on  the  latter  but  a  more  (cid:223)exible  approach  is  needed  to  achieve  the  former.  We
agree  with  Craig  and  Elwood  (1998)  that  (cid:212)it  is  important  for  geographic  information
scientists  to  know  about  community  groups(cid:213)  (p.  103)  but  where  those  groups  do  not
exist in any organised sense we argue that, where appropriate, it is the responsibility of
GIS practitioners to seek out local views and knowledge through other routes. In explor-
ing  spatial  activity  among  local  populations  in  landmine-contaminated  communities
we advocate here the adoption of some of the concepts of (cid:212)rural development(cid:213): notions
with  which  most  mine  clearance  personnel  are  currently  unfamiliar.  CMAC  observers
initially  followed  the  participatory  data  collection  with  evident  bemusement,  but  by
the  end  of  the  (cid:222)eldwork  there  was  general  agreement  that  the  quality  of  information
revealed  was  both  more  informative  and  more  usable  than  that  obtained  through
CMAC(cid:213)s own survey methods.

PMIA  produced  an  informed  baseline  landmine  contamination  survey,  a  detailed
history  that  revealed  which  resources  and  activities  were  important  to  the  viability  of
the villages, and speci(cid:222)c spatial knowledge of the location of resources, features, mine-
(cid:222)elds  and  the  relationships  between  them.  We  obtained  the  villagers(cid:213)  own  clearance
priorities  and  unearthed  the  complex  relationship  between  casualties  and  resource-use
that could identify both direct and indirect means of addressing key development issues.
CMAC(cid:213)s approach to landmine mapping and assessment is labour-intensive and involves
a  heavy  time  commitment  for  surveying  in  the  (cid:222)eld  yet  ultimately,  the  resulting
maps  represent  only  part  of  the  picture.  Our  approach  works  at  the  level  of  the  local
community,  a  context  that  is  largely  missing  from  military  mine(cid:222)eld  surveys  and
clearance.

GIS  in  participatory  research  calls  for  different  approaches  to  the  way  in  which
geographical  information  is  conceptualised  and  used  than  those  normally  adopted  in
conventional GIS analyses. Differences are perhaps most apparent in terms of concepts
of spatial accuracy. Local knowledge  derived  from  PRA  maps is not spatially accurate
in a geometrical sense (although relative locations are preserved) but GIS in participat-
  as
ory  research  relies  on  notions  of  this  type  of  knowledge  being  equally  as 
the  more  spatially  accurate  conventional  data.  One  key  issue  here  is  the  use  to  which
geographical information is put: local knowledge represented as a mental map in a GIS
should  not  be  used  to  imply  exact  positioning  of  features  such  as  boundary  lines
(Cinderby  1999).  The  risk  of  labelling  data  recorded  on  a  geo-referenced  basis  as  spa-
tially  accurate  when  in  fact  participants  have  been  unable  to  relate  spatial  accuracy  to
the image could cause the very misdirection of resources that the methodology aims to
avoid.  Sutherland  (1996)  underlines  the  lack  of  con(cid:222)dence  that  military  deminers
sometimes place in all but comprehensive surveying techniques:

important

(cid:212)There  will  be  greater  con(cid:222)dence  in  a  report  produced  as  a  result  of  a  detailed
survey of a mine(cid:222)eld by military engineers than one produced as a result of hearsay
from civilian sources(cid:213) (p. 8).

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

408

C Williams and C E Dunn

Often however, (cid:212)hearsay(cid:213) may be the only information available and, in many cases,
could  succeed  in  modelling  both  (cid:212)real(cid:213)  and  (cid:212)perceived(cid:213)  issues  more  effectively  than  a
technical  survey.  Further,  high  spatial  accuracy  does  not  necessarily  equate  with  local
realities. Villagers(cid:213) categorisation of the entire study areas as mined may seem indiscrimin-
ate  compared  to  CMAC(cid:213)s  focus  on  individual  mine(cid:222)elds,  but  more  accurately  re(cid:223)ects
perceived  contamination  and  thus  how  villagers  utilise  local  resources.  (cid:212)Of(cid:222)cial(cid:213)  data
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  (cid:212)inaccurate(cid:213)  from  the  perspective  of  a  returning  refugee.
Unfortunately,  poor  data,  of  any  kind,  once  imported  into  a  high-tech  system  such  as
of (cid:212)good(cid:213) data: whether in terms of accuracy or
GIS can help to maintain the 
quality, and users of all types of GIS including (cid:212)participatory GIS(cid:213) need to be aware of
this.  We  argue  that  in  case  studies  like  the  present  one  high  levels  of  spatial  accuracy
are  less  important  than  the  ability  to  provide  meaningful  geographical  understandings
and information. That said, practitioners should carefully cross-check data to ensure an
acceptable
  level  of  accuracy.  In  the  present  study  the  integration  of  conventional  with
unconventional  knowledge  allowed  an  assessment  of  the  spatial  accuracy  of  PMIA,
which  is  necessary  where  the  data  are  to  be  geo-referenced,  and  helped  reveal  and
explain  important  relationships  between  elevation,  land-use  and  mine  contamination
that may have otherwise remained hidden.

pretence 

Ultimately, whatever the success of techniques used to identify land for mine clear-
ance, the bene(cid:222)ts of demining will depend on their end-use. The effectiveness with which
mined land can be identi(cid:222)ed and cleared will be largely meaningless if that land is then
con(cid:222)scated  and  used  for  the  bene(cid:222)t  of  the  powerful.  We  are  aware,  therefore,  of  the
need to avoid creating a situation where the results of PMIA, particularly the participat-
con(cid:223)ict where it currently does not exist. This could
ory maps, could be used to 
result, for example, in increasing tension over boundary disputes or land ownership, or
in the maps being misused in efforts to con(cid:222)scate land. Indeed PMIA may be a double-
edged  sword  in  this  respect,  providing  information  on  land  potential  that  could  be
misused by the powerful to target land for con(cid:222)scation as well as clearance, and forcing
confrontation between those occupying land and the powerful who may, by attempts to
regularise land entitlement, feel driven into securing their claim through force (Townsley
et al. 1997).

create 

This, then, raises important issues of access to the resulting information. If we are
genuinely  keen  to  enable  local  voices  rather  than  simply  to  extract  information  from
participants,  thought  must  be  given  to  where  the  results  should  be  housed  and  who
should control and update them. One strategy may be to distribute the collected informa-
tion  and  the  output  at  district,  rather  than  local  or  village,  level  for  example  in  a
district UN or government of(cid:222)ce but with as wide an access as possible to local people.
The  intention  here  is  to  encourage  informed  dialogue  amongst  a  range  of  interested
stakeholders  and  we  advocate  GIS  in  participatory  research  as  a  potential  means  of
channelling local views into decision-making and policy related to landmine clearance.
We  argue  that  the  approach  adopted  here  uses  a  presentation  format  which  policy-
makers and planners should (cid:222)nd both intuitive and convincing.

We  do  not  advocate  our  speci(cid:222)c  approach  as  a  blanket  solution  for  all  landmine
assessment activities in post-con(cid:223)ict situations. On the contrary, we emphasise the need
to adapt the approach in terms of end-use, data availability and quality. The empirical
work relied on access to relatively high-resolution aerial photographs to provide a geo-
referenced basis for recording, integrating and analysing local knowledge. Aerial photo-
graphs or other high-resolution images are not always available, however, and reliance

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

GIS in Participatory Landmine Assessment in Cambodia

409

on  lower-scale  sources  such  as  topographic  maps,  with  their  intrinsic  barrier  of  sym-
bolism,  may  complicate  interpretation  and  exclude  much  local  detail.  Indeed  much  of
the success of PMIA relied on the advantage offered by aerial photographs in presenting
a  view  of  an  area  quickly  interpreted  by  locals.  Thus  a  more  (cid:212)data-driven(cid:213)  approach
is  valuable  in  settings  such  as  that  found  in  Bosnia  and  Kosovo  where  the  UN  has
developed  a  relatively  sophisticated  approach  to  computerising  its  spatial  information
on  landmines  and  where  a  (cid:212)scaled-up(cid:213)  rapid  risk  assessment  can  prove  bene(cid:222)cial  at  a
countrywide scale (Williams 1998, Bouchardy 2000). In the Bosnian case study, informa-
tion on the geographical location of frontlines (areas most likely to have landmines) and
on forced displacement of ethnic groups has been used to identify areas of potential risk for
returning refugees whilst in Kosovo refugee repatriation has been guided by assessments
of structural damage and basic needs.

The transformation of GIS into a (cid:212)social technology(cid:213) need not remain an unachiev-
able  goal  if  those  groups  who  propose  a  more  critical  perspective  work  more  closely
with  those  who  adopt  a  (cid:212)conventional(cid:213)  approach.  Included  amongst  the  latter  are  the
large commercial GIS software vendors who remain in a particularly powerful position.
There is certainly scope for collaborative ventures between these bodies and proponents
of  a  more  inclusive,  public  participation  approach,  particularly  as  GIS  moves  towards
becoming a multi-media technology where the role of different types of visual and oral
images  (video  clips,  photographs,  scanned  archive  documents,  sketch  maps,  oral  his-
tories, narratives) re(cid:223)ect and enhance the idea of (cid:212)alternative realities(cid:213) within GIS. It has
been suggested that marginalised groups and grassroots organisations themselves should
take  an  active  role  in  changing  the  intrinsic  design  features  of  GIS  technology  (Sieber
2000). This is a forceful argument in terms of seeking to transfer power and ownership
to  the  participating  groups  although  the  extent  to  which  it  is  realistic  and  appropriate
must  remain  dependent  on  the  individual  setting  and  circumstances.  GIS  as  an  appro-
priate technology is one which recognises (cid:222)rst the context of the place and time in which
it is implemented. We suggest that the type of approach adopted in this paper offers a
step towards a more realistic understanding of the social, economic, political and organ-
isational dimensions of spatial activities in post-con(cid:223)ict communities contaminated with
landmines and offers a potentially effective means of achieving truly humanitarian land-
mine clearance.

Acknowledgements

The (cid:222)eldwork for this paper was made possible through the support of the Cambodian
Mine  Action  Centre  (CMAC),  the  Cambodia  Mine  Incident  Database  Project,  the
Integrated  Resource  Information  Centre  (IRIC),  the  National  Mekong  Committee
and the Ministry of Public Works and Transportation. We would also like to thank the
villagers of Treng commune for participating in the research.

References

Abbot J, Chambers R, Dunn C, Harris T, de Merode E, Poter G, Townsend J, and Weiner D 1998

Participatory GIS: Opportunity or oxymoron? 

PLA Notes

 33: 27—34

Andersson  N,  da  Sousa  C  P,  and  Paredes  S  1995  Social  cost  of  land  mines  in  four  countries:

Afghanistan, Bosnia, Cambodia, and Mozambique. 

British Medical Journal

 311: 718—21

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

410

C Williams and C E Dunn

Bouchardy J-Y 2000 Winning the peace in Kosovo. 
Carson  B  R  1987  Appraisal  of  rural  resources  using  aerial  photography:  An  example  from  a
Proceedings  of  the  1985  International  Conference  on  Rapid

remote  hill  region  in  Nepal.  In 
Rural Appraisal, Rural Systems Research Project

, Khon Kaen, Thailand
Chambers R 1994a The origins and practice of participatory rural appraisal. 

World Development

 9(7): 36—41

GeoEurope

Chambers R 1994b Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA): Analysis of experience. 

World Development

22: 953—69

22: 1253—68

Chambers  R  1994c  Participatory  Rural  Appraisal  (PRA):  Challenges,  potentials  and  paradigm.

World Development

 22: 1437—54

Cinderby S 1999 Geographic information systems (GIS) for participation: The future of environ-

mental GIS? 

International Journal of Environmental Pollution

 11: 304—15

Craig  W  J  and  Elwood  S  A  1998  How  and  why  community  groups  use  maps  and  geographic

information. 

Cartography and Geographic Information Systems

 25: 95—104

da Cruz P R 1999 GIS as a social technology. 
Dunn C E, Atkins P J, Blakemore M J, and Townsend J G 1999 Teaching geographical information

South African Geographical Journal

 81: 119—25

handling skills for lower-income countries. 
Flowerdew R 1998 Reacting to Ground Truth. 
Harris T M, Weiner D, Warner T A, and Levin R 1995 Pursuing social goals through participat-
Ground Truth: The Social Implications

Transactions in GIS
Environment and Planning A

 30: 289—301

 3: 319—32

ory geographic information systems. In Pickles J (ed) 
of Geographic Information Systems

. New York, Guilford Press: 196—222

Harris  T  and  Weiner  D  1998  Empowerment,  marginalization  and  (cid:210)community-integrated(cid:211)  GIS.

Cartography and Geographic Information Systems

 25: 67—76

McCracken  J  A,  Pretty  J  N  and  Conway  G  R  1988   

An  Introduction  to  Rapid  Rural  Appraisal

for Agricultural Development

. London, IIED

Miyet B 1997 The United Nations, mine action and effective coordination. 
 2(4): 3—4
Neefjes  K  1993  Examples  of  Participatory  Rural  Appraisal  (PRA)  in  wetland  development  in

Landmines

Obermeyer  N  1998  The  evolution  of  public  participation  GIS. 

Cartography  and  Geographic

Guinea Bissau. 

RRA Notes

 17: 49—56

Information Systems

 25: 65—6

Schuurman  N  1999  An  interview  with  Michael  Goodchild,  January  6,  1998,  Santa  Barbara,

California. 

Environment and Planning D

 17: 3—15

Schuurman N 2000 Trouble in the heartland: GIS and its critics in the 1990s. 

Progress in Human

Sheppard  E  1995  GIS  and  society:  Towards  a  research  agenda. 

Cartography  and  Geographic

Geography

 24: 569—90

Information Systems

 22: 5—16

Sieber R E 2000 Conforming (to) the opposition: The social construction of geographical informa-
tion systems in social movements. International Journal of Geographical Information Science
14: 775—93

Sutherland Capt N 1996 The Design of a Geographic Information System for Recording Mine(cid:222)eld

Data. Unpublished MSc Thesis, Cran(cid:222)eld University

Townsley  P,  Anderson  J,  and  Mees  C  1997  Customary  marine  tenure  in  the  south  Paci(cid:222)c:  The

uses and challenges of mapping. PLA Notes 30: 36—9

UNDHA  1997a  Study  Report  on  the  Development  of  Indigenous  Mine  Action  Capacities.  New

York, United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs

UNDHA  1997b  Afghanistan:  The  Development  of  Indigenous  Mine  Action  Capacities.  New

York, United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs

UNDHA  1997c  Angola:  The  Development  of  Indigenous  Mine  Action  Capacities.  New  York,

United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs

Williams  C  1998  Prioritising  Resources  in  Humanitarian  Demining.  Unpublished  MA  Thesis,

University of Durham

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

