The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

The Impact of Global/Local Bias on Task-Solving
in Map-Related Tasks Employing Extrinsic and
Intrinsic Visualization of Risk Uncertainty Maps

Čeněk Šašinka, Zdeněk Stachoň, Petr Kubíček, Sascha Tamm, Aleš Matas &
Markéta Kukaňová

To cite this article: Čeněk Šašinka, Zdeněk Stachoň, Petr Kubíček, Sascha Tamm, Aleš Matas &
Markéta Kukaňová (2018): The Impact of Global/Local Bias on Task-Solving in Map-Related Tasks
Employing Extrinsic and Intrinsic Visualization of Risk Uncertainty Maps, The Cartographic Journal,
DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1414018

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1414018

Published online: 13 Dec 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 11

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL
https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1414018

SURVEY PAPER

The Impact of Global/Local Bias on Task-Solving in Map-Related Tasks
Employing Extrinsic and Intrinsic Visualization of Risk Uncertainty Maps
Čeněk Šašinka

, Sascha Tamm, Aleš Matas and Markéta Kukaňová

, Zdeněk Stachoň

, Petr Kubíček

Čeněk Šašinka, Aleš Matas and Markéta Kukaňová, Center for Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic; Zdeněk Stachoň and Petr Kubíček, Department of Geography, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; Sascha Tamm,
Center for Applied Neuroscience, Freie Universität, Berlin, Germany

KEYWORDS
Geovisualization method;
avalanche risk; cognitive
style; Navon’s hierarchical
ﬁgure; combined extensive–
intensive research design;
eye-tracking

ABSTRACT
The form of visual representation aﬀects both the way in which the visual representation is
processed and the eﬀectiveness of this processing. Diﬀerent forms of visual representation may
require the employment of diﬀerent cognitive strategies in order to solve a particular task; at the
same time, the diﬀerent representations vary as to the extent to which they correspond with an
individual’s preferred cognitive style. The present study employed a Navon-type task to learn
about the occurrence of global/local bias. The research was based on close interdisciplinary
cooperation between the domains of both psychology and cartography. Several diﬀerent types
of
tasks were made involving avalanche hazard maps with intrinsic/extrinsic visual
representations, each of them employing diﬀerent types of graphic variables representing the
level of avalanche hazard and avalanche hazard uncertainty. The research sample consisted of
two groups of participants, each of which was provided with a diﬀerent form of visual
representation of identical geographical data, such that the representations could be regarded
as ‘informationally equivalent’. The ﬁrst phase of the research consisted of two correlation
studies, the ﬁrst involving subjects with a high degree of map literacy (students of cartography)
(intrinsic method: N = 35; extrinsic method: N = 37). The second study was performed after the
results of the ﬁrst study were analyzed. The second group of participants consisted of subjects
with a low expected degree of map literacy (students of psychology; intrinsic method: N = 35;
extrinsic method: N = 27).The ﬁrst study revealed a statistically signiﬁcant moderate correlation
between the students’ response times in extrinsic visualization tasks and their response times in
a global subtest (r = 0.384, p < 0.05); likewise, a statistically signiﬁcant moderate correlation was
found between the students’ response times in intrinsic visualization tasks and their response
times in the local subtest (r = 0.387, p < 0.05). At the same time, no correlation was found
between the students’ performance in the local subtest and their performance in extrinsic
visualization tasks, or between their scores in the global subtest and their performance in
intrinsic visualization tasks. The second correlation study did not conﬁrm the results of the ﬁrst
correlation study (intrinsic visualization/‘small ﬁgures test’: r = 0.221; extrinsic visualization/‘large
ﬁgures test’: r = 0.135). The ﬁrst phase of the research, where the data was subjected to statistical
analysis, was followed by a comparative eye-tracking study, whose aim was to provide more
detailed insight into the cognitive strategies employed when solving map-related tasks. More
speciﬁcally, the eye-tracking study was expected to be able to detect possible diﬀerences
between the cognitive patterns employed when solving extrinsic- as opposed to intrinsic
visualization tasks. The results of an exploratory eye-tracking data analysis support the
hypothesis of diﬀerent strategies of visual information processing being used in reaction to
diﬀerent types of visualization.

Introduction

Space and time play a crucial role during hazardous events in general and natural hazards in particular. Successful
decision making during emergency situations depends on the availability and relevancy of information presented in
the right time and an understandable way. Such information improves the transparency and credibility of the
decisions taken.

Only ‘raw’ spatial data is currently available for emergency management support. Emergency decision makers all
around the world have available maps with natural hazards (such as ﬂoods, avalanches, droughts, and landslides),
vulnerable zones, land use or geology, and make decisions based on implicit information inferred from such map
sources (Řezník et al., 2017). Such implications are not straightforward and may even diﬀer according to the
diﬀerent professional background of a particular decision maker. Or, more generally, the form of information
visualization should be adjusted to the cognitive characteristics of the users. The responsible persons are able to
process only a limited number of graphics (maps) in case of an emergency. This situation is even more critical

CONTACT Čeněk Šašinka

cenek.sasinka@mail.muni.cz

© 2018 British Cartographic Society

2

C. ŠAŠINKA

when working under severe time pressure. The visualization form can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the ﬁnal decision.
Zhang and Goodchild (2002) proved that visual form can improve the communication about spatial data
uncertainty within spatial analysis and spatial decision support. Uncertainty often possesses spatial patterns.
Uncertainty visualization can thus reveal such patterns and serve not only for presentation but also for
exploration and visual analysis of spatial data.

The present study is a continuation of an earlier research project on crisis management (Staněk et al., 2010;
Konečný et al., 2011; Řezník et al., 2013). The study focuses on perception and cognitive processing of diﬀerent
forms of bivariate visual representation, using alternative visual representations derived from identical
avalanche hazard datasets (Kunz, 2011; Kunz and Hurni, 2011). The employment of diﬀerent cartographic
bivariate visualizations of the same area and topic made it possible to create meaningful and complex stimuli
that were visually diﬀerent and at the same time fulﬁlled the requirement of informational equivalence (Larkin
and Simon, 1987). A map functions as a communication channel (Koláčný, 1977), and when used as a stimulus
material
it enables the researcher to purposely manipulate the form of the
communicated information. The objective of the study was to investigate the impact of diﬀerent types of
visualization and diﬀerent cognitive styles on the eﬀectiveness of solving map-related tasks.

in psychological experiments,

Uncertainty visualization and the use of bivariate visualization

MacEachren (1992) suggested the use of Bertin’s graphic variables to depict uncertainty and even added specialized
variables for depicting uncertainty including crispness, resolution, and transparency. Gershon (1998) grouped
these into intrinsic and extrinsic visual variables depending on whether the variable is visually separable from
the variable depicting the actual attribute. While extrinsic variables are separable, intrinsic variables are not.
Another logical step is to describe how these variables including possible additions or modiﬁcation, might be
logically matched with diﬀerent components of data uncertainty (Buttenﬁeld, 1991; MacEachren, 1992; Leitner
and Buttenﬁeld, 2000). MacEachren (1992), for instance, stated that the graphical variables’ size and colour
value are most appropriate for depicting uncertainty in numerical information, while colour hue, shape, and
perhaps orientation can be used for uncertainty in nominal information. More recently MacEachren et al.
(2012) focused on discrete symbols that could be used to signify the uncertainty of individual items within
information graphics and maps. The experiments examine the relative eﬀectiveness of a set of uncertainty
representation solutions—diﬀering in the visual variable leveraged and level of symbol iconicity. Trau and
Hurni (2007) and Kunz (2011) theoretically analyzed the suitability of visual variables and visualization
techniques for uncertainty depictions in hazard prediction maps.

Most applied uncertainty visualizations in the ﬁeld of natural hazards are simplistic univariate representations
where hazard-related data are displayed in one map and inherent uncertainties are depicted in a second map
display (Kunz, 2011). Kunz was among the ﬁrst
to propose the use of bivariate depiction of studied
phenomenon and its uncertainty, applied this approach in the dynamic environment and even presented brief
feedback from expert users.

Capabilities and limitations of bivariate symbols based on the combination of visual variables and symbol
dimensionalities (point, line, and polygon) were grounded by Nelson (1999; 2000; 2002). Using the selective
attention theory as a cognitive background, she tested a selected combination of point symbols (Nelson, 1999),
complex symbols (Nelson, 2000), and their eﬀectiveness in map settings (Nelson, 2002). Based on her ﬁndings,
she proposed a typology of visual variables combination based on geometric representation (point, line, and
area), data type (qualitative vs. quantitative), and preferred combination of variables. Hue and size combination
was proposed as the most eﬀective and separable combination. Value – saturation (lightness) combination, on
the other hand, was qualiﬁed as one of the most diﬃcult combinations for visual processing and classiﬁed as an
integral type of bivariate combination.

Recently, Elmer (2013) following the selective attention theory, empirically tested eight bivariate map types for
map reading tasks recording their accuracy and response times. These tests also included the combination of size/
value (Choropleth/Graduated symbols) and value/hue-lightness (Bivariate Choropleth) which are relevant for our
study. Both aforementioned combinations performed above average for accuracy and response time and were also
rated positively by users as an appropriate combination to read and understand the information on the map.
However, the author himself concluded that the study only revealed signiﬁcant diﬀerences in perceived
combinations and further research is needed in order to understand diﬀerent mental strategies of users and
identify their cognitive behaviour. Cognitive cartography encompasses the application of cognitive theories and
methods to understanding maps and mapping and the application of maps to understanding cognition
(Montello, 2002).

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

3

Diﬀerent ways of displaying the same spatial information can dramatically aﬀect problem-solving performance.
Spatial cognition research uses distinct concepts of
informational and computational equivalence of
information
representations (Simon, 1978). Alternative cartographic visualizations follow the premise of
equivalency. The possibility to visualize (code) the same spatial information in an alternative way which is
informationally equivalent oﬀers valuable input material
for comparison of cognitive processes used for
decoding. Such a comparative principle enables better understanding of the human cognitive apparatus.
Diﬀerences in representations deal not only with various visual forms but also with diﬀerent operations
necessary for their decoding and interpretation.

Cognitive assumptions are closely connected with visual variables used for uncertainty visualization. Both
methods diﬀer in the type of visualization method and visual variables (intrinsic and extrinsic). The perception
of variables has a close connection with the theory of pre-attentive perception (Treisman and Gelade, 1980;
Wolfe et al., 1989). The extrinsic graphical variable size is generally considered to be a pre-attentive feature.
Such features are appropriate for the determination of presence or absence or particular elements or boundary
detection. On the other hand, intrinsic graphical variable lightness has not been conﬁrmed as pre-attentive.

However, the situation is rather diﬀerent when using a combination of both uncertainty portraying variables
with a main attribute variable. The intrinsic visualization method combines colour hue for the main attribute
value and lightness for its uncertainty. The resulting map legend is comprised of nine categories. On the other
the extrinsic visualization method combines colour lightness for the main attribute value and
hand,
proportional circle size for uncertainty. The map legend is comprised of only six categories. Depending on the
it could be expected that both representations may diﬀer in evoked cognitive and
form of visualization,
perceptual load (Lavie and Tsal, 1994; Granholm et al., 1996; Brünken et al., 2002). We can also expect a
diﬀerent processing diﬃculty of both bivariate combinations based on the selective attention theory (Nelson, 2002).

Cognitive style in map-related tasks

Kozhevnikov (2007) deﬁnes cognitive style as heuristics (i.e. strategy derived from experience with similar
problems used for processing external information). An individual’s cognitive style can be detected at all levels
of perception, from the elementary and highly automated ones to those that are complex and conscious. The
concept is used to refer to the way individuals think, perceive, and orient themselves in the environment.
According to Brigham et al. (2007), cognitive style is a pervasive bipolar dimension that is stable over time and
can be studied using psychometric techniques. He further states that a cognitive style may be value-
diﬀerentiated, meaning that it describes diﬀerences concerning value rather than quality. However, cognitive
style is far from a well-deﬁned construct, both with respect to its content and application to diﬀerent levels of
the personality system. A vast range of diﬀerent interpretations of cognitive styles exist (see Witkin et al., 1967;
Pask, 1976; Kirton, 1989; Rayner, 2000). Riding and Cheema (1991) surveyed more than 30 conceptions of
two principal
cognitive style, concluding that each of
dimensions. The verbal-imagery dimension encompasses an individual’s preference
representing
information in words/verbal associations, or in mental pictures. The wholist-analytic dimension is characterized
as an individual’s preference for processing information either in integrated wholes or in discrete parts.

the investigated conceptions pertains to one of

for

Given the nature of the tasks used in the study and the diﬀerences between intrinsic and extrinsic visual
representations (see Figure 2), it was the wholist-analytic dimension that was of greater importance for the
present study. According to Graﬀ (2003), wholist-analytic cognitive style can be deﬁned as a tendency to
process information either as an integrated whole or in discrete parts of that whole. The wholist-analytic
cognitive dimension is based on the conception of global/local bias (see Dale and Arnell, 2014) related to
whether visual information is perceived at a broad (global) level, or at a more focused (local) level, with more
attention being paid to partial characteristics of objects and phenomena and to their analytical processing.
Rezaei and Katz (2004) add that globally-oriented individuals consider phenomena in a broader perspective and
context. Analytically-oriented individuals, on the other hand, view each situation as an aggregate of discrete
elements, typically preferring to focus on one or two elements at a time at the expense of other elements/
aspects. Graﬀ (2003) further states that analytically-oriented individuals are better at apprehending concepts in
parts, but may experience diﬃculty integrating such concepts into complete, consistent wholes, while globally-
oriented individuals view concepts as wholes, but are unable to separate individual aspects of the concepts into
discrete parts. According to Kozhevnikov (2007), the analytical cognitive style tends to be characterized as
convergent, diﬀerentiated, sequential, reﬂective, and deductive, whereas the ‘global’ style has been described as
divergent, intuitive, impulsive, inductive, and creative. Globality is often discussed in connection with e.g.
attentional breadth in selective attention (Dale and Arnell, 2014) and rapid scene categorization (Brand and
Johnson, 2014).

4

C. ŠAŠINKA

The level of an individual’s performance in map-related tasks is a result of the interaction of three variables: (a)
user characteristics; (b) task type and situational context; (c) map-related characteristics/type of visual
representation (Figure 1). Wehrend and Lewis (1990) constructed a comprehensive catalogue of map-related
including identiﬁcation (identifying visual characteristics of features on the map),
operations,
localization
(determining the absolute or relative position) or categorization (placing in speciﬁcally deﬁned divisions in a
classiﬁcation; this may be done by colour, shape or size). Map-related tasks can be ranked depending on their
relative diﬃculty, from relatively easy operations of ‘altitude estimation’ (Juřík et al., 2017) or ‘ﬁnding the
shortest path’ (e.g. Jones, 1997) to highly complex tasks of ‘planning military operations’ (Hofmann et al.,
2015), which require several concepts to be explored simultaneously, compared, and integrated. Working with a
map always needs to be viewed as mental manipulation with semantically rich material rather than a mere
visual search and processing of visual stimuli (MacEachren and Taylor, 1994; Montello, 2009; Roth et al., 2011).
The highest-level performance in fulﬁlling the task can be expected if the cognitive style of the user matches the
nature of the task (Hammond, 1996) and the form of visual representation used. For instance, at a task
requiring analytical thinking, an analytically-oriented individual can be expected to perform better than a
globally-oriented individual with the same degree of cartographic literacy (Hus and Hojnik, 2013) and domain
knowledge (Alexander et al., 1994). Additionally, a form of visualization allowing for sequential analytical
processing will result in a better performance than a visualization requiring simultaneous and intuitive
processing. The user’s performance will be the best if all three of the areas (i.e. type of task, type of cognitive
style, and form of visualization) are in consonance.

From the point of view of experimental psychology, maps are highly valuable as stimulus material (Olson, 1979)
in that they constitute complex external representations with variables amenable to accurate control and change of
value. By representing identical content (data), diﬀerent forms of visualization are informationally equivalent,
enabling computational equivalence to be studied (Larkin and Simon, 1987). Any diﬀerences in performance
and in the way an individual works with diﬀerent maps can be viewed as directly linked to the diﬀerence in
visual presentation of the same content. In the present study, avalanche hazard maps were used with extrinsic
vs. intrinsic visual representations (Figure 2, left and right, respectively).

visualization
method
Map 

map 
content

s

i

t

c

u

o

a

n

t

e

t

i

o

N

a

x

n

t

u

t

r

e

 

o

f
 
s

o

l

v

e

d

 

t

a

t

s

y

k

 

e

p

p

r

o

b

l

e

m

Cognitive strategies 

map 
literacy

domain 
knowledge

level of 
cognitive 
function 

Figure 1. Triarchic structural model of performance when solving map-related task.

Figure 2. Snow avalanche hazard and hazard uncertainty map: left – extrinsic visual representation; right – intrinsic visual representation (adapted from
Kunz, 2011).

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

5

1

2

3

Colour (lightness)

Lightness 

7

4

1

8

5

2

9

6

3

1

2

3

Size

Colour               Hue 

Figure 3. Diﬀerences in the encoding of variables between the extrinsic (ﬁrst column) and intrinsic (second column) form of visualization; the third column
shows the diﬀerence in salience between rich yellow (1) and lighter blue (6) on white and black backgrounds.

The diﬀerence between the extrinsic and intrinsic representation exists in the way the two thematic layer
variables (snow avalanche hazard and snow avalanche hazard uncertainty) are represented. In extrinsic
representation, the avalanche hazard level is expressed in terms of variation in the lightness of the colour blue,
while hazard uncertainty is represented by the size of the dots. In intrinsic representation, the same map base is
used, with the avalanche hazard expressed in terms of hue, and hazard uncertainty expressed in terms of
variation in the lightness of the hue. Both types of visual representations use a combination of two graphic
variables. However, while the extrinsic type uses two diﬀerent modalities (hue and size) for the presentation of
two phenomena, intrinsic representation is expressed in terms of variation of two properties (hue and lightness)
of a single modality (colour). There is a clear diﬀerence in categorization between the two types of
representations. In the intrinsic visual representation, nine (3 × 3) categories are encoded explicitly; the extrinsic
visual representation, on the other hand, has separate categories for each of the two phenomena it represents (3
for avalanche hazard level and three for hazard uncertainty), with only six categories being encoded explicitly
(although there are a total of nine combinations as well). Even though colour properties (hue and lightness in
this particular case) tend to be regarded as two independent variables in the ﬁeld of cartography (Bertin, 1973),
in the psychology of perception colour properties are viewed as interacting with each other (D’Zmura, 1991; Itti
and Koch, 2000; Lindsey et al., 2010). For instance, a lighter blue on a light (white) background will be less
luminous and thus more salient than a rich yellow (e.g. Nothdurft, 2000; see Figure 3). The phenomenon can
be applied to map reading as well (see Brewer, 1992).

The objective of the presented study was to investigate the relationship between diﬀerent forms of bivariate
visual representation and an individual’s cognitive style as reﬂected by their performance in Navon’s test of
hierarchical ﬁgures (see section 4.2.1). We hypothesize (1) a link between global processing eﬃciency and
extrinsic visualization abilities, and (2) a link between local processing eﬃciency and intrinsic visualization
abilities. We thus consider that a variation of both hue and lightness using a single colour modality (intrinsic)
would refer to a more local approach, whereas two types of independent graphic hues and size variables
(extrinsic) will be considered a more global approach. In other words, the elaboration of two parameters (hue
and lightness) of one modality – colour (intrinsic) – would be linked to local processing abilities. On the other
hand, parallel consideration of two diﬀerent modalities, hue and size (extrinsic), would be linked to global
processing abilities.

Method

The study uses a mixed (conﬁrmatory-exploratory) research design, with the aim to combine extensive research
(for data collection and subsequent statistical analyses) with a more in-depth exploratory data analysis (EDA;
see Andrienko and Andrienko, 2005). The advantages of the mixed-research design, along with its theoretical
grounding, have been described by Štěrba et al. (2014), who also provide a sample study. The authors use the
term ‘mixed-research design’, which, however, tends to be viewed as referring to a combination of qualitative
and quantitative methods, particularly in the context of social sciences and constructivist approaches (see
Creswell, 2008; Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2009). In order to distinguish between the two concepts we propose
the term ‘combined extensive–intensive research design’. A combined mixed extensive–intensive research works
primarily with objective data, combining a conﬁrmatory stage of the research with an exploratory stage. The
ﬁrst (conﬁrmatory) phase of our research comprised two correlation studies. The ﬁrst consisted of the
collection of data on subjects with a high degree of map literacy (students of cartography), while the second
focused on subjects with a low degree of map literacy (students of psychology). After the conﬁrmatory phase,
an exploratory phase followed which was represented by a comparative eye-tracking study. The aim of the
comparative study was to reveal possible diﬀerences in task-solving strategies depending on the type of
visualization employed by usage of an exploratory data analysis. The structure of the research is shown in detail

6

C. ŠAŠINKA

Analysis of performance outputs:
correctness and response time

Exploration of tasks processing 

Group with high
map literacy

Group with low
map literacy

Group with low
map literacy

Extrinsic 

Intrinsic 

CFT 

CFT 

Extrinsic 

Intrinsic 

Extrinsic 

Intrinsic 

Comparative 
study

Correlation study I

Correlation study II

time

First phase: 
confirmative studies

Second phase: 
explorative study

Figure 4. Structure of used combined extensive–intensive research design (CFT – Compound Figures Test).

in Figure 4. While extensive methods are concerned only with the eﬀect of stimulus on behavioural outputs in the
sense of speed or correctness, intensive methods concentrate on the process alone, as in what happens between
stimulus and reaction? This is also the purpose of the eye-tracking comparative study which deeper illuminates
the results of the previous phase of the study.

Correlation studies I and II

The objective of the ﬁrst phase of the research was to investigate the relationship between an individual’s cognitive
style and the type of visualization used. By way of the ﬁrst phase, two correlation studies were conducted. The
design of the second study was adjusted based on the results of the ﬁrst study. More speciﬁcally, several items
were added to the subtest involving a single variable. The second study also included tasks focused on the
degree of understanding of the concept of visualization of snow avalanche hazard and hazard uncertainty.
These more complex tasks are not part of the present article, which focuses primarily on lower cognitive
processes (e.g. visual search as reﬂecting an individual’s cognitive style).

Participants

In the ﬁrst correlation study, the research sample consisted of students of geography in the 1st to 3rd year of their
studies. A total of 73 volunteers aged 19 to 27 years were tested. For the extrinsic visualization task, there were 37
subjects (19 male, 18 female), while 35 subjects (19 male, 16 female) were given a task employing intrinsic
visualization. In the second correlation study, a total of 62 volunteers aged 19–55 years were tested, all students
of psychology in the 1st to 3rd year of their studies. For the intrinsic visualization task, there were 35 subjects
(8 male, 27 female), most of them aged 19–25 years, with one male outlier aged 37 years; 27 subjects (3 male,
24 female) were given the extrinsic visualization task. Most of the subjects were 19 to 28 years, with one male
outlier aged 55 years. None of the subjects had any previous experience of participation in cartographic
visualization testing.

Apparatus

The test was created and administered in MuTeP (Multivariate Testing Programme; see Kubíček et al., 2014; Štěrba
et al., 2015; Kubíček et al., 2017) the predecessor of software Hypothesis. After every data collection a group
discussion followed. Participants were asked about their subjective experience by elaboration of the test battery.

Stimulus material – map-related tasks

In the correlation studies, avalanche maps were used showing both the level of the snow avalanche hazard
(expressed in terms of load on the snowpack) and the level of avalanche hazard uncertainty. Both variables
were expressed by means of a three-level scale (Low – Moderate – High). The map consisted of a base layer
and a thematic layer, with the latter being explained by the legend of the map. In the experimental tasks, the
base layer played only a very marginal role. The subjects’ performance depended on their ability to
comprehend the instructions, decode the legend, and perform a visual search to locate the four numbered
target areas and decide which of them meets the criteria given. There was always only one correct answer. The

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

7

visual scene consisted of a map, a map legend, task instructions located at the top of the computer screen, and
numbered ‘buttons’. The instructions were always presented separately on a blank screen. No time limit for
the instructions was given so that there would be enough time for the participants to comprehend the
instructions. The overall test structure was as follows:

1. Training – two training tasks

a. Identify the level of variable A (avalanche hazard).
b. Identify the level of variable B (avalanche hazard uncertainty).

2. One-variable tasks

3. Two-variable tasks

a. Identify the level of variable A (avalanche hazard) – low, moderate, and high respectively.
b. Identify the level of variable B (avalanche hazard uncertainty) – low, moderate, and high respectively.

a. Identify the level of variable A (avalanche hazard) and variable B (avalanche hazard uncertainty) –

combination of low, moderate, and high respectively).

Both tests were made up of one- and two-variable tasks. In the ﬁrst correlation study, the participants were given
ﬁve test tasks (see Figure 5 top line) – two for one variable and three for two variables. In the second correlation
study (performed on subjects with a low degree of map literacy) the batch of one-variable tasks included four items
instead of two (see Figure 5 bottom line).

Visualizations used in training were similar to the rest of the test. Sample instructions of one-variable task are as
follows: ‘Select the area with a moderate level of avalanche hazard’ (see Figure 6 left). The subjects completed each
task by clicking on the respective ‘button’. Instructions of two-variable tasks were formulated in the following way:
‘Select the area with a high level of avalanche hazard accompanied by a low level of avalanche hazard uncertainty’
(see Figure 6 right).

Stimulus material – compound ﬁgures test

The second part of the test battery consisted of a psychological test of cognitive style. It contained a variation of
Navon’s Hierarchical Figures Test (Navon, 1977) – a compound ﬁgures test (see Figure 7, left) which was
designed for the purposes of the present study using MuTeP. Navon’s test (Navon, 1977) is one of the most
frequently used methods for the measurement of the wholist-analytic dimension of cognitive processing (e.g.
Yovel et al., 2005; Duchaine et al., 2007; Milne and Szczerbinski, 2009; Brand and Johnson, 2014). It
enabled us to measure a person’s ability to direct attention either to the local level of the visual stimulus
material or to the global level. Bouvet et al. (2011) used tasks based on the Hierarchical Figure test and
found evidence that participants exhibit a similar processing style across modalities with respect to both
vision and audition modalities. Thus these ﬁndings support the theory that Navon’s Hierarchical Figures can
be understood and used more generally as a measure of wholistic-analytic cognitive style and not only in
the narrower way, as an indicator of a visuo-attentional global/local style. The compound ﬁgures test

Figure 5. Structure of map-related tasks (students of cartography – top; students of psychology – bottom).

8

C. ŠAŠINKA

Figure 6. Sample map-related tasks: Left (intrinsic visualization) – Select the area with a moderate level of avalanche hazard. Right (extrinsic visualization) –
Select the area with a high level of avalanche hazard accompanied by a low level of avalanche hazard uncertainty.

included instructions, several training items and 32
test items. The stimulus material consisted of a set
of large, single-digit numbers compounded of small
numbers. There were two subtests, local and global,
each comprising 16 items. The participants were
instructed to identify the small numbers in the
ﬁrst subtest and the large numbers in the second
subtest by clicking on one of
four available
buttons as quickly as possible (see Figure 7, left).
The overall response time of the respondents was
recorded electronically; the average response time
per item was calculated.

Results

Figure 7. A compound stimulus (left); an item from the Compound Figures
Test adapted into the MuTeP environment (right).

Psychometric parameters of compound ﬁgures
test
Two subjects with a high error rate for CFT were
excluded from further analyses. One student of
cartography erred ﬁve times in the local subtest
and six times in the global subtest. One student of
psychology erred 12 times in the ﬁrst subtest. The
number of mistakes made by the other participants
was insigniﬁcant; most of
them achieved 100%
accuracy, others erred less than three times. Reaction times of the outlying errors were included in the analyses.
The overall score for the local and global subtests was counted based on 15 items from each subtest. The ﬁrst
item of each subtest was excluded from the analysis. In line with previous ﬁndings, the internal consistency
(Cronbach’s alpha) for both subtests was found to be high (α = 0.805 and α = 0.864, respectively). Diﬀerences in
reaction times between the two subtests (Figure 8) were found to be in agreement with previous ﬁndings as
well. A paired t-test revealed faster processing of global ﬁgures by 15% (N = 133; mean reaction time for the
local subtest m = 1.9 s; SD = 0.2; mean reaction time for the global subtest m = 1.6 s; SD = 0.17; df = 132; p =
0.01). The results showed a positive moderate correlation between the two subtests (r = 0.437, p < 0.01). For
further analysis mean reaction times of both subtests were used, which in our study separately represent the
analytic and wholistic dimension of cognitive style.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

9

Relation between CFT and map-related tasks
The error rate of students of cartography was 7.2% for intrinsic visualization and 9.7% for extrinsic visualization.
Students of psychology exhibited a signiﬁcantly higher error rate in both subtests: 13.8% for intrinsic visualization
and 20.0% for extrinsic visualization. The overall error rate was counted from the individual error rates of all the
subjects who completed the cartographic part of the research, including outliers, which were, however, excluded
from further analyses. Outlying subjects in the research sample of students of cartography were those who erred
two and more times (out of a total of ﬁve items). Thus, participants with an error rate > 40% (intrinsic visualization
– one participant; extrinsic visualization – four participants). As regards the research sample consisting of students
of psychology, four subjects were excluded (extrinsic visualization) who erred three and more times (out of 7; error
rate > 40%). Although the above outliers were excluded from further analyses, all reaction times of the remaining
participants were (as in CFT) included (see Tables 1 and 2). The overall mean reaction times were for students of
cartography and intrinsic visualization m = 9,5 s; SD = 3,1 and m = 12,4 s; SD = 6,8 for extrinsic visualization. For
students of psychology m = 12,0 s; SD = 6,4 (intrinsic) and m = 10,7; SD = 2,7 (extrinsic).

Interpretation of the results

The results of the CFT employing a variation of Navon’s hierarchical ﬁgures test conﬁrmed the eﬀect of global
precedence; the average response time in the global subtest was lower by 15% compared with the local subtest. In
addition, the results showed a positive correlation between the two subtests, which is in line with the expectation
that an individual’s processing capacity in both tasks will be driven by the same psychomotor speed (Spirduso,
1980). After the exclusion of subjects with high error rates (either in CFT or in map-related tasks) the subjects’
results in CFT and map-related tasks were tested for possible correlations. The analysis was conducted by means
of comparison of overall response times in map-related tasks with response times in CFT (for both subtests
separately). The results of the ﬁrst correlation study (on subjects with a high degree of map literacy) revealed a
positive correlation between scores obtained in the local subtest and response times in map-related tasks
employing intrinsic visualization; at the same time, a positive correlation was found to exist between global-
subtest response times and response times in map-related tasks employing extrinsic visualization. The fact that
no cross-correlation was found between either the local subtest and extrinsic visualization or between the global
subtest and intrinsic visualization (although the subjects’ performance in map-related tasks was also driven by the
same psychomotor speed) renders the above ﬁndings even more signiﬁcant. In the second correlation study (on
students of psychology), no signiﬁcant relationship
between the variables was found. We suppose that
the absence of any correlation might have been
caused by low levels of map literacy, which was
reﬂected in comparatively high error rates.

Comparative study: Eye-Tracking

The reason for replicating the correlation studies
to obtain
using an eye-tracking system was
additional information which would provide deeper
insight
into the process of solving map-related
tasks and related cognitive strategies. With the
the technology, eye-tracking
decrease in cost of
became a more widely utilized method, not one
only used in cartographic studies (see Alaçam and
Dalci, 2009; Çöltekin et al., 2009; Ooms et al.,
2012; Popelka and Brychtová, 2013; Popelka and
Dědková, 2014; Herman et al., 2017). The aim of
the eye-tracking study was to investigate the impact
of diﬀerent types of cartographic visualization on
task-processing. While the conﬁrmatory phase of
the research focused on the speed and ‘correctness’
of reactions to visual stimuli, the exploratory phase
consisted of investigating the very process of task-
solving (see Figure 9).

Figure 8. Mean reaction times (s) for both subtests of the Compound Figures
Test.

Table 1. Students of cartography: relationship between map-related task performance (response time)
and CFT results (response time) (Pearson’s correlation; one-tailed).

Intrinsic visualization (n = 34)

Extrinsic visualization (n = 33)

Students of cartography

Local subtest

Global subtest

Global subtest

One variable
Two variables
Overall score
** Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level; * Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level

.400**
.168
.387*

.180
−.114
.050

.375*
.302*
.384*

Local subtest
−.021
.304*
.176

Table 2. Students of psychology: relationship between map-related task performance (response time) and
CFT results (response time) (Pearson’s correlation; one-tailed).
Intrinsic visualization (n = 35)

Extrinsic visualization (n = 23)

Students of psychology

Local subtest

Global subtest

Local subtest

Global subtest

One variable
Two variables
Overall score
** Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level; * Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level

.100
−.079
.027

.222
.230
.266

.211
.106
.221

.291
−.140
.135

10

C. ŠAŠINKA

Participants

Apparatus

A total of 14 subjects aged 21–35 years volunteered to participate in the study; they were either university
students or had already completed their university studies. None of the participants received any education
in cartography or related ﬁelds. The participants were divided into two groups of seven.

The device used in the study was EyeLink 1000, a remote eye-tracking system manufactured by SR Research.
The original test battery presented in MuTeP was adapted to the environment of Experiment Builder, a
software tool by SR Research for creating eye-tracking experiments. Eye-tracking data were saved in a
format enabling an exploratory data analysis to be carried out in EyeLink Data Viewer, software that can be
used for viewing, ﬁltering, and processing eye-tracking data recorded with an EyeLink eye-tracker. The
application oﬀers a range of eye-tracking metrics. In addition, it enables the analysis of transitions between
deﬁned areas of interest (AOIs). In the analysis, visualization tools such as an attention map and video
analysis were also used. After every single data collection an individual inquiry followed. Participants were
asked about their subjective experience by elaboration of a test battery.

Stimulus material

The original test structure was slightly modiﬁed (see Figure 10) and several new training tasks were added to the
original test battery. A detailed graphical explanation of the principles of avalanche risk and uncertainty was added
in order to properly introduce both the risk mapping and its uncertainty. These should enhance the understanding
of the experiment by non-experts.

Results and interpretation

The exploratory data analysis was performed at both the subject level and group level (extrinsic vs. intrinsic
visualization). One participant from the extrinsic visualization group was excluded from the analysis due to

Figure 9. Process of investigating variables: (A) stimulus -> output; (B) stimulus -> cognitive processing and associate behaviour -> output.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

11

a heavy data dropout. Several areas of interest were deﬁned, with key AOIs being set around the legend and the
map. The following measures were analyzed: trial duration, number of transitions between the legend and the
map, the number of ﬁxations on the legend and on the map, dwell time1 on the legend and on the map, and
ﬁxation durations.

Figure 11 (graph on the left) shows average trial durations for the eleven tasks used in the study. The ﬁrst seven
tasks employ only one variable (level of avalanche hazard or avalanche hazard uncertainty), while the rest of the
tasks inquire about both variables. The area represented by the map was identical in all the tasks. The graph on the
right in Figure 11 shows the number of transitions between the map and the legend for each task (in both
directions). Figure 12 (box plots) shows the average number of transitions and their spread for both extrinsic
and intrinsic visualization tasks. As is evident from the graphs, the subjects’ performance across the individual
tasks was much more homogeneous when working with extrinsic visualization; the subjects’ performance at
intrinsic visualization tasks, on the other hand, appears to have been more sensitive to the nature of the task.
The higher variability might have been caused by greater diﬀerences in the diﬃculty of discriminating between
diﬀerent levels of brightness (caused by the interaction between hue and lightness). The diﬀerences in
brightness (see Figure 2 right and Figure 3 second and third columns) make it e.g. easier to distinguish between
low uncertainty/low avalanche hazard and low uncertainty/moderate avalanche hazard than between high
uncertainty/low hazard and high uncertainty/moderate hazard.

The following analyses focus on the diﬀerences between extrinsic and intrinsic visualization as reﬂected by the
diﬀerences in dwell times and ﬁxation durations (related to the legend and the map). Graphs in Figure 13 show the
percentages of map/legend dwell time for all the tasks. For extrinsic visualization tasks, the legend dwell time ranges
from 15 to 35% (of the total dwell time); visual search time (map dwell time) ranges from 65 to 85%. Intrinsic
visualization, on the other hand, exhibits a far greater variability across the individual tasks; for the legend, the
dwell time ranges from below 10% in one task to over 60% in another. In the latter case, the time needed for
decoding the legend even exceeds the time needed to locate the target in the map.

Figure 14 presents a comparison of map and legend ﬁxation durations in intrinsic (right) and extrinsic (left)
visualization tasks. Figure 14 shows the average ﬁxation durations and spreads. As with dwell times, the data
show lower variability across the individual tasks for extrinsic visualization: the curves of ﬁxation durations are
nearly identical (see, for instance, the data concerning the second task, with ﬁxation durations slightly above
250 ms for both the legend and the map). Intrinsic visualization, however, led to a diﬀerent situation during the
legend-related ﬁxations were on average more than 100 ms longer than map-related
same (second) task:
ﬁxations. From Figure 15 it can be seen that extrinsic visualization caused average ﬁxation durations to last
approximately 250 ms for the map and the legend alike. In the case of intrinsic visualization, the same value
was true for map-related average ﬁxation durations; the average duration of legend-related ﬁxations, however,
far exceeded 300 ms.

Figure 10. Structure of map-related tasks in the eye-tracking study.

Figure 11. Trial duration (response time for whole trials in ms; (left) and number of transitions (right) between the map and the legend.

12

C. ŠAŠINKA

Discussion and Conclusion

et

in

to

to

al.,

order

(Poirel

establish

conducted

discriminate

global precedence

The primary objective of the study was to investigate
the relationship between the participants’ cognitive
style and their performance at map-related tasks
employing diﬀerent forms of visualization. First, a
Compound Figures Test (a variation of Navon’s
Hierarchical Figures Test) was administered using
MuTeP
between
analytically and globally oriented individuals. The
test has already been successfully employed in
previous studies (Horváth, 2012; Kubíček et al.,
2016). The results of the test conﬁrmed the eﬀect
of
2008).
Subsequently, two independent correlation studies
were
the
in order
relationship between the participants’ performance
at global and local subtests of the CFT and their
employing
at map-related tasks
performance
diﬀerent
visualization
(intrinsic and extrinsic). Each correlation study
used a research sample with a diﬀerent level of
map literacy. The ﬁrst research sample with a high
degree of map literacy consisted of students of
cartography, while subjects with low levels of map
of
literacy were
psychology. In contrast with the ﬁrst study, the second correlation study showed no signiﬁcant correlation
between the participants’ performance at CFT and their performance at map-related tasks. We suppose that the
absence of any correlation might have been caused by low levels of map literacy and the resulting subjective
diﬃculty of the map-related tasks. In a post-experimental inquiry, the students of psychology more often
reported that they had diﬃculties understanding the notion of ‘avalanche risk uncertainty’. The above was
reﬂected in comparatively high error rates displayed by the students of psychology. We believe that
comprehension problems acted as an intervening variable and might have been a source of signiﬁcant ‘noise’ in
the collected data. The studies focused on the investigation of low-level cognitive processes, particularly the
visual decoding of the legend and subsequent visual search for target areas in the map. It is, however,
important to realize that a map represents a complex communication channel and its thematic layer (if present)
triggers high-level cognitive processes which may override the underlying low-level cognitive processes. Thus,
the amount of time needed for solving the map-related tasks did not primarily depend on the type of
visualization used or the speed of visual processing, but rather on the degree and speed of understanding the
instructions. Low map literacy or domain-knowledge (e.g. by students of psychology) may play a signiﬁcant
role for the successful processing of an entire task and may override the potential eﬀects between diﬀerences in
visualizations. According to Booth (2006), tasks involving low-level cognitive processes are less prone to

Figure 12. Number of transitions between the legend and the map.

cartographic

represented

students

forms

by

of

Figure 13. Dwell times related to the map and the legend in extrinsic (left) and intrinsic (right) visualization tasks (in %).

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

13

Figure 14. Fixation durations related to the map and the legend in extrinsic (left) and intrinsic (right) visualization tasks (in ms).

are

overridden

invoking between-task diﬀerences in the subjects’
performance than those tasks involving high-level
cognitive processes, where local/global processing
executive/strategic
styles
processes. Thus, if a medium-strong correlation is
found between a simple, selective attention task
(such as CFT) and a complex map-related task, it
identical
can be
cognitive processes are at play in both cases.

viewed as

indicating

that

by

literacy,

signiﬁcant

In the ﬁrst correlation study, which worked
with a group of participants with high levels of
correlations were
map
established between the participants’ cognitive
style and the type of visualization used in map-
related tasks. A statistically signiﬁcant positive
correlation (r = .387; p < 0.05) was established
between scores obtained in the local subtest and
response times in map-related tasks employing
intrinsic visualization. No relationship was found
scores
between
obtained in the global subtest. Similarly, while a
positive correlation (r = .384; p < 0.05) was found
to exist between global-subtest response times
tasks
and
employing extrinsic visualization, no relationship
was found between extrinsic visualization and
the local subtest. Thus, it can be concluded that
subjects with high levels of map literacy exhibit diﬀerences in their performance at map-related tasks
depending on their cognitive style and on the type of visualization employed. Analytically-oriented
individuals were better at tasks involving intrinsic visualization, while globally-oriented individuals performed
better at tasks employing extrinsic visualization. The fact that no cross-correlation was found between either
the local subtest and extrinsic visualization or between the global subtest and intrinsic visualization renders
the ﬁndings even more signiﬁcant. Following the two correlation studies in the ﬁrst phase, a comparative
eye-tracking study was conducted in the second phase with the aim of obtaining deeper insight into the
it was not designed to test pre-deﬁned
cognitive processes which were at play during task-solving;
hypotheses or compare types of visualization with respect to their eﬀectiveness.

Figure 15. Fixation durations related to the map and the legend in extrinsic
(two boxplots on the left) and intrinsic (two boxplots on the right) visualization
tasks (in ms).

in map-related

visualization

response

intrinsic

times

and

The results of the eye-tracking part of our research indicate a high dependency of performance at intrinsic
visualization tasks on the nature of the tasks (i.e. on the values of target variables). An example of the above is
represented by the high across-task variability in the number of map/legend transitions. At the same time,
intrinsic visualization tasks exhibit a far greater number of transitions than extrinsic visualization tasks,
requiring more ‘checking look-backs’ at the legend. Another analyzed parameter was represented by the map/
legend dwell time ratio. For extrinsic visualization tasks, the legend dwell time was relatively short, ranging

14

C. ŠAŠINKA

from 10 to 30% (of the total dwell time), while visual search time (map dwell time) ranged from 60 to 80%. Intrinsic
visualization, on the other hand, exhibited a far greater variability across the individual tasks. For the legend, the
dwell time ranges from below 10% in one task to over 50% in another. Time spent on visual search amounted to
more than 70% of the total dwell time in some tasks and less than 40% in others. In some cases, the time needed for
decoding the legend even exceeded the time needed to locate the target in the map. In addition, intrinsic
visualization resulted in longer ﬁxation durations and greater ﬁxation duration variability across the individual
tasks. The results indicate that in intrinsic tasks, decoding the legend may in some cases require signiﬁcant
cognitive eﬀort (see Longo and Barrett, 2010). Our ﬁndings thus support the results of Nelson (2000; 2002) that
the colour lightness and colour value combination is more time consuming for separate symbol dimension
identiﬁcation. An instance of the above may be represented by the established across-task variability in the
diﬃculty of legend decoding in intrinsic visualization tasks. The ﬁndings regarding intrinsic and extrinsic
visualization support the hypothesis that the diﬀerent types of visualization are not computationally equivalent
and that each of them requires a diﬀerent cognitive strategy. It can be assumed, further, that an individual’s
performance will be the best if his/her cognitive style and the preferred cognitive strategy are in consonance
with the type of task given (see Figure 1). The results of the ﬁrst correlation study and of the comparative eye-
tracking study conﬁrmed the hypothesis that the process of solving map-related tasks is, to a large extent,
dependent on the type of visualization used in the task. The correlation study established a diﬀerence between
the participants in their map-related performance depending on their cognitive style, indicating that diﬀerent
cognitive strategies might have been at play. Globally-oriented individuals were better at extrinsic visualization
tasks, where two variables were represented by two diﬀerent modalities which needed to be processed
simultaneously after decoding the legend decoding; intrinsic visualization tasks, on the other hand, allowing for
sequential processing of two variables represented by a single modality (colour), were ‘easier’ for locally-
(analytically-) oriented individuals. The eye-tracking study enabled us to record the participants’ eye
movements during the experiments and to learn about possible diﬀerences in task-solving in a more direct way.
We are currently working on a replicative study with a modiﬁed research design so that the ﬁndings of the
present study can be fully conﬁrmed. The new design will avoid the term ‘uncertainty’; care will be taken to
ensure that only concepts familiar (e.g. ﬁre risk and availability of ﬁre brigade) to individuals with low levels
of map literacy are used. In addition, a more in-depth analysis of the participants’ performance in map-
related tasks will be carried out. A new testing system will be used, enabling the interconnection of SW
Hypothesis (Opach et al., 2017; Štěrba et al., 2015; Svatoňová and Kolejka, 2017) with SW Ogama
(Voßkühler et al., 2008) and the eye-tracking system Eye Tribe or SMI RED250mobile (Popelka et al.,
2016): The system uses a presentation interface which allows for extensive and intensive data collection to
be conducted simultaneously.

1. dwell time refers to the sum duration of ﬁxations falling within a particular AOI; ﬁxation duration refers to the duration of

This research was supported by funding from the project of Masaryk University under the grant agreement No. MUNI/M/
0846/2015, which is called ‘Inﬂuence of cartographic visualization methods on the success of solving practical and
educational spatial tasks’.

Note

Funding

individual ﬁxations.

Notes on the contributor

Čeneˇk Šašinka is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Psychology at Masaryk
University in Brno. He is Head of the Center for Experimental Psychology and Cognitive
Sciences. He is one of the founders of the HUME Lab (Experimental Humanities Laboratory)
and he is also a member of executive board of the HUME Lab. His research interests focus
mainly on psychological assessment, cognitive visualization, and differences among individual
users in map perception and interpretation.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

15

ORCID
Čeněk Šašinka
Zdeněk Stachoň
Petr Kubíček

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6319-5317

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1807-1459

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4613-1068

References
Alaçam, Ö. and Dalci, M. (2009) “A Usability Study of Webmaps with Eye Tracking Tool: The Eﬀects of Iconic Representation
of Information” In Jacko, J.A. (Ed.) Human-Computer Interaction, New Trends pp.12–21, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York:
Springer.

Alexander, P.A., Kulikowich, J.M. and Schulze, S.K. (1994) “The Inﬂuence of Topic Knowledge, Domain Knowledge, and

Interest on the Comprehension of Scientiﬁc Exposition” Learning and Individual Diﬀerences 6 (4) pp.379–397.

Andrienko, N. and Andrienko, G. (2005) Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and Temporal Data: A Systematic Approach New

York: Springer.

Bertin, J. (1973) Sémiologie graphique Paris: La Haye.
Booth, R.D.L. (2006) “Local-global processing and cognitive style in autism spectrum disorders and typical development“ (PhD
Thesis). Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London. Available at: https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/ﬁles/2935437/433168.pdf
(Accessed: 12th June 2016)

Bouvet, L., Rousseta, S., Valdoisa, S. and Donnadieu, S. (2011) “Global Precedence Eﬀect in Audition and Vision: Evidence for

Similar Cognitive Styles Across Modalities” Acta Psychologica 138 pp.329–335.

Brand, J. and Johnson, A.P. (2014) “Attention to Local and Global Levels of Hierarchical Navon Figures Aﬀects Rapid Scene

Categorization” Frontiers in Psychology [e-journal] 5, 1274. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01274 (Accessed: 12 June 2016).

Brewer, C.A. (1992) “Review of Colour Terms and Simultaneous Contrast Research for Cartography” Cartographica 29 (3&4)

pp.20–30.

Brigham, K.H., De Castro, J.O. and Shepherd, D.A. (2007) “A Person-Organization Fit Model of Owner-Managers’ Cognitive

Style and Organizational Demands, Entrepreneurship” Theory and Practice 31 pp.29–51.

Brünken, R., Steinbacher, S., Plass, J.L., and Leutner, D. (2002) “Assessment of Cognitive Load in Multimedia Learning using

Dual-Task Methodology” Experimental Psychology 49 (2) pp.109–119.

Buttenﬁeld, B. (1991) “A Rule for Describing Line Feature Geometry” In Buttenﬁeld, B.P., McMaster, R.B. and Freeman, H.
(Eds.) Map Generalization: Making Rules for Knowledge Representation pp.150–171, London: Longman Scientiﬁc &
Technical.

Çöltekin, A., Heil, B., Garlandini, S. and Fabrikant, S.I. (2009) “Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Interactive Map Interface
Designs: A Case Study Integrating Usability Metrics with Eye-Movement Analysis” Cartography and Geographic
Information Science 36 (1) pp.5–17.

Creswell, J.W. (2008) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches Los Angeles, London, New

Delhi, Singapore: Sage Publications, Inc.

Dale, G. and Arnell, K.M. (2014) “Lost in the Forest, Stuck in the Trees: Dispositional Global/Local Bias is Resistant to
Exposure to High and Low Spatial Frequencies” PLoS ONE [e-journal] 9 (7) p.e98625. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0098625
(Accessed: 10th July 2016).

Duchaine, B., Yovel, G. and Nakayama, K. (2007) “No Global Processing Deﬁcit in the Navon Task in 14 Developmental

Prosopagnosics” Social Cognitive and Aﬀective Neuroscince 2 (2) pp.104–113.

D’Zmura, M. (1991) “Color in Visual Search” Vision Research 31 pp.951–966.
Elmer, M.E. (2013) “Symbol Considerations for Bivariate Thematic Maps” in The 26th International Cartographic Conference,
http://icaci.org/ﬁles/documents/ICC_proceedings/ICC2013/_
at:

25th–30th August

2013. Available

Dresden,
extendedAbstract/278_proceeding.pdf (Accessed: 10th April 2016)

Gershon, N. (1998) “Visualization of an Imperfect World” Computer Graphics and Applications 18 pp.43–45.
Graﬀ, M. (2003) “Learning from Web-Based Instructional Systems and Cognitive Style” British Journal of Educational

Granholm, E., Asarnow, R.F., Sarkin, A.J. and Dykes, K.L. (1996) “Pupillary Responses Index Cognitive Resource Limitations”

Hammond, K.R. (1996) Human Judgment and Social Policy: Irreducible Uncertainty, Inevitable Error, Unavoidable Injustice

Herman, L., Popelka, S. and Hejlová, V. (2017) “Eye-Tracking Analysis of Interactive 3D Geovisualizations” Journal of Eye

Hofmann, A., Hošková-Mayerová, Š., Talhofer, V. and Kovařík, V. (2015) “Creation of Models for Calculation of Coeﬃcients

of Terrain Passability” Quality and Quantity 49 (4) pp.1679–1691.

Horváth, J. (2012) “Funkce Kognitivního Stylu Při Čtení Mapy v Kontextu Krizového Řízení” (Role of cognitive style with

respect to map reading in context of crisis management) (Diploma Thesis) Masaryk University, Brno.

Hus, V. and Hojnik, T. (2013) “Comparative Analysis of Cartographic Literacy in the Selected Curricula at the Primary Level”

Itti, L. and Koch, C. (2000) “A Saliency-Based Search Mechanism for Overt and Covert Shifts of Visual Attention” Vision

Creative Education 4 (12) pp.757–761.

Research 40 pp.1489–1506.

Jones, C. (1997) Geographical Information Systems and Computer Cartography London and New York: Routledge.
Juřík, V., Herman, L., Šašinka, Č., Stachoň, Z. and Chmelík. J. (2017) “When the Display Matters: A Multifaceted Perspective

on 3D Geovisualizations” Open Geosciences 9 (1) pp.89–100.

Kirton, M.J. (1989) Adaptors and Innovators: Styles of Creativity and Problem-Solving London: Routledge.

Technology 34 (4) pp.407–418.

Psychophysiology 33 (4) pp.457–461.

New York: Oxford University Press.

Movement Research 10 (3) pp.1–15.

16

C. ŠAŠINKA

Koláčný, A. (1977) “Cartographic Information – A Fundamental Concept and Term in Modern Cartography” Cartographica:

The International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization 14 (1) pp.39–45.

Konečný, M., Březinová, Š., Drápela, M. V., Friedmannová, L.,Herman, L.,Hübnerová, Z., Kolář, M., Kolejka, J., Konečný, M.,
Kozel, J., Kubíček, P., Kučerová, J., Ludík, T., Michálek, J., Mísařová, D., Mulíčková, E., Ráček, J., Rybanský, M., Řezník, T.,
Stachoň, Z., Svatoňová, H., Šafr, G., Šašinka, Č., Štampach, R., Štěrba, Z., Tajovská, K., Talhofer, V., Trnková, Z., Veselý, V.,
Zbořil, (2011) Dynamická geovizualizace v krizovém managementu Brno: Masarykova univerzita.

Kozhevnikov, M. (2007) “Cognitive Styles in the Context of Modern Psychology: Toward an Integrated Framework”

Psychological Bulletin 133 (3) pp.464–481.

Kubíček, P., Šašinka, Č. and Stachoň, Z. (2014) “Vybrané Kognitivní Aspekty Vizualizace Polohové Nejistoty v Geograﬁckých

Datech. Geograﬁe – Sborník České Geograﬁcké Společnosti” Česká geograﬁcká společnost 119 (1) pp.67–90.

Kubíček, P., Šašinka, Č., Stachoň, Z., Štěrba, Z., Apeltauer, J. and Urbánek, T. (2017) “Cartographic Design and Usability of

Visual Variables for Linear Features” The Cartographic Journal 54(1), pp.1–11.

Kunz, M. (2011) “Interactive Visualizations of Natural Hazards Data and Associated Uncertainties” PhD thesis ETH Curych.
Kunz, M. and Hurni, L. (2011) “How to Enhance Cartographic Visualizations of Natural Hazards Assessment Results” The

Cartographic Journal 48 (1) pp.60–71.

Larkin, J.H. and Simon, A.H. (1987) “Why a Diagram is (sometimes) Worth Ten Thousand Words” Cognitive Science 11

Lavie, N. and Tsal, Y. (1994) “Perceptual Load as a Major Determinant of the Locus of Selection in Visual Attention”

Perception & Psychophysics 56 (2) pp.183–197

Leech, N.L. and Onwuegbuzie, A.J. (2009) “A Typology of Mixed Methods Research Designs” Quality & Quantity 43 (2)

pp.65–100.

pp.265–275.

Leitner, L. and Buttenﬁeld, B. (2000) “Guidelines for the Display of Attribute Certainty” Cartography and Geographic

Information Science 27 pp.3–14.

Lindsey, D.T., Brown, A.M., Reijnen, E., Rich, A.N., Kuzmova, Y.I. and Wolfe, J.M. (2010) “Color Channels, not Color
Appearance or Color Categories, Guide Visual Search for Desaturated Color Targets” Psychological Science 21 (9)
pp.1208–1214.

Longo, L. and Barrett, S. (2010) “A Computational Analysis of Cognitive Eﬀort” In Nguyen, N.T., Le, M.T. and Świątek, J.
(Eds.) Intelligent Information and Database Systems pp.65–74, Volume 5991 of the series Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, New York: Springer.

Maceachren, A. (1992) “Visualizing Uncertain Information” Cartographic Perspectives 13 pp.10–19.
MacEachren, A.M. and Taylor, D.R.F. (1994) Visualization in Modern Cartography Oxford: Pergamon.
MacEachren, A.M., Roth R. E., O’Brien, J., Li, B., Swingley, D., Gahegan, M. (2012) “Visual Semiotics & Uncertainty

Visualization: An Empirical Study” Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics 18 (2) pp.2496–2505.

Milne, E. and Szczerbinski, M. (2009) “Global and Local Perceptual Style, Field-Independence, and Central Coherence: An

Attempt at Concept Validation” Advances in Cognitive Psychology 5 pp.1–26.

Montello, D.R., (2002) “Cognitive Map-Design Research in the Twentieth Century: Theoretical and Empirical Approaches”

Cartography and Geographic Information Science 29 (3) pp.283–304.

Montello, D.R. (2009) “Cognitive Research in GIScience: Recent Achievements and Future Prospects” Geography Compass 3

Navon, D. (1977) “Forest Before Trees: The Precedence of Global Features in Visual Perception” Cognitive Psychology 9 (3)

Nelson, E.S. (1999) “Using Selective Attention Theory to Design Bivariate Point Symbols” Cartographic Perspectives 32

Nelson, E.S. (2000) “Designing Eﬀective Bivariate Symbols: The Inﬂuence of Perceptual Grouping Processes” Cartography and

Geographic Information Science 27 (4) pp.261–278.

Nelson, E.S. (2002) “The Impact of Bivariate Symbol Design on Task Performance in a Map Setting” Cartographica 37 (4)

(5) pp.1824–1840.

pp.353–383.

pp.6–28.

pp.61–78

Nothdurft, H.C. (2000) “Salience from Feature Contrast: Additivity Across Dimensions” Vision Research 40 pp.1183–1201.
Olson, J.M. (1979) “Cognitive Cartographic Experimentation” Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic

Information and Geovisualization 16 (1) pp.34–44.

Ooms, K., Maeyer, P.D., Fack, V., Assche, E.V. and Witlox, F. (2012) “Investigating the Eﬀectiveness of an Eﬃcient Label

Placement Method Using Eye Movement Data” The Cartographic Journal 49 (3) pp.234–246.

Opach, T., Popelka, S., Dolezalova, J. and Rod, J.K. (2017) “Star and Polyline Glyphs in a Grid Plot and on a Map Display:

Which Perform Better?” Cartography and Geographic Information Science doi:10.1080/15230406.2017.1364169

Pask, G. (1976) “Styles and Strategies of Learning” British Journal of Educational Psychology 46 pp.128–148.
Poirel, N., Pineau, A. and Mellet, E. (2008) “What does the Nature of the Stimuli Tell us about the Global Precedence Eﬀect?”

Popelka, S. and Brychtová, A. (2013) “Eye-Tracking Study on Diﬀerent Perception of 2D and 3D Terrain Visualisation”

Acta Psychologica 127 pp.1–11.

Cartographic Journal 50 (3) pp.240–246.

Popelka, S. and Dědková, P. (2014) “Extinct Village 3D Visualization and its Evaluation with Eye-Movement Recording” in
Computational Science and Its Applications – ICCSA 2014 Murgante, B., Misra, S., Rocha, A. M. A. C., Torre, C., Rocha,
J. G., Falcão, M. I., Taniar, D., Apduhan, B. O., Gervasi, O., Part 1, pp.786–795, New York: Springer.

Popelka, S., Stachoň, Z., Šašinka, Č. and Doležalová, J. (2016) “Eyetribe Tracker Data Accuracy Evaluation and its
Interconnection with Hypothesis Software for Cartographic Purposes” Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience [e-
journal] doi:10.1155/2016/9172506 (Accessed: 30th August 2016).

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

17

Rayner, S.G. (2000) “Reconstructing Style Diﬀerences in Thinking and Learning: Proﬁling Learning Performance” In Riding,
R.J. and Rayner, S.G. (Eds.) International Perspectives on Individual Diﬀerences Volume 1 Cognitive Styles pp.115–177,
Stamford: Ablex.

Rezaei, A.R. and Katz, L. (2004) “Evaluation of the Reliability and Validity of the Cognitive Styles Analysis Inventory and

Recommendations for Improvement” Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 36 (6) pp.1317–1327.

Řezník, T., Horáková, B. and Szturc, R. (2013) “Geographic Information for Command and Control Systems: Demonstration
of Emergency Support” in Intelligent Systems for Crisis Management: Geo-Information for Disaster Management Zlatanova,
S., Peters, R., Dilo, A., Scholten, H., pp.263–275, Heidelberg: Springer.

Řezník, T., Lukas, V., Charvát, K., Charvát, K., Jr., Křivánek, Z., Kepka, M., Herman, L. and Řezníková, H. (2017) “Disaster Risk
Reduction in Agriculture through Geospatial (Big) Data Processing” ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 6 (8)
pp.1–11.

Riding, R. and Cheema, I. (1991) “Cognitive Styles – an Overview and Integration” Educational Psychology 11 (3/4) pp.193–

215.

Roth, R.E., Finch, B.G., Blanford, J.I., Klippel, A., Robinson, A.C. and MacEachren, A.M. (2011) “Card Sorting for Cartographic

Research and Practice” Cartography and Geographic Information Science 38 (2) pp.89–99.

Simon, H.A. (1978) “On the Forms of Mental Representation” In Savage, C.W. (Ed.)Perception and Cognition: Issues in the
Foundation of Psychology Volume 9. Minnesota Studies in Philosophy of Science pp.3–18, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.

Spirduso, W.W. (1980) “Physical Fitness, Aging, and Psychomotor Speed: A Review” Journal of Gerontology 35 (6) pp.850–865.
Staněk, K., Friedmannová, L., Kubíček, P. and Konečný, M. (2010) “Selected Issues of Cartographic Communication

Optimization for Emergency Centers” International Journal of Digital Earth 3 (4) pp.316–339.

Štěrba, Z., Šašinka, Č., Stachoň, Z., Kubíček, P. and Tamm, S. (2014) “Mixed Research Design in Cartography: A Combination

of Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches” Kartographische Nachrichten 64 (5) pp.262–269.

Štěrba, Z., Šašinka, Č., Stachoň, Z., Štampach, R. and Morong, K. (2015) Selected Issues of Experimental Testing in Cartography

Brno: Munipress.

Svatoňová, H. and Kolejka, J. (2017) “Comparative Research of Visual Interpretation of Aerial Images and Topographic Maps
for Unskilled Users: Searching for Objects Important for Decision-Making in Crisis Situations” ISPRS International Journal
of Geo-Information 6 (8) pp.1–18.

Trau, J. and Hurni, L. (2007) “Possibilities of Incorporating and Visualizing Uncertainty in Natural Hazard Prediction” in 23rd
International Cartographic Conference ICC, [pdf] Moscow, Russia, 4–10 August 2007. Available at: http://www.
mountaincartography.org/publications/papers/ica_cmc_sessions/5_Moscow_Session_Mountain_Carto/moscow_hurni_
trau.pdf (Accessed: 17th May 2016).

Treisman, A.M. and Gelade, G. (1980) “A Feature-Integration Theory of Attention” Cognitive Psychology 12 pp.97–136.
Voßkühler, A., Nordmeier, V., Kuchinke, L. and Jacobs, A.M. (2008) “OGAMA – Open Gaze and Mouse Analyzer: Open
Source Software Designed to Analyze Eye and Mouse Movements in Slideshow Study Designs” Behavior Research
Methods 40 (4) pp.1150–1162.

Wehrend, S. and Lewis, C. (1990) “A Problem-Oriented Classiﬁcation of Visualization Techniques” In Kaufman, A. and San
Francisco, A. (Eds.) 1st Conference on Visualization ’90 pp.139–143, 23rd–26th October 1990, Los Alamitos: IEEE
Computer Society Press.

Witkin, H.A., Goodenough, D.R. and Karp, S.A. (1967) “Stability of Cognitive Style from Childhood to Young Adulthood”

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 7 (3) pp.291–300.

Wolfe, J.M., Cave, K.R. and Franzel, S.L. (1989) “Guided Search: An Alternative to the Feature Integration Model for Visual

Search” Journal of Experimental Psychology Human Perception & Performance 15 (3) pp.419–433

Yovel, I., Revelle, W. and Mineka, S. (2005) “Who Sees Trees Before Forest? The Obsessive-Compulsive Style of Visual

Attention” Psychological Science 16 (2) pp.123–129.

Zhang, J. and Goodchild, M. (2002) Uncertainty in Geographical Information London: Taylor and Francis.

