The Cartographic Journal Vol. 48 No. 2
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

pp. 79–80

International Cartographic Conference, Paris 2011-Special Issue May 2011

Editorial
Celebrating Jacques Bertin

This Special Issue marks the occasion of the 25th
International Cartographic Association’s Conference in
Paris, July 2011, which is also the 50th Anniversary of the
First General Assembly of the organisation, also held in
Paris in 1961. As one of the ofﬁcial ICA journals, we are
delighted to have worked with the ICA Executive
Committee and local organizing committee to prepare a
Special Issue which we trust will not only mark the
conference but also develop a new collaborative venture
for many ICA conferences to come. The conference aims
to bring together researchers, teachers, engineers, deci-
sion-makers, technicians and lovers of cartography from
across the globe to participate in a diverse, high-quality
and timely event. This Special Issue has been developed to
provide a window on the very best papers submitted to
the conference. Over 900 papers were submitted and the
peer-review team have done a remarkable job of reviewing
every one, selecting the very best for publication and
ensuring that a full peer-review process was implemented.
One of the conference themes authors were encouraged
to consider was the work and inﬂuences of the French
cartographer Jacques Bertin. In addition to the theme, a
half-day session will run during the conference that
speciﬁcally focuses on his work. This
issue of The
Cartographic Journal complements the Bertin conference
theme by presenting papers that broadly stem from his
pioneering work. Indeed, we have titled the issue to reﬂect
this celebration of Jacques Bertin to mark his life and work.
As readers will know, Bertin passed away in May 2010 in
Paris age 90. Born in 1918, he is best known for his
pioneering book Se´miologie Graphique. Les diagrammes, les
re´seaux, les cartes, ﬁrst published in French in 1967 and
translated by William J. Berg in 1983 as Semiology of
Graphics. Bertin’s experience as a cartographer and
geographer allowed him to understand not only the
technical approach to presenting information graphically
but also the geographical patterns and processes that he
wanted to communicate. This combination of insight led
to the ground-breaking book which to this day remains
possibly the ﬁnest contribution to theoretical cartography
and a cornerstone to effective information visualisation.
Bertin won awards for cartography as a schoolchild and
studied geography and cartography at the University of
Paris in the Sorbonne. He went on to enjoy an academic
research career that included founding the Cartographic
Laboratory of the E´ cole Pratique des Hautes Etudes in
1954 of which he was Director of Education. He was
recognized by the highest professional awards including
the Mercator-Medaille der Deutschen Gesellschaft fu¨r
Kartographie in 1993 and the ICA Carl Mannerfelt Gold

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13032074303571

Medal in 1999. The ICA’s conference in Paris in 2011
provides a ﬁtting place to honour and reﬂect on Bertin’s
contribution to cartography and The Cartographic Journal
is privileged to honour him through this Special Issue.

The issue opens with a Viewpoint article by the
President of ICA, William Cartwright, who shares with
us his thoughts on the work of the ICA and reﬂections on
the importance of Bertin at ICC 2011 in Paris. A further
Viewpoint article by Takashi Morita explores the inﬂu-
ence of Bertin’s work on cartography and also on his own
personal career having himself been a student of Bertin.
The refereed papers section contains a collection of papers
that reﬂect
the ongoing cartographic exploration for
effective information visualisation. Chloe´ Yvroux and Jean-
Paul Bord focus on the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict as a case
study for exploring the way in which a non-experienced
place is communicated through the medium of the map. In
this sense,
they show how maps provide the spatial
representation of the geography which is then assessed in
relation to the way in which people subsequently relate to
the conﬂict. Clarisse Didelon, Sophie de Ruffray, Mathias
Boquet and Nicolas Lambert propose a methodology, based
on fuzzy logic, to analyse speciﬁc mental maps at world
scale. The imprecision of drawing and uncertainty of the
object being drawn is investigated and the paper suggests a
way of devising world regions to provide a better framework
for our mental mapping at global scales. The legibility of
orienteering maps as a special type of map that is used under
special circumstances is studied by La´szlo´ Zentai. While
most paper maps are used in benign circumstances where
good visibility supports effective legibility, orienteering maps
are designed to be read while the user is in motion and,
often, in inclement weather conditions. These very particular
circumstances have led to the design of speciﬁc symbolisa-
tion to support communication in such circumstances. Juha
Oksanen, Friederike Schwarzbach, Tiina Sarjakoski and
Tapani Sarjakoski describe the map design process of the
MenoMaps project which also deals with maps
for
recreational use. Here, the authors describe the project
and the process of developing maps speciﬁcally to support
outdoor leisure use. One of their aims is to support multi-
scale designs to support different map uses from a single
database. They argue that a multi-scale publishing frame-
work introduces new challenges for map design and propose
a way of addressing them through the experience of their
project. The world of 3D modelling is examined by Mathias
Jahnke, Jukka Matthias Krisp and Holger Kumke. They
investigate the relationship between level of abstraction,
information density and storage capacity for the representa-
tion of a 3D city model and the consequences for efﬁciency

80

The Cartographic Journal

of information communication. The three dimensions are
proposed as variables that, through careful balancing, can
provide optimal circumstances for a range of mapping tasks.
Kusay Jaara and Franc¸ois Lecordix report on a new
technique for automated contour line extraction developed
by the French national provider of reference geographic
information, Institut Geographique National (IGN). As
part of plans to renew all 1 : 25 000 and 1 : 50 000
topographic base maps, IGN has developed a new technique
to improve the efﬁciency of map design and production.
Here, the technique is described and assessed. In the ﬁnal
refereed paper, Sidonie Christophe focuses speciﬁcally on
the design implications of colour choice for map symbology.
He explores a range of inﬂuences for design including visual
perception, cognitive science, graphic semiotics, cartography
and art and speciﬁes a knowledge base made-up of
cartographic rules, artistic rules and sources of inspiration.
The result is a knowledge system called COLorLEGend that
allows users to specify colours based on a range of
parameters. In the ﬁnal refereed paper, Joa˜o Bravo,
Fernando Santil and Claudia Sluter explore the way in
which our mental representations of space underpin the way
in which we categorize and classify information in maps.

Finally, and ﬁttingly, we include a single book review in
this Special Issue. Menno-Jan Kraak reviews Bertin’s
Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps which
has been republished by Esri Press. The 2011 version
follows other successful Esri Press republications of Eduard
Imhof’s Cartographic Relief Presentation and Arthur
Robinson’s The Look of Maps. Without pre-empting
Kraak’s review, the republication of Semiology of Graphics
with new material is an important contribution to modern
cartography. As more people than ever make maps, the
importance of clear, effective guides to graphic commu-
nication is vital. There seems little point reinventing the
wheel and while many may never have seen a copy of
Bertin’s work, this new edition brings his knowledge,
wisdom and experience to those who are beginning their
cartographic journey. Computers have led to profound
changes
in cartography since Bertin originally wrote
Semiology of Graphics, yet the fundamentals for graphical
communication remain. All those involved in cartography
and map-making need to know how to treat data to get
information and then, how to communicate the informa-
tion obtained. In the preface to this new edition, Howard
Wainer notes that had the text not fallen out of print, some
of today’s graphical ignorance would have been amelio-
rated. He is right of course, and practice lags behind the
ever more rapid desire to simply publish data in some
semblance of map form. All three classic texts allow a new
generation of cartographers and map-makers to beneﬁt
from the clear thinking and expert articulation of these
cartographic theorists. Of course, the work is intended to
beneﬁt all those whose work involves the preparation of
maps and as Kraak’s review testiﬁes, reading Semiology of
Graphics and having it as a reference text to support the idea

of designing maps and symbols to communicate can only
be a valuable addition to the map-maker’s toolbox.

In bringing about this Special Issue, I would particu-
larly like to thank William Cartwright who, as President of
ICA, has led efforts to give a more prominent role to the
afﬁliated journals within ICA. He also raised the idea of a
Special Issue for the Paris conference during meetings in
Santiago, Chile, at the 49th ICA Conference and it has
taken 2 years of sustained effort by all involved to ensure
the issue came to fruition. Without the vision of the ICA
President and the Executive Committee, the initiative
would not have come about and, on behalf of the British
Cartographic Society, I place on record our thanks and
shared desire to see future Special Issues also publish
exceptional ICA conference papers. I would also like to
extend my thanks to local conference organizers and, in
particular, Anne Ruas for helping formulate a Special
Issue dedicated to Jacques Bertin,
for ensuring the
smooth peer-review process and paper submission and
for personally providing the French translations of the
abstracts to support the two ofﬁcial languages of the ICA.
Finally, if you are reading this Special Issue at the
conference in Paris, then I wish you an enjoyable and
stimulating week. If you have any comments on The
Cartographic Journal, then please look out for me or
one of my colleagues on the Editorial Board, most of
whom are attending the conference. If you are not
attending then I hope you ﬁnd the Issue interesting and
that it provides a way of engaging with the conference
and the work being presented.Figure 1.

Kenneth Field
April 2011
Redlands, CA

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Kenneth Field is a
Research Cartographer at
formerly
Esri. He was
Principal Lecturer
and
GIS Course Director at
Kingston University Lon-
don. He holds a PhD
in GIS from Leicester
University, has presented
and published widely
and is Editor of The
Journal.
Cartographic
He
a Fellow of
is
the British Cartographic
Society, Royal Geographic Society and a Chartered
Geographer (GIS). He is also the new Chair of a proposed
ICA Commission on Map Design which attendees at ICC
Paris 2011 may wish to ﬁnd out more about. Don’t forget
you can follow The Cartographic Journal on Twitter
(@CartoJnl).

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

