Transactions in GIS, 2000, 4(1): 5–22

Review Article

On the Use of Weighted Linear
Combination Method in GIS: Common
and Best Practice Approaches

Jacek Malczewski
Department of Geography
University of Western Ontario

Abstract
The weighted linear combination (WLC) technique is a decision rule for deriving
composite maps using GIS. It is one of the most often used decision models in GIS.
The method, however, is frequently applied without full understanding of the
assumptions underling this approach. In many case studies, the WLC model has
been applied incorrectly and with dubious results because analysts (decision
makers) have ignored or been unaware of the assumptions. This paper provides a
critical overview of the current practice with respect to GIS/WLC and suggests the
best practice approach.

1 Introduction

The weighted linear combination (WLC) model is one the most widely used GIS-based
decision rules (Hopkins 1977, Tomlin 1990, Carver 1991, Eastman et al 1993, Heywood
et al 1995, Malczewski 1999). The method is often applied in land use/suitability
analysis, site selection, and resource evaluation problems (Hobbs 1980, Han and Kim
1988, Eastman et al 1995, Herzfeld and Merriam 1995, Lowry et al 1995). The primary
reason for its popularity is that the method is very easy to implement within the GIS
environment using map algebra operations and cartographic modeling (Tomlin 1990,
Berry 1993). The method is also easy-to-understand and intuitively appealing to
decision makers (Hwang and Yoon 1981, Massam 1988). However, GIS implemen-
tations of WLC are often used without full understanding of the assumptions
underlying this approach. In addition, the method is frequently applied without full
insight into the meanings of two critical elements of WLC: the weights assigned to

Address for correspondence: Jacek Malczewski, Department of Geography, University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C2, Canada. Email: jmalczew@julian.uwo.ca

(cid:223) 2000 Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

6

Jacek Malczewski

attribute maps and the procedures for deriving commensurate attribute maps. In many
case studies the WLC model has been applied incorrectly and with dubious results
because analysts (decision makers) have ignored or been unaware of these elements.
Hobbs (1980), Lai and Hopkins (1989), Heywood et al (1995) and Chrisman (1996)
provide discussions on some aspects of the incorrect use of the method. Although the
difficulties encountered in using WCL are well-researched by the decision analysts
(Hwang and Yoon 1981, Belton 1986, Goodwin and Wright 1998), they have received
relatively little attention from the GIS community (Heywood et al 1995). This paper
aims to clarify and systematize the most common errors and misconceptions associated
with the use of WLC in the raster GIS environment.

WLC can be formalized by means of the multi-attribute decision making (MADM)
problem (Massam 1988, Pereira and Duckstein 1993, Malczewski 1996). Let the set of
decision alternatives be represented by X (cid:136) fxi(cid:3)ji (cid:136) 1; 2; . . . ; mg. The alternatives are
represented by the set of cells or pixels in a raster GIS database. Thus, the index i
indicates the location of the i-th alternative. For the sake of simplicity we will use a
single subscript to indicate the location of an alternative (the cell designated by i (cid:136) 1 is
in the top left-hand corner of a grid-cell map and the cells are numbered left-to-right
for each row; the cell m is located in the bottom right-hand corner of the raster map).
Each alternative is described by means of its locational attribute (coordinate data) and
attribute data (attribute values associated with the location). Since the attributes serve
as decision variables we can designate a decision outcome (criterion value) by xij, that
represents the level of the j-th attribute with respect to alternative i. Hence, an
alternative i can be characterized by the vector in equation (1), and the levels of
attributes across an alternative are represented by the vector in equation (2).

xi(cid:3) (cid:136) (cid:133)xi1; xi2; . . . ; xin(cid:134);

for i (cid:136) 1; 2; . . . ; m;

x(cid:3)j (cid:136) (cid:133)x1j; x2j; . . . ; xmj(cid:134);

for i (cid:136) 1; 2; . . . ; n:

The input data for equations (1) and (2) can be organized in a tabular form (evaluation
matrix or geographical matrix). Accordingly, the data can be stored in a GIS as a set of
map layers. The data consists of a set of n data layers and each grid-cell in the data
layer contains an attribute value, xij. In a particular decision situation the set of
alternatives can be limited by imposing constraints on the attribute values (aspatial
constraints) or on the locational attributes (spatial constraints).

Given the input data, the problem is to aggregate the map layers according to the
WLC decision rule. Formally, the decision rule evaluates each alternative, ai, by the
following value function:

(cid:133)1(cid:134)

(cid:133)2(cid:134)

(cid:133)3(cid:134)

V(cid:133)xi(cid:134) (cid:136)

wjvj(cid:133)xi(cid:134) (cid:136)

wjrij

X

j

X

j

P

where wj is a normalized weight, such that
wj (cid:136) 1, vj(cid:133)xi(cid:134) is the value function for
the j-th attribute, xi (cid:136) (cid:133)xi1; xx2; . . . ; xin(cid:134), and rij is the attribute transformed into the
comparable scale. The weights represent the relative importance of the attributes. The
most preferred alternative is selected by identifying the maximum value of V(cid:133)xi(cid:134) for
i (cid:136) 1; 2; . . . ; m.

Given the decision rule (equation 3) the GIS/WLC method involves the following
steps: (1) define the set of attribute (objectives and associated attribute map layers); (2)
identify the set of feasible alternatives; (3) derive commensurate attribute maps; (4)

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

7

define the criterion weights (that is, a weight of ‘‘relative importance’’ is directly
assigned to each attribute); (5) combine the commensurate attribute maps and weights
using the multiplication and addition overlay operations to obtain the overall score for
each cell (alternative); and (6) rank the alternatives according to the overall perform-
ance score (the cell with the highest score is the ‘‘best’’ cell). WLC can be opera-
tionalized using any GIS system having overlay capabilities. The overlay techniques
allow the attribute map layers (input maps) to be aggregated in order to determine the
composite map layer (output map). Some GIS systems (e.g. IDRISI and SPANS) feature
WLC modules performing the WLC procedure (Eastman 1997, TYDAC Research Inc
1997). Although the methods can be implemented in both raster and vector GIS
environments (ERSI 1995, Chrisman 1996), discussion is limited here to the raster-
based implementation. Most of the discussion is, however, of relevance to vector-based
approaches as well. The structure of this paper follows the six steps involved in the
GIS/WLC procedure (see Table 1). Each section focuses on a particular aspect of the
methodology and discusses the common practice and associated problems as well as
the best-practice approach to the GIS/WLC analysis.

2 The GIS/WLC Procedure

2.1 Defining the set of attributes

Before proceeding, we need to clarify the terms evaluation criteria, objectives and
attributes. In the GIS literature, these terms are often used interchangeably or they are
assigned meanings that are inconsistent with the decision analysis literature (Eastman
et al 1995; Thill 1999). These terms have specific meanings that decision analysts agree
on (Keeney 1980, Hwang and Yoon 1981, Goodwin and Wright 1998). Evaluation
criterion is a generic term that includes both the concept of objectives and attributes.
An objective is a statement about the desired state of a real-world geographical system
(e.g. a land use pattern). It indicates the directions of improvement of one or more
attributes of the elements of the system. For any given objective, several different
attributes might be necessary to provide a complete assessment of the degree to which
the objective might be achieved. An attribute is used to measure performance in
relation to an objective. For example, if the objective is ‘‘maximize forest habitat
preservation’’, then attributes associated with this objective might be ‘‘the populations
of different animal and bird species’’, ‘‘the quality of water in streams’’, and ‘‘the
acreage of different tree species in the forest’’. The specific objectives represent the
direction of improvement, such as improving the water quality in streams or increasing
the population of certain animal species. In this context, quantification of an objective
is the adoption of some quantitative (numerical) scale that provides an indicator for
how well the objective would be achieved. Thus, the concept of an objective is made
operational by assigning to each objective under consideration, one or more attributes
that directly or indirectly measure the level of achievement. The relationship between
objectives and attributes has a hierarchical structure (sometimes referred to as a value
structure). At the highest level are the most general objectives. They may be defined in
terms of more specific objectives, which themselves can be further defined at still lower
levels. At the lowest level of the hierarchy are attributes, which are quantifiable
indicators of the extent to which associated objectives are realized. In spatial decision

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

8

Jacek Malczewski

making, the lowest level of the hierarchical structure (i.e. attributes) can be represented
on maps and can be stored in a GIS database.

The hierarchical structure of objectives and associated attributes provides us with
guidelines for identifying the set of attribute maps that should be included in a
particular decision analysis. Furthermore, both an individual attribute and a set of
attributes must possess some properties to adequately represent a spatial decision
problem in a GIS database. First, each attribute must be comprehensive and
measurable. An attribute is comprehensive if its level for a particular decision problem
clearly indicates the degree to which the associated objective is achieved. An attribute is
measurable if it is practical to: (1) assign a number to the attribute for each alternative,
and (2) assess the preferences of the decision maker for various levels of the attribute.
Second, a set of attributes should be complete (the attributes should cover all relevant
aspects of the decision problem and adequately indicate the degree to which the overall
objective is achieved), operational (they can be meaningfully used in the analysis),
decomposable (the performance of an alternative on one attribute can be evaluated
independently of its performance on other attributes), nonredundant (this is required
to avoid problems of double counting), and minimal (the number of attributes should
be kept as small as possible) (Keeney 1980).

These principles of defining a set of attribute map layers for WLC have largely
been ignored in GIS-based approaches (Table 1). This is partly due to the fact that it is
usually very difficult to meet all these requirements in spatial decision making. The
process of identifying the set of attributes is heavily dependent on the availability of
georeferenced data in digital form. Simply, even if the analyst is aware that some
attributes are important for a particular decision problem, the required data may not
be available or may be of poor quality. In addition, the requirement of decomposability
and nonredundancy are very difficult to satisfy for spatial decision problems. Given a
set of attribute maps to be considered in the context of a decision problem it is likely
for
some pairs of attributes will be correlated (redundant). The test
that
interdependence should be performed with every pair of attribute maps. If they prove
to be approximately independent, the set of attributes is said to be nonredundant. If, on
the other hand, some pairs of attributes turn out to be redundant, some further steps
are required. For example, a surrogate attribute may be identified to replace the
overlapping pair or subset of attributes. If attributes are highly redundant, the
overlapping attributes should be dropped from the analysis. It should be emphasized
that if the value structure is incomplete or incorrectly defined the GIS/WLC procedure
may lead to misleading results. The procedure may generate ‘‘incorrect’’ ordering of
alternatives if an important element of the problem has not been captured by the
analysis and/or the interaction between attributes has not been taken into account.

2.2 Defining the set of feasible alternatives

In raster GIS-based applications, it is assumed that an alternative is represented by an
individual pixel or combination of pixels (see Section 1). An alternative is feasible if it
satisfies all constraints. The feasible alternatives are identified either by exclusionary
screening (Boolean constraints) or by imposing target constraints on the set of all
alternatives (Eastman et al 1993). For example, in the context of the problem of landfill
facility location we may require ‘‘the sites must be outside wetlands’’ or ‘‘the sites must
be 1 km away from any river’’. The two limitations imposed on the set of alternatives

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

l

(cid:223)
B
a
c
k
w
e

l
l

P
u
b

l
i
s
h
e
r
s

L
t
d

.

2
0
0
0

Table 1 Comparing the common and best practice approaches to the weighted linear combination (WLC) using a raster GIS

WLC procedure

Common practice

Problems associated with
common practice approaches

Best practice

1. Identifying the set of attribute Data availability driven process Ad-hoc approach;

Incomplete and incorrect decision
problem specification

Hierarchical structure of objectives
and attributes;
Value structure process

2. Defining the set of feasible

Fixed grid cells

Modifiable area unit problem

Multiscale analysis

map layers

alternatives

Non-linearity problem

Value function analysis

3. Generating commensurate

attribute maps

Standardization score range
procedure

4. Assigning attribute weights

Direct assignment or pairwise
comparisons

5. Combining attribute maps

Overlay operations

and weights

Units of measurement and
ranges of attribute values
ignored

Preferential independence
problem

6. Ranking the grid cells

Ordering of cells

Spatial interdependence problem Ordering cells (examining all

Trade-off analysis

Overlay operations (checking
for preferential independence)

combinations of grid-cells)

O
n

t

h
e

U
s
e

o

f

W

i

e
g
h
t
e
d

L
i
n
e
a
r

i

C
o
m
b
n
a
t
i
o
n
M
e
t
h
o
d

i

n
G
I
S

9

10

Jacek Malczewski

are examples of Boolean constraints. Another example might be that ‘‘the area for
establishing the landfill facility must be approximately 200 acres’’. This provides an
example of a target constraint. The Boolean constraints are typically operationalized in
terms of conjunctive and disjunctive screening using GIS overlay operations. Under
conjunctive screening, an alternative is accepted if it meets specified standards or
thresholds for all attributes. Disjunctive screening accepts alternative scores sufficiently
high on at least one of the attributes under consideration. It is important to note that
the feasible alternative should be identified before the standardization procedure is
undertaken (see Section 2.3).

The way in which spatial decision problems are represented in the GIS database
depends on the resolution (scale) of the images from which the attribute maps are to be
derived (Goodchild and Quattrochi 1997). Different decision problems require maps of
different scales for representing the decision. Scales define the space over which the
decision is to be made. One of the main reasons scale is considered important is that it
deals with the interactions between various elements of real-world geographical
systems. No one element of a geographical system is independent of the surrounding
components. A phenomenon may appear homogenous at one spatial scale, but
heterogeneous at another. Many geographical
show a hierarchical
organization, with nested patterns and processing occurring over a wide range of
characteristic spatial scales. The difficulty encountered in using a set of attributes for
evaluating spatial alternatives (e.g. areal units) of different size is that the best
alternative at one level does not necessarily hold at another level. It can be argued that
every change in scale for which a decision problem is formulated will bring about the
statement of a new set of alternatives and a new problem. Therefore it must be
recognized that a new set of alternatives and evaluation criteria may emerge as the scale
of observation is varied. The mismatch between the scale of the problem (decision
alternatives) and the scale within which individuals involved in the decision process
operate may be one of the major obstacles of effective and efficient use of GIS-based
decision techniques (see Table 1).

systems

The GIS/WLC methods conventionally employ fixed spatial data (prespecified
shape and size of decision alternatives) and thus the decision analysis is prone to scale
and aggregation effects (or the modifiable area unit problem) (Openshaw 1984).
Although, the research on the modifiable area unit problem focuses on its implications
for statistical analysis, a similar problem arises in the context of spatial decision
making. The scale effect is related to the question of how many zones should be used.
In general, using data gathered and reported at different resolutions or aggregation
levels can derive significantly different analytical results. Usually data of higher
resolution or disaggregated data are less biased. For example, the larger the unit of
aggregation, the larger, on average, is the correlation between two variables. Since
WLC requires that the attribute maps are independent of each other (a high correlation
between attributes is considered an undesirable property of a set of criteria – see
Section 2.1), it is suggested that the more aggregated the input data the higher the
chance of violating the assumptions underlying WLC. To illustrate this problem
consider a situation that requires combination of two attribute maps representing
population density (people/km2) and slope (%). Figure 1a shows the distribution of
these two attributes on the two maps where grid-cells have an equal size of 1 km2.
Assuming that the two attributes have been assigned the weights of 0.6 and 0.4
respectively, and standardized by the score range procedure (see Section 2.3), the WLC

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

11

Figure 1
layers; (b) the results of WLC for 0.25 km2 resolution map layers.

The effect of scale on WLC: (a) the result of WLC for 1 km2 resolution map

method identifies cell 1 as the best (most suitable) area. Now let us assume that the
population density data are available in a finer resolution. Figure 1b shows that each
cell of 1 km2 has been disaggregated into four cells of 0.25 km2. The number of people
in each square is identified to obtain the population density attribute for the new
resolution level. It is assumed, for the sake of simplicity, that the spatial pattern of the
slope attribute remains the same (compare Figure 1a and 1b). Then, the two attribute
maps are aggregated using the same weights of importance and the WLC procedure.
We can see that the cells 15 and 16 form the most suitable area. Comparing this result
with that obtained for the 1 km2 cell-data-layers, we see that the best areas do not
overlap. Thus, we conclude that changing the resolution levels may significantly
influence the results of WLC.

The aggregation effect focuses on the question of which zoning scheme should be
used at a given level of aggregation. In general, using images at different resolutions (or
aggregation levels) for analysis can derive significantly different analytical results. For
many raster GIS-based decision problems there is an unimaginably large number of
combinations of pixels that can be considered as decision alternatives. When WLC is

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

12

Jacek Malczewski

The effect of scale on WLC: (a) the result of WLC for an aggregation of the 1 km2
Figure 2
resolution map layers; (b) the results of WLC for an aggregation of the 0.25 km2 resolution
map layers.

used for ordering the set of feasible alternatives, virtually any target ordering can be
obtained purely by engineering an appropriate zoning system (configuration of cells).
Suppose, for example, that in our sample decision problem (Figure 1b) an alternative is
defined as any land parcel of 1 km2. Given a single cell size of 0.25 km2 a combination of
four cells that meets the requirement of continuity can be considered as a feasible
alternative. It is obvious that the different combinations are characterized by different
values of attributes. Consequently, one can expect that the different types of aggregation
can produce wholly different outcomes, and consequently can lead to different orderings
of the alternatives. Figure 2 illustrates this problem for two aggregation schemes. Not
surprisingly the two schemes produce different best alternatives.

One may argue that it would be better to process the data at the 0.25 km2
resolution using WLC, and in the last step of the procedure one can identify the four
highest ranking cells to form the best alternative of 1 km2 (Eastman et al 1993). There
are, however, two problems with this approach. First, it is likely the alternative will not
meet the continuity requirement; that is, the highest ranked cells may not be clustered

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

13

(Brookes 1997). Second, there is an interdependency problem involved; the problem is
that the selection of one alternative may depend on the choice of another alternative
(Rajabi et al 1997). For example, nearby sites for waste disposal facilities are often
interdependent with respect to environmental impact (see Section 2.6 for a detailed
discussion).

Although GIS can offer some assistance in helping to reduce the scale and
aggregation effects, there is no simple and satisfactory solution to the modifable areal
units problem for WLC (Goodchild and Quattrochi 1997). GIS systems allow the
decision analyst to access data at various levels of geographical aggregation so that the
aggregation level considered best for a particular decision problem can be determined.
The systems facilitate the concept of user defined flexible geographic representation.
The same set of geographical data can be given a large number of broadly equivalent
but different spatial representations. As suggested earlier there are many different ways
of aggregating 1 m data to a 1 km grid, for example. This can be achieved by moving
the grid-origin and by rotating the grid. Given the GIS capabilities of data
manipulation, it is no longer justifiable to assume fixed spatial data for WLC. The
attribute data map layers can be processed according to WLC, analyzed, and displayed
at the lowest possible level of aggregation, and the scale and aggregation effects can be
explored by reaggregating and reanalyzing. While this approach cannot remove the
effects, and can be only done at levels of aggregation above the lowest available, the
results will be of great importance for letting the decision maker realize the degree of
aggregation error in the aggregated data. It can help the decision maker to make a
rational decision and build in uncertainty in the decision making process.

2.3 Generating commensurate attribute maps

Given the variety of scales on which attributes can be measured, WLC requires that the
values contained in the different attribute map layers be transformed to comparable
units. There are a number of approaches that can be used to make the attribute map
layers comparable. Linear scale transformation is the most frequently used GIS-based
method for transforming input (raw) data into commensurate attribute maps (Table 1).
The linear scale transformation methods convert the raw data into standardized
attribute scores. A number of linear scale transformations exist (Voogd 1983, Massam
1988). The most often used method is the score range procedure (Eastman et al 1993,
Heywood et al 1995). For the maximization criteria, the procedure first subtracts the
minimum attribute value from the attribute values, and then rescales them by dividing
the results by the range. Values of standardized attributes range from 0 to 1. The higher
the value of the score, the more attractive the standardized attribute value. This
approach to standardization is based on a strong assumption of linearity. Although it
may be argued that the linear transformation is an approximation of the ‘‘true’’ value
function, this approximation becomes more inaccurate as the curvature of the ‘‘true’’
value function increases.

In spatial decision problems, the preferences with respect to the levels of attributes
are usually nonlinear. One example of such a function is the ‘‘distance decay’’
phenomenon describing the inversely exponential relationship between the ‘‘value of
distance’’ and the distance. Since the proximity operations (widely used in deriving
attribute maps for raster GIS applications) are based on the straight line or cell
measurements of distance, there is an implicit assumption of linearity between distance

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

14

Jacek Malczewski

and the proximity attributes. Also note that once a transformation function has been
chosen, the transformation of the attribute levels to scores is purely a map algebra
operation, without any preference inputs from the decision maker. Finally, since the
weights assigned to attribute maps imply the trade-offs among attributes with respect
to the transformed attribute levels and they vary with attribute level if the ‘‘true’’ value
function is nonlinear, the standardized scores make the procedure for deriving weights
more difficult (Lai and Hopkins 1989). The transformed attribute levels to which the
weights apply are too abstract for a decision maker to consider. This is particularly
true when the standardized attributes are assigned values in the interval 0 to 255 to
meet color display standards of GIS supporting SuperVGA (see Section 2.4). Heywood
et al (1995) have obtained significantly different results processing the same set of data
using IDRISI and SPANS. They demonstrated that the WCL analysis is sensitive inter
alia to the standardization procedure.

Given the limitations of the linear transformation techniques, some authors
advocate the use of the value function approach for transforming the attribute maps
(Hepner 1984, Hobbs 1980, Lai and Hopkins 1989, Keisler and Sundell 1997). The
value function converts different levels for an attribute into value scores. It relates
possible decision outcomes to a scale which reflects the decision maker’s relative
preferences. There are a number of techniques for assessing a value function (or curve).
The midvalue method is one of the most popular techniques for deriving a value curve
(Keeney 1980, Lai and Hopkins 1989). First, the technique identifies the minimum and
maximum values on an attribute map. The decision maker then estimates the midpoint
of the value interval between the minimum and maximum attribute values so that the
value difference between the minimum and the midpoint is equal to the difference
between the midpoint and the maximum. The midvalue point corresponds to the value
of 0.5. This implies that an increase in an attribute value from the minimum to the
midpoint is just as attractive as an increase from the midvalue point to the maximum.
Having identified the midpoint value, the ‘‘quarter points’’ are identified. The first of
these is the point which has a value halfway between the minimum and the midpoint.
The second ‘‘quarter point’’ has a value halfway between the midpoint and the
maximum. These two points correspond to the values of 0.25 and 0.75. The procedure
can be repeated to assign subsequent values of 0.125, 0.375, 0.625, 0.875, etc to the
corresponding ‘‘midvalue’’ points; the more points, the greater accuracy level of the
curve. The author is not aware of a commercial GIS system that supports this
procedure. There are, however, spatial decision support systems that integrate GIS and
decision analysis techniques which incorporate a module for deriving value functions
(e.g. Jankowski 1995). In addition, value function procedures can be implemented in a
spreadsheet environment (Kirkwood 1997), and subsequently the results can be
imported to GIS (Keisler and Sundell 1997). It should be emphasized that once the form
of the value function is identified, the transformation of the raw attributes maps into
the value maps is a matter of simple map algebra manipulation.

Finally, it is important to note that the transformation procedure should be
performed on the set of feasible alternatives (see Section 2.2). Since the alternatives are
defined by the set of constraints imposed on the values of the attributes, it is incorrect
to perform the transformation procedure on the attribute maps and then combine the
attribute maps with the constraint maps (see Section 2.3). This is a widespread practice
in the GIS/WLC studies. For example, Eastman et al (1993, 1995) suggest that the WLC
model can be modified for the GIS application by incorporating the constraint maps

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

15

into equation (3); that is,

V(cid:133)xi(cid:134) (cid:136) (cid:133)

wjrij(cid:134)(cid:133)(cid:5)jr(cid:3)

ik(cid:134);

X

j

(cid:133)4(cid:134)

where r(cid:3)
ik is a value assigned to the i-th cell on the k-th constraint map layer; it takes a
value of 1 if a cell is a feasible alternative and a value of 0 is assigned to infeasible cells.
This essentially means that the standardization procedure is performed first and then
the standardized attribute maps are multiplied by the binary constraint maps. It is
argued here that this is incorrect. The feasible cells (constraints maps) should be
generated first, and then a procedure for deriving commensurate criterion maps should
be performed.

Figure 3 demonstrates the effect of applying the WLC procedure before and after a
set of feasible alternatives is identified. Figure 3a shows the WLC procedure according
to equation (4). The two attribute maps are first standardized using the score range

Figure 3
The effect of attribute standardization where: (a) standardization is performed on
all cells in attribute map layers; (b) standardization is performed on the set of feasible cells.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

16

Jacek Malczewski

procedure and then they are weighted and added to obtain the overall score map layer.
The constraint map is generated by conjunctive screening using 400 and 8 as cut-offs
for the population density and slope map layers, respectively. Finally, the constraint
maps and the overall score map layer are combined using the multiplication overlay
operation to obtain the set of feasible alternatives along with the overall scores
assigned to them. Figure 3b shows the WCL procedure that follows the steps listed in
Section 1. Thus, the procedure starts with identifying the feasible alternatives, followed
by standardization, and the combination of the standardized map layers according to
equation (3). Although the same cells are identified as the best ones for both
procedures, the results differ substantially in terms of the values of overall scores
assigned to corresponding cells. Thus, the procedures result in different orderings. This
is of particular importance when more then one cell is to be identified as the best area
on the basis of the cell ranking (Eastman et al 1993).

2.4 Assigning weights to attribute maps

Spatial decision problems typically involve criteria of different importance to the
decision makers. Consequently,
information about the relative importance of the
criteria is required. The derivation of weights is a central step in eliciting the decision
maker’s preferences. To this end, one should realize that assigning weights to attribute
maps accounts for: (1) the changes in the range of variation for each attribute map, and
(2) the different degrees of importance being attached to these ranges of variation.

Incorrect specification of weights is an especially common error in the application
of WCL to spatial decision problems (for an overview see Hobbs 1980, Lai and
Hopkins 1989). In many GIS-based studies the weights are directly assigned to the
attribute maps without full understanding of their meaning (e.g. Williams 1985, IGISE
1991). The weights are obtained simply be asking the decision maker to directly assign
numbers between 0 and 1 or 0 and 100 for each thematic data layer. This approach can
be criticized for its ignorance of the definition of the units of measurement. Since the
weights are multiplied by the ratings for attributes to obtain a score for an alternative,
they must depend on the units used for each attribute (Table 1).

It is misleading to interpret the weights as general measures of the importance. An
attribute weight is dependent on the range of the attribute values; that is, the difference
between the minimum and maximum value for a given attribute. An attribute weight
can be made arbitrarily large or small by increasing or decreasing the range. For
example, if all alternatives to be evaluated are characterized by the proximity to water
of 1000 and 1010 m, the attribute would be less important than in the case where the
attribute values range from 1 to 1000 m. The general rule is that we are concerned with
the perceived advantage of changing from the maximum level to the minimum level of
each attribute, relative to the advantages of changing from the worst to the best level
for the other attributes under consideration. Thus, the weights assigned to attribute
maps should be derived by asking the decision maker to compare a change from the
least-preferred to the most-preferred value on one attribute map to a similar change in
another attribute. To achieve this the swing weights technique can be used (see Bodily
1985 for details). This technique is probably the most appropriate for use in conjunc-
tion with GIS. We illustrate the approach using a site suitability problem (Banai-
Kashani 1989). The problem involves assigning weights of importance to the following
attributes: price, slope, and views. The swing weights method derives the weights by

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

17

asking the decision maker to compare a change from the least-preferred to the most-
preferred value on one attribute to a similar change in another attribute. The decision
maker is asked to imagine a hypothetical grid-cell with the three attributes at their
least-preferred levels. Then, he/she is asked, if just one of the attributes could be moved
to its best level, which would he/she choose? Suppose that the decision maker selects
‘‘price’’. After this change has been made, he/she is asked which attribute he would
next choose to move to its best level, and so on until all attributes have been ranked.
Let us assume that the decision maker’s rankings are: ‘‘price’’, ‘‘slope’’, and ‘‘view’’.

Given the rankings, we can now assign a weight of 100 to the price criterion. Then,
the decision maker is asked to compare a swing from the least-preferred slope to the
most-preferred slope, with a swing from the least-cost site to the highest-cost site.
Suppose that the decision maker indicates that the swing in ‘‘slope’’
is 60% as
important as the swing in ‘‘price’’. Consequently, a weight of 60 is given to the slope
criterion. Finally, a swing from the worst ‘‘view’’ to the best is considered 30% as
important as a change from the least-cost to the highest-cost site. Accordingly, ‘‘view’’
is given a weight of 30. Finally, the three weights are normalized as follows:

w1 (cid:136) 100=(cid:133)100 (cid:135) 60 (cid:135) 30(cid:134) (cid:136) 0:526

w2 (cid:136) 60=(cid:133)100 (cid:135) 60 (cid:135) 30(cid:134) (cid:136) 0:316

w3 (cid:136) 30=(cid:133)100 (cid:135) 60 (cid:135) 30(cid:134) (cid:136) 0:158

It should be noted that this form of trade-off analysis is rarely used in GIS-based
studies (Hobbs 1980; Keisler and Sundell 1997). Some analysts argue that the pairwise
comparison method is a more appropriate method for use in conjunction with GIS
(Banai 1993, Siddiqui et al 1996). The popularity of this method is in part due to the
fact that the IDRISI GIS incorporates a module for deriving attribute weights using the
pairwise comparison technique (Eastman 1997, Eastman et al 1993). In short, this
method involves pairwise comparisons to create a ratio matrix. It takes as an input the
pairwise comparisons and produces the relative weights as output. Specifically, the
weights are determined by normalizing the eigenvector associated with the maximum
eigenvalue of the (reciprocal) ratio matrix. However, this approach can be criticized for
its meaningfulness of responses to the underlying questions (Goodwin and Wright
1998). The questions simply ask for the relative importance of attributes without
reference to the units of measurement and scales on which the attribute are measured.
This fuzziness may mean that the questions are interpreted in different, and possibly
erroneous ways, by decision makers. As suggested earlier, to have a consistent meaning
the weights must depend on the units used for each attribute.

2.5 Combining attribute maps and weights

As mentioned earlier there are two strong assumptions implicit in the WLC method:
the linearity and additivity of attributes. The former assumption means that the
desirability of an additional unit of an attribute is constant for any level of that
attribute. For example, this assumption implies that an additional 10 ha in a parcel of
land is valued the same regardless of whether it is added to a land parcel of 100 or 1000
ha. The additivity assumption implies attributes under consideration are mutually
preference independent of each other. In many spatial decision situations these two
assumptions are very difficult to apply (Table 1). Because of the interaction between

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

18

Jacek Malczewski

Figure 4

The problem of mutually interdependent attribute map layers in WLC.

different attributes the WLC method may lead to ‘‘false’’ results. To see what happens
when the WLC is applied to a problem where mutual preference independence does not
exist, consider the following problem. Suppose that four parcels of land (cells) are
evaluated with respect to land suitability for a housing development (Figure 4). Two
mutually dependent attributes are considered: cost of land acquisition and slope.
Assume the scores assigned to each parcel of land are derived from value functions. In
addition, the decision maker assigned weights of 0.6 and 0.4 to the attributes,
respectively. Using the WLC model, parcel (cell) 4 is the most preferred one. It is
characterized by the lowest cost (highest value) and steepest slope (lowest value).
However, it may be that the decision maker considers low cost only to be of ‘‘high
value’’ if the parcel is suitable in terms its slope (notice that a relatively high weight was
assigned to the slope attribute). It can be argued that the high value of the cost attribute
is virtually ‘‘worthless’’ because it is characterized as steep (low value). Thus, the
‘‘best’’ alternative identified by WLC might not, in fact, be the most preferred one. If
the cost attribute is not preferentially independent of the slope attribute, WLC will not
correctly represent the decision maker preference structure.

How can the absence of mutual preference independence be identified? The most
obvious way in which this will reveal itself is in the use of phrases like ‘‘this depends
on . . .’’ when the decision maker responds to questions. For example, when asked to
assign a value to the cost attribute, our decision maker might well have said ‘‘that
depends on how steep the parcel of land is’’. If mutual preference independence does
not exist it is usually possible to return to the hierarchical structure of evaluation
criteria (see Section 2.1) and redefine the attributes so that a set of attributes which is
mutually preference independent can be identified.

Even if the WLC method meets all the underlying assumptions, there still remains a
problem of interpreting the overall scores assigned to each cell of the output map. Note
that if we multiplied weights of 0.3 and 0.1 by attribute values 0.36 and 1.0,
respectively, then the results are about the same. If we interpret 1.0 as being an
exceptional attribute value and 0.36 as being a below average attribute, then this
identity implies that an exceptional value and a somewhat below average value make
the same contribution to the weighted average. Thus, there exist some difficulties in
interpreting the output of the WLC method (Hwang and Yoon 1981).

Although it is argued that the value function methods are superior to the ad hoc

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

19

techniques commonly used in GIS, one should point out the fact that both approaches
neglect the existence of spatial relationships among alternatives (ReVelle et al 1981).
For example, in the case of the coal-based power station siting problem, the level of
emissions allowed for a given power plant depends on the emissions from other
facilities located in a given region. Furthermore, it can be argued that location choice or
site selection is a Gestalt process in which alternatives are considered holistically. This
means that the overall score obtained by WLC is something more than the sum of its
elements. This point is missed in WLC, because its components are determined
separately, and then combined.

2.6 Ranking the alternatives

The final stage of GIS/WLC involves the ranking procedure to order all the cells on the
output layer according to their overall score value. The cell assigned the rank of 1 is the
best alternative. This may look a simple operation, especially when a GIS system
featuring the rank procedure is used (e.g. IDRISI). However, in some applications using
the rank operation to identify the best alternative may be a problem. For example,
consider a situation in which 10 acres of land are to be allocated to a particular use. If
each cell has a size of 1 acre, then the WLC procedure is performed and the first 10 cells
are recommended as the most suitable land (Eastman et al 1993, 1995). However, this
approach assumes strict independence of alternatives (grid cells), a situation which is
very difficult to meet in a spatial decision problem due to the spatial interaction
phenomenon (Table 1). Specifically, an evaluation of one alternative with respect to a
particular attribute may depend on whether another alternative is selected (Keeney
1980, Rajabi et al 1997).

To illustrate this problem suppose that four grid cells are evaluated with respect to
three attributes: population density, slope, and cost of land (Figure 5a). It is assumed
that the weights of 0.4, 0.2 and 0.4 have been assigned to each of the three attributes,
respectively. All evaluation criteria are to be minimized. In addition, let us assume that
each cell (parcel of land) has a size of 1 ha and the aim is to identify 2 ha of most
suitable land. The WLC procedure is performed to obtain a ranking of the four cells.
From this cells 2 and 1 are found to be the best and the second best parcels of land,
respectively. Therefore, assuming independence, the most suitable area consists of
those two parcels of land. However, it can be expected that the value of an attribute in
one cell depends on the value of an attribute in the other cells. If interdependency is
involved, then the highest ranked parcel (cell 2) should be eliminated and the remaining
three parcels should be re-evaluated (Figure 5b). Observe that the value of parcel 4 is
now 0.64 and is greater than for parcel 1 (previously ranked as the second best).
Accordingly, the most suitable area consists of cells 2 and 4. This simple example
demonstrates that in the presence of interdependency, one may need to examine all
combinations of grid cells in order to find the best subset; and that selection according
to the ranked list of individual cells may not result in the best solution. The difficulties
with using ranking for identifying the most suitable land are aggravated as the highest
ranked cells may not be clustered into one or more regions. Therefore, depending on
the particular situation some further processing of the ranking output is required to
identify a continuous region. The reader is referred to Brookes (1997) for a description
of this problem and a suggestion for its solution using parameterized region-growing
programming.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

20

Jacek Malczewski

Figure 5
The effect of spatial dependence on the ordering of alternatives (cells) using
WLC: (a) spatial independence of alternatives is assumed; (b) spatial interdependence of
alternatives is assumed. Note: R (cid:136) ranking; S (cid:136) standardization; the standardized scores
are obtained using the following formula: rij (cid:136) (cid:133)xmax
and
xmax
are the minimum and maximum scores for the j-th attribute, respectively, and the
j
remaining terms have been defined previously.

j (cid:255) xij(cid:134)=(cid:133)xmax

(cid:134), where xmin

j (cid:255) xmin

j

j

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

On the Use of Weighted Linear Combination Method in GIS

21

3 Conclusions

This paper has provided an evaluation of commonly used GIS/WLC procedures. It has
also offered some advice on best practice approaches to GIS/WLC (Table 1). In each
step of the procedure there are problems that may significantly affect the ‘‘true’’
outcome of WLC as applied to spatial decision making. The greatest disadvantage of
the current practice with respect to the GIS/WLC methods is that the approaches tend
to be ad hoc procedures with little theoretical foundation to support them. It is
suggested that incorporating the value function approach and trade-off analysis into
the GIS/WLC procedures can substantially improve the decision making process.

One should emphasize that the purpose of any GIS-based decision analysis is to
provide insights and understanding, rather than to prescribe a ‘‘correct’’ solution.
Often the process of attempting to structure the decision problem is more useful in
achieving these aims than the numeric output of the GIS-based modeling. Nevertheless,
this process is still best served when the analytical method, such as WLC, bases its
suggested solutions on testable axioms and an accurate translation of the decision
maker’s judgments. Whether the WLC is the best technique to support this process is a
question which is bound to continue to attract debate and controversy.

The author would like to acknowledge financial support from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada (Grant # 410-97-0404).

Acknowledgments

References

Banai R 1993 Fuzziness in geographic information systems: Contributions from the analytic
hierarchy process. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 7: 315–29
Banai-Kashani R 1989 A new method for site suitability analysis: The analytic hierarchy process.

Environmental Management 13: 685–93

Belton V 1986 A comparison of the analytic hierarchy process and a simple multiattribute value

function. European Journal of Operational Research 26: 7–21

Berry J K 1993 Cartographic modeling: The analytical capabilities of GIS. In: Goodchild M, Parks B
and Steyaert L (eds) Environmental Modeling with GIS. Oxford, Oxford University Press: 58–
74

Brookes C J 1997 A parameterized region-growing programme for site allocation on raster
suitability maps. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 11: 375–96
Bodily S E 1985 Modern Decision Making: A Guide to Modeling with Decision Support Systems.

New York, McGraw-Hill

Carver S J 1991 Integrating multi-criteria evaluation with geographical information systems.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 5: 321–339

Chrisman N R 1996 Exploring Geographic Information Systems. New York, John Wiley and Sons,

Eastman J R 1997 IDRISI for Windows, Version 2.0: Tutorial Exercises. Worcester, Graduate

School of Geography, Clark University

Eastman J R, Kyem P A K, Toledano J, and Jin W 1993 GIS and Decision Making. Geneva,

Inc

UNITAR

Eastman J R, Jin W, Kyem P A K, Toledano J 1995 Raster procedures for multi-criteria/multi-

objective decisions. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 61: 539–47

Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) 1995 Understanding GIS: The ARC/INFO(cid:213)

Method. Cambridge, UK, GeoInformation International

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

22

Jacek Malczewski

Goodchild M F and Quattrochi D A 1997 Scale, multiscaling, remote sensing and GIS, In Quattrochi
D A and Goodchild M F (eds) Scale in Remote Sensing and GIS. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 1–
11

Goodwin P and Wright G 1998 Decision Analysis for Management Judgment. Chichester, John

Wiley and Sons

Han S-Y and Kim T J 1988 ESSAS: Expert system for site analysis and selection. Computers,

Environment and Urban Systems 12: 239–52

Hepner G F 1984 Using of value functions as a possible suitability scaling procedure in automated

composition mapping. The Professional Geographer 36: 468–72

Herzfeld U C and Merriam D F 1995 Optimization techniques for integrating spatial data.

Mathematical Geology 27: 559–86

Heywood I, Oliver J and Tomlinson S 1995 Building an exploratory multi-criteria modelling
environment for spatial decision support. In Fisher P (ed) Innovations in GIS 2. London, Taylor
and Francis: 127–36

Hobbs B F 1980 A comparison of weighting methods in power plant siting. Decision Sciences 11:

Hopkins L 1977 Methods for generating land suitability maps: a comparative evaluation. Journal for

Hwang C-L and Yoon K 1981 Multiple Attribute Decision Making: Methods and Applications.

725–37

American Institute of Planners 34: 19–29

Berlin, Springer-Verlag

IGISE 1991 Curriculum Development Toolkit. Ottawa: Institute for GIS in Eduction
Jankowski P 1995 Integrating geographical information systems and multiple criteria decision
making methods. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 9: 251–73

Keeney R L 1980 Siting Energy Facilities. New York, Academic Press.
Keisler J M and R C Sundell 1997 Combining multi-attribute utility and geographic information for
boundary decisions: An application to park planning. Journal of Geographic Information and
Decision Analysis 1: 110–23

Kirkwood C W 1997 Strategic Decision Making: Multiobjective Decision Analysis with

Spreadsheets. Belmont, Duxbury Press.

Lai S-K and L D Hopkins 1989 The meanings of trade-offs in multiattribute evaluation methods: A

comparison. Environment and Planning B 16: 155–70

Lowry Jr. J H, Miller H J and Hepner G F 1995 A GIS-based sensitivity analysis of community
vulnerability to hazardous contaminations on the Mexico/U.S. Border. Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing 61: 1347–59

Malczewski J 1996 A GIS-based approach to multiple criteria group decision making. International

Journal of Geographical Information Systems 10: 955–71

Malczewski J 1999 GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis. New York, John Wiley and Sons
Massam B H 1988 Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) techniques in planning. Progress in

Planning 30: 1–84

Openshaw S 1984 The Modifiable Areal Unit Problem. Norwich, GeoAbstracts
Pereira J M C and Duckstein L 1993 A multiple criteria decision-making approach to GIS-based land

suitability evaluation. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 7: 407–24

Rajabi S, Kilgour D M and Hipel K W 1997 Zero-one goal programming under interdependence of
actions. In Fandel G and Gal T (eds) Multiple Criteria Decision Making. Berlin, Springer
Verlag: 382–92

ReVelle C, Cohon J L, and Shobrys D E 1981 Multiple objective facility location: A review. In Morse
J N (ed) Organizations: Multiple Agents with Multiple Criteria. Berlin, Springer-Verlag: 320–37
Siddiqui M Z, Everett J W, and Vieux B E 1996 Landfill siting using geographic information systems:

A demonstration. Journal of Environmental Engineering 122: 515–23.

Thill J-C 1999 Multicriteria Decision-Making and Analysis: A Geographic Information Sciences

Tomlin C D 1990 Geographical Information Systems and Cartographic Modeling. Englewood

TYDAC Research Inc. 1997 SPANS Explorer, Version 7.0: User’s Manual. Nepean, TYDAC

Voogd H 1983 Multicriteria Evaluation for Urban and Regional Planning. London, Pion
Williams T H L 1985 Implementing LESA on a geographic information system: A case study.

Photogrametric Engineering and Remote Sensing 51: 1923–32

Approach. New York, Ashgate

Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall

Research Inc

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

