This article was downloaded by: [Otterbein University]
On: 21 September 2013, At: 01:35
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Loose-coupling a cellular
automaton model and GIS:
long-term urban growth
prediction for San Francisco
and Washington/Baltimore
KEITH C. CLARKE & LEONARD J. GAYDOS
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: KEITH C. CLARKE & LEONARD J. GAYDOS (1998) Loose-
coupling a cellular automaton model and GIS: long-term urban growth
prediction for San Francisco and Washington/Baltimore, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 12:7, 699-714, DOI: 10.1080/136588198241617

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241617

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever

or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 7, 699± 714

Research Article

Loose-coupling a cellular automaton model and GIS: long-term urban
growth prediction for San Francisco and Washington/Baltimore

KEITH C. CLARKE
University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

and LEONARD J. GAYDOS
United States Geological Survey, EROS Data Center, 242-4 NASA-Ames
Research Center, Mo(cid:128) ett Field, CA 94035 USA

Abstract. Prior research developed a cellular automaton model, that was calib-
rated by using historical digital maps of urban areas and can be used to predict
the future extent of an urban area. The model has now been applied to two
rapidly growing, but remarkably di(cid:128) erent urban areas: the San Francisco Bay
region in California and the Washington/Baltimore corridor in the Eastern United
States. This paper presents the calibration and prediction results for both regions,
reviews their data requirements, compares the di(cid:128) erences in the initial con® gura-
tions and control parameters for the model in the two settings, and discusses the
role of GIS in the applications. The model has generated some long term predic-
tions that appear useful for urban planning and are consistent with results from
other models and observations of growth. Although the GIS was only loosely
coupled with the model, the model’s provision of future urban patterns as data
layers for GIS description and analysis is an important outcome of this type of
calculation.

1. Introduction

The human geographical processes of urbanization and urban spread will appar-
ently continue unabated into the twenty-® rst century. By the last decade of this
century ( 1995 ), 21 world cities had total metropolitan area populations of over 6
million,
led by Tokyo ( 30 300 000), New York( 18 087 251), Seoul ( 15 850 000),
Mexico City( 14 100 000) and Moscow(13 150 000). Also by 1995, the number of
people worldwide living in settlements of ® ve thousand or more reached 51%, a
majority of humankind and a dramatic increase from 29% in 1950. Gottmann ( 1961)
coined the term megalopolis to describe the coalescence of metropolitan areas in the
northeastern United States. In the era of GIS, remote sensing and digital map
products have recorded the birth and growth of similar megalopolises in California
and in Mexico, South America, Europe, and Asia. New estimates of the world
population in 2100ad indicate an increase from the present population of 5.5 billion
to 10 to 20 billion. We have termed the resultant super cities gigalopolis , the twenty-
® rst century system of world cities containing billions of people centered on the
world’s major urban areas. Gibson’s ® ctional view of the future urban United States,
for example, talks only of the `East Sprawl’ and the `West Sprawl’ (Gibson 1984).

The magnitude of gigalopolis in population terms, however, understates the most
critical permanent impact of increased urban-space consumption, which is usually
at the expense of prime agricultural land essential for food production. Looked at
spatially, each expanding metropolitan area will become both physically and virtually

1365-8816 /98 $12.00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 700

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

connected to other growing concentrations of people in the coming century through
raw gain of territory as well as broader communication, transportation, and economic
ties. Not since the dominance of agriculture within human a(cid:128) airs millennia ago has
humankind’s habitat changed so quickly and irreversibly. Simultaneously, recent
trends show ® rst that people are consuming more space per person within their
urban environment, but also that the average household size is decreasing, at least
in western cities. Urbanization and urban growth go hand-in-hand, and generate
many other land transitions, with several varied land use types eventually converting
to urban use. The spatial consequences of the urban transition deserve serious study
by scientists and policy makers concerned with global change because they will
impact humankind directly and profoundly. Vitousek (1994 ) called land use/land
cover changes, including the urban transition, one of the few certainties of global
change, because we are `certain that they are going on, and certain that they are
human-caused’.

This paper summarizes research conducted to describe, model, and predict future
urban transitions. We constructed a model using a cellular automaton that simulates
the urban growth process. We calibrated the model with historical data for two
major metropolitan regions in the United States, and used it to produce one-hundred-
year projections of their urban growth. GIS has been an indispensable tool in the
model construction and calibration, and will play far more critical a role when the
predictions are distributed and reproduced for other areas. The broader purpose of
this work is to model and predict the spatial consequences of future urbanization,
so that the impact of human-induced land transformations can be better understood.
Cellular modelling grew out of earlier environmental simulation work on wild® re
behaviour (Clarke et al. 1995 ), that in itself was based on pioneering work by
Michael Batty ( Batty and Xie 1994 ). The role of cellular automata as potential
powerful contributions to urban process modelling was demonstrated by Couclelis
( 1997) and Takeyama and Couclelis ( 1997). In¯ uencing model choice was the need
for a model that was scale independent, so that local, regional and continental scale
processes could be described in a single context. Cellular automata are simple models
for the simulation of complex systems ( Waldrop 1992, Wolfram 1986 ). A cellular
model assumes only an action space (usually a grid), a set of initial conditions, and
a set of behaviour rules. Characteristic of such models of complexity is that behaviour
is emergent, that is, it is generated by repetitive application of the rules beyond the
initial conditions. Complex systems are also termed self-organi zing and are remark-
ably suitable to computational simulation ( Wolfram 1984). Simple cellular automata
are characterized by phase transitions between behaviour types, so that a single
model can result in stability, stochastic instability or chaos. As such they seem ideally
suited to modelling the complexity of urban systems, which typically have many
more unknowns than measurable variables. Cellular models are known in ecology
as individual based models and this concept, that complex aggregate behaviour
results from many interacting self-motivated agents, has great value for both urban
modelling and for the data rich environment of GIS. This is especially appropriate
in urban modelling, where the process of urban spread is entirely local in nature
and aggregate e(cid:128) ects, such as growth booms, are emergent.

Modelling cities with cellular automata is a new approach, and one that was
virtually impossible without the data management capabilities of GIS and powerful
workstation technology. The approach has distant roots in geography in the work
of Hagerstrand ( 1965 ) and Tobler ( 1979). Links to prior urban modelling are less

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

701

clear (Clarke, Gaydos and Hoppen, 1997 ), though Batty and Longley ( 1994), Makse
et al. ( 1995 ) and White and Engelen ( 1992 ) have used essentially similar approaches.

2. The role of GIS in urban cellular modelling

Much has been written on the integration of GIS and modelling, especially for
environmental issues (Wilson 1995, Goodchild et al. 1996, Wagner 1997 ). In a recent
paper, Park and Wagner ( 1997 ) implemented a tight coupling of several cellular
automaton models (including ours) within Idrisi using the Cellang CA language. In
the context of the our cellular model, GIS served at least three important roles, none
of which could be called tight coupling. The ® rst of these was as data integrator. In
each of the initial applications, data were either already available as ARC/INFO
coverages, or were captured by scanning and digitizing (Crawford-Tilly et al. 1996 ).
Although the coverages existed, new map extents, projections, and grid resolutions
were required, and the GIS was invaluable in ensuring co-registered input data layers
for the model. All further modelling and analysis depended on this essential ® rst
step, what Chrisman has called a `universal requirement’ for GIS (Chrisman 1997,
les and
p. 108). The input data layers were each raster grids, exported as image ®
converted by specialized software. Thus the relation of our modelling to GIS is one
of loose coupling, as classi® ed and described by Anselin et al. ( 1993).

Secondly, GIS allowed the results to be visualized. This was the weakest compon-
ent of the loose coupling. Stand-alone versions of software for the model were written
to generate map displays, multiple display windows, and results (Clarke et al. 1996,
Acevedo and Masuoka 1997 ). The role for the GIS in this instance was one of taking
intermediate results, and facilitating their comparison with the original and other
layers of information.

Thirdly, the predictions generated were reintroduced into the GIS data sets
available for application, allowing planning decisions to be made with the data. An
example is the ArcView window interface developed to display the three development
scenarios for the Sterling Forest area in New York State ( Kramer 1996 ). It is this
third application of GIS that is by far the most powerful from the modelling point
of view. Having `what if ’ model projections available to perform the more traditional
GIS operations and analyses such as bu(cid:128) ering and overlay is a very powerful GIS
capability. This function alone favours the use of loose coupling. In spite of e(cid:128) orts
to build cellular modelling functions into GIS directly ( Takeyama and Couclelis
1997; Park and Wagner 1997) and the suitability both of speci® c GIS packages (e.g.
GRASS) and of control languages (e.g. MapObjects and Avenue in ArcView), it is
likely that most numerical modelling, especially that requiring exhaustive or rigorous
calibration, will need to parallel the GIS rather than work within the software. This
approach is similar to the way that statistical functions and spatial analytical capabil-
ities have been integrated with GIS. By broadening the de® nition of GIS, such as
that of GIScience, the model coding can even be viewed as part of the science, if not
part of the system (Goodchild 1992, Clarke 1997).

3. Data for the model

Data for the model’s calibration and initial use in prediction came from a variety
of sources. For the San Francisco Bay area, we assembled data from historical maps
and air photos, analog and digital maps for di(cid:128) erent time periods, from data supplied
by such agencies as local governments, and from satellite images ( Kirtland et al.
1994). After success of the initial model application equivalent data, but to more

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 702

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

speci® c and documented standards, was compiled for the Washington/Baltimore
region (Crawford-Tilley et al. 1996 ). These data are available on-line as part of the
Washington/Baltimore Regional Collaboratory (Clark et al. 1996 ).

Data assembly problems included inconsistent feature de® nitions over time,
especially for urban areas and major roads, extensive manual generalization present
in historical maps, and the need to integrate multiple image and map sources from
di(cid:128) erent projections, datums, and coordinate systems. Although much of the delin-
eation of urban versus non-urban use had to be interpreted, skilled image interpreters
were available to make the interpretation to acceptable standards.

The model’s input layers are fourfold: ( 1) A digital elevation model, for which
the GIS was used to create a grid of slopes in percentage, ( 2) A layer showing the
initial or seed con® guration of urban areas, plus as many additional historical layers
as possible, to calibrate the model, ( 3) As many historical transportation layers as
possible, which the model reads and uses sequentially as their year of construction
is reached, ( 4) A layer of excluded areas unlikely or impossible to urbanize, such as
national parks, water bodies and protected wetlands. The latest version for the
gigalopolis project, in which several additional land cover types such as agricultural
and forest are included in the model’s behaviour, requires a land use layer as well.
Since the growth rules in this model are de® ned primarily by physical factors,
the San Francisco Bay area was an ideal ® rst test site. Elevations range from sea
level to 2500 m, with some clear topographic control over growth by the dichotomy
between slopes and ¯ ats. The region also is diverse in its patterns of urbanization,
re¯ ecting its beginnings in small enclaves clustered around the inland waterway
network, the emergence of San Francisco as a transportation hub, and the more
recent urbanization of the surrounding valleys closely re¯ ecting the extended highway
system. The model’s temporal input comprised six raster image maps of urban extent
for the years 1900, 1940, 1954, 1962, 1974, and 1990, with 1900 as the inital conditions
or `seed’ year. An 1850 data set was too sparse for modelling purposes. Roads
were available for 1900, 1920 and 1970. The San Francisco data were included
( 1997) and can be viewed on the World Wide Web at
in Clarke et al.
http://edcwww2.cr.usgs.gov/umap/umap.html.

Similarly, for Washington/Baltimore, urban and road layers were constructed for
1792, 1850, 1900, 1925, 1938, 1953, 1966, 1972, 1982, and 1992 (® gures 1 and 2).
Again due to the sparse and least reliable early data, 1900 was used as the initial
conditions or seed layer. While the Washington/Baltimore Collaboratory digitized
layers for railroads also, these were excluded to ensure reliability and compatibility
between the two applications (Clark et al. 1996).

4. M odel description

The urban model is a scale-independent cellular automaton (CA), model with
some variations from the traditional CA, and multiple behaviour types. The growth
rules are uniform throughout a gridded representation of geographical space and
are applied on a cell-by-cell basis. A single time span is one iteration of the CA, and
all changes are applied synchronously at the end of each time period. The set of
growth rules, and the initial condition (map of urban extent at a period in time) are
integral to the data set being used because they are de® ned in terms of the physical
nature of the location under study. In-site calibration then adapts the model to its
local environment. One interpretation is that the urban area corresponds to an
organism. The inital condition is the start `seed’ layer, growth occurs one cell at a

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

703

Figure 1. Historical urban development in the Washington/Baltimore area.

time with each cell acting independently of all others, and patterns emerge during
growth as the organism `learns’ more about its environment.

The model was implemented as a computer program written in the C language.
The program operates as a set of nested loops: the outer control loop repeatedly
executes each growth `history’, retaining cumulative statistical data, while the inner
loop executes the growth rules for a single `year’. The starting point for urban growth

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 704

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

Figure 2. Historical growth of transportation in the Washington/Baltimore area.

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

705

is an input layer of `seed’ cells, the urban extent for a particular year identi® ed from
historical maps, atlases, and other sources. The rules apply a cell at a time and the
whole grid is updated as the `annual’ iterations complete. The modi® ed array forms
the basis for urban expansion in each succeeding year. Potential cells for urbanization
are selected at random and the growth rules evaluate the properties of the cell and
its neighbours (e.g., whether or not they are already urban, what their topographic
slope is, how close they are to a road). The decision to urbanize is based on
mechanistic growth rules as well as a set of weighted probabilities that encourage
or inhibit growth. The model is described in detail in Clarke et al. ( 1997 ).

Five factors control the behaviour of the system. These are: a di(cid:128) usion factor,
which determines the overall outward dispersive nature of the distribution; a breed
coe(cid:129) cient, which speci® es how likely a newly generated detached settlement is to
begin its own growth cycle; a spread coe(cid:129) cient, which controls how much di(cid:128) usion
expansion occurs from existing settlements, a slope resistance factor, which in¯ uences
the likelihood of settlement extending up steeper slopes; and a road-gravity factor
which attracts new settlements toward and along roads. These values, which a(cid:128) ect
the acceptance level of randomly drawn numbers, are set by the user at the outset
of every model run.

Four types of growth are possible in the model: spontaneous, di(cid:128) usive, organic,
and road in¯ uenced growth. Spontaneous growth occurs when a randomly chosen
falls in a suitable location for urbanization at the boundary of an existing
cell
settlement, simulating the fragmenting in¯ uence urban areas have on their surround-
ings. Di(cid:128) usive growth permits the urbanization of cells which are ¯ at enough to be
desirable locations for development, even if not near an established urban area.
Organic growth spreads outward from existing urban cores, representing the tendency
of all urban areas to expand. Road in¯ uenced growth encourages urbanized cells to
develop along the transportation network, re¯ ecting increased accessibility.

A second hierarchy of growth rules, termed self-modi® cation, is prompted by an
unusually high or low growth rate above or below a threshold. The growth rate is
computed by comparing the number of new pixels urbanized in any time period to
the total existing urban area. The limits of `critical high’ and `critical low’ begin an
increase or decrease in three of the growth-control parameters. The increase in the
parameters is by a multiplier greater than one, `boom’, imitating the tendency of an
expanding system to grow ever more rapidly, while the decrease is by a multiplier
less than one, `bust’, causing growth to taper o(cid:128) as it does in a depressed or saturated
system. However, to prevent uncontrolled exponential growth as the system increases
in overall size, the multiplier applied to the factors is slightly decreased or lagged in
every subsequent growth year.

Other e(cid:128) ects of self-modi® cation are an increase in the road-gravity factor as the
road network enlarges, prompting a wider band of urbanization around the roads,
and a decrease in the slope resistance factor as the percentage of land available for
development decreases, permitting expansion onto steeper slopes. Under self-
modi® cation, the parameter values increase most rapidly in the beginning of the
growth cycle when many cells are available for urbanization, and decrease as urban
density increases in the region and expansion levels o(cid:128) . Without self- modi® cation
the model produces linear or exponential growth as long as new land remains
available; self-modi® cation generates the typical S-curve growth rate of urban
expansion observed within a region.

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 706

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

5. M odel calibration

Calibration of the original model was described in Clarke et al. ( 1996). Since
then, a new procedure has been developed and tested for the two study areas. After
assembly of the various data sets and their conversion to the input format for the
model, the calibration problem may be stated: given a starting image of urban extent,
which set of initial control parameters leads to a model run which best ® ts the
observed historical data? Pursuit of this question implies that `best’ can be quanti® ed,
and used to test statistically the observed against the expected. These parameters
are then used for prediction.

We chose four ways to test statistically the degree of historical ® t, and are
investigating twelve measures in our latest work. The four initial tests are correlation
coe(cid:129) cients of predicted outcomes from the model with values computed from the
historical map layers. The speci® c measures were: ( 1) the r-squared ® t between the
actual and predicted number of urban pixels; (2 ). the r-squared ® t between the actual
and the predicted number of edges in the images (i.e. those pixels that have contact
between urban and non-urban on any side, so that a single isolated urban pixel
counts as 4 edges); ( 3) the r-squared ® t between the actual and the predicted number
of separate clusters in the urban distribution, computed by eroding cluster edges
with an image processing routine until all separate blobs collapse onto just one pixel,
then counting these pixels; and ( 4) A modi® ed Lee-Sallee shape index, computed by
combining the actual and the predicted distributions as binary urban/non-urban
layers, and computing the ratio of the intersection over the union. For perfect
correspondence the value is 1.0. Practically, values of about 0.3 were obtained. The
four measures were computed as averages of multiple runs. We used 4, 10, and 100
runs in the tests, although more rigorous multi-start tests were conducted in the
initial calibration (Clarke et al. 1996). We devised a single composite measure, the
® rst three summed and multiplied by the fourth, to rank overall outcomes.

Calibration then proceeded with a UNIX script written in the PERL shell
language. The script generated a control ®
le for the program, executed the program
les of its outputs, then
so that it iterated over four Monte Carlo runs, wrote log ®
executed a stand-alone program that computed the four measures, and wrote these
into a master log ®
le. The ® rst of two PERL scripts performed coarse iterations over
the control parameters, with increments of 20 units at a time and 25 for Washington/
Baltimore. Even so, this procedure involved iterating over the 0± 100 range of the
di(cid:128) usion coe(cid:129) cient, the breed coe(cid:129) cient, the spread coe(cid:129) cient, the slope-resistance
and the road-gravity control parameters. For San Francisco, six, six, six, ® ve and
seven combinations were tested for the parameters respectively, starting in 1900 and
terminating at the 1990 data set. This gave r-squared values computed for 1940,
1954, 1962, 1974, and 1990, for only ® ve `observations’ although each r-squared was
a composite of
four measures and an average over four model runs. The 7560
combinations executed in about 252 hours of CPU time on a Silicon Graphics
Indigo 2 Impact 10000 workstation. The longer runs for the much larger Washington/
Baltimore data set mandated fewer combinations, on the order of 3000. This broad
coverage phase of the calibration gave those combinations of parameter setting that
tended to produce the best `projections’ of the present day.

The initial test was then repeated for unit increments of the control parameters
above and below the `winning’ values for the coarse calibration. The additional step
or ® ne calibration involved another 6 x 5 x 5 x 5 combinations of four iterations
each for 3000 combinations and another 100 hours of CPU time. Again, for the

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

707

larger data set only about 1800 combinations were computed. A ® nal set of para-
meters was then used for a 100-run iteration, saving the terminating values of the
control parameters (changed by the self-modi® cation) as input for a 100-iteration
prediction run into the future, stopping at the year 2100.

One obvious problem with this approach is the processing time. Therefore, the
Washington/Baltimore data set was used in an experiment to test sensitivity of the
calibration process to scale dependence. In the original calibration, at the full reso-
lution and extent of the data set, the mapped area was 486 by 720 pixels with a
resolution of 210 m. The entire two step calibration process described above was
then repeated at resolutions of 410 m, 820 m, and 1640 m. New data sets were created
by direct sub-sampling, i.e. taking every other pixel in each case. To prevent the
drop out problem or loss of connectivity in the roads map, the roads were thickened
prior to re-sampling. this did indeed cut the processing time. The 1640 m data set
was fully calibrated in only 6 hours of CPU time, a 42 fold speed-up.

6. Results

The self-modi® cation internal to the cellular model enhances phase changes. In
geographical terms, this means that di(cid:128) erent periods of time should be dominated
by di(cid:128) erent growth behaviour, and by increasing spatial adaptation to the local
environmental conditions. As a result, it was expected that the impact of slope would
be more pronounced in San Francisco at ® rst, followed by a `spilling out’ of growth
into the Central Valley. On the other hand, topography is clearly less of a constraint
to growth in the Washington/Baltimore corridor, so that little di(cid:128) erence in behaviour
would be expected to result from to the slope factor. There were indeed signi® cant
di(cid:128) erences in slope behaviour. For example, for the population (number of urban
pixels) correlation, the San Francisco ® t was high but varied, and increased as the
slope resistance increased. On the contrary, in Washington/Baltimore, there was very
little variance in response, and ® t declined with the slope resistance (® gure 3). This
implied that slope explains far more of the urbanization in San Francisco than in
Washington and Baltimore. While a rather obvious point, it con® rms the basic
soundness of the model.

Phase changes are obvious from the coarse calibration data. In each case, the
® ve control parameter initial settings were compared to the scores. Some remarkable
behaviour was evident within the full range of model applications. For example, for
the population r-squared (actual vs. predicted urban extent for each observation
period ), the mean score decreased as the di(cid:128) usion coe(cid:129) cient increased, but the

Figure 3. Calibration results: initial values for the model control parameters.

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 708

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

lowest setting had four iterations that scored higher than all others. A phase transition
was clearly precipitated by changing the spread parameter. Extremely high correla-
tion ( in excess of 0.99 r-squared) dropped markedly between spread settings of 1
and 20, but then increased linearly for the remainder of the values. In other words,
at a setting between 1 and 20, some interaction was triggered that precipitates a
behaviour change. Spatially, for example, this may be the breaking out of the initial
constrained urban areas and valleys. The e(cid:128) ect is evident, though less clearly, in the
Washington/Baltimore data also. Phase transitions were evident in all four of the
test measures.

If the success measures can be characterized, then the four are increasingly spatial
in nature. The population value is, as expected, the easiest to simulate with the
model. Most ® ts were in the 0.99 range, partly due to the low number of data years.
The number of clusters was an indication of how many separate spreading centres
or independent communities were present. This value proved a far better discrimin-
ator in San Francisco than in Washington/Baltimore. The number of edges was the
total number of pixel contact edges between urban and non-urban within the grids.
As such, it has already been shown to be in¯ uenced strongly by the map source.
Remotely sensed data are more speckled than map sources, and thus have more
edges. Finally, the Lee Sallee measure is a modi® ed shape index, de® ned as a ratio
of the AND to the OR of the actual and predicted urban images as binary layers.
This measure penalizes spatial mismatch twice; for example if a good spatial shape
match was displaced slightly, the intersection would be smaller but the union would
be larger by twice the displacement area. Values rarely approached even a 30%
match, and the ability to discriminate spatial match with this measure was quite
good. Again, the spread-parameter phase change was evident, both in San Francisco
and Washington/Baltimore. In a few cases, evidence pointed to a local maximum,
for example in the breed coe(cid:129) cient for both data sets.

The second round of calibration selected the best outcome from the coarse
calibration and iterated single parameter-value increments above and below. Not all
values were permuted, since some were already clearly at maxim. Most striking from
the ® ne tuning results was the scaling nature of the model. Phase transitions, trends,
maxim and even oscillations (e.g. breed in Washington/Baltimore for the Lee-Sallee
measure) were evident. While in each case a single value was chosen as maximum,
in fact many individual runs can attain far higher success, in a speci® c measure and
overall. Nevertheless, stability across many runs was considered important for Monte
Carlo modelling. We made 100 permutations of the ® nal predictive runs. This was
done by starting the model at the present time, but using the terminating values
( because of the self-modi® cation) of the control parameters.

Predictions made for over 100 Monte Carlo runs allow us to map probabilities.
We decided to divide the probabilities into three categories. Stopping the predictions
at di(cid:128) erent future dates created multiple frame displays (® gures 4 and 5). The images
of the future urban extent are most convincing when animated with the historical
data. In a ® rst attempt to animate the San Francisco data, it was di(cid:129) cult to tell
where the observed data ended and the simulations began.

Finally, the results of the multiscale calibration were very encouraging. Table 1
shows the results of the `best’ combinations for the Washington/Baltimore data set
arrived at by successive halving of the resolution. As can be seen, the only major
di(cid:128) erences in the degree of success came after the change from 820 to 1640 m. We
attribute this change to the severe distortion of the roads layer when roads must be

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

709

.

a
e
r
a

y
a
B

o
c
s
i
c
n
a
r
F

n
a
S

e
h
t

r
o

f

s
n
o

i
t
c
i

d
e
r
p

l
e
d
o
m

A
C

.

4

e
r
u
g
i
F

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 710

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

Figure 5. CA model predictions for the Washington/Baltimore area.

over one and a half kilometers wide, and occasionally disconnect. Slope also su(cid:128) ers
from the resolution change, with maximum and average slopes diminishing quickly
as the scale is made smaller. From table 1, is was clear that the di(cid:128) usion factor seems
most scale sensitive, and that the breed factor seems almost a self-similar fractal,
with complete scale invariance. The obvious conclusion from the multi-scale calib-
ration is that a nested or hierarchical approach to calibration would be optimal,
® rst using coarse data to investigate the scaling nature of each parameter in a
di(cid:128) erent city setting, then scaling up once the best data ranges are found. As a result,
far fewer combinations need be run at the ® nest scales, and CPU times can be
signi® cantly reduced, with no loss of calibration rigour.

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

711

Table 1. Best overall calibrations by resolution: Washington/Baltimore.

210 m
(486 x 720)

420 m
(243 x 360)

840 m
( 121 x 180)

1680 m
(60 x 100)

0.900014
3.223740
0.971070
0.965636
0.978280
0.308754
75
25
22
9
4

0.950593
3.237434
0.969425
0.972149
0.969293
0.326567

0.993430
3.226773
0.960926
0.972061
0.949094
0.344692

10
2
26
1
25

50
2
20
5
3

0.841441
3.213986
0.967818
0.985269
0.973370
0.287529
75
3
22
5
9

Resolution

Composite score 1
Composite score 2
r-squared urban
r-squared edges
r-squared clusters
Shape match
Di(cid:128) usion
Breed
Spread
Slope
Roads

7. Predictions

Figures 4 and 5 show model predictions of future urbanization patterns for the
two applications areas. Obviously, the short-term predictions are more reliable than
the long term. The Monte Carlo probabilities have been reduced to three classes.
Shaded pink are those areas that the model predicts as 100% certain of growth.
Some of these areas are the existing urbanized areas, but as can be seen from the
® gures, this area expands over time. Most conservatively, these would be judged as
potential growth zones. Because ordinary outward expansion and in®
lling of existing
settlements are the most predictable types of growth, the organic spread of the
settlements has the highest degree of con® dence. Shaded green are areas with less
than 100%, but greater than 50% or even chance of growth. The greater-than-even-
odds criterion may be a good compromise for spatial forecasting. Taking in this
class of prediction much of the highway-based growth is captured. Finally, a high-
risk projection category of greater than zero but less-than-even-odds is plotted in
light green. This zone combines more extended and fragmented growth of transporta-
tion, but also includes many entirely new urban centers. When a new spreading
centre forms in repeated model runs, it could be identi® ed as a `city waiting to
happen’, a site so potentially ripe for growth that it is merely a matter of time before
urbanization arrives. Examples of such settlements are: Vacaville and Morgan Hill
in California, and Chantilly and Manassas in Virginia.

The utility of these predictive layers clearly lies in their being placed in the public
realm. The San Francisco Bay area projections have been posted on the World Wide
Web for some time. The Washington D.C./Baltimore projections are available at
http:// urban.wr.usgs.gov/ urban.html. They will be most useful as data layers in a
GIS data format, for integration with existing information.

8. Conclusions

Work on the model so far has established that the approach can produce useful
results. While the calibration phase is slow and highly dependent on the size of the
input data set and on the quality and quantity of historical data, historical map and
image data as the basis for future settlement predictions seems suitable and the
multi-scale calibration process could speed the process. Monte Carlo methods,
coupled with the variance estimates they generate, allow clear con® dence limits to
be placed on projected future spatial patterns. As sensitive and potentially controver-

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 712

K. C. Clarke and L . J. Gaydos

sial as growth predictions are from the political and societal viewpoint, the rigour
of the calibration, the repeatability of the experiment and the utility of a prediction-
probability layer for further GIS work justify the outcomes of the modelling. Only
the real future, as it slowly unfolds, can verify our model. But then, is the purpose
of modelling to actually predict, or to help imagine, test, and choose between possible
futures? If so, then this model and approach can indeed be useful
for scenario
planning ( Kramer 1996 ).

While the role of the model as both a consumer and provider of GIS data has
been evident, the functional coupling of the model with any particular GIS has been
loose, at best. On the other hand, we see such models as valuable enriching sources
of GIS data layers, and layers that have real value for planning and GIS application.
For example, what location decisions pending today might change in the light of
predicted future patterns? Could better decisions on siting waste disposal be made
given predictions of urban spread? Would zoning or land-preservation policies change
if their future consequences were better known, or even better understood? Could
cities test and evaluate alternative growth-control strategies by spatial modeling?
Experience with existing models have shown this to be the case.

Future work with the model will

involve extending the land transition to a
broader set of land use and land-cover changes. We have set the Anderson Level I
classes as a ® rst goal for the new work (Anderson et al. 1976). In addition, the model
needs to be ported to and repeatedly applied to new study areas and at di(cid:128) erent
map scales. We intend to further examine the impact of scale and locale of application
of the model on the initial conditions, on the best start parameters, and on the
process of self-modi® cation. Our plans call
for testing the model at about 1 km
resolution for the entire lower 48 United States for the full Anderson Level I
classi® cation, and for applications in New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, and Portland.
Finally, can the model be used to predict the extent and impact of gigalopolis ? Can
the model be coupled with other models of the global environment to provide
multiple assessments of the impact of global change? If these questions are answerable
in the a(cid:129) rmative, the cellular model could become a valuable tool for anticipating,
and e(cid:128) ectively addressing some aspects of our children’s, and our childrens children’s,
urban future.

Acknowledgments

The Human-Induced Land Transformations (HILT ) project was supported by
the United States Geological Survey ( USGS) under a NASA Joint Research Initiative
( JRI NCC2-5091 ). The Gigalopolis project is supported by the USGS National
Mapping Division’s EROS Data Center under grant 1434-CR-96-SA-01235
( Department of the Interior). Support is gratefully acknowledged.

William Acevedo, Michael Figueroa and Stacy Hoppen provided programming
and data analysis support. Data were compiled and provided by USGS under the
HILT and Temporal Urban Mapping projects (see, http://edcwww2.cr.usgs.gov/
umap/umap.html ). Jeanette Candau and John Lin prepared the graphics. Additional
support for data for Washington/Baltimore came from the Washington/Baltimore
Regional Collaboratory courtesy of Dr Tim Foresman of the University of Maryland-
Baltimore County (see, http://research.umbc.edu/~tbenja.bwhp/main.html ). Dr
Richard J. Pike and four anonymous reviewers gave valuable comments on the
manuscript.

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

713

References
Acevedo, W. and Masuoka, P., 1997, Time-series animation techniques for visualizing urban

growth. Computers & Geosciences, 23, 423± 435.

Anderson, J. R., Hardy, E. E., Roach, J. T. and Witmer, R. E., 1976, A L and Use and L and
Cover Classi® cation System for use with Remote Sensor Data, U.S. Geological Survey
Professional Paper 964 (Washington, DC: US Government Printing O(cid:129) ce).
Anselin, L., Dodson, R. F. and Hudak, S., 1993, Linking GIS and spatial data analysis in

practice. Geographical Systems, 1, 3± 23.

Batty, M. and Longley, P., 1994, Fractal Cities (London: Academic Press).
Batty, M. and Xie, Y., 1994, Modelling inside GIS: Part 2. Selecting and calibrating urban
models using Arc/Info. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems,
8, 429± 450.

Chrisman, N., 1997, Exploring Geographic Information Systems (New York: Wiley).
Clark, S., Starr, J., Foresman, T. W., Prince, W. and Acevedo, W., 1996, Development
of the temporal transportation database for the analysis of urban development in the
Baltimore-Washington Region. In Proceedings, ASPRS/ACSM Annual Convention and
Exhibition, Baltimore, MD, 22± 24 April.

Clarke, K. C., 1997, Getting Started W ith Geographic Information Systems (Upper Saddle

River, NJ: Prentice Hall ).

Clarke, K. C., Gaydos, L. J. and Hoppen, S., 1997, A self-modifying cellular automaton
model of historical urbanization in the San Francisco Bay area. Environment and
Planning B, 24, 247± 61.

Clarke, K. C., Hoppen, S. and Gaydos, L. J., 1996, Methods and techniques for rigorous
calibration of a cellular automaton model of urban growth. In Proceedings, T hird
International Conference/W orkshop on Integrating GIS and Environmental Modeling
CD-ROM, Santa Fe, NM, 21± 26 January, 1996 (Santa Barbara, CA: National Center
for Geographic
http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu /conf/
and Analysis).
SANTA_FE_CD-ROM /main.html.

Information

Clarke, K. C., Riggan, P. and Brass, J. A., 1995, A cellular automaton model of wild® re
propagation and extinction. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 60,
1355± 1367.

Couclelis, H., 1997, From cellular automata to urban models: New principles for model
development and implementation. Environment and Planning B-Planning & Design,
24, 165± 174.

Crawford-Tilley, J. S., Acevedo, W., Foresman, T. and Prince, W., 1996, Developing a
temporal database of urban development
for the Baltimore/Washington region.
In Proceedings, ACSM/ASPRS Annual Meeting, Washington DC, 3, 101± 110.
http://edcwww2.cr.usgs.gov/umap/pubs/asprs_jt.html.

Gibson, W., 1984, Neuromancer ( New York: Ace Books).
Goodchild, M. F., 1992, Geographical

Geographical Information Systems, 6, 31± 46.

information science. International Journal of

Goodchild, M. F., Steyaert, L. T. and Parks, B. O., editors, 1996, GIS and Environmental

Gottmann, J., 1961, Megalopolis: the urbanized northeastern seaboard of the United States

Modeling ( Fort Collins: GIS World ).

( New York: Twentieth Century Fund ).

VI, 43± 67.

Hagerstrand, T., 1965, A Monte-Carlo approach to di(cid:128) usion. European Journal of Sociology,

Kirtland, D., Gaydos, L. J., Clarke, K. C., DeCola, L., Acevedo, W. and Bell, C., 1994,
An analysis of human-induced land transformations in the San Francisco Bay/
Sacramento Area. W orld Resources Review, 6, 206± 217.

Kramer, J., 1996, Integration of a GIS with a Local Scale Self-Modifying Cellular Automaton
Urban Growth Model in Southeastern Orange County, New York. MA Thesis. Hunter
College CUNY. http://everest.hunter.cuny.ed u/~jkramer/paper.html.

Makse, H. A., Havlin, S. and Stanley, H. E., 1995, Modelling urban growth patterns. Nature,

377, 608± 612.

Park, S. and Wagner, D. F., 1997, Incorporating Cellular Automata simulators as analytical

engines in GIS, T ransactions in GIS, 2, 213± 231.

Takeyama, M. and Couclelis, H., 1997, Map dynamics: Integrating cellular automata and

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 714

L oose-coupling a cellular automaton model

GIS through geoalgebra. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
11, 73± 91.

Tobler, W. R., 1979, Cellular geography. In Philosophy in Geography, edited by S. Gale and

G. Olssen, (Dordrecht: Reidel ), pp. 379± 386.

Vitousek, P. M., 1994, Beyond global warming: Ecology and global change. Ecology, 75,

Wagner, D., 1997, Cellular automata and geographic information systems. Environment and

1861± 1876.

Planning B, 24, 219± 234.

Waldrop, M. M., 1992, Complexity: T he Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos

( New York: Simon and Schuster).

White, R. and Engelen, G., 1992, Cellular automata and fractal urban form: a cellular
modelling approach to the evolution of urban land use patterns, Working Paper
no. 9264, Research Institute for Knowledge Systems (RIKS ), Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

Wilson, J., editor, 1995, Special issue on the integration of GIS and environmental modelling.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 9.

Wolfram, S., 1984, Cellular automata as models of complexity. Nature, 311, 419± 424.
Wolfram, S., 1986, T heory and Applications of Cellular Automata (Singapore: World Scienti® c).

Downloaded by [Otterbein University] at 01:35 21 September 2013 