This article was downloaded by: [Dalhousie University]
On: 04 October 2014, At: 13:44
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Automated conflation of digital
gazetteer data
J. T. Hastings a
a Department of Geography , University of California , Santa
Barbara, CA, USA
Published online: 19 Aug 2008.

To cite this article: J. T. Hastings (2008) Automated conflation of digital gazetteer
data, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22:10, 1109-1127, DOI:
10.1080/13658810701851453

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701851453

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 10, October 2008, 1109–1127

Research Article

Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

J. T. HASTINGS*
Department of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA

(Received 5 December 2007; in final form 6 December 2007 )

A digital gazetteer (DG) is a spatial dictionary of named and typed places in
some environment, typically the near-surface of the Earth. DGs are proliferating
in number and sophistication with the popularity of location-based services such
as GoogleEarth, MapQuest, and OnStar. The essential utility of a DG is to
translate between formal and informal systems of place referencing, i.e. between
the ad hoc names and qualitative type classifications assigned to places, on the
one hand, and quantitative locations for them, on the other. Frequently, it is
necessary to consult and combine results from multiple sources of gazetteer data,
which is tedious for humans and currently not done by machines. Thus, a
fundamental challenge with DGs is conflation: merging gazetteer data so that
place identity is preserved. The challenge can be met using a computational
approach modelled on human behaviour, focusing first on places’ geometries
(since disjoint places cannot be the same), second on their type categories, and
finally on their names. This article details a troika of metrics that mimic the
human cognitive process, together with operational procedures for automated
conflation of DG data using them. By way of demonstration, both abstract and
practical results of conflation for the Lake Tahoe Basin of California and
Nevada are presented.

Keywords: Conflation; Gazetteers; Similarity metrics

1.

Introduction

The real world is phenomenally complicated: a simultaneously tangible and
conceptual environment in which a huge variety of geographic phenomena—
mountains, lakes and rivers, weather events, administrative areas, settlements, and
landmarks—are co-evolving and interacting. Proximate phenomena are directly
experienced by our sensory systems and selectively assimilated into our mental maps
(Kitchin 1994); distant phenomena reported by others and/or remotely sensed also
may be captured in those maps. To help organize our experiences, we categorize the
phenomena in various ways and assign names to many of them for convenience.

A persistent but not altogether static kind of geographic phenomenon is place, a
recognizable portion of the world shared across minds, time, and space. The
distinction of place from space is at the core of geography (Couclelis 1992), of
course. Naming a place is also a spontaneous cognitive and socially situated
linguistic act, part of the naı¨ve geographic behaviour (Egenhofer and Mark 1995)
that people share. The remainder of the article takes this general background for
granted, and focuses rather on places themselves as objects of study and discussion.

*Email: jordan@geog.ucsb.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851453

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1110

J. T. Hastings

Of particular interest is how individuals, in their socio-linguistic milieu, identify
geographic places, and how this behaviour can be mimicked by machines. Because
humans overwhelmingly locate both themselves and phenomena of interest to them
by place, machines must do so as well to become more geographically friendly and
useful. The coordinates 39u 109 020 N and 120u 089 390 W, while precise to ,5 m, are
for many purposes less satisfactory than the place recognizable at those coordinates,
known as ‘Lake Tahoe Dam’. Even this relatively small dam extends much more
than 5 m in both length and width, covering a substantial area, which the
coordinates do not. Rich topological and geographic context are also carried in the
words. In general, topology matters more than metric accuracy with places, but not
always: the bus-stop named ‘Lake Tahoe Dam’ occurs on both sides of the road
passing by the dam. The names and types of places are not diagnostic either. ‘Lake
Tahoe’ is officially both a ‘reservoir’ (because its upper 6 feet of water are now dam-
controlled) and a ‘lake’ (for its underlying volume). Since the mid-1800s, the lake
has been called variously ‘Da’Owaga’ (from the ancestral Washoe Indian name),
‘Lake Bonpland’ (after von Humboldt’s naturalist), ‘Lake Bigler’ (after the third
Governor of California), ‘Sierra Lake’, ‘Tula Tulia’, and other names. In all their
aspects, location, type, and name, places present geographical challenges.

2. Background

Formally, following Hill (2000), a geographic place is defined by: at least one
placename by which it is commonly known and communicated; at least one
placetype situating it in a classification scheme that also provides conceptual/
symbolic bases for it; and finally at least one footprint, a georeferenced geometry,
locating it in the real-world and optionally designating its areal configuration. (A
footprint may be a point, line, bounding rectangle, or other polygonal shape.)

Placename and footprint correspond directly to the first two of four spatial
primitives noted by Golledge (1995), which he calls identity and location. Placetype
serves to anchor a place categorically within the human experience of geographic
places generally, i.e. medium-scale objects locked to the surface of the Earth that
exhibit conjoint mereological and topological connectedness (Mark et al. 1999).
Golledge’s third spatial primitive, magnitude, further grades places numerically
within such categories. His last primitive, time, is generally implied to be present
day, although in fact the temporality of a place is essential, too. Often, a place is
given a multiplicity of placenames, placetypes, and footprints by different people
and groups for their purposes over time. Numerous other descriptors of a place, e.g.
elevation or population, may be given, some of which are, again, time-dependent.
The set of descriptors of a place constitutes its description. The place itself remains a
real-world phenomenon, of course.

A gazetteer is a compendium of place descriptions in the sense above, a
geographic dictionary (Hill 2006: 91 ff). Within a particular gazetteer, each
descriptive entry comprises all the placenames, placetypes, and footprints stipulated
for a single place, to which a unique identifier is assigned. (In most gazetteers, a
single placetype is chosen from a pre-designated classification scheme.) Thus, a real-
world place and its gazetteer entry should stand in a one-to-one relationship, within
a particular gazetteer. A familiar kind of gazetteer is the index in the back of an
atlas, for which the maps themselves supply the georeference, viz. footprints
generalized to rectangles as given by ‘JK’ coordinates on the map pages. Numerous
regional and several famous national and international gazetteers were published as

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1111

stand-alone monographs in the 19th and 20th centuries; generally, these had more
narrative and less cartographic content, e.g.
the Columbia (ne´e Lippincott)
Gazetteer (Cohen 1998), which is still available today. Beginning in the 1990s,
gazetteers morphed again into digital databases, accessed via computer systems.
Increasingly, such digital gazetteers (DG) are used in conjunction with both
traditional library information retrieval (IR) and geographic information retrieval
(GIR) systems (National Research Council 1998, Hill and Goodchild 1999,
Goodchild 2004, Hill 2004).

A free-standing DG is the quintessential geographic information system (GIS), in
fact. The focus of GIS is geospatial features—points, lines, and polygons—that are
in a layer
simultaneously displayed cartographically and described tabularly,
construct. A DG contains just one feature layer, place, with the three descriptors
noted above, the footprint being mapped. Of significant concern in GIS is geospatial
representation: how to encode feature geometries in order to achieve the desired
levels of storage, retrieval, and display performance. DGs can be large, with millions
of places. A second concern with GIS, and DGs especially, is how to situate and
display features within classification scheme(s) that are cross-cut by nuances of
language. What are the essential differences between creeks, rivers, and streams, for
example? Are there other terms, particularly a suitable over-arching term?
Regrettably, most current GIS mechanisms for feature typing are ‘flat’, inexpressive
of hierarchical structuring that is commonplace in peoples’ understanding of space
and place (Golledge 1998). Finally, unique to gazetteers, is how to comprehend places’
names, with their variant spellings and transliterations (‘Bondland’, ‘Bonpland’),
accents, diacritical marks, foreign scripts (‘Da’Owaga’), etc. Placenames frequently
embed placetype information as well (‘Lake Shore Community Park’), and can even be
misleading (‘Crystal Bay’, as a populated place as well as a water body). To make sense
of placenames, their etymology is highly desirable. At a minimum, the source of each
descriptor should be documented. For footprints, indications of their geospatial
accuracy and precision also are desirable.

A fundamental challenge with DGs and gazetteer data generally is conflation:
combining descriptions so that place identity is honored, i.e. achieving or preserving
the single place/single entry relationship. If GIS is involved, the single place/single
feature relationship must be preserved as well. A dictionary definition of conflation
is ‘blend, fusion; esp.: a composite reading or text’ (Merriam-Webster n.d.). For
DGs, conflation is necessarily focused on the three required descriptors, footprints,
placetypes, and placenames, taking into account their time-dependencies. Other
descriptors, if present, may be conflated or else simply accumulated. Conflation
underlies both the construction of new gazetteers from multiple data sources and the
retrieval of data from multiple gazetteers.

Both the inputs to and the outputs from DG conflation may be visualized as
places on a map, either hardcopy or GIS. However, DGs are only incidentally
cartographic artefacts; rather, they are specialized geospatial data stores, used
primarily to translate between informal and formal types of georeferencing (Hill
2006), i.e. between placenames (often with placetypes) and footprints, or vice versa.
Notwithstanding this use, DGs are not currently catalogues of detailed place-centric
data, although they could evolve into such, blending the content of a basic ‘map
reference’ in Web services such as the US National Atlas (www.nationalatlas.gov)
with Columbia-style narratives. The essentials of a DG remain: placename,
placetype, and footprint. For some georeferencing applications, e.g. geoparsing

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1112

J. T. Hastings

(Hill 2006: 100 ff), the simple existence of a place, confirmed by a placename, is of
first importance; placetype and footprint details are secondary. Similarly,
in
wayfinding, people are quite tolerant of approximate footprints because it seems
that we continually conflate them mentally (Montello 1998).

3. Conceptual approach

Humans have relatively little difficulty in deciding if two mapped places are
(probably) the same. Notwithstanding the importance of placenames, we think first
of the places’ locations and footprints, using our mental map if nothing else. Places
whose locations are not ‘close’ cannot be the same,
in consonance with the
observation that ‘No two things can occupy the same point in space at the same
moment in time’ (Golledge 1995: 31)—practically the ‘zeroth law’ of geography.
Elevation also can be a discriminator of location, although it is often ignored, i.e.
assumed to be the Earth’s surface. In judging overlap, we consider the places’ spatial
similarity in terms of size and shape, if known, as well as mean location. Size may
sometimes be estimated from placetype, placename, or historical trends. For
example, cities are relatively larger than towns, which in turn are larger than
villages, even if absolute size is not known. Overall, footprint expresses some of the
human sense of the importance of a place, as well as delimiting its location.

Next, but also somewhat concurrently, we consider placetype, allowing that
many, vaguely different classification schemes exist. Nonetheless, we have a sense of
proximity both within and among such schemes, generally based on classification
hierarchies. The placetypes ‘lake’ and ‘marsh’ are conceptually similar, possible
descriptors for the same place; however, a place described as a ‘lake’ cannot also be
a ‘railroad switching yard’. People’s classification systems
for geographic
phenomena are idiosyncratic, even playful: both ‘dry lake’ and ‘hanging lake’ are
nonsensical a priori, and ‘nunatak’ makes a veiled anatomical reference. Placetype
situates the experience of a place socially and linguistically. It is significant that
placetype classification schemes evolve and are learned ad hoc, rather than being
memorized from school.

Finally, we examine placenames, making wide allowances again for spelling,
abbreviations and elisions, transliterations, etc. Historical and linguistic knowledge
also may come into play—that ‘Lake Tahoe’ derives ‘Da’Owaga’, for example.
Placenames that are sufficiently similar support our assessment that a common place
is being described; dissimilar placenames do not dissuade us from that conclusion if
the evidence from footprint and placetype is solid.

similarities—geometric centre,

The process sketched above is human geocognition, applied in the restricted
circumstance of maps (MacEachren 1995: 21 ff). We first rely on perceptions of
footprint
size and shape—together with our
experience of planar enforcement on Earth, to rule out impossible combinations.
We then rank the remaining possibilities according to their placetype similarities,
allowing ambivalences. For the highest-ranking possibilities, we then cross-check
the similarity of placenames. Finally, we commit to accept some or all of the
placenames, nominate the most appropriate placetype within some predetermined
classification scheme, and aggregate the geometries, thought of now as enveloping a
common location, into a unified new description of the place. In summary, we
‘blend or fuse’ the place description—we conflate it.

Some authors (Jones et al. 2001, Frontiera 2004) focus primarily on spatial
measures in determining the similarity of places; while others (Fu et al. 2005) take an

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1113

opposite tack, making placename primary in the place-matching process. Both Jones
et al. (2001) and Fu et al. (2005) include places’ spatial hierarchy, i.e. topology,
encoded explicitly in their algorithms. Yet other authors (Rodriguez and Egenhofer
2003) focus on placetype, particularly placetype comparison across classification
schemes, which is arguably critical in multi-gazetteer applications. The hallmark of
the present approach is its balanced treatment of placenames, placetypes, and
footprints, after ruling out improbable matches based on disparate locations.

Specifically, the automated conflation of DG data outlined here employs a troika
of metrics that mimic the human cognitive process in a GIS context, i.e. using GIS
features in lieu of places. (A GIS feature is the computer representation of a
geospatial phenomenon, here a place.) First, basic geospatial metrics involving
centroids, perimeters and areas of overlap are used to identify feature pairs that are
potentially conflatable. For areas, computations based on bounding rectangles,
convex hulls, or full GIS shapes may be satisfactory, depending on many factors.
The features must be brought to a common datum and projection prior to
conflation.

Based on any areal measure, Area, a basic metric of geospatial similarity between

two spatially extended features, F1 and F2, is:

Gs~Area F1\F2
ð

Þ=

ð

Area F1ð

ÞzArea F2ð

Þ

Þ

1
2

i.e. the ratio of their overlapping area to the average of their individual areas (Hill
1990). This works nicely with convex hulls and particularly well with multihulls
(Hastings 2006, 2007), a refinement of convex hulls that iteratively dissects them to
improve shape fidelity (faithfulness of the emergent hull to the original shape).
Frontiera (2004) has proposed an alternative approach based on logistic regression
with simple bounding rectangles; this achieves ranking even without shape fidelity.
Shape analysis (Lee and Sallee 1970, Dryden and Mardia 1998) goes further, but the
simple metric of overlap, Gs, noted above is sufficient for gazetteer feature
comparisons. Figure 1 demonstrates sample geospatial metrics.

Features that are displayed schematically as lines or points can be dilated into
areas by buffering (using GIS) or, more simply, by hulling (without GIS) small

Figure 1. Geospatial metrics, Gs.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1114

J. T. Hastings

random perturbations of the features’ coordinates. The appropriate amount of
dilation is generally inherent in the type of feature, i.e. placetype. A lower bound on
dilation is given by the scale at which the features were located and mapped, e.g.
,10 m for a 1:24K topographic map, according to US National Map Accuracy
Standards (US Geological Survey 1947). Proximity of polygon features to dilated
lines or points can be tested directly using areal metrics as above; proximity to
undilated lines and points also can be tested by intersection.

In some DGs, point locations are assigned to known linear and areal features, the
purpose being disambiguation rather than depiction. For example, a common label
point for Lake Tahoe is its outlet dam, mentioned above, which is hardly central to
the lake. Disambiguating points may even fall some distance outside the feature(s)
to which they apply, e.g. a spit of land at the confluence of two streams. It is
noteworthy that conflation by point dilation also succeeds in these cases.

Comparisons between line features are the most difficult. Here, a workable
strategy is to dilate both lines (by the same amount as for points of the same type)
and to intersect them. For lines that are close, this intersection will generally result in
multiple patches, which can be re-summarized to a bounding rectangle or convex
hull. If this summary shape overlaps substantially with both the dilated input lines,
again using an areal metric as above, then the lines themselves are also similar.
Depending on data quality and placetype, the notion of ‘both’ may be interpreted
strictly as the minimum overlap for either of the two lines, or more loosely as their
average.

Next, geotaxial metrics are applied to the features’ placetype assignments within
classification schemes. These schemes themselves go by many names: class
hierarchies (computer science); authority lists, subject headings, and thesauri
(library science); and taxonomies (biological and, to a lesser extent, physical
sciences). Hastings (2003) adopts and extends the notion of taxonomy to include a
range of flat lists, n-ary trees and multiply parented trees, all with optional acyclic
cross-linkages. Hastings’ taxonomies utilize a multi-decimal key notation, viz. 1, 1.1,
1.1.1, etc., commonly seen in document indexing and outlining.

Gazetteer placetype classification schemes are geotaxonomies, taxonomies that
specifically apply to geographic phenomena, with their essential characteristics of
autocorrelation, scale, and uncertainty (cf. Longley et al. 2001, chapter 15). Mark
and Turk (2003) present
the case that geotaxonomies are linguistically and
sociologically situated as well. Thus, placetype schemes are inherently ‘messy’ and
continually evolving. Nevertheless, Hill (2002) defined an extensive geotaxonomy,
the Feature Type Thesaurus (FTT), for the Alexandria Digital Library (ADL)
Gazetteer, which was globally applied to a union of approximately ,5 million US
domestic and international places. Other researchers have utilized the FTT as a
starting-point for their own place classification schemes.

Given two placetype terms coded to the same geotaxonomy, a simple geotaxial
metric derives from a count of the ‘up-steps’ (to broader terms) necessary to
bring them to the lowest (narrowest) term that subsumes them both; these are the
familiar BT and NT thesaurus operations. For example, in the FTT, the terms ‘dam
sites’ and ‘piers’ are both immediate narrrowings of ‘hydrographic structures’: one
up-step from either reaches the parent term, and hence the pair is two up-steps
apart.

The up-steps may need to be taken for only one or both of the placetype terms; in
the latter case the effect is multiplicative. Considering the up-steps as exponents

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1115

Figure 2. Geotaxial metrics, Gt.

simplifies the mathematics (other authors prefer reciprocals, viz. 1 / Upstep(. . .); the
choice seems arbitrary):

Gt~2{ Upstep T1,T2
ð

ð

ÞzUpstep T2,T1

ð

Þ

Þ, for a taxonomy T(cid:1)

Here, Upstep is a function that counts the up-steps necessary to reach a taxonomic
match between its arguments, Ti and Tj, which are terms within a pre-determined
taxonomy, T*; it works simply by truncating the multi-decimal key of the first
argument to match (a prefix of) the second, counting the dots removed. A non-
match returns infinity, hence Gt50. Special consideration is given to keys that are
explicitly related through acyclic linkages, which may be asymmetric, rather than
through hierarchy. Specifically, the equivalence relationship ‘use instead’ transposes
the search to a new starting-point in the hierarchy, and the association relationship
‘see also’ bridges two branches of the hierarchy together, equilibrating their multi-
decimal key depth if necessary. Figure 2 demonstrates some sample geotaxial
metrics.

When DGs or gazetteer datasets are coded according to different geotaxonomies,
as is frequently the case, a correlation or ‘cross-walk’ between their classification
schemes must be done. Doerr (2001) explores this topic extensively for information
retrieval purposes, and Rodriguez and Egenhofer (2003) present a knowledge-
engineering discussion. While intriguing and clearly related to conflation, the
correlation problem is actually separable from it, as a preparatory step. Just as
footprints must be in the same datum, placetypes must be in the same geotaxonomy
in order to be conflated. Thus, establishing a single geotaxonomy is a precursor to
DG construction or conflation of gazetteer data.

Finally, geonomial metrics are applied to feature names, taking advantage of
syntactic and semantic constraints on place naming, viz. proper nouns and placetype
terms. Standard textual metrics, called ‘distances’ by the IR community (Baeza-
the number of
Yates and Ribeiro-Neto 1999),
positional discrepancies in equal-length strings; and more generally Levenshtein
distance,
the minimum number of character deletions/insertions/substitutions
required to equate two strings. Soundex (National Archives and Records
Administration 1995) is another metric, popularized by the US Census Bureau to
facilitate comparison of proper nouns—specifically family surnames—on a phonetic

include: Hamming distance,

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1116

J. T. Hastings

basis. As noted in Hastings and Hill (2002), none of these metrics is particularly well
suited to gazetteers because, in everyday usage, the stylistic variability of feature
names is simply too great, e.g. ‘So. Lakeshore Dr’ vs. ‘South Lake Shore Drive’.
Attempts by Hastings (unpub.) to develop a canonical representation of feature
names also have met with limited success; Fu et al. (2005) report otherwise.

Instead, a ‘stemming cross-match’ algorithm, essentially a simplification of the
string similarity algorithm described in Samal et al. (2004: 468), is adopted for DG
conflation work. Given two placename strings, S1 and S2, this algorithm matches the
occurrence of each token (the substring between successive punctuation characters
or whitespaces), excluding placetype terms and stopwords, from one string within
the possibly stemmed words of the other, and vice versa. Abbreviations are
expanded, and common misspellings are corrected as part of stemming. Word
position, whitespace, and case are ignored. For each token–word pairing between
the two strings, a match score of 0, J, K, or 1 is assigned, giving quarter-weight to
infix matches (partial occurring anywhere within a string, except at its beginning),
half-weight to prefix/stemmed matches, and full-weight to exact matches. The
accumulated bi-directional score is normalized by the total number of tokens in the
two strings to account for unmatched tokens, viz.:

Gn~ Match Tokens S1ð
ð

ð

Þ,S2

ÞzMatch Tokens S2ð
ð

Þ,S1

Þ

Þ=Count Tokens S1zS2

ð

ð

Þ

Þ,

where function Match matches a vector of tokens against a string, with stemming,
and function Tokens splits a string into a vector of significant tokens. Figure 3
shows some sample geonomial metrics based on the above formula.

Geospatial, geotaxial, and geonomial metrics all vary between 0 and 1, defining
the pairwise similarity of features in each of those aspects. Conflation occurs when
sufficiently high values of the three metrics co-apply to two or more place
descriptions, as described below.

First, define a unitary GIS feature as having one geometry, one type, and one
name. Determining whether two unitary features (probably) refer to the same place
then proceeds by two thresholding tests. First, if the features’ geospatial similarity

Figure 3. Geonomial metrics, Gn.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1117

falls below an exclusion threshold (indicating they are not sufficiently well
collocated), then place identity is ruled out. Otherwise, if a weighted sum over all
three metrics falls above a nomination threshold, place identity is declared with the
following conflated descriptors: union of the features’ geometries, lowest common
subsuming feature type, and both names (if different) with the better matching one
(highest stemming cross-match) marked as preferred.

For non-unitary features, a small modification to the above procedure suffices:
auto-conflate the geometry and type attributes for the individual
feature(s)
beforehand, then perform the pairwise tests between features, as above, using the
preferred name; retain all names. Thus, the procedure can be applied iteratively to
build up ‘similarity sets’ of conflated features, as Samal et al. (2004: 466) describe,
ignoring their ‘context dependent similarity’ matrix refinements.

Other researchers (Frontiera 2004, Samal et al. 2004, Fu et al. 2005, Sehgal et al.
2006, Anderson and Hetherington-Young 2007) have also worked with similarity
metrics based on footprints, placetypes, and placenames (described variously). With
the exception of Frontiera (2004), who focuses on bounding rectangles, these
researchers have considered distance metrics between point features, or polygons
reduced to mean-centre points. Samal et al. (2004) also utilize shape similarity,
derived from buffered perimeter calculations following Goodchild and Hunter
(1997). Linear features that correspond to etiolated places such as rivers are treated
in passing, if at all. (Conflation of street networks, by contrast, is well researched; cf.
Saalfeld 1988.) These other approaches tend to be heuristic and data-driven, without
appeal to human geocognition.

Data-driven approaches can use training datasets to work out their thresholds
and weights statistically, whereas those parameters have been determined ad hoc for
the approach described here. Sehgal et al. (2006) describe the difficulties of defining
suitable training datasets, given the preponderance of non-conflatable places.
Clearly, the cognitive and data-driven approaches have complementary strengths,
which might be combined in some fashion.

4. Data management

three of

Management of gazetteer data, inside or outside a DG, presents special problems. In
any place-related record, all
the principal descriptors—placename,
placetype, and footprint—are optional and also potentially repeating; however,
none of them is definitive. Even if a unique primary key (in a database sense) has
been assigned to the record by its source, this will not be consistent with the key(s)
assigned, if any, by other source(s), so these are not generally useful as keys, in fact,
but simply additional ad hoc descriptors to be conflated. Different sources
commonly report different sets of descriptors, as well as different names for the
same descriptors and vice versa. Since no constraints can be placed on descriptors
across sources, all must be treated as unbounded, variable-length strings. In such
circumstances,
indexes are necessarily difficult but absolutely required for
performance where more than a few thousand records are considered.

In fact, a DG comprises not one but three interrelated knowledge organization
systems (KOS) (Hodge 2000): (1) the gazetteer entries proper, with their manifold
descriptors; (2) the underlying classification scheme for the gazetteer, which is in
general a graph structure; and (3) the set of gazetteer source citations, essentially a
bibliography. All three KOSs are time-dependent, subject to asynchronous and
frequent updates, which must not invalidate relationships among them. Ideally, the

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1118

J. T. Hastings

transaction history in all KOSs should be maintained in perpetuity: historic places
and placename/placetype changes are often as interesting and important as modern-
day places, particularly for legal and scholarly work.

DG data, involving hierarchies (placetypes) and indefinitely repeating groups
(placenames and footprints), is a natural fit for XML encoding, as documented for
the ADL Gazetteer (ADL 2004). Detailed footprints, where present, are represented
in embedded Geographic Markup Language (GML) (Open GIS Consortium n.d.),
and further summarized to bounding rectangles represented by four scalars (westing,
southing, easting, and northing), which can be processed without a GIS. The ADL
schema is necessarily detailed (77 elements occurring in 30 complex types) and
repetitive; together with the overhead of tagging, the ‘full report’ of an ADL
Gazetteer entry in XML is many times the size of its substantive data. ADL also
defines a minimal subset of 31 XML elements/types (plus GML as needed) for a
‘standard report’ (Jane´e and Hill 2001; see Hands-on Introduction) that is more
suitable for the transfer of gazetteer query results.

For production work with the ADL Gazetteer (,5 million entries), a relational
database management system (R-DBMS) schema was also specified (ADL 2004).
The master schema entails 50 tables, making it cumbersome for some purposes.
Source attribution and time-stamping at the level of individual fields can be
achieved by ‘mirror tables’ that operate in parallel to the main tables; such
arrangements add 17 more tables. A ‘lite’ form of the schema without source-level
attribution, reduced to 12 tables, also exists.

The fundamental issue with DG data, evident in both XML and R-DBMS forms,
is syntactic complexity, which is inherent in the subjective real-world phenomena—
places—that DGs document. On the other hand, the semantic content of DG entries
is starkly limited—a place is stipulated to exist, or not—and approximate in all three
of its descriptive aspects, footprint, placetype, and placename. This ‘approximacy’
of places is poorly accommodated in digital data systems of any sort, based as they
are on binary logic. A fuzzy approach (Zadeh 2000) is superficially appealing;
however, fuzzy theory has so far been developed around scalar numeric data, not the
sorts of ‘rough’ geospatial, hierarchical, or linguistic data inherent in gazetteers. The
metric approach proposed here also avoids a formal theory, it may be noted.

Because of the size of DGs, data-management efficiency and query performance
are important
issues, particularly for DG conflation. Given the primacy of
geospatial metrics, regardless of footprint representation, it makes sense to index
footprints in some way, e.g. quadtrees or gridfiles (cf. Rigaux et al. 2001). The vast
percentage of empty intersections between footprints can then be ruled out quickly.
The essential hierarchical organization of placetypes is captured directly in their
multi-decimal keys; any exceptions (viz. equivalent and related terms) can be
encoded in a 2-D associative table, indexed by such keys. For placenames, an index
built on each of the (non-stop) words in the name, rather than just the full name,
makes sense. Alternatively, the full name can be progressively truncated from the
left, as Jane´e (pers. comm.) has implemented to support placename searching in the
ADL Gazetteer.

In summary, storage and conflation of DG data are highly inter-dependent;
however, neither of the prevailing data management techniques, R-DBMS and
XML, is well suited to the DG application, which entails hierarchies and repeating
groups as well as complex relationships. In a GIS context, R-DBMS is the only
viable technology choice, forcing a cumbersome data schema, which also must be

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1119

Figure 4. Lake Tahoe Basin (stylized).

converted back and forth to XML for inter-machine and human–machine
communications.

5. Demonstration and discussion

For DG testing and demonstration purposes, a stylized landscape abstracting
various real places in the Lake Tahoe Basin (LTB), between California and Nevada,
has been compiled (figure 4, table 1). A mix of administrative, cultural, and
hydrographic features spanning point, line, and area geometries is included. Feature
placenames and footprints are taken from the Environmental Systems Research
Institute (ESRI) ‘Data and Maps CD’ (shipped with ArcGIS software v9.0), the
Geographic Data Technology (GDT, now TeleAtlas) ‘Transportation 2.0’ data
suite, and the US Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System
(GNIS; geonames.usgs.gov) and Lake Tahoe Data Clearing house (LTC;
tahoe.usgs.gov) websites. For simplicity, map projection is avoided, i.e. georeferen-
cing is stated in WGS84 platte carre´e coordinates. Both simple point locations and
geometric footprints are reduced to bounding rectangles (table 1);
in a few
calculations, convex hulls also are used. Placetype terms are taken from a subset
of the ADL FTT (table 2), established by manual translation. All feature data are
encoded in the ADL Gazetteer formats, both XML standard reports and the
R-DBMS ‘lite’ schema. For such a small DG, performance is not a concern.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1120

J. T. Hastings

Table 1. Places in Lake Tahoe Basin (stylized).

Placename

Placetype

Westing

Southing

Easting

Northing

Alpine County
California
Carson County
Douglas County
El Dorado County
Incline Village
LakeTahoe
Lake Tahoe Dam
Nevada
Placer County
Stateline
South Lake Tahoe
Sunnyside
Tahoe City
Truckee River
Washoe County

2120.16

2nd-order divisions 2119.90
1st-order divisions 2120.26
2nd-order divisions 2120.00
2nd-order divisions 2120.00
2nd-order divisions 2120.26
Cities
Lakes
Dam sites
1st-order divisions 2120.00
2nd-order divisions 2120.26
Cities
Cities
Cities
Cities
2120.21
Rivers
2nd-order divisions 2120.00

38.85
38.85
39.10
38.88
38.85

38.94

38.88
39.02

39.16
39.16

2119.83
2119.83
2119.83
2119.83
2119.89
2119.97
2119.93
2120.14
2119.83
2120.00
2119.94
2119.98
2120.17
2120.13
2120.14
2119.83

38.92
39.31
39.21
39.11
39.06
39.27
39.25
39.17
39.31
39.31
38.97
38.94
39.15
39.19
39.31
39.31

The main purpose of the LTB dataset was to aid in the development and testing
of the conflationary metrics, Gs, Gt, and Gn, discussed above; this involved
performing an automated conflation vetted against a manual one (and common
sense). To recapitulate, the automated conflation proceeds by first excluding feature
pairs whose footprints are too dissimilar (Gs,T1), then by nominating pairs whose
placetypes and placenames, in combination with their footprints, are sufficiently
similar (ws*Gs + wt*Gt + wn*Gn.T2), where the ws + wt + wn51, and T1, T2 are
thresholds between 0 and 1. By experimentation, ws50.1, wt50.7, and wn50.2, with
T150.85 and T250.5, were found to give good results. Other weights, thresholds,
and formulae for the metrics themselves are clearly possible.

Figures 5(a)–(f) present some sample conflations. In figure 5(a), the cross-hatched
shape, an invented feature, typed as an FTT ‘administrative area’, is identified as
Placer County, because its geospatial and geotaxial similarities are high, Gs50.94
(by bounding rectangle) and Gt51, respectively. This shape is not identified as

Table 2. Placetype taxonomy, subset of ADL Feature Type Thesaurus (FTT).

Term

See also

Use instead

Key

1
1.3
1.3.1
1.3.2
1.5
1.5.1
2
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.12.1
4
4.10
4.10.3
4.10.9

Administrative areas
Countries
Countries, 1st-order divisions (states)
Countries, 2nd-order divisions (counties)
Populated places
Cities
Hydrographic features
Lakes
Ponds
Streams
Rivers
Man-made features
Hydrographic features
Dam sites
Reservoirs

1.5

2.10

2.12

4.10.9

2.10

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1121

Figure 5. Sample conflations (includes six figures as small multiples): (a) placer county; (b)
two Lake Tahoes; (c) third Lake Tahoe; (d) Truckee River (e) minor lakes; (f) populated
places.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1122

J. T. Hastings

California (stippled), even though it exactly fits within the upper portion of that
feature because its ‘geospatial’ (Gs50.51) is too low; nor is it identified as the
Truckee River, even though it completely envelopes the bounding rectangle for that
feature, for the same reason (Gs50.32). In the latter case, the ‘geotaxial’ (Gt50) is
also prohibitive, although that fact is never tested. For similar reasons, this shape is
not identified as Lake Tahoe.

In figure 5(b), the cross-hatched shape is the convex hull of Lake Tahoe from
GDT, typed as an FTT ‘reservoir’; this is correctly identified with the stylized Lake
Tahoe, an FTT ‘lake’, because its geospatials are high (Gs50.92, by bounding
rectangle, outlined; Gs50.89, by convex hull), and its geotaxial is exact (Gt51,
owing to a ‘See also’). In addition, the historical name ‘Lake Bigler’ and the
ancestral name ‘Da’Owaga’ as well as the alcove ‘Crystal Bay’, at the white cross-
hair label points within the main body of the lake, are conflated with these shapes.
However, the two black cross-hair label points cannot be conflated because, even
when buffered, they do not intersect either of the lake shapes.

In figure 5(c), the cross-hatched shape is the detail of Lake Tahoe from LTC (the
highest-quality geospatial data for the basin, but typed simply as a ‘lake or pond’);
this is further conflated with Lake Tahoe from figure 5(b) because its geospatials are
high (Gs50.98, by bounding rectangle; Gs50.89, by convex hull), and its geotaxial
is again exact (Gt51). Now, also the two black cross-hair label points, ‘Tahoe,
Lake’ and ‘Emerald Bay’, can be conflated because, when suitably buffered, these do
intersect one or other of the lake shapes. It is noteworthy that Emerald Bay appears
as a separate feature in one map and as an integral part of Lake Tahoe on another.
In figure 5(d), the cross-hatched shape is the bounding rectangle for the detailed
Truckee River from LTC, described as an FTT ‘stream’; this is successfully
identified with the stylized Truckee River (diagonally hatched) in a two-step process.
First, the two line shapes are dilated, intersected, and rebounded (heavy outline).
Second, geospatial metrics for the rebounded area with each of the original shapes’
bounding rectangles are computed and averaged (Gs5(0.99 + 0.83)/250.91). Since
both this geospatial and the geotaxial (Gt51) are acceptably high, the conflation is
made.

In figure 5(e), the cross-hatched shapes are a selection of unnamed LTC ‘lake or
pond’ features (other than Lake Tahoe) which are conflated with cross-hair points
representing GNIS ‘lakes’ and ‘reservoirs’ that do have names. Conflation succeeds
because the GNIS point falls within or, when dilated intersects, an areal LTC
feature. One exception is the cross-hair point for ‘Rubicon Lake’ (strikeout text)
which erroneously appears in proximity to Emerald Bay rather than near the west
edge of the map.

Finally, in figure 5(f), the encircled points are GNIS ‘Census designated places
(CDP)’ or ‘cities’ dilated to a nominal 1 km diameter; an FTT placetype of
‘populated place’ is assigned to both. Identifications are made when either existing
point features—viz. Incline Village, Tahoe City—fall within a circle, or when a circle
intersects an existing areal feature—viz. South Lake Tahoe (stippled). Features
other than populated places are ignored on geotaxial grounds (Gt50, typically). For
the test dataset, all geonomials are exact, with the exception of ‘Incline Village—
Crystal Bay’, which partially matches both placenames (Gn50.33). Crystal Bay (as
populated place) fails to conflate because of its location (Gs50). An additional
populated place, Kings Beach, not matching any existing one, is recognized and
optionally retained as well.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1123

Table 3. Conflation inputs of Lake Tahoe Basin hydrographic features from three datasets.

Source

Place names

(per ADL FTT)

Areas

Lines

Points

Place types

Footprints

170 lakes

97 streams

10 springs

GNIS

GDT

LTC

280 (includes
15 duplicates,
18 alternates)
36 (includes 4
duplicates)
none

4

1

6

36 lakes

75 lakes;
1 stream

none

none

65 streams
(with 937 arcs)

Using the above approach, Hastings and Hill (2006) presented conflation results
for a larger group of Lake Tahoe basin-related hydrographic features, taken from
the ESRI, GDT, and the LTC datasets. A summary of inputs to this demonstration
appears in table 3, and outputs from it in table 4.

From a direct examination of US Geological Survey topographic quadrangle
maps, which were the origin of all three datasets, a total of 63 streams, passing
through several hundred lakes enter Lake Tahoe (the exact number is subjective,
depending on size threshold, year measured, and other considerations); only one
stream, the Truckee River, exits from it. The reporting of these places, as GIS
features,
is different across the datasets, however. GNIS reports only point
footprints, some with alternate names as well as a few duplicate footprints with
variant names. By contrast, GDT reports areal footprints, all for lakes, again with
several duplicates (ignoring the generic name ‘lake or pond’). LTC reports both
areal and linear footprints in something approaching a hydrological network,
including many small stream segment arcs; inconsistently, the Truckee River is
double-lined, i.e. an areal feature. None of the LTC features bear placenames.
Different placetype systems apply to the native GNIS, GDT, and LTC datasets;
these were all manually translated into terms from the ADL Gazetteer FTT for the
purpose of conflation, as described above.

From the above reports, a total of 35 conflations (including five errors) were made
for lake features, and 28 conflations (including two errors) were made for stream
features in the LTB. Regrettably, springs were reported only in GNIS, so no
conflation was possible. An additional 35 area lake footprints, from GDT and LTC
combined, remained unconflated, along with 131 point placenames for lakes, from
GDT. Similarly, 37 linear stream footprints remained unconflated, along with 49
point placenames for streams.

Table 4. Conflation outputs of Lake Tahoe Basin hydrographic features from three datasets.

Features

From 3 sources

From 2 sources

From 1 source

21 new conflations;
plus 5 corrections

Lakes

Streams

Springs

14 new conflations,
including 5 errors
28 new conflations,
including 2 errors

35 with footprints,
plus 131 without
37 with footprints,
plus 49 without
10 (point footprints)

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1124

J. T. Hastings

6. Future work

A more extensive DG of the Lake Tahoe basin, reflecting local and historical
knowledge below the ‘visibility’ of current national compilations, would clearly be
desirable for conflation testing purposes. Additional data on springs might be
recovered from US Forest Service maps, which also originally derive from US
Geological Survey topographic maps. An accurate count of
lakes remains
problematic, however. Many of these maps are out of date, and in the near-desert
Eastern Sierra environment, both the size and the number of lakes vary significantly
with climate—even year-to-year weather. Thus, aerial photography and remote-
sensing techniques such as LiDAR also give disparate results by year. By contrast,
the closed nature of the basin and the tight controls on its development lead to
cultural features that are relatively static, not of high conflational interest.

More interesting would be a high-level Digital Gazetteer of the World (DGW)
that delineated major continental/geopolitical regions, countries and their first-
and second-order administrative divisions, plus major hydrographic features. Data
for such a DG already exist in numerous organizations, notably at Columbia
University’s CIESIN (www.ciesin.org)
the Global Rural-
Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP), and at the National Geographic Society
from national governments and
(www.nationalgeographic.com), as well as
numerous commercial sources. Developing a DGW would be a good practical test
of the techniques outlined here, and the product would be immediately useful in
many research and commercial applications.

facility, as part of

Notwithstanding the value of a stand-alone DGW, it is essential to shift from
monolithic gazetteers to a distributed network of gazetteers for many reasons: the
inherently local nature of geographic knowledge; the authority, currency, and
security of gazetteer entries; the reliability and scalability of DG systems overall.
Distributed, Web-based DG queries would necessarily entail distributed conflation,
which begs attention to the taxonomic ‘cross-walk’ problem dismissed earlier.

In addition to distributed queries, distributed update processes are often
characteristic of the large organizations that maintain DGs; these entail conflation,
too. Both queries and updates demand further work on a transparent, overarching
gazetteer service protocol (Jane´e and Hill 2001) that embeds support for conflation.
Such a protocol also would moot the many DG storage models that exist and that
will inevitably continue to evolve.

Whether stand-alone or networked, DGs tend to become large. Not only is
geographic knowledge increasingly detailed at larger scales, but it also evolves more
rapidly with increasing scale, as populations grow and people ramify their
environment. For political as well as scholarly reasons, DG entries should be
preserved in perpetuity, even if the places they describe are lost or destroyed. The
incremental but continual growth of DGs must not be allowed to erode
performance. Geospatial operations are central to most DG functions, especially
conflation. Distributed spatial indexing is therefore another critical research area.

7. Conclusions

Digital gazetteers are proliferating in number and sophistication with the popularity
of location-based services such as GoogleEarth, MapQuest, and OnStar. Currently,
these DGs are proprietary, largely repetitive efforts by the various vendors, which
become expensive for them and ultimately unsatisfactory for their users because the

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1125

geography that DGs describe is inherently shared. In addition, because detailed
geographic knowledge is necessarily local, improved DGs must be distributed as
well as shared. The knowledge accumulated in DGs is essential to nearly all
commercial, government, and military/security activities as well as applied research
in a wide range of fields. Many challenging and important problems in computer
science,
library science, and geographic information science underlie DGs.
Conflation of gazetteer data should be tackled in a broadly collaborative,
multidisciplinary fashion to accelerate results.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency and
the Department of Geography at the University of California, Santa Barbara over
many years. In addition, the author expresses his appreciation to six anonymous
reviewers, whose comments and suggestions resulted in numerous improvements to
this article.

References
ALEXANDRIA DIGITAL LIBRARY (ADL) PROJECT, 2004, Guide to the ADL Gazetteer Content
Standard—February 26, 2004. Available online at: http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/
gazetteer/ContentStandard/version3.2/GCS3.2-guide.htm (accessed 31 August 2007).
ANDERSON, D. and HETHERINGTON-YOUNG, K., 2007, Practical joining of geographic feature
datasets. At 7th International Conference on Military Geology and Geography, June
2007, Quebec City, Canada.

BAEZA-YATES, R. and RIBEIRO-NETO, B., 1999, Modern Information Retrieval (Reading, MA:

COHEN, S., 1998, The Columbia Gazetteer of the World (Ithaca, NY: Columbia University

Addison-Wesley).

Press).

COUCLELIS, H., 1992, Location, place, region, and space. In Geography’s Inner Worlds:
Pervasive themes in Contemporary American Geography, R.F. Abler, M.G. Marcus
and J.M. Olson (Eds), pp. 215–233 (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press).

DOERR, M., 2001, Semantic problems of thesaurus mapping. Journal of Digital Information:,
Special Issue on Networked Knowledge Organization Systems, 1, March 2001, Article
52. Available online at: http://jodi.tamu.edu/Articles/v01/i08/Doerr/ (accessed 31
August 2007).

DRYDEN, I. and MARDIA, K.V., 1998, Statistical Shape Analysis (New York: Wiley).
EGENHOFER, M.J. and MARK, D.M., 1995, Naı¨ve geography. In Spatial Information Theory,
A Theoretical Basis for GIS (COSIT’95 Proceedings), Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pp. 1–15 (Berlin: Springer).

FRONTIERA, P.L., 2004, A probabilistic approach to spatial ranking for geographic

information retrieval. PhD dissertation, University of California.

FU, F., JONES, C.B. and ABDELMOTY, A.I., 2005, Building a geographical ontology for
intelligent spatial search on the Web. In Proceedings of IASTED International
(DBA-2005), February
Conference
on Databases
2005,
Innsbruck, Austria, M.H. Hamza (Ed.)
(Calgary, Canada: ACTA Press), pp.
167–172.

and Applications

GOLLEDGE, R.G., 1995, Primitives of spatial knowledge. In Cognitive Aspects of Human–
Computer Interaction for Geographic Information Systems, T.L. Nyerges, D.M.
Mark, R. Laurini and M.J. Egenhofer (Eds), pp. 29–44 (Dordrecht, Holland:
Kluwer).

GOLLEDGE, R.G., 1998, Wayfinding Behavior: Cognitive Mapping and Other Spatial Processes

(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press).

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 1126

J. T. Hastings

GOODCHILD, M.F., 2004, The Alexandria Digital Library project: Review, assessment, and
prospects. D-Lib Magazine, 10, May 2004. Available online at: http://www.dlib.org/
dlib/may04/goodchild/05goodchild.html (accessed 31 August 2007).

GOODCHILD, M.F. and HUNTER, G.J., 1997, A simple positional accuracy measure for linear
features. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 11, pp. 299–306.
HASTINGS, J.T., 2003, Portable software tools for managing and referencing taxonomies. In
Digital Mapping Techniques ’03—Workshop Proceedings, June 2003, P.A. Millersville
D.R. Soller (Eds), US Geological Survey Open-File Report 03-471, pp.185–192.
Available
http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2003/of03-471/hastings/index.html
(accessed 31 August 2007).

online

at:

HASTINGS, J.T., 2006, Multihulls. In Geographic Information Science, Fourth International
Conference, September 2006, Mu¨ nster, Germany, Extended Abstracts, M.
Raubal, H.J. Miller, A.U. Frank, and M.F. Goodchild (Eds), pp. 285–288.
HASTINGS, J.T., 2007, Multihulls: Spatial representation and processing with variable shape

fidelity, applied to gazetteers. Transactions in GIS, submitted.

HASTINGS, J.T. and HILL, L.L., 2002, Treatment of ‘Duplicates’’ in the Alexandria Digital
Information Science, Second International
Library gazetteer.
Conference, September 2002, Boulder, CO, Extended Abstracts, M.J. Egenhofer,
and D.M. Mark (Eds), pp. 64–65.

In Geographic

HASTINGS, J.T. and HILL, L.L., 2006, Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data. In
Geographic Information Science, Fourth International Conference, September 2006,
Mu¨ nster, Extended Abstracts, Germany, M. Raubal, H.J. Miller, A.U. Frank,
and M.F. Goodchild (Eds), pp. 89–92.

HILL, L.L., 1990, Access to geographic concepts in online bibliographic files: effectiveness of
current practices and the potential of a graphic interface. PhD dissertation, University
of Pittsburgh.

HILL, L.L., 2000, Core elements of digital gazetteers: Placenames, categories, and footprints.
In Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries: Proceedings of the 4th
European Conference on Digital Libraries (Berlin: Springer), pp. 280–290.

HILL, L.L., 2002, Feature type thesaurus. In Alexandria Digital Library Project. Available
online at: http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/gazetteer/FeatureTypes/FTT_metadata.
htm (accessed 31 August 2007).

HILL, L.L., 2004, Georeferencing in digital libraries (guest editorial). In D-Lib Magazine, 10:
May 2004. Available online at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may04/hill/05hill.html
(accessed 31 August 2007).

HILL, L.L., 2006, Georeferencing: The Geographic Associations of Information (Cambridge,

MA: MIT Press).

HILL, L.L. and GOODCHILD, M.F., 1999, Digital Gazetteer Information Exchange (DGIE)
Workshop, October 1999, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC. Available
online at: http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/gazetteer/dgie/DGIE_website/DGIEfinal.
pdf (accessed 31 August 2007).

HODGE, G., 2000, Systems of Knowledge Organization for Digital Libraries: Beyond
Traditional Authority Files (Boulder, CO: Council on Library and Information
Resources, Publication 91). Available online at: http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/
pub91/contents.html (accessed 31 August 2007).

JANE´ E, G. and HILL, L.L., 2001, The ADL Gazetteer Protocol—18 October 2004. Available
online at: http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/gazetteer/protocol/ (accessed 31 August
2007).

JONES, C.B., ALANI, H. and TUDHOPE, D., 2001, Geographical information retrieval with
ontologies of place. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 2205: Spatial
Information Theory Foundations of Geographic Information Science (Berlin: Springer),
pp. 322–335.

KITCHIN, R.M., 1994, Cognitive maps: What are they and why study them? Journal of

Environmental Psychology, 14, pp. 1–19.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data

1127

LEE, D.R. and SALLEE, T., 1970, A method of measuring shape. Geographical Review, 60,

pp. 555–563.

LONGLEY, P.A., GOODCHILD, M.F., MAGUIRE, D.J. and RHIND, D.W., 2001, Geographic

Information Systems and Science (Chichester, UK: Wiley).

MACEACHREN, A.J., 1995, How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization and Design

(New York: Guilford Press).

MARK, D.M., SMITH, B. and TVERSKY, B., 1999, Ontology and geographic objects: An
empirical study of cognitive categorization. In Spatial Information Theory: A
Theoretical Basis for GIS (Berlin: Springer), pp. 283–298.

MARK, D.M. and TURK, A.G., 2003, Landscape categories in Yindjibarndi: Ontology,
environment, and language. In Spatial Information Theory: A Theoretical Basis for
GIS (COSIT’03 Proceedings), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Berlin: Springer),
pp. 31–49.

MERRIAM-WEBSTER, n.d., Dictionary. Available online at: http://www.merriam-webster.com/

(accessed 31 August 2007).

MONTELLO, D.R., 1998, A new framework for understanding the acquisition of spatial
knowledge in large-scale environments. In Spatial and Temporal Reasoning in
Geographic Information Systems, M.J. Egenhofer and R.G. Golledge (Eds),
pp. 143–154 , (New York: Oxford University Press).

OPEN GIS CONSORTIUM, n.d., The Geography Markup Language (GML 3.1). Available

online at: http://www.opengis.net/gml/ (accessed 31 August 2007).

NATIONAL ARCHIVES and RECORDS ADMINISTRATION, 1995, Using the Census Soundex;
General Information Leaflet 55 (Washington, DC: National Archives and Records
Administration).

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL, MAPPING SCIENCE COMMITTEE, 1998, Distributed Geolibraries:
Spatial Information Resources (Washington, DC: National Academy Press).
RIGAUX, P., SCHOLL, M. and VOISARD, A., 2001, Spatial Databases: with Application to GIS,

2/e (San Francisco: Morgan-Kaufmann).

RODRIGUEZ, M.A. and EGENHOFER, M.J., 2003, Determining semantic similarity among
entity classes from different ontologies. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 14, pp. 442–456.

SAALFELD, A., 1988, Conflation: Automated map compilation. International Journal of

Geographical Information Systems, 2, pp. 217–228.

SAMAL, A., SETH, S. and CUETO, K., 2004, A feature-based approach to conflation of
geospatial sources. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 18,
pp. 459–489.

SEHGAL, V., GETOOR, L. and VIECHNIKI, P.D., 2006, Entity resolution in geospatial data
integration. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual International Symposium on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems (ACM-GIS’06), November 2006, Arlington,
VA, R.A. de By, and S. Nittel (Eds), (New York: ACM Press), pp. 83–90.
US GEOLOGICAL SURVEY (USGS), 1947, National map accuracy standards. Available online
at: http://rockyweb.cr.usgs.gov/nmpstds/nmas.html (accessed 31 August 2007).
ZADEH, L.A., 2000, From computing with numbers to computing with words. Lecture Notes

in Computer Science, 1804, pp. 3–40.

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 13:44 04 October 2014 