Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496
DOI 10.1007/s10707-007-0023-2

A Relative Representation of Trajectories
in Geogaphical Spaces

Valérie Noyon · Christophe Claramunt ·
Thomas Devogele

Received: 29 September 2006 / Revised: 21 December 2006 /
Accepted: 9 January 2007 / Published online: 27 March 2007
© Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2007

Abstract The research presented in this paper introduces a relative representation
of trajectories in space and time. The objective is to represent space the way it
is perceived by a moving observer acting in the environment, and to provide a
complementary view to the usual absolute vision of space. Trajectories are char-
acterized from the perception of a moving observer where relative positions and
relative velocities are the basic primitives. This allows for a formal identiﬁcation of
elementary trajectory conﬁgurations, and their relationships with the regions that
compose the environment. The properties of the model are studied, including tran-
sitions and composition tables. These properties characterize trajectory transitions
by the underlying processes that semantically qualify them. The approach provides
a representation that might help the understanding of trajectory patterns in space
and time.

Keywords spatio-temporal modelling · spatial qualitative reasoning · trajectories

1 Introduction

The integration of the temporal dimension within GIS is an area that has attracted
a wide range of research in spatio-temporal databases [1], [9]. Applications range
from monitoring to simulation systems, prediction and planning studies where the
objective is to control and analyse dynamic phenomena. Recent research progress
includes developments of spatio-temporal models and query languages [8], [11], [21],
[26], and physical storage structures [17], [19].

A speciﬁc application area that has gained considerable attention is the one
of moving objects considered as continuous functions in space [8], [19]. Mobile
objects are present in many domains such as in transportation and trafﬁc systems,

V. Noyon (B) · C. Claramunt · T. Devogele

Naval Academy Research Institute, Brest, France
e-mail: noyon@ecole-navale.fr

480

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

and correspond to elementary modelling primitives whose behaviour should be
represented within spatio-temporal databases to guaranty successful development of
these applications. Most of the data models developed so far have considered moving
objects with an absolute representation of space, and have proposed query languages
and data mining functions that support their manipulation in space and time [9].

Here we advocate a different approach where the point of view is the one of an
observer acting and moving in the environment, and where the modelling problem
is the one of the representation of the interaction of this observer, modelled as a
moving object, with moving objects and regions that compose this environment. This
encompasses a relative and process-based view of space, centered to the observer.
Our approach is supported by a formal model where the basic primitives are the
relative positions and relative velocities of the neighbouring objects and regions,
as perceived by an observer acting in the environment. These primitives allow
for a characterization of elementary trajectories, trajectory transitions and their
composition tables. One of the emerging property of our modelling approach is
that the trajectory conﬁgurations identiﬁed correspond relatively well to the way
human intuitively qualify them in natural language. The approach complements the
absolute vision of space, and should facilitate the perception and understanding
of trajectory conﬁgurations. This should be of interest for many applications such
as in the maritime domain, where the object of interest is a ship navigating in
the environment, perceiving the other ships and regions of interest, and where the
analysis of the relative position, behaviours and interactions are of crucial need for
the monitoring and planning of navigation decisions.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the mod-
elling principles of a trajectory representation, using either the absolute or relative
views of space, and motivates the need for a complementary view of the absolute and
relative representations. Section 3 develops a formal model of trajectories in a two-
dimensional space, and Section 4 studies trajectory transitions. Section 5 identiﬁes
the composition tables of the trajectory conﬁgurations identiﬁed. Finally Section 6
draws some conclusions.

2 Modelling background

Recent trends in Geographical Information Science provide qualitative models that
complement the conventional absolute vision of space. Spatial cognition and naive
geography are some of the domains that contribute to the emergence of cognitive
representations of space [16], [28]. This is exempliﬁed by the relative view of space
where the objective is to model space the way it is perceived from a moving observer
acting in the environment [12].

The main difference between the absolute and relative representations of space
comes from the fact that in an absolute representation the origin and the system
of reference are ﬁxed, while in a relative representation they are a function of the
observer’s location. Absolute and relative representations provide complementary
views, they can be derived one from the other. Absolute representations are intuitive,
and are adapted and commonly applied to the observation of the behaviours of
different moving objects in the environment. On the other hand, relative representa-
tions have not been very much used, to the best of our knowledge, for the exploration

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

481

of trajectory behaviours. Considering a relative model for the representation of
trajectories, it might be possible to offer a different view of the way a moving
object behaves in space and time. This might also allow for the study of trajectory
interactions, and to analyse the behaviour of a moving object, with respect to the
underlying environment, and other regions that interact with this object. But this still
implies to explore in further details the semantics revealed by and associated to a
trajectory, when perceived from a relative point of view.

Cognitive and spatial reasoning studies have shown that relative position and
relative velocity are amongst the relationships that are intuitively perceived and
understood by human beings when acting in the environment and perceiving other
moving actors [7], [15], [18], [30]. This motivates our choice of a trajectory data
model, where relative positions and relative velocities are modelled over time. Such a
motivation is not completely new as recent works in spatial databases have explored
the integration of velocity for the representation and manipulation of trajectories
[20], [27], but this has been mainly considered as a solution to optimize spatial data
queries.

At the physical level, the velocity of moving objects has been considered as
a criteria to optimise search queries [13], [14], [23]. At the logical level, speciﬁc
functions for computing velocities and orientations of moving objects extend the
expressivity of the data manipulation model [8]. Velocity can also be represented
as an attribute of moving objects [26], but this leads to some data redundancies.
Moving objects in constrained environments (e.g. urban networks) can be also
indexed using the geometrical properties of predeﬁned paths [25]. From a different
perspective, the modelling of moving objects is a problem of qualitative nature where
distinctions between conﬁgurations should be valid when necessary, and centered to
a given actor behaving in the environment [10]. This is particularly appropriate in
many application areas such as in robotics and navigation systems. The problem is
equivalent to identify the basic modelling units and operations on them.

Within temporal GIS models, a moving object is usually represented using its
location as a function of time. Although this representation supports the modelling
of trajectories in their geographical environment, relative positions and relative
velocities are not explicitly taken into account. Let us consider the example presented
in Fig. 1, where two different trajectories A and B are presented using an absolute
space and a snapshot view without time-stamps (Fig. 1a), and with time-stamps
(Fig. 1b). The fact that the moving objects A and B are getting closer appears in both
cases. However, one can remark that Fig. 1a does not make any difference between
the two cases. On the other hand, the time-stamps that appear in the trajectories
in Fig. 1b show that the case A is likely to lead to a collision, while in case B
the two moving objects are likely to not collide as the time-stamps materialized
(t0 < t1 < t2) show that the moving object B is deccelerating while the moving object
A is accelerating. When the number of objects increase signiﬁcantly, it is also difﬁcult
to directly interpret the emerging patterns at the level of each moving object. This
shows the kind of situations that motivate the need for a complementary frame of
reference, and that characterizes the relative positions and relative velocities of the
trajectories that describe the behaviour of the neighbouring objects acting in the
environment.

A qualitative trajectory representation of two disconnected points based on the
notion of distance and velocity has been recently introduced [29], but the framework

482

Fig. 1 One object getting
closer to the other

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

is limited to punctual primitives and do not provide a correspondance between the
patterns exhibited and the underlying processes that qualify them. Our modelling
approach also considers moving points and trajectories in a two-dimensional space as
the shape and size of a moving object, when considered from the point of view of the
observer, are not very signiﬁcant. However, interactions with the environment imply
to consider not only moving points, but also other regions of interest considered
as points, lines or polygons. The proposed model qualiﬁes sound conﬁguration
transitions, and compostion tables. From these trajectory transitions, we provide a
semantic qualiﬁcation of the processes exhibited that closely correspond to common
interpretations.

3 Towards a conceptual-based trajectory data model

The objective of our modelling approach is to provide a conceptual trajectory
data model centered to a moving object of interest, and that complements the
absolute view of space. This section introduces a trajectory data model, based on two
elementary primitives: relative velocity and relative position. This gives a modelling
support for the exploration of (1) elementary trajectory conﬁgurations, (2) possible
transitions between them and (3) composition tables.

The trajectory data model considers moving objects, denoted as target objects,
with reference to a moving object hereafter denoted as a reference object. A target
object can be a point, a line or a polygon with no holes. Let us consider a moving
reference point A and a moving target object B represented either as a polygon,

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

483

a line or a point. The topological relations considered between a reference point
and a target object are the usual ones introduced by Egenhofer, and Cohn and his
associates although derived in a different fashion [3], [22], [31]:

–

–

–

If B is a polygon and A a point, the possible relations are: B contains A,
B meets A and B disjoint A.
If B is a line and A a point, the possible relations are: B meets A and
B disjoint A.
If B and A are points, the possible relations are: B equals A and B disjoint A.

The relative position pAB between a reference object A and target object B is given
by the minimum distance in order for A to meet B. It is deﬁned as follows:

– If the target object B is a polygon, then

(xA − xB(cid:2) )2 + (yA − yB(cid:2) )2

+
where (xB(cid:2) , yB(cid:2) ) denotes the coordinates of the point B(cid:2)
of the polygon B the closest to the reference point A

Iff B disjoint A

pAB =

0

Iff B meets A

(xA − xB(cid:2)(cid:2) )2 + (yA − yB(cid:2)(cid:2) )2

−
where (xB(cid:2)(cid:2) (t), yB(cid:2)(cid:2) (t)) denotes the coordinates of the point B(cid:2)(cid:2) of ∂ B
the closest to the reference point A

Iff B contains A

– If the target object B is a line then

(xA − xB(cid:2) )2 + (yA − yB(cid:2) )2

+
where (xB(cid:2) , yB(cid:2) ) denotes the coordinates of the point B(cid:2) of the line B
the closest to the reference point A

Iff B disjoint A

pAB =

(cid:6)

(cid:6)

(cid:6)

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

0 Iff B meets A

– If the target object B is a point then

(xA − xB)2 + (yA − yB)2

+
where (xB, yB)) denotes the coordinates of the point B

Iff B disjoint A

(cid:6)

⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

pAB =

0

Iff B equals A

(1)

(2)

(3)

Per convention, and in order to reﬂect negative, null and positive values, relative

positions are denoted by

– A( p−)B iff B contains A (does not apply when B is a line or a point);
– A( p0)B iff B meets A when B is a polygon or a line, and B equals A when B is a

point;

– A( p+)B iff B disjoint A.

484

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

The relative velocity vAB between a reference object A and a target object B is given
as follows (the norm of the velocity vector of A is the usual one deﬁned as (cid:3)−→vA(cid:3) =
(cid:7)
v2
xA

+ v2
yA

):

vAB = ((cid:3)−→vA(cid:3) − (cid:3)−→vB(cid:3)) ∗ (cid:3)−→vr (cid:3) with

−→vr = −→vB − −→vA

(4)

Target objects represented by lines or polygons are considered as having an homoge-
neous velocity. This allows us to assign a velocity vector to a moving object, whatever
its geometrical representation is. vAB is positive when the reference object A is faster
than the target object B (negative on the contrary) and null when the velocity norms
of A and B are equal. This choice is motivated by the implicit prominent role played
by the reference object which is likely to be the one of the observer, and the fact
that the relative velocity of the target object is considered as negative when it is
faster than the one of the observer (positive and slower on the contrary). As for the
notations used for the relative positions, negative, null and positive relative velocities
of a target object B with respect to a reference object A are respectively denoted as
follows:
– A(v−)B iff vAB(t) < 0;
– A(v0)B iff vAB(t) = 0;
– A(v+)B iff vAB(t) > 0.

The combination of the relative positions and relative velocities give nine resulting
and possible trajectory conﬁgurations of a target object with respect to a reference
object (Table 1):

– A(v−)B ∧ A( p+)B denoted as A(v− p+)B
– A(v+)B ∧ A( p+)B denoted as A(v+ p+)B
– A(v−)B ∧ A( p−)B denoted as A(v− p−)B
– A(v+)B ∧ A( p−)B denoted as A(v+ p−)B
– A(v0)B ∧ A( p0)B denoted as A(v0 p0)B
– A(v−)B ∧ A( p0)B denoted as A(v− p0)B
– A(v0)B ∧ A( p+)B denoted as A(v0 p+)B
– A(v+)B ∧ A( p0)B denoted as A(v+ p0)B
– A(v0)B ∧ A( p−)B denoted as A(v0 p−)B

Let T = {A(v+ p+)B, A(v+ p0)B, A(v+ p−)B, A(v0 p+)B, A(v0 p0)B, A(v0 p−)B, A
(v− p+)B, A(v− p0)B, A(v− p−)B} denote the set of possible trajectory conﬁgura-
tions. The trajectory conﬁgurations exhibited in Fig. 2 are an example of the
conﬁguration A(v+ p+)B when B is either a point (Fig. 2a), a line (Fig. 2b), or
a polygon (Fig. 2c) where the relative velocity is positive, and B disjoint A. The
black point in the diagrammatic representation presented in Fig. 2d shows which of

Table 1 Trajectory primitive conﬁgurations

A( p+)B
A( p0)B
A( p−)B

A(v−)B

A(v− p+)B
A(v− p0)B
A(v− p−)B

A(v0)B

A(v0 p+)B
A(v0 p0)B
A(v0 p−)B

A(v+)B

A(v+ p+)B
A(v+ p0)B
A(v+ p−)B

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

485

Fig. 2 Example of the trajectory conﬁguration A(v+ p+)B and its diagrammatic representation

the nine and resulting trajectory conﬁgurations presented in Table 1 represents the
conﬁguration A(v+ p+)B. This diagramatic representation is applied in the following
sections for the presentation of conceptual neighbourhoods and composition tables.

4 Conceptual neighbourhoods

The transitions of trajectory conﬁgurations can be formally studied using the notion
of conceptual neighbourhood initially introduced by Freska in [4], and the theory
of dominance introduced by Galton [5]. The notion of conceptual neighbourhood
can be applied to trajectory conﬁgurations. Two trajectory conﬁgurations tr1, tr2 ∈ T
are conceptual neighbourhoods iff there is a continuous transition between them
without any intermediary trajectory conﬁguration. Following Galton [5], the concept
of dominance reﬂects the constraints imposed by the notion of continuity. A primal
constraint is that a given relative position p0 can be instantaneous, while relative
positions p− and p+ must take place over an interval as there is always another
relative position between p0 and them (i.e. there is always a Real value between
the null value and any Real value). The notion of continuity also implies that any
transition from the relative position p− to p+, and p+ to p− must pass through
the relative position p0. According to the theory of dominance, this also leads
to a dominance space ({ p−, p0, p+}, (cid:8)) where p0 (cid:8) p− denotes that p0 dominates
p−, and p0 (cid:8) p+ denotes that p0 dominates p+. This reﬂects the facts that p0
holds at the limit of the higher values of p− (and respectively at the limit of the
lower values of p+), and not the reverse. Similarly, ({v−, v0, v+}, (cid:8)) is a domi-
nance space (v0 (cid:8) v− denotes that v0 dominates v−, and v0 (cid:8) v+ denotes that v0
dominates v+). According to the theorem of dominance spaces [5], the combina-
tion of dominance spaces ({ p−, p0, p+}, (cid:8)) and ({v−, v0, v+}, (cid:8)) gives a dominance
space ({v− p+, v0 p+, v+ p+, v− p0, v0 p0, v+ p0, v− p−, v0 p−, v+ p−}, (cid:8)). The resulting
dominance space contains the dominance relations (Fig. 3), where unbroken lines
represent changes in one of the two dimensions only (i.e. relative velocity or relative
position) while broken lines represent simultaneous changes in these two dimensions.
In particular, this shows that passing between trajectory conﬁguration (v− p+) and
(v+ p−) is not possible without passing through an intermediate state (v0 p0) or a path
such as [(v0 p+) → (v+ p+) → (v+ p0)].

According to the properties of dominance spaces, there is a continuous transition
between two given relative positions iff there is a path of dominance relations
between them. This is the case of the relative positions p− and p0, p0 and p−, p+

486

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

Fig. 3 Dominance relations
for relative positions and
relative velocities

v p- +

v p0 +

v p+ +

v p- 0

v p0 0

v p+ 0

v p-

-

v p0 -

v p+ -

and p0, and p0 and p+. Similarly, the relative velocity v0 dominates v− and v+, and
there are continuous transitions between v− and v0, v0 and v−, v+ and v0, and v0
and v+. As the two dimensions of a trajectory conﬁguration are orthogonal, there is
a continuous transition between two trajectory conﬁgurations tr1 and tr2 when there
is a dominance relation between them. This gives the following pairs of continuous
transitions: (v− p+, v0 p+), (v0 p0, v− p0), (v0 p0, v+ p0), (v+ p+, v0 p+), (v+ p−, v0 p−),
(v− p−, v0 p−), (v− p+, v− p0), (v− p−, v− p0), (v+ p+, v+ p0), (v+ p−, v+ p0), (v0 p0,
v0 p+), (v0 p0, v0 p−), (v− p+, v0 p0), (v+ p+, v0 p0), (v+ p−, v0 p0) and (v− p−, v0 p0).

In order to verify the physical plausibility of these trajectory conﬁgurations,
the soundness of the trajectory conﬁgurations should be studied, that is, their

b Point versus line

a Point versus polygon

Fig. 4 Continuous trajectory transitions / conceptual neighbourhoods

c Point versus point

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

487

“propensity” to stay over time. Let us ﬁrst consider the case where the target object
B is a point. It is immediate to note that the relative position pAB cannot stay null
if the relative velocity vAB is not null. This implies that A(v− p0)B and A(v+ p0)B
are instantaneous trajectory conﬁgurations. Similarly, we derive that the trajectory
conﬁgurations A(v− p+)B, A(v0 p+)B, A(v+ p+)B and A(v0 p0)B can hold over an
interval of time (represented as self-transitions in Fig. 4). When the target object B
is either a line or a polygon, the reference point A can be in the boundary or in
the interior of B with a null or non null relative velocity over an interval of time.
Therefore, all trajectory conﬁgurations can hold over an interval of time when B is
either a line or a polygon. Applied to the modelling of the relative trajectories of two
moving objects A and B, the resulting and sound continuous transitions are shown in
Fig. 4 (note that point vs. point and point vs. line cases don’t have negative relative
velocities).

A continuous transition between two trajectory conﬁgurations tends to represent
the semantic of a speciﬁc and relative process that is likely to be semantically quali-
ﬁed (deﬁned as a “change as it is actually occuring” by Galton in [6]). Tables 2 and 3
summarize the sound continuous transitions for a point and a polygon (Table 2), and

Table 2 Continuous transitions between a point A and a polygon B

488

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

Table 3 Continuous
transitions between a point A
and a line B; and two points A
and B (A grey background
denotes the cases valid for
point vs. line and not valid for
point vs. point)

for a point and either a point or a line (Table 3). The semantics of the processes
that imply these changes of relative velocity and relative position are qualiﬁed
in Tables 4 and 5. Note that the processes reported in Tables 4 and 5 describe
qualitative changes, and not quantitative changes. Regarding the relative positions,
the behaviours exhibited reﬂect the processes of getting closer, moving away or
staying at the same location. The relative velocities allow for the characterization
of relative accelerations and deccelerations, and relative velocity stabililities. Let us
apply this semantics to the examples presented in Fig. 1:

– Case A: The target object B disjoint A, the reference object A and the target

object B get closer and have the same relative velocity;

– Case B: The target object B disjoint A, the reference object A and the target
object B get closer and there is a relative decceleration (the target object B is
faster than the reference object A, and then the target object B is slower than the
reference object A).

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

Table 4 Changes of relative velocity

Trajectory conﬁgurations

Relative velocity characterization

489

Decceleration of A or/and acceleration of B to reach a null relative

Acceleration of A or/and decceleration of B starting from a null

Acceleration of A or/and decceleration of B to reach a null relative

Decceleration of A or/and acceleration of B starting from a null

relative velocity

velocity

velocity

relative velocity

B stays slower than A
A and B have a null relative velocity
B stays faster than A

A(v+)B −→ A(v0)B

A(v0)B −→ A(v+)B

A(v−)B −→ A(v0)B

A(v0)B −→ A(v−)B

A(v+)B −→ A(v+)B
A(v0)B −→ A(v0)B
A(v−)B −→ A(v−)B

5 Composition tables

The main principle of the composition tables, initially introduced by Allen [2] and
applied to temporal intervals, is to support the derivation of the relationship between
A and C given the relationships between A and B, and B and C. Composition
tables can be used for deriving transitive relationships and reasoning with incomplete
knowledge [4], [29]. Let us consider B and C as target objects with respect to a
reference object A. The composition is a disjunction of trajectory conﬁgurations that
denote the possible trajectory conﬁgurations between the reference object A and the
target object C.

5.1 Composition between three points

Let us ﬁrst consider the case where the moving objects A, B and C are all points.
Composition tables are derived and presented using diagrammatic reasoning [24],
[29]. Let us consider the example where relative velocities between the points A and
B and between the points B and C are positive, and the relative position between
the points A and B is positive, while it is null between the points B and C. This
implies that the target object B is faster than the reference object A and B disjoint
A (Fig. 5, ﬁrst column), and the target object C is faster than the reference object B
and C equals B (Fig. 5, ﬁrst line). It is immediate to derive that the relative position

Table 5 Changes of relative position

Trajectory conﬁgurations

Relative position characterization

A( p+)B −→ A( p0)B
A( p0)B −→ A( p+)B
A( p+)B −→ A( p+)B
A( p0)B −→ A( p0)B
A( p−)B −→ A( p−)B
A( p−)B −→ A( p0)B
A( p0)B −→ A( p−)B

A moves from the exterior, to the boundary of B
A moves from the boundary, to the exterior of B
A stays in the exterior of B
A stays in the boundary of B
A stays in the interior of B
A moves from the interior to the boundary of B
A moves from the boundary to the interior of B

490

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

Fig. 5 Composition of the
relationships A(v− p+)B and
B(v− p0)C when C is a point

y

y

C

B
vB

x

vC

A

vA

C

vC

x

vA

A

y

vB

B

x

between the reference object A and the target object C is positive, and the relative
velocity between the reference object A and the target object C is positive. The result
of the composition of these trajectory conﬁgurations is the trajectory conﬁguration
A(v− p+)C. The principle of this composition is applied to all possible cases, and
gives the results presented in Table 6. The result of these compositions gives thirty
six different cases (Table 6). Resulting conﬁgurations are well deﬁned in twenty-one
cases, and given from a disjunction of conﬁgurations in ﬁfteen cases.

5.2 Composition between two points and a line

Let us consider the case where the two moving objects A and B are points, and
the moving object C is a line. As for the compositions derived for three points,
composition tables are derived and presented using diagrammatic reasoning. Let
us consider the example where relative velocities between the points A and B and
between the point B and the line C are positive, and the relative position between the
points A and B is positive, while it is null between the point B and the line C. This
implies that the target object B is faster than the reference object A and B disjoint
A (Fig. 6, ﬁrst column), and the target object C is faster than the reference object
B and C equals B (Fig. 6, ﬁrst line). It is also immediate to derive that the relative

Table 6 Composition between
three points (A, B and C)

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

491

Fig. 6 Composition of relationships A(v− p+)B and B(v− p0)C when C is a line

position between the reference object A and the target object C can be positive or
null, while the relative velocity between the reference object A and the target object
C is positive. The result of the composition of these trajectory conﬁgurations is the
disjunction of the conﬁgurations A(v− p0)C and A(v− p+)C (Fig. 6 second line, and
second column and third column). The compositions lead to fourteen well-deﬁned
resulting conﬁgurations, and twenty-two disjunctions of conﬁguration (Table 7).

5.3 Composition between two points and a polygon

Let us consider the case where the two moving objects A and B are points, and
the moving object C is a polygon. Let us consider an example where the relative
velocities between the points A and B and between a point B and a polygon C are
positive, and the relative position between the points A and B is positive, while it is
null between the point B and the polygon C. This implies that the target object B
is faster than the reference object A and B disjoint A (Fig. 7, ﬁrst column), and the
target object C is faster than the reference object B and C equals B (Fig. 7, ﬁrst line).

Table 7 Composition between
two points (A and B) and a
line (C)

492

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

Fig. 7 Composition of the relationships of A(v− p+)B and B(v− p0)C when C is a polygon

Then the relative position between the reference object A and the target object C can
be positive, null or negative, while the relative velocity between the reference object
A and the target object C is positive. The result of the composition of these trajectory
conﬁgurations is the disjunction of three conﬁgurations A(v− p−)C, A(v− p0)C and
A(v− p+)C (Fig. 6 second line, second column, third column and fourth column).
As there are six possible trajectory conﬁgurations between the moving objects A
and B, and nine possible trajectory conﬁgurations between the object B and the
target object C, the result of the composition gives ﬁfty-four resulting conﬁgurations
(Table 8) that are well deﬁned in twenty-one cases, and that are given from a
disjunction of conﬁgurations in thirty-three cases.

5.4 Discussion

It is worth remarking that the composition of three points gives a subset of the
composition of two points and a line, and that the composition of two points and

Table 8 Composition between two points ( A and B) and a polygon (C)

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

493

a line gives a subset of the composition of two points and a polygon. This comes
from the differences of dimensionality between points, lines and polygons. This is
exampliﬁed by the composition between the relationships A(v− p+)B and B(v− p0)C
that gives the following disjunctions (Figs. 5, 6 and 7):

– A(v− p+)C when A, B, and C are points;
– A(v− p+)C, A(v− p0)C when A and B are points, and C is a line;
– A(v− p+)C, A(v− p0)C, A(v− p−)C when A and B are points and C is a polygon.

It is also worth denoting that when the target object C is a point, the composition
relationship is commutative, and non commutative when the target object C is a line
or a polygon.

6 Conclusion

Recent developments of database structures and languages oriented to the modelling
of moving objects still require the development of semantic models that characterize
the properties exhibited by the underlying processes. The research presented in
this paper introduces a representation of trajectories where a relative-based view
complements the conventional absolute representation of space. The model is
based on two trajectory primitives: relative velocity and relative position, these
being commonly used and perceived as important constituents of an observer
acting in geographical space. The model allows for an identiﬁcation of trajectory
states, trajectory transitions, and composition tables. The model also characterizes
the trajectory semantics exhibited by points, lines and polygons with respect to a
reference point. The transitions identiﬁed are described by underlying processes
that qualify them. Further work concerns the generalisation of the model to other
geometrical primitives. We also plan to take into account of additional spatial
properties such as orientation, and validation of the model for the monitoring and
analysis of moving trajectories in the context of maritime navigation.

Acknowledgement The authors thank the anonymous rewievers for their constructive comments
and suggestions.

References

3(1):61–99, 1999.

26(11):832–843, 1983.

1. T. Abraham and J. Roddick. “Survey of spatio-temporal databases,” Geoinformatica, Vol.

2. J. F. Allen. “Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals,” Communication of ACM, Vol.

3. M. Egenhofer. “Reasoning about Binary Topological Relations,” in O. Gunther and H.-J. Schek
(Eds.), Proc. of the 2nd Symposium on Large Spatial Databases, Zürich, Switzerland, pp. 143–160,
1991.

4. C. Freksa. “Temporal reasoning based on semi-intervals,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 54(1):199–

227, 1992.

5. A. Galton. “A qualitative approach to continuity,” in P. Amsili, M. Borillo, and L. Vieu (Eds.),
Proc. of the 5th International Workshop on Time, Space and Movement: Meaning and Knowledge
in the Sensible World (TSM’95), Toulouse, France, pp. 17–30, 1995.

6. A. Galton. Qualitative Spatial Change. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2000.

494

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

7. J. Gibson. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates:

Boston, MA, 1979.

8. R. Güting, M. Böhlen, M. Erwig, C. Jensen, N. Lorentzos, M. Schneider, and M. Vazirgiannis.
“A foundation for representing and querying moving objects,” ACM Transactions on Database
Systems, Vol. 25(1):1–42, 2000.

9. R. Güting and M. Schneider. Moving objects databases. Morgan Kaufmann: San Fransisco, CA,

2005.

10. D. Hernandez and E. Jungert. “Qualitative motion of point-like objects,” Journal of Visual

Languages and Computing, Vol. 10:269–289, 1999.

11. B. Huang and C. Claramunt. “STOQL: An ODMG-based spatio-temporal object model and
query language,” in D. Richardson and P. Oosterom (Eds.), Proc. of the 9th Spatial Data Han-
dling Symposium, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 225–237, Springer, 2002.

12. S. Imfeld. Time, points and space—towards a better analysis of wildlife data in GIS. PhD report.

University of Zürich, Switzerland, 2000.

13. G. Kollios, D. Gunopulos, and V. J. Tsotras. “On indexing mobile objects,” in PODS ’99: Proc.
of the 18th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems,
pp. 261–272, ACM Press, 1999.

14. I. Lazaridis, K. Porkaew, and S. Mehrotra. “Dynamic queries over mobile objects,” in Proc. of
the 8th International Conference on Extending Database Technology, Prague, Czech Republic, pp.
269–286, 2002.

15. S. Levinson. “Studying spatial conceptualization across cultures: anthropology and cognitive
science,” The Journal of the Society for Psychological Anthropology, Vol. 26(1):7–24, 1998.
16. W. Maass. “A cognitive model for the process of multimodal, incremental route descriptions,” in
A. Frank and I. Campari (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory: Theoretical Basis for GIS, Marciana
Marina, Elba Island, Italy, volume 716, Lectures Notes in Computer Science, pp. 1–13, Springer,
1993.

17. M. Mokbel, T. Ghanem, and W. Aref. “Spatio-temporal access methods,” IEEE Data Engineer-

ing Bulletin, Vol. 26(2):40–49, 2003.

18. T. Morineau, J.-M. Hoc, and P. Denecker. “Cognitive control levels in air trafﬁc radar controller

activity,” International Journal of Aviation Psychology, Vol. 13(2):107–130, 2003.

19. D. Pfoser. “Indexing the trajectories of moving objects,” IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, Vol.

25(2):3–9, 2002.

20. D. Pfoser and Y. Theodoridis. “Generating semantics-based trajectories of moving objects,”
in Proc. of the International Workshop on Emerging Technologies for Geo-Based Applications,
Ascona, Switzerland, pp. 59–76, 2000.

21. K. Porkaew. Database support for similarity retrieveal and querying mobile objects. PhD report.

University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, 2000.

22. D. Randell, Z. Cui and A. Cohn. “A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and Connection,” in
B. Nebel, C. Rich and W. Swartout (Eds.), Proc. of the Third International Conference Principles
of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’92), San Mateo, CA, pp. 165–176, 1992.

23. S. Saltenis, C. Jensen, S. Leutenegger, and M. Lopez. “Indexing the positions of continuously
moving objects,” in W. Chen, J. Naughton, and P. Bernstein (Eds.), Proc. of the 19th ACM-
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, Dallas, TX, pp. 331–342, 2000.
24. C. Schlieder. “A computational account of preferences in mental model construction,” in
U. Schmid, J. Krems, and F. Wysotzki (Eds.), Proc. of the First European Workshop on Cognitive
Modeling, Berlin, Germany, pp. 90–96, 1996.

25. C. Shahabi, M. Kolahdouzan, S. Thakkar, J. Ambite, and C. Knoblock. “Efﬁciently querying
moving objects with pre-deﬁned paths in a distrituted environment,” in Proc. of the 9th ACM
International Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information Systems (ACM-GIS), Atlanta,
GA, pp. 34–40, ACM Press, 2001.

26. A. Sistla, O. Wolfson, S. Chamberlain, and S. Dao. “Modeling and querying moving objects,”
in International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), Birmingham, UK, pp. 422–432, IEEE
Computer Society, 1997.

27. J. Su, H. Xu, and O. Ibarra. “Moving objects: logical relationships and queries,” in C. Jensen,
M. Schneider, B. Seeger, and V. Tsotras (Eds.), Proc. of the 7th International Symposium on
Spatial and Temporal Databases (SSTD), Los Angeles, CA, volume 2121, Lectures Notes in
Computer Science, pp. 3–19, Springer, 2001.

28. B. Tversky. “Cognitive maps, cognitive collages, and spatial mental models,” in A. Frank and I.
Campari (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory: Theoretical Basis for GIS, Marciana Marina, Elba
Island, Italy, volume 716, Lectures Notes in Computer Science, pp. 14–24, Springer, 1993.

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

495

29. N. Van de Weghe, B. Kuijpers, P. Bogaert, and P. D. Maeyer. “A qualitative trajectory calculus
and the composition of its relations,” in L. Delcambre, C. Kop, H. Mayr, J. Mylopoulos and
O. Pastor (Eds.), Proceedings of the ﬁrst International Conference on GeoSpatial Semantics,
Klagenfurt, Austria, volume 3799, Lectures Notes in Computer Science, pp. 60–76, Springer, 2005.
30. L. Vieu. “Spatial Representation and Reasoning in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,” in O. Stock (Ed.)

Spatial and Temporal Reasoning, pp. 3–41, Kluwer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1997.

31. M. Worboys and M. Duckham. GIS: A Computing Perspective. 2nd edition, CRC Press: Boca

Raton, FL, 2004.

Valérie Noyon is a Ph.D. student in computer science and geographical information systems at the
Naval Academy Research Institute, France. Her research is oriented to the qualitative modelling
of moving objects, and the development of data manipulation languages and interfaces for the
application or this modelling approach to the context of maritime navigation.

Christophe Claramunt
is a Professor in Computer Science and Director of the Naval Academy
Research Institute, France. He received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of
Bourgogne, France. He has also been a researcher at the Nottingham Trent University and at the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, and a consultant for several GIS companies and international
GIS programs. His main research interests include the development of spatio-temporal models for
GIS, semantic and cognitive-based GIS, integration of GIS and simulation systems, development of
environmental and urban GIS, and the integration of WEB, wireless and GIS systems. He is the
cofounder of the series of symposiums on Web and Wireless Geographical Information Systems
(W2GIS). He has also served in the program committee of several international conferences related
to theories and applications of geographical information systems.

496

Geoinformatica (2007) 11:479–496

Dr. Thomas Devogele is an Assistant Professor in computer science at the French Naval Academy
Research Institute. His research interests include spatial databases, computational geometry, navi-
gation systems and digital elevation models. Dr. Thomas Devogele received his Ph.D. in computer
science in 1997 from the University of Versailles and the French National Geographic Institute.
His thesis was oriented towards spatial database integration, data matching and multi-scale rep-
resentation. His current research interests involve moving objects, integration of topographic and
bathymetric data, and maritime GIS. He is one of the leaders of the French national working group
on mobility and real time GIS (SIGMA research network).

