The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

British Contribution to the Charting of the Adriatic
Sea

Mirela Slukan Altić

To cite this article: Mirela Slukan Altić (2015) British Contribution to the Charting of the Adriatic
Sea, The Cartographic Journal, 52:4, 305-317, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1108659

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1108659

Published online: 30 Jan 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 31

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [94.242.228.108]

Date: 15 March 2016, At: 20:31

The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2015

Vol. 52 No. 4

pp. 305–

317

November 2015

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

The  British Contribution to Charting the Adriatic Sea

Mirela Slukan Altic´

Institute of Social Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia
Email: mirela.altic@zg.t-com.hr

In this paper, I 
 present  the  results  of  an  original  research  study  that  was based on the analysis of British charts of the
Adriatic produced during and immediately after military operations undertaken by British forces and their allies against
 production of British charts of the Adriatic from the first charting
Napoleon in the Adriatic. I 
campaign of the Hydrographic Office of 1800–1801 to charts produced in the period of British rule over the island of Lissa
of 1811–1815 to the first systematic hydrographic surveying of the Adriatic of 1817–1819 under the leadership of William
Henry Smyth that resulted in the first hydrographic atlas and pilot book of the Adriatic. At the same time, the paper
evaluates the British contribution to the creation of some of the first reliable nautical charts of the Adriatic and to the
development of the nautical cartography of the Adriatic in general.

 creation  

 analyse  

 and  

 the  

Keywords: nineteenth century, British cartography, Adriatic, Admiralty charts, William Henry Smyth

THE ADRIATIC SEA AS A THEATRE OF THE
NAPOLEONIC WARS

The Napoleonic Wars that France was waging against
Britain and its allies (Austria, Russia, Spain and Prussia) for
more than 20 years strongly inﬂuenced the history of the
entire Mediterranean. Although the Adriatic was never the
these wars, Britain’s participation in
major theatre of
the battle for control over the Adriatic played a key role
in the forming of geostrategic relations between Austria and
France and between Britain and all its allies, respectively.
Indeed, one of the biggest risks to the British allies resulted
from the possibility that France might conquer
the
European part of Turkey. As long as the French did not
have the eastern Adriatic coast in their possession, that
possibility was unlikely. After conquering the Adriatic Sea
and its eastern coast, Napoleon, for the ﬁrst time, had a free
passage to the East and the Turkish possessions in the
Southeast Europe region. In this regard, the establishment
of French control over the Adriatic in 1805 was a turning
point in the geostrategic position of France and Britain. The
turning point came when Austria, severely defeated by the
French in the Battle of Austerlitz, was forced to cede
Lombardy, Venetia, Modena,
the Papal States, Istria,
Dalmatia, Piedmont, Savoy, Genoa, Parma and Tuscany
to France, These lands then became part of the Kingdom of
Italy under Napoleon’s rule. This led to the ﬁrst limited
actions of the British Royal Navy in the Adriatic Sea in
alliance with the Russians. The situation deteriorated
further in 1807 when, in the Treaty of Tilsit, Russia had
granted France control over the Ionian Islands and Bay of
Kotor, and the French also exercised control in the Strait of

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1108659

Otranto, which, together with the Ionian Islands, enabled
them to have strategic access to the territory of the
Ottoman Empire in the East. Already in 1809, Napoleon
was able to secure further territorial expansion of his
Empire to Trieste, Gorizia, Carniola, parts of Carinthia and
Croatia south of the Sava River, and to establish, together
with Istria and Dalmatia, the so-called Illyrian Provinces.
Austria, the main British ally, thus lost its last Adriatic Ports
of Trieste and Fiume, and was completely defeated at sea.
This sequence of events called for stronger engagement
of the British Navy in the Adriatic, their main objective
being to deprive the French of the supplies and to destroy
the trade in the Adriatic. That is to say, immediately after
establishing control, the French imposed a continental
blockade of Dalmatia aimed at excluding the British goods
from the European market. In response to this continental
blockade, Britain, in alliance with Austria, established a
naval blockade of the Adriatic, which were in turn aimed at
interrupting the supply lines of Napoleon’s Empire from
the sea. To this end, Britain deployed its Royal Navy, which
would remain present in the Adriatic from 1800 to 1815,
the year of the fall of Napoleon.

MARINE CARTOGRAPHY OF THE ADRIATIC UNTIL THE
NAPOLEONIC WARS

The  Adriatic  Sea,  situated  in  the  central  part  of  the 
Mediterranean,  was  the  key  maritime  link  between  the    
East  and  the  West.  Because  of  intensive  shipping  in  the 
Adriatic, as  early  as  the Middle Ages, there was a signiﬁcant 
number   of   portolan   charts  of  the  area.  They  served  the

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
306

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. Chart of the Port of Pola, Jacques Nicolas Bellin, Paris, 1771. State Archives of Zadar, Croatia

commercial  and  navy  ﬂeets  not  only  of  the  Venetian 
Republic,  but  also  of  other  empires  whose  ships  were 
operating in the Adriatic. With the growing requirements of 
maritime trade and navigation, but also of naval warfare, the 
portolans  of  the  Adriatic  were  produced  at  a  relatively  tiny 
scale, and as early as the seventeenth century, they were no 
longer able to serve the requirements of navigational safety, 
especially  along  the  highly  indented  eastern  Adriatic  coast. 
The cause for such slow improvements in nautical charts of 
the  Adriatic  was  the  centuries-old  conﬂict  between  the 
Venetian  Republic  and  the  Ottoman  Empire,  which  put  a 
long-term  strain  on  both  Empires,  and  hampered  the 
charting  of  the  Adriatic.  The  Venetian  Republic,  which 
controlled the Adriatic until as late 1797, the year of its fall,

had not conducted a single systematic hydrographic survey,
while its nautical charts had only been upgraded on the
basis of observations from single seafarers.

The  shortage  of  reliable  nautical  charts  of  the  Adriatic 
particularly  came  to  the  fore  after  the  fall  of  the  Venetian 
Republic  and the establishment  of  French control  over the 
Adriatic  (1805–1813).  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  whose  mili-
tary  operations  were  conducted  precisely  at  sea,  immedi-
ately  after  the  establishment  of  the  French  rule,  hired  his 
best  Hydrographer,  Charles  Franc¸ois  Beautemps-Beaupre´, 
to  conduct  a  hydrographic  survey  of  the  eastern  shores  of 
the  Adriatic,  and  to  produce  appropriate  nautical  charts. It 
was  the  ﬁrst  scientiﬁc  hydrographic  surveying  of  the 
Adriatic.  However,  the  nautical  charts  produced  as  a  result

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016 The 

  British  Contribution  to  Charting  the  Adriatic  Sea

307

Figure 2. Admiralty chart of Harbor of Pola, Robert Nellson, London, 1801. British Library, London

of this survey remained in manuscript until 1820, and were 
not  available  outside  higher  French  military  circles1.  The 
only  available  charts  of  the  Adriatic,  which  to  some  extent 
facilitated  safe  navigation,  were  published  by  the  French 
Hydrographer  Jacques  Nicolas  Bellin2  in  his  pilot  book  of 
17713.  They  were  the  ﬁrst  charts  of  some  parts  of  the 
Adriatic  in  a  somewhat  more  detailed  scale4,  which  also 
contained  indications  of  depths  of  water  stated  in  French 
feet  (Pied  du  roi  y32.48  cm)5  (Figure  1).

The charts of the Adriatic published in Bellin’s pilot
book were used as the cartographic base for all other pilot
books and maritime atlases of the late eighteenth and early
including later editions of Joseph
nineteenth centuries,
Roux’s Atlas of the Mediterranean (1779, 1795, 1804 and
1839). The only attempt at a new survey was the 1798

‘

’   
  because of its numerous errors (Smyth, 1854).

the Adriatic by Vincenzo di Lucio6, which
chart of
Captain William Henry Smyth described as  a  disgrace  to
hydrography 
Only a little bit better was the situation with the western
coast of the Adriatic Sea, between Trieste and the mouth
of the Tronto River, for which the pilot book Il Pilota
Pratico was published in 1816 by Ignazio Prina7, which
’   
Smyth rated as  very  tolerable  (Smyth, 1854). So when the
Royal Navy started the Adriatic campaign, there was not a
single reliable nautical chart or pilot book of the Adriatic
that would ensure the safety of navigation along the
indented coastline and numerous islands of the eastern
the   complex naval operations that
Adriatic, 
were 
1800
onwards.

alone 
  undertaken 

the  Adriatic 

from 

let 

in 

‘

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
308

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Topographic map of St\ George Bay area of the Island of Lissa (Vis), Captain J.M.F Smith, 1811. University of Nottingham,
Portland (Welbeck) Collection

THE FIRST BRITISH CHARTING CAMPAIGN IN THE
ADRIATIC OF 1800–1801

Although  Great  Britain  was  the  world’s  dominant  naval 
power of the late eighteenth century, its, the Royal Navy  still 
relied on the charts of private and foreign publishers. There 
was  no  speciﬁc  organization  within  the  Admiralty  solely 
assigned to carrying out surveys and publishing charts. This 
situation  began  to  change  only  in  1795  with  the  establish-
ment  of  the  British  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce.  Alexander  Dalry-
mple  was  appointed  as  the  ﬁrst  Hydrographer.  In  1800,  he 
acquired  a  printing  press  for  the  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce,  and 
published the ﬁrst Admiralty chart. Most of the early Adm-
iralty  charts  were  clearly  published  to  support  naval  opera-
tions.  They  were  all  based  on  surveys  carried  out  by  naval 
ofﬁcers in the course of their normal duties (David, 2008).

At  the  time,  the  Royal  Navy,  already  present  in  the 
Mediterranean  with  Britain  assuming  control  of  Malta  in 
1800,  begins  to  more  frequently  sail  on  the  Adriatic. 
Initially,  merely  to  escort  trade  convoys  on  their  way  to 
   hidden  intent
Venice, 

  a decreasingly 

  with 

  later 

  but 

  on, 

to disrupt France’s trade and warships. HMS El Corso (a 14-
gun  brig-sloop)  was  no  exception.  Already  in  1799,  the  El 
Corso was occasionally operating between Malta and Venice 
to  ensure  the  safety  of  the  convoys.  In  the  period  from 
February  1800  until  the  end  of  1801,  however,  she  was 
continually  sailing  in  the  waters  of  the  Adriatic,  closely 
observing  the  activities  of  the  French  ﬂeet.  It  was  in  this 
period of almost two years that the ﬁrst British survey of the 
Adriatic  was  conducted  under  the  leadership  of  Robert 
Nellson8,  Master  of  the  Royal  Navy9.  Because  of  the 
importance  of  Venice  and  Trieste,  the  key  Adriatic  ports, 
Nellson’s  interest  was  primarily  focused  on  the  charting  of 
the  Northern  Adriatic.  In  this  context,  Istria,  the  peninsula 
which  controlled  the  access  to  Trieste  and  Venice,  was  of 
utmost geostrategic importance, and British ships anchored 
in  well-sheltered  Istrian  bays  on  an  almost  regular  basis. 
Accordingly, Nellson produced at least seven nautical charts 
of Istrian ports: the Piran Bay, the Port of Pola and the road 
of  Fasano  (Pula-Faz˘ana),  Parenzo  (Porec˘),  the  Bay  of 
Cittanova (Novigrad), the Port and Bay of Rovignio

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  British Contribution to the Charting of Adriatic Sea

309

Figure 4. Chart of Port of St George on the Island of Lissa (Vis), 1812. National Maritime Museum, London

(Rovinj), the Port of Veruda and the Port of Orsera (Vrsar)
(Figure 2). Apart from the above charts of Istrian ports and 
anchorages,  only  one  more  Nellson’s  chart  of  the  Adriatic 
region  has  been  found  so  far:  the  plan  of  the  port  on  the 
island  of  Lesina  (Hvar)  in  central  Dalmatia  (the  Port  of 
Lesina  on  the  island  of  Lesina  in  the  Adriatic)10.  All  the 
above  charts 
locations  of 
indicated  depths  of  water, 
anchorages,  shallows  and  reefs,  while  on  the  shore,  they 
outlined  the  main  contours  of  the  settlements  with  their 
dominant  structures:  identiﬁable  objects  such  as  monas-
teries,  churches  with  bell  towers,  etc.  None  of  these  charts 
were  graduated,  either  for  latitude  or  longitude.  In  1803 
Nellson’s  nautical  charts  of  the  Adriatic  were  printed  as 
Admiralty charts of the Hydrographic Ofﬁce. It is unknown 
whether  Nellson  had  produced  any  more  charts  of  the 
Adriatic,  as  only  a  handful  of  his  charts  have  survived 
through to the present11. Although the record of Nellson’s 
surveying of the Adriatic has been kept at the Hydrographic 
Ofﬁce  in  Taunton,  the  original  ﬁeld  copies  have  not  been 
preserved, and all eight charts were withdrawn from use by 
.12
  the  end  of   the 
the  Royal  Navy  after 

  Napoleonic  Wars

THE ISLAND OF LISSA (VIS) DURING THE BRITISH RULE
(1811–1815) – SURVEYING OF THE ISLAND BY THE 
ROYAL  NAVY AND THE ROYAL ENGINEERS

in  1809,  Austria 

When, 
lost  another  battle  against 
Napoleon,  the  Adriatic  for  the  ﬁrst  time  became  an 
important  theater  of  naval  operations  in  the  war  between 
Britain and France. Owing to the loss of own ports and the 
permanent  war  against  Napoleon  on  land,  Austria  was  no 
longer able to signiﬁcantly participate in naval battles in the 
Adriatic.  After  1809,  the  war  for  control  over  the  Adriatic 
thus largely depended on British forces. Since they were no 
longer  able  to  use  the  Austrian  ports  in  Northern  Adriatic 
because  of  French  occupation,  the  British  had  to  ﬁnd 
another port that would also serve as the Royal Navy base. 
Thus, the interest of the British slowly began to shift from 
the  Northern  to  the  Central  Adriatic.  Initially,  the  British 
ﬂeet found refuge south of Istria, in the well-sheltered port 
  where  they  regularly  anchored  as  late  as 
of  Mali 
1808 when the port was captured by the French who built a 
   British  were  forced  to  seek  safe  harbour
fort 

    there.   The 

Los˘inj, \

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
310

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. General map with a list of trigonometric points of the hydrographic survey, Milan, 1822–1824. State Archives of Zadar, Croatia

elsewhere, and found in the Bay of St George on the island 
of  Lissa  (Vis).  The  invasion  of  the  island  of  Lissa  and 
deployment of the Royal Navy in the Bay of St George was 
proposed  as  early  as  1808  by  Captain  Patrick  Campbell, 
commander of the British squadron in the Adriatic. That is, 
he  immediately  recognized  that  Lissa’s  central  location  in 
the Adriatic would enable the best position to interfere with 
maritime  connections  the  French  maintained  between  the 
western  and  eastern  shores  of  the  Adriatic.  In  addition, 
Lissa  was  also  suitably  located  in  relation  to  Malta,  the 
Royal  Navy  base  in  the  Mediterranean,  ensuring  good 
connections  between 
the  Eastern 
Mediterranean  (Hardy,  2006).  Accordingly,  from  1808 
onwards, British ships started to increasingly anchor in the 
Bay of St George, which they considered an appropriate, yet 
unofﬁcial  Royal  Navy  port.  When  on  12th  March  1811, 
French ships from Ancona attempted to capture the island, 
its  geostrategic  importance  became  undoubtedly  widely 
recognised.  In  the  famous  Battle  of  Lissa,  the  French  ﬂeet 
was severely defeated by the British under the command of 
Captain  William  Hoste13.  From  then  on,  until  the  fall  of 
Napoleon  in  1815,  Port  St  George  was  ofﬁcially  the  main 
base of the Royal Navy in the Adriatic, and the entire island 
came under  British rule with George Duncan Robertson as 
its Governor (Safonov, 1988, pp. 183, 224).

the  Adriatic  and 

When it was ﬁnally decided that Britain was to send a
permanent garrison to Lissa for the purpose of fortifying
the island and organizing its defence, the ﬁrst surveying was
carried  out  as   early   as ~ autumn 1811. It was conducted
by Captain William Bennett14 who went on to compile the
ﬁrst British map of the Bay of St George, attaching it to his
written report that was sent to Captain John Smith, the
15
then British commander on Greek Islands, on 8th October  . 
It  was  a  topographic  map  of  the  Bay  before  the 
commencement  of  British  fortiﬁcations,  and  was  based  on 
original  surveying.  The  focus  of  the  map’s  view  is  on  the 
conﬁguration  of  the  terrain  around  the  Bay,  along  with 
indications of the most important strategic positions for the 
defence of this part of the island: Whitby Hill as the highest 
point south of the Bay 16,  Hornby Hill, controlling the port 
entrance  from  the  eastern  side  of  the  Bay17,  and  the  Bay 
itself 18  as   an  alternative  anchorage.  In  addition,  Bennett 
speciﬁcally indicated the Capes of St George and Argentina 
on his chart, which closed the entrance to the port. Bennett 
suggested them as suitable locations for the construction of 
naval  batteries  to  secure  Port  St  George  and  the  islet  of 
Hoste,  named  after  Captain  William  Hoste.  On the  latter, 
there  already  was  a  small  battery  built  by  Captain Maxwell  
in  181119.  In  addition  to  the  topography  of  the  terrain 
and  the  detailed  view  of  the  coastline,  Bennett  paid 
particular  attention  to  the  mapping  of  urban  structures  in

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016 The  British Contribution to the Charting of Adriatic Sea

311

Figure 6. Chart of Northern Adriatic, Carta di Cabotaggio del Mare Adriatico, Milan, 1822–1824. State Archives of Zadar, Croatia

the settlement in the Bay, whose street layout and the
distribution of the most distinguished buildings is still fully
recognisable to this day20.
the ﬁrst detailed
topographic map of the future main port of the British
ﬂeet in the Adriatic.

It was

The second report on the island was compiled by Captain
John Smith21 in October 1811, who, for the purposes of
planning for future fortiﬁcations and the organization of the
island’s defence, compiled another two maps, enclosing
them to his report on Lissa that was received on 7

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016 312

The Cartographic Journal

November 1811. The ﬁrst map shows the entire island22.
The map was produced by circumnavigating the island in
great haste, and the measurements were taken from the
ship. Given the intended use of the map – to show the
conﬁguration of the coastline, the locations of anchorages,
promontories and shallow waters with the purpose of
planning the island’s defence – initially, such surveying
provided sufﬁcient information. It should, however, be
noted that, due to the absence of measurements on the
shore, the map had its shortcomings in terms of deforma-
tion of the island’s surface area. This was particularly
noticeable in the western part of the island around the town
of Komiz˘a23.

 key 

 elevations 

As supporting material for the continuation of his report,
Smith had also produced his own topographic map of Port
St  George  (Figure  3)24.  Smith’s  chart  of  the  Bay  was 
compiled  more  accurately  and 
in  more  detail  than
Bennett’s25.  The  chart  is  entirely  focused  on  the  repre-
sentation  of  the  topography  and  the  locations  for  future
fortiﬁcations,  while  the  representation  of  settlements  is  in
 heights
this case fully generalized. 
 Smith 
of 
 the 
fact  that  he  was  taking  extensive  ﬁeld  measurements.
In 
  terrain, 
Smith’s    map    also    comprised    a    proposal    for 
    defence
of the island, which largely coincided with that of Bennett.
The main geostrategic places that were suggested as suitable
for  a  fortiﬁcation  were  Hornby  Hill  (Wellington),  Whitby
Hill and the islet of Hoste. Smith was, however, the ﬁrst to
emphasize  the  necessity  of  construction  of  another  fort  at
the western entrance to the Bay (Cove Hill) as well26.

 measured 
 which 

  topography 

  the 
    the 

 supports 

 addition 

 around 

    the 

 Bay, 

 had 

 the 

 the 

  to 

  of 

Another  survey  of  the   terrain adjacent to the Bay was
carried out immediately before the construction of the
forts. It was carried out by John Henryson27 who, like his
two predecessors, was also a member of the Corps of Royal
Engineers of the British Army. His map of the entrance to
the Bay, which depicted the sites of the future British forts,
looked more like a topographical sketch28. It seems rather
paradoxical because, when it comes
to cartography,
Henryson was arguably the most experienced of all
British ofﬁcers working on Lissa (it is generally known
that he was the aid to William Henry Smyth in the Sicilian
survey of 1813). His map entirely relied on the Smith’s
map of the Bay, which was used as a base map. In this
particular case, Henryson was entirely focused on the forts,
as he was personally responsible for their construction29.
Henryson decided that the main fort should be built near
Cove  Hill,  and   Fort  St George  was subsequently built
on the site. His chart depicted the full ﬂoor plan of the
Fort. Two additional round towers, the Bentinck30 and
Robertson Towers31, were also built in the vicinity of the
main   Fort, 
  while   Fort  Wellington  was  built on Hornby 
Hill.

Immediately  before  ofﬁcially  taking  over  the  island,  the 
British conducted their ﬁrst hydrographic surveying of the 
Bay  of  St  George  (Figure  4).  The  measurements  on  Lissa 
were  taken  in  March  1812  by  W.  White,  the  master  of 
HMS Eagle32. It is interesting to note that, topographica-
lly, White’s chart did not rely on previous British surveying 
of   the   Bay   at   all.   Consequently,   his  representation  of
the Bay’s coastline, particularly of its western side, showed

33

signiﬁcant inaccuracies. White carried out his measure-
ments of the depths of water in the entire Bay of St
George as well as in the neighbouring Carober Bay and
the area around the islet of Hoste, stating the depths in
.   White’s   chart  was   the  ﬁrst hydrographic
fathoms
chart of the main  British base in the Adriatic. In spite of
its several shortcomings, the chart was a major step
forward in that it enabled much safer maneuvering and
anchoring for British ships34. When it ofﬁcially took
control of the island on 24th April 1812 , the British
squadron thus had at 
its   disposal  detailed and speciﬁc
topographic maps of the area around Port St George, the
hydrographic chart of the Bay and the general map of the
island, which enabled the British to successfully rule over
and to defend the island.

35

Thanks to this British base on Lissa, the French never
succeeded in conquering the island. As early as February
1813, the British forces captured the islands of Lagosta
(Lastovo) and Curzola (Korc˘ula) as well, which signiﬁ-
cantly contributed to the ﬁnal defeat of Napoleon in the
Adriatic. It is interesting to note that so far no indications
have been found that the British were surveying the islands
of Lagosta and Curzola as well (the so-called English
Tower, however, built by Taylor and Cole, a British naval
captain and a second lieutenant in the British Army, still
exists today in the Town of Curzola). After the ﬁnal defeat
of Napoleon, in July 1815, the British withdrew from all
the
their possessions
geographical names commemorating the Royal Navy and
the naval ofﬁcers involved in the Battle of Lissa have faded
away and been replaced. The only two exceptions are the
islet of Hoste, named after William Hoste, and, ironically,
Fort  Wellington, after 
famous   British Field marshal
the 
who had nothing to do with Lissa (Hardy, 2006).

in the Adriatic. Unfortunately,

THE AUSTRIAN–ITALIAN–BRITISH HYDROGRAPHIC
SURVEY OF THE ADRIATIC UNDER THE LEADERSHIP
OF WILLIAM HENRY SMYTH (1817–1819)

In  the  early  nineteenth  century,  the  overall  status  of 
mapping  in  other  parts  of  the  Mediterranean  was  only 
slightly  better  than  that  of  the  Adriatic.  Shortly  after  the
British  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce  was  formed  in  London,  the
Royal  Navy  commenced  its  sporadic  mapping  of  the
Mediterranean; initially, due to the war in the territories of
Spain  and  France,  of  the  western,  and  then  of  the  central
and eastern parts. The hydrographic surveying operations in
the Mediterranean were greatly intensiﬁed after 1812, when
the  leading  role  in  the  surveying  efforts  was  taken  by
Captain William Henry Smyth, one of the foremost British
Hydrographers  of  the  nineteenth  century36.  In  agreement 
with  Thomas  Hurd,  the  Head  of  the  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce
of the Admiralty at the time, Smyth assumed the surveying
obligation  as  part  of  his  regular  duties  and  to  the  extent
possible  (Smyth,  1854).  Accordingly,  in the  period  from
1812  to  1817,  Smyth  carried  out  the  hydrographic
surveys  of 
the  Spanish,  Balearic,  Sicilian,  Sardinian,
Maltese  and  northern  African  coasts.  When  in  1817,
his cartographic  efforts  received  the  highest  praise  of     the
Admiralty,  his  work  was  put on  a  more  formal footing.

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  British Contribution to the Charting of Adriatic Sea

313

The Admiralty gave him an ofﬁcial appointment to proceed
with surveying of the Mediterranean shores,
including
those of the Adriatic. The survey ship deployed to the
Mediterranean to carry out surveying operations was HMS
Aid. On board the same ship, renamed HMS Adventure in
1821, Smyth would continue his surveying of different
regions of the Mediterranean until 1824.

In the meantime, the Austrians, having re-established their 
control over the Adriatic in 1815, decided to carry out the ﬁrst 
systematic  hydrographic  survey  of  the  Adriatic.  The  survey 
was jointly conducted by two institutions under the authority 
of  the  military:  the  Topographical  Office  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Naples  (Officio  Topografico  del  Regno  di  Napoli)37,  led  by 
Colonel  Ferdinand  Visconti38  and  the  Military  Geographical 
Institute  of  the  Austrian  General  Staff  (Istituto  Geograﬁco 
Militare)39 in Milan, led by Colonel Antonio Campagna40.

When  the  Austrians  heard  of  Smyth’s  intended  survey  in 
the Adriatic, they proposed a joint survey, realising that the 
survey could be carried out along the whole eastern side of 
in  Turkish  hands. 
Adriatic,  much  of  which  was  still 
Accordingly,  Smyth  visited  Naples  early 
in  1818  to 
negotiate  with  the  Neapolitan  and  Austrian  authorities. 
Agreement was reached. It was arranged that four Austrians 
(Baron  Potier  des  Echelles,  Baron  Gra¨nzenstein,  Baron 
Jetzer  and  Lieutenant  Lapie)  and  four  Neapolitan  ofﬁcers 
(Captain  Soldan,  Lieutenant  Giordano,  Captain  Chiandi 
and Lieutenant Bardet) should join HMS Aid. In addition, 
the  Velox,  the  Austrian  sloop,  was  placed  under  Smyth’s 
command  with  the  promise  of  further  assistance  from 
Austrian gun-boats in principal ports (Smyth, 1854; David, 
2008). According to the reached agreement, Smyth was to 
coordinate  the  survey  of  the  Adriatic  carried  out  by  the 
Italian  and  Austrian  surveyors,  ensuring  the  maritime 
completion,  and  then  to  proceed  with  an  independent 
survey  from  Budva  to  Parga  (Epirus),  parts  of  the  Adriatic 
under Ottoman rule where safe sailing was only possible for 
ships under the British ﬂag.

The  hydrographic  survey,  jointly  conducted  by  Austrian 
and  Italian  surveyors  under  the  leadership  of  Captain 
Smyth, was based on a chronometric chain, which was run 
over  the  whole  sea  and  extended  into  detail  by  copious 
triangulations (Smyth, 1854). The basis for the survey was 
a  chain  of  triangles  tied  to  the  previously  established 
triangulation  network  in  the  regions  of  Italy,  Austria  and 
Hungary.  As early  as  the  eighteenth  century,  several 
triangulation  chains  were  established  in  these  areas  that 
were  subsequently  connected  and  then  extended  to  the 
entire  Adriatic  territory  as  well.  These  chains  were  based 
on the baselines  which  were  measured  astronomically  near 
the  town  of  Rimini  by  Roger  Joseph  Boscovich  (1750–
1753),  near  Turin  by  Father  Giovanni  Battista  Beccaria 
(1768),  Anton  von  Zach  near  Padua,  Passariano  and 
Cadore (1805), as well the baselines in the Upper Austrian 
towns of Wels and Raab, measured at the beginning of the 
nineteenth  century  (Zach,  1823).  The  chain  of  triangles 
that Smyth and his associates established along the eastern 
and western shores of the Adriatic consisted of a very large 
number  of  points.  Only  a  small  number  was  measured 
astronomically,  while  in  the  largest  number  of  cases,  the 
locations of the points were determined trigonometrically. 
The  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  180  points  in  total  were

determined,  of  which  17  were  determined  astro-
nomically.  In  addition  to  geodetic  surveying,  which  also
included  measurements  of  heights  of  mountain  peaks,
it  was  necessary  to  carry  out  a  series  of  hydrographic
measurements  for  which  no  previous  data  were  available.
In  fact,  even  though  he  highly  valued  the  work  of
Beautemps-Beaupre´, 
the  French  Hydrographer  who
con-ducted  a  hydrographic  survey  of  the  Adriatic  from
1806  to  1809,  Smyth  never  had  a  chance  to  see  his
charts41.  Accordingly,  special  attention  was  paid  to 
measuring  depths  of  water42,  magnetic  declination43, 
water 
and
meteorological  phenomena44.  Also,  samples  were  taken  
both on and off shore  in  order  to  identify  the  geologic
features  of  the seabed.

temperatures 

different 

depths) 

(at 

Technically,  Smyth  and  his  crew  were  extremely  well 
equipped45,  which,  along  with  the  good  organisation  of 
their  survey,  resulted  in  highly  accurate  measurements 
results.  By  the  end  of  1819,  the  survey  of  the  Adriatic  was 
complete,  and  Smyth  was  able  to  discharge  the  Austrian 
sloop  and  the  foreign  ofﬁcers.  As  a  token  of  gratitude  for 
Smyth’s participation in the survey of the Adriatic, Francis I, 
the  Austrian  Emperor,  sent  him  a  golden  box  with 
diamonds.  He  also  ordered  the  erection  of  small  stone 
pyramids  in  Budva  and  Pola,  two  of  Smyth’s  measuring 
stations,  with  dedications  about  the  completed  survey  and 
Captain  Smyth  as  its  head46.  By  the  summer  of  1820,  the 
survey of the Ionian Islands was completed as well, and the 
planned  survey  ﬁnalized.  The  survey  data,  along  with 
detailed  plans  of  ports  and  anchorages,  was  sent  to  Milan 
and  Naples.  The  work  was  continued  in  the  ofﬁce,  at  the 
Geographic  Military  Institute  in  Milan,  where  the  entire 
collected material was prepared for publication.

THE  CARTA  DI  CABOTAGGIO  DEL  MARE ADRIATICO (1822, 
1824)

in  the 

Based  on  the  extensive  surveying  data  collected  and            
the original ﬁeld sheets of plane table surveying, the Military 
Geographical  Institute  in  Milan  had  the  task  of  ﬁnalising    
the  charts  and  preparing  them  for  publication.  The  charts 
form  of  an  atlas  with 
were  ﬁnally  printed 
accompanying  navigational  instructions,  which  gave  the   
atlas  the  quality  of  a  pilot  book  (piloto).  The  Cabotaggio 
consisted of two parts, the ﬁrst relating to the western coast 
of  the  Adriatic  and  the  second  to  the  eastern.  Special 
attention  was  paid  not  only  to  the  quality  of  graphic 
composition  of  the  atlas  (lithography),  but  to  the  artistic 
design  as  well.  The  Cabotaggio  was  actually  the  ﬁrst  major 
project  of  the  General  Staff  after  the  Austrian  Reconquista, 
and  accordingly,  the  visual  identity  of  the  publication  had   
to  reﬂect  the  imperial  power  of  the  reconstructed  Austrian 
Empire47.

The  Cabotaggio  comprises  a  single  large  general  chart 
of  the  Adriatic  and  20  coastal  charts  at  a  scale  of 
1 : 175  000,  which  cover  the  entire  area  of  the  Adriatic, 
from Venice and Trieste in the west to Otranto and Corfu 
in  the  east  (Figure  5).  Apart  from  the  main  chart,  each 
chart sheet  comprises  several  detailed  plans  of  ports 
and  anchorages,  representations  of  the  shoreline  as 
viewed

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016 314

The Cartographic Journal

from  the  sea,  and  extensive  descriptions  of  local  waters,
thus  having  all  the  characteristics  of  a  nautical  pilot  book
(Figure  6).  The  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude  are 
marked along both sides of each sheet. The main horizontal
axis  of  the  survey  is  the  forty-second  parallel  north.
Accordingly, due to the southeast direction of the Adriatic
Sea,  the  circles  of  vertical  orientation  on  the  chart
(meridians)  are  not  perpendicular  to  the  parallels,  but
positioned  at  an  angle  of  45u.  The  grid  uses  the  Paris 
meridian  as  its  prime  meridian.  All  coastal  charts  are
supplemented  with  detailed  charts  of  major  ports  and
anchorages (usually at a scale of 1 : 25 000) and the coastal-
views  that  are  printed  along  the  edge  of  the  main  chart.
Wind  roses  are  placed  in  the  corner  of  each  sheet,  and
the  degrees  of  longitude  and  latitude  are  marked  laterally
along  all  four  edges  of  each  particular  sheet.  Depths  of
water,  stated  in  French  feet,  are  more  densely  marked  in
coastal  areas  while  less  densely  on  high  seas.  Types  of  sea
indicated  (sabbia5sandy  bottom,
bottom  are  often 
mud5muddy  bottom,  roccia 5  rocky  bottom,  ghiaia  5 
gravel)  as  well  as  types  of  shoreline  (rocky,  sandy,  gravel,
low).  Each  sheet  further  comprises  the  directions  of  sea
currents  (marked  with  arrow  symbols),  the  magnetic
declination,  lighthouses  and  all  the  reefs  and  shallows.  In
addition  to  the  names  of  coastal  settlements,  the  charts
display  the  names  of  all  bays,  capes  and  anchorages  for
the  ﬁrst  time,  thus  recording  the  rich  local  toponymy
related  to  the  coastline.  Naturally,  special  attention
has  been  paid  to  ports  and  anchorages,  which  are
categorized  in  terms  of  their  safety  and  capacity  into  ﬁrst-
class  anchorages  (indicated  by  anchor  symbols)  and
second-class  anchorages  (indicated  by  smaller  anchor
symbols).  The  coastal  relief  is  very  concisely  represented
by  hachures  (shading 
lines),  a  common  method  of
relief  representation  in  military  cartography  of  the  time.
These nautical  charts  thus  have  some  characteristics  of
topo-graphic  charts  as  well.

The  printing  of  the  charts  was  completed  in  1822  and
1824,  respectively,  when  the  Cabotaggio  was  published  by 
the  Istituto  Geograﬁco  Militare  in  Milan.  It  was  sold  at  a 
price  of  130  francs  (Zach,  1823).  The  sizes  of  the  charts 
were considerable, 94663 cm for each sheet, and they were 
almost  similar  in  format  to  the  standard  format  of  the
Admiralty charts of the time, the so-called double elephant
(DE538625 inches)48.

The Carta di Cabotaggio del Mare Adriatico comprised the 
ﬁrst  printed  navigational  charts  of  the  Adriatic  that  were
compiled  by  using  all  the  methods  of  the  astronomical,
geodetic,  topographic  and  hydrographic  professions  that
were  available  at  the  time.  These  charts  were  also  the  ﬁrst
truly  reliable  charts  of  the  Adriatic  that  were  accessible  to
the general public and offered for purchase, which allowed
their  widespread  use  outside  the  military  circles  as  well.  In
this context, the publication of the Cabotaggio was a turning 
point  not  only  for  the  cartographic  knowledge  of  the
Adriatic,  but  also  for  the  development  of  shipping  in  the
Adriatic,  which  was  for  the  ﬁrst  time  supported  by  up  to
date  and  scientiﬁc  hydrographic  charts  as  well  as  detailed
descriptions  of  the  entire  Adriatic  Sea.  Almost  simulta-
neously, separate sheets from the Cabotaggio appeared at the 
   well,  which  were  published  by  the  Neapolitan
market  as 

Ofﬁcio  Topograﬁco.  In  1825,  based  on  the  same  survey,  the
Milanese  Institute  published  a  hydrographic  chart  of  the
Adriatic  on  two  sheets  at  a  scale  of  1  :  500  000,  and  was
selling  them  separately  (Marinelli,  1881).  Already  in  1830,
as  an  addition  to  the  Cabotaggio,  The  Istituto  Geograﬁco 
Militare 
the  Portolano  del  Mare 
Adriatico, a comprehensive pilot book of the Adriatic Sea by
Captain Giacomo Marieni, which signiﬁcantly amended the
descriptions  of 
and  navigational
instructions.

in  Milan  published 

coastline 

features 

SMYTH’S CHARTS OF THE ADRIATIC REFERRED TO AS
ADMIRALTY CHARTS

the 

were 

  coastal 

produced 

different 
  all 

On  his  return  to  England  in  1824,  Smyth  began  preparing  
his  charts  for  engraving,  during  which  he  continued  to
correspond  with  his  many  friends  and  British  ofﬁcers
continuing  his  Mediterranean  survey  (David,  1995).  By
1825,  Smyth  had  published  his  charts  for  the  areas  from
Gibraltar  to  Sicily  and  Malta49,  and  began  publishing  his 
charts  of  the  Adriatic  in  182750.  In  fact,  from  1826 
onwards,  Smyth’s  charts  of  the  Adriatic  were  issued  by  the
British Hydrographic Ofﬁce, and they were all referred to as
Admiralty  charts  (in  his  memoirs,  Smyth 
included  a
comprehensive  list  of  his  charts  that  were  prepared  for
publication  as  the  Admiralty  charts).  It  should  be  noted
that,  in  preparing  his  charts  for  publication,  Smyth  did  not
copy  the  charts  from  the  edition  of  the  Istituto  Geograﬁco
Militare, but instead compiled his own edition of the charts
based  on  original  manuscript  copies.  Smyth’s  chart  of  the
Adriatic  issued  by  the  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce  had  a  different
distribution  of  sections.  Also,  the  charts  were  produced
scales.  Unlike 
in 
Cabotaggio, 
where 
  charts  were  made  at  a  uniformscale  of
1  :  175  000,  the  coastal charts  of  the  Adriatic  in Smyth’s
 different   scales.  For  example,
edition  
 
 
region,
of the northern Adriatic
the
Istria
(Rimini–Capo Promontore) 
was produced  at  a  scale of
   
 
extends
1  :  350  000,  the chart
the
latter   (Capo
that
Promontore–Zara Channel) 
at    a    scale  of  1:355  000, 
 
   
 
 
 
the central  Dalmatia  (Zara–Ragusa)  at  a
and
 
scale  of  1 :  422 500 (Smyth,  1854).  Also,  he  published
anchorages  on 
detailed  charts  of
separate  sheets  rather than placing them along the edge of 
the  case    of   
In
the  
main 
as 
   
addition,
made
those
 
 
in the  Cabotaggio,  and  added  some  entirely  new  charts  as  
 
 
well.
the Adriatic  is  represented  on  seven
Smyth’s
  sheets    of    the    coastal    chart (mainly  in  double  elephant
format),  as  well  as  on  11   additional 
  sheets  of  detailed 
 
anchorages (mainly 
in  half  a  double
plans
of
 
 
1826 English   edition of Smyth’s
The
elephant
 
a new  pilot  book  in  the 
charts  
d 
  accompanie
 
 
the
English   language   (
The New Sailing
Mediterranean Sea, the  Adriatic  Sea…; Purdy,
The
 
 
following this  ﬁrst  edition.
charts  were 
improved
further
 
 
 
 
by
the
publication
The
corrections
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional
of
publication
the
second
edition51,
well
as
in
the
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
that
(the  
latter  edition
 
 
 
 

for
 
1826).
 
followed
1843 was
of
 
 
 
individual sheets
 
the
in
edition
third
the
 
 
 
corrections 
the
 
 

the  Cabotaggio.
 
 
 
different
 

in 
them
 
chart,

 
seventies,
 
 comprised 
 
 

ports
and
format).
also 

individual    ports  and 
 

 
 
Directory
 
 

 
 including

 
scales
 

chart
 

 
 
from
 

chart 
he

 
chart

  by 
 

 
the

at  
 

from

was  

In

of

at

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  British Contribution to the Charting of Adriatic Sea

were made after the Austrian hydrographic survey of the
Adriatic, which was conducted from 1866 to 1872 by the
Austrian hydrographer von Tobias O¨ sterreicher)52.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

  (cid:1) nineteenth(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) century 

The 
  (cid:1) saw(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) the(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) intensiﬁcation
of(cid:1) (cid:1) interest(cid:1) (cid:1) in(cid:1) (cid:1) charting  (cid:1) (cid:1) the(cid:1) (cid:1) Adriatic(cid:1) (cid:1) Sea.(cid:1) That(cid:1)
interest(cid:1) was(cid:1) facilitated(cid:1) by(cid:1) the(cid:1) role(cid:1) of(cid:1) the(cid:1) Adriatic(cid:1) in(cid:1) the(cid:1)  
wars(cid:1) with(cid:1) Napoleon.(cid:1) Since(cid:1) the(cid:1) main(cid:1) roles(cid:1)
in(cid:1) these(cid:1)
hostilities(cid:1)were(cid:1)played(cid:1)by(cid:1)the(cid:1)British,(cid:1)French(cid:1)and(cid:1)Austrian(cid:1)
forces,(cid:1) those(cid:1) were(cid:1) the(cid:1) empires(cid:1) that(cid:1) invested(cid:1) considerable(cid:1)
efforts(cid:1)in(cid:1)developing(cid:1)the(cid:1)ﬁrst(cid:1)reliable(cid:1)navigational(cid:1)charts(cid:1)of(cid:1)
the(cid:1) Adriatic(cid:1) during(cid:1) the(cid:1) nineteenth(cid:1) century.(cid:1) In(cid:1) this  (cid:1)
respect,(cid:1) the(cid:1) British(cid:1) cartographic(cid:1) cam-paigns(cid:1) were(cid:1) of(cid:1)
particular(cid:1)
in(cid:1) the(cid:1)
importance(cid:1) because(cid:1) they(cid:1) resulted(cid:1)
publication(cid:1) of(cid:1) the(cid:1) ﬁrst(cid:1) printed(cid:1) charts(cid:1) that(cid:1) were(cid:1) available(cid:1)
(cid:1) military  circles  (unlike  the  French(cid:1)
outside(cid:1)
which(cid:1) remained(cid:1)
public(cid:1)use).

in(cid:1) manuscript(cid:1) and(cid:1) unavailable(cid:1) for   (cid:1)

charts,(cid:1)      

institution  was 

The  support  in  the  charting  of  the  Adriatic  that  the
British  Admiralty  provided  to  the  Austrian  Empire  was  the
decisive  factor  in  the  successful  establishment  of  their  own
hydrographic  service.  Immediately  after  the  re-establish-
ment  of  Austrian  rule,  Austria  took  control  of  the  Naval
College  in  Venice  (Marinekollegium;  formerly  the  Collegio
the  Naval  Academy 
di  Marina),  which  became 
(Marineakademie)  in  1851,  establishing  its  seat  in  Trieste  in 
1860.  Another  institution,  the  Hydrographic  Institute
(Hydrographische  Anstalt)  was  also  established  in  Trieste,
and  was  made  responsible  for  hydrographic  measurements
and  production  of  ofﬁcial  hydrographic  charts  of  the
Adriatic. When Pola assumed the role of the major Austrian
naval port in 1853, the seat of the hydrographic service was
also  relocated  from  Trieste  to  Pola  in  1866.  The  service
developed  to  become  the  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce  of  the
Imperial  and  Royal  Navy  (Hydrographisches  Amt  der  k.u.k.
charge  of
Kriegsmarine).  This 
hydrographic surveying and publication of nautical charts of
the Adriatic to as late as 1918. The hydrographic survey of
the Adriatic Sea, which, under the leadership of von Tobias
O¨  sterreicher,  would  be 
from 
1866  to  1872  by  this  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce,  would  greatly
rely 
 experience and results from surveying carried out
under  the  supervision  of  Captain  William  Henry  Smyth.  In
this  way,  the  British  Admiralty  and  its  ofﬁcers  decisively  co-
ntributed  to  the  birth  of  the 
  ofﬁcial  hydrographic  service
  Austrian    Empire  and  the  development  of  modern
of 
  the 
  the  Adriatic.  In  addition,  all  later  editions
  charts  of 
nautical 
of 
  the  British  Admiralty  charts  were  regularly  supplemented
with  the  surveying  results  of  the  Hydrographic  Ofﬁce  of  the
Austrian Navy. We can thus conclude that the collaboration
between  the  Austrian  and  British  Hydrographic  Ofﬁces
continued, jointly promoting the improvement of quality of
nautical  charts  of  the  Adriatic  and  the  development  of  the
hydrographic  service  in  general.  British  achievements  in
surveying 
  into  the
  of  Adriatic  hydrography  and  nautical
very 
cartography.

independently 

  are  permanently 

  o f  the  Adriatic 

carried  out 

  foundations 

  built 

 the 

 on 

in 

315

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Professor Dr Mirela Altic´, is
a senior
research fellow
in the Institute of Social
Sciences Zagreb, Croatia,
where she works as a Head
of the Centre of Urban and
Local History. She specia-
lizes in historical geography
and historical cartography.
At
the Department of
History of the University
of Zagreb, Professor Altic´
the 
lectures  courses   on 
history 
  of cartography.
She  has  been the head of
Croatian  national project,
‘Historic  Towns  Atlas’,  since  2003.  She  is  also  the  author  of  
14  books,  including  ﬁve  volumes  of  the  Croatian  Historic
Towns  Atlas.  In  2004,  she  won  the  annual  prize  for  sci- 
ence  for  her  book  Historical  Cartography:  Cartographic
Sources  in  Historical  Sciences. Professor  Altic´   is  a  member 
of the ICA Commission on the History of Cartography.

NOTES

1 This survey resulted in the so-called Napoleon’s atlas
(1806), which contained the ﬁrst detailed charts of some
parts of the Adriatic, completed in 1809 (Slukan Altic´,
2011).

2 Jacques  Nicolas  Bellin  (1703–1772)  was  a  French
hydrographer and geographer. In 1721, at age 18, he was
appointed  Hydrographer  (chief  cartographer)  to  the 
French Navy. In 1741, he became the ﬁrst Inge´nieur de la
Marine  of  the  Depot  des  cartes  et  plans  de  la  Marine  (the
French Hydrographical Ofﬁce). Latter, he became Ofﬁcial
Hydrographer  of  the  French  King  (Hydrographe  du  Roi).
and a member of the Royal Society in London.

Paris

3 Description ge´ographique du Golfe de Venise et de la
More´e,  
  , 1771. Bellin’s views of parts of the Adriatic
coast rely heavily on the charts from Vincenzo Maria
Coronelli’s atlas, which Bellin himself mentions in the
introduction to his pilot book.

4 The detailed charts and plans of the eastern Adriatic
coast in Bellin’s pilot book are made at scales ranging
between 1 : 30 000 and 1 : 7000.

5 The only older maritime atlas to additionally show
water depths of the Adriatic was the ﬁrst edition of the Atlas
of the Mediterranean (The Recueil), published in 1764 by
Joseph Roux. That edition, however, included only three
charts for the entire eastern Adriatic region. Hence, Bellin’s
pilot book signiﬁed a quantum leap in the knowledge of the
hydrography of the Adriatic.

6 Carta del Mare Adriatico o sia Golfo di Venezia disegnata 
secondo 
fatti 
l’ultime  osservazioni  Astronomiche  e  rilevi 
sopra  luogo  con  i  dettagli  delle  coste,  Trieste,  1798.  An 
English  edition  based  on  this  chart  and  entitled  Chart  of 
the  Adriatic  Sea  or  Gulf  of  Venice,  Constructed  from  the 
Venetian, Neapolitan  and  French  Observations was  released 
in London in 1806 by J. F. Dessiou.

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
316

The Cartographic Journal

7 Il pilota pratico alla costa occidentale dell’Adriatico da

Trieste al ﬁume Tronto…, Milan, 1816.

8 The only biographical

information we know about
Robert Nellson today comes from his service record. Robert
Nellson joined HMS El Corso in December 1798. In 1799,
he sailed on the El Corso around Palermo, Genoa, Livorno,
Tripoli, Corfu and Malta. That year, he ﬁrst sailed for the
Adriatic. During that period he made at least two nautical
charts: the chart of the Gozo Channel between Malta and the
island of Gozo and the chart of the Port of Tripoli. Nellson
served on the El Corso until 1802 when he joined HMS Pique
on the West Indies Station until 1804. He ﬁnished his service
on the Cape Station in 1810 (David, 2009).

9 Master was a historic term for a naval ofﬁcer tasked with
helping the Captain with sailing and navigating the ship, as
well as with chart making.

10 At that time, the island of Lesina was often mentioned
as the site of the future Royal Navy base in the Adriatic.
However, when the French captured the island in 1807,
they built their own fort at the port, and thus the latter
option was abandoned.

11 Two of them, the charts of the Port of Pola and the
Port of Lesina, are kept at the British Museum. Others
remain in a private collection.

12 Information about the survey is still recorded in the
catalogue, but it is crossed out in red ink as destroyed
(David, 2009).

13 William Hoste (1780–1828) was a Royal Navy captain
who served under Lord Nelson. He fought in the Battle of
Lissa as commander of HMS Amphion (Hardy, 2006).

14 William Bennett (?–1821) was a member of the Corps
of Royal Engineers of the British Army. He served in Sicily
from 1812 to 1815. He was promoted captain in 1809, and
major in 1819 (Hardy, 2006).

15 Sketch of the Port of St George, Lissa/Captain
William Bennett. Scale ca 1 : 25 000. Lissa, October
1811. Manuscript in colour; 37622.5 cm. University of
Nottingham, Portland (Welbeck) Collection, Pw Jd 6348.
16 Henry Whitby (?–1812) was a member of the Royal
Navy who fought in the Battle of Lissa (Hardy, 2006).
Present-day St Andrew Hill.

17 Phipps Hornby (1785–1867) was a member of the
Royal Navy and Commander of HMS Volage who fought in
the Battle of Lissa (Hardy, 2006). Present-day Wellington
Hill.

18 Present-day Rogac˘ic´ Bay; known as the Carober Bay in

the nineteenth century.

Royal Navy.

20 Port of St George consists of 

settle-
ments, Kut in the east and Luka in the west. A monastery and
St  Jerome’s   Church  are 
located   on the small peninsula in
Luka.

two   smaller 

21 John Mark Frederick Smith (1790–1874) was a Colonel-
Commandant of the Corps of Royal Engineers of the British
Army. He served in Sicily from 1807 to 1811, and was
promoted general in 1863 (Hardy, 2006).

22 Island of Lissa/Captain John Mark Frederick Smith.
Scale ca 1 : 97 000.Lissa, October 1811. Manuscript in
colour; 35.5625 cm. University of Nottingham, Portland
(Welbeck) Collection, Pw Jd 6349.

Scale

  was 

23 The  chart 

  analysed using the MapAnalyst
software, and found that the mathematical basis of the chart 
showed  signiﬁcant  deformation.  The  horizontal  map  scale 
  the 
was 
  1  :  107  300.  The 
standard  deviation equalled
 

  vertical 
¡2670 m.
 

  1  :  92  600 

  and 
 

46631 cm. University

24 [Port St. Giorgio]/Captain John Mark Frederick
ca 1 : 12 500. Lissa, October 1811.
Smith.
Manuscript
of
Nottingham, Portland (Welbeck) Collection, Pw Jd 6350.
25 The  standard   deviation   of   the   Bay   of  St  George
  chart  was  only   ¡57 m,   yet   ¡184 m 
  Smith’s  
  Bennett’s.
26 The map also comprises Frederick Maitland’s hand-
written note saying that the forts should be erected on
Hornby and Cove Hills and on the islet of Hoste.

colour;

on 
on 

in

27 John Henryson (?–1841) was a captain in the Royal
Navy. He served in Sicily from 1810 to 1815, and was
stationed on Lissa from 1812 to 1813 (Hardy, 2006).

28 [Entrance to Port St George]/Captain John Henryson.
Scale ca 1 7300. Lissa, April 1812. Manuscript in colour;
41616.5 cm. University
Portland
(Welbeck) Collection, Pw Jd 4721.

of Nottingham,

29 It is obvious from the correspondence that Henryson
had not brought his measuring instruments for this task.
The absence of more extensive surveying by Henryson
could be due to the urgency of fort construction on Lissa.
This is also the reason why the forts were apparently
constructed without previously prepared plans (Hardy,
2006).

30 Lord William H. Cavendish Bentinck (1774–1839)
was a British military ofﬁcer. From 1811, he was General
the Royal Navy in the
and Supreme Commander of
Mediterranean.

31 George Duncan Robertson (1766–1842) was Com-
mander of HMS Imogen. He participated in the Battle of
Lissa, and was the Governor on the island during the British
rule.

32 Map of Port St George in the Island of Lissa as
surveyed by Mr W. White, Master HMS ‘Eagle’, March
1812/copied into his sketchbook by William Innes Pocock.
Scale ca 1 : 15 000. Manuscript in colour, 32.7622.6 cm.
National Maritime Museum London, PAF 0043. Pocock,
otherwise an extremely talented artist, served as a lieutenant
on HMS Eagle. During his stay on Lissa he made two views
of Port St George.

33 1 fathom51.8288 m.
34 The only other existing nautical charts of the Bay were

35 The British naval garrison on the island consisted of
more than 1000 troops. At that period, the number of local
inhabitants on the island was 4700.

36 William Henry Smyth (1788–1865) was an English
sailor, hydrographer and astronomer. He served in the
Royal Navy in the Indian, Chinese and Australian waters.
From 1809 onwards, he was serving in the waters of France
and Spain, and from 1815 onwards, around Sicily, Sardinia,
the African coast, the Adriatic Sea and the Ionian Islands. It
is important to note that in his memoirs, published in 1854,
Smyth gave a comprehensive overview of the history of
mapping of the   Mediterranean 
from Antiquity to
the early nineteenth century. His writings represented a

19 Murray Maxwell (1775–1831) was a member of the

reprints of Bellin’s 1771 chart.

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016  
 
The  British Contribution to the Charting of Adriatic Sea

317

signiﬁcant contribution to the knowledge of the history of
cartography of the Mediterranean.

37 Founded in 1781 by Giovanni Antonio Rizzi Zannoni,

it was among the ﬁrst state mapping agencies in Europe.

38 Colonel  Ferdinand  Visconti  (1772–1841)  was  a 
famous  Neapolitan  military  engineer  and  surveyor.  He  was  
Head of the Topographical Ofﬁce of the Kingdom of Naples 
from 1814 until his death in 1841.

39 Established as The Topographical Bureau in Milan by
Napoleon’s Army, it was renamed Deposit of War in 1803
(analogous to the De´poˆt de la Guerre in Paris). When the
Austrians established the Kingdom of Lombardy-Veneto,
the Deposit was transformed into The Military Geographical
Institute of the Austrian General Staff in 1814. In 1839, by
the union of the Milanese Geographic Institute and the
Viennese Topographic Institute of the I&R Quartermaster
General Staff, the Institute of Military Geography (K.u.k.
Milita¨rgeographisches Institut) was formed. From 1860
onwards, the navigational charts for restricted military use
were instead produced at the naval base in Trieste.

40 Captain  Antonio  Campana  (1772–1841)  joined  the 
Neapolitan  Republic  in  1799,  and  was  enlisted  in  the 
French  Army.  Thereafter  appointed  geographer-engineer, 
he  was  assigned  to  The  Deposit  of  War  in  Milan.  He  was  
Head  of  The  Military  Geographical  Institute  from  1814 
until  his  death  in  1841.

41 In his memoirs, Smyth expressly stated that he had not
seen the Beautemps-Beaupre´’s charts of the Adriatic, and
that he was only able to see some of the charts relating to
Greek islands, the Levant and the Black Sea, respectively
(Smyth, 1854).

42 Soundings  were  usually  taken  with  Massey’s  sound-
for  greater 

leads  were  used 

ing-machine,  but  solid 
depths (Smyth,  1854).

43 The inclination, and estimated magnetic intensity,
were carefully observed with a well-made dipping needle at
principal stations; on which occasions they usually shifted
the poles of the magnet, and took readings with the face of
the instrument alternately to the east and to the west, in the
plane of the magnetic meridian (Smyth, 1854).

44 The meteorological phenomena were constantly noted
and duly recorded with barometers, sympiesometer, thermo-
meters and hygrometer  (Smyth,  1854).

45 Besides two excellent chronometers, one (Earnshaw,
825) belonging to Smyth and the other (Arnold, 807) to the
surveyors had also been furnished by the
Admiralty,
Hydrographer with a 6-inch theodolite, a micrometrical
telescope, a sextant and a station-pointer. Smyth’s own stock
of working tools consisted of a portable transit; a 10-inch
reﬂecting circle, reading to 200 of arc; a 9-inch quintant,
divided by a vernier to 100 of arc, with a stand and
counterpoises, made expressly for him  by Troughton; a
dipping needle; a variation dial; a ﬁnely-divided circular
protractor with spring points; a 3K-foot achromatic tele-
scope with an object-glass of 2L-inch diameter; a Gregorian
reﬂector of 5-inch aperture; a Rochon’s prismatic telescope,

and some minor instruments, including a well-poised marine
barometer, three of Six’s thermometers and De Luc’s
hygrometer (Smyth, 1854).

46 Observatio  Astronomiae  ab  W.  H.  Smyth  Anglorum 
I, 

Imperatore  Francisco 

Navis  Aid  Praefecto,  Regnate 
MDCCCXVIII.

47 The cover page is adorned with symbols of victory and
power: a captured warship with lowered sails, over which
hovers a double-headed eagle, the heraldic symbol of the
Austrian Empire. The eagle stands on an anchor, the
symbol of the Navy. In the centre is an oval portrait of
Francis I being crowned by an angel. Next to him stands
Athena, the goddess of wisdom and prudent warfare,
carrying the ﬂag of the Empire.

48 Dalrymple  adopted  38625 

inches  as  the  DE. 
However,  the  DE  is  now  known  in  the  trade  as  a  size 
between 36624 and 46631 inches (David, 2008).

49 Catalogue of Charts, Plans & Views Printed at the

Admiralty Ofﬁce. London, 1825.

50 Catalogue of Charts, Plans & Views Printed at the

Admiralty Ofﬁce. London, 1839.

51 Catalogue of Charts, Plans, Views, and Sailing Direc-

tions. London, 1849.

tions. London, 1898.

52 Catalogue of Charts, Plans, Views, and Sailing Direc-

REFERENCES

David, A. (1995). ‘Introductory essay’, in The Admiralty Chart:
British Naval Hydrography in the Nineteenth Century with an
Introductory Essay by Lieutenant Commander Andrew David,
ed. by Ritchie, G. S, pp. 7–17, The Pentland Press, Cambridge/
Durham, NC.

David, A. (2008). ‘The emergence of the Admiralty Chart in the
nineteenth century’, in Proceedings of the Symposium of the
Commission on the History of Cartography in the 19th and
20th centuries, ed. by Liebenberg, E., Demhardt, I. J. and Collier,
P., pp. 1–16, Portsmouth University, Portsmouth.

David, A. (2009). ‘Robert Nellson: eight early Admiralty charts of the

Adriatic’, IMCoS Journal, 119, pp. 13–17.

Hardy, M. S. (2006). The British and Vis: War in the Adriatic

1805–1815, Knjizˇevni krug, Split.

Marinelli, G. (1881). Saggio di cartografia della regione Veneta,

Spese della Societa, Venezia.

Purdy, J. (1826). The New Sailing Directory for the Mediterranean
Sea, the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice, the Archipelago and
Levant, the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea, Printed for R. H.
Laurie, London.

Safonov, N. (1988). Ratovi na Jadranu 1797–1815 [Wars on

Adriatic 1797–1815], Mornaricˇki glasnik, Beograd.

Slukan Altic´, M. (2011).

‘French topographic and hydrographic
surveys of Dalmatia in the Napoleonic Period’, in Proceedings of
the 25th International Cartographic Conference, ed. by Ruas,
A., pp. 1–5, ICA, Paris.

Smyth, W. H. (1854). The Mediterranean: A Memoir Physical,
Historical and Nautical, John W. Parker and Son, London.

Zach, B. du (1823).

‘Nouvelles et annonces. Mer Adriatique’,
Correspondance astronomique, ge´ographique, hydrographique
et statistique, 8, pp. 483–505.

Downloaded by [94.242.228.108] at 20:31 15 March 2016 