The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Map Symbols for Crisis Mapping: Challenges and
Prospects

John C. Kostelnick & Leah C. Hoeniges

To cite this article: John C. Kostelnick & Leah C. Hoeniges (2018): Map Symbols
for Crisis Mapping: Challenges and Prospects, The Cartographic Journal, DOI:
10.1080/00087041.2017.1413810

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1413810

Published online: 20 Nov 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL
https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1413810

REFEREED PAPER

Map Symbols for Crisis Mapping: Challenges and Prospects

John C. Kostelnick and Leah C. Hoeniges

Department of Geography-Geology, Illinois State University, Normal, IL, USA

including consideration of the following:

ABSTRACT
Crisis maps and visualizations utilized routinely by international agencies, humanitarian
organizations, and non-governmental organizations for aid and relief activities commonly
require complex sets of map symbols. However, eﬀective map symbology for humanitarian
relief purposes entails several challenges,
(1)
taxonomy development, (2) symbol design issues, (3) promulgation and sharing of map
symbols, and (4) standardization of symbols within and among organizations. This paper
discusses these key challenges to the design and use of crisis map symbology through a
review of the cartographic literature as well as results collected from a survey targeted at
humanitarian organizations from around the world. The survey was designed to gather
information on current symbology design and use practices in order to understand common
challenges. Survey results conﬁrm agreement in the persistence of these four primary
symbology challenges, especially the importance of intuitive symbol design. Respondents
disagreed most about the adequacy of current crisis map symbology standards as well as the
ease in which standards may be implemented within and across organizations. Survey results
suggest the need for expert systems designed speciﬁcally for symbology design to support
humanitarian relief activities.

KEYWORDS
Crisis mapping; hazards;
symbology; map design;
standards; humanitarian
relief

Introduction

A signiﬁcant proportion of the world’s 7.4 billion inhabitants today are at risk to a range of life-threatening
challenges that may escalate quickly into full-scale humanitarian crises. Diseases and epidemics (e.g. Ebola, Zika
viruses), extreme weather events (e.g. ﬂoods, hurricanes), natural disasters (e.g. earthquakes, mudslides), famine
and malnutrition, freshwater shortages, human traﬃcking, social and political instability, civil warfare, ethnic
cleansing, and human rights violations are some of the many challenges that confront human communities
around the globe. In 2013, over 97 million persons were impacted by natural disasters and another 51 million,
the highest annual count since World War II, displaced by conﬂict or violence as internally displaced persons
(IDPs) or refugees ﬂeeing to other countries (United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Aﬀairs, 2014a). Today, a single humanitarian crisis may impact millions of people. For example, by mid-2015
over 4 million refugees had ﬂed Syria for other countries due to the ongoing civil war (United Nations High
Commission for Refugees, 2015), while an additional 2.8 million people required humanitarian assistance in the
months following the 2015 earthquakes in Nepal (United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Aﬀairs, 2015). The number of people requiring humanitarian assistance to mitigate these crises has increased
sharply to unprecedented levels in recent years, with nearly 78 million people in 22 countries requiring aid in
2014 (United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs, 2014b) and that number expected
to rise to nearly 128.6 million people in 33 countries in 2017 (United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Aﬀairs, 2016).

Maps and geographic or location-enabled information are integral to humanitarian relief activities that
respond to natural and human-made disasters and crises (Figure 1). The term ‘crisis mapping’ (Liu and
Palen, 2010) is commonly used today to describe the holistic integration and visualization of location-enabled
information to support a broad spectrum of humanitarian relief and emergency management activities.
for
Symbols are the means for portraying information graphically on maps, and thus are integral
communication to various audiences during times of crisis. In the realm of crisis mapping, symbols are
particularly important for communication under scenarios when interpretation of a map or visualization can
inﬂuence the security and protection of human lives. Given the unique nature of crisis maps, the design of
eﬀective crisis map symbology must consider several
including considerations for
representation of active hazards (e.g. ﬂooded area), cultural considerations of map users, and dissemination
and standardization of symbols between organizations.

important

factors,

CONTACT John C. Kostelnick

jkostelnick@ilstu.edu

© 2018 British Cartographic Society

2

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

Figure 1. An example of a crisis map developed for humanitarian relief purposes in response to displaced populations in South Sudan. Disclaimer: The
boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply oﬃcial endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. Source:
OCHA, available from ReliefWeb at http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/South_Sudan_Humanitarian_Snapshot_15August2014.pdf.

There are two primary objectives to this article. First, we identify and categorize key issues related to map
symbology for crisis maps through a review of relevant studies in the cartographic literature. Our intention is
to categorize the major challenges that have been described in these studies, summarize the solutions that
have been proposed, and identify outstanding issues that remain as ongoing challenges for crisis map
design. For the purposes of this paper, we adopt a broad meaning of the term ‘symbol’ to describe the
entire graphic symbology displayed on a map. Second, although these studies have focused on speciﬁc
applications (e.g. emergency management, humanitarian demining) or geographic areas (e.g. United
States), we consider the prevalence of these crisis map symbology challenges when extended to the
broader context of general humanitarian relief activities at the global scale. The investigation is guided by
the following primary questions: (1) What are the main map symbology challenges encountered by
humanitarian relief organizations? (2) How pervasive are these challenges? and (3) What future resources
are needed to assist with these challenges for crisis maps? We assess the current state of map symbology
issues through an online survey with questions organized around key issues identiﬁed through previous
studies. We document these challenges across the community of humanitarian relief organizations as a
precursor towards future development of map design resources that may be used to assist with the
development of crisis map symbology.

Overview of key challenges and literature review

The ﬁeld of crisis mapping has expanded signiﬁcantly in recent years due in part to at least two key factors: (1)
technological developments that facilitate the dissemination of ‘democratized’ maps designed by more and
more novice cartographers and disseminated to wider audiences; and (2) the greater availability in the quantity
and type of location-enabled data available for mapping purposes. Technological developments include web and
mobile technologies that facilitate eﬃcient development and rapid deployment of maps to multiple audiences
(e.g. general public, decision-makers, operations personnel) through various end-user platforms. These maps
are developed from massive amounts of geographic data available from diverse sources. For example,
‘volunteered geographic information’ (Goodchild, 2007) captured from the crowd through social media (e.g.
Twitter, Flickr, Instagram), such as the 250,000 disaster-related tweets that were generated in the ﬁrst three
days following Typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines in 2013, are readily available for visualization on maps by
volunteer humanitarians during times of crisis (Meier, 2015). In addition, databases of geographic information

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

3

collected from automated sensors (e.g. seismometers that monitor earthquakes) and unmanned aerial systems
continue to expand greatly in the era of ‘Big Data.’ These and other sources have created a wealth of data from
‘digital communities’ (Meier, 2015: 27) that enable more maps that may be used for disaster planning,
preparation, mitigation, and response activities by agencies and organizations that provide humanitarian relief
and aid.

The rapid increase in the number and type of crisis maps enabled by new mapping technologies and datasets has
created important new challenges for how geographic information is visualized for hazards and risks on these maps
(Kostelnick et al., 2013). Symbology for crisis mapping should consider numerous factors, many of which have
been documented through speciﬁc applications in the cartographic literature in speciﬁc domains such as
humanitarian demining and emergency/crisis management (e.g. see Dymon, 2003; Kostelnick, 2005; Kostelnick
et al., 2008; Akella, 2009; Dobson et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2010; 2012; 2013; Korpi and Ahonen-Rainio,
2010; Roth et al., 2011; Bianchetti et al., 2012). The major challenges identiﬁed from these studies can be
synthesized into four broad categories: (1) Methods for developing symbol taxonomies; (2) Considerations for
designing crisis map symbols; (3) Standardization of crisis map symbols; and (4) Sharing and promulgation of
crisis map symbols (Figure 2).

For complex symbology, the development of a symbology taxonomy or hierarchy is an important task prior to
symbol design. A symbol taxonomy provides a logical order to symbols, especially useful when a common symbol
set is used to display both general and speciﬁc information for diﬀerent map users. For example, Kostelnick et al.
(2008) advocated the use of a symbol taxonomy or hierarchy to display general mineﬁeld hazards to civilians and
the same symbol structure with additional graphic attributes to display more complex information such as the type
of mineﬁeld and status of the mineﬁeld for operational personnel engaged in landmine removal. Development of a
symbol hierarchy should consider the following: What variables/attributes needs to be represented, and how do
variables/attributes relate (if at all)? Once a symbol taxonomy or hierarchy is developed, graphic attributes can
be used most eﬀectively to symbolize features in the taxonomy in a logical manner through eﬀective use of the
visual variables outlined by Bertin (1967). A key issue in the development of a symbol taxonomy is the
methods used to determine the order and structure of the taxonomy, which is especially necessary since symbol
catalogues for crisis mapping are often complex. As a solution to this challenge, Roth et al. (2011) proposed
card sorting as a method for organizing single-level, nominal categories for emergency management symbology.
In addition to organizing symbols into logical categories, card sorting also may be beneﬁcial for identifying
ambiguous symbols that require redesign, or missing symbols not included in the symbol set (Roth et al., 2011).
Issues encountered during the design process is another key topic related to crisis map symbol design. These
issues have ranged from cultural considerations related to connotations and meanings of symbols (e.g. Dymon,
2003; Kostelnick et al., 2008; Korpi and Ahonen-Rainio, 2010) to technical considerations associated with
symbol sets such as black and white printing/photocopying requirements in the absence of colour printing
capabilities (Dymon, 2003; Kostelnick et al., 2008). Much of the work in this area has focused on the challenges
associated with the design of pictorial (or pictographic) point symbols, which are commonly used in crisis

Figure 2. Four key map symbology challenges for crisis maps.

4

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

mapping domains given the advantage that such symbols may be intuitive for a range of map users, similar to their
prevalence also in the domain of tourist maps (e.g. Forrest and Castner, 1985; Gerber et al., 1990). As an added
advantage speciﬁc to the realm of crisis mapping, pictorial symbols may convey connotations of danger or
hazard when necessary more easily than abstract symbols. One key issue is the understanding of how cultural
backgrounds of the cartographer or map user may inﬂuence the design or interpretation of pictorial symbols
when symbols are used across national boundaries (Korpi and Ahonen-Rainio, 2010). As demonstrated by user
testing conducted by Korpi and Ahonen-Rainio (2010), map users from diﬀerent cultures may infer diﬀerent
meanings from the same symbol and therefore all pictorial symbols, especially those that are concept-related
and arbitrary, may not be culturally independent. Technical constraints oftentimes further complicate the
development of pictorial symbols: black and white printing/photocopying may be required which limits the use
of colour as a visual variable to the designer, and symbols are increasingly used on mobile devices in the ﬁeld
where available screen space can limit the overall size of pictorial symbols that typically must be designed larger
than abstract symbols because of the need to discriminate between diﬀerent icons.

A related issue is the process of how pictorial symbols are designed, and the development of eﬀective
methodologies for developing quality map symbol designs given challenges such as cultural issues and technical
constraints. Towards this end, Korpi and Ahonen-Rainio (2015) provide ten useful graphic and semantic
qualities that may be considered in the design of pictorial symbols: (1) simplicity; (2) clarity; (3) visibility; (4)
consistency; (5) distinctiveness; (6) aesthetic appeal; (7) concreteness; (8) semantic closeness; (9) familiarity; and
(10) acceptability. Kostelnick et al. (2008) proposed a broader workﬂow or sequence of steps for developing
map symbols for humanitarian demining as well as incorporating user feedback, such as focus groups,
throughout the process. They proposed a ﬁve-step methodology that may be applied to the design process for
crisis map symbology: (1) Inventory existing symbols; (2) Develop criteria for symbols; (3) Develop initial
symbol drafts; (4) Qualitative evaluation of symbols; and (5) Revise symbols.

(2012),

The high stakes nature of crisis map symbols evokes the importance of thorough user testing and other robust
methods of evaluating actual user interpretation and comprehension. Although such studies have been less
frequent in the cartographic literature compared to those focusing on other issues related to crisis map
symbology, user studies of emergency management symbology in the United States and Canada by Akella
(2009) and Bianchetti et al.
respectively, are notable exceptions. Akella (2009) performed a
comprehension test of several symbols designed for the US Homeland Security Working Group (HSWG)
Emergency and Hazard Management Mapping Standards point symbology, ﬁnding that only 6 of 28 symbols
tested achieved the target 85% or above comprehension rate. Bianchetti et al. (2012) conducted a user study of
symbol classiﬁcation, and concluded that stylistic factors can inﬂuence how map users group together related
symbols into categories. Furthermore, they found that users created more categories of symbols when allowed
to classify them freely compared to the standard categories established by the designers. Collectively, these
results highlight the ease in which ambiguity may confound the meaning and classiﬁcation of crisis map
symbols, and the importance of testing comprehension of symbols, not just aesthetic appeal or preferences, in
actual map use scenarios.

Once developed, sharing and promulgation of map symbols may be another challenge which raises a number of
logistical questions. How does one know that a map symbol set exists, and how is it discovered if it exists? How does
an organization promulgate a new symbol set for adoption by other organizations? How are symbols shared across
diﬀerent software platforms amidst potential technical constraints? An advantage of sharing a symbol set is that it
avoids duplication of eﬀort and promotes consistency which may be especially important when maps are shared
between organizations. Crisis map symbols are commonly shared via an organization’s website,1 or through more
general mapping or cartography resource websites.

Crowdsourced online platforms have emerged to provide users with easy options to share or discover symbols.
One such general platform is the Noun Project, which curates icons uploaded by the crowd for other users to
discover in an eﬀort to ‘help build the world’s visual language’ (The Noun Project, 2014). In their work with
emergency management symbology for the US Department of Homeland Security, Robinson et al. (2013)
developed Symbol Store (www.symbolstore.org), another online tool that facilitates discovery, retrieval, and
sharing of map symbol sets between users. Using Symbol Store, map users may search a collection of existing
symbol sets which may be downloaded for use in their own maps, or contribute symbols they wish to share
with other users. Realizing the diﬃculties of sharing symbols in diﬀerent proprietary formats, Wu et al. (2017)
developed a sharing-oriented map-symbol model that allows point, line, and area symbols to be shared across
mapping/GIS software platforms. Regarding the procedural question of how best to promulgate a new map
symbol set for adoption, Kostelnick et al. (2008) report on the use of workshops targeted at important
government and not-for-proﬁt agencies as a venue to raise awareness, facilitate discussion, and encourage
adoption of their map symbols within the humanitarian demining community.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

5

Standardization of map symbology is a ﬁnal major topic that has received much attention in the context of crisis
mapping. The renewed attention to the role of symbol standards within crisis mapping is reminiscent of the general
discussion related to the pros and cons of symbol standardization within the cartographic community in the 1970s
(e.g. see Joly, 1971; Komkov, 1971; Ratajski, 1971; Board, 1973; Robinson, 1973). An advantage of standarization is
that standards promote consistency and eﬃciency when maps and information are shared, which is especially
necessary in the context of a disaster when maps must be interpreted quickly to support decision-making
activities by emergency managers (Dymon, 2003). Disadvantages are that standards require consensus to
implement, and may be too rigid, inﬂexible, and not interoperable to meet the needs of all organizations.

The term ‘standard’ implies common recognition or acceptance, yet a map symbology standard may evolve
through diﬀerent degrees of standardization within a community which in turn may determine the number of
adopters of the standard (Figure 3). For example, map symbols often are developed ﬁrst as an ‘in-house’
standard to meet the primary mapping needs of an organization, such as a government agency (e.g. Ordnance
Survey). The popularity and familiarity of an ‘in house’ organizational standard may encourage its adoption
outside of the organization for broader mapping purposes. Finally, the standard may be formalized further
through recognition or acceptance by an independent standards body, such as the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), thereby likely increasing the overall number of adopters even further. The Homeland
Security Mapping Standard – Point Symbology for Emergency Management developed by the US Department of
Homeland Security (ANSI, 2006) and Humanitarian and Country Icons 2012 (Figure 4) by the United Nations
Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA, 2012) are prominent examples of map
symbology that have been promoted in recent years as standards within the crisis mapping community.

Several key questions remain regarding the role of standards, including issues related to both the development and
implementation of the standard. Regarding development issues, who develops the standard and what process is
followed for map symbols to become recognized as a standard? For implementation, how is the standard
implemented across an organization, and how practical is the adoption of a standard across organizations, given
the range of maps, map uses, and map users that typically span crisis mapping? Studies in the realm of
emergency management in the United States (e.g. Robinson et al., 2010; 2011; 2012) have raised these and
related challenges. In their evaluation of
the use of standardized emergency management symbology by
mapmakers within the US Department of Homeland Security, Robinson et al. (2010; 2011) identiﬁed both
technical and organizational issues that pose challenges to standardization of map symbology, with organizational

Figure 3. Varying degrees of standardization for map symbology. Typically, the number of adopters of a standard increases as the formality or degree of
standardization increases.

6

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

Figure 4. A portion of the map symbols included in OCHA’s Humanitarian and Country Icons 2012. Source: OCHA, available from ReliefWeb at https://
reliefweb.int/report/world/world-humanitarian-and-country-icons-2012.

issues requiring the most attention. Organizational issues include challenges such as educating and training
personnel about how to implement the standard, and providing ﬂexibility for mapmakers to modify the standard
as needed given diverse mapping needs. Related to the standardization process, Robinson et al. (2012) developed
a collaborative, participant-centred process based on four major steps: (1) Needs assessment and critique of
existing symbols; (2) Develop categories using an open card sorting method; (3) Assign symbols to categories
using a closed card sorting method; and (4) Redesign of symbols based on feedback collected in previous steps.

Symbology survey of humanitarian relief organizations

Given the many challenges to map symbology drawn from previous studies and applications, it is reasonable to
assume that many of these same challenges are pervasive across the global crisis mapping community. To
determine the extent of these challenges, an online survey was administered to crisis mapping personnel
representing humanitarian relief organizations around the world. The goal of the survey was to understand
map symbology design practices encountered generally in the context of humanitarian relief applications, and
especially to identify any ongoing challenges as well as the pervasiveness of these challenges across organizations.

Goals

Audience

Since the goal of the survey was to identify broad trends across humanitarian relief activities, every eﬀort was made
to be inclusive as possible to maximize the number of survey responses. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
international/intergovernmental organizations, private foundations, government agencies, and universities alike
were invited to participate, regardless of any specialty areas within humanitarian relief or area of geographic
coverage. A snowball survey sampling method was adopted to encourage as much participation as possible.
First, pre-deﬁned lists of humanitarian organizations were systematically compiled and organizations likely to
be involved with GIS or mapping identiﬁed. Next, appropriate contacts, ideally a GIS or mapping specialist,

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

7

were identiﬁed at each organization. An invitation to participate in the survey was extended to each contact
through a brief cover letter that described the purpose of the survey, along with a link to the online survey.
Survey invitees were also encouraged to forward the survey to other colleagues as appropriate, which increased
the number of survey participants but also led to multiple responses by the same organization in some
instances. In addition to predeﬁned contacts, the invitation to participate in the survey was also sent via e-mail
list-serves targeted at humanitarian relief organizations, including the International Network of Crisis Mappers
(ICCM) and the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap list-serves.

Survey content and distribution

All questions on the survey are included in the appendix. Questions were organized around the four common map
symbology challenges for crisis maps as discussed previously in the literature review section (Figure 2). Survey
questions were a combination of both closed and open-ended questions. An advantage of closed questions is
that they allow for easy summary of quantitative trends, while open-ended questions provide respondents with
opportunities to provide detailed responses or speciﬁc examples.

Results

Eighty-four participants completed the survey, however the number of responses for each question varied in part
due to a few likely factors. First, some questions in the survey employed skip logic of which follow-up questions
were asked only if a ‘Yes’ answer was provided to the question at hand. Second, given the broad nature of the
audience that the survey was directed towards and the varied level of mapping activities by organizations, it is
assumed that some survey respondents were not able to provide suitable expertise for each question and
therefore declined to answer
represented a variety of humanitarian relief
organizations, providing assistance in all regions of the world in over 120 countries on six continents. To
protect the anonymity of the survey, speciﬁc organizations that participated are not listed here.

the question. Participants

In order to facilitate analysis and interpretation, survey response results are grouped here into ﬁve categories of
questions that solicited input on the following: (1) general background questions regarding crisis map and map
symbology usage by typical users; (2) current symbol design practices; (3) current challenges for designing map
symbols; (4) adherence to symbology standards; and (5) additional symbology and related map design resources
that might be developed in the future for crisis mapping.

General background questions

General questions were included on the survey to gauge general usage of crisis maps and map symbols by each
organization. As expected, an overwhelming majority of organizations (83% of respondents) use maps that
require crisis map symbols. Many respondents indicated multiple audiences for these crisis maps, including
civilians or the general public (53%), organization personnel or specialists (82%), and decision-makers or
political leaders (71%). Other users (media, students/academic, volunteer groups, etc.) were speciﬁed by 18% of
respondents. Organizations use both reference and thematic crisis maps for wide-ranging purposes, including
incident response maps, situational awareness maps, safety level maps, pre-event planning maps, maps of
refugee/IDP migrations and camp locations, damage assessment maps, risk maps for journalists, and maps of
humanitarian aid delivery. The diversity in these users and uses of crisis maps highlights the important need
for map symbology that is versatile for these various audiences and diﬀerent types of maps.

Current symbol design practices

When asked about who designs current map symbols, 15% of survey respondents reported using map symbols
designed by their own organization, 28% use symbols developed by other organizations, and over half (57%) a
mix of both. The trend here is important to note given the sharing of maps and information in the
humanitarian relief community during times of crisis, which is evident
in the nearly three-fourths of
organizations that use at least some symbols developed by organizations other than their own. Interestingly, of
those organizations that develop all or some map symbols, over half (54%) do not use any speciﬁc workﬂows or
resources to assist with symbol design. Open-ended responses indicate that common resources for symbol
development include existing standardized map symbols used by other organizations (e.g. United Nations
Organization for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA) symbols) or default symbols provided
by mapping software vendors (e.g. ESRI’s ArcGIS, QGIS) that are adopted and then modiﬁed or expanded

8

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

upon further as needed. In the words of one respondent, ‘we ﬁrst look to authoritative sources, and common
standards or best practices, and if those don’t provide what we need, we design our own, with an eye to ease of
use, clarity of understanding, and integration with existing symbols, if any.’

Current challenges for designing crisis map symbols

Survey respondents were asked to assess the importance of several common symbol design issues that have been
highlighted in other studies, which may provide important information to determine which cartographic resources
might be developed in the future to assist with these challenges. These issues were summarized into seven factors
that respondents were asked to rank along a Likert scale ranging from ‘not important (1)’ to ‘very important (5)’:
(1) symbols that convey hazard or danger when necessary; (2) symbols that are intuitive; (3) symbols that are
sensitive to diﬀerent cultures; (4) symbols that display complex and simple information; (5) symbols that are
compatible at multiple scales; (6) symbols that print in black and white; and (7) symbols that display on mobile devices.
Results for the symbol design challenges are summarized in Figure 5. Symbols that are intuitive and symbols that
convey hazard or danger when necessary were identiﬁed as the most important challenges by respondents, with
over two-thirds of respondents ranking each factor as ‘very important (5).’ This is perhaps not especially
surprising given that crisis maps are routinely used to mitigate the dangers that accompany a natural hazard or
human conﬂict event, yet the strong level of agreement is an important reminder for how this seemingly
obvious fact might be easily overlooked during the map symbol design process. Symbols that are compatible at
several map scales were ranked third highest, with over 85% of respondents ranking this factor as either a ‘4’ or
‘5’ on the Likert scale. This trend likely indicates,
in part, the increasing importance of developing map
symbology that is eﬀective in web mapping and GIS environments with multi-scale basemaps and other layers.
Map symbols that display clearly on mobile devices scored lowest of all factors (60% of respondents ranked as a
‘4’ or ‘5’), which could indicate an area that is growing in importance within humanitarian relief activities, but
is still not a prevalent practice among all organizations. When given the free response opportunity to list
additional symbol design challenges, respondents mentioned the lack of standards, inconsistencies of symbol
usage across organizations, challenges to design colour-blind friendly schemes, incomplete symbol catalogues,
and the need to design simplistic symbols as other major challenges. When asked about the single most
important challenge to symbol design, two words in particular were mentioned most frequently by survey
respondents: simplicity and clarity. In the words of one respondent, ‘symbols should be simple and immediately
identiﬁable and easily understandable.’

Figure 5. Survey responses for crisis map symbol design challenges.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

9

Symbol standards

Symbol standards were an important topic of the survey given the previous discussion in the cartographic
literature and the inherent pros/cons of any type of mapping standard. When asked about the role of
standards for symbols, a strong majority (68%) of respondents answered in the aﬃrmative that their
organization adheres to map symbol standards, with many respondents indicating multiple sources for
the respondents (59%) used standards developed internally by their
symbol standards. Over half of
organization and over half (59%) used standards developed by another humanitarian relief organization. An
international mapping or standards organization/agency (45%) was also commonly indicated by respondents
as a third option, as well as a national mapping or standards organization/agency to a lesser degree (17%).
When asked which speciﬁc standards are utilised, the most common response (n = 4) was the humanitarian
icon set developed by UN OCHA. Survey respondents also noted several challenges to standardization,
including issues related to designing symbols ‘by committee,’ achieving consensus and agreement
for
symbols, maintaining and updating standards over time, transferability of symbols across cultures, and the
ﬂexibility of
in crisis mapping across various mapping
environments (paper, web/interactive, mobile devices).

to support diverse mission needs

symbols

Survey respondents were also asked their agreement to several statements related to map symbology standards
as measured on a Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree). The purpose of these questions was to
gauge general feelings towards the pros/cons of map symbology standards as well as the standardization
process. Results are displayed in Figure 6. Respondents overwhelmingly (85%) agreed that map symbology
standards are necessary for crisis mapping, conﬁrming the importance of consistency in these maps. However,
only 41% agreed that current standards available for humanitarian relief hold are inadequate, with nearly the
same number (39%) responding neutral. When asked if
their organizations are receptive to adopting
standardised map symbols, a majority (77%) responded in the aﬃrmative. However, respondents were in less
agreement for the two questions that asked about the actual implementation of standards. When asked if
standards are diﬃcult to implement in their own organization, responses were fairly balanced across the Likert
scale (54% disagreed, 26% agreed, and 20% neutral). This likely alludes to diﬀerences between the internal
operations of organizations, and the level of ease or diﬃculty for adopting standards in general. Survey
respondents also tended to agree that symbology standards are diﬃcult to adopt across organizations (48%
agreed, 27% disagreed, 25% neutral).

Figure 6. Survey responses for crisis map symbol standards.

10

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

Additional resources for crisis map symbol design

Survey respondents were also asked to provide input on any speciﬁc resources that might be beneﬁcial to assist with
future crisis map symbol development. Responses varied from technical symbology resources for standard GIS/
mapping software, to training materials, to broader resources and initiatives to encourage collaboration between
personnel within and among humanitarian organizations. Technical resources included a web-based application
to generate symbols, symbol templates, and predeﬁned Style ﬁles for ESRI’s ArcGIS and related symbol
catalogues that could be loaded into standard mapping software to promote easy sharing within and among
organizations. Training resources included example maps, reference manuals, training sessions, and ‘best
practices’ guidelines. Collaborative resources included crowdsourced, open-source web-based applications to
support the symbol design process and sharing between organizations, as well as the development of formal
committees to oversee broader symbol design processes. Collaborative resources such as these would seem
especially well-suited to promote symbology standards in the humanitarian relief community.

Discussion

Several generalizations may be drawn from the symbology survey of humanitarian relief organizations. First, it is
readily apparent that several of the challenges identiﬁed in the cartographic literature from previous studies, albeit
for speciﬁc crisis mapping applications, transcend into the broader global realm of humanitarian relief activity as
evident in the symbology survey results. That is, survey respondents agreed, overwhelmingly in many cases, that the
challenges related to speciﬁc symbol design issues (e.g. design of intuitive icons) are of important concern in crisis
mapping. Further, it is important to note that at least 60% of the respondents agreed or strongly agreed on the
Likert scale of overall importance for each of the speciﬁc seven symbol design challenges identiﬁed (Figure 5).
In many ways these results may be expected given the inherent complexities in crisis mapping, yet the results
provide strong conﬁrmation that these challenges exist across a broad spectrum of crisis mapping activities
around the world, and are not just limited to speciﬁc examples that have been documented in previous studies.
However,
is perhaps somewhat surprising given the range in crisis mapping
organizations that participated in the survey, which spanned many speciﬁc domains within crisis mapping (e.g.
emergency management, disaster response, humanitarian demining, famine relief, conﬂict resolution), types of
organizations (e.g. international, NGOs, governmental), and geographic area of operation.

the level of agreement

Second, symbol standardization was the topic that generated the most disagreement between survey
respondents. Results clearly indicated strong support for the importance of standards to ensure consistency
within and among organizations, and a majority of respondents indicated their organization’s adherence to
some type of symbology standard(s). However, respondents disagreed on two issues in particular related to
standardization: (1) whether or not current symbology standards for crisis mapping are adequate or not; and
(2) whether or not symbology standards are diﬃcult to implement within their own organization, or adopt
it seems that the overall concept and beneﬁts of symbol
across multiple organizations. In other words,
standardization seem favourable, but the logistics involved with implementation of such standards may not be
certain. These results are consistent with studies by Robinson et al. (2010; 2011) who found that operational
issues were the biggest challenge to standardizing map symbols within the US Department of Homeland
Security. Of course, perspectives on the feasibility of implementing standards likely will vary by factors such as
the type and size of an individual organization.

Finally, results from the survey also raise an obvious issue: what resources exist currently, or what resources
could be developed, to assist mapping personnel with the many symbology challenges inherent to crisis
mapping? These various challenges create opportunities for the development of additional resources and ‘best
practices’ to support humanitarian relief organizations, and survey results conﬁrm the need for these additional
resources. These resources could be particularly useful for humanitarian relief organizations where GIS and
mapping activities are overseen by those with little or no formal training in cartography, which is especially
common among smaller humanitarian relief organizations which may have constraints on staﬃng and
personnel. But what speciﬁc resources should be developed, and in what format? Instead of a single resource,
we argue that a ‘suite’ of tools that each assist with various symbology challenges is needed. For example,
cartographic expert systems have been developed to address several general cartographic design challenges such
as colour (Brewer et al., 2003; Harrower and Brewer, 2003), text (Sheesley, 2007), and abstract map symbols
(Schnabel, 2005). Similarly, decision-support
tools have been proposed to optimize data collection in
participatory mapping activities (Pánek, 2015). The expert system approach could be extended further towards
development of a step-by-step tool speciﬁcally to guide the creation of crisis map symbology. A related resource
might include a self-evaluation tool that would allow novice mapmakers to evaluate the quality of the

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

11

symbology utilised on a crisis map, perhaps quantiﬁed with a score to provide an intuitive form of feedback as well
as suggestions for improvement. An online collaborative space where crisis mapping personnel could critique map
design, including symbology, and receive feedback on submitted maps would be an additional resource. Finally,
additional resources to encourage sharing of symbols between organizations would be useful for promoting
consistency and standards. We argue that future research in the area of crisis mapping should look towards
development of additional resources such as these.

Conclusions

This paper has provided a summary of important issues related to development of crisis map symbology. A review
of the cartographic literature suggests four general challenges that have been highlighted in other studies: (1)
methods for developing symbol
(3)
standardization of crisis map symbols; and (4) sharing and promulgation of crisis map symbols. An online
survey of humanitarian relief organizations around the world provides evidence that several of these challenges
persist today.

(2) considerations for designing crisis map symbols;

taxonomies;

At a broader level, the literature review and survey results perhaps highlight crisis mapping as an example of a
unique cartographic challenge: the need for map symbols that must be versatile for multiple map uses and map
users. The ultimate goal of symbology for many crisis maps is symbols that clearly display complex information
in a simplistic manner for multiple cultural groups that are ideally sharable and interoperable between
organizations. Map design, of course, is a creative endeavour where oftentimes there are no simple solutions to
a design challenge, and the design of crisis map symbology is an excellent example of this dilemma. In many
regards, the challenge is best resolved by striking the cartographic balance, realizing that the best solution is one
that carefully considers and accounts for as many factors as possible.

The primary purpose of documenting these challenges as evident in the cartographic literature as well as from
the survey is to identify resources that might be developed in the future to mitigate these challenges. These
resources might entail a suite of tools, such as an expert system, a self-evaluation tool, and additional online
collaborative tool for critiquing and sharing crisis maps. Future research will focus on the development of
these tools to assist crisis mapping practices at humanitarian relief organizations, especially those with
limited personnel who are well-versed in mapping. As long as humanitarian crises persist and continue to
threaten the world’s growing population, maps will continue to serve a signiﬁcant role in the future for
protecting human lives.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to extend thanks and appreciation to the many anonymous respondents from the humanitarian relief and
crisis mapping communities who participated in the international symbology survey as described in this manuscript. These
respondents provided critical input regarding their experiences with maps and GIS in the realm of crisis mapping on
behalf of the organizations they represent. Thanks are due also to research assistants Joseph Anderson and Mark McCleary
for assistance with project tasks. This work was supported by funding provided by the Douglas C. Ridgley Fellowship at
Illinois State University.

Note

1. For example, see http://reliefweb.int/report/world/world-humanitarian-and-country-icons-2012 for UN OCHA’s
for the US
World: 2012 Humanitarian and Country Icons 2012 and https://www.fgdc.gov/HSWG/index.html
Department of Homeland Security’s Homeland Security Mapping Standard – Point Symbology for Emergency
Management symbol sets.

Notes on the contributor

John Kostelnick is an associate professor in the Department of Geography-Geology and Director
of the Institute for Geospatial Analysis and Mapping (GEOMAP) at Illinois State University,
Normal, IL, USA. He holds a PhD in geography from the University of Kansas. His primary
research interests
including crisis mapping,
geovisualization, GIS integration into science and society, and cultural mapping.

facets of GIScience,

include multiple

12

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

(4) pp.92–102.

pp.227–237.

Journal 22 (1) pp.11–19.

References
Akella, M.K. (2009) “First Responders and Crisis Map Symbols: Clarifying Communication” Cartography and Geographic

Information Science 36 (1) pp.19–28.

ANSI (2006) ANSI INCITS-415 2006 Homeland Security Mapping Standard – Point Symbology for Emergency Management

Washington, DC: American National Standard for Information Technology.

Bertin, J. (1967) Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps (trans. W.J. Berg)., 1983, Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Bianchetti, R.A., Wallgrün, J.O., Yang, J., Blanford, J.I., Robinson, A.C., and Klippel, A. (2012) “Free Classiﬁcation of Canadian

and American Emergency Management Map Symbol Standards” The Cartographic Journal 49 (4) pp.350–360.

Board, C. (1973) “Cartographic Communication and Standardization” International Yearbook of Cartography 13 pp.229–236.
Brewer, C.A., Hatchard, G.W., and Harrower, M.A. (2003) “Colorbrewer in Print: A Catalog of Color Schemes for Maps”

Cartography and Geographic Information Science 30 (1) pp.5–32.

Dobson, J.E., Egbert, S.L., Dunbar, M.D., and Kostelnick, J.C. (2010) “Geographers Tackle Landmines” Focus on Geography 53

Dymon, U.J. (2003) “An Analysis of Emergency Map Symbology” International Journal of Emergency Management 1 (3)

Forrest, D. and Castner, H.W. (1985) “The Design and Perception of Point Symbols for Tourist Maps” The Cartographic

Gerber, R., Burden, P. and Stanton, G. (1990) “Development of Public Information Symbols for Tourism and Recreational

Mapping” The Cartographic Journal 27 (2) pp.92–103.

Goodchild, M.F. (2007) “Citizens as Sensors: The World of Volunteered Geography” GeoJournal 69 pp.211–221.
Harrower, M.A. and Brewer, C.A. (2003) “Colorbrewer.org: An Online Tool for Selecting Colour Schemes for Maps” The

Cartographic Journal 40 (1) pp.27–37.

Joly, F. (1971) “Problemes de Standardization en Cartographie Thematique” International Yearbook of Cartography 11

pp.116–119.

215.

47 (4) pp.351–359.

Komkov, A.M. (1971) “The International Language of Geographical Maps” International Yearbook of Cartography 11 pp.209–

Korpi, J. and Ahonen-Rainio, P. (2010) “Cultural Constraints in the Design of Pictographic Symbols” The Cartographic Journal

Korpi, J. and Ahonen-Rainio, P. (2015) ‘Design guidelines for pictographic symbols: evidence from symbols designed by
students,’ in Proceedings of the 1st ICA European Symposium on Cartography, ed. by G. Gartner and H. Huang,
EuroCarto 2015, Vienna, Austria, 10th–12th November 2015.

Kostelnick, J. (2005) Cartographic recommendations for humanitarian demining map symbols in the Information
Management System for Mine Action (IMSMA). Report prepared for the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining, Geneva: Switzerland, p.100.

Kostelnick, J.C., Dobson, J.E., Egbert, S.L. and Dunbar, M.D. (2008) “Cartographic Symbols for Humanitarian Demining” The

Cartographic Journal 45 (1) pp.18–31.

Kostelnick, J.C., McDermott, D., Rowley, R.J. and Haas, N. (2013) “A Cartographic Framework for Visualizing Risk”

Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization 48 (3) pp.200–224.

Liu, S.B. and Palen, L. (2010) “The New Cartographers: Crisis Map Mashups and the Emergence of Neogeographic Practice”

Cartography and Geographic Information Science 37 (1) pp.69–90.

Meier, P. (2015) Digital Humanitarians: How Big Data Is Changing the Face of Humanitarian Response Boca Raton, FL: CRC

Press.

27th March 2017).

Cartographic Journal 52 (2) pp.107–113.

Cartography 11 pp.137–159.

Yearbook of Cartography 13 pp.19–26.

The Noun Project (2014) The Noun Project. (updated December 2014). Available at: https://thenounproject.com/ (Accessed:

Pánek, J. (2015) “ARAMANI – Decision-Support Tool

for Selecting Optimal Participatory Mapping Method” The

Ratajski, L. (1971) “The Methodological Basis of the Standardization of Signs on Economic Maps” International Yearbook of

Robinson, A.H. (1973) “An International Standard Symbolism for Thematic Maps: Approaches and Problems” International

Robinson, A.C., Roth, R.E. and MacEachren, A.M. (2010) ‘Challenges for map symbol standardization in crisis management’,
In 7th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM). Seattle, WA,
USA, 2nd–5th May 2010.

Robinson, A.C., Roth, R.E. and MacEachren, A.M. (2011) “Understanding user Needs for Map Symbol Standards in

Emergency Management” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 8 (1), Article 33.

Robinson, A.C., Roth, R.E., Blanford, J., Pezanowski, S. and MacEachren, A.M. (2012) “Developing Map Symbol Standards
through an Iterative Collaboration Process” Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 39 (6) pp.1034–1048.
Robinson, A.C., Pezanowski, S., Troedson, S., Bianchetti, R.A., Blanford, J.I., Stevens, J., Guidero, E., Roth, R.E. and
MacEachren, A.M. (2013) “Symbolstore: A Web-Based Platform for Sharing Map Symbols” Cartography and Geographic
Information Science 40 (5), 415–426.

Roth, R.E., Finch, B.G., Blanford, J.I., Klippel, A., Robinson, A.C. and MacEachren, A.M. (2011) “Card Sorting for Cartographic

Research and Practice” Cartography and Geographic Information Science 38 (2) pp.89–99.

Schnabel, O. (2005) ‘Map Symbol Brewer – a new approach for a cartographic map symbol generator’, in Proceedings of 22nd

International Cartographic Conference. A Coruña, Spain, 9th–16th July 2005.

Sheesley, B.C. (2007) ‘TypeBrewer: design and evaluation of a help tool for selecting map typography’ (PhD thesis) University

of Wisconsin, Madison.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

13

United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) (2015) Available at: http://www.unhcr.org/emergency/5051e8cd6-

559d661ac.html (Accessed 3rd November 2015).

United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA) (2012) World: Humanitarian and Country
Icons 2012. (updated August 2012). Available at: http://reliefweb.int/report/world/world-humanitarian-and-country-icons-
2012 (Accessed 26th January 2017).

United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA) (2014a) World Humanitarian Data and
at: http://www.UNOCHA.org/data-and-trends-2014/downloads/World%20Humanitarian%

Trends
20Data%20and%20Trends%202014.pdf (Accessed 29th December 2014).

2014. Available

United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA) (2014b) Global Humanitarian Appeal 2015.
[online] (updated December 2014). Available at: http://www.UNOCHA.org/top-stories/all-stories/2015-global-appeal-164-
billion-help-57-million-people-22-countries (Accessed 29th December 2014).

United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA) (2015) Nepal Earthquake: Humanitarian
Snapshot (As of 07 July 2015). (updated July 2015). Available at: http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/resources/
npl_eq_snapshot_150707.pdf (Accessed 3rd November 2015).

United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs (UN OCHA) (2016) Global Humanitarian Overview

2017. Available at: https://docs.UNOCHA.org/sites/dms/Documents/GHO_2017.pdf (Accessed 24th March 2017).

Wu, M., Zhu, A., Zheng, P., Cui, L. and Zhang, X. (2017) “An Improved Map-Symbol Model to Facilitate Sharing of

Heterogeneous Qualitative Map Symbols” Cartography and Geographic Information Science 44 (1) pp.62–75.

Appendix: symbology survey questions

General background questions

1. Please list below the name of your organization.
2. Please list below the primary country, countries, or regions of the world where your organization operates.
3. Do your organization’s mapping or GIS needs ever require map symbols that depict hazard, risk, or crisis of any type for

humanitarian assistance or relief purposes?

4. Please comment brieﬂy on the general types of maps that your organization develops for hazards, risks, or crises/

5. Who is the general audience that uses the hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief maps? Please check all that apply.

humanitarian relief.

. Civilians or the general public
. Organization personnel or specialists
. Decision-makers or political leaders
. Other

Current symbol design practices

humanitarian relief maps?

6. Which of the following best describes the map symbols utilised by your organization for hazard, risk, or crisis/

. My organization designs and develops map symbols for hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief maps
. My organization uses symbols developed by other organizations
. Both of the above

7. Do you or your organization utilize any speciﬁc workﬂows or resources to assist in the design and development of map

symbols for hazards, risks, or crisis/humanitarian relief?

8. Please describe brieﬂy any workﬂows or resources that you or your organization use to develop hazard, risk, or crisis/

humanitarian relief map symbology.

Current challenges for designing crisis map symbols

9. How critical are the following issues related to the design and development of hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief

map symbols for your organization? Ranking Scale: 1 = Not important; 5 = Very important

. Map symbols must be able to convey hazard or danger when necessary
. Map symbols must be intuitive and easy to understand
. Map symbols must be sensitive to map users from many cultural backgrounds
. Map symbols must display both simple and complex information for diﬀerent types of map users
. Map symbols must be compatible at several map scales
. Map symbols must be able to print in black and white when colour printing is not available
. Map symbols must display clearly on mobile devices (e.g. cell phones, tablet, GPS device)

10. Please describe any other challenges that your organization encounters in the design or use of hazard, risk, or crisis/

11.

humanitarian relief map symbols.
In your opinion, what is the single most important factor that should be considered for developing eﬀective map symbols
to support humanitarian relief activities for hazards, risks, or crises?

14

J. C. KOSTELNICK AND L. C. HOENIGES

Symbol standards

12. Does your organization adhere to any standards for hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief map symbols?
13. Who develops the speciﬁc map symbology standards that are used by your organization?

. Your organization/agency
. Another humanitarian organization, international agency, or NGO
. An international mapping or standards organization/agency
. A national mapping or standards organization/agency
. Other

14. Please list or describe any speciﬁc map symbology standards that your organization uses.
15. Please evaluate each of the following statements related to the use of standards for hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian

relief map symbols for your organization. Ranking Scale: 1 = Strongly disagree; 5 = Strongly agree

. Standarized map symbols are needed for hazard, risk, and crisis mapping for humanitarian relief purposes
. Current standardized map symbols that are available today for hazard, risk, or crisis mapping are inadequate or

incomplete

. My organization is open to adopting map symbology standards created by other organizations
. Map symbology standards are diﬃcult to implement across my organization
. A limitation of map symbology standards is that they are diﬃcult to adopt across many organizations

16. Please describe any other challenges that your organization encounters in the use of symbology standards for use

with hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief maps.

17. What is the biggest challenge for standardizing map symbols for hazard, risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief mapping in the

international community?

Additional resources for crisis map symbol design

18. Please describe any resources that you would like to see developed to assist with map symbology development for hazard,

risk, or crisis/humanitarian relief mapping.

