The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 3

pp. 208–217

August 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

IconMap-Based Visualisation Technique and its Application
in Soil Fertility Analysis

Xianfeng Zhang1, Xuyang Wang1, Jonathan Li2 and Micha Pazner3

1Institute of Remote Sensing and GIS, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. 2Department of Geography and
Environmental Management, University of Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada. 3Department of Geography,
University of Western Ontario, N6A 5C2, Canada
Email: xfzhang@pku.edu.cn

With the development of geographic information science and the progress in the research of scientific visualisation, the
visualisation of multivariate geospatial data has attracted much attention. This paper discusses an IconMap-based
visualisation technique that enables multiple geospatial variables be represented in a single raster layer. This is achieved by
extending the conventional pixel-based image structure to the three-tiered iconic design. Thereby the spatial pattern
generated by the interaction between multivariate geographic variables can be disclosed, and the goal of geospatial data
mining is achieved. A visualisation case study on soil organic matter and nutrients for the Shuangliu County of Chengdu
City, China, was performed using the proposed approach. The result shows that the static IconMap can better display the
distribution tendency of the high-end and low-end soil organic matter and nutrients, and that the dynamic IconMap can
both reflect the interaction between the organic matter and the nutrients variables, and display the soil fertility levels in a
comprehensive way. Thus, the IconMap-based visualisation approach is a non-fused, exploratory analytical approach for
multivariate data and valuable for visually analyse the soil fertility condition.

Keywords: icon, IconMap, visualisation, multivariate geographic data, soil nutrients

INTRODUCTION

It is an important concern for the geographic information
science community to process huge volumes of geospatial
data to extract speciﬁc features and then display their
geographic patterns using visualisation tools (Kraak, 2003;
Liang et al., 2007; Kulawiak et al., 2010; de Chiara et al.,
2011, Mitasova et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2011). The con-
ventional images of raster GIS data are made up of mosaicing
of a group of pixels, and at each pixel location only one
geospatial attribute can be displayed at a time (Tomlin, 1990;
Zhang and Pazner, 2004; Ropinski et al., 2010). In order to
represent multiple geospatial variables in a coordinated way,
often three data layers are composed and expressed in the
form of composite false-colour images in image processing
packages, or a number of layers are converted into a fused
composite index through weighted combination using
cartographic overlay analysis, so as to express the synergistic
effect of these spatial variables. Although the two methods
can give the coordinated representation of multiple geospatial
variables to some extent, they cannot satisfy the needs of
increasing complexity of spatial data and data analysis. For
instance, it is impossible to know from the fused composite
index the information carried by the original data layers, or

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000016

which variables are playing a dominating role (Pazner and
Lafreniere, 1997; Zhang and Pazner, 2004). Therefore, it is
still necessary to explore new techniques and methods for
visualisation of multiple geospatial variables on the basis of a
single raster layer.

Currently,

icon-based, pixel-based,

scientiﬁc visualisation techniques

includes
geometric,
three-dimensional,
dynamic, virtual or enhanced reality (Ning, 2007; Brooks
and Whalley, 2008; Lammeren et al., 2010; Lorenz and
Dollner, 2010; Ropinski et al., 2011), service-oriented
(Hildebrandt and Dollner, 2010) and hybrid visualisation
methods (Keim, 1996; Schroeder et al., 1997; Jia et al.,
2006). The icon-based method is widely applied in
computer
interface design (Grinstein et al., 1992;
Horton, 1994; Dovey, 1995; Chan et al., 2008), visualisa-
tion in scientiﬁc computing, physical experiment simulation
(Walsum et al., 1996; Wood, 1997; Yaman et al., 2007),
medical diagnosis (Rangayyan et al., 1998; Ropinski et al.,
2011), and musical study (Kolhoff et al., 2008). Early
applications of icon or glyph for visualisation were mainly
used to visualize the similarity or clusters of point data sets.
For example, ‘Chernoff Faces’ display data using cartoon
faces by relating different variables
facial
features (Chernoff and Rizvi, 1975). In cartography, icon

to different

IconMap-Based Visualisation Technique

209

Figure 1. The icon templates: example (a) static icon, three icon elements designed in the template and each graphic design can be linked to
a data layer; for example, 1 to vegetation, 2 to topographic gradient, and 3 to road accessibility; (b)–(d) to form a three-level dynamic icon
sequence, and each icon graph ‘bar’, totally 8 can be related to a speciﬁc geospatial data layer; the area numbered with ‘9’ is icon back-
ground)

is also used as a type of cartographic symbol, such as the
directional icon symbols (Keim, 1996; Lammeren et al.,
2010) in the tourist maps (Woodside et al., 2007). The icon-
based method was extended and applied in the research for
visualisation of multivariate geospatial data (Pazner and
Zhang, 2004; Ropinski et al., 2011). They created the GIS-
icon concept and developed an IconMap-based visualisation
technique which is capacious of visualizing multiple geospa-
tial variables and was applied in the research for vehicle
accessibility in the Las Vegas area of the United States
(Zhang and Pazner, 2004). The IconMap-based visualisation
technique is a non-fused co-visualisation approach, so that it
can effectively express a number of correlated geospatial
variables, thus solving the problem that a conventional raster
GIS layer cannot represent several variables at a single pixel
location in the simple raster structure, and providing a
reliable and viable technique for visualizing exploratory
analysis of multiple geospatial variables
and
Lafreniere, 1997; Zhang and Pazner, 2004; Lammeren
et al., 2010; Ropinski et al., 2011).

(Pazner

In recent years, the research and practical work on formula
fertilisation is requiring increasingly more understanding of
soil organic matters, nutrients, and fertility. However,
relevant work is often focused on the spatial variability of a
single variable, or research on soil fertility involving multiple
variables continues
to use the conventional classiﬁed
composite index method, which is a fused visualisation
method. Currently, there is no report published on icon-
based visualisation for soil composition variables, and the soil
fertility is usually characterized by several
‘multivariate’
variables such as soil organic matter, total nitrogen, available
nitrogen, available phosphorus, and available potassium.
Thus, this study will examine the usefulness of the IconMap-
based visualisation technique for analysing the soil organic
matters and nutrients. Two categories of icons: static and
dynamic, are designed and used to explore the spatial pat-
terns inherent from the soil organic and nutrient geospatial
multivariate data or variables. Comparison with the conven-
tional composite index approach will be also presented in the
section on ‘Results and discussion’.

PRINCIPLE OF THE ICONMAP-BASED VISUALISATION
TECHNIQUE

According to Horton (2004), icon is a small piece of image
correlated to data or a symbolic representation. The
function of an icon or glyph is ‘to show the key features
or characteristics of a data domain in a symbolic way’ or
symbolic representation of one or more variables of a data
set (Horton, 2004; Ropinski et al., 2011). Unlike the
conventional use of icons, in the IconMap-based technique,
each icon will not only include meaningful graphic design,
location –– a
but is corresponding to certain geospatial
development of the conventional icon representation under
the raster GIS environment (Pazner and Lafreniere, 1997;
Zhang and Pazner, 2004). As a graphic element, the icon
extends the conventional dual image structure ‘image-pixel’
to a three-tiered image structure ‘image-icon-pixel’ in a
raster GIS data layer. Therefore, each icon consists of
several icon elements, and each icon element consists of
several pixels and bears certain geometric shape and
attributes. Consequently, if the geometric attribute of an
icon element does not change with different values of the
variable, but its colour varies to indicate the various values
of the data layers the icon represents, then it is called a
‘static’ icon. On the contrary, if the geometric attribute (i.e.
the length of a bar) of an icon element does change with
different values of the data layers, then it is called a
‘dynamic’ icon. As shown in Figure 1, ‘A’ represents a static
icon consisting of three icon elements in which each icon
element can represent a geographic variable or data layer,
for example, ‘1’ can represents fractional vegetation cover;
‘2’ topographic gradient; and ‘3’ road accessibility. ‘B’, ‘C’,
and ‘D’ form a dynamic icon sequence, with each icon
element’s graphic shape (designed as a bar here) changing
in length with the quantity of the data layer it represents.
There are eight icon elements (numbered as ‘1’ to ‘9’) and
one background (numbered as ‘9’) in all for this dynamic
icon design. However, the graphic shape of a static icon will
remain unchanged, and the changes in colour is related to
the changes in the data set it represents, as a way for
showing the spatial or temporal distribution pattern of the

210

The Cartographic Journal

in the section on
geospatial variables. For example,
‘Designing the icon template’, a colour sequence from
black to red indicates that the content of soil total nitrogen
changes from low to high.

An icon image map can be created by populating each pixel
of the input data layers into an iconic representation using
the selected icon template(s). The geospatial data layers are
to be analysed onto an image map structured on the designed
icon template, thereby expressing multivariate geographic
variables in a single raster GIS layer. For instance, by using
the static icon template ‘A’ in Figure 1, the three data layers
of fractional vegetation cover, road accessibility and topo-
graphic gradient can be projected to icon elements 1, 2, and
3 respectively, and the relief information generated from the
DEM data can be represented by the background of the icon
template. Thus, the four geospatial variables can be displayed
in one raster GIS layer, termed ‘icon image map’. This
process of icon image map generation can be automatically
accomplished with the IconMapper system, a prototype
software system developed by the authors to implement the
proposed visualisation technique.

Apart from displaying multivariate geospatial data in one
raster layer in a non-fused way as mentioned above, icon
itself as a graphic design with certain geometric shape can
‘visually’ represent certain thematic variables to convey
more information to the map reader than pixel-based
images (Wood, 1997; Zhang and Pazner, 2004; Ropinski
et al., 2011). The interactions between icons and between
icon components can produce some visual effects, and thus
can display spatial distribution patterns produced by the
interaction among the geospatial variables.

The discussion in the section on ‘Methodology and case
study’ will be focused on creating icon image maps of soil
organic matters and nutrients, visualizing their spatial
patterns of soil fertility using the principle of icon image
map as a new technique.

METHODOLOGY AND CASE STUDY

The study area is located in the central part of the Shuangliu
County of Chengdu City, Sichuan Province, China. It
consists of 11 townships and is a state-level demonstration
area for the program of Soil Testing and Formulated
Fertilisation which is being implemented by the China
Ministry of Agriculture. Soil samples were collected accord-
ing to Sichuan Province’s ‘Technique Regulation for the Soil
Testing and Formulated Fertilization Program’, and the
geographic locations of sampling sites were collected by
GPS. Each soil sample is an average of samples from ﬁve
points at 0–20 cm depth, centring on one point. A total of
836 sample points were obtained for the study area. The soil
samples were analysed in laboratory for the ﬁve variables
which characterize soil fertility for agriculture, namely, soil
organic matter, total nitrogen, available nitrogen, available
phosphorus, and available potassium. As the soil organic
matter and nutrients are the result of the complicated
interaction and historical evolution of the factors soil type,
topography, climate, surface coverage type and farming
system, to disclose their distribution patterns will be of
signiﬁcance to prescribing the multivariate fertilisation

to demonstrate the usefulness of

the
formula. Thus,
proposed visualisation technique in exploratory analysis of
the soil
for
understanding these patterns.

fertility can offer a new and helpful tool

Data preprocessing
In order to prepare soil fertility data layers for exploratory
analysis by IconMap-based visualisation technique, the soil
sample data need to be preprocessed with spatial statistics
and interpolation methods, so as to obtain the spatial
distribution pattern of each soil organic matter and nutrient
variables. Raster GIS data layers of soil organic matter and
nutrient contents were generated by means of spatial
interpolation using both Kriging and disjunctive Kriging
method as provided by the geo-statistical analysis function
in ArcGIS system (Pang et al., 2011). The main purpose of
this preprocessing is obviously to convert the discrete point
data sets into continuously distributed thematic layers. The
paper soil type map and topographic map of the study area
were also digitized to obtain administrative boundary and
soil type map with the ArcGIS9.2 package, and registered
to the same geographic coordinate system of the ﬁve soil
organic and nutrient data layers.

After data preprocessing, representative icon templates
are designed according to the characteristics of
the
geographic multivariate data for visual analysis, and then
the IconMap-based visualisation approach is to be applied
to map each pixel of the soil variables into a patterned icon
block, to produce the icon image map.

segregation and patterns of

Designing the icon template
The design of icon template is critical to the visualisation
effect. A ‘good’ icon design can effectively express the visual
interaction among multivariate data, and as a result can
display the spatial
such
interaction in both macro and micro scales. Each icon
template consists of two parts: icon graphic elements and
background (Figure 1), where the icon elements are the
graphic designs representing multivariate geographic data,
and each icon element in its turn consists of a series of
pixels, carrying speciﬁc geometric shapes and attributes.
The background is the area of blank pixels other than the
icon element pixels and its attribute can also be related to a
certain geographic variable, or it is just blank pixels. Note
that the icon will not have an attribute value of its own, as it
is but a graphic symbol
representing the geographic
variables. The colour assigned to the icon element during
design stage will not be a part of the computing or ﬁnal
displaying, but is for differentiating the shapes of different
icon components. The colour and attribute displayed in
each icon block of the ﬁnal icon image map are projection
of
the data layer
represented by each icon element, and they reﬂect the
changes of the pixel value of the geospatial data layers.

the corresponding pixel colour of

The static icon template consists of 10610 pixels and has
ﬁve icon elements in this study to represent soil organic
matter, total nitrogen, available nitrogen, available phos-
phorus, and available potassium respectively, and the icon
background is intently assigned to the soil type data layer.
To ensure the ﬁnal visual effect, the number of pixels for

IconMap-Based Visualisation Technique

211

Figure 2. Static icon template and the represented soil nutrient data layers: (a) static icon, and the six icon elements are related to the soil
nutrients as 1 to (b), 2 to (c), 3 to (d), 4 to (e), and 5 to (f); (b) all-nitrogen; (c) available nitrogen, (d) available phosphorus, (e) available
potassium, (f) organic matter

each icon element in the icon block should be approxi-
in case inconsistencies are
mately same where possible,
created in the icon components due to different sizes of the
geometric graphs. In this study, the design of the static icon
template uses 16 pixels graph to represent the soil organic
matter, and all the other four icon elements are graphs
consisting of 15 pixels. The background of the design has
24 pixels, conforming to the above mentioned icon
template design principle. The sum of all the pixels of the
icon elements and background is 100 and exactly equal to
the size of the 10610 icon. Since the static icon element
remains unchanged in its geometric shape, with only the
colour changing in gradient following the change in the
value of the variable or data layer it represents, and such
change is inherited from the colour in the pixel that
corresponds to the data layer represented by the icon
elements. Therefore, before the visual modelling to
produce the icon image map, it is necessary to assign a
colour sequence to each raster GIS data layer which is
preprocessed in the previous section, to indicate the spatial
segregation of that variable. In fact, this process can also be
understood as using colour
for visualizing a single
geographic data layer under the raster GIS environment,
to indicate the spatial distribution of the variable. According
to the characteristics of the data histogram of each raster
GIS data layer to be visualized, a colour sequence that can

give the best visual effect and satisfy the requirements for
producing the static icon image map is selected: black to
red, black to green, black to yellow, black to magenta, and
black to blue, to represent the increment in the values of
soil total nitrogen, soil available nitrogen, soil available
phosphorus, soil available potassium, and soil organic
matter respectively. The design of the static icon template
and the colour assignment for the soil variables represented
by the icon components are shown as in Figure 2.

The dynamic icon template designed in this study again
consists of 10610 pixels, and there are also ﬁve icon
elements to stand for the ﬁve soil variables: soil organic
matter, total nitrogen, available nitrogen, available phos-
phorus, and available potassium. A very simple graphic
design ‘bar’ is used for each icon element (Figure 3). In
designing dynamic icon template, the length of a bar is used
to dynamically represent the changes in the icon elements:
the greater the variable’s value, the longer the correspond-
ing bar; the smaller the value, the shorter the bar. The
geometric attribute in the design of each icon element (such
as a bar) will change with the value of the soil variable,
hence the icon is termed ‘dynamic icon’. In the ﬁnally
generated icon image map, the colour of each element of an
icon block is inherited from the data layer the icon element
represents. In this study, ﬁve-level bars (not continuously
changed) are used in the design of dynamic icon template to

212

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Bar-shaped dynamic icon templates. (a)–(c) form a three-level dynamic icon sequence in which 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 are icon ele-
ments (1–5) and background related to the data layers all nitrogen, available nitrogen, available phosphorus, available potassium, organic mat-
ter, and soil types respectively. The dynamic icon image map is actually created using ﬁve-level dynamic icon templates in the section on
‘Visual modelling: generating the IconMap’)

represent dynamically the changes in the contained elements.
Unlike the colour sequences used in the design of the static
icon template, the ﬁve colours of red, green, yellow, magenta,
and blue are assigned to the data layers during the
preprocessing stage and copied to icon elements to represent
the ﬁve icon elements of total nitrogen, available nitrogen,
available phosphorus, available potassium, and organic matter
respectively. The designed dynamic icon template is shown in
Figure 3, and to save space, only three-level dynamic icon
sequences are illustrated.

shape of each icon element will

Visual modelling: generating the IconMap
After the accomplishment of the icon template design and
colourisation of the icon component data layer, visual
modelling can be conducted to generate the icon image
map. The designed templates are used to convert the values
of each pixel in the preprocessed data layers to the value of
the icon element at that location. For the static icon, the
geometric
remain
unchanged, but its colour will change with the data value
of each pixel; for the dynamic icon, the geometric shape of
each icon element (e.g. bars as in Figure 3) will change in
length with the value in the pixel location of the data layers
that they represent. The colour of the icon element is also
inherited from the colour of the pixel at that pixel location.
Since each pixel of all the original soil organic matter and
nutrients data layers will be populated into an icon block in
the end, such conversion is rather time consuming, and
none of the currently available commercial GIS software has
such function yet. Therefore, in this study the prototype
system IconMapper specially developed by the authors is
used for the creation of the icon image map using the
designed icon templates and the sixe preprocessed multi-
variate data layers. The design of icon templates can be
completed using a raster GIS software or raster graph tool,
while the visualisation modelling and the generation of the
icon map can be completed automatically by using this
prototype software. The software system also provides some
supportive tools to help designing the icon templates (i.e.
testing the dynamic icon sequence), such as previewing

tools (i.e. quick generating of a small portion of icon image
map) and interactive query tools. Figure 4 illustrates the
main interface of the IconMapper software package.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Static IconMap
The high value areas of soil organic matter and nutrient
contents can be well visualized in the static icon images in the
macroview level in Figure 5. The area ‘A’ of Figure 5a gives
bright blue, and following the icon component colouring
rule we know that the organic matter is rich at the location A.
Similarly, the reddish colour at the area B indicates the
existence of high content of total nitrogen, the greenish
colour at area C indicates high values of available nitrogen,
the yellow and magenta for area D and area E indicate areas
with high values of available phosphorus and available
potassium. By referring to the data layers represented by
the icon elements in Figure 2, it is clear that the distribution
pattern of each icon element shown in the static icon map is
consistent with the single variable, and it can well reﬂect the
synergistic information of multivariate data as well in one
raster GIS image layer.

Apart from the macrolevel patterns of soil organic matter
and nutrients, the static icon image map can also reﬂect the
visual interaction relationship among the geographic vari-
ables in microlevels. Figure 5b illustrates a small portion of
the static icon map with a scale of 1 : 1 zoom-in of the area
B in Figure 5a, and the colours of the icon elements soil
total nitrogen and available phosphorus in this area are
bright red and yellow, which indicates the existence of rich
in the soil
total nitrogen and available phosphorus
according to the design of the static icon template. The
colours blue, green, and magenta of the other three icon
components: organic matter, available nitrogen, and avail-
able potassium are relatively dark in the area, indicating low
content of these three soil nutrients. The patterns show that
the soil total nitrogen and available phosphorus are high
and the main contributors to the soil fertility, and in this area

IconMap-Based Visualisation Technique

213

Figure 4. Main graphic user interface of the IconMapper system (main window: image browse area; lens: allowing interactive real-time icon
image map creation and browse; key legend: keys to icon blocks)

the content of organic matter is relatively low. Thus, it calls
for effective measures to increase the content of organic
matter, so that the soil fertility will not keep dropping.

Since the static icons reﬂect the variation pattern of each
icon element through the change in colour range, and black
is designed to be the colour for lowest value of all elements.
Therefore, the colours in between for the icon image map as
a whole can hardly give any quantitative idea, except for the
relatively high and low values. For better visualisation effect
of the multivariate data and for better visual discloses of the
soil fertility, a dynamic icon map is required for further
analysis.

Dynamic IconMap
The above designed dynamic icon template and soil
nutrient data sets were input into the IconMapper system,
and the link between the icon elements and the data layers
they represent is built using an index ﬁle. The projection
and conversion of the raster GIS layers to a single icon-
based image are then completed to produce a ‘patterned’
icon image map in the system. As mentioned above, and
different from the static icon image map, the graphic

attribute of each element of an icon block changes with the
pixel value of the data layer it represents. The icon image
map produced with the IconMapper system is shown in
Figure 6. Thus, the changing icon graphs and the colours
together may give visual differences and exhibit spatial
distribution pattern inherent from the soil organic matter
and nutrients.

Figure 6 is a portion of the icon image map for the study
area, created by the IconMapper system for analysis of the
visualisation effect. Considering the dynamic icon template,
the area indicated by ‘1’ in Figure 6a is dominated by the
magenta colour, showing the area has a high content of
available potassium (colourized in magenta in this data layer
in preprocessing stage); and the area indicated by ‘2’ is
dominated by green, indicating a relatively high content of
available nitrogen in these places represented by the second
icon element; and the area indicated by ‘3’ is dominated by
red and yellow, showing that there are high contents of
available phosphorus and total nitrogen which are repre-
sented by the ﬁrst and the third icon elements; other areas
that do not give distinct colour effects are areas that low in
overall soil nutrient level, and with low levels of both soil

214

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. A portion of static icon image map in the study area: (a) a macrolevel view; (b) a local 1 : 1 microlevel view. 1: total nitrogen; 2:
available nitrogen; 3: available phosphorus; 4: available potassium; 5: soil organic matter; 6: icon background

organic matter and nutrients. On the contrary,
in the
brightly coloured areas, there are less numbers of back-
ground pixels (in grey), with the pixels for icon elements
dominating in number,
in other words, there are high
contents of soil organic matter and nutrients, with the
overall fertility level on the high side.

The zoom-in view of a part of the icon image map shows
that each icon changes according to the different values of
the variables. The lengths of the bars reﬂect the content
levels of the elements at different pixel locations. Figure 6b
shows a lower-medium level of soil fertility in this area, with
contents of available phosphorus and available potassium at
the medium level, and the contents of organic matter, total
nitrogen, and available nitrogen are low in general. In the
southwest corner however, apart from the content of
organic matter which is low, all other soil nutrients are at
a medium level because the bar length is in medium size.

Compared with the static icon image map, the dynamic
icon can directly show the distribution pattern of the soil
variables by the changing graphic shapes to give better
visual effects. The graphic shapes help in analysing the
synergistic relationship among the variables and in ﬁnding
out the restraining factors for the soil fertility, offering
practical support to agricultural production.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The IconMap-based visualisation technique is a ‘non-fused’
approach for qualitatively and semi-quantitatively visualiz-
ing a number of geographically correlated quantitative

spatial variables. To analyse the synergistic relationship
between multivariate geospatial variables in the conven-
tional raster GIS model, conventionally these multivariate
data layers are weighted integrated or combined into a
comprehensive index that is represented as one raster GIS
image layer. This is called ‘fused’ visualisation analysis for
multivariate data.

to verify usefulness of

Comparison between the ‘non-fused’ and ‘fused’ visualisation
the IconMap-based
In order
visualisation technique in reﬂecting the distribution of soil
organic matter and nutrients in the study area and revealing
the soil fertility patterns, a conventional fused method, or
integrated index, was applied for the same data sets of the
study area. The comparison between the IconMap-based
and fused index approaches is conducted and analysed in
this section.

The integrated fertility indicator (IFI) is derived and used
to represent the soil fertility level by a weighted combina-
tion of the ﬁve soil organic and nutrient data layers. The
equation is

IFI~Swi|NVi

is weight for each data layer, and NVi

where wi
is the
normalized soil organic matter and nutrient data layer.
Considering that the content interpolation of soil organic
matter and nutrients is closely related to its variation, the
variation coefﬁcient method is therefore applied in deter-
mining the index weight. The main steps are as follows:

IconMap-Based Visualisation Technique

215

Figure 6. A portion of dynamic icon image map in the study area: (a) a macrolevel view; (b) a 1 : 1 microlevel view. 1: total nitrogen; 2:
available nitrogen; 3: available phosphorus; 4: available potassium; 5: soil organic matter; 6: background. The area with ‘1’ is dominated by
the magenta colour, showing the area has a high content of available potassium (colourized in magenta in the data layer in Figure 4); and the
area with ‘2’ is dominated by green, indicating a relatively high content of available nitrogen in these places represented by the second icon
element; and the area indicated by ‘3’ is dominated by red and yellow, showing there are high contents of available phosphorus and total
nitrogen)

ﬁrstly, the standard deviation of the indicators is calculated
to reﬂect the absolute variation of the factors.

n
P
i~1

2

6
6
4

Sj~

1=2

3

(cid:2)
xij{xxj

(cid:3)2

7
7
5

n

where n is the number of samples for evaluation, xij is the
is the standard
jth factor value of the ith pixel, and Sj
deviation of
the variation
the jth factor. Secondly,
coefﬁcients of factors are calculated, to reﬂect the relative
variation of the factors.

The third step is to normalize the variation coefﬁcients of
the indicators to obtain the weights of the indicators.

vj~Sj=Xj

wj~vj=

m
X

j~1

vj

Finally, the weight values of soil organic matter, total
nitrogen, available nitrogen, available phosphorus, and
available potassium are determined as 0.148, 0.153,
0.172, 0.311, and 0.216 respectively. The indicator IFI is
calculated for the entire study (Figure 7a).

Comparing the IFI image with the dynamic icon image
map, it is found that, as shown in Figure 7a, the white and
light-red patches in the IFI map (indicating low values of
IFI) exactly match the dark patches at the same locations in
the dynamic icon image map (Figure 7b), while the red
patches in the IFI map (showing high IFI values) also
match the brighter coloured (indicating icon elements
bearing longer bars) patches in the dynamic icon image map
quite well. This visual comparison indicates that the icon
image map for soil organic matter and nutrients is basically
consistent with the IFI obtained by the conventional fused
method, and that both can well reﬂect the soil fertility
condition. However, the IFI method cannot tell exactly
which element or variable is high in content in a given
location, while the icon image map can do this by checking
the dynamics of the graph for each icon element on the
microview level (Figure 7c), thus offering more information
to the user. This is an advantage of the ‘non-fused’
visualisation approach.

Figure 7c is a portion of the icon image map recreated
using IFI as the icon background. Obviously when the
background colour is light red or white, indicating the IFI
values are low, the bars for all the icon elements in the
dynamic icon are short, showing low contents of soil
organic matter and nutrients, which is consistent with
the background value. Further analysis will show that the
distribution patterns of the soil variables given by the

216

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. Comparison between the non-fused and fused visualisation methods. (a) IFI integrated index: white and light red indicating lower
fertility levels and dark red indicating higher fertility levels; (b) icon image map: using the legend in Figure 6 to read this image and compare
the pattern with that of the IFI image; (c) icon image map using IFI as the background of icon blocks: the colour of the icon background is
from the IFI pixels, and the foreground bars indicating dynamic icon elements)

dynamic icon image map and by the IFI map do not give
one-on-one matches, telling certain degrees of difference
for visualisation of multivariate
between the methods
geospatial data. Where the conventional fused method is
concerned, it is the different methods for determining the
factor weights that impact on the ﬁnal IFI result greatly,
and the synergistic relationship among the variables is not
directly revealed. On the other hand, the IconMap-based
dynamic icons will not only reﬂect the integrated soil
fertility level in a macroview way, but will directly indicate
the synergistic relationship among the soil organic matter
and nutrients on the microview level, allowing user to
identify the key factor underlying the soil fertility of a
region. Therefore, it is valuable to apply the icon-based
approach to visually analyse soil organic matter and
nutrients, and it can be utilized in the visualisation of
multivariate geospatial data in many ﬁelds. For example, the
proposed icon-based visualisation technique can be used to
visually analyse the mineral abundance extracted from
remotely sensed data to reveal the mineral patterns inherent
from the mineralisation process.

Conclusion and future work
This study innovatively incorporated the icon concept of
conventional scientiﬁc visualisation into the display of raster
to develop the IconMap-based visualisation
GIS data,
technique. The extension from the pixels to the icon
structure enables each pixel in the simple raster GIS data
structure become capable of displaying multivariate geospa-
tial attributes, so as to disclose, by way of visual modelling,
the geospatial pattern arising from the interaction of several
geographically related variables. Such patterns are embedded
in the spatial data, and need be uncovered by way of model
analysis and visualisation. In this sense, geospatial visualisa-
tion is an exploratory analysis mean in itself.

A case study of exploratory analysis of soil organic matter
and nutrients in Shuangliu County, Sichuan Province,
China is also presented in this study, and used to verify the
usefulness of the proposed visualisation technique. This is
the ﬁrst attempt at applying the IconMap-based visualisa-
tion technique in soil fertility analysis. Two types of icon

images maps were produced for visual analysis of soil fertility
condition using static icon and dynamic icon designs. The
results show that the IconMap-based visualisation method
can better reveal the spatial distribution patterns of soil
organic matter, total nitrogen, available nitrogen, available
phosphorus, and available potassium, providing a basis for
formulized fertilisation. Compared with the fused method
for visualisation of multivariate data, the icon image map can
provide a basically consistent visual effect on the macrolevel
views; while on the microlevel views, each icon of the icon
image maps can indicate which icon elements have resulted in
the site’s soil fertility condition, which nutrient is lack, and
can therefore provide the user with more information. The
shortcoming is that the icon image map is relatively difﬁcult
to read than the conventional map, as it requires good
understanding of the icon templates. In addition, to convert
pixels of the multivariate data to icon blocks of the icon
image map increases the image size and needs large computer
memory storage.

The future research will be on designing of more effective
static and dynamic icon templates, rather than the simple
graphics (bars). In addition, expressing the temporal–spatial
changes of multiple geographic variables in the icon image
map will be one of the focuses for future research.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Xianfeng Zhang received
the PhD degree in geogra-
phy from the University of
Western Ontario, Canada,
in 2005. He is currently an
Associate Professor at the
Institute of Remote Sensing
and Geographical Informa-
tion Systems, Peking Uni-
versity, Beijing, China. His
research interests are in re-
mote sensing of ecology,
geospatial data visualization.

IconMap-Based Visualisation Technique

217

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research work is supported by the project granted by
the China Ministry of Education (no. 20070001050) and
the project granted by the China Ministry of Science and
Technology (no. 2007BAH12B05).

REFERENCES

Brooks, S. and Whalley, J. L. (2008). ‘Multilayer hybrid visualizations
to support 3D GIS’, Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 32, pp. 278–292.

Chan, A., MacLean, K. and McGrenere, J. (2008). ‘Designing haptic
icons to support collaborative turn-taking’, International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 66, pp. 333–355.

Chernoff, H. and Rizvi, M. H. (1975). ‘Effect on classification error of
random permutations of features in representing multivariate data
by faces’, Journal of American Statistical Association, 70, pp.
548–554.

de Chiara, D., Fatto, V. D., Laurini, R., Sebillo, M. and Vitiello,
G. (2011). ‘A chorem-based approach for visually analyzing spatial
data’, Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 22, pp.
173–193.

Dovey, D. (1995).

in IEEE
Visualization’95, ed. by Nielson, G. M. and Silver, D., pp. 248–
253, IEEE.

‘Vector plots for irregular grids’,

Grinstein, G., Sieg, J. C., Smith, S. and Williams, M. G. (1992).
‘Visualization for knowledge discovery’, International Journal of
Intelligent Systems, 7, pp. 637–648.

Hildebrandt, D. and Dollner, J. (2010). ‘Service-oriented, standards-
based 3D geovisualization: potential and challenges’, Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems, 34, pp. 484–495.

Horton, W. (1994). The Icon Book: Visual Symbols for Computer
Systems and Documentation. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York.

Jia, Z., Liu, Y. and Zhang, T. (2006). ‘Design and development of
system based on visual interactive spatial data mining’, Geomatics
and Information Science of Wuhan University, 31, pp. 916–919.
Keim, D. A. (1996). ‘Databases and visualization’, in SIGMOD’96,

Montreal, Canada, Jun 4–6.

Kolhoff, P., Preuß, J. and Loviscach, J. (2008). ‘Content-based icons

for music files’, Computers & Graphics, 32, pp. 550–560.

Kraak, M. (2003). ‘Geovisualization illustrated’, ISPRS Journal of

Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing, 57, pp. 390–399.

Kulawiak, M., Prospathopoulos, A., Perivoliotis, L.,

łuba, M.,
Kioroglou, S. and Stepnowski, A. (2010). ‘Interactive visualization
of marine pollution monitoring and forecasting data via a Web-
based GIS’, Computers & Geosciences, 36, pp. 1069–1080.
Lammeren, R. van, Houtkamp, J., Colijn, S., Hilferink, M. and
Bouwman, A.
‘Affective appraisal of 3D land use
visualization’, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
34, pp. 465–475.

(2010).

Liang, H., Arangarasan, R. and Theller L.

‘Dynamic
visualization of high resolution GIS dataset on multi-panel display
using ArcGIS
in
Agriculture, 58, pp. 174–188.

engine’, Computers

and Electronics

(2007).

Lorenz, H. and Dollner, J. (2010). ‘3D feature surface properties and
their application in geovisualization’, Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems, 34, pp. 476–483.

Mitasova, H., Harmon, R. S., Weaver, K. J., Lyons, N. J. and Overton,
M. F. (2011). ‘Scientific visualization of landscapes and landforms’,
Geomorphology, 137, pp. 122–137.

Ning, J. (2007). ‘Design and development of a 3D visualization system
for gravity field models: WHU-3D gravit’, Geomatics and
Information Science of Wuhan University, 32, pp. 945–949.
Pang, S., Li, T., Zhang, X., Wang, Y. and Yu, Y. (2010). ‘Spatial
variability of cropland lead and its influencing factors: a case study
in Shuangliu county, Sichuan province, China’, Geoderma, 162,
pp. 223–230.

Pazner, M. and Lafreniere, M. (1997). ‘GIS Icon Maps’, in ACSM/
ASPRS Annual Convention and Exposition, Technical Papers
Volume 5, Auto-Carto 13, pp. 126–135, Seattle, WA, Apr 7–10.
Rangayyan, R. M. and Zuffo, M. K. (1998). ‘Iconographic display of
mammographic features for computer-aided diagnosis of breast
cancer’, 1998 IEEE International Conference on Information
91–96,
Technology Applications
Washington, DC, May 16–17.

in Biomedicine,

pp.

Ropinski, T., Oeltze, S. and Preim, B. (2011). ‘Survey of glyph-based
visualization techniques for spatial multivariate medical data’,
Computers & Graphics, 35, pp. 392–401.

Schroeder, W., Martin, K.

(1997). The
Visualization Toolkit, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ.

and Lorensen, B.

Tomlin, C. D. (1990). Geographic Information Systems and
Cartographic Modeling, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Walsum, T. V., Post, F. H., Silver, D. and Post, F. J. (1997). ‘Feature
extraction and iconic visualization’, IEEE Transaction on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2, pp. 111–119.

Wood, M. (1997). ‘The traditional map as a visualization technique’,
in Visualization in Geographical Information Systems, ed. by
Hearbshaw, H. and Unwin, D., John Wiley and Sons Ltd, England.
Woodside, A. G., Cruickshank, B. F. and Ning, D. (2007). ‘Stories
visitors tell about Italian cities as destination icons’, Tourism
Management, 28, pp. 162–174.

Xu, B., Lin, H., Chiu, L., Hua, Y., Zhu, J., Hua, M. and Cui,
W. (2011). ‘Collaborative virtual geographic environments: a case
study of air pollution simulation’, Information Sciences, 181, pp.
2231–2246.

Yaman, M., Ha¨rting, M., Nsengiyumva, S. and Britton, D. T. (2007).
‘Scientific visualization: analysis, exploration and presentation of tri-
implanted titanium determined by X-ray
axial stress states of Kr
diffraction’, Surface and Coatings Technology, 201, pp. 8431–
8436.

z

Zhang, X. and Pazner, M. (2004). ‘The Icon Imagemap technique for
multivariate geospatial data visualization: approach and software
system’, Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 31,
pp. 29–41.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

