G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

FITTED, GREEN, AND VOLUNTEERED:
LEGAL AND SURVEY COMPLEXITIES OF
FUTURE BOUNDARY SYSTEMS

Rohan M. Bennett, Paul van der Molen, and Jaap A. Zevenbergen
ITC Faculty, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands

The disparity between the legal understanding of boundaries and their surveyed location is explained. The
impacts of this disparity on three boundary fabrics issues: survey-accuracy; greening cadastres; and crowd-
sourced cadastres are then examined. The features are selected based on contemporary discourse within the
domain of land administration. Survey-accuracy is found to be a confused, misused, and often politicized term.
The concept of idealization precision should be revisited and embedded into both curriculum and cadastral
design. Green boundaries, at least some forms, are already handled in some systems; however, newer varieties
require better tools for adjudication, demarcation, survey, recording, and adherence. Crowdsourced data can
be understood as a re-emergence of deeds style registration with its associated benefits and disadvantages. It
might support existing cadastral systems, particularly those that lack complete coverage; however, it may also
be used to publicize discontent with these existing systems. The paper illustrates lessons, threats, and oppor-
tunities for land practitioners involved with the establishment and maintenance of the legal boundary fabric.

La disparité entre la compréhension juridique des limites et leur emplacement arpenté est expliquée.
Les  impacts  de  cette  disparité  sur  trois  aspects  touchant  aux  limites  cadastrales  sont  ensuite  examinés  :
l’exactitude des levés d’arpentage, le cadastre vert et les cadastres participatifs. Ces aspects sont abordés
en  se  basant  sur  les  énoncés  contemporains  du  domaine  de  l’administration  des  terres.  L’exactitude  des
arpentages est un terme portant à confusion, mal utilisé et souvent politisé. Le concept d’exactitude/d’adé-
quation de la représentation devrait être révisé et enchâssé tant dans le curriculum que dans la conception des
cadastres. Les limites vertes, à tout le moins dans quelques-unes de leurs formes, sont déjà prises en compte
dans certains systèmes; toutefois, de nouvelles variétés nécessitent de meilleurs outils pour l’adjudication, la
délimitation, l’arpentage, l’enregistrement et la conformité. Les données participatives peuvent être consi-
dérées comme une nouvelle émergence des systèmes fonciers de type « enregistrtement des actes » accom-
pagnée  des  avantages  et  désavantages  inhérents.  Ces  données  peuvent  soutenir  les  systèmes  cadastraux
actuels, surtout ceux qui ne comptent pas une couverture complète; toutefois, elles peuvent aussi être utilisées
pour faire la promotion du mécontentement face aux systèmes actuels. Cet article illustre les leçons apprises,
les menaces et les possibilités pour les praticiens qui travaillent dans le domaine de l’établissement et de la
maintenance des limites cadastrales.

1. Introduction

Since  property  exists,  boundaries  exist.  Since
rights  in  property  are  registered  and  the  limits  of
property estates are surveyed, cadastral boundaries
must exist. The cadastral boundary is a legal con-
cept. It is an authoritative recording in which lines
on a map are a representation of the legal boundary
between mine and thine. Of course, in parts of the
world  where  cadastres  are  not  institutionalized
[Powell 2009]  or  simply  do  not  perform  [World
Bank 2012],  boundaries  still  exist;  boundaries
between what people possess are, by their nature, a
reflection of social relationships.

One of the first to explain a property right as a
social relationship was Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld
[1913] in his essay ‘Fundamental Legal Concepts’.

He argued that the various powers comprised by a
property right represented at least 4 different rela-
tionships  between  human  beings  with  regard  to  a
thing.  This  was  further  elaborated  by  Stanhope
Rowton  Simpson  in  his  seminal  work  ‘Land  Law
and Registration’ (1976), who introduced these dif-
ferent elements as a ‘bundle of rights’, illustrating
the complexity of property. So, irrespective of the
existence  of  a  cadastre,  property  and  property
boundaries exist.

Recognizing  the  world’s  huge  variety  of  land
tenure  arrangements  [Payne 2004],  it  is  clear  that
property  rights  are  a  highly  political  issue.
Extremes which can be  found are John Locke’s

Rohan Bennett
bennett@itc.nl

Paul van der Molen

Jaap Zevenbergen

GEOMATICA  Vol. 66, No. 3, 2012, pp. 181 to 193

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

‘Treatise of Government’ (1690), inspiring the USA
Constitution  1789,  and  more  precisely  the  Fifth
Amendment  in  the  Bill  of  Rights  1791,  in  which
founding  father  James  Madison  states  ‘…that  the
rights of persons, and the rights of property, are the
objects, for the protection of which Government was
instituted…’.  Meanwhile,  at  the  other  end  of  the
spectrum Pierre Joseph Proudhon’s ‘Qu’est-ce que la
propriété?’  (‘What  is  property?’,  1841)  inspired
Marx’  and  Engels’  ‘Communist  Manifesto’  (1848)
and finally led to art. 2 of the 1918 Constitution of
the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic, of
which  Lenin [1917]  wrote,  ‘…for  the  purpose  of
attaining the socialization of land, all private prop-
erty  in  land  is  abolished,  and  the  entire  land  is
declared to be national property…’. Later, common
land  ownership,  as  it  exists  in  large  parts  of  the
world, notably Africa, received critical review from
Hardin [1968]  who  argued  that  common  land  use
would lead to overexploitation and major environ-
mental consequences. This premise inspired the first
land reform policy paper of the World Bank [1975].
It  underpinned  land  development  projects  where  a
major  objective  was  the  replacement  of  customary
forms  of  land  tenure  by  individual  land  tenure
(called ‘titling’). The benefits of private tenure were
elaborated in the property rights theory of Demsetz
[1967] who related property rights to the minimiza-
tion of the costs of regulating externalities. Later, the
critical view of Hardin regarding common property
rights was challenged by the publications of Bruce
and Migot- Adholla [1994] and Ostrom et al. [1994],
amongst others. These works inspired a new ‘Land
Policy  Paper  of  the  World  Bank’  [2003],  which
gave more recognition to other forms of tenure than
private property alone.

Thus,  when  dealing  with  property  and—as  a
consequence—with  property  boundaries,  we  enter
a sensitive domain, that goes beyond technical land
surveying  notions.  When  it  comes  to  cadastral
boundaries,  this  is  revealed  through  the  delicate
decisions of a countries’ leadership on how to deal
with property, property rights, and property bound-
aries. The well documented backlog in many coun-
tries regarding the introduction and development of
cadastral  systems  is  often  attributed  to  an  insuffi-
cient  level  of  support  by  the  population  [Fourie
2001; Moyo 2008; Okoth-Ogendo 2007]. The level
of investment interest does not appear to be a major
bottleneck, as donors are ready to invest heavily in
land  administration  projects  [Zakout 2006;  Bell
2007; Adlington 2009]. Rather, the problem is the
difficulty countries face to reconcile and harmonize
the  different  land  tenure  arrangements  that  might
exist  within  a  country’s  setting—a  phenomenon

often  referred  to  as  ‘legal  pluralism’  [von  Benda-
Beckmann 2002].

Bringing different property rights regimes into
one legal framework (or into a singular system of
laws)  is  an  enterprise  for  which  only  recently  has
necessary  experience  been  gained  [Ubink et  al.
2009].  For  cadastral  surveyors,  this  constitutes  an
interesting  conceptual  and  technical  challenge,
namely  how  to  deal  with  the  different  kinds  of
cadastral boundary concepts that relate to different
concepts  of  property.  The  most  extreme  of  those,
for example, is that certain property concepts might
even  deny  the  acceptance  of  a  boundary  to  be
delimited,  such  as  native  title  lands  in  Australia,
notably  spiritual  lands  [Brazenor  et  al 1999].
However,  the  surveyor  might  hope  that  with  the
development of a property law system that includes
boundaries,  the  leadership  of  such  a  jurisdiction
might  apply  the  appropriate  democratic  decision
making  processes,  in  which  all  the  political  chal-
lenges are aligned, so that the land surveyor is pro-
vided  with  a  conceptual  context  in  which  he  can
develop his technical methods to come to a trusted
representation of boundaries on the cadastral map.
The  splintering  of  the  boundary  concept,
caused by this legal pluralism, appears at odds with
the  rather  prescriptive  international  definition  for
cadastres  of  the  International  Federation  of
Surveyors  (FIG):  that  of  ‘a  parcel-based  system’
whose information is geographically referenced to
unique,  well-defined  units  of  land;  the  units  of
which are defined by the formal or informal bound-
aries marking the extent of lands held for exclusive
use by individuals and specific groups of individu-
als  (e.g.  families,  corporations,  and  communal
groups).  In  this  definition,  each  parcel  is  given  a
unique code or parcel identifier. Examples of these
codes include ‘addresses, co-ordinates, or lot num-
bers shown on a survey plan or map’ [FIG 1998].
‘Cadastre  2014’  [FIG 1998]  further  adds  that
cadastres are public inventories (they are authorita-
tive).  Indeed,  one  of  the  authors,  Jürg  Kaufmann,
explained  that  the  boundary  concept  is  crucial  to
such modern cadastres [Kaufmann 2008].

These  disparities  between  legal  and  surveyed
understandings  of  boundaries  eventually  create
administrative  uncertainties  and  property  owner-
ship  disputes  that  are  played  out  in  the  courts.
Boundaries,  as  used  in  a  legal  environment,  are
understood as dimensionless lines, while land sur-
veyors  understand  that  ‘surveying’  means  collect-
ing  geodetic  observations  of  stochastic  variables,
which link to every surveyed boundary a precision
and reliability indicator. For them, the legal dimen-
sionless  line  simply  does  not  exist.  As  far  as  we

182

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

know there are not many publications attempting to
align  legal  and  surveying  notions  of  what  the
boundary line is. In 1984 the Netherlands Geodetic
Commission  published  an  essay  authored  by
Anneveld trying to solve this problem [NCG 1984]
which - as subsequent experience demonstrated—
did not become adopted in the Dutch jurisdiction.
Judges often don’t want to have anything to do with
cadastral surveyors who state that the location of a
cadastral  boundary  is  plus  or  minus  x  centimetres
with a reliability strip of y centimetres or so.

With  this  as  a  background,  the  cadastral  land
surveyor has to find a way to survey, in a fit- for-
purpose  way,  the  boundaries  of  private,  common,
socialist,  customary,  native,  green,  and  spiritual
properties, in a world where the state of cadastres is
still  very  different  and  technology  relentlessly
advances.  This  paper  aims  to  examine  how  these
disparities between legal and surveyed understand-
ings  of  boundaries  will  impact  on  three  emergent
cadastral  issues:  survey-accuracy;  greening  cadas-
tres;  and  crowdsourced  cadastres.  The  issues  are
dealt  with  sequentially  using  a  range  of  source
material  from  a  variety  of  contexts.  Each  issue

reveals  weaknesses,  threats,  and  also  opportunities
for existing boundary fabrics and their management.
The  paper  concludes  with  an  epilogue  outlining
significant findings and implications.

2. The Survey-
Accurate Cadastre

Discourse  on  ‘survey  accuracy’  is  not  new.  It
received  attention  in  all  the  seminal  texts  on  land
registration,  cadastres,  and  land  administration  (c.f.
Rowton  Simpson 1976;  Dale 1976;  Larsson 1991;
Dale and McLaughlin 1999; Williamson et al 2010].
A common view was that higher spatial accuracies in
recorded  boundaries  resulted  in  increased  certainty
for  land  holders,  less  disputes,  and  fairer  taxation.
However, over recent decades, costly land adminis-
tration  interventions  and  their  mixed  outcomes
resulted in the term ‘survey- accuracy’ being linked
to  the  ‘unreasonable’  and  ‘uncertainty-averse  land
surveyor’  [Adlington 2009].  In  broader  discussions
on land governance the terms appear confused, mis-
used,  and  often  politicized.  Despite  this,  the  issue

Table 1: Types of inaccuracy inherent to cadastral processes

Spatial

Textual

Adjudication

None applicable

Inaccurate identification of
attributes of rights holder and
type of rights (e.g. systematic
error is made by repeatedly
listing the current occupier as
the owner, rather than socially
agreed one)

Inaccurate attribute identifiers
placed on boundary markers (e.g.
blunder results in wrong parcel
number being scribed on survey
marker)
None Applicable

Inaccurate lodgment of attribute
details into recording system (e.g.
blunders in re-entering owner
names and details)

Demarcation

Surveying

Recording

Inaccurate location of boundary markers
with respect to adjudicated boundary (e.g.
blunder results in boundary marker being
offset to the actual location)

Inaccurate field measurements or coordi-
nates derived with respect to boundary
marker location (e.g. noise from total
station measurements results in small
inaccuracies in derived coordinates)

Inaccurate creation or lodgment of paper
or digital records with respect to the
field measurements (e.g. systematic
error results in all digitized parcels being
2m offset from actual position)

Most discussions on ‘survey accuracy’ focus on these aspects

183

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

remains central to the disparity between legal and
surveyed understandings of boundaries.

‘Survey accuracy’ is used in a variety of con-
texts and is imbued with a variety of different mean-
ings. In the context of cadastres, the following dis-
tinctions are useful: 1) the difference between cadas-
tral  establishment  and  maintenance  processes  of
adjudication, demarcation, surveying, and recording
[Henssen 2010]; 2) the difference between the spa-
tial  component  and  textual  components  of  legal
boundary  fabrics  [FIG 1998];  and  3)  the  different
causes of inaccuracy that may occur in any measure-
ment process: blunders, systematic errors, and noise.
Combined,  these  create  much  potential  for  dispari-
ties  to  permeate  legal  boundary  fabrics  (Table  1).
Within  a  country  or  state  cadastral  regulations  are
designed to mitigate each of these inaccuracies; but,
one  can  only  go  so  far:  the  technical  and  financial
limitations of the day decide the acceptable inaccu-
racies within the legal boundary fabric.

Contemporary advances in spatial technologies
drove discussions related to improving spatial inac-
curacies of the surveying and recording processes.
For the surveying component, the necessity to sur-
vey parcels to within centimetre accuracy received
much  discussion  [Adlington 2009].  Generally,  it
was  (and  still  is)  suggested  that  urban  parcel
boundaries should be measured to around ten cen-
timetres  (10cm)  [Henssen 2010].  A  higher  toler-
ance  is  usually  considered  acceptable  in  other
areas.  While  not  always  the  case,  many  highly
developed  countries  regulate  for  high  accuracy
cadastral surveys (< 10cm).

Indeed,  some  countries  (for  example  New
Zealand  and  the  Canadian  province  of  Quebec),
completed  resurveys  of  all  boundary  points  to
upgrade  earlier  survey  work  (c.f.  Rowe 2003;
Roberge 2012].  The  Korean  Cadastre  Survey
Corporation’s (KCSC) is undertaking similar con-
siderations [Lemmen 2012]. However, these large-
scale resurvey projects are the exception rather than
the norm.

Meanwhile,  many  lesser  developed  countries
have also aspired to survey accurate practices; how-
ever, the capacity and finances to deliver and main-
tain such standards were often lacking. This remains
the  case.  Bottlenecks  emerged,  cadastral  progress
was  delayed,  and  broader  development  objectives
were  derailed.  Cadastral  accuracy  became  politi-
cized and extreme cases were highlighted. Consider
the  World  Bank  ECA  Land  Assessment  Report
of2009 [Adlington 2009], which lamented, ‘survey-
ors who are unreasonable and insist on very outdat-
ed methods or extreme technical accuracy in survey
work. It is slow painstaking work […] because […]

methodologies and procedures are overly complex’.
Consider  also  the  PhD  dissertation  ‘Modelling
Causes  of  Cadastral  Development’  by  Maria  Silva
[2005] who reported how, in 1993, the government
of Portugal asked the former Institute of Geography
and  Cadastre  to  establish  the  Agricultural  Parcel
Identification System for the country required by the
European Union. The land surveyors of the Institute
declared  it  would  need  500  million  euro  and  100
years for completion. The government then – out of
desperation  –  commissioned  the  Earth  and  Space
Institute, who fixed the job within four years using
aerial photography and orthophotos.

Putting  extreme  claims  aside,  there  can  be  no
debating  that  opportunities  for  higher  surveying
accuracies are now available due to developments in
spatial technologies. The capacity to accurately posi-
tion objects using less amounts of time and money
has  increased.  Much  of  the  increased  capability
emerges  from  the  proliferation  of  augmentation
services for GNSS positioning (e.g. national CORS
networks and so on) [FIG 2010] and the science of
precise point positioning (PPP). In this realm, devel-
opment  is  fast:  Galileo,  GLONASS,  COMPASS
(China), and regional and local systems such as the
Beidou (China), IRNSS (India), and QZSS (Japan)
provide examples. Coupled with the rapid availabil-
ity of high precision earth observation satellites, we
can,  with  reason,  expect  within  the  next  decade  or
so, that high precision capability will be handed to us
on a ‘silver platter’.

If such a reality occurs, the question becomes not
whether or not to be in favour of higher precision
survey methods, since those will presumably be the
new standard, but how eager one is to apply the tools in
a purposeful way. It would be a dereliction of duty if a
cadastral practitioner failed to consider how, or how not,
to utilize these developments within their workflows.

Meanwhile,  the  debate  on  surveying  inaccura-
cies  should  not  be  confused  with  discussions  on
upgrading  ‘records’,  or  what  have  previously  been
described  as  digital  cadastral  databases  (DCDBs)
[Schedu  et  al.  2000].  This  tends  to  be  a  focus  for
countries that first developed DCDBs in the 1970s,
80s, and early 90s. While earlier paper-based cadas-
tral maps may have exhibited survey-accuracy (cen-
timetre  level)  in  the  form  of  survey  plans,  many
early  DCDBs  did  not:  crude  digitization  of  paper
maps resulted in large errors in the cartographic pre-
cision of boundary points and lines in these databas-
es  [Effenberg  et  al.  1999;  Hope  et  al.  2008].  This
meant the digital version of the cadastre was inaccu-
rate, perhaps upwards of twenty metres (20m), when
overlaid  on  more  recently  acquired,  and  accurately
positioned aerial imagery.

184

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

A common conundrum faced by contemporary
managers of these DCDBs was how to harmonize
the  DCDB’s  low  accuracy  coordinates  with  high
precision  measurements  submitted  by  surveyors.
Rather  than  upgrading  the  existing  ones  with  the
newly  surveyed  ones,  a  standard  approach  saw
newly  acquired  coordinates,  with  better  quality,
adjusted to the existing inaccurate coordinates. This
made the new coordinates as inaccurate as the old
ones-  or,  at  best,  resulted  in  incremental  accuracy
improvements  to  only  parts  of  the  DCDB.
However, the low accuracy of DCDBs was increas-
ingly  challenged,  even  for  cartographic  applica-
tions. For example, to find an answer to the ques-
tion:  ‘is  my  boundary  coinciding  with  the  fence
with my neighbour as I always assumed, or is it one
metre  beyond,  as  the  maps  now  tell  me?’  citizens
could  view  the  digitized  cadastral  map  overlaid
with new maps or precise aerial imagery. Concerns
arose when mismatches were discovered: the valid-
ity  of  the  cadastre,  not  just  the  DCDB,  was  ques-
tioned.  If  such  concerns  were  not  well  managed,
the repercussions could be quite significant.

Beyond  issues  of  public  confidence,  many
emergent  applications  of  the  cadastre  appeared  to
require  boundary  representation  that  were  better
than 10m, or even 1m: building management, utili-
ty  administration,  infrastructure  organization,  pre-
cision  farming,  some  navigation  applications,  and
sea-level  rise  response  were  prominent  examples.
Additionally,  along  with  ownership  boundaries,  it
seemed that many of the hundreds of newer prop-
erty rights, restrictions, and responsibilities created
by  governments  might  also  require  some  form  of
spatial measurement and representation [Bennett et
al, 2008; 2008a]. Only reasonable levels of spatial
accuracy  would  enable  the  complex  layering  of
property  interests  to  be  understood  both  on  the
ground  and  cartographically.  Consequently,  it
seemed  that  those  countries  and  states  equipped
with survey accurate cadastres, at least in the areas
that needed it, would be better placed to manage the
new challenges. Where it could be afforded, a sur-
vey-accurate  cadastre  would  fit  most  purposes,  if
not all. It remains as an ongoing aspiration among
many countries, especially as the costs and expert-
ise required for implementation begin to decline.

A  good  amount  of  literature  already  exists  on
how such upgrades might be performed. The major-
ity  was  derived  from  more  developed  countries
including Australian, Israeli, and Malaysian contexts
[c.f. Buyong et al. 1991; Elfick 1995; Spaziani 2002;
Fradkin and Doytsher 2002; Rowe 2003]. Solutions
have already been put into practice. As an example,
to  avoid  public  mistrust  of  the  cadastre,  the

Netherlands  Kadaster  spent  50  million  Euros  to
adjust boundary lines on the DCDB to align with the
topographic lines of the new large-scale topographic
base map.

When, and if this type of project will be required
in other countries, or even all parts of one country, is
a matter for more context-specific discussion. This is
where  the  concept  of  ‘idealization  precision’  could
receive  more  attention,  especially  in  land  adminis-
tration  curricula. The  theory  suggests  that  the  final
precision of a surveyed (boundary) point is not only
dependent  from  the  precision  that  the  survey  tool
delivers, but also from the precision with which the
boundary  can  be  identified  [Baarda  and  Alberda
1960]. This so-called ‘idealisation precision’ differs
for the corner of a stone house, a ditch, and the mid-
dle of a river. The nature of the boundary thus large-
ly determines the point precision achievable. Using
precise measurement devices does not mean that the
boundary can be surveyed at millimetre level. A very
accurate measurement of an impressisly determined
‘point’ does not repair this low idealization position.
Instead,  the  concept  makes  modelling  of  different
boundary  features  possible.  On  the  one  hand,  high
precision  tools  can  be  used  to  survey  and  record
complex 3D urban spaces. On the other hand, cus-
tomary or informal boundaries can be modelled and
defined as they feature in some developing countries
at lower, yet appropriate levels of ‘survey-accuracy’
[c.f. Gustafson 2005].

While  these  technical  discussions  on  ‘survey
accuracy’  are  useful  to  practitioners,  the  surveyor
must not forget to place them into the broader con-
text: there must be alignment with a state or coun-
try’s  social  challenges  and  political  interests.  As
made  clear  by  Augustinus [2010],  in  some  cases
cadastres of completely different design are neces-
sary.  For  example,  in  some  cases,  mostly  remote
areas, where no problems exist with tenure securi-
ty, and there is little reason for government to both-
er citizens with land taxation, land use planning, or
resource  management  measures,  there  may  be  no
need to be concerned with cadastres, let alone their
accuracy  [Lemmens 2010].  In  addition,  in many
countries the judicial system is clogged with
land conflicts. T h e   World Bank Policy Research
Paper (2003) states:

‘…In line with the impact of land rights on economic
outcomes and environmental sustainability, insecuri-
ty  of  land  rights  can  have  a  disastrous  impact  on
social  relations  and  governance.  For  example,  land
conflicts account for a huge share of court cases in
countries  such  as  Mexico,  Nicaragua,  Sri  Lanka,
Cambodia,  and  Ghana.  In  Cambodia,  more than
50% of all court cases  and 85% of all  cases  pre-

185

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

sented  to  the  Commission  on  Human  Rights  were
related to land. Even in Indonesia, land disputes are
reported  to  account  for  65%  of  all  court  matters.
Land  disputes  clog  up  the  courts  in  Ghana  and
Niger, impairing the ability to provide effective jus-
tice  in  other  areas  as  well.  The  large  amount  of
unresolved  land  conflicts,  together  with  arcane
planning regulations, have long been identified as a
serious  impediment  to  (foreign)  investment  and
development  on  what  are  often  the  most  valuable
lands in the country.’.

This  brings  us  full  circle,  back  to  the  disparity
between  legal  and  surveyed  understandings  of
boundaries. The overarching conceptual problem is
the  difference  of  the  notion  of  the  law  of  what  a
boundary is, and the surveyed feature on the ground.
The law often presumes a boundary as a line on earth
without  dimensions:  it  does  not  accept  that  the
boundary can be ‘here but may be also there…’. As
discussed, explanations about idealisation precision,
survey precision, and so on are normally wasted on
judges: the greyness between ‘legal’ and ‘physical’ is
likely  to  remain.  In  more  developed  countries  this
will not be a concern; usually only a handful of dis-
putes are evident each year. However, in less devel-
oped  countries,  the  inability  to  identify  one’s
boundaries  at  any  level  of  accuracy,  individual  or
otherwise, in an authoritative local or state system,
will  continue  to  support  land  disputes,  conflicts,
social unrest, and economic uncertainty.

In summary, survey-accuracy is hardly a preoc-
cupation of uncertainty-averse surveyors. Rather, it
attracts considered thought by measurement practi-
tioners in broader discussions on cadastral and land
administration  design.  In  more  developed  contexts
this relates to discussions on how best to utilize high
precision  equipment  in  cadastral  surveying,  and
methods for upgrading the quality of DCDBs. In less
developed  contexts  discussions  focus  on  adding
flexibility to regulated survey practices, in order to
reduce costs and speed up coverage. In both cases,
the discussions are based on the unchanging premise
that  legal  boundaries,  when  aligned  with  social
boundaries and appropriately recorded, reduce dis-
putes and promote tenure security.

3. Green Cadastres

Traditional understandings of cadastres conjure
imagery of thin black lines on white parchment, of
digital  parcel  boundaries,  parcel  numbers,  and
owner IDs. These are simplified representations of
the  real  world,  idealized  workspaces  or  canvases
for land surveyors and lawyers. The simplicity rep-

resents  strength.  Most  can  appreciate  that  the
recorded lines represent land tenures, land values,
or  land  uses.  However,  this  approach  is  now
arguably  outdated.  The  principles  of  conventional
cadastral  systems  were  developed  in  line  with  the
emergence of capitalism, modern land taxation, and
the  industrial  revolution  [Ting  et  al 1999].  Land,
along with labour and capital, was understood as a
means of wealth production. Consequently, cadas-
tres  generally  treated  all  land  equally.  In  cases  of
colonization, it was merely white space on the map
to be identified, carved up, and allocated. However,
societies and their economies have changed.

The green economy– sometimes also known as
natural  capitalism–  emerged  [Benyus 2002;
Hawkin et al. 2010]. This worldview emphasized a
modified  vision  of  land,  one  that  better  captures
social  and  environmental  value  in  economic  sys-
tems.  National  land  policies  and  laws  began  to
adapt  by  reflecting  these  new  belief  systems
[Williamson et al. 2010]. They did this by creating
new green property rights, restrictions, or responsi-
bilities. In other words, new land regulations were,
and  continue  to  be,  created  to  protect  or  allocate
interests  in  the  environment  [Bennett  et  al. 2008;
2008a]. This might be in the form of a new market
(e.g.  carbon  market),  in  the  form  of  mandatory
information  disclosure  rules  (e.g.  naming  and
shaming polluters of land), or in the form of restric-
tions of activities (e.g. rules against logging). The
land  administrator  might  ask:  ‘Do  our  cadastral
systems need to incorporate these new land rights,
and if so, how?’ In other words, do green property
interests  need  to  be  added  to  conventional  black
and  white  cadastres?  Are  these  green  property
interests really in the form of negative restrictions
which control unfettered enjoyment and also have a
spatial element that is not necessarily aligned with
the parcel fabric or ownership boundary?

Adaptating  to  this  new  paradigm  may  require
many changes in boundary adjudication, surveying,
demarcation,  and  recordation  techniques.  The
green  tenures  are  expressed  spatially  using  the
characteristics  of  nature:  the  tools  for  describing
traditional land parcels, namely bearings, distances,
boundary marks, and straight lines, may not suffice.
For  maximum  efficiency  in  environmental  usage,
alternatives  are  required:  natural  phenomena  are
fuzzy and often changeable and this might need to
be captured in spatial and textual descriptions.

Many  examples  can  already  be  cited.  Marine
environments  and  associated  property  interests  are
highly dynamic [Bennett et al. 2010]—consider, for
example,  a  school  of  protected  blue  fin  tuna.
Meanwhile, legal controls protecting flora and fauna

186

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

or  the  land  interests  of  indigenous  communities
[Brazenor  et  al.  1999]  are  also  often  vague  when
compared to conventional cadastral surveying rules.
These  existing  surveying  approaches  or  even  the
laws  themselves  might  be  inappropriate  when  it
comes  to  spatial  delineation.  At  any  rate,  Ratia
[2010]  provides  an  example  of  natural  boundaries
being captured in Finland’s cadastral system.

“In  Finland  prerequisites  and  process  have  been
defined  for  forming  a  cadastral  unit  with  fixed
boundaries  of,  for  example,  a  conservation  area.
Natural phenomena such as post-glacial rebound or
riverbank  migration  may  again  mean  a  cadastral
boundary no longer runs along the original shore-
line. These sorts of discrepancy can be dealt with in
cadastral  surveys  and  in  the  cadastre.  Little  or  no
importance  has  been  paid  to  the  idea  of  letting  a
boundary follow a moving geographical feature.”

However,

this approach demonstrates the
land administrator’s inclination to capture the
natural environment and make it adhere to a
cadastral system. Not all cadastral systems  take
such an approach with natural boundaries.  Many
systems already possess simple  approaches for
dealing with natural boundaries.

Many land administrators will be familiar with
the  notion  of  ‘fixed  boundaries’  and  ‘general
boundaries’  [Dale  and  McLaughin 1999].  Fixed
boundaries  have  been  precisely  agreed,  measured
and  recorded  using,  for  example,  a  total  station.
General  boundaries  approximate  the  location  as
descriptions  of  physical  features,  while  locations
can change over time. The United Kingdom exten-
sively uses the latter: fixed boundaries represented
on cadastral maps have played a very minor role in
the development of the country’s property markets
[Powell 2005; 2009]. It is believed that less than 20
registered  properties  feature  fixed  boundaries,  out
of over 18 million registered [Maynard 2001].

Australian  states  provide  examples  of  where
fixed  boundaries  are  used  extensively.  However,
like  the  United  Kingdom  (Land  Registration  Act,
2002 (UK)), they incorporate some flexibility with
respect  to  natural  boundaries  too.  The  Registrar
General  of  New  South  Wales  (Registrar  General
NSW, 2012) describes how:

The  doctrine  of  accretion  and  erosion  applies  to
boundaries  of  tidal  lakes  and  both  tidal  and  non-
tidal  streams  and  waterways  where  the  change  in
the position of the bank of the waterway is natural,
gradual and imperceptible.

That is, wherever the waterway goes, the bound-
ary goes, regardless of whether a cadastral surveyor

is around to measure it. In this way, a new survey is
not required every time a boundary changes, which,
by the way, could be quite often. But the challenge is
then,  how  to  keep  our  cadastral  records  up  to  date
with reality? This is discussed later.

Another  example  of  natural  boundaries  is  the
boundary between sea and land. A number of authors
have examined this issue, including Sutherland and
Nichols [2002], Sutherland [2003], and Hoogsteden
and  Robertson [1998].  The  United  Nations
Convention Law of the Sea 1994 [UN 1994] tackled
the problem of the moving waterline by relating ter-
ritorial  zones  to  the  ‘baseline’,  which  fixes  the
boundary between land and sea at ‘low water line’
level  (a  hydrographically  defined  line),  wherever
that may be [Barry et al, 2003].

In  countries  where  indigenous  land  claims  are
lodged (Australia, New Zealand, Canada, USA) and
the phenomenon of ‘native title’ exists, it appears to
be difficult sometimes to plot such traditional estates
by conventional cartographic means, as the bound-
aries of these may be imprecise, permeable and peri-
odically  negotiable  [Neate 1999;  Brazenor  et  al.
1999;  Brazenor
2000;  Sutherland  2003].
Nevertheless  attempts  are  made  to  define  them  in
terms  of  tenure,  topographic  features,  coordinates
and directions.

Buffer zones is another method used to manage
natural  phenomena.  Buffer  zones  around  nature
conservation areas can have a fixed outer boundary,
while  the  natural  phenomenon  itself  can  move.
Buffer  zones  are  frequently  applied  in  Europe,
under the EU Natura 2000 policy [EU 1992]. In the
Netherlands,  analysis  of  administrative  decisions
shows that these outer boundaries are visualized as
‘general boundaries’ and depicted on topographical
maps  and  also  Google  Maps  and  Google  Earth.
However, this approach can needlessly restrict the
use and development of large areas.

Public restrictions regarding people-made phe-
nomena that possess natural characteristics, such as
soil contamination or noise hindrance are also dif-
ficult to capture and record spatially [Bennett et al.
2008].  Moving  contamination  contours  or  noise
produced by airplanes provide examples. These are
sometimes recorded in traditional land administra-
tion  systems,  however  more  often  they  are  not.
Whether spatial representations of such phenomena
are cost effective to capture and maintain requires
careful consideration.

For cadastres, the key issue in all this is the
legal status of a given natural boundary, both on
the ground and in relation to the conventional
legal boundary fabric. To cite Coan  and
Egenhofer [1996]:
‘spatial objects—as natural

187

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

occurrences—have  imprecise  boundaries  that  con-
tinuously  change  over  time,  while  spatial  objects
defined  by  people  are  administrative  objects  with
well-defined boundaries, that might change because
of  discrete  changes’.  Or  equally,  to  cite  Smith
[1995],  ‘spatial  boundaries  can  exist  independently
of human cognitive acts or can (or might) not exist
independently’.  Kaufmann [2010]  also  comments
that  answers  to  the  question  of  precise  boundary
location  can  be  found  only  within  the  legal  frame-
works  and  respective  case  law.  We  believe  this  is
true:  where  natural  objects  and  administrative
objects  coincide  there  is  a  need  for  cadastres  to
respond.  In  these  cases  the  management  of  natural
spatial objects requires action by people (to do some-
thing or to refrain from doing it) to be enforceable by
administrative  legitimation  (law).  The  laws,  and
arguably  a  cadastre,  have  to  define  how  imprecise
natural  boundaries  and  precise  administrative
boundaries relate at a certain point in time. As exam-
ples, we can look to the UNCLOS having solved the
moving  land-sea  boundary  by  fixing  a  baseline,
buffer  zones  are  delimited  to  allow  internal  nature
conservation areas to have changing boundaries, and
legal  boundaries  along  the  banks  of  rivers  follow
natural changes, etc. But, these legal solutions do not
always  assist  on  the  ground  in  real-time:  ‘Am  I
allowed to excavate beside this building a contractor
wants  to  know?’,  and  the  farmer  may  ask  ‘am  I
allowed  to  drain  my  lands?’  In  many  cases,  these
practical  challenges  could  do  with  better  demarca-
tion and retracement mechanisms than those that are
currently available for defining the spatial extent of
the land use controls.

Technological  advances  in  the  geospatial  sci-
ences will provide some solutions. Readily available
high resolution satellite and aerial imagery provide
human scale resolutions. Organizations already exist
that specialize in updating such imagery for specific
areas  on  a  recurring  basis.  This  approach  enables
assessment  and  enforcement  of  certain  types  of
green  boundaries  (e.g.  illegal  forest  clearing).
Meanwhile,  Ambient  Spatial  Intelligence  (see
http://ambientspatial.net/amsi/) enabled through the
use of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) will allow
for the continuous movement of natural boundaries
to be measured and presented visually in real-time,
potentially within a cadastral system [Duckham and
Bennett 2009]. A school of blue fin tuna, a protected
estuary, or a customary grazing route can be tracked,
positioned,  and  represented  using  networks  of  sen-
sors  scattered  around  the  natural  resource. Another
alternative is crowd-sourced boundary information,
but, more on that later. However, it must be said, that
the application of these tools for administering green

boundaries is still in its infancy. Considerably more
investigation is needed.

In summary, within jurisdictions, greater clarity
on  the  legal  and  surveyed  nature  of  new  green
boundaries  is  needed.  Better  understandings  would
assist  in  determining  where  the  administration  of
these boundaries can belong in conventional cadas-
tres or elsewhere. Then suitable adjudication, demar-
cation,  surveying,  and  recording  solutions  can  be
developed.  As  always,  these  should  be  low-cost,
high-speed, and appropriate for the context in which
they are implemented.

4. Crowdsourced Cadastre

In  the  late  2000s,  some  cadastral  practitioners
became  increasingly  interested  in  ‘crowdsourcing’:
the  compilation  of  large  datasets  using  the  data
received from the mobile devices of ordinary people.
In the context of cadastres, citizens using location-
enabled mobile phones could themselves perform (at
least partially) adjudication, surveying, demarcation,
and recording [RICS 2011]. Some suggested it could
revolutionize  cadastral  establishment  and  mainte-
nance  [McLaren 2010]. At  first  glance  the  concept
appeared  highly  innovative,  with  significant  impli-
cations for boundary surveying and legal boundary
descriptions. It promised to help lower costs of reg-
istration, speed up recording, deliver more complete
cadastral  coverage,  and  improve  the  relationship
between  citizens  and  their  governments.  However,
the attentive surveyor might have asked: “Have we
not been through all this before?”

Proponents of crowdsourced cadastres appeared
to agitate for the deconstruction or circumvention of
established  cadastral  and  land  registration  institu-
tions. Daniel Roberge [2012], Chair of Commission
7  2010-2014  of  the  International  Federation  of
Surveyors (FIG), explained how more than 75% of
the world’s 6 billion land interests remained unregis-
tered. Moreover, others suggested that at the existing
rates it would take decades or centuries to get near
full registration in some places [UN Habitat 2012].
Looking  beyond  the  debate  as  to  whether  land
records actually result in economic and social devel-
opment,  the  majority  of  land  administrators  agree
that faster, cheaper, and more fit-for-purpose meth-
ods for building and maintaining cadastres is desir-
able in many countries, if not as a broad and general
proposition. In this way, the crowdsourced solution
provides  another  instrument  in  the  expanding  land
administration toolbox.

There has already been plenty of dialogue on the
crowdsourced  cadastre.  Most  of  it  appears  to  be

188

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

coming from practitioners, or the existing ‘empire’,
as Gavin Adlington [2011] put it. RICS [2011] and
FIG [2011] provided introductory visions and strate-
gies.  Meanwhile,  industry  workshops  and  confer-
ences  continued  to  focus  on  the  issue.  In  January
(http://www.eurosdr.net/start/)
2012  EuroSDR 
organized a crowdsourcing workshop inNottingham
to  bring  together  researchers  with  practitioners
from national mapping organizations. The 9th edi-
tion  of  the  ‘Fill  the  Gap’  seminar  (http://fill-the-
gap.nl/) in April 2012, co-organized and sponsored
(http://www.iicd.org/)  and  Hivos
by 
(http://www.hivos.nl/),  also  examined  crowd-
sourced solutions in less developed contexts. Even
a call for revisiting the deed registration system for
crowdsourced  recording  was  proposed  [van  der
Molen 2012].

IICD 

In practice though, unlike topographic or street
map  equivalents,  where  services  such  as
OpenStreetMap are  leading  the  way,  examples  of
crowdsourced cadastres are not as prominent (yet).
However, McLaren (2012) shed light on numerous
examples.  Experiences  of  co-operation  between
local  communities  in  Laos,  Cambodia,  and
Azerbaijan  with  German  Development  (GIZ  and
KfW)  revealed  that  land  rights  could  be  validated
using  a  mix  of  captured  data,  public  consultation,
and local land committees. McLaren also provided
examples of customary tenure recording by rainfor-
est communities utilizing handheld GNSS, and also
argued  that  costs  could  be  reduced  to  as  little  as
US$3 per parcel. In another case, Kyrgyz Republic
people were hired “off the street”, trained in a few
weeks, given basic equipment and maps, and sent
out to survey almost 4 million parcels. Despite the
crudeness, the records were apparently accepted by
banks and used to access credit. Similarily, in July
2012  the  Global  Land Tool  Network  (GLTN)  and
Slum  Dwellers  International  (SDI)  commenced
‘training-the-trainers’ workshops on Social Tenure
Domain  Model  (STDM)  software.  The  tool  is
designed  to  enable  easier  recording  of  often  neg-
lected forms of tenure, such as those found in slum
areas [Lemmen 2010].

All the work has provided good starting points,
but  a  key  element  still  appears  to  be  missing:  the
crowd  itself.  As  demonstrated  by  OpenStreetMap
and Wikipedia, successful crowdsourcing endeavors
tend to require an active community of participants
and  followers  to  build,  popularize,  and  legitimize
content.  These  communities  tend  to  sit  outside  the
traditional institutions and authorities, are built from
the bottom-up, and most often work under different
sets  of  incentives  [Parker  et  al.  2010].  They  even
maintain their own hierarchies and create their own

institutional norms. A crowd of this nature is not evi-
dent  in  the  cadastral  realm. The  land  administrator
might ask, “Why has it not emerged? Should we wait
a little longer, or do the existing institutional norms
related to property and property boundaries impede
traction  and  legitimization  of  the  crowdsourced
cadastre?”  The  answer  to  the  question  potentially
lies  in  an  examination  of  earlier  times,  when  con-
ventional cadastres were established. Understanding
where, when, and how these cadastral and land reg-
istration systems emerged provide some lessons.

Early  western  property  systems  were  heavily
reliant on citizens for legitimacy. In early deed sys-
tems  documents  were  not  booked  or  checked  by  a
central  agency  [Zevenbergen 2002].  Outside  the
west  a  mere  symbolic  gesture  often  meant  that  a
transfer had occurred [Larsson 1991]. These systems
were far more local in coverage and legitimacy. No
central  government  was  recording  transactions,
insuring  titles,  or  measuring  boundaries  [Henssen
2010];  these  tasks  were  the  role  of  the  transacting
parties,  if  completed  at  all.  It  was  only  with  the
development  of  modern  cadastres  (let’s  say  post
Napoleon)  and  with  the  advent  of  land  registration
systems that central governments increased their role
[Larsson 1991]. Increasingly, they began organizing
adjudication, surveying, demarcation, and recording
tasks.  In  some  cases,  as  seen  in  ‘positive’  or  title-
based  systems,  they  began  examining  and  even
assuring  documents  [Henssen 2010].  Modern  land
administration  institutions  evolved  over  time,  from
the agreed norms and basic rules of a local commu-
nity  (or  crowd),  into  contemporary  institutional
arrangements. These norms took decades if not cen-
turies to embed,. From this viewpoint a number of
predictions  about  the  future  of  the  crowdsourced
cadastre can be made.

Perhaps  the  most  promising  application  of
crowdsourcing  for  cadastres,  in  the  short  term  at
least,  will  be  where,  as  suggested  by  McLaren
[2012],  existing  land  administration  agencies
embrace and nurture the concept. Land administra-
tion agencies will need to change strategic visions,
and  subsequent  operational  workflows.  They
would also need to provide support and incentives
for participants; a sense of ownership in the system
will be paramount. Such innovations might com-
mence on a trial basis or at smaller scales. Over
time they could become essential components  of
operational workflows and strategic  positioning.
The Netherlands  Kadaster, for example, in 2011
began providing web tools to  notaries (usually
from non-technical backgrounds)
for updating
cadastral boundaries at  the time of a  transaction.
More accurate cadastral surveys  occur later when

189

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

time  permits. Additionally,  in  a  pilot  project  com-
menced  in  early  2012,  citizens  helped  to  confirm
Netherlands-Germany border markers using iPhones
and  accompanying  applications.  Eventually  this
approach  could  be  extended  to  cadastral  surveys,
demarcation, and recording processes.

In  places  with  unregistered  customary  lands,
urban slums, or other places where land administra-
tion institutions are not evident, crowdsourced solu-
tions might emerge from the bottom up. These might
be  local  in  scale  and  use,  but,  with  support  from
NGOs, could utilize a low cost and easy to use plat-
form  hosted  somewhere  in  ‘the  cloud’,  or  perhaps
more  locally  using  pen  and  paper  (c.f.  UN  Habitat
2012].  They  may  have  some  relationship  with,  or
recognition  from  existing  state  or  national  land
administration institutions, but, potentially not. The
example from the Kyrgyz Republic springs to mind
here  [McLaren 2012].  Even  if  governments  do  not
legitimize the data, financial institutions and the sur-
rounding community may. This would be enough to
enable some of the simple benefits of land registra-
tion: more tenure security, access to credit, less land
disputes,  and  faster  land  dealings.  A  key  concern
would  be  maintaining  completeness  and  access  to
the  web  server,  the  geodatabase,  or  even  the  paper
records.  While  advanced  technologies  are  being
increasingly  simplified  and  made  freely  available,
they still require a certain level of capacity to imple-
ment and maintain. This includes dealing with issues
of  corruption  and  good  governance.  This  is  where
McLaren’s
land  committees  or
local 
Zevenbergen et al’s [2012] bare foot land recorders
could play a crucial role.

[2012] 

Crowdsourced  cadastres  may  also  emerge  in
direct opposition to conventional cadastres. In these
cases  they  may  represent  outright  antagonism  to
existing land administration institutions and the land
tenure arrangements they support. Rather than being
tools  for  securing  land  tenure  or  enabling  taxation,
these cadastres would be used for exposing corrup-
tion, lack of transparency, and unfair dealings in the
land  sector.  They  could  expose  potential  claims  of
pre-existing land interests in the case of large-scale
land  acquisitions  or  ‘land  grabbing’.  They  would
demonstrate how elites manipulate, undervalue, and
acquire  land  holdings  at  the  expense  of  local  com-
munities.  Much  like  provocative  propaganda  maps
used  heavily  in  the  19th  and  early  20th  centuries,
these cadastres would be tools for garnering political
will and promoting citizen action.

The establishment and longevity of any of these
crowdsourced cadastres is not clear. Issues regarding
data authoritativeness, accuracy, and assuredness are
still  largely  unexplored  due  to  the  newness  of  the

concept. The relationship between the legal and sur-
veyed aspects of the crowdsourced boundaries there-
fore  also  remains  unexplored.  Understanding  this
relationship  and  then  piloting  technical  systems
appears to be the next step in the research domain,
although some communities may not wait.

In  summary,  the  crowdsourced  cadastre  con-
cept adds further complexity to discussions on legal
versus  surveyed  boundary  descriptions:  issues  of
assuredness,  accuracy,  ambiguity,  accessibility,  and
authoritativeness are further compounded. However
it  may  be  that  these  technical  issues  are  resolved,
institutions  take  time  to  build.  Any  cadastre
attempting to operate without the legitimacy of the
‘existing  empire’  will  most  likely  take  decades  to
gain such legitimacy. Those that do carry the support
of governments need to be made permanent through
a mix of incentives and controls. Where existing land
administration  institutions  do  not  carry  legitimacy,
the crowdsourced cadastre might be one of the first
signs  that  a  nation,  country,  or  state  is  undergoing
conflict or reconstruction. Whatever the case, while
the technological approach might be new, the under-
lying driver is not: a cost efficient system for enabling
fair  and  secure  land  access  is  still  the  necessity.
Governments, the private sector, and citizens should
keep this in mind as crowdsourced cadastres begin to
evolve more fully in concept, if not yet in practice.

5. Conclusion

In  his  essay  on  The  Natural  Boundaries  of
Empires,  Finch [1844],  showed  that  artificial
boundaries do not possess inherent strength: physi-
cal geographical boundaries, or ‘bona- fide’ bound-
aries that exist independent of human cognitive acts
(Smith, 1995) produce the most permanent effect,
relative to power of people. Regardless, from time
immemorial,  we  have  constructed  boundaries  that
are  artificial  in  nature.  These  ‘fiat’  boundaries  do
not  exist  independent  of  human  cognitive  acts
[Smith 1995]. However, our social norms and insti-
tutions,  and  more  specifically  our  property  rights,
depend  on  these  boundaries. To  this  end,  we  face
the challenge of attributing inherent strength to our
artificial boundaries. History shows that an exem-
plary tool for this task is the cadastral survey, with
all  its  legal  and  technical  dimensions:  it  links  the
fiat to the bona-fide, the legal to the physical.

As demonstrated, establishing and maintaining
this  link  is  not  an  insignificant  task.  New  chal-
lenges continue to present both threats and oppor-
tunities  to  our  existing  boundary  fabrics.  Survey-

190

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

accuracy  if  often  discussed,  if  not  confused  and
politicized. Without a proper understanding of ide-
alization  precision,  ambiguity  will  impede  dis-
course  and  solutions.  This  paper  recommends  its
inclusion  in  land  administration  education.  Green
boundaries, those inherent in nature rather than cre-
ations of cartography or human acts, require better
tools for adjudication, demarcation, survey, record-
ing, and adherence. Meanwhile, in those large parts
of the world that do not enjoy inherent strength of
boundaries,  participation  of  people  themselves  is
offered  up  as  a  legal  and  survey  solution.  The
approach  harkens  back  to  deeds  style  registration
and might support existing cadastral systems; how-
ever,  it  may  also  be  used  to  publicize  discontent
about them.

Each of the issues require careful consideration
by land practitioners in each country or state. Those
that already operate modern cadastres need to con-
sider how to integrate solutions with other develop-
ments  including  3D  and  4D  cadastres,  real-time
cadastres, and the incorporation of the new proper-
ty  rights,  restrictions,  and  responsibilities.  Those
countries without complete legal boundary frame-
works  must  consider  how  discussions  on  survey
accuracy,  green  cadastres,  and  crowdsourcing  can
be used to expedite completion and sustain mainte-
nance  efforts  at  the  lowest  possible  cost.  Without
balancedconsideration of the technology push and
the demands of people, the unacceptable ‘cadastral
divide’  between  countries  will  remain  just  that
[Bennett 2012; Rekha 2012].

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to acknowledge that sections
of the work are extracted, adapted, or rewritten from
short pieces submitted to GIM International during
2011  and  2012.  GIM  International is  an  industry
magazine for the spatial professions. The pieces are
not  considered  peer  reviewed,  contained  no  refer-
ences,  and  did  not 
the
introductory/conclusion  text  or  ideas.  The  authors
consider the works separate pieces.

include  any  of 

References

Adlington,  G.  2011.  The  Rise  or  Fall  of  the  Cadastral
Empire, Cadastre 2.0: Proceedings International FIG
Symposium  and  Commission  7  Annual  Meeting,
Innsbruck, Austria, September.

Adlington,  G.  2009.  Land  administration  projects  in
Europe  and  Central  Asia,  World  Bank  Washington
USA.

Augustinus,  C.  2010.  Accuracy  No  Solution—Towards
Cadastre  2034—International  Experts  Speak  Out,
GIM International 24(10), October.

Baarda,  W.,  and  J.E. Alberda.  1960.  The  Connection  of
Geodetic  Adjustment  Procedures  with  Methods  of
Mathematical Statistics, Communication presented to
International
the  General  Assembly  of  The 
Association of Geodesists, Helsinki, Finland.

Barry,  M.,  I.  Elema,  P.  van  der  Molen.  2003.  Governing
the  North  Sea  in  the  Netherlands,  Geomatica 57(3)
313-324.

Bell,  K.  2007.  Good  Governance  in  land  administration,

FIG, Hong Kong, China.

Benda-Beckmann,  F.  von.  2002.  Who  is  afraid  of  legal
pluralism, Journal Legal Pluralism, 2002 (47).
Bennett, R., J. Wallace. I.P. Williamson. 2008. Organising
land information for sustainable land administration,
Journal of Land Use Policy, No 25 (2008), 126-138.
Bennett, R., J. Wallace, I.P. Williamson. 2008a. A frame-
work  for  mapping  and  managing  land  interests,
Survey Review, 40(307), January.

Bennett, R.M., A. Kitchingman and J. Leach. 2010. On the
nature and utility of natural boundaries for land and
marine  administration.  In:  Land  use  policy,  27
(2010)3 pp. 772-779.

Bennett,  R.M.  2012.  The  Cadastral  Divide,  Geospatial

World 2(11) (June 2012).

Benyus,  J.M.  2002.  Biomimicry:  Innovation  Inspired  by

nature, Harper Perennial, United States.

Brazenor, C. 2000. The Spatial Dimension of Native Title,

MSC Thesis Melbourne.

Brazenor, C., C. Ogleby, I.P. Williamson. 1999. The spa-
tial dimension of Aboriginal Land Tenure, South East
Surveyors Congress, Fremantle Australia.

Bruce, J., and S. Migot-Adholla. 1994. Searching for land
tenure  security  in  Africa,  World  Bank  Washington
USA.

Buyong, T., W. Kuhn, and A.U. Frank. 1991. A Conceptual
Model  of  Measurement  Based  Multi-Purpose
Cadastral Systems, URISA Journal, p. 35-49.

Coan,  M.,  and  M.J.  Egenhofer.  1996.  The  Ontology  of
Land Boundaries under Natural Change:  erosion and
accretion  of  sandy  shoals  in  Nantucket  Sound,
Proceedings ASPRS/ACSM 22-25 April 1996 3: 306-
313.

Dale,  P.,  and 

Dale,  P.  1976.  Cadastral  Surveys  within 

the
Commonwealth, HMSO, London, United Kingdom.
J.D.  McLaughlin.  1999.  Land
Administration, Oxford University Press, New York,
United States.

Demsetz,  H.  1967.  Toward  a  theory  of  Property  Rights,
The American Economic Review, 57(2) (May 1967).
Duckham,  M.  and  R.M.  Bennett.  2009. Ambient  spatial
intelligence. In: Behaviour monitoring and interpreta-
tion:  BMI:  smart  environments,  ed.  by  B.  Gottfried
and  H.  Aghajan,  IOS  Press,  2009.  ISBN  978-1-
60750-048-3. (Ambient intelligence and smart envi-
ronments ; 3) pp. 319-335.

191

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Effenberg, W.W., S. Enemark, and I.P. Williamson. 1999,
Framework  for  Discussion  of  Digital  Spatial  Data
Flow  within  Cadastral  Systems,  The  Australian
Surveyor, 44(1), pp. 35-43.

Elfick,  M.H.  1995. A  Cadastral  Geometry  Management
System, The Australian Surveyor, pp. 35-40.
EU. 1992. Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992
on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild
fauna and flora.

Fradkin. K., and Y. Doytsher. 2002. Establishing an urban
digital  cadastre:  analytical  reconstruction  of  parcel
boundaries,  Computers,  Environment  and  Urban
Systems, 26(5), September 2002, pp. 447-463.
FIG. 1998. Cadastre 2014 (authors J. Kaufmann and D.
Steudler),  International  Federation  of  Surveyors
Copenhagen, Denmark.

FIG.  1998.  Statement  on  the  Cadastre,  International
Federation of Surveyors Copenhagen, Denmark.
FIG. 2010. Cost Effective GNSS Positioning Techniques,
International  Federation  of  Surveyors  Copenhagen
Denmark.

FIG. 2011. Cadastre 2.0 – Proceedings International FIG
Symposium  and  Commission  7 Annual  Meeting,
Innsbruck, Austria, September, OVG.

Finch,  J.  1844.  The  Natural  Boundaries  of  Empires,
Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans USA.
Fourie, C. 2001. The use of new forms of spatial infor-
mation, not the cadastre, FIG, Nairobi, Kenya.
Gustafson,  B.  2005.  Strategies  and  Technologies  for
Integrated Land Administration and Management of
National  Resources—the  DataGrid  Approach,
Symposium  on  Innovative  Technologies  for  Land
Administratio, Madison WI, US 24-25 June. 
Hardin, G. 1968. The tragedy of the Commons, Science

Vol 162 (13 December 1968).

Hawken, P., A.B. Lovins, and H.L. Lovins. 2010. Natural
Capitalism:  The  Next  Industrial  Revolution,  10th
Anniversary Edition, Earthscan, London, U.K.
Henssen,  J.  2010.  Land  registration  and  cadastre  sys-
tems:  principles  and  related  issues,  Lecture  Notes,
Masters  Program  in  Land  Management  and  Land
Tenure, TU Munchen, Germany.

Hohfeld, W.N. 1913. Fundamental Legal Concepts, New

Haven Yale University Press, USA.

Hoogsteden, C.C., and A.W. Robertson. 1998. On Land-
Off  Shore:  strategic  issues  in  building  a  seamless
cadastre  for  New  Zealand,  Proceedings  FIG
Conference, Brighton 1998,

Hope, S., C. Gordini, and A. Kealy. 2008, Positional accu-
racy  improvement:  lessons  learned  from  regional
Victoria, Australia, Survey Review, 40(207), pp. 29-42.
Kaufmann,  J.  2008.  The  Boundary  Concept:  Land
Management  Opportunities 
for  Sustainable
Development  Provided  by  the  Cadastre  2014
Approach, FIG, Stockholm, Sweden.

Kaufmann., J. 2010. FIG should take the lead—Towards
Cadastre  2034—International  Experts  Speak  Out,
GIM International 24(9), September.

Larsson,  G.  1991.  Land  Registration  and  Cadastral
Systems:  Tools  for  land  information  and  manage-
ment. Longman Scientific and Technical.

Lemmen, C.H.J. 2010. The social tenure domain model :
a  pro-poor  land  tool  :  e-book.  Copenhagen,
International Federation of Surveyors (FIG), 2010.
FIG publication 52, ISBN: 978-87-90907-83-9.
Lemmen,  C.H,J.  2012.  Resurveying  38  Million  Parcels
of Land—GIM International Interviews Young-Ho
Kim, 26(9), September.

Lemmens,  M.  2010.  Towards  Cadastre  2034:  Part  II—
Speak  Out,  GIM

International 
International, 24(10), October.

Experts 

Lenin, V.I. 1917. April Theses, Pravda 26 (7 April 1917).
Locke, J. 1690. Two Treatise of Government, Awnsham

Churchill Publishers, London, U.K.

Marx,  K,  and  F.  Engels.  1848.  Communist  Manifesto,

Communist League, London, U.K.

Maynard,  J.  2001.  Digital  Boundaries  in  England  and
Wales, Surveying World, 9(4) (May/June 2001).
McLaren,  R.  2010.  Can  the  Innovative  Use  of  Mobile
Land
Phones 
Administration  Services?,  FIG  Congress  2010.
Facing  the  Challenges—Building  the  Capacity,
Sydney, Australia, April 11-16, 2010.

Support  More 

Effective 

McLaren,  R.  2012.  Crowdsourcing  support  of  land
administration:  A  new,  collaborative  partnership
between  citizens  and  land  professionals,  World
Bank  Land  and  Poverty  Conference,  April  24,
Washington D.C., United States.

Molen,  P.  van  der.  2012.  The  Deed  System  Revisited,

GIM International 26(7) (July, 2012).

Moyo,  S.  2008.  The  African  Land  Question,  Working

Paper CODESRIA, Dakar, Senegal.

Neate,  G.  1999.  Mapping  landscapes  of  the  mind:  a
cadastral  conundrum  in  the  native  title  area,  FIG
Bathurst Seminar.

NCG.  1984.  Zekerheid  omtrent  eigendomsgrenzen  van
onroerend goed (‘Security concerning property bound-
aries of real estate’) (author J. Anneveld), Netherland
Geodetic Commission, Delft, The Netherlands.
Okoth-Ogendo,  H.W.O.  2007.  The  Last  Colonial

Question, NORAD, Oslo.

Ostrom,  E.,  R.  Gardner,  and  J.  Walker.  1994.  Rules,
Games  and  Common  Pool  Resources,  Ann  Arbor,
University of Michigan Press, USA

Parker,  C.J., A.  May  and  V.  Mitchell.  2010. An  explo-
ration  of  Volunteered  Geographic  Information
stakeholders, GISRUK, University College London.
Payne,  G.  2004.  Typology  of  land  tenure  (editorial),

Habitat International 28(2004).

Powell,  D.J.  2005.  Neighbours  at  war  (Boundary
Disputes),  Proceedings  FIG  Conference,  Cairo
April 16-21, 2005.

Powell,  D.J.  2009.  Property  boundaries  in  England  and
Wales: ‘Cadastre?- No thank you’, Proceedings The
Boundary, Norway 2009.

Proudhon, P-J. 1841. Qu’est-ce que la propriété (‘What is

property’), Librairie Pérot, France.

Ratia,  J.  2010.  Finnish  Perspective—Towards  Cadastre
2034—International  Experts  Speak  Out,  GIM
International 24(9), September.

Registrar  General  NSW.  2012.  Registrar  General’s
erosion,  NSW

Directions—Accretion 

and 

192

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

RICS.  2011.  Crowdsourcing  for  Land  Administration,

Policy Paper, Washington USA.

Government—Land  and  Property  Information,
http://rgdirections.lpi.nsw.gov.au/deposited_plans/n
atural_boundaries/accretion_erosion
(accessed
September 9, 2012).

Rekha, B. 2012. Living in a two speed world, Geospatial

World 2(11) (June 2012).

RICS, United Kingdom.

Roberge, D. 2010. Time Will Tell – International Experts
Speak Out, GIM International, 24(10), October.
Roberge,  D.  2012.  Land  Governance  Key 

to
Sustainability:  GIM  International  Interviews,
Daniel Roberge, GIM International, 26(3), March.
Rowe, G. 2003. The Survey-Conversion of Project-mak-
ing  a  survey-accurate  cadastre  in  New  Zealand  a
reality,  Journal  of  New  Zealand  Institute  of
Surveyors, No 293, June. 

Rowton Simpson, S. 1976. Land Law and Registration,

RICS Surveyors Publications London, U.K.

Schedu, A., W.W. Effengerg, and I.P. Williamson. 2000.
Inremental  update  and  upgrade  of  Spatial  Data,
Zeitschriftfur  Vermessungswesen,  125(4),  pp.  115-
120.

Silva, M. 2005. Modelling causes of cadastral develop-
ment:  cases  in  Portugal  and  Spain  during  the  last
two  decades,  Ph.D.  Dissertation,  Aalborg
University, Denmark.

Smith, B. 1995. On drawing lines on a map, in Frank, U.,
Kuhn, W., Mark, D.M., Spatial Information Theory,
COSIT Springer, Berlin.

Spaziani,  D.  2002.  Constructing  a  Survey  Accurate
Digital Cadastre, FIG XXII International Congress,
Washington, D.C. USA, April 19-26 2002.

Sutherland,  M.  2003.  Characteristics  of  Marine
Boundaries  and  Marine  Boundary  Information
Required to Support Canadian Coastal and Marine
Governance,  Proceedings  FIG  Conference Paris
2003.

Sutherland, M., and S. Nichols. 2002. Marine Boundary
Delimitation  for  Ocean  Governance,  Proceeding
FIG Conference, Washington, U.S. 

Ting, L., I.P. Williamson, I. Parker, and D. Grant. 1999.
Understanding the Evolution of Western Societies’
Land Administration Systems: A basis for cadastral
reform, Survey Review, 35 (272) pp. 83-102.
Ubink, J., A. Hoekema, and J. Assies. 2009, Legalising
Land  Rights,  Leiden  University  Press,  The
Netherlands.

UN. 1994. United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea,  http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agree-
ments/texts/unclos/closindx.htm (accessed September
9, 2012).

UN Habitat. 2012. Designing a land records system for

the poor, Report 2/2012, Nairobi, Kenya.

Williamson,  I.P.,  S.  Enemark,  A.    Rajabifard,  and  J.
Wallace.  2010. Land Administration and Sustainable
Development, ESRI, United States.

World  Bank.  1975.  World  Bank  Land  Reform  Sector

World Bank. 2003. Land Policy for Growth and Poverty
Reduction (author Deininger K.), Washington USA.
World Bank. 2012. World Bank Doing Business Reports

(annually), Washington USA.

Zevenbergen, J.A. 2002. Systems of Land Registration-
Aspects  and  Effects,  PhD  Dissertation,  TU  Delft,
The Netherlands.

Zevenbergen, J.A., C. Augustinus, and D. Antonio. 2012.
Designing  a  Land  Records  System  for  the  poor:
Secure land and property rights for all: UN-HABI-
TAT  Report  2/2012:  e-book.  Nairobi,  UN-HABI-
TAT,  University  of  Twente  Faculty  of  Geo-
Information  and  Earth  Observation  (ITC),  Global
Land Tool Network (GLTN), 2012. ISBN: 978-92-
1-132442-6.

Zakout, W. 2006. Good Governance in World Bank sup-
ported land administration projects,  FAO/World
Bank, Rome 2006.

Authors

Rohan Bennett (31) is an Assistant Professor at
the  University  of  Twente,  ITC  Faculty  (NL).  He
in  Geomatics  and
holds  a  double  degree 
Information  Systems  from  The  University  of
Melbourne.  He  also  holds  PhD 
in  Land
Administration from the same institution.

Paul  van  der  Molen (62)  holds  a  degree  in
Geodesy from Delft University of Technology. He
is former chair of FIG Commission 7 (2002-2006),
former FIG Vice President (2007-2008) and a FIG
honorary  member.  He  holds  the  chair  in  Cadastre
and  Land  Administration  at  Twente  University,
Faculty ITC (NL).

Jaap  Zevenbergen (47)  is  Professor  of  Land
Administration  Systems  and  Land  Management  at
The  University  of  Twente,  ITC  Faculty.  He  holds  a
Geodetic Engineering degree from TU Delft, a degree
in Dutch Law from Leiden University, and a PhD on
Systems of Land Registration from TU Delft. o

193

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/07/20For personal use only. 