The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 52 No. 1
q The British Cartographic Society 2015

pp. 1–1

February 2015

Editorial

First of all, I should like to thank all former Editors, most
recently, Ken Field, for their stewardship of The Carto-
graphic Journal over its ﬁrst 50 years. Supported with the
dedication and diligence of editorial teams and reviewers,
they have nurtured this ﬂagship publication of the British
Cartographic Society to its present state as a leading
international periodical in cartography. I therefore feel very
privileged to have been given the opportunity to be Editor at
the beginning of the next chapter in its future.

My goal is simply to publish the best new research in our
growing and ever-changing ﬁeld, building on the reputation
of the Journal as the periodical of choice for emerging and
established authors from around the globe. To this end, I
have decided to broaden the editorial executive of the
Journal in the form of its two most recent Editors, Prof.
Peter Vujakovic and Ken Field, as Associate Editors. Their
experience and familiarity with the scope of the Journal will
both enhance and facilitate the editorial process. They are
joined by a new face, Martin Davis (doctoral student and
University Instructor at Canterbury Christ Church Univer-
sity), as Editorial Assistant. Martin will be coordinating the
Reviews, an important aspect of the Journal which I am
especially keen to revitalise (and whilst on the topic, let me
stress that I have never condoned anonymous reviewing – if
authors are brave enough to nail their colours to the mast, I
expect the same of reviewers).

Although familiar with the team at Maney, I look forward to
working with Laura Bradford and Nick Hunt and their
colleagues more closely on ways in which the Journal can better
serve its authors and readers. It is therefore with pleasure that I
can announce that under a new agreement with Maney, all
Individual Members of the Society will receive online access to
the Journal, and Corporate Members will be offered a special
introductory rate to subscribe to the online version. Of course,
Members will continue to receive their printed copy, but online
access presents a superb additional beneﬁt.

Online submission and review has been in place for some
time and has certainly raised the number of excellent papers
we publish each year, but I should also mention Advance
Articles, our fast-track system of publishing content online
ahead of the printed issue. This is especially useful for
authors who are seeking to publish cutting-edge peer-
reviewed research as soon as possible, allowing their work to
be indexed and accessed more quickly.

The papers in this Issue of the Journal were all published as
Advance Articles, and as such have already attracted numerous
citations before going to print. Characterising the breadth and
depth of cartography by contributors from around the globe,
they are organised into the Journal’s familiar sections. The
Refereed section brings together four contributions towards the
areas of map use, design, and ethics. How novice and expert
map users utilise their memory in map reading is examined in
detail by Kristien Ooms and her colleagues, which is followed by

DOI: 10.1179/0008704115Z.000000000155

Frank Dickmann’s helpful account of how maps can be enriched
through the incorporation of QR (Quick Response) codes. We
return to understanding map users’ cognitive behaviour
through the valuable insights provided by Izabela Gołe˛biowska’s
research before Teresa Scassa and her co-authors present an
important new framework for understanding the ethical and
legal issues surrounding the mapping of traditional knowl-
edge in a digital environment.

The Observations section of shorter papers includes
proposals for more effective feature ontologies – for both
land and sea – and begins by explaining how users of tactile
mapping can beneﬁt
from new developments in 3D
printing. These are complemented by a Survey paper that
provides new guidelines with regard to the design of online
maps and map-viewers for a growing ageing population.

So as I begin my time as Editor, I look forward to sharing

the world’s best cartographic research with you.

Alexander J. Kent
Canterbury Christ Church University
Editor, The Cartographic Journal

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

With a life-long passion for
maps, Alex studied Geogra-
phy and Cartography at
Oxford Brookes University
and took an MPhil in GIS
and Remote Sensing at
Queens’ College, Cam-
bridge. Following his PhD
on the stylistic diversity in
European topographical
mapping from the Univer-
sity of Kent, he became
Head of the Cartographic
Unit at the University of
Southampton and is now
Senior Lecturer in Geography and GIS within the School of
Human and Life Sciences at Canterbury Christ Church
University. Aside from teaching and research in cartography
and in political and European geography, his career has
involved managing and consulting on a variety of geospatial
projects, from cartographic editing, design and production
for An Atlas of the Social and Intellectual History of Islam at
the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies to building a GIS for
Action Contre la Faim in Colombo, Sri Lanka. Alex is the
current Vice-President of the British Cartographic Society
and Co-convenor of the BCS Design Group. A Fellow of the
BCS and of the Royal Geographical Society, he is a member
of the UK Cartography Committee and Vice-Chair of the
ICA Map Design Commission.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

