The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 51 No. 4

pp. 287–290 November 2014

Editorial: Time and tide…

…wait for no man, or so the saying goes. Well, as far as my
contribution as Editor of The Cartographic Journal goes,
my time’s up. When you realize your biographical picture
no longer looks anything like you, it’s time to move on so
this is my ﬁnal issue as the steward of the world’s foremost
scholarly publication on cartography.

I recall a comment I read somewhere in early 2005
from then President Seppe Cassettari that Peter Vujakovic
was going to step down as Editor and that the British
Cartographic Society invited expressions of interest to
become the new Editor. All terribly formal but I thought
I’d throw my hat into the ring, not imagining the
conversation which went something like this:

Me: ‘Hi Seppe, I see you’re in need of a new Editor
and just wanted to say I’d be happy to give it a go if you
haven’t others already in line’

Seppe: ‘Hi Ken, Thanks. No-one else has been in

touch so you’re it’.

Me: ‘oh, OK then…thanks.’
I’m probably paraphrasing…but this isn’t far off the
conversation we had. My ﬁrst issue was Volume 42, Issue
2 in September 2005 after meeting Peter in a supermarket
car park in Cambridge to transfer two cardboard boxes full
of paper that equated to The Journal’s ofﬁce. It amounted
to papers in various stages of review and proof checking.
Peter managed things ﬁne with this approach but it wasn’t
for me and it was about this time that I wondered what on
earth I’d got myself into. Too late to back out, I got to
grips with the job and made a few changes to how we
processed submitted papers (to reduce the paper-pushing)
and before I knew it, sometime in 2010 I realized I’d been
Editor for nearly 5 years. I wondered if there was a
maximum number of years one could be Editor because I
didn’t wish to outstay my welcome so after digging
around in the BCS statutes it was apparent that the term of
Editor was for 4 years and that carrying on for a further
term was a matter for Council to decide. As I was already
beyond the term I mentioned this to then President Bob
Lilley and was asked the simple question whether I’d be
happy to just carry on as no-one else had offered their
services and no-one had complained about my handling of
the job. I agreed, because I enjoyed the job.

A few more years passed and I then found myself beyond
the 8 year mark of a second ‘ofﬁcial’ term. Again, no-one
had pulled me aside but really…there’s only so long one
person should have the honour of being the Editor of any
publication so I’m stepping aside to let someone else take
up the reigns. I’ve not been pushed. There’s been no
clamour to depose me (at least none that I’m aware of) but
it’s time and it’s my decision. I’ve had an absolutely

DOI: 10.1179/0008704114Z.000000000148

fantastic time being Editor and it’s been a privilege. I’ve
had the freedom to get on with the role with little
interference from the BCS Council and I hope I’ve
maintained the standards expected. That’s for others to
judge but every time I’ve sat and written one of these
editorials I begin with the weight of knowledge that I have
tremendous freedom to write what I write and with that
comes a hefty responsibility to get it right. I’ve always tried
to throw around a few contentious ideas…not always my
personal belief (it’s up to you to discern where I’m playing
‘devil’s advocate’) but I’ve always held dear the importance
of an editorial that is designed to provoke thought,
comment and debate. Cartography often needs agitating
to generate passion and to move things forward. I know
I’ve gone close to the edge a few times but that’s by design
and because I have a strong commitment and passion for
cartography in all forms. I shall miss the luxury of having an
open platform to pontiﬁcate but it’s time someone else
shared their perspective from the editorial pulpit.

So here we are, my last editorial. I’ve overseen 37 issues
across 10 volumes which is nearly one-third of all the issues
of the last 50 years. I’ve handled nearly 500 papers
through the review process and seen some really great
Special Issues from guest Editors and contributors. I wrote
my ﬁrst editorial 24 hours after narrowly missing being in
the wrong place at the wrong time in London as I
commuted to work on the day of the London bombings in
July 2005. That was only 5 months after an internet search
engine company had released something called Google
Maps onto our desktops which has characterized the
changing landscape of cartography during my tenure. I was
considering leaving a year or so ago but couldn’t give it up
on the cusp of our 50th Anniversary celebrations and the
publication of our Landmarks in Mapping book of which
we’re extremely proud.

I began my ﬁrst editorial with a metaphor from Doctor
WHO and the idea that editors get regenerated to sustain
a series. Well, I’m now simply the Eighth Editor of The
Cartographic Journal. Doctor WHO, of course, began in
late 1963 at about the same time the British Cartographic
Society was formed and only a couple of months ahead of
the ﬁrst issue of The Cartographic Journal in June 1964.
Since then, while we’re about to embark on our 8th
regeneration from the Eighth to Ninth Editor, Doctor
WHO has accelerated on to its Twelfth Doctor. Like any
good episode of the science ﬁction series, I’ll toy with you
a little longer before revealing the Ninth Editor…for
now, Table 1 shows you the history so far.

What other changes have we seen over the last nine
years? The Journal has moved from 3 to 4 issues per year

288

Table 1. The Cartographic Journal Editors

Editor

K. S. Field

P. Vujakovic

D. R. Green

D. J. Fairbairn

G. R. P. Lawrence

G. E. D. Cole

A. D. Jones

J. S. Keates

Incarna-
tion

Start
Issue

End
Issue

Issues

Years

8th
Editor
7th
Editor
6th
Editor
5th
Editor
4th
Editor
3rd
Editor
2nd
Editor
1st
Editor

2005:
42.2
2002:
39.1
1995:
32.1
1988:
25.1
1978:
15.1
1974:
11.1
1970:
7.2
1964:
1.1

2014:
51.4
2005:
42.1
2001:
38.2
1994:
31.2
1987:
24.2
1977:
14.2
1973:
10.2
1970:
7.1

37

9

14

14

20

8

7

13

9

3

6

6

9

3

3

6

and at the same time fended off suggestions to move to 5
or 6 issues. You can spread yourself too thin and 4 issues is
a good number, particularly in light of the impending
publication of a new international Journal of Cartography
by ICA. The paper box in the boot of the car has been
transformed into an online submission and peer review
system that has greatly facilitated the editorial process.
We’ve gone from a situation where most papers
submitted were published hand-to-mouth style to one
where we now have a healthy rejection rate that drives
standards up and ensures only the very best papers are
published. Authors now also beneﬁt
from advance
publication so, currently, there are about 20 papers
already published online which allows authors to get value
out of their work ahead of being published in the print
version. Subscribers to the journal can see these advance
articles already and there should be additional beneﬁts for
readers announced shortly (I wish I could announce them
but I’ve got to leave something for the next Editor).
We’ve also formally become an afﬁliate publication of the
International Cartographic Association and played a
central part in disseminating the scholarly work from
the International Cartographic Conferences in Paris in
2011 and Dresden in 2013. This relationship should
continue as we head towards the next ICC in Rio in 2015.
The relationship of time and cartography also seems to
be a good general theme for this, my ﬁnal editorial too.
There’s a perception that GIS and cartography has always
had a struggle to adequately deal with and represent time.
The notion that a phenomena that varies temporally is
difﬁcult to model perhaps gives rise to the idea that static
layers are unable to capture such variability. If this ever
were the case, it’s not so any more. Our ability to handle
large temporal datasets is well supported. Adding time
and date ﬁelds to data allows you to conﬁgure and work
with temporal dimensions which at its basic level allows
you to animate time slices and control playback. Many
online map services also have a temporal aspect. For
instance live ﬂow data from stream gauges is one example

The Cartographic Journal

of data that updates in real time and which can be
consumed in web maps. Functionality and support for
temporal visualization is now core across many different
desktop and online software platforms.

Creating animations of thematic layers only goes so far
though and sometimes it’s difﬁcult to gain a detailed
impression of the message in the map if you’re trying to
assimilate a slice of your data from one time period with
another that ﬂashes brieﬂy then moves to the next time
period. A good example of this problem is the animated
choropleth where trying to build a mental picture of change
over time is challenging as the map continually changes.
We’ve also recently seen rise of a whole spate of what have
been referred to as ‘ectoplasm’ maps – the mapping of
various social media feeds using ﬂashing blobs of colour.
Figure 1 shows a still from the animated CartoDB map of
people following Robert Downey Jr after he joined Twitter.
There’s just nothing particularly substantive about
making maps like this. Once you’ve seen one you’ve seen
them all. The digital tools make making the map very
simple but it doesn’t mean it has purpose. It’s quite
literally a data dump on a map. There’s no sorting, sifting,
no trying to extract an interesting story or communicate a
highlight (no pun intended though this would be a useful
thing to do!). Light is cumulative and brighter 5 more
but why are we so fascinated by ’more’ of everything?

When I look at the map I see ﬂashing light but after a
short while I lose sight of the light area (most tweeting in
relative terms..and really, the only metric this map is capable
of displaying) because the almost strobe effect of the single
tweets in the sparse areas becomes more prominent. Is this
really the right message? And when the map is saturated
with tweets what are we seeing? Anything?

Maps should communicate something and, to me at
least, this new breed of ﬂashy maps says nothing. People
say something about something online and we get a map
of where people say it. But the map reveals nothing.
Technically I like the effect but it’s a case of a potentially
interesting technique looking for a reason to be used.

Figure 1. Robert Downey Jr
EhmewFyAdf for animation)

joins Twitter

(see http://t.co/

Editorial

289

I’ve yet to ﬁnd a version of this mapping approach used
successfully. Maybe in time?

Our thirst for real-time information across news media
and social media is driving our demand for maps that give
us immediate information. Time is as hotter a topic than
ever for cartography and this was even reﬂected by
the North American Cartographic Information Society
(NACIS) who chose ‘Cartography and Time’ as its
overarching conference theme in Pittsburgh, PA recently.
The conference gave rise to a number of interesting talks
but one thing struck me and that’s how many of our new
map-makers seem to wrestle with issues that cartographers
might consider already solved. Haven’t we solved how to
map time before? Perhaps the most widely known example
is the classic mid 1800s map of Napoleon’s 1812 march on
Moscow by Charles Minard (Figure 2).

Minard gave us an exquisite map that shows change
over time using a simple ﬂow map to denote the losses of
Napoleon’s Grand Army. Similarly, Florence Nightingale,
a British nurse in the Crimean War some 150 years ago,
in military
worked to improve sanitary conditions
hospitals. Her reports included rose diagrams (colloquially
referred to as a coxcomb) - an efﬁcient, elegant way of
representing the causes of mortality in the British army that
supported multiple comparisons across time (Figure 3).

The coxcomb is a simple yet effective technique for
mapping multivariate data that exists at a point and also
which varies over time. The point here is that we’ve invented
techniques to handle the multivariate characteristics of time
and which are deserving of a renaissance as we search for
ways to map our new temporal datasets. It’s useful to look
back in cartographic history once in a while to see if we
haven’t already tackled some of the problems that seem to
resurface every now and then. There’s a considerable body
of cartographic research and practice that has gone before
from a time past that can serve current and future needs with
perhaps a little work. That’s not to say new techniques are of
no value, but merely creating a technological solution that
happens to be called a map doesn’t serve cartography well.
In pointing to classic examples of temporal cartogra-
phy, I’m not decrying technological
innovation and
progress - just lamenting the decline of the thought that
people used to have to put into making a map and
techniques that have already been invented to do so. If it

was worth making it’d take time...and so that cost alone
was a good way to decide if making the map was worth
the investment. Minard and Nightingale must have
poured over their ideas before creating their ﬁnal maps.
Iterating and experimenting led to something excep-
tional. Pouring temporal data through any software to
create a generic map shortcuts the design process.
Flashy, ectoplasm maps can be made in minutes but
without any sort of cartographic craft you end up
making maps of ﬂashing lights that simply wastes time.
Onto the contents of this ﬁnal issue of 2014 which
reﬂect the fascinating diversity of cartographic research but
they’re all connected in some way to the notion of time.
The refereed papers section begins with what I sense will
become a landmark paper by Fabio Veronesi and Lorenz
Hurni on analytical hillshading. For decades, digital
cartographers have sought the holy grail of a hillshading
algorithm that matches
the very best hand drawn
techniques of past generations. It’s an example of how
current research looks to the past as a reference point in
order to create something new with modern technology
and the potential to serve many thousands of map-makers.
Over time, many have tried to varying degrees of success in
creating a high quality hillshade and, ﬁnally, Veronesi and
Hurni’s approach creates some of the most beautiful
analytical hillshading yet seen. Their paper discusses the
methods and they also include links to a tool for wider use.
Colin Arrowsmith et al. take an historical perspective
and explore the geographies and cartographies of cinema
use in post-war Australia. An unusual historical and
complex dataset is analysed to explore patterns of use as
well as to provide the cinema historian with interpretive
insight and maps that bring a new aesthetic to their study.
Time is also a framework of study for Weihua Dong et al.
who deal with far shorter timespans in their paper on eye
tracking techniques to assess enhanced imagery basemaps.
Understanding how we use maps, where our eyes gaze
ﬁrst and how that gaze develops over the seconds we look
at a map gives us important understanding of map use.
This, of course, can lead to improved design so our map

Figure 2. Napoleon’s march on Moscow by Charles Minard, 1869

Figure 3. Florence Nightingale’s Diagram of the Causes of mortal-
ity in the Army in the East

290

The Cartographic Journal

products ﬁt the way we view modern web maps on a
variety of digital devices. The way in which we use maps is
also the basis for the work by Tomasz Opach et al. who
examine how people explore multi-component animated
maps. These include multiple linked space-time visualisa-
tions which create conﬂicting data windows of related
content. Their empirical study is important for establish-
ing the limitations of such techniques in terms of
attention overload and split attention effects. William
Cartwright and I go back in time and pay our respects to
the classic Underground Map by Harry Beck. Ostensibly a
reﬂection on the importance of the map to modern
cartography, we explore how the map has spawned
countless imitations and how these may, in some ways,
be seen to detract from Beck’s legacy.

We also offer some discussion on the impact of
exploitation of cartographic icons on cartography more
generally. In the Observations section by Bernhard
Jenny et al. consider what they refer to as the ‘time-
intensive’ construction of rock drawing, establishing a
set of principles to deﬁne classic Swiss style relief
portrayal. They create a systematic classiﬁcation of
hachure-based techniques and also discuss their combi-
nation with other relief techniques such as contour lines.
Finally, we include a Survey paper which intentionally
together research and papers to provide an
draws
overview of
the state-of-play. The review looks at
research in uncertainty visualization over the last few
decades and draws together some unifying themes and
suggestions for future evaluation in the ﬁeld.

And as we’re about out of time, it’s time to reveal the
Ninth Editor. This is where we modify the regeneration
metaphor of Doctor WHO a little. Normally, when the
Doctor regenerates his assistant carries on as an assistant,
bafﬂed by the new quirks and eccentricities of the new
incarnation. That won’t happen here because the Ninth
Editor is the current Assistant Editor Alex Kent. Alex has
been terriﬁc to work with over the years and has ably
supported me as Editor. He is well placed to take charge
and steer his own version of this TARDIS into a new
space. I’m not completely jumping ship though and will
be the Assistant Editor while Alex does the hard work
but I warmly welcome him to the post and can assure
you that our journal is in very good hands.

Finally, I’d like to end by thanking some very
important people who have supported me during my
tenure as Editor. First and foremost, my partner Linda
Beale encouraged me to get in touch with Seppe in
2005. I wasn’t conﬁdent I could take on the role but she
gave me the conﬁdence to put my name forward (i.e.,
blame her). The job of Editor is extra curricula and her
support as I spent evenings and weekends dealing with
papers and writing editorials has been immeasurable. My
thanks also to the various Presidents and Council
members of the British Cartographic Society who I have
served and who have supported me as Editor. Maney

Publishing have always been fantastic to work with and I
hope they continue to be involved as publishers of The
Journal for a long time to come. I’d particularly like to
extend my thanks to Samantha Green, Nick Hunt and
Laura Bradford whose tireless work helps get the journal
out in such a beautiful state but there’s many more
working behind the scenes who also deserve my
gratitude. Thanks particularly to my employers, both
Kingston University and now Esri, who have both given
me the support needed to do the work of an Editor
which has been a tremendous help. Without
their
understanding of the commitment needed they could
have made life difﬁcult to juggle the challenges of a day
job with this extra-curricula role. Editorial colleagues
have been great to work with and many have become
very good friends. Their commissioning roles as well as
ability to offer sage advice and help turn around reviews
rapidly is always critical. Having a strong Editorial Board
that truly represents global cartography in academic and
commercial contexts gives the journal signiﬁcant cred-
ibility. Without the many authors and reviewers there
would be no journal and although it’s impossible to list
everyone I’ve worked with I truly appreciate the patience
and efforts you’ve made to get the papers to publication.
Authors and reviewers are the lifeblood of any publica-
their
tion and the Editor can really only marshall
considerable efforts. Finally, to our readers – there is
no journal unless people are interested in reading and
learning about cartography. Thank you for your support
and kind words about my editorials over the years. I’ve
had a blast, though I’m looking forward to not waking
up in the middle of the night struggling to think of
something to write for an editorial past its due date.
Now, where did I put my sonic screwdriver…

Kenneth Field
October 2014
Redlands, CA

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Kenneth Field works in Car-
tographic Research and Develo-
pment at Esri Inc and was for-
merly Principal Lecturer and GIS
Course Director
at Kingston
University London. He holds a
PhD in GIS from Leicester
University and has presented and
published widely on map design. He is a Fellow of the British
Cartographic Society, Royal Geographic Society and a
Chartered Geographer (GIS). He is also Chair of the ICA
Commission on Map Design (mapdesign.icaci.org), main-
tains a personal blog (cartonerd.com) and tweets (@kenneth-
ﬁeld). Don’t forget you can follow The Cartographic Journal
on Twitter (@CartoJnl). He’s about to be the ex-Editor and
new Assistant Editor of The Cartographic Journal and has
ﬁnally got round to updating his biographical picture.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

