The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 277–282 December 2003

277

S U R V E Y

‘Here is the Beech tree!’ Understanding Tactile Maps in
the Field

Ann Gardiner* and Chris Perkins**

*Tactility, 5 Greenacres, Frodsham WA6 6BU, UK.
**School of Geography, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.

This paper presents a successful approach to learning tactile map skills in the ®eld. During a three-phase project,
visually impaired primary school children explored a route between a ®eld studies centre and the village church. The
®rst stage involved using non-visual senses to discover speci®c landmarks and the character of the parkland surroundings.
Secondly, the children made their own tactile sketch maps of the route, and discussed the choice of symbols for a vacuum
formed tactile map of the study area. Finally, a more detailed exploration of the route was accomplished with the help
of a tactile map that set the path in the context of its surroundings.

INTRODUCTION

Much reported research into children’s map use has centred
on the ability to draw maps, rather than the use of maps in
the (cid:142)eld (Catling, 1979; Matthews, 1992). Catling (1980)
argues that sighted primary school children are able to use
maps in the (cid:142)eld to locate landmarks, navigate a route,
understand the layout of an area and pinpoint their own
position in relation to some features. Catling (1980) itemizes
a scheme of teaching objectives built on the premise that
one of the main uses of a map is to show ‘what is where’.
He argues that when children are using maps they should
be able to:

1. Locate places and features on a map
2. Orientate the map with the world
3. Understand the idea of direction
4. Understand the relationship between places
5. Understand the vertical viewpoint
6. Read and interpret symbols
7. Read and interpret scale
8. Use a map in the (cid:142)eld as an aid to navigation
9. Use a map in the (cid:142)eld to identify observed features
10. Use a map in the (cid:142)eld to be aware of distant features.

Ottosson (1988) claims that the starting point for learning
map use skills should be students’ understanding of the
world around them. When children use a map in the (cid:142)eld,
they may not have prior knowledge of the area represented,
but a sound geographical vocabulary and familiarity with
similar environments should provide the necessary under-
standing. Balchin (1972, p. 192) stresses the importance
of (cid:142)eldwork carried out ‘on foot’, so that an appreciation
of a place ‘soaks in . . . subtly as one moves through and
explores a landscape as a continuum.’ He suggests that
spatial relationships are built up and reinforced by moving

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225013005

through an area, and slopes and distances are registered by
the expenditure of energy. Although Balchin (1972) discusses
map use by sighted children, his comments are pertinent
to map use by visually impaired children.

Spencer et al. (1992) show direct experience is important
to visually impaired children in the process of constructing
an awareness of the spatial relationships and nature of an
area. They conclude that:

tactile maps, used sensitively with visually-impaired
children in real-life settings they are keen to explore,
can signi(cid:142)cantly improve both the child’s speci(cid:142)c
knowledge of that particular environment, and increase
their general ability to conceptualise areas, with the
obvious implications for the learning and subsequent
use of future, novel environments. (p. 195)

Therefore,
if visually impaired children have access to
tactile maps that they can read, it is reasonable to expect
that they should be able to use them, as sighted children
do, to learn about their environment.

James and Armstrong (1976) advocate that children should
be taught map making skills so that they gain a compre-
hensive understanding of mapping concepts, and Yngstrom
(1988) describes a method of teaching map making to
visually impaired children. However, these authors do not
discuss how maps might be made following direct experi-
ence in the (cid:142)eld. The approach adopted in this case study
enabled a group of visually impaired children to learn about
their surroundings and use that knowledge to design a tactile
map of the same area. Consequently, they understood the
concept of symbolization, how a map can represent a place
and how a tactile map is made.

This case study is part of a wider investigation into
tactile map use (Gardiner, 2001) and discusses one method
of learning how tactile maps are designed, made and used

278

The Cartographic Journal

in the (cid:142)eld. The project was developed in collaboration
with staff and pupils of St Vincent’s School, Liverpool.
During a (cid:142)ve-day residential visit to a (cid:142)eld studies centre,
a group of visually impaired children, aged eight to eleven
learned how to discover what was around them,
years,
helped to design a tactile map of the area they had explored
and then found out how that map could increase their
knowledge of their surroundings.

MAP USE CASE STUDY

Crosby Hall Education Trust Field Studies Centre (CHET)
at Little Crosby is set in an area of mature parkland com-
prising open (cid:142)elds, woodland and a range of outbuildings.
Two classes of children aged eight to eleven years, on a
residential visit from St Vincent’s school, took part in the
case study. Some children had already participated in a
pilot study and a similar case study elsewhere, and it was
anticipated that they would be able to use their previously
learned map skills to perform better in a different location.

PRE-FIELDWORK SESSIONS

The teachers had previous experience of using tactile
maps with the researcher and were happy to develop their
own approach to the preparation for the (cid:142)eldwork. The
children had already learned that a map represents part of
the world and understood the relationship between symbols
and landmarks. Preliminary classroom sessions included:

1. Familiarization with a tactile map of the area surrounding
CHET made in collaboration with another group of
children on a previous visit.

2. Games based on following imaginary routes on the

above map.
Symbol detection, discrimination and interpretation.

3.

At the end of each session, teachers were satis(cid:142)ed that the
children understood the map they had worked with.

ENVIRONMENTAL PERCEPTION FIELDWORK

In order to de(cid:142)ne the map content, the map designer,
pupils and teachers worked together on an environmental
perception exercise in the (cid:142)eld. The aim was to discover
how much of their surroundings the children could sense
and recognise. Pupils were encouraged to infer what was
around them using their non-visual senses as they explored
several distinctive landmarks. Though the children identi-
(cid:142)ed several environmental features on the route through
the parkland, between the main CHET building and Little
Crosby Church, it appeared some could not be sensed (see
Table 1). Teachers also wanted to include some elements
of the environment on the map that the pupils had yet to
discover to enable them to build a better understanding of
their surroundings.

On returning to the classroom, children were encouraged
to recall their understanding of the route they had followed.
They then built up a simple tactile ‘sketch map’ (see Table 2
for method) to show different landmarks in relation to the
path, a raised line that had been previously embossed on
manilla paper. Point symbols were attached with adhesive

Table 1. Environmental features for inclusion on a tactile map
of CHET

Features that were sensed
Blocks of woodland
Open spaces
Paths that were walked on
Large Beech tree close to path

Gates across path
Buildings adjacent to path
Distant boundary roads

Features that were not sensed
Hedge not adjacent to path
Still water — ditch
Branching paths
Small
from path
Fences
Buildings not adjacent to path

individual trees remote

Table 2. Map making exercise at CHET after a sensory survey of the
route between CHET main building and Little Crosby church

1. Recap of walk: route, non-visual sensory stimuli
2. Each child given manilla paper embossed with dotted line

path, scale 1:1250 (2 cm to 25 m)

3. Recap of symbols for CHET building and church used on
map made in collaboration with another group of children

4. CHET symbol placed at start of path
5. Church symbol placed at end of path
6. Recap of path junction and change of direction
7. Location of change of direction of path on map
8. Discussion about kissing gate
9. Placement of 1st kissing gate symbol

10. Measurement of path from CHET to path corner = four

5 cm = ten (cid:142)nger widths, from 1st kissing

(cid:142)nger widths (5 cm)
11. Simple explanation of scale
12. Measurement of 2.5

gate to second kissing gate

£

13. Placement of 2nd kissing gate symbol
14. Recap about beech tree
15. Measurement from 2nd kissing gate to beech tree

(2.5 cm) = 2 (cid:142)nger widths
16. Placement of beech tree symbol
17. Discussion about woodland areas
18. Placement of woodland area symbols

‘putty’ and area symbols with double-sided sticky tape.
Figure 1 shows an example of a (cid:142)nished tactile ‘sketch map’.
During the map-making session, pupils learnt to trace a
line and follow a route built around that line. It included
developing an understanding of the relationships of different
environmental features and exploring the rudiments of scale
using their (cid:142)ngers as a measuring device. In addition, the

Figure 1. A collage ‘sketch map’ of the route from CHET to Little
Crosby Church (original size 29.0

22.0 cm)

£

Understanding Tactile Maps in the Field

279

children realised that the map represented what they had
just discovered in the (cid:142)eld. The session also served as an
exercise to make everyone aware of the whole process of
making a tactile map from sensory survey to (cid:142)nal product.

DESIGN AND PRODUCTION OF A DETAILED SITE MAP

A single Ordnance Survey map (OS, 1979) supplied most of
the required detail for the base map; additional information
was easily gained from a site visit prior to the school (cid:142)eld-
work session. The map design was developed in class as a

joint exercise. Symbols forming the basic set for this case
study had all been used previously. The selection of addi-
tional symbols resulted from deliberation between the map
designer, teaching staff and pupils (see Table 3). A map
mould was made using the collage method (Gardiner and
Perkins, 2002). Due to extensive discussion about content
and symbolisation, the (cid:142)rst version of the detailed map
required no design changes. Each child was given a copy
of the map, reproduced by vacuum forming in 0.250 mm
transparent PVC. A yellow opaque version in 0.200 mm
PVC was made for children with some residual vision (see
Figure 2).

Table 3. Symbols used in the case study map of CHET Field Studies Centre

Map scale

Symbol type

Referent

Symbol detail

Material used

1:1250

Area

Line

Point

Grassland
Woodland
Path
Road
Fence
Hedge
Wall
Ditch
Gate
Building
Main building
Coach house
Church
Cemetery
Main tree
Tree

Irregular texture
Irregular rounded bumps
Dotted line
Rectangular section line
Rounded, smooth line
Uneven line
Square section line
Recessed line
H-shape
Cuboid
Cuboid + hexahedron
Cuboid + dotted O
Cuboid + cross
Cross
Large ring
Small ring

Aluminium oxide abrasive paper grit p80
Anaglypta wallpaper
String of spherical beads
Balsa wood
Solder wire
Pipe-cleaner
Pine strip
Groove in base layer
Plastic shape
Balsa wood
Balsa wood + square ’bump-on’
Balsa wood+ RNIB symbol
Balsa wood + tile spacer
Tile spacer
Cup washer
RNIB symbol

Figure 2. An opaque PVC (cid:142)lm version of the vacuum formed map of CHET (original size 22.0 x 41.5 cm)

280

MAP USE FIELDWORK

Due to time restrictions, teachers had to impose limitations
on who would be permitted to complete the task. Thus
only children with previous map experience in the (cid:142)eld
were allowed to undertake subsequent (cid:142)eldwork. The head
teacher led (cid:142)eldwork using maps made by the researcher,
by ensuring children knew their location on the map at
the start (see Figure 3). The class (cid:142)rst concentrated on
features to the left of the path and everyone discussed
route choices with reference to all the information that
had been mapped previously.

Landmarks that had been anticipated and pinpointed
using the tactile maps were then searched for and found using
non-visual sensory perception. Next, the maps were used
to update users’ current positions. Examining the relevant
mapped landmark subsequently con(cid:142)rms this. Figures 4
and 5 show children identifying their position on their maps
and con(cid:142)rming the existence of the Beech tree that was
marked. Throughout the exercise relationships between
surrounding features were also discussed. Further time
constraints, led to only partial exploration of the whole
mapped route in this session. Although teachers intended
to continue another day, the weather made it impossible.

POST-FIELDWORK INTERVIEWS WITH TEACHERS

All the teachers involved in the map use (cid:142)eldwork were
interviewed approximately two weeks after the event to
discover their impressions of the project. None of the
children had previously used ready-made maps; apart from

The Cartographic Journal

those made by the researcher for pilot studies and a pre-
vious case study. However, all the pupils had at least some
limited experience of making collage maps of built-up areas
close to their school. Teachers set different achievement
targets according to the children’s ability; these are set out
in Table 4. Not only did pupils reach an expected level of
understanding, many exceeded expectations.

Table 4. The main aims and objectives of teachers for each group of
children who participated in the (cid:142)eldwork (derived from teacher inter-
views)

Aims for less
able children

Aims for more
able children

Increase geographical knowledge
Understand what maps are
Understand the reason for maps
Understand the usefulness of maps
Use maps with help from teacher
Understand that a path goes from one place to
another
Understand that a symbol represents something
in the world
Follow instructions to locate places on a map
Understand cardinal points
Enjoy map reading

All the above aims
Experience using maps in conjunction with
experiencing the place
Use maps independently
Use map to follow a route
Use map to recognise landmarks
Use map to (cid:142)nd out what was around them
Orientation of self to the surrounding world
Understand simple relationships between
adjacent features

Figure 3. Children using their maps in the CHET courtyard to discover where they are before walking along the path to the church

Understanding Tactile Maps in the Field

281

Figure 4. Children located a landmark Beech tree through underfoot texture and then found the symbol on their maps

Figure 5. Children con(cid:142)rming the existence of the Beech tree by feeling it

282

The Cartographic Journal

The main topics of the National Curriculum syllabus

that teachers incorporated into the (cid:142)eldwork were:

1. Observe and ask questions about geographical features

and issues

2. Use appropriate geographical vocabulary
3. Use maps

a variety of

scales

at

(incorporated

mathematics)

4. Undertake (cid:142)eldwork
5. Make maps and plans
6. Use symbols and keys.

it’. There was unanimous agreement

Teachers underestimated the children’s ability to use maps
in the (cid:142)eld and were ‘surprised by how much the children
that
got out of
experiencing the site (cid:142)rst, to perceive what was there,
followed by a simple tactile mapmaking session and sub-
sequently using a more durable version in the (cid:142)eld, gave
the children an understanding of both the concept of maps
and how they could be made and used. It was ‘a really
good way of con(cid:142)rming knowledge, and helping them to
understand the world around them’.

Teachers did not have time to prepare tactile maps to
use in the (cid:142)eld similar to those used in this study, nor had
they any previous experience of using maps in the (cid:142)eld
with visually impaired children. All the teachers admitted
to a lack of con(cid:142)dence about embarking on such a project,
but realized, after the event, that it was a very valuable
experience for the children and was not as daunting as had
been supposed.

CONCLUSION

This case study revealed a range of activities associated
with map use by the children and teachers in both the
classroom and the (cid:142)eld.

If these activities are compared with Catling’s (1980)
scheme of teaching objectives, set out earlier, it can be seen
that visually impaired children are able to use tactile maps
in a similar way to sighted children.

1. Locate places and features on a map; children found
different features on a map without guidance and in
response to verbal direction.

2. Orientate the map with the world; children were able
to align the map to correspond with their line of travel
in the (cid:142)eld.

3. Understand the idea of direction; children understood
which way paths ran and whether speci(cid:142)c features were
to the left, right, ahead or behind, in relation to their
own position in the (cid:142)eld and to speci(cid:142)ed locations on
their map.

4. Understand the relationship between places; this is
closely related to understanding direction. For example,
children understood how the starting point of their
walk related to the church at the end and to various
features along the way.

5. Understand the vertical viewpoint; children were

familiar with this concept prior to the case study.

6. Read and interpret symbols; this is closely associated
with locating features on a map. It did not present
any problems.

7. Read and interpret scale; a scale bar 2.0 cm long
representing 25 m was included on the (cid:142)nal version
of the map. Children were introduced to the concept
of scale and measured distances on their maps using
multiples of (cid:142)nger widths.

8. Use a map in the (cid:142)eld as an aid to navigation; maps
were used to anticipate what lay ahead and to con(cid:142)rm
pupils’ own locations at various landmarks. The children
also used their maps to recall where they had just
walked in order to reinforce their knowledge of their
route.

9. Use a map in the (cid:142)eld to identify observed features;
sound clues, such as birds singing and traf(cid:142)c noise,
alerted the children to the presence of woodland and
roads in the vicinity. They used their maps to discover
where these features
lay in relation to the route
walked.

10. Use a map in the (cid:142)eld to be aware of distant features;
if sound clues were not apparent, the children were
able to discover what lay in the area beyond the paths
e.g. small trees in the open grassland and ditches in
the woodland.

In addition, children used their imagination and played
games with their maps without prompting. Learning about
the mapped environment in the (cid:142)eld increased a child’s geo-
graphical vocabulary. They appreciated the relationships
between landscape features on their maps and the same
features in the ’real world’. The children were surprised to
discover that what they were experiencing in the (cid:142)eld was
represented on the sheet in their hands. As one child said;
‘it’s just like it is on the map’.

REFERENCES

Balchin, W. G. V. (1972). ‘Graphicacy’, Geography, 57, 185–95.
Catling, S. J. (1979). ‘Maps and cognitive maps: the young child’s

perception’, Geography, 64, 288–96.

Catling, S. J. (1980). ‘For the junior and middle school: map use and
objectives for map learning’, Teaching Geography, 6, 15–17.
Gardiner, E. A. H. (2001). The Role of Tactile Maps in Environ-
mental Education and Recreation in Areas of Managed
Countryside. PhD, University of Manchester (unpublished).
Gardiner, A. and Perkins, C. (2002). Best practice guidelines for
the design, production and presentation of vacuum formed
tactile maps. http://www.art.man.ac.uk/Geog/tactileguidelines/
James, G. A. and Armstrong, J. D. (1976). Handbook for Mobility
Maps. (Mobility Monograph No. 2). Blind Mobility Research
Unit, Department of Psychology, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, England.

OS (1979). 1:10,000 Lancashire-Merseyside, Sheet SD30SW.

Ottosson, T. (1988). ‘What does it take to read a map?’, Cartographica,

Southampton: OS.

25, 28–35.

Matthews, M. H. (1992). Making Sense of Place: Children’s Under-
standing of Large-scale Environments. Harvester Wheatsheaf,
Hemel-Hempstead.

Spencer, C., Morsley, K., Ungar, S., Pike, E. and Blades, M. (1992).
‘Developing the blind child’s cognition of the environment: the
role of direct and map-given experience’, Geoforum, 23, 191–97.
Yngstrom, A. (1988). ‘The tactile map: the surrounding world in
miniature.’ In Proceedings of the Second International Sym-
posium on Maps and Tactile Graphics for Visually Handicapped
People: London, 20–22 April, 1988, ed. by Tatham, A. F. and
Dodds, A. G., pp. 91–108, King’s College, London.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

