This article was downloaded by: [University of Otago]
On: 13 March 2015, At: 18:27
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

A geographical information
system for a GPS based
personal guidance system
REGINALD G. GOLLEDGE , ROBERTA L.
KLATZKY , JACK M. LOOMIS , JON SPEIGLE &
JEROME TIETZ
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: REGINALD G. GOLLEDGE , ROBERTA L. KLATZKY , JACK M.
LOOMIS , JON SPEIGLE & JEROME TIETZ (1998) A geographical information system
for a GPS based personal guidance system, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 12:7, 727-749, DOI: 10.1080/136588198241635

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241635

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever

or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 7, 727± 749

Research Article

A geographical information system for a GPS based personal
guidance system

REGINALD G. GOLLEDGE
Department of Geography, University of California Santa Barbara,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060, USA
e-mail: golledge@geog.ucsb.edu

ROBERTA L. KLATZKY
Department of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA

JACK M. LOOMIS, JON SPEIGLE and JEROME TIETZ
Department of Psychology, University of California Santa Barbara,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060, USA

(Received 12 May 1997; accepted 8 April 1998 )

Abstract. This paper describes the process of building a GIS for use in real time
by blind travellers. Initially the components of a Personal Guidance System (PGS)
for blind pedestrians are outlined. The location ® nding and database components
of the system are then elaborated. Next follows a discussion of the environmental
features likely to be used by blind travellers, and a discussion of the di(cid:128) erent path
following and environmental learning modes that can be activated in the system.
Developments such as personalizing the system and accounting for veering are
also presented. Finally, possible competing schemes and problems related to the
GIS component are examined.

1.

Introduction
In a previous article we discussed some elements of a geographical information
system (GIS) that could act as a database and analytical tool in a Personal Guidance
System ( PGS) for blind and vision-impaired travellers (Golledge et al. 1991). Over
the past seven years considerable changes have been made in the nature of the
guidance system. In particular, the spatial database and analytical functions that are
crucial to the traveller’s successful use of the virtual acoustic interface have been
modi® ed. As computational and satellite tracking technology have advanced so too
has our equipment evolved (e.g. computer miniaturization and portability). Changes
to the PGS now allows the assumption of a naive traveller who is not experienced
with GIS or any other technology used by the system. It is therefore a practical
example of a `naive GIS’ ( Egenhofer and Mark 1995).

The primary purpose of this paper is to update the description of the PGS and
to focus on the problem of building a database and a set of GIS functions that can
be accessed in continuous real-time by a naive traveller moving through an unknown

1365-8816 /98 $12.00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 728

R. G. Golledge et al.

environment. Real-time access is essential because, as will be explained in a following
section, the unique component of the PGS is that environmental features identify
themselves via a virtual acoustic display when they are within the vicinity of a
traveller, thus giving enhanced information about
the non-visual environment
through which locomotion takes place. For a sighted traveller this might be a
description of what’s in a parallel city block; for a vision impaired traveller it could
include what is currently nearby. This in turn impacts on the richness of the traveller’s
cognitive map, and in¯ uences his/her ability to determine location, orientation,
course, and frame of reference. In addition, the spatial layout of local and distant
environmental features is provided. Signi® cant problems that had to be overcome
are discussed as are current and future problems that may limit the e(cid:128) ectiveness of
the proposed guidance system unless innovative research produces timely solutions.
The ® rst section consists of a brief description of the components of the Personal
Guidance System ( PGS), so that reasons for choosing certain options for the spatial
database and GIS are made transparent.

2. Overview of the Personal Guidance System

The guidance system consists of three modules (® gure 1). A complete description
of the system design is provided in Loomis et al. ( 1994). Details of the system
hardware are provided in Loomis et al. ( 1995).

The ® rst module concerns User Location and Orientation. Following suggestions
by Collins ( 1985), and Loomis ( 1985), a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver
with di(cid:128) erential correction ( DGPS) is used to determine location and to track the
path of travel. The current version includes a 12-channel receiver from Trimble
Navigation (Model 4000SE) running ProPlan software. Di(cid:128) erential correction can
be obtained from a commercial service (e.g. Accqpoint ) which uses a base station in
the city of Santa Barbara ( located about 20 Km away from the test site). An alternate
di(cid:128) erential correction can be obtained from Coastguard stations spaced around
coastal USA. The GPS and FM radio receivers are carried in a backpack also
containing a sub-notebook computer (® gure 2 ). The computer in use is a 486-25
MM2 subnotebook computer with a hard disk. The DGPS con® guration gives an
absolute positional accuracy on the order of 1m root-mean-squared error, under
conditions of good satellite availability.

The other component of this ® rst module is concerned with the traveller’s orienta-
tion ( heading or facing direction). Although GPS can indicate the traveller’s course
(direction of travel over the ground ) on the basis of successive position ® xes, naviga-
tion systems are more e(cid:128) ective when heading is independently available, for travel
instructions are usually expressed relative to the traveller’s heading rather than
course, and course is not de® ned for a stationary traveller. In the PGS, heading is
indicated by a ¯ uxgate compass mounted on the strap of the headphones worn by
the traveller; as such, the compass indicates orientation of the head rather than the
body. Head orientation is measured because the virtual display component uses
head orientation to compute the proper directional cues for spatialization of sound.
The GIS Components Module includes a digitized base map and software
designed to track the traveller’s path, select routes, advise the traveller about land-
marks and local features, control dynamic access to the database, and correct for
signal loss or error. It also contains the commands needed to assist navigation.

In standard GIS, sets of spatial or non-spatial attributes are tied to geocoded
locations. Spatial attributes might include some measure of system centrality, con-

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

729

Figure 1. Guidance system consisting of three modules.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 730

R. G. Golledge et al.

Figure 2.

(a) Current con® guration of PGS. ( b) Planned con® guration of PGS.

nectivity, size, area, feature or population density ( if the location is, say, a mean
areal center representative of a census tract), distances to other features, nearest
neighbours, and so on. Many of the attributes stored in commercial databases have
limited relevance for blind people, particularly in relation to travel. Information such
as location of transit stops, whether or not a shelter is present, proximity and
direction of the nearest intersection, whether the intersection has a tra(cid:129) c control
system or curb cuts, or how far a bus stop is from a corner, are more important to
blind travellers than cadastral features such as parcel size, planning features such as
age of nearby buildings and number of occupants, or design features such as colour,
number of rooms, or age of building (Strelow and Brabyn 1982, Rieser et al. 1996 ).
Attributes useful for blind navigators include building frontages, road characteristics
such as direction of ¯ ow or existence of a central divider, parks or open areas, bicycle
lanes, car parks, or other types of land use.

Given the need for operating in real time, and because of size constraints imposed
by the backpack system design, which places limits on data storage and manipulation
space, only a limited number of GIS functions have been incorporated in the PGS.
In particular, use is made of functions for bu(cid:128) ering, centroid calculations, a path
selection algorithm, and various procedures for calculating distances and directions.
Bu(cid:128) ering and corridoring may need further de® nition here: bu(cid:128) ering is the selection
of data from the GIS that pertains to the space immediately around the traveller;
this information becomes available for display. In the PGS, a 30 by 30 m bu(cid:128) er is
the default option, but its size can be manipulated (at this stage) by keyboard input.
The initial bu(cid:128) er is centered on the traveller’s location in the database. Within the
adjacent area covered by the bu(cid:128) er, features or objects represented in the database
are scanned for importance weights (e.g. a nearby on-route building may have a
prior weight of 1 (most important) allocated to it; an o(cid:128) -route bench, tree or
telephone booth may have a weight of 3 ( least important)). The traveller can identify
what level (s) of salience will be attended to, and the appropriately weighted features
will be identi® ed by name as they fall within the bu(cid:128) ered zone. The location of the

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

731

bu(cid:128) er remains constant until the traveller reaches a set distance from the bu(cid:128) er
boundary (e.g. 7 m). At this time the old bu(cid:128) er disappears and a new one centered
on the current location of the traveller is created. Thus some information activated
by the old bu(cid:128) er is deleted, those features still covered by the new bu(cid:128) er are retained,
and additional appropriately weighted features located within the range of the new
bu(cid:128) er boundaries are added. This regular shift of the bu(cid:128) er continues as the traveller
follows the chosen route ( ® gure 3 ). A narrow corridor (approximately 4 m wide)
containing the path to be followed also is de® ned; if the traveller veers beyond this
corridor an error is signaled, and directions are given to the traveller to return to
the path.

The User Interface Module provides for two-way communication between the
GIS and the user. There are two display options for GIS-to-user communication:
conventional speech display through a speaker or earphone, and a virtual acoustic
display using binaural earphones. The conventional speech display is the alternative
that all other groups developing navigation systems for the blind have adopted (e.g.
Fruchterman 1995, Gill 1996, and Makino et al. 1996 ). When using the PGS,
information about the environment is conveyed by synthetic speech. The synthesized
speech signal is the input to an Alphatron virtual acoustic display, which outputs
binaural signals to the earphones worn by the user. The virtual acoustic display
allows features to `call’ as if from their real location in objective space. Output
consists of spatialized synthetic speech in which both virtual beacons along the route
and virtual landmarks o(cid:128) -route identify themselves by name. A full description of
the virtual auditory display originally developed for this project is given in Loomis
et al. (1990 ).

In the long run, operating commands will be given by direct speech. At this time
interaction is via a 24 button key pad. This controls commands to set up and operate
the system, choose the guidance mode, actuate bu(cid:128) ers, and select the mode of
operation.

The largest design constraint is that the system must operate in real-time on
existing ( portable) computer hardware. Initially we used an 80486, 25 MHz sub-
notebook computer. Miniaturization of the system is planned for the future. The
design constraint was met using a simple time-sharing scheme to allocate resources
among the di(cid:128) erent sub-systems. The highest priority was given to updating the
virtual acoustic display, as the accurate portrayal of a virtual sound source requires
updating for any changes in the observer’s orientation. A high priority was also
given to processing information from the GPS receiver.

The Trimble hardware handles all computations necessary to ® nd user position
from the prevailing satellite constellation, including the integration of di(cid:128) erential
corrections. Originally purchased from a commercial company (Accqpoint ), correc-
tions can now be supplied by a US Coast Guard network. Communication between
the Trimble receiver and sub-notebook is over a serial
line at 9600 Baud.
Communication is de® ned by the Trimble Serial Interface Protocol, TSIP. The GPS
receiver is con® gured to transmit current position to the computer as soon as
available and to notify of any changes in satellite con® guration or availability of
di(cid:128) erential signal. Queries to the receiver can also be made for any other receiver
parameter. This information can be, when desired, written to logging ®
les. The
timesharing between sub-systems is such that after processing any bytes held in the
serial port bu(cid:128) er, control is passed on to the other sub-systems. When a complete
packet of location and error correction measures has been received, the appropriate

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 732

R. G. Golledge et al.

Figure 3. Map of area showing travel path and several overlapping bu(cid:128) ers with selected
layout information.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

733

state variables are updated. Problems such as signal loss or re¯ ection are discussed
in a later section.

2.1. C om parison to other system s

As we envisage it, the PGS is a true navigation aid. It also provides information
about the proximate and the more distant and occluded environment. This enriched
source of information should give to the vision impaired or blind traveller capabilities
similar to that available to the sighted traveller who, while walking, glances in
various directions or who looks at a map, and from this visual scanning, determines
what features are close and distant. Thus it is designed to go well beyond the concepts
of other electronic guidance systems, although the ultimate success of the PGS will
depend on the successful testing of the software functionality built into the system.
Some of this software is still being developed, and testing of its performance is still
ongoing. Other guidance systems (e.g. Arkenstone’s STRIDER, Fruchterman 1995,
the MoBIC Guidance System, Gill 1996, and the GPS Cellphone, Makino et al.
1996) use GPS to locate an individual, then provide the traveller with verbalized
route related information. Such information relies on the traveller’s con® dence and
independence, and his or her knowledge of the major local geographical frame of
reference. It also relies on being willing to accept the limited information contained
in the verbal commands as su(cid:129) cient for goal achievement. Existing systems di(cid:128) er in
the extent to which they can provide orientation information.

Without proper orientation (e.g. carrying a separate compass), signi® cant errors
can be made in determining geographic direction ( Klatzky et al. in press), and no
additional information is gained about the environment as the traveller proceeds
along the speci® ed path. At this time STRIDER has no compass attachment, while
MoBIC suggests a compass be carried by the traveller and be worn on the body
(e.g. attached to a jacket lapel ). Such devices are really path following supplements
rather than navigation or environmental learning assistive devices.

It is doubtful whether the sparse information provided in the verbal descriptions
used by these devices would be of much help in understanding the complex locational
con® guration of features in a real world environment. Indeed recent research by
Taylor and Tversky ( 1994), Ferguson and Hegarty ( 1994), Franklin ( 1996) and
interpreting spatial relations from
Couclelis (1996 ), points to the di(cid:129) culties of
common speech (natural language).

Although simple systems may reduce the fear of becoming lost, they may not
enrich the traveller’s knowledge of the environment or give to them some of the
knowledge capability typically obtained by sighted travellers using a map or glancing
around ( Blades 1991, Spencer and Blades 1986, Ungar et al. 1994, Mark and Frank
1991). They may fall short of being a `quality of life enriching device.’ Similarly, since
such devices lack objective orientation capability, they must rely on the traveller’s
knowledge of underlying geographical directionality (which is usually quite fuzzy
even in people with full vision). In comparison with these systems, the proposed
PGS does act as a navigation aid, not just a path following device. It also provides
landmark and local layout information in the vicinity of a traveller.

Given this overview of the PGS, the next section discusses the nature, functioning,
and problems associated with the spatial database and GIS that constitute the
second module of the system.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 734

R. G. Golledge et al.

3. The spatial database
3.1. Information needed by the blind traveller

Most existing databases have been developed without considering the needs of
blind users. In particular, few if any of the databases developed for travel (usually
by auto) have contained features that could help a blind pedestrian or transit user.
Missing are features such as the presence or absence of sidewalks, paths (e. g. across
a park area), or trails (e. g. through a recreational area). There usually is no indication
as to whether or not a street has bike paths along its edges, nor are the widths of
roads and the number of tra(cid:129) c lanes given. Other missing features include whether
the tra(cid:129) c is one way or two way, whether there is a central divider or pedestrian
island, whether there are curb cuts facilitating entry into the street (see Hauger et al.
1996, for an evaluation of just how e(cid:128) ective these are), whether tra(cid:129) c lights or other
exist at a corner,
such as stop signs and pedestrian crossingsÐ
control systemsÐ
whether the tra(cid:129) c signals include auditory signage to indicate periods of safe crossing,
and whether tra(cid:129) c is allowed to make u-turns (often of signi® cant importance when
trying to cross a divided roadway). Environmental
features often used by blind
travellers to estimate distance travelled include ® re hydrants and telephone poles
(whose regular spacing provide the blind traveller with a way of estimating distance
travelled ). Most existing databases do not indicate changes in texture of the surface
being covered or on either side of it. All these features can be used by the blind
traveller to estimate distances travelled, to help ensure safety when crossing streets
or roadways, to obtain shelter during inclement weather, or simply to allow `shorelin-
ing’ to take place. (Shorelining involves using a continuous edge such as a wall, a
curb, or a change in surface texture such as the edge of a paved path, to guide one’s
progress ( Welsh and Blasch, 1980).)

3.2. Early states of the G IS

The GIS had its origins in hand digitized AutoCad maps of the UCSB Campus.
As these were incomplete and inaccurate, they were corrected into ARCINFO
readable coverages. The initial database was developed in an ARCINFO format.
This allowed us to produce a very detailed database, extending for instance, to
manholes and telephone poles. Although ARCINFO at ® rst seemed to provide
excellent software for compoiling the database and an appropriate range of GIS
functions, it soon became evident that it was too powerful and too complicated (and
thus too inaccessible)
for use in real-time conditions. Questions that arose with
respect to the large amount of detail in the ARCINFO database included: Was the
level of existing detail necessary for a blind navigator? How much detail is needed
to provide a reasonable knowledge of layout and signi® cant cues and landmarks for
navigational purposes? How should speci® c entities be represented, for example,
should bike paths be lines or polygons? Did the CAD-based drawing from a 1983
air photo mosaic provide the level of accuracy needed for personal navigation
purposes? For example, were the sidewalks located accurately enough for a GPS
initiated trace of a traveller’s movements to stay within the parameters of a particular
path? Did the polygon topology exist for all the coverages required in the database?
What basic coordinate system should the data be projected into? What was the
current locational accuracy of the data?

To conserve waiting and processing time, alternatives other than a full-scale GIS
were considered as the host for the database and auditory interface. Consequently

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

735

the original AUTOCAD DXF ®
reactivated.

le which described a minimal campus database was

The current database and analytic functions were assembled in a CAD/DXF
format; all programming was done in `C’. The resulting CAD/DXF database was
divided into fourteen coverages, each representing a particular theme. These were
grouped into four general classes: ( 1) transportation (e.g. roads, bike paths, walkways,
car parking areas, bike parking),
( 2) buildings (e.g. permanent and temporary),
( 3 ) land use (e.g. open space, recreation, vegetation), and ( 4) other objects (e.g. light
poles, telephones, stairs). Each coverage consisted of a layer of chains that de® ned
the areas of the features enclosed. For example, the building coverage included chains
that enclosed polygons which de® ned the footprint of each building. One of the
limitations of CAD-based systems is that attributes must be stored as separate disk
les. But given the CAD/DXF constraints, there were no attributes or lookup tables
describing the features of individual buildings. These fourteen coverages were simply
the original converted AUTOCAD ®

les edited to eliminate digitizing errors.

3.3. C urrent G IS: C AD /DX F format

The new system had to be expanded so that some basic GIS functions could be
embedded within it. A fundamental set of functions useful for most GIS has been
suggested by Albrecht ( 1995 ). Basically, functions built into the new system were
similar to sets of cognitive functions performed by travellers when learning a new
environment. Examples are given in table 1. Typical functions include distance and
direction estimation, scale transforms, orientation, and interpolation.

A polygon format for data encoding was chosen whenever possible. For example,
kiosks, manholes, planters, and conversation pits were coded as small polygons.
More important, however, was polygonal coding of sidewalks, bike paths, service
roads and other roads. This format was chosen because of the di(cid:129) culty in di(cid:128) erenti-
ating which was the real path for travel in cases where bike paths paralleled sidewalks

Table 1. Selected functions common to GIS and spatial cognition.

Location of points
Interpolation
Line drawing
Line length estimation
Search
Bu(cid:128) ering
Corridoring
Overlaying
Area ( polygon) de® nition
Slope and aspect
Viewshed/line of sight
Network structure
Shortest path
Abstraction
Proximity
Nearest neighbour/adjacency
Di(cid:128) usion/spread
2-D surface interpretation
3-D surface interpretation

dispersion
connectivity
mean areal centre/centroid
modi® able areal unit/regionalization
perimeter, height, volume
shape
similarity
measurement
decomposing
scanning/digitizing
georeferencing (encoding)
rubber sheeting
generalizing/smoothing
enhancement
aggregation
scale change

ltering
boundary de® nition
data retrieval (decoding)

Source: Adapted and enhanced from J. Albrecht (1995 ) `Universal GIS operations’ Ph.D.
Dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Vechta, Germany, pp. 15± 20.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 ®
®
736

R. G. Golledge et al.

and sidewalks paralleled and `merged’ into building walls. Although coding both the
edge of the sidewalk and the side of the building with parallel lines introduced a
small location error into one feature or another, it was preferable to having the
sidewalk de® ned only as a single line feature which might end at a building edge
and produce confusion when the computer attempted to di(cid:128) erentiate the two features
as separate entities as needed for specifying a path to be followed.

While the extremely detailed campus database on which we initially worked
could be justi® ed in terms of the amount of detail that a blind person might require in
order to travel safely, independently, and in a relatively obstacle-free way (Golledge
1991), upon re¯ ection, many of the layers appeared to be unnecessary. Maybe in
the future, with proper computing power, these could be retained, but based on
accumulated knowledge of the techniques of blind travel, many features and levels
were eliminated. For example, surface type may be unnecessary because a person
travelling with a cane or a guide dog can quickly determine the type of surface upon
which he or she is travelling. The long cane speci® cally picks up variations in surface
texture such as the di(cid:128) erences between a surfaced path (e.g. cement, brick, tile, or
bitumen walkway) and an unsurfaced path (e.g. packed dirt, grass, or other type of
natural surface) ( Blasch et al. 1996 ). Similarly, since travel would rarely be across
unsurfaced areas with di(cid:128) erent types of natural vegetation, detailed vegetation layers
proved to be unnecessary, and a simple indication of whether an area was vegetated
or not proved satisfactory for the most part.

Future versions of the guidance system might include an ultrasonic obstacle
avoider, supplementing or even supplanting the blind traveller’s own use of cane
vibrations or echo location; this would reduce the need to store many detailed
geometric elements. The addition of such an obstacle avoidance system should reduce
the need for frequent updating of the database, for many of the most frequently
occurring obstacles to the blind traveller are temporary environmental features (e. g.
construction barriers or excavations, temporary diversions, randomly placed waste
bins or outside furniture, and so on). An environment in which complementary travel
aids were available, such as Verbal Landmarks (for building directories), or Talking
see
(e.g. for identifying key intersections or other environmental features,Ð
Signsâ
later section on non-GIS travel aids), would reduce the need for encoding small scale
geometric features such as waste bins, signposts, permanent seats/benches, planters,
kiosks, elevators, or stairwells.

3.4. Map registration

The map was registered by locating a GPS base station at its correct position
on the map. Initial scaling of the map was accomplished by measuring the physical
distance between several map features (in both x and y directions). The map was
scaled in AUTOCAD until the distance between those features corresponded to the
physical distances. To con® rm the scaling, a GPS logged path, which covered a large
portion of the campus, was overlaid on the map (® gure 4). The path was considered
stable with respect to latitude and longitude because it was the average of several
traversals all with di(cid:128) erential GPS correction operating. The initially scaled map
based on a primary registration point did not ® t well, and was re-scaled to ® t the
GPS located path.

4. Operating characteristics of the PG S

In the following sections a discussion of the operating characteristics of the PGS
is provided. Initially, an emphasis is placed on how the database is partitioned for

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

737

Figure 4. Map of GPS logged path.

timely access, and the command structure is described. Then follows a summary of
how the PGS works in terms of path selection and path following. In particular the
use of corridoring to maintain contact with a given path and the use of bu(cid:128) ering to
identify relevant nearby features are explained.

4.1. T he im pac t of partitioning and segm entation

Due to memory limitations associated with running under DOS and the time
consuming nature of disk access, the entire map was partitioned into a spatial
quadtree. The partitioning process began with a two-dimensional bounding box
which enclosed all map entities. This box was subdivided into quadrants. DXF ®
les
were then created, into which were placed the map entities contained by each of
these smaller bounding boxes. Containment by a bounding box was decided based
on the entity centroid ( i.e.
if a building overlapped two bounding boxes it was
allocated to the one containing its centroid ). A running count was kept of the

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 738

R. G. Golledge et al.

memory necessary to store a partition’s entities. If a partition exceeded a set size
criterion, its bounding box was subdivided and its entities were re-partitioned. The
process thus created a quadtree with variable size leaves. A description of the ® nal
partition ®

les was stored for future map access.

Upon activating the system, the decision as to which leaves are to be loaded is
based on the proximity of the traveller to the centroids of the bounding boxes. To
determine when to re-con® gure the loaded partitions, the user’s position is compared
to partition boundaries. When the leading edge of the bu(cid:128) er around the traveller
approaches the edge of a partition, that new partition is loaded. This new partition
covers the subsequent segments of the path. At the time of reloading, objects from
the new partition enter the bu(cid:128) er.

Access to a larger address space would make feasible a RAM-based version (cf.
disk based version) of the above partitioning process. Then the map information
common to all partitions could be stored as the environmental base and a spatial
quadtree could be constructed in memory. The granularity of the spatial quadtree
would be based on machine performance criteria, such as the amount of time to
access all entities in a given leaf.

4.2. A ctivating the PGS: waypoin t versus spatial lead

Procedurally, the traveller starts by activating the GPS locator, establishing the
bu(cid:128) er to de® ne a set of proximate objects, and de® ning the type of mode to be used
(e.g. waypoint or landmark layout mode). If waypoint is selected then, upon entering
the location of a destination, a path selection algorithm determines the ® rst waypoint.
As movement along a path segment occurs, the waypoint calls its number, increasing
in sound level as the traveller approaches it. Once this goal
it is
acknowledged (i.e. `reached waypoint x’) and the next waypoint beacon is activated.
The traveller orients on the new directional label and proceeds along the next path
segment. As travel continues, and if a `layout’ mode is chosen (see §5 for elaboration),
the proximate objects are identi® ed to the traveller. As the traveller approaches the
bu(cid:128) er’s boundary, a new set of proximate objects is determined.

is achieved,

One way to guide the traveller from a well known or well used starting point to
a known destination using auditory cues from virtual locations is to `hardwire’
several `paths’ in the environment and lead the traveller along the path via sequen-
tially numbered virtual beacons. By orienting on and pursuing each beacon in turn,
the traveller is guided from waypoint to waypoint. Such paths might represent
habitually travelled routes which are followed almost invariably (e.g. journey-to-
work,
journey-to-buy food, or other highly repetitive activities (Axhausen and
GaÈ rling 1992 ). These paths are constructed from a number of `waypoints’, which are
locations along the path at which the observer is required to change the direction
of travel. The waypoints are numbered consecutively from start to ® nish. The
traveller, originating at waypoint 1, walks to each of the successively higher numbered
waypoints, being guided by the directional auditory cue of the current waypoint
speaking its numerical value. Normally one waypoint automatically switches to the
next higher numbered one when the traveller arrives near it (i.e. within a 5 foot
radius). But, manual switching to another waypoint on a given path is also possible.
This powerful alternative allows the blind traveller to take a shortcut to a distant
waypoint along a path, an act which few if any blind travellers have been able to
do prior to this development because of uncertainty about possible alternate paths.
An example might be to shorten a regularly followed sequential `U’ shaped path by

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

739

manually requesting a direct ( beaconed ) route between the two end points. At any
time it is possible to enable or disable paths or waypoints and to add or delete items
from the speech output (e.g. to replace a simple number designating a waypoint with
a number and building name).

An alternate path following mode, called spatial lead, is to project a virtual
acoustic beacon at a standard distance (e.g. 2 m) in front of the traveller. This beacon
follows the path to be taken and leads the traveller along each segment. It clearly
identi® es direction changes and provides continuous movement potential rather than
waiting for the next waypoint to be activated and making the appropriate course
change. This mode has advantages for travelling curved pathways, because the spatial
lead circumvents any tendency to stray from or straighten the curved path.

4.3. T he problem of wandering f rom a path

One of the problems of walking without sight is the tendency to veer from a
straight line ( Worchel 1951, Cicinelli 1988, Loomis et al. 1993, Guth and LaDuke
1994, 1995). This could cause some problems, especially in those segments where
the GPS signal might be lost because of interference. To address this problem, the
GIS notion of corridoring can be used. Essentially, a corridor of arbitrary diameter
(e.g. 3 m) can be de® ned about the centre of a line of travel between consecutive
waypoints (® gure 5). As long as the traveller stays within the corridor so de® ned,
there is no interruption in the presentation of auditory information including the
virtual beacon and the announcement of labels of those features contained within
the bu(cid:128) er zone. However, if substantial veering occurs and the traveller transgresses
the corridor boundary, bu(cid:128) er operations are suspended and an audible warning
(`path’) is heard. The traveller is then reoriented to the direction of the `path’ sound,
which returns him or her to the nearest point on the original path, using right angle
o(cid:128) set procedures.

However, some problems can arise when the traveller both transgresses the path
and loses the GPS signal at the same time. Disorientation can occur and failure to
return to the original line of travel is a possibility. To overcome possible disorienta-
tion (e.g. a 180 degree reversal), the suppression routine can be modi® ed by interspers-
ing the virtual beacon sound intermittently between the o(cid:128) -path auditory indicators.
Thus, instead of just hearing `path, path, path....’ until recovery occurs, the traveller
hears `path, waypoint, path, waypoint, etc.’ This means that orientation to the
waypoint controlling direction of travel can be maintained and that travel may be
continued without fear.

4.4. R oute selection

The route selection algorithm used is a modi® ed Dijkstra shortest-path algorithm
( Yang 1991 ). Once an origin and destination have been determined, it begins search-
ing for possible routes according to a shortest path constraint. If more than one
route is found (e.g. as might occur between diagonally opposite corners of a regular
grid ), a route using fewest turns is given the highest priority for selection.

5. Learning the environment: Landmark and layout modes

Navigating a prede® ned or novel-path by following a spatially lagged virtual
beacon provides an easily comprehended and cognitively simple way of travelling
independently. However, using such a guidance mode still leaves a blind traveller
unaware of nearby or distant on and o(cid:128) route features. Both landmark and layout

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 740

R. G. Golledge et al.

Figure 5. Example of a 3-leg path plus corridor.

modes provide a means for learning the local geography of features. Since the usual
practice of Orienation and Mobility training is to teach routes rather than layouts,
the PGS provides an opportunity for the blind traveller to engage in `con® gurational’
or `layout’ learning. Often called `survey knowledge’, this is accepted to be the highest

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

741

level of spatial learning (Siegel and White 1975, Piaget and Inhelder 1967). But
without the use of vision, this requires complex internal integration of routes into
networks and con® gurations; tasks that those without vision are rarely trained to
accomplish.

Two modes of representing con® gurational information about environmental
features are used; landmark and layout modes. Both modes use spatialized sound to
localize entities within the environment, thus providing the auditory equivalent of a
vision-based `survey’ representation.

5.1. L andm ark m ode

Landmark mode may be used most often by an experienced traveller who knows
a route and its nearby features well. Such a traveller may only require an occasional
check on current location with respect to well known distant places to gain reassur-
ance that the correct direction is being followed, or by triangulating on two or more
landmarks, to use mental geometry to estimate approximate current location. This
mode’s primary purpose is not to facilitate environmental
learning, but to help
estimate current location and heading. It serves a similar purpose to the head turning
and visual scanning for well known features that is typical of sighted travel.

As with sighted travellers, landmarks often play an important part in way® nding
by those who are blind or vision impaired and in facilitating knowledge of location
and orientation ( Lindberg and GaÈ rling 1982, Evans et al. 1984, Presson and Montello
1988). In landmark mode, only features in the database that have been identi® ed a
priori as having a given importance value are activated (at this time only three levels
of importance have been designated ). Two orders of landmarks are de® ned: `system’
landmarks that generally are recognized as dominant local features, and local land-
marks (called `nodes’ by Lynch, 1960), which are nearby features of some importance
to be activated when appearing in a bu(cid:128) er and given importance ratings of 2 or 3.
Features given an importance level of 1 are the most commonly identi® ed and most
familiar landmarks in the larger scale environment. These could be the same places
identi® ed by sighted people. Accessing these distant landmarks (something that is
virtually impossible for blind travellers to do under normal conditions) gives the
blind traveller a larger scale frame of reference and the ability to determine his/her
approximate current location within that geographic space (e.g. by triangulation
procedures). It may also help to identify the most familiar frames of reference,
whether they be the cardinal compass directions of geographical space (north, south,
east, west), or a more local relational frame of reference (such as the pattern of a
local street system ( Presson and Montello, 1994)). If the traveller is familiar with
the approximate location of these geographical scale landmarks, use of internal
processes (such as mental triangulation) can provide an approximate indication of
the traveller’s current location.

5.2. L ayout m ode

At the more local scale, i.e. the scale of the bu(cid:128) er zone, the guidance system
works in what is termed `layout mode’. Once the bu(cid:128) er has been established around
the traveller, the GIS searches it for features with designated importance levels. These
are activated according to either automatic or manual commands. Layout mode
provides information similar to that obtained when sighted people travelling the
same route simply turn their heads and scan for signi® cant features in their vicinity.
Users can select subsets of the currently loaded entities in several ways when

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 742

R. G. Golledge et al.

they operate the system in layout mode. These include proximity to the navigator,
layer in the database, or attribute value. A list based on proximity is useful for
informing the user of their immediate surroundings, not only for learning layout but
to warn them of possible obstacles. Because entities are linked to a simple set of
attributes such as building name, size, or type, a command may be given to `identify
large buildings’. As the traveller follows a selected path, buildings that have the
attribute `large size’ and that lie within the bu(cid:128) ered area would then be identi® ed
and spoken. Similarly, one can designate that only features contained in one speci® c
layer are activated if they fall within the bu(cid:128) er zone (e.g. only vegetation, only
buildings).

The virtual auditory system is intended to display the spoken information so
that it appears to emanate from the distance and direction that the named entity
occupies with respect to the traveller’s location and orientation. Environmental
features that have been selected for spatialized auditory presentation can be ordered
in di(cid:128) erent ways. One is by proximity to the traveller. Because the distance relations
to the traveller change as he or she moves within the environment, the order of
presentation and the features identi® ed as proximal enough to be spoken also change.
Alternatively, features can be spoken in order of clockwise direction; indeed one can
limit the occurrence of feature names to those lying in that section of the bu(cid:128) er that
is in front of a perpendicular to the line of travel in the forward direction.

The above constraints are default options and allow the guidance system to
choose a feature presentation order automatically. However, the traveller can also
have control by keypad or speech. Using the current keypad input, travellers can
indicate when they want the next item in a list (which is ordered by one or another
of the above rules) to be spoken. It is possible to signal a backup to hear a previously
spoken item again. Clockwise or counter-clockwise ordering is possible; this may be
important if the traveller has knowledge of the con® guration of important features
in the vicinity relative to the direction of travel. If the progression of feature announce-
ments is halted at a particular place, the system will keep updating the position of
that single feature until a new one is requested.

Layout mode gives a power to the blind traveller that is often beyond the
capability of sighted travellers. If the bu(cid:128) er is set large enough, visually occluded
features (such as those a block or more away) can be identi® ed. Thus the terra
incognitae of far distances are reduced to known territory. Destination substitution
is possible to unseen or previously unknown places, and shortcutting becomes feasible
to get to alternate destinations. In other words, activity substitution processes can
become a reality instead of a distant, unreachable goal.

5.3. T he activation sequence and com m and structure

The various steps involved in de® ning and activating information in the PGS
are outlined below. Steps 1± 5 de® ne system parameters; steps 6± 8 activate the system
for a particular journey.

Step 1: De® ne and load a digital map of the task area.
Step 2: Select output interface (speech is the default option).
Step 3: Select and activate the locating mode (e.g. DGPS).
Step 4: Select `speech name’ option for each signi® cant item in the database;
once enabled, the name can be spoken as it occurs on the pathway or
in the bu(cid:128) er.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

743

Step 5: Select `speech-rate’ to control the time lag between the speaking of

names.

Step 6: Bu(cid:128) er proximate objects around the traveller’s position.
Step 7: Overlay the proximate environment with a larger geographical scale
layout of critical landmarks. These landmarks can be enabled or dis-
abled at will by activating a button on the keypad.

Step 8: Select a path from an origin to a destination.

In the current con® guration, in which input is via a keyboard, each of the
necessary commands ( table 2) is activated by pressing `Control’ plus an appropriately
de® ned letter. In the con® guration to be developed for blind users, an auditory
interface is planned. Speci® c commands would be voice trained using a speech
recognition system. Spoken terms such as `speech-rate’, `bu(cid:128) er size’, `landmark mode’,
and `layout mode’ will replace push-button controls for setting up the operating
system, and speci® c origin and destination locations would be verbally identi® ed as
route anchors. Development and testing of the software needed for these commands
is part of the next phase of research.

6. Problems with GPS/GIS

Some signi® cant problems involved in using GPS and GIS technologies for travel

guidance can be summarized as follows:

1. The Global Positioning System may be inadequate to achieve a desired degree
of locational accuracy in many types of user environments (e.g. areas of high
buildings or steep mountain terrain).

2. Currently there is a lack of any suitable backup devices to derive location and

orientation when the GPS signal is lost.

3. An additional problem involves re¯ ections of GPS signals from nearby struc-
tures. Re¯ ected signals are referred to as `multi-path’. Because distance to the
satellite is computed from the time delay of signal transmission and signal
reception, positions derived from re¯ ected signals will be in error. Under
conditions where the GPS receiver has line-of-sight access to the satellite,
re¯ ected signals may be ignored. It is unclear whether re¯ ected signals are

Table 2. Example of commands.

Advance to next windowed item
Reverse order of accessing next windowed item
Waypoint name
Switch to next waypoint
Shift display
Warn of close object
Cycle through importance types
Signal north direction
Speak range and bearing of waypoint
Toggle layouts on and o(cid:128)
Toggle waypoints on and o(cid:128)
Toggle bu(cid:128) er on and o(cid:128)
Toggle to indicate range of object or distance to waypoint
De® ne a waypoint
Make a path out of the de® ned waypoints
Indicate waypoint direction

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 744

R. G. Golledge et al.

identi® ed by the signal having the shortest path to the satellite. It is under
conditions of occlusion that re¯ ections become problematic. If the receiver is
stationary, then it is possible to reduce the problem of re¯ ected signals by
setting the elevation mask. For our purposes, a mask of 35ß above the horizon
determines satellite selection. Direct signals at low elevations thus will be
rejected. The drawback to raising the elevation mask is that it increases the
positional dilution of precision ( PDOP) because a particular satellite constella-
tion could generate a smaller solid locational angle.

4. A major problem associated with the development of usable GPS is also the
accuracy of available GPS signals. At a world-wide scale this may at ® rst be
achieved by removing the random error disturbance (selective availability) in
the existing satellite signals Ð
a procedure which is due to be completed early
next century. Then, if there is successful integration of GPS and the former
Soviet GLONASS systems, there will be approximately 50 satellites that could
be accessed by GPS technology. Assuming the (undisturbed) signals from the
United States and Russian systems can be successfully merged and accessed
by a standard commercial GPS system, this should improve the availability
of relevant satellites and diminish the danger of falling below the necessary
four satellite con® guration needed to get highly accurate location. However,
the problem of obtaining a satisfactory GPS signal in inner city areas or in
densely forested rural areas, or within signi® cant covered areas such as airport
terminals, bus terminals, or railway stations, and large shopping malls, may
prove insoluble.

5. There is still a scarcity of detailed and accurate commercial databases for
many countries of the world. Many of the existing databases lack information
that is important to a vision impaired or blind traveller (e.g. even information
as fundamental as to whether or not there are sidewalks on either side of roads).
6. Most cities require very large databases, and the storage required is substantial.
This means that access time to bring up map segments after determining
location from a GPS may involve signi® cant delays.

7. The most common routing algorithm uses shortest path or shortest distance
principles; it is uncertain to what extent this criterion is satisfactory for most
pedestrian tra(cid:129) c, and particularly whether it is at all relevant for blind pedes-
et al. ( 1986 ) show that most pedestrian tra(cid:129) c is
trians. For example, SaÈ isaÈ
not spatially optimal in a shortest distance sense.

In such cases as described above, guidance will need to be supplemented by a
local positioning system ( LPS) that might use radio beacon, infrared, cellular tele-
phone, or other types of devices not tied to a person that could help a traveller. The
PGS system would be of much greater value if it could work with an LPS or Talking
Signsâ
system (Crandall et al. 1995) within enclosed areas such as central business
districts, airport terminals, shopping malls, rail or bus terminals.

7. Next steps
7.1. Personalizing the databas e

Transportation science has made innovative use of GPS and GIS components
by assembling them in a vehicle which can travel at speed along designated streets,
roads, and highways, while updating existing road maps (Bossler et al. 1991). This
is done by recording a GPS signal at speci® c locations and depressing a function

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

745

key to code features at that particular location (e.g. a highway entrance or exit; a
bridge or overpass; or a sign). The PGS is capable of being personalized using similar
procedures.

To personalize the PGS system, an individual needs only a framework database
(e.g. the street system of a local area, which, for the United States, is readily available
now from commercial sources such as those listed above) and software that identi® es
the limited range of
functions relevant to the world of the blind traveller. For
example, the blind traveller may wish to enter his or her home location into a
something that is otherwise very unlikely to be geocoded.
commercial databaseÐ
The traveller may then begin to follow a familiar route around a local neighborhood
and, where signi® cant local
features occur, obtain a GPS ® x at that point, and
depress a function key tied to a list of land use types so that a name is given to that
coordinate location, making it accessible within a travel bu(cid:128) er on succeeding trips.
Speci® c features include damaged sidewalk areas (e.g. tree roots or surface irregularit-
ies from vehicular tra(cid:129) c entering driveways), a local bus stop or bus shelter, the
location of a friend’s house, or a local store. In contrast with other systems being
developed at this time only the PGS is conceptualized and designed to give the user
an opportunity to personalize a database and incorporate and delete transient
features (e.g. construction sites) that would otherwise be di(cid:129) cult to maintain in a
database.

7.2. Furthe r developm ent

There are many problems to be solved and much research to be done before the
product reported on here becomes marketable. Three problem domains stand out:
hardware, software, and cognitive behavioural.

In the hardware domain, interfacing a sonar-type obstacle avoider with the PGS
will involve complicated signal detection and transmittal. Of necessity, testing such
developments will require human factors research into the way the di(cid:128) erent signals
can be transmitted, arranged hierarchically in times of hazard exposure, and easily
interpreted by the user. The design and manufacture of an auditory interface and
possibly a backup keyboard interface needs further exploration, and should bene® t
from the current interest in exploration of voice interaction with computers. But the
cutting edge auditory interaction software (such as Dragon Dictate or Naturally
Speaking), needs considerable further work before it can be taken from the stationary
PC to the dynamic wearable computer environment.

In the software domain, relevant research questions include: how can one improve
data accessability from partitioned boxes? How can cross-boundary problems (such
as buildings straddling two partitions) be most e(cid:128) ectively handled? What style of
communication about distance, direction, location and orientation are most e(cid:128) ective
(e.g. relative or absolute, naive or expert language)?

In the data model domain, would use of an object-oriented system (suggested to
be the most `realistic’ because of its capacity to conform most to precepts of cognitive
behaviour) simplify and extend the domain of empirical settings (e.g. urban
databases)?

Cognitive behavioural research problems abound. How many di(cid:128) erent signals
can a traveller comprehend while still being aware of normal ambient sound? Should
signals from local cues be randomized or serialized? How can one design an auditory
interface that explicitly includes distance e(cid:128) ects? What type of layout (or con® gura-
tion) information maximizes comprehension of the environment? What e(cid:128) ect does

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 746

R. G. Golledge et al.

scale changing or zooming have on the listener’s ability to comprehend the informa-
tion being transmitted?

Needless to say, most of these questions need to be solved for future use of GPS
and GIS whether or not the potential users are vision impaired. The rate at which
technology is evolving gives us considerable hope that many of these problems will
be solved in the immediate future. Although the device as conceptualized and built
is close to optimal in terms of the needs of vision impaired or blind travellers, it
may not prove to be the most acceptable by this population. Some users have been
interfere with their normal use of sound to identify
worried that earphones will
things or places (e.g. echo location). Others fail to see why layout information is
needed, i.e. why route information is not enough. Perhaps a somewhat simpli® ed
version that
lies somewhere between a simple path follower (e.g. STRIDER,
Fruchterman, 1995) and a PGS might prove to be the most widely adopted device.
Work on this technology needs to continue, for many of the problems detailed herein
are speci® c to use by vision impaired or blind individuals, and would disappear
when the device is used by those with vision. In the long run it is anticipated that
the PGS will be much more widely adopted by sighted populations than by disabled
populations, particularly as a locating, route selection, and environmental informa-
tion device for travellers in unfamiliar areas or tourists in unfamiliar cultures. It is
this conviction that the Personal Guidance Systems will ultimately be of bene® t to
a signi® cantly large part of both able and disabled populations that warrants con-
tinued exploration of its potential. Along with other ongoing research on technology
such as Talking Signsâ
(Crandall et al. 1995, Bentzen and Mitchell 1995, Golledge
and Marston 1997), auditory/tactual information systems (e.g. Blades et al. 1994,
Parkes and Dear 1997), and other innovative uses of GPS (e.g. Makino et al. 1996,
Gill 1996), perhaps early next century vision impaired people will have the possibility
for an enriched quality of life that includes increased measures of independence and
mobility based on more complete and accurate local geographical knowledge.

8. Final comments

This paper has examined ways that GIS technology can assist a disabled group
(the blind or vision impaired ). Some of the major problems associated with navigation
without sight include availability of
information, accessibility to a surrounding
environment, and independence ( particularly of movement). The last decade has
seen the emergence of a world-wide interest in using current technology to help this
population achieve its goals of overcoming such di(cid:129) culties.

Foremost among these attempts are guidance systems which include both naviga-
tional or way® nding advice, and information about the environment with which one
is interacting. Stationary systems such as talking signs, verbal landmarks, bar code
readers, stationary radio transmitters, and so on are being used in innovative ways
to provide localized on-site information to the traveller. However, they provide
neither navigational assistance in the larger environment, nor general layout informa-
tion such as would be equivalent to what a sighted person could access by looking
at a map or by scanning a city from a lookout point. These technologies, however,
have potential for use within enclosed environments such as air terminals, shopping
malls, large industrial or institutional complexes of buildings, and transit terminals
for rail or road vehicles. It is precisely in these areas that the GPS based system is
currently at its weakest.

All of the systems have speci® c disadvantages. Some of these are external to the

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

747

device (e.g. GPS accuracy, commercial database adequacy) and some are internal to
the device (e.g. directional or non-directional information, and natural or technical
language based instructions). Many of the problems associated with adopting and
using guidance devices have been discussed in this paper. Not the least among these
is that of the legal responsibility of the seller. Obviously environments change, many
of them quite rapidly, and maintaining an up-to-date computerized database may
be an extremely di(cid:129) cult procedure. Such would be required if the claim was to be
made that a true guidance system was being marketed. And ® nally, readers are
advised that, while the basic software needed to run the system exists, some of the
software needed for embellishments (e.g. peronalizing the database, and full speech
interaction with the PGS) are still under development.

Acknowledgments

#EY 09740-02).

This project was supported by the National Institute of Health ( NIH/NEI Grant

References
Albrecht, J., 1995, Universal GIS operations: A task-oriented systematization of data struc-
ture-independent GIS functionality leading towards a geographic modeling language.
A thesis submitted in ful®
llment of the requirement for the degree of Doctor of Natural
Sciences, Department of Geography, University of Vechta, Germany, June.

Axhausen, K. W., and Ga¨ rling, T., 1992, Activity-based approaches to travel analysis:
frameworks, models, and research problems. T ransport Reviews, 12,

Conceptual
323± 341.

Bentzen, B. L., and Mitchell, P. A., 1995, Audible signage as a way® nding aid: Verbal
Landmark versus Talking Signs. Journal of V isual Impairment & Blindness, 89, 494± 505.
Blades, M., 1991, The development of the abilities required to understand spatial representa-
tions. In Cognitive and linguistic aspects of geographical space, edited by D. M. Mark
and A. V. Frank (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press), pp. 81± 115.
Blades, M., Ungar, S., and Spencer, C. P., 1994, Tactile maps used by young children with
visual impairments and blindness. In Proceedings of Canadian Cartographi c Association
and the North American Cartographi c Information Society (Ottawa).

Blasch, B. B., Lagrow, S. J., and De L’ aune, W. R., 1996, Three aspects of coverage provided
by the long cane: Object, surface, and foot-placement preview. Journal of V isual
Impairment & Blindness, 90, 4: 295± 301.

Bossler, J. D., Goad, C. C., Johnson, P. C., and Novak, K., 1991, GPS and GIS: Map the

nation’s highways. Geo Info Systems, 1, 3: 27± 37.

Cicinelli, J. G., 1988, Analysis of human locomotion performed without the use of sight. MA
Thesis, Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara.
Collins, C. C., 1985, On mobility aids for the blind. In Electronic spatial sensing for the blind:
edited by
Contributions
D. H. Warren and E. R. Strelow (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijho(cid:128) Publications), pp. 35± 64.
Couclelis, H., 1996, Verbal directions for way-® nding: Space, cognition, and language. In
T he construction of cognitive maps, edited by J. Portugali (The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers), pp. 133± 153.

rehabilitation, and computer

f rom perception,

vision,

Crandall, W., Bentzen, B. L., and Myers, L., 1995, T alking Signsâ

remote inf rared signage:
A guide for transit managers (San Francisco, CA. The Smith-Kettlewell Eye Institute,
Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center).

Egenhofer, M. J., and Mark, D. M., 1995, Naive Geography. Technical Report 95-8. National
Center for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA), Orono, ME: University
of Maine, and Bu(cid:128) alo, NY: State University of New York (SUNY ).

Evans, G. W., Skorpanich, M. A., Ga¨ rling, T., Bryant, K. J., and Bresolin, B., 1984, The
e(cid:128) ects of pathway con® guration, landmarks, and stress on environmental cognition.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 4, 323± 335.

Franklin, N., 1996, Language as a means of constructing and conveying cognitive maps. In

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 748

R. G. Golledge et al.

T he construction of cognitive maps, edited by J. Portugali (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers), pp. 275± 295.

Ferguson, E. L., and Hegarty, M., 1994, Properties of cognitive maps constructed from texts.

Memory & Cognition, 22, 455± 473.

Fruchterman, J., 1995, Arkenstone’ s orientation tools: Atlas Speaks and STRIDER. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Orientation and Navigation Systems for Blind Persons
( Hat® eld, England ), 1± 2 February.

Gill, J., 1996, T he MoBIC Project (Hat® eld: Royal National Institute for the Blind ).
Golledge, R. G., 1991, Tactual strip maps as navigational aids. Journal of V isual Impairment

& Blindness, 85, 296± 301.

Golledge, R. G., and Marston, J. R., 1997, T alking signs and the accessible city. Paper
presented at the PATH Program-Wide Research Meeting, Richmond Field Station,
University of California, Berkeley, 9± 10 October.

Golledge, R. G., Loomis, J. M., Klatzky, R. L., Flury, A., and Yang, X. L., 1991, Designing
a personal guidance system to aid navigation without sight: Progress on the GIS
component. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5, 373± 395.

Guth, D. A., and Laduke, R., 1994, The veering tendency of blind pedestrians: An analysis
of the problem and literature review. Journal of V isual Impairment & Blindness, 88,
391± 400.

Guth, D. A., and Laduke, R., 1995, Veering by blind pedestrians: Individual di(cid:128) erences and
their implications for instruction. Journal of V isual Impairment & Blindness, 89, 28± 37.
Hauger, J. S., Rigby, J. C., Safewright, M., and McAuley, W. J., 1996, Detectable warning
surfaces at curb ramps. Journal of V isual Impairment & Blindness, 90, 512± 525.
Klatzky, R. L., Loomis, J. M., Beall, A. C., Chance, S. S., and Golledge, R. G., (1988 ),
Spatial updating of self-position and orientation during real, imagined, and virtual
locomotion. Psychological Science, 9, 293± 298.

Lindberg, E., and Ga¨ rling, T. (1982 ) Acquisition of locational information about reference
points during locomotion: The role of central information processing. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 23, 207± 218.

Loomis, J. M., 1985, Digital map and navigation system for the visually impaired. Unpublished

manuscript. Department of Psychology, University of California Santa Barbara.

Loomis, J. M., Golledge, R. G., and Klatzky, R. L., 1995, Personal guidance system for blind
persons. Paper presented at the Conference on Orientation and Navigation Systems
for Blind Persons ( Hat® eld, England ), 1± 2 February.

Loomis, J. M., Hebert, C., and Cicinelli, J. G., 1990, Active localization of virtual sounds.

T he Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 88, 1757± 1764.

Loomis, J. M., Golledge, R. G., Klatzky, R. L., Speigle, J. M., and Tietz, J., 1994, Personal
guidance system for the visually impaired. In Proceedings of
the First Annual
International ACM/SIGCAPH Conference on Assistive T echnologies (Marina Del Rey,
California), pp. 85± 91.

Loomis, J. M., Klatzky, R. L., Golledge, R. G., Cicinelli, J. G., Pellegrino, J. W., and
Fry, P. A., 1993, Non-visual navigation by blind and sighted: Assessment of path
integration ability. Journal of Experimental Psychology, General, 122, 73± 91.

Lynch, K., 1960, T he image of the city (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Makino, H., Ishii, I., and Nakashizuka, M., 1996, Development of navigation system for the
blind using GPS and mobile phone connection. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual
Meeting of the IEEE EMBS, Amsterdam.

Mark, D. M., and Frank, A. (editors), 1991, Cognitive and linguistic aspects of geographic

space (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers).

Piaget, J., and Inhelder, B., 1967, T he child’s conception of space (New York: Norton).
Parkes, D., and Dear, M., 1997, Expanding auditory-tact ual graphics. Presentation made at

CSUN Technology Conference, Los Angeles.

Presson, C. C., and Montello, D. R., 1988, Points of reference in spatial cognition: Stalking
the elusive landmark. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, 378± 381.
Presson, C. C., and Montello, D. R., 1994, Updating after rotational and translational body

movements: Coordinate structure of perspective space. Perception, 23, 1447± 1455.

Rieser, J. J., Guth, D. A., and Hill, E. W., 1986, Sensitivity to perspective structure while

walking without vision. Perception, 15, 173± 188.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 GPS based guidance system

749

Sa¨ isa¨ , J., Svenson-Ga¨ rling, A., Ga¨ rling, T., and Lindberg, E., 1986, Intra-urban cognitive
distance: The relationship between judgment of straight-line distances, travel distances,
and travel times. Geographical Analysis, 18, 167± 174.

Siegel, A. W., and White, S. H., 1975, The development of spatial representations of large
scale environments. In H.W. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and behavior,
V olume 10 (New York: Academic Press), pp. 9± 55.

Spencer, C. P., and Blades, M., 1986, Pattern and process: A review essay on the relationship
between behavioural geography and environmental psychology. Progress in Human
Geography, 10, 230± 248.

Strelow, E. R., and Brabyn, J. A., 1982, Locomotion of the blind controlled by natural

sound cues. Perception, 11, 635± 640.

Taylor, H. A., and Tversky, B., 1994, Perspective in spatial descriptions. Paper prepared for
the 90th Annual Meeting of the Association of American Geographers, San Francisco,
California, 29 March± 4 April.

Ungar, S., Blades, M., Spencer, C., and Morsley, K., 1994, Can visually impaired children
use tactile maps to estimate directions? Journal of V isual Impairment & Blindness,
88, 221± 233.

Worchel, P., 1951, Space perception and orientation in the blind. Psychological Monographs:

General and Applied, 65, 1± 27 (Whole No. 332).

Welsh, R. L., and Blasch, B. B. (editors), 1980, Foundation of orientation and mobility (New

York: American Foundation for the Blind ).

Yang, X-L., 1991, Design and implementation of a spatial data base for a blind and visually
impaired navigation system unsing GIS: Components of a visual guidance system. A
thesis submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Arts in Geography. University of California, Santa Barbara, March.

Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:27 13 March 2015 