GeoInformatica 9:1, 5–32, 2005
# 2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc. Manufactured in The Netherlands.

Interpretive Tools for 3-D Structural Geological
Modelling Part II: Surface Design from Sparse
Spatial Data

KEVIN B. SPRAGUE*,1 AND ERIC A. DE KEMP 2
1NRCAN/ESS/ESS INFO GeoInformatics, Ottawa, Canada
E-mail: ksprague@nrcan.gc.ca
2NRCAN/ESS/GSC Continental Geoscience Division, Geological Survey, Ottawa, Canada
E-mail: Edekemp@nrcan.gc.ca

Received April 19, 2002; Revised March 3, 2004; Accepted October 15, 2004

Abstract

We present software tools and methods applicable to the geological modelling of sparse spatial and structural
data within a 3-D digital environment. Free-form surfaces derived from section-style control frames and
constrained by field-based structural measurements are employed as partially automated design aids intended to
speed up and streamline the 3-D geological model building process. Some design degrees of freedom such as
NURBS tension (or weights), knot sequencing and tying surface features are also discussed with examples
drawn from spatial and structural data collected in Baffin Island by the Geological Survey of Canada and near-
mine exploration data from Canadian mines. Interpolation of field-based structural measurements along the
boundary of an unknown surface is also demonstrated. This work is potentially relevant to regional mappers and
others dealing with sparse spatial and structural data, and/or conceptual surface modelling.

Keywords: geology, structure, surface, NURBS, Be´zier, sparse, mining, orientation, map trace

1.

Introduction

Sparse data is often the rule rather than the exception for regional mapping and mining
exploration work. As a result, many structural geologists must routinely make sensible
conclusions about subsurface structures through extrapolation from incomplete data. The
modelling problem that we address is surface construction given sparse spatial and
structural data in a 3-D digital environment. We explore the utility of using free-form
surfaces to model geological data of this nature. In the unconstrained case, free-form
surfaces can be defined completely by a designer who manipulates graphic tools to
outline the shape being modelled. In practice, the detail required to create an exact geo-
logical surface (for instance, one that delineates the boundary between two geological
bodies) can be excessive, and so approximations are ofien used. If the approximation

* Corresponding author.

6

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

mechanism relies on interpretation, as it often must using current technology, then the
design engine to ensure utility should satisfy certain requirements such as an easy-to-use,
interactive interface within a 3-D environment that is capable of rendering common
representations of geological data (e.g., points, curves, surfaces, grids). It
is also
desirable, in as much as possible, that the user need only manipulate a small number of
graphical entities to produce the imagined surface, otherwise the design process can
become prohibitively tedious. This latter requirement calls for a higher level of
modelling abstraction in cases where the design degrees of freedom are conceptually
simple and broad, but consistency with data demands an excessive level of hand-crafted
detail for some constrained piece(s). For example, if the boundary of a surface at ground
level is known together with some structural data at that boundary, but its shape at depth
is unknown, we would like to use only a few design entities to describe the depth
structure of the surface whilst constraining the surface to exactly match structural
measurements at the known boundary. We say a few because it does not make sense to
produce an overly detailed design where virtually nothing is known with certainty.
Hence, given this scenario we must be able to concentrate on the simplistic design at
depth while automation of some kind keeps the boundary in check. One further
requirement integral to this kind of design process is smoothness of the resulting surface,
since unsightly features that do not directly relate to measurements can be distracting and
may obscure the interpretation or presentation of the material.

There are some obvious pitfalls to be wary of when employing a design-based
approach to surface modelling with limited data. For one, we must somehow keep track
of exactly what is data and what is interpretation. Surprisingly, over time such details
can be lost, especially when data is revisited years later by someone unfamiliar with the
original data or interpretation thereof. Furthermore, when we deviate from known data
we also deviate from certainty, or at least from a comfortable degree of certainty.
Keeping a tight handle on uncertainty is a major issue accompanying interpretive or
speculative workVthis is to be expected whenever users are empowered with design aids
that allow them to reach beyond what is well known with little effort. We do not address
these issues here. In light of the above drawbacks, design-based approaches seem
appropriate mainly for highly conceptual work that
for some reason must be
accomplished with limited data, such as Bwhat-if ^ scenarios, situations where data is
fundamentally scarce, or when unknown structures need to be established (or at least
parameterised) in order to move a model forward in a larger context (e.g., to constrain a
simulation). Ideally, we would prefer to simulate thousands of realisations in some kind
of structural simulator that randomises design degrees of freedom, and from these select
one or more models that fall in line with a geological interpretation, with the ability to
update the structures effortlessly when new data arrives. Unfortunately,
to our
knowledge such a simulator is not currently available and we have to content ourselves
with a sub-optimal solution for the time being.

Our approach to surface modelling using sparse data relies on a well-known family of
design aids proven to be appropriate for many kinds of geological surfaces [7], [8], [13],
[16] and which are common throughout the field of Computer Aided Geometric Design
(CAGD) [1], [4]Y[6], [15], [17], [23]. We apply and adapt these basic methods to some

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

7

specific challenges in a regime where surface modelling is largely interpretive. The
curve and surface construction techniques presented in this paper are merely an
application of CAGD technology, and we present nothing new in this area. Rather, we
display software tools that we have developed for designing surfaces quickly and
efficiently within a 3-D digital environment whilst constraining them to the available
(sparse) data. Software for this project was developed by Natural Resources Canada
as a C++ plugin to the gOcadi software system, and may be obtained commercially
through [20].

In what follows we discuss interpolation, design degrees of freedom, automation,
structural dip plane graphics, and interpolation of structural measurementsVall within a
sparse data environment. Several practical examples, real world models and illustrations
are mixed into the body in topical context.

2.

Interpolation

Interpolation refers to the process of filling in unknown values in a sequence based on
known values. In this work, surface design is based on an adaptation of two central
CAGD interpolation methods capable of generating smooth curves from a sparse set of
points: Be´zier curves and Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS) [1], [6], [15], [17],
[23]. Input for both methods is a control net [15]Vfor curves this corresponds to an
ordered set of point locations that outline a curvilinear shape. For visual clarity, we
connect these points with a series of line segments to form a polygonal line. Output is a
smooth curve (Figure 1a). Note that the polygonal line in Figure 1a has been used in two
ways: in the case of a Be´zier curve, the polygonal line is a control net, whereas for a
NURBS curve, the polygonal line consists of spline junction [15] points which lie
directly on the curve (i.e., intermediate Be´zier points are not shown). We use the term
control point loosely to describe either of these.

If we think of a surface as a curve moving through space [15], then a sequence of
polygonal lines, which translates to a matrix-style control net, can be used to define a
surface using Be´zier and/or NURBS curves in two parametric directions1 (Figure 1c, d, e).
We refer to the sequence of polygonal lines as a control frame (Figure 1b), or grip frame
[11]. The latter term emphasises the interactive nature of the graphics design tool used to
drag vertices for shape editing.2

Be´zier and NURBS design aids were originally engineered for the automotive and
aerospace design industries and have since been applied successfully to many other areas
including geological model building [8], [9], [13], [16]. They are well suited to a cross-
sectional approach to smooth surface construction and are easy to manipulate in a 3-D
graphics environment. Be´zier curves are named for the French mathematician Pierre
Be´zier (1910Y1999) [1], [15] who worked as an engineer for the Renault car company.
They are polynomial curves of degree N j 1 when derived from N control points. A
Be´zier curve duplicates the endpoints of the source polygonal line, and is confined to the
convex hull3 of its control net. The magnitude of binomial coefficients in the equation for
a Be´zier curve and the fact that the polynomial degree is tied to the number of control

8

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

Figure 1.
surface control frame with (c) Be´zier patch, (d) NURBS surface, (e) Be´zier-NURBS hybrid surface.

(a) Be´zier curve (light) and a sinuous NURBS curve (dark) for a single polygonal Fcontrol_ line, (b)

points precludes their use for large numbers of control points. B-splines (basis-splines)
are created by linking together a collection of Be´zier curves under imposed continuity
constraints and are routinely employed to smoothly interpolate any number of nodes.
The distinction between NURBS and standard b-splines (i.e., the BNUR^ in NURBS)
is two-fold:

1) Non-uniformVthis refers to the scheme used to parameterise the curve (or surface).
A uniform parameterisation means that we simply number control frame points in
proper order without regard for geometry or lengths (e.g., {0, 1, 2...}). In any case, the
numbers we assign are referred to as knots.

2) RationalVa weight or tension parameter can be applied to each control point. Be´zier

curves and Be´zier patches can also be rational.

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

9

Regarding item (1), other parameterisation methods include chord length, centripetal,
and Foley. The collection of knots assigned to the control points is referred to as a knot
sequence [15], and intervals in the knot sequence correspond to the beginning and end of
Be´zier curves that, when strung together, define a single NURBS curve. So a NURBS
curve is a composite of Be´zier curves, and parameterising a NURBS curve means
defining a global curve parameter t and some interval [u0, uL] such that if t = u is within
the interval then u corresponds to a point on one of the Be´zier curves.

Both knot sequencing and tension influence the shape of a NURBS surface. A Be´zier
patch, on the other hand, responds only to tension. High tension at a control point pulls
neighbouring surface points closer to the source of the tension (Figure 2) whereas low
tension loosens the grip. The knot sequencing strategy employed can also have drastic
impact on the resulting shape of a NURBS curve or surface [11], [15]. Overall, we have
found that the chord length scheme is the best behaved for our purposes in the sense that
results are normally in line with expectations. In the chord length knot-sequencing
scheme, knots are assigned values according to distance from a curve endpoint or
reference point as measured along the path of the polygonal line. We have also found
that weights are not normally necessary to achieve the desired shape when working with
NURBS objects as long as new control points are easily added within the 3-D camera.
They do, however, tend to play a strong role when working with Be´zier patches.

There is more to say in the way of NURBS parameterisation for surfaces before
proceeding. We have not yet addressed the effect of the parameter value distribution on
the shape of a surface described by a control frame. The distribution of chosen parameter
values does not normally impact the shape of any NURBS curve that interpolates a
polygonal line, but rather the linkages between NURBS curves that trace polygonal lines
within a control frame (Figure 3a). In our surface construction scheme, each interpolated
curve must consist of equal number of Fsample_ points (note, however, that polygonal
lines within a control frame can have different numbers of points). The sample points are
connected from one curve to the next using NURBS curves in the cross-curve direction
as part of the surface mesh. Thus the parameter value distribution impacts the shape of
the surface between polygonal lines. For example, parameter value synchronisation can
be used to spatially Btie^ points in the cross-curve parametric direction (Figure 3b, see
also Section 10). Tied points are guaranteed to lie along the same NURBS curve.

Figure 2. Be´zier patches derived from a control net. The middle graph is without tension and the right-most
graph shows the effect of high tension at a point (0.9 on a scale 0.1).

10

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

(a) A NURBS surface. (b) The same NURBS surface with spatial ties linking two chosen features
Figure 3.
across polygonal control lines (cross-curve direction). The Bties^ (large cubes) mark feature locations. NURBS
curves are visualised as traces along the surface in the cross-curve parametric direction. Notice that a single
NURBS curve passes through each of the two trios of tied points in (b).

3. Application: Bornite zone in a mine model

In this example, a control frame is used to define the shape of an irregular ore bodyVa
greater then 3% copper zone with abundant bornite mineralogy. Referred to as the
FBornite Zone,_ it forms a volume of highly productive ore and defining its geometry in
3-D would be of great value for reserve estimation and interpretation of the ore genesis.
The control frame in this case is defined from input of 2-D interpreted plan views at
semi-regular spaced depths. Initially, 2-D interpretations provided by the mine geologists
are created from local slices of projected drill hole data and maps from active mine
workings. These 2-D interpretations were recast as components of a 3-D control frame in

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

11

Figure 4.
to mine infrastructure.

(a) Upper and (b) lower bornite zone tied control frames and surfaces. (c) Shown together in relation

the context of the original 3-D data points by automatically re-sampling the original
polygonal lines or re-digitising these lines manually. In moving from 2-D polygonal lines
to 3-D surface construction, the continuation of common features requires delicate
spatial synchronisation across neighbouring plan-sections. This synchronisation was
accomplished using spatial ties, depicted as large cubes in Figure 4. Without such ties,
self-intersections of the surface were unavoidable. A self-intersecting surface in geology
is impossible, so this critical step of tie lining by the geologist is needed to make a more
realistic looking structure.

4. Control frame generation and automation

Controlling large numbers of control points individually by hand can be tedious and lead
to surfaces with undesirable extraneous features such as self-intersections and
meaningless localised distortions. As a result, there is clearly a need to explore means
by which collections of control points can be manipulated in an easy, smooth and well-
defined manner.

One approach that we have employed is to use a rough control frame to automatically
generate and guide a more refined control frame that respects the boundary of a surface

12

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

as well as structural measurements along that boundary. The idea is that the rough
control frame conveys the structure at depth using only a few polygonal lines, while
the refined (automated) control frame keeps the boundary in check. Figure 5 displays
a rough control frame and a derived (refined) hybrid Be´zierYNURBS control frame.
The refined control frame reacts to movement of the rough control frame points, or
super-grip points, in a manner that is conducive to interactive and interpretive free-form
design and that respects the control data. There are many possible ways to achieve such
partial automation. In general, design requirements and constraints will drive the nature
of a super-grip point scheme. Without the extra layer of abstraction, in most practical
cases the user would have to create and manipulate an excessive number of polygonal
lines to achieve the desired shape, and furthermore updating the surface in the face of
new data would likely be prohibitive. It is appropriate for use only when the surface
being modeled does not branch, otherwise the design must be partitioned and meshes
merged and possibly cut. An example application of the procedure is provided in the
section that follows.

Another approach to partial automation that we have found beneficial is the use of a
keel to guide the automated construction of a control frame. Given a surface boundary
complete with structural measurements, a keel is polygonal line that intersects the
boundary at least once and roughly outlines the depth degree of freedom of the surface
(Figure 6). Moving a point on the keel generates a new control frame and hence a new
surface. Obviously,
this method is only appropriate for simple surface designs as
described above. For the case in Figure 6, each member of the rough control frame (not
shown) is generated automatically using a point on the keel and two points on the surface
boundary; the points on the boundary are the endpoints of the polygonal control line.
Once created, the rough control frame spawns the creation of a refined control frame.
Details concerning migration from a rough control frame to a refined control frame appear
in the next section. The refined control frame is enough to define the surface.

Figure 5. A rough control frame (thick gray) for a dome together with a refined hybrid control frame (thin
dark blue) and the resulting surface (light blue). The dome is shown with a visualisation of structural
measurements (yellow/red) within the surrounding fabric [22]. These tablets and other dip plane graphics are
also found within the SPARSE plugin [20].

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

13

Figure 6. A keel, together with a surface boundary containing structural measurements, is used to guide the
construction of a rough control frame. The rough control frame guides the construction of a refined control
frame, which defines the control net for a surface (for ease of visibility, a hybrid Be´zierYNURBS surface is
shown).

For the sake of brevity, in what follows we define a map trace as a geological
interpretation delineating the intersection of a geologic boundary as it breaks through
intersects a given elevation plane. The surface
the surface of the earth or as it
boundaries shown in Figures 5 and 6 are practical examples of map traces, though
they need not be closed. Map traces, and the attached structural data, are a central
focus of our current schemes for automation (for more detail on map traces and an
illustration see Section 6).

5. Application: Generating a refined control frame for a map trace

As an example, we shall outline a procedure that produces a surface given a map trace
and a rough control frame outlining the interpretation of an imagined geological surface
(Figure 7a). Manipulation of only the super-grip points shapes the final form surface. As
mentioned in the previous section, the process is appropriate for structures exhibiting a
single, non-branching directional axis and a simple surface-bounding map trace (i.e., a
simple non-branching fold axis). To include the case of branching, one would need to
divide the problem into non-branching parts and later merge the separate surface pieces
together. Such a process is likely to require cuts and also a smoothing operation at the
cut boundaries.

In this section we must emphasise the distinction between form curves and polygonal
control lines (or form lines). A form curve, in the present context, is the result of an
NURBS interpolation or Be´zier approximation of a polygonal control line. Thus a form
curve can be a Be´zier or NURBS curve. Recall that it is the polygonal control lines that
compose the control frame (Figure 7b, spheres and cubes). Here the term control frame is
synonymous with a Fcontrol net_ for Be´zier curves or the set of Fjunction points_ for
NURBS curves, the latter two being common in CAGD literature.

The process of creating a refined control frame for a map trace proceeds in what
follows. The user provides a map trace and a rough control frame. The control frame
contains the initial and final polygonal control lines at opposite ends of the principle
directional axis, and the ends of each polygonal control line coincide with the map

14

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

Figure 7. Example of a control frame generation scheme: a rough control frame (a) is used to automatically
generate a refined control frame (e) that respects the map trace and the attached structural data. The refined
control frame is then used to generate a surface (f ).

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

15

is assumed that

these polygonal control

trace where possible (Note: these are simple to generate automatically). Neighbouring
pairs of polygonal control lines partition the map trace into regions (e.g., box in
lines do not overlap when
Figure 7a). It
projected onto the medium plane of the map trace (normally XY ). Note that two
consecutive polygonal control lines together with the corresponding map trace segments
form a simple closed loop. Next, the opposing map trace segments of a loop are
interpolated individually so that each side consists of an equivalent number of points M.
Bounding control polygonal lines are interpolated using N points to generate form
curves. Connecting, in sequence, the M points of opposing map trace curves with straight
crossing lines that contain N points further partitions the loop (Figure 7c). Note that it is
not necessary that the initial polygonal control lines have the same number of points.
This is an advantage over traditional tie-line methods that require equal-point form-lines
at the onset. The next step is to identify the transformation T I
that maps the initial
straight crossing line to the initial form curve and also the transformation T F that
maps the final straight crossing line to the final form curve in the loop. Each trans-
formation is characterised by a set of N-2 vectors (Figure 7d, shown as near-vertical
lines). Their purpose is to provide a reference for mapping intermediate straight crossing
lines to intermediate Finterpolated_ curves so as to smooth over the transition from initial
to final form curves. If, in projection onto the map trace plane, intermediate curves
cross over the map trace or over one another then the initial control frame is too
coarse in the given loop and refinement must occur before proceeding.

To approximate the depth and relative position of the intermediate curve points, we
transform each point of an intermediate (straight) crossing line by adding to it a linear
in sequence. The
combination of the corresponding boundary form curve vectors,
parametric distance of the crossing line along the reference map trace segments deter-
mines the coefficients of the linear combination (i.e., intermediate curves are influenced
according to a ratio of their parametric distances from each bounding form curve, see
Eq. 1). Figure 7e shows the transformed crossing lines, which are now interpreted as
polygonal control lines for a refined control frame. In a sense, we are Fpushing_ down on
the straight crossing lines of Figure 7dVbending them so that they conform to the
imagined shape of the surface within the loop in such a way that they coincide with the
bounding curves, resulting in a new set of polygonal control lines as shown in Figure 7e.
0 from its straight crossing line
Quantitatively, to find an intermediate control point pij
counterpart pij we write (using a uniform parameterisation along the map trace segments)

p0
ij ¼ pij þ

M (cid:1) i
M (cid:1) 1

v I

j þ

i (cid:1) 1
M (cid:1) 1

v F
j ;

ð1Þ

I and vj

F denote the set of transformation vectors for the initial and final form
where vj
curves bounding the section and i = 1 . . M, j = 1 . . N. Note that moving a control point
from the initial rough control frame (i.e., a super-grip point) causes only those
intermediate control points in neighbouring loops to be updated.

Here we assumed a complete set of structural data. Exactly how to define the slopes
at the surface boundary in Figure 7 given sparse structural information is a topic of the
next section.

16

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

6. Map traces, orientation vectors and structural ribbons

6.1. Map trace and structural data acquisition

Proper collection, storage and manipulation of geological orientation data are critical for
3-D modeling of sparse data. It is common to measure orientation properties in the field
along the boundary where the body breaks through the earth’s surface. From this practice
we gain two kinds of information: spatial locations of points on a surface boundary and
corresponding structural measurements. The structural measurements may come from
the boundary itself or the surrounding fabric [22]. Frequently, these data are spatially
sparse, having been obtained via examination of rocky outcrops. A geologist interprets
the spatial data and creates curvilinear pieces that
lie on a map trace. Through
interpolation of some kind (tracing, NURBS, or otherwise), the geologist completes the
map trace by connecting the pieces so that together they form a single curve. However,
the structural data remains to be extended to the map trace and interpolated (Figure 8).
In general, North American geologists do not measure the direction of dip directly, but
use instead a horizontal vector 90- to the dip direction called the strike; that is the
horizontal intersection of the geologic surface. The strike is the direction a structural
contour line would make on the geologic surface. In addition, the right hand rule
convention is applied to ensure that, of the two possible strike directions, the one that is
used is oriented so that the surface slopes downward and to the right of the strike vector.
Outside of North America the convention tends to favor the measuring of dip direction
rather than strike. For the purposes of visualisation and ease of interpolation, we convert
either strike or dip direction format as applicable into a single three-component
orientation vector.

6.2. Orientation vector

An orientation vector [7] is a three-dimensional unit vector representation of the
maximum slope orientation. It characterises the point spatial orientation of the surface of
a geological body and is measured by dip direction and dip angles.

The coordinates of an orientation vector D = (dx, dy, dz) are easily derived from
corresponding dip ((cid:1)) and dip direction ((cid:2)) angles through the following trigonometric
formula: (see Figure 9)

dx ¼ cos (cid:1)ð Þ (cid:2) sin (cid:2)ð Þ;
dy ¼ cos (cid:1)ð Þ (cid:2) cos (cid:2)ð Þ;
dz ¼ (cid:1)sin (cid:1)ð Þ:

ð2Þ

Notice that Dk k ¼ 1. The minus sign in dz is based on the assumption that we are
changing from a coordinate system where the positive z-direction points into the earth to

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

17

Figure 8.
(a) Map of the Nadluardjuk Lake area of central Baftin Island, Canada, together with some
structural data. The map trace, outlined in red, represents a possible paleoproterozoic thrust 3-D surface [10].
(b) Map trace shown with a NURBS control frame (spheres and cubes), form curves (blue) and refined control
frame (faint). Nearby fabric structural measurements are propagated to the map trace by either grabbing the
nearest measurements, inverse distance weighting, or some other appropriate method.

18

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

Figure 9. Dip direction ((cid:2)) and dip ((cid:1)). Note that the dip direction is always an angle measured in the
horizontal plane while the dip (i.e., 45-) is always measured in the vertical plane. For geological applications
(cid:2) = 0 at north direction, (cid:1) = 0 for horizontal dip and (cid:1) = 90- when dip is vertical.

one where positive z points upward. The vector coordinates dx, dy, and dz are also
referred to as vector cosines.

Within a digital computing environment, employing a 3-D vector representation of
orientation has several advantages over using traditional dip direction (or strike) and dip
measurements. 3-D vectors are easy to display and manipulate (i.e., vector addition), and
change of basis or other transformations are easily applied. By controlling the
representation space of the orientation vectors, we may also take advantage of a variety
of vector interpolation schemes (see below). A disadvantage is that when the dip angle is
exactly 90 degrees (vertical), the dip plane normal cannot be derived from the orientation
vector alone.

Strike and dip measurements are often sparse, and so a complete description of the
orientation of a surface along the geological boundary requires that we employ a method
of interpolating orientation vectors along a polygonal line. Using the spatial co-ordinates
to define a knot sequence (a parameterisation of the curve), B-spline routines may be
employed to smoothly propagate orientation vectors to points on a map trace lacking
orientation data. Naive interpolation of vector cosine co-ordinates does not, however,
always produce satisfactory results, especially in areas characterised by a high degree of
curvature. In cases where it is desirable to allow orientation vector interpolation to
respond to curvature (i.e., the rim of a speculated bowl-shape), it may become necessary
to transform the orientation vector co-ordinates to a new basis defined by the plane

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

19

normal to the Finstantaneous_ direction of propagation along the curve, or propagating
plane. Interpolation of the transformed vector co-ordinates is then performed in this
alternative basis, and the results are later transformed back to the standard co-ordinate
representation (where we started). For information concerning vector change of basis
transformations see Butkov [3].

Without loss of generality, we assume here that the polygonal curve is (roughly)
confined to a horizontal planeVenough at least to ensure that the projection of the
Z-direction vector (Fup_) onto the propagation plane at each node is not null. The original
basis set (cid:1)^ii; ^jj; ^kk(cid:2) is mapped to a new basis set (cid:1)^ii0; ^jj0; ^kk0(cid:2) at each node i. The propagating
plane defines the new basis set. In the new basis, the normalised propagating direction
defines the x0-axis, the normalised projection of the original z-axis onto the propagating
plane defines the z0-axis and the cross product of z0 and x0 basis vectors defines the
y0-axis. Specifically,

;

vi
^i0i0 ¼
vik k
^j0j0 ¼ ^k0k0 (cid:2) ^i0i0;
^k0k0 ¼ ^kk (cid:1) ð^kk (cid:3) ^i0i0Þ^i0i0

ð3Þ

where vi is the traverse direction along the polygonal line at node i. At the curve end
points, we choose v0 = p1 j p0 and vN = pN j pN j 1 and for intermediate points vi =
pi + 1 j pij1. Figure 10 illustrates various forms of orientation vector interpolation using
NURBS along a polygonal line.

6.3.

Structural ribbon

The core idea of a ribbon is that it is an extended 3-D map trace [11]. It serves as a visual
guide for the linear projection of structural measurements topologically connected by a
map trace. Ribbons also provide a visualisation of inside-outside topology through side
colouring, and furthermore act as a digitization guide when creating a rough control
frame to model the corresponding surface at depth (Figure 11). The simplest way to
create a ribbon along a map trace is by connecting the tips of orientation vectors and
forming a mesh with their bases at points on the map trace.

Given a map trace together with some strike and dip measurements along the line,
one can often design, through interpolation or other means, a reasonable representation
of the orientation of the surface defining the geologic body at the map trace boundary.
The orientation of the surface at this boundary may be expressed in terms of orien-
tation vectors, which in turn can be used to construct a ribbon extending into the earth
(Figure 11). As a ribbon represents an estimate of the local dip of a surface, an expert
can digitize a series of rough cross-section interpretations through these ribbons;
attempting to respect local slopes and constructing form lines at depth that are com-
patible with map patterns and structural styles in the region. These rough form-lines are
combined into a control frame that will be used to create a more accurate repre-

20

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

Figure 10. Two orientation vector interpolation schemes along a polygonal line using NURBS. (a) Original
vectors, (b) standard coordinate interpolation (ignores curvature, preserves original data), (c) interpolation using
local coordinate system defined by the propagating plane ( preserves original data). Note: interpolation by
projecting onto the propagating plane is also possible. This may alter original orientation data, however,
original ribbon (see below) surface normals remain intact.

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

21

Figure 11. Example map trace (dark blue) shown with orientation vectors (light blue), a structural ribbon
(green/purple), plus rough (grey) and refined (yellow) control frames. Orientation vectors (red arrows) at the
ends of the rough polygonal control lines are interpolated (automatically) along the map trace so that local
slopes can be utilised as initial tangents for the refined control frame.

sentation of the surface of the geologic body (i.e., a more refined control frame
consisting of more polygonal lines). Utilisation of the control frame now facilitates
interpretation in 3-D rather than interpretations along narrow 2-D corridors, as would
be the case when iteratively interpreting several serial map-based sections or multiple
plan views in a mine. In effect, the control frame will automatically tie the individual

Figure 12. The stages of designing a surface from a map trace with some orientation data. Note that with
sufficient automation, all the user should be required to do by hand is construct either a keel or a rough control
frame.

22

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

polygonal control
line interpretations into a single compiled 3-D interpretation,
avoiding an often tedious Ftie-line_ process of linking critical structures such as
troughs, inflection points and hinge lines. The rough control frame orientation vectors
then act as initial tangents for interpolation of the polygonal control lines using a
NURBS or FHybrid_-style surface generator.

The next section follows an example of interpretive surface construction that utilises a

structural ribbon.

7. Application: Surface construction from sparse structural data

Figure 12 presents an overview of the employed surface construction methodology given
a map trace and sparse structural data. The process begins by extracting strike and dip
information from fabric-embedded spatial data in the neigbourhood of the map trace
curve, either by simply grabbing nearby measurements, computing a weighted average,
or through some other appropriate means as determined by the nature of the available
data (Figure 12aVstructural data is shown as oriented discs shaded by dip angle) [11].
Orientation vectors are then computed from the strike and dip angles using (Eq. 1) and
are attached as properties to the map trace nodes (Figure 8).

Additional orientation vectors must then be assigned to nodes lacking orientation data
through NURBS interpolation, as demonstrated in the previous section, or by some other
reasonable means (Figure 12b).

Now that all map trace nodes carry orientation data, we may construct a structural
ribbon that dives into the earth (Figure 12c). The geologist uses expert knowledge of the
region, in addition to the visual reference provided by the ribbon, to digitize a rough set
of 3-D form lines. These 3-D form lines constitute the control frame (Figure 12c). A
starting rough control frame could also have been generated using a keel (see Section 4
and Figure 6). Form-line tangent vectors can then be assigned from map trace orientation
vectors. Note that using the rough control frame alone to represent the surface does not
produce a satisfactory result since the resulting surface deviates strongly from structural
measurements and the boundary (Figure 12d).

The rough control frame can now act as an interactive super-grip frame, automatically
generating a refined control frame after each edit (Figure 12e). The refined control frame
is at last interpolated to create a final surface representation of the original data using a
NURBS or Hybrid surface generating routine (Figure 12f ). The slope of the final surface
at its ground-level boundary will respect all selected orientation vectors.

8. Extending or combining control frames

The control frames used to design local geological surface characteristics often cannot be
easily extended beyond their original domain to include neighbouring features or features
at an extended regional scale. In a model there may exist several control frames, each of
which defines a piece of an extended structure. One can opt to generate a Fregional_

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

23

Figure 13. Combining Flocal_ control frames to form a regional one.

control frame based on a medium plane through the control data (i.e., map traces,
outcrop data, surfaces, etc.). A starting control frame is generated along the medium
plane, which is then automatically adjusted to conform to the control data. The resolution
(distances between polygonal control lines and density along one) of the control frame
can be adapted so that surface features of varying frequency are well characterised.
Constrained Discrete Smooth Interpolation (DSI) [18] can then be implemented to
improve control frame smoothness. To this end, we employ routines designed to shape
a regional control frame to scattered pieces of localized model data (control frames,

Figure 14. Generating an Faverage_ surface through a point cloud from a medium plane perspective view. (a)
A medium plane for a point cloud and a Fstarting_ control frame. (b) Automatically adjusted control frame and
the resulting surface shown together with the point cloud.

24

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

25

resulting surfaces, etc.). Figure 13 illustrates the procedure. The method may also be
applied to constructing a kind of Faverage_ surface through a point cloud data set
(Figure 14) referenced from the perspective view of a medium plane through the
pointset.

In Figure 14b, the control points from Figure 14a are automatically adjusted in a
direction normal to the medium plane depending on the spatial location of neighbours
within the point cloud, thus generating a Ftight_ fitting control frame that outlines a
surface. Note that if no data are found within a tolerable search radius of a given control
point, then that control point is removed from the frame. Manual edits are not normally
required except with regard to outliers. A nearest neighbour distance property on the
point set could be used to filter outliers statistically, if desired. The resulting surface
captures the local variability of the point cloud data in addition to the general shape. It
does not allow for branching though, except through partitioning.

9. Application: Geologic body in a mine model

2-D map based regional geologic data and denser 3-D mine data tends to be interpreted
almost exclusively in a 2-D environment. This idealized example shows the
interpretation of a complex closed geologic body from a mine undertaken in 3-D.
Similar to regional data, a single line interpretation is drawn on a section or plan map
using available (usually sparse) local control points (Figure 15). A series of these line
interpretations can be compiled into a control frame and manipulated in 3-D. Using
regional geologic map data the lines would be composed of a series of vertical cross-
section interpretations. Alternatively, in a mine data set, they could be established from
serial mine plans or sections. More accurate information such as map traces (also
interpretations but in map view) or well-established horizon data (e.g. established from
seismic picks or detailed drill logs) can be used to refine the model by adding a
polygonal control line directly to the control frame. Now by using a single interface
to manipulate the interpreted surface in 3-D it is relatively easy to update the model
if a map trace were to be
should any single element be changed. For example,

Figure 15. Example of the 3-D interpretive process using control frames and map traces. (a) The geologist
interprets the local extent (red line) of the control point observations (red spheres) of a given rock type from
drill core data (curvilinear point streams). Note that this interpretation is available for quick updating using the
local control points (magenta spheres). The interpretation is conducted with only a narrow slice of the data, in
this case from drill core. (b) Later local polygonal control lines can be modified so that the interpolated surface
is compatible with more extensive drill data. (c) Specific control line data from map traces, or as in this case
horizon intersection traces, can be exactly fitted during the surface interpolation. (d) Internal geometry between
a cross cutting known horizon and the modelled surface must be respected. (e) A control frame is constructed
with this control line data (red line) with control frame end points snapped to it. (f ) Final interpreted form
surface that is geometrically consistent with the local detailed observational data: drill core information and a
known crosscutting horizon.

26

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

Figure 17.
Interpreted control frame ( polygonal
control lines with blue balls at vertices and red
cubes at extremities) digitized along vertical sec-
tions perpendicular to the regional fold axis (smooth
red lines). Note the use of tie-points ( purple cubes)
along the fold axis to force NURBS parameter-
isation to follow common interpreted features from
one section to the next.

Figure 16. Musselwhite Mine control data set:
Regional distribution of highly magnetic Banded
Iron Formation shown as blue curve-lineaments.
Red and yellow dots indicate sub-surface pierce
points of magnetic banded iron formation. Opapi-
reference. Map is
miskan Lake is shown for
approximately 5 km wide. For details concerning
geologic context see [2].

Figure 18. Resultant regional NURBS surface of
folded geologic surface. Interpretive control frame
and tie-lines can be updated as new control
information is added to the model. Structural
contours on NURBS surface represent 500 meter
elevations. Notice much of the model is above the
lake level, indicating that in this flat region of the
Canadian Shield much of the model is above ground
and represents a pre-erosional structure. Mine
explorationists will naturally be more interested in
the existing lower portion of the model where real
exploitable mineral resources exist.

Figure 19. Lower underground NURBS surface
(red surface) clipped by present day topography.
Structural contours spaced at 100 meters. This
surface now forms a locus of exploration interest
and can be rigorously interrogated in the context of
the existing productive ore body (depicted as
coloured balls along the axis of a major fold hinge,
red balls indicate highest values). Yellow line
segments indicate drilling density. Orientation
sphere in center of image indicates mine grid
north-south as red great circle, blue as horizontal
and green as mine grid east-west.

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

27

re-interpreted or a cross-cutting horizon updated, the control frame end points would
just need to be re-snapped to the control line matching the map trace or updated horizon.
Then a new form surface could automatically be calculated to match the updated data
(e.g. Figure 12f ).

10. Application: Regional banded iron formation surfaceVmusselwhite gold mine

Geological processes at the regional scale in the oldest parts of the Canadian Shield
involve complex deformation histories that produce kilometer sized structures termed
interference folds [21]. These folds are difficult to visualise in 3-D for a multitude of
reasons but mostly because of limited 3-D control information and the difficulty in
constructing these surfaces even from highly interpretive cross-sections [9]. The
Musselwhite Gold mine in Northern Ontario, Canada has been developed in one of
these complex fold strutures and has a reasonable amount of local control data from
hard rock drilling and from geophysical inversion studies. From the limited control
data provided by the mine exploration team we have constructed a constrained regional
NURBS surface as an exploration guide and visual reference for the deposit (see
Figures 16Y19).

11. Conclusions

We have found that when limited by sparse spatial and structural data, the design and
interpretation of a geologic-boundary surface can benefit from a partially automated
implementation of control frame tools in concert with the many design degrees of
freedom presented by Be´zier and NURBS curves and surfaces. Even though initial data
may be sparse, the design process itself is likely to introduce a significant amount of
data into the model. It is important to record the distinction between interpreted and
collected data when modelling under sparse data constraints in addition to being mindful
of uncertainty. Large amounts of interpreted data means manipulating unwieldy control
nets, which quickly becomes tedious and furthermore is difficult to update in the face of
new information or a revised interpretation. Hence the control frame approach must be
augmented with management systems that at least partially automate the positions of
shape guiding control points. Surface design can then proceed through interaction with
one or a few master polygonal control lines (see Section 4: keel, refined control frame).
We have provided examples of such mechanisms applicable to a map trace, defined
herein as a geological boundary as it breaks through the surface of the earth or an
elevation plane.

Visualisation of the structural orientation field as it relates to the final surface was
also illustrated using a set of structural dip plane graphics appearing as tablets, discs,
or other similar shapes (e.g., surfboards [22]) together with a strike and dip symbol and

28

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

top/bottom colour distinction. Extended dip plane structures can play an important role
when interpreting data in the sparse regime (Section 6: ribbons).

In addition to extending the spatial aspects of a data set, it has been demonstrated that
NURBS effectively extend some properties associated with the spatial data (e.g., strike
and dip along a map trace). We have seen that by converting strike and dip
measurements to spatial orientation vectors, we can take advantage of co-ordinate
basis-transformations to aid in interpolation (Section 6).

Ideally, when structural interpretation and design with sparse data is unavoidable, we
would prefer to simulate thousands of realisations in some kind of structural simulator
that randomises the design degrees of freedom, and from these select one or more
models that fall in line with a geological interpretation, with the ability to update the
structures effortlessly when new data arrives. To our knowledge, such a system does
not yet exist.

It must be stressed that the tools introduced in this work are design tools, and that the
resulting models are an interpretation of the data based on a combination of fact and
speculation. It is to be regarded as an extension of the imagination and visualisation
capabilities of the structural geologist, who must routinely make sensible conclusions
about subsurface structures through extrapolation from incomplete data.

Appendix A: Grip frames for the practitioner

Some technical considerations and pitfalls concerning the implementation of a grip
frame (c.f. control net, control frame) system for use with Be´zier and NURBS surface
design are outlined in this section. Figure A1 illustrates the construction process from
grip frames to surfaces producing either a Be´zier patch (Be´zier curves in both parametric

Figure A1. Surface styles generated from a grip frame.

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

29

directions), Hybrid surface (Be´zier curves in one parametric direction, NURBS the other)
or NURBS surface (NURBS curves in both parametric directions).

To define a smooth surface from a grip frame, the polygonal control lines that
compose the frame are first interpolated using a NURBS or Be´zier curve. See Farin [15]
for details and formulas. They are interpolated in such a way that each resulting curve
contains the same number of points M. For a NURBS object, the locations of the
parametric values will vary depending upon the choice of parameterisation (eg. uniform,
chord-length, Foley [15]) and possibly the spatial configuration of the control points.
in fact, represents a degree of design freedomVby appropriate selection of
This,
parameter values one can link point locations across form curves using a single NURBS
curve. The technique has the effect of Bconnecting^ surface features across polygonal
control
the form curves are themselves
interpolated in the cross-curve direction, also using a NURBS or Be´zier algorithm such
that each interpolated cross-curve is composed of an equal number of points N. The end
result is an M (cid:2) N matrix of points that can easily be triangulated to form a surface. Note
that the existence of duplicate points within the original control frame can lead to an
unsightly surface and so should be avoided. Furthermore, there is no guarantee that the
generated surface will not self-intersect.

lines (see Section 2 and Figure 3). Next,

A partially automated approach can also be useful, where the designer uses a rough
control frame to control a more refined control frame (see Section 4). In the cases
presented, the approach allowed the user to parameterise the design degrees of freedom
without compromising known orientation data.

We employed C2, G2 and C1 (see [15]) b-spline algorithms with a common tension
interface ranging from 0 (loose) to 1 (tight). In the C2 case, the weights are relative
(decreasing tension at one node is equivalent to tightening a little everywhere else),
whereas in G2 and C1 algorithms the weighting is absolute and localized. In the latter two
cases, global
tension adjustments are also possible. Both open- and closed-curve
interpolation routines can be implemented to accommodate control frames homogeneous
with respect to either choice of closure. We have not attempted to interpolate open ended
and closed polygonal lines within the same control frame.

The most critical considerations beyond those listed above are the order and orien-
tation of the polygonal control line sequence. It is not enough that the control frame
outlines the imagined surfaceVit must also be ordered such that traversing the form
curve sequence from one curve to the next amounts to traversing adjacent surface
sections. In addition, the endpoints (for open curves) must be matched up so as to mini-
mize surface self-crossings. Similarly, for a collection of closed form curves, a traversal
direction along each curve needs to be established so as to match up points coherently in
the cross-curve direction.

Lastly, an update function should be provided to speed up surface editing when using
control points interactively, as opposed to costly re-computation of the entire surface on
a per edit basis. See [15] for details. Surfaces can be expensive to compute, so if
interactive speed is an issue consider allowing for multiple representations of the
interpolated object such as points or curves. When editing is completed the user can then
choose to create a surface.

30

Acknowledgments

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

This work is part of ongoing methodological development for regional mapping and
mining exploration applications at Natural Resources Canada (NRCAN). This work has
been supported in part through funding of Project 23VOntario Mineral Exploration
Technology Fund. The use of exploration project data from the Musselwhite gold
property from Placer Dome Gold Corporation is greatly appreciated. We thank both
internal and external reviewers for their time and comments. We extend our gratitude to
Don Desnoyers (NRCAN/Geological Survey of Canada) and John Glynn (NRCAN/
GeoInformatics) for logistical support. ESS Contribution Number 2004172.

Notes

1. A curve can be parameterised using a real-valued variable u within some interval [a, b]. This means that a
specific value of u corresponds to a point on the curve. For example, we may parameterise an open-ended
curve by arc length from one end, so that exact positions can be specified using the value of the arc length at
that point. We say that such a curve has one parametric direction. Similarly, to parameterise a surface
requires two variables (u, v), and the surface is said to have two parametric directions. For more details on
the subject of parameterisation, refer to [19].

2. Our design tools are implemented in the gOcadi software system, where the default mouse pointer icon
within the 3D camera is an open hand. To move a point displayed in the camera, the hand is seen to Fgrip_
the point, hence the term Fgrip frame._

3. The convex hull of a point set is always Binside^ those points. For a 2-D set, imagine a string that is loosely
circumscribed around the set, with nails driven through the points of the set. Now pull the string tightVthis
becomes the boundary of the convex hull [15].

References

1. P. Be´zier. Numerical Control: Mathematics and Applications. Wiley: New York, 1972.
2. F.W. Breaks, I. Osmani, and E.A. de Kemp. BOpapamiskan lake project: Opapamiskan-forester lakes area,
District of Kenora, Patricia Portion,^ in P.C. Thurston, O. White, R.B. Barlow, M.E. Cherry, and A.C.
Colvine (Eds.), Summary of Field Work 1986, Ontario Geological Survey Miscellaneous Paper 132,
368, 1986.

3. E. Butkov. Mathematical Physics. Addison-Wesley, 1968.
4. S. Coons. BSurfaces for computer aided design,^ Technical Report, MIT, Project MAC, 1968.
5. S. Coons. BSurface Patches and B-spline curves,^ in R. Bamhill and R. Riesenfeld (Eds.), Computer Aided

Geometric Design, Academic Press, 1974.

6. P. de Casteljau. Shape Mathematics and CAD. Kogan Page: London, 1986.
7. E.A. de Kemp. BVariable 3-D geometrical projection of curvilinear geological features through direction
cosine interpolation of structural field observations,^ Computers and Geosciences, Vol. 24(3):269Y284, 1998.
8. E.A. de Kemp. BVisualization of complex geological structures using 3-D Be´zier construction tools,^

Computers and Geosciences, Vol. 25(4):581Y597, 1999.

9. E.A. de Kemp. B3-D visualization of structural field data: Examples from the Archean Caopatina
Formation, Abitibi greenstone belt, Quebec, Canada,^ Computers and Geosciences, Vol. 26:509Y530, 2000.

INTERPRETIVE TOOLS FOR 3-D STRUCTURAL GEOLOGICAL MODELLING PART II

31

10. E.A. de Kemp, T. Sherwin, I. Ryder, A. Davies, and D. Snyder. BPaleoproterozoic Geology, Nadluardjuk
Lake area, central Baffin Island, Nunavut,^ Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 4168, scale 1: 15000,
2002.

11. E.A. de Kemp and K.B. Sprague. BInterpretive tools for 3-D structural geological modelling part I: Be´zier-

based curves, ribbons and grip frames,^ GeoInformatica, Vol. 7(1):55Y71, 2003 March.

12. E.A. de Kemp. B3-D interpretive mappingVan extension of GIS technologies for the Geoscientist,^
Geological Association of Canada Special VolumeVApplication of Geographic Information Systems for
the Geosciences, Edited by Jeff Harris, 2004.

13. D.G. De Paor. BBe´zier curves and geological design,^ in Structural geology and personal computers,

14. See the Earth Decision Sciences Corporation website for details about gOcad \ software at: http:\\www.

Pergamon Press, 389Y417, 1996.

earthdecision.com.

15. G.E. Farin. Curves and Surfaces for Computer Aided Geometric Design: A Practical Guide. 2nd edition,

Academic Press, Inc.: San Diego, CA., (USA), 1990.

16. T. Fisher and R.Q. Wales. B3-D solid modeling of geological objects using non-uniform rational B-splines
(NURBS),’’ in A.K. Turner (Ed.), Three Dimensional Modelling with Geoscientific Information Systems.
Kluwer: Dordrecht, 85Y105, 1991.

17. A. Forrest. BCurves and surfaces for computer-aided design,^ PhD thesis, Cambridge, 1968.
18. J.-L. Mallet. BDiscrete smooth interpolation,^ ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 8(2):121Y144, 1989.
19. J.E. Marsden and A.J. Tromba. Vector Calculus: Third Edition. W.H. Freeman and Company: New York,

1988 (chapter 7).

20. Mira Geoscience Limited, 310 Victoria Avenue, Suite 309 Westmount, Quebec, Canada H3Z 2M9, Tel:

(514) 489-1890, http://www.mirageoscience.com/

21. J.G. Ramsay. BFolding and Fracturing of Rocks,^ McGraw-Hill: New York, 568, 1967.
22. E.M. Schetselaar and E.A. de Kemp. B3-D symbolization of planar and linear fabric elements using
surfboards as an aid to the analysis of geological structures,^ IAMG Conference-Papers, September 6Y12,
Cancun, Mexico.

23. D. Terzopoulos and H. Qin. BD-NURBS: A Physics Based Framework for Geometric Design,^ IEEE

Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 2(1):85Y96, 1996.

is a scientific computing expert with the GeoInformatics group in Natural Resources
Kevin Boyce Sprague
Canada in Ottawa, where he is involved in software prototyping and development for applications pertaining to
3-D geomodelling, agent-based modeling for decision making and other geospatial applications. Kevin
completed his Doctorate in Theoretical Physics (1999) at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Kevin
also pursues interests in high energy physics and medical imaging.

32

SPRAGUE AND DE KEMP

Eric de Kemp
is a 3-D GIS specialist with the Continental Geoscience Division of the Geological Survey of
Canada in Ottawa, and is active in the newly emerging field of computer-aided 3-D visualization and modelling
of geological structures. His expertise in 3-D geological analysis is coupled with a strong background in the
integration of geoscientific data using Geographic Information Systems and remote sensing technologies. He
specializes in 3-D field-based studies that combine stratigraphical, structural, and geochronological analysis in
tectonically complex regions of the Canadian Shield. Eric completed his Ph.D. at the Universite´ du Que´bec a`
Chicoutimi in 2000. His thesis was entitled B3-D Integration and Visualization of Structural Field Data: Tools
For Regional Subsurface Mapping.^ His current research focuses on the optimization of methods for improving
regional geological interpretations using advanced 3-D computing technologies. Future interests include co-
modelling through inversion (geophysical and structural), geological process simulation (folding, emplacement,
erosion) and hyperspectral imaging in bedrock mapping applications.

