International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Guest Editorial

HUI LI

To cite this article: HUI LI (1998) Guest Editorial, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 12:7, 649-650, DOI: 10.1080/136588198241572

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241572

Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 49

View related articles 

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [University of the Sunshine Coast]

Date: 04 August 2017, At: 07:12

int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 7, 649± 650

Guest Editorial

Signi® cant advances in using Geographical Information Systems for spatial popu-
lation analysis and regional economic development modelling have resulted from
the increasing availability of GIS software and hardware. This has been fostered in
many western countries by the availability of data services such as TIGER in the
USA and Census data in the UK. Facing the structural changes of a new global
economy, geographical information, particularly about population and the regional
economy, has become critical to investors and government o(cid:129) cials who would like
to understand the impacts of economic globalization.

China is experiencing rapid socioeconomic growth and change. There is an urgent
need to monitor development and to design development strategies and to make
policy recommendations to the government and business institutions. Both of these
demand su(cid:129) cient data and e(cid:129) cient GIS. Although there has been an exponential
growth in the quantity of data, researchers are often frustrated because the required
information is either unavailable or is not collected in a format that can be readily
utilizable and comparable. It is necessary for China to learn from others to improve
its census information system and its research methods in regional economic develop-
ment and welfare services.

This focus issue collects papers selected from the Research Workshop on GIS in
Spatial Population Analysis and Regional Economic Development, held at the
Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) between 24± 25 March, 1997. The
research workshop aimed to bring together experts in the ® eld to discuss the
American and British experiences and to explore the ways that similar standards
and levels of development can be promoted and implemented in China and Hong
Kong.

In the ® rst paper of this issue, Daniel Sui reviews the practices, the problems and
the prospects of GIS-base urban modelling. He argues that the integration of urban
modelling with GIS must proceed with the development of new models for informa-
tion cities, the incorporation of multidimensional concepts of space and time in GIS,
and the expansion of a feature-based strategy. The second and third papers focus
on census data processing and applications. David Martin presents, from a British
perspective, a four-stage model of census geography development with a review of
the change to increasing automation of census data processing. Peter Rogerson in
his paper describes an initial step towards understanding the ageing of minority
populations in the USA. He expects to see a better integration of spatial analysis
and GIS for a more user-friendly system in population analysis. In the fourth paper,
Keith Clarke and Leonard Gaydos discuss their cellular automation model and GIS
applications to long term urban growth prediction with some calibration and predic-
tion results for San Francisco Bay area in California and the Washington/Baltimore
corridor in the Eastern United States. The ® nal article describes Hui Lin and
Li Zhang’s research on an Internet-based investment environment information
system. Their goal is to develop a better communication between investors and the
local governments for regional economic development.

This focus issue constitutes a signi® cant contribution to GIS-related spatial
population analysis and studies on regional and urban development. Thanks are
extended to all participants at the workshop for their contribution to the discussions

1365-8816 /98 $12.00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [University of the Sunshine Coast] at 07:12 04 August 2017 650

Guest editorial

and debates. Special thanks are given to authors who made e(cid:128) orts to revise their
manuscripts to be considered for this special publication. In addition, I thank the
reviewers who contributed their valuable time, energies, and expertise to evaluate
papers submitted. The Geography Department and South China Program of Hong
Kong Institute of Asia-Paci® c Studies of CUHK provided ® nancial support to the
workshop. Drs David Chu and Jianfa Shen, my colleagues in the Geography
Department, worked closely with me to organize the workshop. Their support, co-
operation and advice are gratefully acknowledged. Finally I would like to thank Dr
Peter Fisher, Editor of IJGIS, for encouraging me to edit this focus issue. I hope it
will generate further dicussion for future studies in relevant directions.

Hui Lin
Joint L aboratory for GeoInformation Science
Chinese Academy of Sciences & T he Chinese University of Hong Kong

Downloaded by [University of the Sunshine Coast] at 07:12 04 August 2017 