This article was downloaded by: [University of West Florida]
On: 07 October 2014, At: 01:46
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Introduction to object-based landscape
analysis
Paul Aplin a & Geoffrey M. Smith b
a School of Geography , The University of Nottingham, University
Park , Nottingham, UK
b Specto Natura Limited , College Road, Impington, Cambridge,
UK
Published online: 19 Jul 2011.

To cite this article: Paul Aplin & Geoffrey M. Smith (2011) Introduction to object-based landscape
analysis, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25:6, 869-875, DOI:
10.1080/13658816.2011.566570

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.566570

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 25, No. 6, June 2011, 869–875

Introduction to object-based landscape analysis

Paul Aplina* and Geoffrey M. Smithb

aSchool of Geography, The University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, UK; bSpecto
Natura Limited, College Road, Impington, Cambridge, UK

(Received 23 February 2011; ﬁnal version received 23 February 2011)

Current environmental challenges often require regular and wide-area monitoring,
which in theory Earth observation (EO) can provide. Commonly, these challenges do
not focus on individual point targets, as represented by image pixels, but require con-
sideration of whole landscapes and assessment of features in broader spatial contexts.
Object-based approaches, which operate at the scale of real-world objects rather than
pixels, offer a means of analysing EO data in a realistic context and integrating asso-
ciated ancillary information to support real-world applications. The development of
object-based image analysis has accelerated over the past decade and can now be con-
sidered mainstream, with commercially available software and a wide user community.
For full and rigorous consideration of the implementation of object-based analysis in
environmental applications, we propose an extension of the discussion to object-based
‘landscape’ analysis. This article serves as an introduction to a Special Issue on this
theme, drawing on a technical meeting held in 2009 at The University of Nottingham,
UK. The meeting’s aim was to bring together practitioners in remote sensing, geo-
graphic information science (GIScience) and environmental science to identify best
practice in the development and application of object-based landscape analysis tech-
niques. The papers presented outline new opportunities for object-based landscape
analysis, showing the expansion of object-centred classiﬁcation studies beyond rou-
tine use of image data, engaging with fundamental GIScience concepts such as spatial
accuracy and scale and demonstrating the wider and growing relevance for the EO,
GIScience, landscape ecology and broader environmental science communities.

Keywords: object; landscape; scale; image; classiﬁcation

Introduction

1.
Earth observation (EO) imagery is an important source of information for characterisa-
tion of the earth’s surface, especially when considering current environmental challenges,
such as climate change and biodiversity assessment. Many of these challenges require reg-
ular, wide-area monitoring and do not focus on single-point targets (e.g. soil samples), but
instead require consideration of features in broader spatial contexts (e.g. as in the use of
land accounting to assess urban ‘land take’ in Europe; Weber 2007). Here, the effective-
ness of EO data can be limited by conventional pixel-based analysis approaches (Smith
and Fuller 2001), since these do not incorporate the concept of landscape features or

*Corresponding author. Email: paul.aplin@nottingham.ac.uk

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2011.566570
http://www.informaworld.com

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 870

P. Aplin and G.M. Smith

real-world objects. Now, however, alternative object-based approaches are becoming com-
monplace, and these can exploit landscape features to increase the accuracy and usability
of EO-derived products (Lang 2008).

This article provides an introduction to the Special Issue on object-based landscape
analysis. First, the context and stimulus for the emergence of this subject is described,
with reference in particular to precursor investigation of geographical objects involving
image data. Next, the advancement of object-based investigation is outlined, from early
experimentation in the 1980s, through technological and data enablement in the 1990s
and wide commercial availability (and associated under-education/misuse of techniques)
in the 2000s, to thoughtful and careful environmental application in the 2010s. Finally,
new opportunities for object-based landscape analysis are outlined, showing the expansion
of object-centred classiﬁcation studies beyond routine use of image data, engaging with
fundamental geographic information science (GIScience) concepts such as spatial accuracy
and scale and demonstrating the wider and growing relevance for the GIScience, landscape
ecology and broader environmental science communities.

2. What is object-based image analysis?

Conventionally, EO images are processed on a per-pixel basis, where each pixel is treated as
an individual spatial entity, without consideration of spatial context or membership to real-
world objects. For instance, pixel-based classiﬁcation generally allocates pixels to classes
according to spectral properties alone (Mather 2004). However, using the pixel as the basic
scale of analysis has certain drawbacks. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant here is the potential
for mapping error as a result of noise in original imagery (i.e. erroneous pixel values, often
referred to as the ‘salt and pepper’ effect) or through misrepresentation of Earth-surface
features because pixels are too large (mixed pixels) or too small (within-feature variation)
to characterise the features of interest effectively (Aplin et al. 1999a). Also, pixel-based
mapping products are not universally favoured by users of spatial information, with raster
representation sometimes considered artiﬁcial and noisy, and a common preference among
geographical information system (GIS) operators for vector data.

Object-based image analysis offers an alternative to pixel-based approaches. Here, the
scale of analysis is the real-world feature or object of interest (Castilla and Hay 2008),
thus avoiding any error associated with individual pixel misidentiﬁcation and providing
traditional and ‘clean’ mapping products for the user community. Generally, object-based
approaches employ spatial frameworks of objects (e.g. representing agricultural ﬁelds,
habitat patches, urban features, distinct parcels of land cover) to subdivide and control
the analysis of EO data. Object-based output is achieved from raster EO imagery by a pixel
grouping or segmentation mechanism (Dey et al. 2010). Several procedures are available
for this purpose. First, region growing can be used to group adjoining pixels into regions or
objects according to similarities between neighbours. The grouped pixels are then given a
single identiﬁer as a label for the newly created object. Second, edge detection can be used
to identify boundary features in an image and these features are then employed in the con-
struction of object outlines. Object-based image analysis proceeds through analysis of the
set of pixels within each object. These two procedures have the beneﬁt that object-based
analysis can be performed using only image data as an input. Third, EO imagery can be
integrated with additional object data, commonly vector map data, where objects are char-
acterised as polygons (Smith and Morton 2010). In this case, the pixels associated with
each polygon are investigated as a group and used to assign an attribute value (e.g. land
cover class) to the whole object. This procedure has the beneﬁt of outputting information as

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

871

recognisable cartographic data that may be integrated readily with other map data attributes
(e.g. additional data layers in a GIS), but clearly it has the drawback of requiring additional
input data and the costs associated with this at the outset.

3. Development of object-based investigation

The potential value of object-based image analysis was recognised some decades ago
(Catlow et al. 1984, Mason et al. 1988, Pedley and Curran 1991), long before it became
a routine approach, but was constrained by technological limitations and data availability
(Ehlers et al. 1991, Cowen et al. 1995, Aplin et al. 1999b). Simple visualisation of raster
(image) and vector (object) data in combination, for instance, remained a considerable
technological challenge as late as the 1990s. From this point on, computing power, data
storage and database capabilities increased rapidly (Blaschke 2010), as did spatial data
provision from remote sensing and other sources. These advancements fuelled progress
in object-based analysis, which beneﬁted in particular from growing interest in object-
orientation within the GIS community (Milne et al. 1993, Worboys 1994), plus progress in
image segmentation, vector/raster integration and classiﬁcation procedures incorporating
non-spectral information (Johnsson 1994, Ryherd and Woodcock 1996, Congalton 1997,
Wu et al. 2007).

From the data supply perspective, a key driver for the development of object-based
image analysis was the dramatic increase in the availability of very high spatial resolution
(VHR) imagery from satellite platforms, starting with the 1999 launch of IKONOS (Aplin
2003, Blaschke 2010). Conventional per-pixel analysis approaches were often unable to
deal with the ﬁne spatial detail afforded by these data, often misidentifying target features
due to image over-sampling (Aplin et al. 1999a). That is, in some cases VHR imagery
had a tendency to characterise very small features within an object of interest, rather than
the object itself (e.g. VHR imagery may identify forest shadow, gap or understory features
instead of the forest itself). Object-based analysis overcomes this problem since it operates
at the scale of the objects of interest, effectively averaging out any within-object error or
unwanted variability.

Over the past decade or so, what could be described as a paradigm shifted has occurred
in image processing, as object-based approaches gained widespread attention and routine
adoption, often in place of pixel-based analysis (Aplin et al. 1999a, Dean and Smith 2003,
Lang and Blaschke 2006, Blaschke 2010). A major turning point occurred in 2000 with the
release of purpose-built commercial software to support object-based analysis, combining
all required processing components in a single package (Blaschke 2010). Object-based
methods may now be considered mainstream, with multiple commercial software packages
on the market, specialist research and user groups established, conferences and conference
sessions becoming commonplace and increasing publication of peer-reviewed literature.

Technologically, object-based analysis capabilities have matured considerably, and
sophisticated techniques are now available to investigate objects and their characteristics.
For instance, object-based classiﬁcation can be enhanced by including advanced discrim-
inating procedures such as rule sets that are tailored to the actual spatial and spectral
characteristics of the objects (e.g. incorporating within-patch variability when dealing with
heterogeneous features). Multi-scale segmentation is used widely to represent the changing
nature of objects over a range of scales (Baatz and Schäpe 2000), related to the differ-
ent levels of real-world features present within imagery. This work provokes engagement
with current theoretical debates in GIScience on the inﬂuence of scale of investigation on
spatial analysis. Perhaps more fundamentally, linking objects derived from imagery with

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 872

P. Aplin and G.M. Smith

real-world objects (Castilla and Hay 2008) raises conceptual, semantic issues about the
nature of objects in the ﬁrst place. Reference to real-world objects also allows the incor-
poration of domain knowledge (for instance, the impact of agricultural practices on spatial
crop patterns) into analysis, a further advantage of object-based investigation over per-pixel
approaches (Smith and Fuller 2002, Lang 2008).

Initially, development of object-based image analysis was driven largely through tech-
nological progress, and not as a result of application to environmental problems and studies.
Consequently, the work undertaken tended to be proprietary and experimental. Given the
growing need for reliable environmental monitoring at the landscape scale, object-based
analysis is now being adopted widely by operational users and application developers.
As such, the focus of development is shifting away from technological advancement and
towards thoughtful application and implementation. Blaschke (2010) described this trend
as a move from segmentation-centred to information-centred approaches.

Object-based image analysis is now used in a wide range of application areas, from
agriculture and natural resource management to defence and global climate change. Its
economic impact extends from data providers, hardware and software vendors, through
developers and researchers, to both public- and private-sector end-users. Growing exploita-
tion of object-based analysis is not only inﬂuencing how landscapes and the objects within
them are identiﬁed and monitored, but is causing a re-thinking of how we conceptualise
these objects and landscapes in the ﬁrst place (Blaschke 2010). Therefore, for full and
rigorous consideration of the implementation of object-based analysis in environmen-
tal applications, we propose an extension of the discussion to object-based ‘landscape’
analysis.

4. Object-based landscape analysis

The theme of this Special Issue addresses object-based landscape analysis, and the work
published here draws on a technical meeting held on this theme in 2009 at The University
of Nottingham, UK. The aim of this initiative was to bring together practitioners in remote
sensing, GIS and environmental science to identify best practice in the development and
application of object-based landscape analysis techniques. The research presented draws
broadly on traditional object-based image analysis, but extends the scope beyond routine
use of object-based approaches using image data in environmental applications. Indeed this
research initiative was conceived partly in response to routine and growing (mis)use and
application of commercial object-based image analysis software by under-educated users.
That is, commercial packages make it easy for users to undertake object-based analysis
projects, and the subject has become popularised through exposure in the literature, but
users often have limited understanding of the technical procedures since vendors restrict
detail of the computational algorithms involved. The Special Issue, therefore, fulﬁls a train-
ing role in exposing users to the strengths, weaknesses and complexities of object-based
analysis.

Here, in extending the scope from image to landscape, object-based investigation is
conducted using non-image spatial data. For instance, Gercek et al. (2011) exploit ele-
vation data in their attempt to characterise geomorphological landforms, while Robinson
et al. (2011) incorporate polygon metadata attributes in the aggregation process. Also,
in an attempt to increase the rigour with which object-based analysis is conducted, fun-
damental GIScience concepts such as spatial accuracy (Radoux et al. 2011) and spatial
scale (Browning et al. 2011, Chen et al. 2011) are addressed. Other papers report progress
in object-based analysis of VHR imagery for landscape characterisation (Malinverni

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

873

et al. 2011, Peters et al. 2011) and development of novel environmental applications such
as vineyard characterisation (Kass et al. 2011) and coral reef geomorphology (Leon and
Woodroffe 2011).

The work published in this Special Issue demonstrates that object-based analysis is
not only a signiﬁcant contemporary theme in EO (Blaschke 2010) but also a powerful
tool adopted widely by end-users to build landscape-level solutions for environmental
and social studies. The papers presented here demonstrate the power and maturity of
object-based analysis in delivering timely and accurate geospatial information, used for
key environmental challenges in a wide range of application areas. Incorporating object-
based landscape analysis in real-world applications is now likely to spawn a new round
of technological development, further enhancing the tools available. The relevance of this
work extends well beyond traditional EO and holds signiﬁcant implications for GIScience,
landscape ecology and broader environmental science. In the future, it may become the
convention for environmental monitoring applications at local to national scales to adopt
an object-based landscape analysis approach.

Acknowledgements
This Special Issue represents the culmination of a lengthy initiative to stimulate interest, research and
communication in object-based landscape analysis. The starting point, and a very signiﬁcant part
of the initiative, was the technical meeting held in Nottingham in 2009. Many people contributed
to the meeting, not least the participants who presented and discussed their work, leading directly
towards this publication. Special thanks to Meredith Williams, Karen Laughton and Roger Hore,
variously involved in the Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry Society, who helped organise the
meeting. Thanks too to Somnath Ghosal and Nural Islam for their general assistance throughout the
event. Following the meeting, Gemma Polmear helped with the early stages of the Special Issue.
We are most grateful to the many reviewers who gave their time generously, ensuring the papers
are of the highest quality. Finally, thanks to Brian Lees, chief editor of the International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, who provided very useful and very prompt guidance throughout
the preparation of the Special Issue.

References
Aplin, P., 2003. Remote sensing: base mapping. Progress in Physical Geography, 27, 275–283.
Aplin, P., Atkinson, P.M., and Curran, P.J., 1999a. Fine spatial resolution simulated satellite sensor
imagery for land cover mapping in the UK. Remote Sensing of Environment, 68, 206–216.
Aplin, P., Atkinson, P., and Curran, P., 1999b. Per-ﬁeld classiﬁcation of land use using the forthcom-
ing very ﬁne spatial resolution satellite sensors: problems and potential solutions. In: P. Atkinson
and N. Tate, eds. Advances in remote sensing and GIS analysis. Chichester: Wiley, 219–239.
Baatz, M. and Schäpe, A., 2000. Multiresolution segmentation – an optimisation approach for
high quality multi-scale image segmentation. In: J. Strobl, T. Blaschke and G. Griesebner, eds.
Angewandte geographische informationsverarbeitung. vol XII. Karlsruhhe: Herbert Wichman,
12–23.

Blaschke, T., 2010. Object based image analysis for

remote sensing.

ISPRS Journal of

Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 65, 2–16.

Browning, D., Laliberte, A., and Rango, A., 2011. Temporal dynamics of shrub proliferation: linking
patches to landscapes. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25, 913–930.
Castilla, G. and Hay, G.J., 2008. Image objects and geographic objects. In: T. Blaschke, S. Lang
and G.J. Hay, eds. Object-based image analysis – spatial concepts for knowledge-driven remote
sensing applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 91–109.

Catlow, D.R., Parsell, R.J., and Wyatt, B.K., 1984. The integrated use of digital cartographic data and
remotely sensed imagery. Earth-Orientated Applications in Space Technology, 4, 255–260.
Chen, G., et al., 2011. A multiscale geographic object-based image analysis (GEOBIA) to esti-
mate lidar-measured forest canopy height using Quickbird imagery. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 25, 877–893.

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 874

P. Aplin and G.M. Smith

Congalton, R.G., 1997. Exploring and evaluating the consequences of vector-to raster and raster-to-

vector conversion. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 63, 425–434.

Cowen, D.J., et al., 1995. The design and implementation of an integrated geographic information
system for environmental applications. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 61,
1393–1404.

Dean, A.M. and Smith, G.M., 2003. An evaluation of per-parcel land cover mapping using fuzzy

classiﬁcation methods. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 24, 2905–2920.

Dey, V., Zhang, Y., and Zhong, M., 2010. A review on image segmentation techniques with remote
sensing perspective. International Archives in the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences, 38 (7A), 31–42.

Ehlers, M., et al., 1991.

Integration of
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 57, 669–675.

remote sensing and GIS: data and data access.

Gercek, D., Toprak, V., and Strobl, J., 2011. Object-based classiﬁcation of landforms based on
their local geometry and geomorphometric context. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 25, 1011–1023.

Johnsson, K., 1994. Segment-based land-use

classiﬁcation from SPOT satellite data.

Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 60, 47–53.

Kass, S., Notarnicola, C., and Zebisch, M., 2011. Identiﬁcation of orchards and vineyards with
different texture-based measurements by using an object oriented classiﬁcation approach.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25, 931–947.

Lang, S., 2008. Object-based image analysis for remote sensing applications: modelling reality –
dealing with complexity. In: T. Blaschke, S. Lang and G.J. Hay, eds. Object-based image analysis
– spatial concepts for knowledge-driven remote sensing applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
3–27.

Lang, S. and Blaschke, T., 2006. Bridging remote sensing and GIS – What are the main supportive
pillars? In: S. Lang, T. Blaschke and E. Schöpfer, eds. 1st international conference on object-
based image analysis (OBIA 2006), 4–5 July 2006, Salzburg University: International Society
for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.

Leon, J. and Woodroffe, C., 2011. Improving the synoptic mapping of coral reef geomorphology
using object-based image analysis. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
25, 949–989.

Malinverni, E., et al., 2011. Hybrid object-based approach for land use/land cover mapping using
high spatial resolution imagery. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25,
1025–1052.

Mason, D.C., et al., 1988. The use of digital map data in the segmentation and classiﬁcation of

remotely-sensed images. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 2, 195–215.

Mather, P.M., 2004. Computer processing of remotely-sensed images. 3rd ed. Chichester: Wiley.
Milne, P., Milton, S., and Smith, J.L., 1993. Geographical object–oriented databases – a case study.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 7, 39–55.

Pedley, M.I. and Curran, P.J., 1991. Per-ﬁeld classiﬁcation: an example using SPOT HRV imagery.

International Journal of Remote Sensing, 12, 2181–2192.

Peters, J., et al., 2011. Synergy of very high resolution optical and radar data for object-based olive
grove mapping. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25, 971–989.
Radoux, J., et al., 2011. Thematic accuracy assessment of object-based classiﬁcation. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25, 895–911.

Robinson, P., Fisher, P., and Smith, G., 2011. Land cover mapping within ﬁxed segmented parcels and
grown regions based on metadata attributes. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 25, 991–1010.

Ryherd, S. and Woodcock, C., 1996. Combining spectral and texture data in the segmentation of
remotely sensed images. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 62, 181–194.
Smith, G.M. and Fuller, R.M., 2001. An integrated approach to land cover classiﬁcation: an example

in the Island of Jersey. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 22, 3123–3142.

Smith, G.M. and Fuller, R.M., 2002. Land cover map 2000 and meta data at the land parcel level.
In: G.M. Foody and P.M. Atkinson, eds. Uncertainty in remote sensing and GIS. Chichester:
Wiley.

Smith, G.M. and Morton, R.D., 2010. Real world objects in GEOBIA through the exploitation of
existing digital cartography and image segmentation. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote
Sensing, 76, 163–171.

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

875

Weber, J.L., 2007. Implementation of land and ecosystem accounts at the European Environment

Agency. Ecological Economics, 61, 695–707.

Worboys, M.F., 1994. Object-oriented approaches to geo-referenced information. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, 8, 385–399.

Wu, S., Silvan-Cardenas, J., and Wang, L., 2007. Per-ﬁeld urban land use classiﬁcation based on tax

parcel boundaries. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 28, 2777–2800.

Downloaded by [University of West Florida] at 01:46 07 October 2014 