This article was downloaded by: [Fondren Library, Rice University ]
On: 12 November 2014, At: 19:09
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

A less‐is‐more approach to
geovisualization – enhancing knowledge
construction across multidisciplinary
teams
Catherine Emma Jones a , Mordechai Haklay a , Sam Griffiths b &
Laura Vaughan b
a Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering ,
University College London , London, UK
b The Bartlett School of Graduate Studies , University College
London , London, UK
Published online: 21 Aug 2009.

To cite this article: Catherine Emma Jones , Mordechai Haklay , Sam Griffiths & Laura Vaughan
(2009) A less‐is‐more approach to geovisualization – enhancing knowledge construction across
multidisciplinary teams, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23:8,
1077-1093, DOI: 10.1080/13658810802705723

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810802705723

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,

systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 23, No. 8, August 2009, 1077–1093

Research Article

A less-is-more approach to geovisualization – enhancing knowledge
construction across multidisciplinary teams

CATHERINE EMMA JONES*{, MORDECHAI HAKLAY{,
SAM GRIFFITHS{ and LAURA VAUGHAN{
{Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College
London, London, UK
{The Bartlett School of Graduate Studies, University College London, London, UK

(Received 15 August 2008; final version received 30 November 2008 )

The ‘less-is-more’ concept in interface design for computer applications has
recently gained ground. In this article, the concept is adopted for a user-centered
design of geovisualization application. The premise is that using simple and clear
design can lead to successful applications with improved ease of use. Over the last
three decades, the development of GIS and geovisualization has seen a marked
increase in the levels of interaction between the user, the system and the
information. However, these enthusiastic advances in technology have not
resulted in a significant increase in the number of users.

This article suggests that types of user interaction should not simply emphasize
traditional GIS functions such as zooming and panning but move towards
interaction based on facilitating the knowledge construction process.
Considerations are made for the complexity of the system, the task at hand
and the skills and limitations of the users. These elements are particularly
important when maps act as the mediators in collaboration with users across
disciplinary backgrounds. In such cases, the emphasis on simplicity and usability
becomes as important as functionality. In these situations a geovisualization
application designed for specific uses can maximize effective development of
geographic knowledge.

In this article, a minimalistic design approach to geovisualization is adopted by
creating a geographic profiling tool which shifts the emphasis from technological
advances or interaction with the map to the interaction elements key to building
the spatial knowledge of GIS experts and non-experts alike. To evaluate this
notion of ‘less-is-more geovisualization’ the profiling tool is evaluated according
to usability matrices: efficiency, effectiveness and learnability. How well the
Suburban Profiler contributes to these elements is assessed by conducting a video
analysis of the types and forms of user interaction available. The video analysis
demonstrates the usefulness and usability of the Suburban Profiler, providing
proof of concept for ‘less-is-more geovisualization’.

Keywords: HCI; geovisualization; video analysis; suburban geography

1.

Introduction

With the rise in GIS and geovisualization technologies the value of spatial
representations and their contribution to spatial cognition and knowledge

*Corresponding author. Email: kate-emma.jones@ucl.ac.uk

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2009 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810802705723

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1078

C. E. Jones et al.

construction comes to the fore. Cartographic representations have long been used to
encode spatial relationships to assist geographic reasoning and understanding
(MacEachren 1994). This leads to the building knowledge of observed phenomena.
In the early 1950s Philbruck (cited in MacEachren 1994) noted: ‘…the interpretation
of phenomena geographically depends upon visualisation by means of maps’
(Philbruck 1953, p. 11). Cartographic visualization is not, therefore, just a means of
communication but also a tool for acquiring spatial understanding and knowledge.
Today’s geovisualization technologies provide many advanced options. Users are
able to explore spatial data using multiple views and visualization techniques and
compile their own maps with full control over graphic variables and display.
However, for non-expert users, time is lost when choosing colour palettes, classifying
ranges, moving around the map and trying to interpret complex statistics rather than
gaining knowledge and insight from the data. Unfortunately, insufficient considera-
tion is made for the scientific reasoning process (Gahegan 2005).

Importantly, Philbrick was concerned with defining principles for interdisciplinary
working and the need to harmonize working practice across the different fields,
specifically between geography and cartography. He developed a set of best practice
guidelines for the production of maps with simplicity as the principal one: ‘Say the
most with the greatest economy of means…’ (p. 15). This we argue should be also the
guide for geovisualization applications. Admittedly, the main change from the 1950s
stems from the growth in data capture techniques; current trends in geographic
technologies concentrate on the production, manipulation and representation of
large volumes of spatial data. Yet too often, this focus is coupled with a lack of
attention towards specific tasks and knowledge construction which limits effective
data use (Yuan and Albrecht 1995, MacEachren and Kraak 2001).

The absence of effective data use, the acknowledgement that GIS are inherently
complex (Traynor and Williams 1995) and the growing possibilities available to the
user for interacting with the map all distract from the user’s task. These usability
issues are commonly recognized, but they should not be restricted to the analysis of
desktop GIS but also to geovisualization applications. In many applications, the
outcome is that users focus primarily on map manipulation and not on the process of
acquiring and building knowledge. For this reason, simplicity in design should be
given more consideration by researchers and evaluated appropriately.

In this article, we argue that in many GIS and geovisualization applications the
concept of simplicity has been neglected, so on first use they are often daunting and
unwieldy. Traynor and Williams noted in 1995 that GIS are hard to use; a statement
still valid today more than a decade later, and one which can equally be applied to
geovisualization applications. This state of affairs can partly be explained by a
failure to incorporate those aspects of human computer interaction (HCI) that
reduce the complexity of user interactions within geographic technologies (Haklay
and Tobo´ n 2003) and by the need to develop methods that are specific for
geovisualization applications (Marsh 2007).

2. Human computer interaction and GIS

Although comprehensive reviews of HCI aspects in GIS are available elsewhere
(Haklay and Tobo´ n 2003, Worboys and Duckham 2004), a short sketch is provided
here as a context to the discussion. Research relating to human factors of computer
interaction started to be published in the 1950s (Turk 1993), and the earliest paper
that discusses HCI aspects of geographical information can be traced to 1963 (Pivar

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1079

et al. 1963). HCI investigates the quality of interaction between humans and
computer systems within the physical, organizational and social aspects of the users’
environment, in order to produce systems that are usable, safe and functional (Preece
et al. 2007). For successful design, knowledge about the users and the work they need
to accomplish, as well as details about the technology, are equally required (Haklay
and Tobo´ n 2003).

Dialogue between HCI and GIS began in earnest in the mid-1980s. By the mid-
1990s several books had been published (Medyckyj-Scott and Hearnshaw 1993,
Nyerges et al. 1994). More recently (and specifically for geovisualization), the
collection ‘Exploring Geovisualization’ (Dykes et al. 2005) has explored this area.
These books considered GIS technologies from a human-centric point of view. These
collections emphasized the importance of human factors in GIS when significant
decisions are being made with spatial data, and that any factors that impede effective
decision-making should be cause for concern (Medyckyj-Scott and Hearnshaw
1993).

Especially relevant to our discussion are observational studies of GIS users in the
workplace (Davies and Medyckyj-Scott 1996) and users who are new to GIS. These
studies highlight
fundamental GIS
the difficulties relating to even the most
component of opening a simple map (Traynor and Williams 1995). Yet since these
early studies there has been little usability research which records observations of
GIS or geovisualization users at work. Notable exceptions include a screenshot study
capturing users’ experience in the workplace (Haklay and Zafiri 2008) and an
epidemiology geovisualization tool that, following its prototype development, used
video to record end-user input (Robinson et al. 2005). These studies provide the
motivation and the methodology for this study.

3. Human computer interaction and geovisualization

Today, HCI research in GIS encompasses topics such as interface design, cognitive
models of spatial knowledge, digital representations of spatial knowledge and the
translation of digital representations into intuitive human reasoning (Goodchild
1999). Geovisualization focuses on representation,
interface design,
spatial cognition and usability, themes explored as part of a recent research agenda
commissioned by the International Cartographic Association (MacEachren 2001,
Slocum et al. 2001, Dykes et al. 2005).

integration,

Interface design problems are notorious for the ease with which they can be
recognized and the difficulty of identifying obvious solutions (Laurel 1990) and
presenting geovisualization developers with some complex challenges. Dykes (2005)
emphasizes the importance of high levels of interaction and user control to facilitate
data interaction for exploration, synthesis, scientific reasoning or communication.
Although these principles are clear, Gahegan (2005) notes that many innovative
geovisualization research tools are not easy to use and require significant user
training. They are also difficult to integrate with other systems and the scientific
activities they are meant to inform are often unclear. Furthermore, despite the recent
research focus and the subsequent advances in geovisualization capabilities, the
number of active geovisualization users remains lower than expected (Slocum et al.
2001, Robinson 2005, Andrienko and Andrienko 2006).

The increase in complexity of the interface is contributing to user difficulties
alongside several other factors that limit the adoption of these tools (Slocum et al.
2001, Fuhrmann et al. 2005, Gahegan 2005, Andrienko and Andrienko 2006).

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1080

C. E. Jones et al.

Fuhrmann et al. (2005) suggest the tools are not effective because few designers
adopt a user-centred design process to account for individual user differences. In the
past, design has focused on tools that are developed for a broadly generic audience
and user base (Slocum et al. 2001, Andrienko and Andrienko 2006), but it has been
recognized that achieving usable geovisualization for everyone (universal usability) is
complex and raises many challenges (Plaisant et al. 2005, Marsh 2007).

Geovisualization tools that adopt the ‘one system fits all’ approach, where one
tool is applied to different application domains, are common in many off-the-shelf
applications but they have the potential to confuse users. Redundant functionality,
irrelevant interactivity and inconsistencies in information feedback are all problems.
An example is The InstantAtlas tool used in a website highlighting the results of the
2008 London, UK Mayoral elections (Figure 1). In the first instance, the application
looks good but the types of interactions offered do little to enhance knowledge
construction, are frustrating and therefore unlikely to have users returning. The
problems arise for a number of reasons. The varying skill sets of users are not
accounted for in the design process. The issue most relevant to our discussion stems
from the interaction the website affords with the map. The data are produced for one
spatial resolution only and for a finite extent (London) meaning the interface
contains redundant functionality. Why should the user need to pan and zoom when
data do not change?

Low uptake of geovisualization tools is attributed to poor consideration of the
knowledge construction processes when developing these tools. Gahegan (2005)
stresses the importance of incorporating the elements of: exploration, synthesis,

Figure 1.
election.

Interface of the geovisualization application for the 2008 London, UK mayoral

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1081

analysis, evaluation and presentation. Dykes and his colleagues (2005) acknowledge
that the research challenge remains for geovisualization development to focus on a
human-centred approach. This represents something of a paradigm shift, as until
fairly recently geovisualization tools were predominately technology driven and were
primarily used by their developers (Dykes et al. 2005, Fuhrmann et al. 2005).

In this article, we suggest that successful geovisualization applications do not have
to rely on user interaction with the spatial components of the map and its underlying
spatial data, particularly during workplace collaborations with non-expert GIS
users. Over-reliance on sophisticated and often complex interactions can alienate
users and impairs knowledge construction. Tools developed specifically for the task
in hand, which consider the human aspects of the interactions, are more likely to lead
to useful and usable applications. The ‘less-is-more’ approach for geovisualization
proposed here takes the view that the human factors of interaction are the most
important and should provide sufficient support to facilitate the use of the tools,
instead of simply developing tools on the basis of advances in technology (Buxton
2001).

4. Designing a useful and usable geovisualization tool

The tool used to demonstrate the ‘less-is-more’ approach is a profiling application
developed specifically for the inductive formulation of a research project’s
hypotheses. The project is the Towards Successful Suburban Town Centres Project
at University College London. During the project’s first phase we sought to profile
town centres according to socio-economic activity, morphological characteristics
(using space syntax), commuting patterns and typical modes of transport use. The
project aims to explore objectively patterns of sociability and social activities
occurring in outer London’s suburbs. To do this an inductive approach to
developing hypotheses was adopted using descriptive profiles of twenty-six case
study centres. To facilitate inductive thinking across all the sampled centres a
geovisualization profiling application was developed providing the mechanism for
the systematic visual comparison of data. The project team is multi-disciplinary in
nature with a diverse portfolio of expertise and a range of GIS skills from novice to
expert. Non-expert GIS users were familiar with the analysis of spatial information
(using space syntax) but were less familiar with socio-economic data and had no
formal training in cartography or GIS. By considering the skills available within the
team, we needed to design a geovisualization tool that all users would find simple
and effective. The importance of this task seems to have eluded many geovisualiza-
tion developers and therefore required a move away from standard geovisualization
development practices.

4.1 The human-centred perspective to geovisualization development

In designing the system we deliberately set out not to explore new technologies for
geovisualization but considered how best to encourage spatial knowledge construc-
tion by simplifying geovisualization technologies. As suggested by MacEachren and
Kraak (2001), complementary advances are required in geovisualization interface
design. One such advance would be to pay greater attention to the balance between
types of functionality, end use and the skills of user(s). The literature emphasizes two
points that must be addressed before geovisualization system development. First, a
set of key user questions need to be considered. Once answered these will determine

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1082

C. E. Jones et al.

the types of user control required of the interface; by agreeing these at the outset it is
more likely that a usable application will be developed (Harrower and Sheesley
2005). Buxton (2001) proposed a series of questions taking into account motor-
sensory, cognitive and social skills. An adapted version of the questions and their
answers (Table 1) were incorporated into the design process alongside design
principles of understandability and usability.

The Suburban Profiler was developed primarily for use internally by the multi-
disciplinary project team, comprising two non-GIS experts (a historian and an
architect) and two geographers (both GIS experts). The tool would have a secondary
user base comprising a range of GIS expertise, including local authority planners. In
this context, the Suburban Profiler would provide an enriched picture of the local
neighbourhood and its suburban structure.

The primary users would be able to explore patterns for a range of activity-
generating data themes with the option of interacting with the profiler to view
different map themes for different town centres. For this reason the Suburban
Profiler could be expected to encourage creativity and stimulate inductive thinking
amongst the project team. Significantly, this notion of map use in geovisualization is
in contrast to the conventional approach of using maps to disseminate existing
knowledge (MacEachren 2004).

4.2 Type of interaction

Harrower and Sheesley (2005) identified three forms of user control that should be
considered: (1) the type of required interactivity, how the user interacts with the map
and the data; (2) the amount of interactivity required and the extent of control the
user will have and (3) the method of control and how system interactivity should be
implemented in line with the skills of the user.

Table 1. Five less-is-more user questions that assisted the design of the Suburban Profiler.

Who will be using the
Suburban Profiler?
What will they be doing

with the Suburban Profiler?

Why they are doing it?

Where will they be doing it?

User perspective – primary users

Multi-disciplinary project team with a mix of GIS expertise

ranging from novice to expert

Exploring patterns for a range of activity generating datasets
comprising socio-economic data and space syntax graphs
for town centres and their local neighbourhoods:
Diversity of patterns within one town centre (vertical

Differential patterns across all town centres (horizontal

transition)

transition)

To encourage research creativity and knowledge construction
To construct knowledge about morphology, sociability and

activity within and across town centres:
To use an inductive process of identifying project hypoth
eses that can be explored in detail in the next phase of
the project

In the first instance the project team will be working together
within a workshop environment. Later on, members of the
team will be able to use the profiler independently from a
multi-sited office or when working at home

How will they be doing it?

They will be using the interface to view different data themes

or town centres

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1083

Typical geovisualization technologies almost always enable interaction with the
map itself. In 1995, Nyergres observed the need to improve GIS interfaces, an
observation reiterated throughout the chapters of Dykes et al. (2005), suggesting that
better interface design improves user productivity, efficiency and comfort. Specific
forms of interface design linked to map interaction were reviewed by Harrower and
Sheesley (2004), who considered various functionalities used for zooming and
panning – incorrectly assuming that these operations are unavoidable. User needs
analysis for the Suburban Profiler revealed that this type of functionality can be
discarded by providing data only for one unit of analysis: the spatial extent of the
maps for each town centre would be constant. Although for extensive areas the
dynamic duo of panning and zooming is a necessary feature of the interface, for
small geographical areas distributed across a larger regional geography they are
redundant. The provision of zooming and panning would only lead to data being
viewed at inconsistent scales and detract from consistent and systemic evaluation of
all town centres in the same way.

Consideration for the user task is often neglected during the design process
(Davies and Medyckyj-Scott 1996). In this case, it is important to realize that
zooming and panning rarely form part of the user’s task itself, rather an activity that
occurs in the process of its performance. In the Suburban Profiler users may wish to
look at the proportion of output areas without a car in Surbiton and compare the
results with South Norwood. This constitutes the user’s task. The need to pan
becomes a requirement only when the map is unable to show the user what they want
to see; thus panning and zooming is, in many cases, an artefact of the limitations of
computer screen resolution (Haklay and Jones 2008). Panning also raises conflict
between functionality and the user’s task with respect to orientation, short-term
memory and rendering time. The centres of interest are located across a wide area
but unless users are familiar with the relative location of the centres it would be
difficult to pan between them. Even with a map orientation window, users would
find it difficult to negotiate the large extent because by the time they found the
centre, patterns from the previous one would be lost from their short-term memory.
The users’ task would actually be hindered by this functionality because of rendering
time.

Ruling out the conventional types of functionality provided by GIS meant that an
alternative form for viewing data was required; this led us to develop a customized
web dissemination tool. This type of tool would provide a working environment for
various scenarios: workshops, different office locations and working at home. The
types of activity were derived from the user questions with four constituent
components. Firstly, users wanted the ability to select a centre and browse through
all of its mapping themes in the form of ‘vertical transition’. This provides
functionality for tasks such as ‘is retail activity the only functional activity in High
Barnet, or is there evidence for industrial activity too?’

Users also required the option to select a mapping theme and compare it across all
town centres; an interaction named ‘horizontal transition’. This was imperative
because the sets of relations across centres are an important aspect of the project. It
enables users to answer questions such as ‘is office activity present in all town centres
or in their surrounding neighbourhood?’ The third form of interaction was the
ability to systematically view both the socio-economic data and the space syntax
information, each with very different data structures, presenting distinct types
of information. Users needed to switch easily between a space syntax map and a

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1084

C. E. Jones et al.

socio-economic map, in order to answer questions such as ‘does the structure of the
built form mean office activity is located in poorly integrated areas?’

4.3 Level of interactivity required

It was decided that data processing and rendering should not happen during
application use time. High levels of interaction would be maintained between the
users and the interface but the interaction between the users and the underlying
datasets minimized. The interactivity of the map is sacrificed to allow users to
concentrate their attention on the information relayed in the map.

4.4 Method of control

The design process led to the development of an application where users would not
be interacting with the map, despite it being the key element of the interface. The
map should be given priority in the interface because it is central to knowledge
construction. It was necessary, therefore, to recognize from the start that its size as a
proportion of the interface window must be maximized: the larger the map window,
the more data that can be explored and reviewed. This was achieved by utilizing the
full screen area and by designing the application for a screen resolution of 1280 by
1024, enabling the use of more screen assets, while still being appropriate for
common monitors. Notably, the decision on the resolution contravenes established
guidelines for website development (Nielsen 1999). However, doing so meant we
could utilize the advantages of the browser’s environment whilst ensuring that our
geovisualization tool remained useful and usable. The control of the application was
implemented through menus and hyperlinks positioned around the map window; the
controls are listed in Table 2.

5. Developing a useful and usable geovisualization interface

Once the interface design principles were established development could begin.
Special attention was paid to activity-generating features such as data on offices,
shops and community facilities; therefore a range of activity-generating mapping
themes were compiled. The data were processed automatically using a GIS (MapInfo
Professional and MapBasic) to produce maps consistent across all the centres so they
could be directly compared to each other according to scale, ranges, colour scheme
and the background map. Thematic maps were produced by following mapping
guidelines (Brewer 2005) aiming to reduce the false assumptions often derived from
poorly visualized maps, whilst paying attention to the documented limitations
associated with using administrative data units (Openshaw 1984). At first glance the
space syntax maps appear to contradict standard cartographic conventions for map

Table 2. Interaction forms and the methods of user control required of the Suburban Profiler.

Forms of interaction

Method of control

Vertical transitions
Horizontal transitions
Switch between socio-economic
data and space syntax data

Menu enabling selection of different map themes
Menu enabling selection of town centre
Different menu system for map themes

Open application in full screen mode Option to launch application in full screen provided
by a link

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1085

classification but this is not actually the case. Because the maps represent values of a
graph analysis distributed continuously across a spatial network (Hillier and Hanson
1984), it is appropriate to visualize them using a continuous colour scheme – moving
from blue to green to yellow to red.

GIS processing led to the production of more than 3000 map images across 12
major themes each with a number of sub-themes. The images became the primary
composites of the Suburban Profiler, which was developed using a mixture of client-
side JavaScript, server-side PHP scripts and HTML code to produce interactive web
pages (Figure 2). The use of the browser environment for dissemination seemed
natural because it is easy to implement and allows distribution over the web.
Another advantage is that users are already familiar with the interaction principles of
the browser and the web. The Suburban Profiler is, in effect, an interactive atlas of
maps with the menu options providing access to a multi-dimensional map index. The
maps themselves are static and cannot be changed during use time, and this
encourages the users to consider in detail the actual content of the maps and their
meaning.

The interface comprises four component sections, listed in Figure 2. Section 1
indicates the profiler status providing information about the user selections, i.e. the
town centre name and the mapping theme. The elements in this component give
feedback to the user, an essential feature of any good interface (Norman 1990).
Section 2 demarcates the map area containing two modes of interaction that change
the town centre under observation. Users can move between centres by selecting the

Figure 2. Suburban Profiler application interface and its components.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1086

C. E. Jones et al.

next centre or previous centre links. To facilitate automatic transition between town
centres slideshow functionality was implemented, activated by clicking on the map
and moving the mouse off the map area. The status changes automatically to update
the centre name.

Section 3 contains three of four items of supporting information for the map
theme: a map overview, a legend, a data table and a link to detailed metadata. The
map overview gives situational context of the centre relevant to its position in
London, with the map legend beneath it. In some cases the data tables supply
information to assist the users in comparing the centre to the wider neighbourhood.
In the case of the space syntax maps the legend is complemented by a brief
description of the measure, increasing the possibility of the Suburban Profiler being
more useful to non-expert users of space syntax methodology. The final element is a
hyperlink directing the users to a detailed description of the data measures used to
create the maps with supporting information describing the origin of the data, and
the time frame of data collection.

The fourth and final section (Section 4, Figure 2) is devoted to the menu system
and comprises two menu elements enabling changes of town centres (horizontal
transition) or changes of map theme (vertical transition). The menu emulates the
filing structure found on desktop computing platforms by organizing the data into a
series of folders and subfolders. The mapping themes menu has two components that
give the users the option of viewing the space syntax data or the socio-economic
data. The four elements of the Suburban Profiler interface were designed specifically
with the users in mind, minimizing the interaction with the map and maximizing the
ability of the users to focus on their knowledge construction task.

6. Analysing usefulness and usability of Suburban Profiler

the project

team. The need to assess

The Suburban Profiler presents a different form of interaction to that commonly
experienced by geovisualization users, so it was necessary to evaluate its effectiveness
for
the usefulness and usability of
geovisualization tools has become increasingly important as new types of
interactions emerge (Muntz et al. 2003, Marsh 2007). It has been acknowledged
that, ‘new representation forms and interactive means to visualize geospatial data
require an understanding of the impact of the visual tools used for data exploration
and knowledge construction’ (Koua and MacEachren 2006, p. 425). Reducing
interaction between the users and the map in order to develop interaction of a
different kind is a new conceptualization, so it was necessary to assess its success. By
assessing its usability in the workplace environment, we were better placed to
understand the advantages and disadvantages of
the application and future
developments.

There are a number of usability evaluation methods including usability testing,
heuristic evaluation, cognitive or pluralistic walkthroughs and predictive models
(Nielsen 1999, Preece et al. 2007, Haklay and Zafiri 2008). However, as Marsh (2007)
has found out, usability evaluation methods do not translate easily to geovisualiza-
tion applications and there is a need for more nuanced evaluation with users who use
the application for knowledge construction. For this reason it was decided to
evaluate the Suburban Profiler in the workplace environment. Video analysis was
used during an exploratory task-orientated project workshop with the four project
team members, two of whom were not directly involved in its development. This
approach enabled the evaluation of the tool with respect to relevant aspects of

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1087

usability, assessing its facilitation of knowledge construction and gauging the extent
of project hypotheses development.

With few exceptions, there is an absence of literature exploring the assessment of
geovisualization applications through video analysis (Davies and Medyckyj-Scott
1996, Robinson et al. 2005). Video analysis is useful because it provides the most
complete method of data collection that can also be replayed repeatedly (Jordan and
Henderson 1995, Preece et al. 2007). It records the intricate details of the interaction
between the users and the Suburban Profiler alongside the context of activities and
the interactions (Preece et al. 2007); thus, it enabled both visual and audio data
capture to facilitate a more detailed evaluation of the application and the ‘less-is-
more’ concept.

6.1 Video analysis for qualitative evaluation of Suburban Profiler

A meeting room was set up with a video camera mounted on a tripod focussed on the
computer and the backs of the two non-GIS experts (the main participants of the
experiment), who were given the most central seats near the computer. By locating
the camera behind the users, the participants’ attention was focused on the computer
and not on the recording, thereby minimizing disturbance to the users and reducing
the influence of the ‘Hawthorne Effect’, i.e., the change in performance that occurs
when users know they are being monitored (Preece et al. 2007).

After the workshop, the video was analysed using Mangold Interact video analysis
software. Behavioural and interaction categories were defined and used to code the
video. Three specific groups of activities were highlighted: discussion, menu
interaction and browsing the interface. Table 3 lists the three categories and the
corresponding activity codes logged in the video analysis. These codes were chosen
because of their association with those usability aspects of the Suburban Profiler
necessary to our working theory that ‘less-is-more geovisualization’ provides a
learnable, efficient and effective application.

For the combination of less map-based and more task-based interaction to be
successful, the interface should be simple, easy to use and facilitate learnability.
During the workshop it was possible to develop a measure of how ‘learnable’ it was
by using the ‘browsing interaction’ category, which classified tasks such as the time
taken by the workshop users to log onto the profiler, launch it as a full screen and

Table 3. Major categories and codes of activities during the workshop.

Category
Discussion

Browsing interaction
Menu interaction

Code
Discussing map
General discussion
Irrelevant talk
Exploring interface
Town centre change
Map theme change
Switch between socio-economic map theme
and syntax map theme (and vice versa)
Syntax scale change
Syntax measure change
Syntax background change
Next or previous town centre
Two windows side by side

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1088

C. E. Jones et al.

Figure 3. Timeline of discussion activities occurring during workshop.

familiarize themselves with the application. Out of 35 minutes of video recording,
only 1 minute and 36 seconds was spent browsing the interface, occurring at two
separate instances. The first occasion was at the beginning when users perused the
interface before discussions. The second was midway into the session and
represented an interesting change in the knowledge construction process, when
users decided to compare two map themes at a time. This functionality was not an
original user requirement of the Suburban Profiler, but it had sufficient flexibility to
enable this without too much interruption.

An efficient application is one that equips users to carry out their work and
complete their objectives systematically and proficiently, providing a means for
accessing necessary information. The central task of the workshop was to develop
project hypotheses using a portfolio of maps. For the Suburban Profiler to be
regarded as efficient, it must provide a mechanism for enabling users to engage in
discussion about specific maps. The discussion was directed by preliminary
hypotheses developed during a previous workshop. Different discussion categories
were used to the code the video: discussing map, general project discussion and
irrelevant talk. When specific patterns observed in the maps were discussed this was
classified as a map discussion whereas general project discussion referred to dialogue
not explicitly relating to the maps. Irrelevant talk coded conversation unrelated to
the purposes of the workshop (general chit chat). Of the 35 minutes, 25 were spent
examining the various maps and developing ideas derived from their observations.
Only 6 minutes were spent on general discussion, which principally took place at the
beginning of the workshop. Fewer than 30 seconds were spent on irrelevant talk, see
Figure 3.

The Suburban Profiler provided a number of different interaction forms, none of
which engaged the users with standard GIS interaction capabilities. The efficiency of
these forms can be understood by measuring how many button presses were
required, the length of time these interactions took and how they correspond to the
initial user tasks identified at the outset of the development. There are six main
possibilities for human interaction within the tool, listed in Table 3 as codes within
the category menu interaction. There were 58 instances of the users interacting with
the Suburban Profiler, but this amounted to only 3.5% of the total workshop time;
less than 2 minutes of total activity.

The most frequently occurring interactions were a change in map theme for a town
centre; the use of the next town centre button to carry out horizontal transitions and
the activation of the slideshow to view one map theme across all the town centres.
This evidence supports the initial desire for the ability to review maps in this way as
noted during the design phase. Each instance of this type of interaction occurred
within periods of discussion about the maps, as opposed to more generalized
discussion, but were used at different times in the workshop (Figure 4). The next
button was used in the latter half of the workshop, when two windows were open. It
was used to synchronize both windows by changing the town centres for both. The

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1089

Figure 4. Time lineof Suburban Profiler users interaction during workshop.

type of interaction was available in three forms. Users could either use the menu to
make a town centre change, press the next/previous town centre button, or activate a
slideshow. The former requires two mouse clicks, the latter two options just one. In
the end the more time efficient interaction was preferred. We can surmise that at this
early stage of the project users did not feel the need to explore the specific town
centres using the town centre menu;
they were comfortable browsing them
alphabetically using the next button.

7.

Is less or more geovisualization useful and usable?

In the main, the goal of the Suburban Profiler could be described as mediation in the
knowledge construction process. The types of interactions analysed during the
workshop indicate phases of the knowledge construction process undertaken and the
usefulness of different forms of interaction at different stages of this process.

The interaction forms of vertical transition can be investigated by the looking at
the start and end time in seconds (Figure 5). The phases represent the human
reasoning process. Initial unstructured processing of information and exploration by

Figure 5. Types of vertical transitions used during the workshop.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1090

C. E. Jones et al.

participants occurred at the beginning of the workshop, which was also the phase
with the most interaction with 73% of the interactions occurring within the first 20
minutes of the workshop. In fact 30% of the interactions took place in the first 5
minutes during generalized discussion where users were settling down to the task and
undertaking general exploration. When more directed discussion about the maps
occurred, interactions became less frequent and exploration more specific. After the
first 20 minutes a new phase in the process was marked by more complex phase of
human reasoning, users felt it necessary to explore in detail and were sufficiently
comfortable to begin the synthesis of more than one set of data themes. The results
of the video analysis imply that different forms of interaction are useful at different
stages of the knowledge construction process enhanced by the simple nature of the
interface. Our results complement a statement made by Muntz et al. (2003), which
suggests that for information to be both accessible (usable) and useful, minimal
statistical and information technology expertise should be required by users.

The ‘less-is-more’ nature of the Suburban Profiler undoubtedly enabled the users
to complete the tasks they set out to achieve at the beginning of the workshop. A tool
such as the one described in this article provided a mechanism for constructing
knowledge by compiling abstract data sources into a coherent and structured
interface. With the arrival of Web 2.0 and its mapping facilities such as Google Maps
or Microsoft Virtual Earth, the use of static map images may be considered
somewhat outmoded, yet the Suburban Profiler has a number of advantages over
these interfaces.

Creating maps as images then making them available to users enables the GIS
expert to maintain control of the content, design and scale at which the visualizations
are produced – meaning they are not merely visually aesthetic but portray relevant
information (Monmonier 1996). This also removed the need for non-experts to learn
GIS operations. A primary motivator for its development was to enable non-GIS
users to visually critique and explore a large quantity of information in a user
friendly manner. As noted ‘user friendliness is usually equated with interface design,
but the concept should also be used in relation to how well the tools provided map
into the users perceptions and expectations of what needs to be done with them’
(Unwin 2005, p. 683).

The advantage of the application is reflected in the video analysis, which shows
that 71% of all the activity during the workshop was taken up by discussion about
specific maps. The Suburban Profiler carefully considered the end use of the maps
and the types of functionality required to make them useful, whilst limiting
functionality found in a traditional GIS such as panning, zooming, classifying
themes and changing colours. The provision of such interaction would have
detracted from the content and meaning for non-expert users, reducing the amount
of time the users could spend engaging with the map, reducing workshop efficiency
by interrupting and fragmenting knowledge construction phases. This would have
lengthened the durations of each phase, slowing down the process overall. This
should be avoided, particularly in situations where multi-disciplinary teams
collaborate.

If a conventional GIS or geovisualization application had been used,

the
participants’ short-term memory would have been hampered by the interaction
provided by standard spatial interactivity. The time taken for the user to pan around
the map to locate the next centre would be longer than the average 1.3 seconds it
took to use the next town centre button on the Suburban Profiler. What is more,

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1091

because the images are all produced at the same scale, the application controls the
spatial extents making it much easier for the users to move around the different
centres encouraging sensible interpretations and hypotheses formulation.

Conducting the video analysis provided the project team with two primary
outcomes. The first being an initial evidence-base to support our thesis that ‘less-is-
more’ geovisualization is useful and usable. The second being the video analysis
results enabled us to assess proof of concept and provide preliminary quantitative
evidence for its practical application and understanding of the potential benefits for
non-expert users and multi-disciplined teams. It was decided that at this stage in the
development it was not necessary to conduct a detailed statistical analysis that would
be more appropriate when the concept is extended to future studies comprising a
larger user base.

The Suburban Profiler was used successfully in further project workshops where we
could confidently refute common perceptions that suburban centres are merely sleepy
residential commuter towns reliant on the urban centre. The visualizations showed a
wider range of activity generating land uses prevalent in our centres and their local
hinterland. Additionally, we were able to hypothesize that local patterns of spatial
integration and movement play an important role in generating activity. The
visualizations enabled the project team to demonstrate a need to understand suburbs
as ‘multi-dimensional’ places characterized in part by the complexity of their relations
with other places, rather than by a particular relationship to a single central place.

To conclude, this article represents a departure from the conceptual norm for
geovisualization technologies. From the perspective of technological advancement,
some may conceive the tool as lacking functionality or not using the latest advances.
On the contrary, we propose that the step away from map interaction toward
designing specifically for a user-orientated approach presents an innovative advance.
The task objective of the end users was placed at the centre of the development
process. Thought and consideration was made for the specific types and forms of
interaction that would deliver an unambiguous application, which is both useful and
usable. Recent advances
in technology and data have led to exploratory
geovisualization applications that showcase functional capabilities without due care
and attention to the fact that they are only useful with the appropriate analytical
models (Goodchild 1999). The ‘less-is-more’ approach to geovisualization adopted in
this article calls for adoption of the principle of parsimony in geovisualization
research. Significantly, this approach resonates with the well-established conceptual
framework of generalization in which complex features are simplified to aid clearer
presentation of data. Everyday cartographers make conscious decisions about which
features to include or exclude. It is pertinent to do the same when developing
geovisualization tools and interactions. Creating simple and unique applications for
specific users and purposes will result in more useful and usable geovisualization
products.

Acknowledgements
The research reported in this article forms part of a 36-month study funded by the
EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, start date 01/10/06.
EPSRC reference EP/D06595X/1). Kind thanks to the Ordnance Survey for granting
permission to publish the Suburban Profiler in the public domain, which will be
available through http://www.sstc.ucl.ac.uk/. We also extend our thanks to Noe_mie
Gre_maux from Ecole Nationale des Sciences Ge_ographiques (ENSG), France.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 1092

C. E. Jones et al.

References
ANDRIENKO, N. and ANDRIENKO, G., 2006, The complexity challenge to creating useful and
usable geovisualization tools. Proceedings of 4th international conference GIScience
(Muenster: IFGI).

BREWER, C.A., 2005, Designing better maps, a guide for GIS users (Redlands, CA: ESRI Press).
BUXTON, W., 2001, Less-is-more (More or Less). In P. Denning (Ed.) The invisible future: the
seamless integration of technology in everyday life (New York: McGraw Hill).
DAVIES, C. and MEDYCKYJ-SCOTT, D., 1996, GIS users observed. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 10, pp. 363–384.

DYKES, J., MACEACHREN, A.M. and KRAAK, M.-J., 2005, Introduction exploring geovisualiza-

tion (Oxford: Elsevier).

FUHRMANN, S., et al. 2005, User-centered design of collaborative geovisualization tools. In J.
Dykes, A.M. MacEachren and J.-M. Kraak (Eds) Introduction exploring geovisualiza-
tion (Oxford: Elsevier).

GAHEGAN, M., 2005, Beyond tools: visual support for the entire process of GIScience. In J.
Dykes, A.M. MacEachren and J.-M. Kraak (Eds) Introduction exploring geovisualiza-
tion (Oxford: Elsevier).

GOODCHILD, M.F., 1999, Reflections of a past editor. Geographical Analysis, 31, pp. 328–331.
HAKLAY, M. and TOBO´ N, C., 2003, Usability engineering and PPGIS: towards a user-centred
approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17, pp. 577–592.
HAKLAY, M. and JONES, C.E., 2008, Usability and GIS – why your boss should buy you a
larger monitor. Proceedings of the association of geographic information annual
conference Stratford-upon-Avon Sep 08, Available from: http://www.agi.org.uk/.
HAKLAY, M. and ZAFIRI, A., 2008, Usability engineering for GIS: learning from a screenshot.

The Cartographic Journal, 45, pp. 87–97.

HARROWER, M. and SHEESLEY, B., 2005, Designing better map interfaces: a framework for

panning and zooming. Transactions in GIS, 9, pp. 77–89.

HILLIER, B. and HANSON, J., 1984, The social

logic of space (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press).

JORDAN, B. and HENDERSON, A., 1995, Interaction analysis: foundations and practice. The

Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, pp. 39–103.

KOUA, E.L. and MACEACHREN, A.M., 2006, Evaluating the usability of visualization methods
in an exploratory geovisualization environment. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 20, pp. 425–448.

LAUREL, B., 1990, The art of human-computer interface design (Reading, MA: Addison-

Wesley).

MACEACHREN, A.M., 1994, Visualization in modern cartography: setting the agenda. In A.M.
MacEachren and D.R.F. Taylor (Eds) Visualization in modern cartography (Oxford:
Pergamon).

MACEACHREN, A.M. and KRAAK, M., 2001, Research challenges in geovisualization.

Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 28, pp. 3–12.

MACEACHREN, A.M., 2004, How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization, and Design, New

York: the Guilford Press.

MARSH, S.L., 2007, Techniques in geovisualization: applying standard and adapted methods in

research and education, unpublished PhD. City University, London.

MEDYCKYJ-SCOTT, D. and HEARNSHAW, H.M., 1993, Human factors in geographical

information systems (London: Belhaven Press).

MONMONIER, M., 1996, How to lie with maps (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press).
MUNTZ, R.R., et al. 2003, IT roadmap to a geospatial future, report of the committee on
intersections between geospatial information and information technology (Washington,
DC: National Academy of Sciences Press).

NIELSEN, J., 1999, Designing web usability: the practice of simplicity (Indianapolis: New Riders

Publishing).

NORMAN, D.A., 1990, The design of everyday things (New York: Doubleday).

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 A less-is-more approach to geovisualization

1093

NYERGES, T.L., et al. 1994, Cognitive aspects of human-computer interaction for geographic

information systems (Palma de Mallorca: Spain).

OPENSHAW, S., 1984, The modifiable areal unit problem (Norwich: Geo Book).
PHILBRUCK, A., 1953, Towards a unity of cartographic terms and geographical content.

Professional Geographer, 5, pp. 11–15.

PIVAR, M., FREDKIN, E. and STOMMEL, H., 1963, Computer-compiled oceanographic atlas: an
experiment in man-machine interaction. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America interactive, 50, pp. 396–398.

PLAISANT, C., et al. 2005, Information visualization and the challenge of universal usability. In
Introduction exploring

J. Dykes, A.M. MacEachren and J-M. Kraak (Eds)
geovisualization (Oxford: Elsevier).

PREECE, J., SHARP, H. and ROGERS, I., 2007, Interaction design beyond human-computer

interaction (Chichester: Wiley).

ROBINSON, A.C., et al. 2005, Combining usability techniques to design geovisualization tools

for epidemiology. Proceedings of Auto-Carto 2005, Las Vegas, NV.

SLOCUM, T.A., et al. 2001, Cognitive and usability issues in geovisualization. Cartography and

Geographic Information Science, 28, pp. 61–75.

TRAYNOR, C. and WILLIAMS, M.G., 1995, Why are geographic information systems hard to
use? Conference companion of human factors in computing systems conference (Boston:
Addison-Wesley).

TURK, A., 1993, The relevance of human factors to geographical information systems. In D.
Medyckyj-Scott and H.M. Hearnshaw (Eds) Human factors in geographical informa-
tion systems (London: Belhaven Press).

UNWIN, D.J., 2005, Fiddling on a different planet? Geoforum, 36, pp. 681–684.
YUAN, M. and ALBRECHT, J., 1995, Structural analysis of geographic information and GIS
operations from a user’s perspective. In S.C. Hirtle and A.U. Frank (Eds) Spatial
information theory a theoretical basis for GIS (Heidelberg: Springer Berlin).

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 19:09 12 November 2014 