int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 8, 711± 713

Editorial Introduction

The social construction of geographical information systems

FRANCIS HARVEY
Department of Geography, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0027,
USA

This special issue of the International Journal of Geographical Information Science
contains articles that represent a variety of approaches broadly associated with
Science, Technology and Society (STS) studies. The interdisciplinary (cid:142) eld of STS has
examined the development, production, and engagement of physics and other
sciences, diverse activities of engineers, and the multiple roles technologies play
in today’s world. The interdisciplinary nature of geographical information science
presents a rich (cid:142) eld for research that draws on STS.

The origins of STS are broad and diverse. A key (cid:142) gure in their development is
undoubtedly Thomas Kuhn. In his research on physics, Kuhn showed the importance
of studying speci(cid:142) c scienti(cid:142) c communities, their problem sets, and paradigms.
Inspired by his work researchers have broadened the in-depth engagement with
activities of scientists and the contexts in which they work. The work of Harry
Collins, Trevor Pinch, Peter Galison, Andrew Pickering, Karin Knorr-Cetina and
many others has shed new light on the genesis and organizational acumen necessary
for the advancement of scienti(cid:142) c disciplines. STS use primarily historiographic and
sociological methods and empirical observation of practice. The engaged and detailed
participant observations have opened debates about the experimental method, work
practices, language communities, engineering approaches, and medical ethics.

In perhaps his best know English language publication, Bruno Latour’s Science
in Action (1987 ) explores the inner workings of science by examining the actual
practices of producing scienti(cid:142) c facts. Latour’s study accounts for the development
of science by tracing the interactions in laboratories, literature, and with funding
groups. Using concepts such as enrollment and centers of calculation, he provides
thought-provoking insights into the networks of relationships that sustain scienti(cid:142) c
communities. Instead of hagiography, this work provides a framework for engaging
the social construction of science and technology.

Latour is not the sole, nor predominant, (cid:142) gure in STS. CliŒord Geertz and
Anselm Strauss’ work predates Latour’s detailed study of science in action and their
students have undertaken a variety of noteworthy studies in (cid:142) elds as diverse as HIV
research and library science. Applying STS methods to weapons research, Collins
and Pinch (1998 ) show that in the Gulf War of 1991 the success ‘rate’ in destroying
Scuds with Patriot missiles involves more than questions of proof, truth, experimental
design and display. The actual criteria of ‘interception’ means diŒerent things at
diŒerent times. When pressed in hearings it turns out to actually mean ‘passing in
the sky’. In other words, the success of ‘interception’ is measured in terms of political

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

712

Editorial

consequences for society, not actually striking the target. The underlying, and more
pertinent issue in evaluating the success of Patriot missiles, is the social construction
of the measure of ‘accuracy’ that counts as ‘interception’. Clearly, not all scienti(cid:142) c
endeavours face the political and social pressures that the deployment of Patriots
during the Gulf war did. Scientists obviously do understand the di(cid:141) culties of replicat-
ing experiments —especially in di(cid:141) cult environments —the relevancy of science is
the insight into the context of the experiment. STS studies show that it takes more
than scientists to make science: science also needs material, people, and techniques.
These issues are determined as much by administrators and politicians as by scientists
themselves.

1. The world as laboratory

Turning back again to Science in Action, it is important to underscore technolo-
gies’ key role in STS. The role of non-human artefacts to amalgamate diŒerences is
critical to understanding how STS diŒers from sociological work. Non-humans ‘act’
in diŒerent ways in STS. Beyond individual artifacts or artifact constellations, STS
is increasingly broadening its analysis to examine technology as the infrastructure
that makes other activities possible (Star 1999 ). ‘Infrastructure de(cid:142) nes the basis of
society; it is the underlying foundation of the facilities, services, and standards upon
which everything else builds’ (Norman 1998, p. 115). Infrastructure is a critical topic,
yet because it is so mundane in its ubiquity, does not excite the same degree of
interest a new subatomic particle does. Yet it is precisely the infrastructure that
makes science possible. Digital Earth presents geographical information scientists
with an infrastructure that makes the world as accessible as a physics laboratory
makes subatomic particles accessible to physicists.

The articles in this issue of International Journal of Geographical Information
Science are part of a broader engagement with the various ways we construct
meaning, develop technologies, and use these technologies in a dynamic world.
The success of GIS opens fundamental questions about the relationships between
theory, experience, and practice. Technology has become ubiquitous in our lives, a
fact STS accounts for. STS speak about technoscience to indicate the synergy and
complementarity of science and technology.

2. STS and geographical information science

The articles in this issue focus on several themes with great relevance to the
broad GI community. They range from issues in assembling global databases to the
challenges
face in accessing and making sense of geographical
information.

individuals

Eugene Martin deploys actor network theory to study the interactions involved
in developing GIS technology in Ecuador. His case study of implementation shows
how various actors (cid:142) nd alignment between diŒerent perspectives on data, technolo-
gies, and institutional arrangements. This research traces actor-network interactions
through texts, technological objects, people, money, and control. This breadth enables
Martin to articulate critical
linkages between groups. GIS implementation is a
process that many relationships and jointly shared knowledge constrain.

GeoŒBowker analyses the di(cid:141) culties of using data in multiple ways and shows
the challenges for integrating diverse representation. His study examines international
biodiversity programs but is intriguing to re(cid:143) ect upon as global geospatial databases
become more common. This work illustrates that contradictions resulting from

Editorial

713

diŒerent naming practices are folded into databases and data processing and become
part of local orderings and alignment of data sets. Bowker suggests that a universally
accepted global panoptic biodiversity database is extremely unlikely. These con-
siderations are highly relevant to work on the interoperability of diŒerent scale
databases, particularly issues of semantic interoperability.

Renee Sieber’s article addresses the adoption of GIS technology by Grass Roots
Organizations (GRO). Through several case studies she describes the data sharing
empowerment and marginalization issues that these groups face. The main question
she raises asks whether the groups have to conform to the perceived opposition in
developing GIS or if they are autonomous enough to form their own GIS. This
question has relevancy for a broader set of organizations and raises points that
complement implementation and diŒusion literature.

The last article takes up diŒerent issues that help broaden understanding of the
origins of geographic information science concepts. Pat McHa(cid:141) e examines the role
of language and communication in the development of the surface concept in the
already famed Harvard Laboratory. His work as an outsider on a topic that many
scientists experienced directly oŒers insights into the key role of communication and
teaching for Howard Fisher and William Warntz. The analysis focuses on the role
of metaphor, a term that just under linguists is open to multiple interpretations. The
results of this analysis remind us of the ground-breaking work done in the Harvard
lab while opening this topic for more discussion.

As a (cid:142) nal note I would like to thank all the participants of the Intersections
workshop held in May 1999 in Rough River, Kentucky. Selected papers from this
workshop were rewritten, reviewed and edited for this special issue. In the intersection
between GIScience and STS these papers show the potential for increased research
in this area.

References
Collins, H., and Pinch, T., 1998, T he Golem at large. W hat you should know about technology

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Latour, B., 1987, Science in Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Norman, D. A., 1998, T he Invisible Computer. W hy Good Products Fail, the Personal Computer
is so Complex, and Information Appliances are the Solution (Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press).

Star, S. L., 1999, The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 43, 377–391.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of
Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted
to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may
print, download, or email articles for individual use.

