The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 288–291 December 2003

288

S U R V E Y

Topographic Maps to Support Courses for Visually
Impaired Students

D. Pardy, C.Phys., M.Inst.P

This short paper describes an inexpensive method for making topographic maps to support visually impaired students.
The maps are mainly for courses in geology and ecology, but maps for walking and other recreational purposes have
also been produced. The method is not well suited to reproduction of multiple copies, but work is continuing to investi-
gate replication. The paper also considers the choice of materials, scale including vertical exaggeration) and optimum
methods of labelling to meet the needs of both blind and partially sighted students. The project concentrates on making
tactile maps affordable, and shows that these can be effective despite using simple tools and techniques from low cost

sometimes free, scrap) material.

BACKGROUND

For the past three years the author has been making tactile
topographic maps to help visually impaired people gain a
better perception of their environment. This has largely been
on a voluntary basis, in the (cid:142)rst instance for recreational,
and more recently, for educational purposes. The process
uses expanded polystyrene that is easy to cut into the com-
plex contour shapes and creates light models despite the
considerable thickness necessary to reproduce hilly areas.
An added advantage arises from the availability of polystyrene
in suitable sizes as scrap packaging material. Though the
polystyrene is suf(cid:142)ciently robust for one off maps, it is not
strong enough to withstand the replication process involved
in thermoform production. As diagrams are quick to pro-
duce using simple portable tools, maps can be made on site.
These bespoke methods for producing tactile topographic
maps are unique, but rely heavily on the input of visually
impaired users whose contributions have helped the author
re(cid:142)ne the technique.

HISTORY/DATA

The earliest maps produced by this method used OS small-
scale contour data. As it had to be extracted manually
from paper maps it was necessarily a slow and tedious
process. More recently digital data from the OS Interactive
Atlas of Great Britain provides an ef(cid:142)cient way of deriving
topographic information that can then be modelled, but
there are limitations. A contour interval of 200 ft is too
coarse for large-scale mapping, especially for relatively (cid:143)at
areas for which more detailed elevation information is
required. Though Ordnance Survey has professional products
that provide this detail, for example Landform Panorama
with contour intervals of 10 m, costs are prohibitively
expensive for this type of tactile reproduction. That does

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225013023

not however preclude universities from accessing such
data. Current educational provisions mean OS large-scale
information is available to colleges relatively cheaply.

OBJECTIVE

To provide tactile maps that include both topography and
some geological features of an area, together with orientation
and location cues, it is imperative that map provide infor-
mation that can be clearly understood by blind and
partially sighted students, and their sighted guides.

METHOD

The process begins with a detailed planning phase. This
involves discussions with an organising tutor to establish
which area to cover. A good example is a map the author
made of the ecology and geology of the Forest of Dean,
which additionally needed to include the Vale of Berkeley
and Bristol (referred to as the essential area below).

Design considerations follow. Initially it is necessary
to establish an appropriate scale giving due consideration
to both horizontal and vertical dimensions. Draft versions
of the Forest of Dean map on paper indicated that in
order to provide suf(cid:142)cient topographic detail to make the
information discriminable to touch required a minimum
horizontal scale of 1 inch to the mile. However this would
result in a map too large for a person to reach across from
south to north. A scale of 0.8 inches to the mile was
chosen as a compromise. Although this makes the Wye
Valley too narrow for all but the smallest (cid:142)ngers in places,
it provides a map that is overall more manageable in
regard to its size.

Experience indicates it is necessary to over exaggerate
information more

vertical scales to make topographical

Topographic Maps for Visually Impaired Students

289

easily discriminable to touch. After making sample hills,
the author decided that each 200 ft contour
interval
should be represented by 8 mm thick polystyrene, a scale
approximately 8 inches to the mile.

Previous knowledge of tactile map production has shown
a preference amongst blind students for using main roads,
motorways, railways and major towns for orientation. A
decision to include these features as cues for location
purposes is thus taken, omitting major roads crossing the
Forest of Dean to avoid breaking the continuity of the
more important geological information.

CONSTRUCTION

A master map is constructed by transferring contour and
water feature data into a Paint application where it under-
goes enlargement to the required scale. Each height band
is shaded in a contrasting colour. The map is then printed
out and contour templates cut for each height. These tem-
plates were placed on the 8 mm polystyrene foam sheet
and cut around with a hot wire ‘saw’. A home made hot
wire sculpting tool provides the facility for extra detailing
when required (Figure 1).

The position of the next higher contour is traced onto
the level below so that the edges of each contour layer can
be chamfered to avoid hills with unnatural steps. A base
outline showing the coastline and major rivers is glued to a
plywood support board upon which the succeeding 200 ft
contour layers are then glued.

Motorways are added by gluing wide (cid:143)at purple boot-
laces along the routes, major roads are represented by
round red bootlaces and railways by knobbly white plastic
strips. Extraordinary features such as the two Severn Bridges
on the Forest of Dean map are modelled in balsa wood and
cocktail sticks before being placed in position. Providing high
colour contrast between tactile symbols facilitates partially
sighted students who can make use of their residual vision
in addition to touch.

In addition to a tactile key, a horizontal scale bar is also
included on the map. The map and key are both labelled
using Braille and print. Braille labelling is limited by the
space available, where it is likely to exceed the boundaries
of the map or there simply is not suf(cid:142)cient room for its
inclusion it is replaced by a marker system

Geological features were depicted using area symbols
for example a rough Artex ceiling paint (later over painted
black) was used to represent coal measures, and a striped
yellow surface (cid:142)nish indicated the position of limestone
underlying the surface.

Point symbols to indicate sites of particular interest
to be visited by students consisted of a range of wooden
pegs and pins. These used shape and colour as a means of
differentiating between them and to avoid cluttering the
map with Braille labels. A key providing a description of
their meaning was produced on a separate board.

Figure 1. Hot wire cutter and sculpting tool, narrow V of nichrome
wire about 5 cm long equivalent to a craft knife

Figure 2. Forest of Dean tactile map 0.8 inch = 1 mile

290

The Cartographic Journal

FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

Recently a visually impaired student reported that tactile
maps of the world lacked detail, adding that the labelling
was unclear, and differentiation between countries made
on the basis of texture was insuf(cid:142)cient and made tactile
sensing dif(cid:142)cult. In response to that comment the author
has conducted a feasibility study into whether it is possible
to apply the techniques learned from producing topo-
graphic maps to making maps of the world. Initial (cid:142)ndings
indicate that at least some of the same processes can be
used. The phases that cover the planning and design con-
siderations are equally likely to involve similar approaches,
none more so than when considering the issue of scale. The
actual construction however has proved more problematic.
A variety of methods have been tested, the author (cid:142)nally
deciding to concentrate on producing tactile globes after
also hearing about their limitations. The (cid:142)nal outcomes
can be seen in Figure 3 and Figure 4.

It is also the case that the inclusion of a ‘talking key’
where a visually impaired student could activate a spoken
commentary or have a place identi(cid:142)ed verbally by touching
the map would be a bene(cid:142)t. As with other types of tactile
maps it is possible that this further avenue might also be
developed in the future.

Figure 3. Tactile topographic globe

Figure 4. Political globe adapted for tactile users

Topographic Maps for Visually Impaired Students

291

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks are due to members of the University of Bristol
Access Unit, Claire Wickham for her encouragement and
Paul Sullivan for Braille labels and also to my friend Geoff

Roberts who, at very short notice, made the labels for
the geology sites on the Forest of Dean Map that were
only (cid:142)nalised at the last minute. Special thanks are due to
Colin R. Howard who made all the labels for the political
globe.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

