This article was downloaded by: [North Carolina State University]
On: 20 January 2013, At: 09:52
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Introduction to distributed geographic
information processing research
C. Yang a & R. Raskin b
a Department of Geography and GeoInformation Science,
Joint Center for Intelligent Spatial Computing, George Mason
University, Fairfax, VA, USA
b NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, USA
Version of record first published: 24 Jul 2009.

To cite this article: C. Yang & R. Raskin (2009): Introduction to distributed geographic information
processing research, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23:5, 553-560

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810902733682

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 23, No. 5, May 2009, 553–560

Editorial

Introduction to distributed geographic information processing research

C. YANG*† and R. RASKIN‡
†Department of Geography and GeoInformation Science, Joint Center for Intelligent
Spatial Computing, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
‡NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, USA

(Received 26 December 2008; in final form 30 December 2008)

Distributed geographic information processing (DGIP) refers to the processing of
geographic information across dispersed processing units through computer net-
works and other communication channels. DGIP has become increasingly impor-
tant in the past decade with the popularization of computer networks, the growth
of distributed data repositories, and the collaboration of researchers, developers,
and users among multiple disciplines using geographic information. DGIP focuses
on the technical research on how to allocate and process geographic information
resources in a distributed environment to achieve a specific application objective
(such as the implementation of virtual globes). The geographic information
resources may include sensors, geographic data, models, information, knowledge,
visualization tools, computers, computer networks, software components, archi-
tecture, security strategies, applications, and human resources. This introduction
to DGIP research defines six research areas: (a) DGIP architecture, including
service-oriented architecture (SOA) and Federal Enterprise Architecture
(FEA), (b) spatial computing issues for leveraging and allocating computing
power to process geographic information, (c) geographic information-processing
models for decoupling and integrating models for specific or cross application
domains, (d) interoperability, defining the standards and interfaces for sharing
processing units, (e) intelligence in DGIP for leveraging knowledge, and (f) applied
sciences. The papers selected for this special issue cover all six areas. DGIP will
become increasingly important with the globalization of our daily lives across
planet Earth and the need to leverage distributed geographic information
resources for problem solving and decision making in the global environment.

Keywords: DGIP; Cyberinfrastructure; Geographic information and knowledge;
Interoperability; SOA; High-performance computing; Spatial web portal;
Geobrowser; Grid computing; Spatial ontology

1.

Introduction

Geographic information is collected for geographically dispersed locations and
archived, processed, and maintained by numerous organizations spanning multiple
application objectives (Goodchild et al. 1999). The globalization calls for the integra-
tion of heterogeneous geographic data from local to global levels to assist in decision
making and societal benefits. Decision making at the local level could be affected by
global activities, whereas that at the global level could be impacted by local activities

*Corresponding author. Email: cyang3@gmu.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2009 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810902733682

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 554

C. Yang and R. Raskin

(Kates et al. 2001). Sharing distributed geographic information becomes a global
effort with the initiatives of global collaborations, such as Digital Earth (DE) and
Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS). The requirements from the
global initiatives and the nature of distributed geographic information call for the
research and development of effective distributed geographic information processing
(DGIP).

DGIP refers to the processing of geographic information across geographically
dispersed processing units through computer networks and other communication
channels (Yang et al. 2008). The origin of DGIP can be traced back to ancient times
when people traveled around the world and brought back geographical information
for decision making, such as for international trade (Anderson and Blackhurst 1993).
The introduction of the computer and computer networks in the latter half of the
twentieth century enabled the digital storage of geographic information and its rapid
processing for generating useful and accurate decision support
information
(Tomlinson 1990).

The proliferation of popular computer network applications provides computing
infrastructure to conduct more advanced DGIP tasks. For example, by the mid-
1990s, computers and computer networks could provide driving directions between
arbitrary locations; this technology was further enhanced around 2000 for use in
vehicles for location-based services (LBS) (Schiller and Voisard 2004). The growing
volumes of emerging digital spatial data spawned the development of spatial data
infrastructures (SDIs). For example, the National Spatial Data Infrastructure
(NSDI) (NRC 1993) provides comprehensive channels, such as geobrowsers or
spatial web portals (Yang et al. 2007), to share geographic data and processing for
the benefit of large user communities beyond the traditional geographic information
consumer. The success of Google Earth and Virtual Earth brought an easy-to-use
platform for generic users to collaborate, explore, and share geographic information
across platforms (Butler 2006). These platforms provide convenient tools for the
general public with popular applications such as navigation and real-estate discovery
and evaluation. The virtual globes also provide a platform for almost anyone to be an
information provider, and input, comment on, and share geographic information
collected dispersedly on a volunteer basis.

These applications need distributed geographic information, and the demands for
distributed geographic resources are rapidly increasing. For example, for rapid
response to natural disasters and emergencies, such as earthquakes and tsunamis,
we need to rapidly integrate historical and/or on-demand information resources
(Kafatos et al. 2002). These demands have produced a new set of research areas
that must be addressed, including (a) architectures that support flexibility in archi-
tectural design, (b) spatial computing that easily leverages and allocates computing
power for geographic information processing, (c) models and model frameworks that
support the integration of space, time, and important factors at a global level and
across domains for supporting information sharing, knowledge extraction, and solu-
tion integration, (d) interoperability with needed standards and interfaces for proces-
sing units to interact with, (e) intelligence in supporting knowledge capture and
utilization, and (f) applications or applied sciences that solve specific problems of
potential impact to user communities.

The proliferation of DGIP research and development inspired us to organize
several DGIP sessions at the 2007 AAG Annual Meeting, including four technical
to discuss recent DGIP advancements. The meeting
sessions and a panel

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 Distributed geographic information processing

555

contributions helped define the pressing research areas of DGIP, and most partici-
pants saw the need for a journal special issue to capture recent developments. We
invited extended abstract submissions from the session presenters and other research-
ers, from which we selected seven for full paper submissions. Through a rigorous
review process, five of the seven were selected for inclusion in this special issue.

In supporting DE, Yang et al. (2008) introduced three DGIP research aspects: (1)
sharing Earth data, information, and services through geographic interoperability
supported by the standardization of contents and interfaces; (2) sharing computing
and software resources through a GeoCyberinfrastructure supported by DGIP mid-
dleware; and (3) sharing knowledge within and across domains through ontology and
semantic searches. We expanded these three research aspects to the six DGIP areas
represented in this special issue.

2. Six key DGIP research areas

Architecture is the first theme in DGIP research; a successful architectural design must
flexibly integrate DGIP resources in the midst of changing and maturing technologies.
A popular architecture is the service-oriented architecture (SOA) that provides a
flexible framework for integrating resources to compose problem-solving applications
(Bambacus et al. 2007). The US government developed a Federal Enterprise
Architecture (FEA) for integrating and sharing government investments. Several
research items under SOA include strategies to (a) populate more distributed geospatial
information services; (b) identify missing services for sharing geographic information
and processing; (c) automate and chain the services to form applications through work
flow management; and (d) integrate more knowledge in automating the process.
Resource-oriented architecture and model-driven architecture are also under investiga-
tion for leveraging existing resource and application/decision support requirements.

Spatial computing addresses issues of optimal utilization and allocation of comput-
ing resources for DGIP. Spatial computing techniques directly contribute to DGIP
advancements by providing advanced processing platforms, including: grid comput-
ing, peer-to-peer computing, cloud computing, and high-performance computing
(HPC). As more applications are brought online requiring rapid response and/or
large volumes of geographic information, more research is required for optimal
allocation of spatial computing resources that match the computing needs.
Examples include utilizing HPC for near real-time applications, utilizing grid com-
puting for time-consuming applications, using peer-to-peer computing for sharing
information among a large number of users, and adopting cloud computing for
generic users to access complex computing facilities.

Models have been developed to capture the geographic information principles that
support reasoning and computing needs for collecting, archiving, processing, inte-
grating, and representing geographic information (Shekhar et al. 1997). Most of these
models are developed for a specific usage, for example, to support generic GIS soft-
ware (Peuquet 1984) or specific application domains, such as land cover and land use
(Meyer and Turner 1991). DGIP requires a flexible framework to facilitate the sharing
of global and regional models, sub-models, and atomic models that capture the space,
time, and essential components. Such a research agenda will be a fundamental con-
tribution to evolve and advance DGIP capabilities.

Interoperability will be an important research area of DGIP in the next decade as we
strive for full plug-and-play of geographic information processing units (Yang et al.

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 556

C. Yang and R. Raskin

2007). The research and development on standards conducted by various national
and international organizations, such as the Federal Geographic Data Committee
the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), and the International
(FGDC),
Organization for Standardization/Technical Committee (ISO/TC211), provide build-
ing blocks for implementing interoperability. And the standards implementations
contribute multiple interoperable processing units to build up an expanded
SDI. Practical problems need to be addressed on the limited implementations to
date, including security, digital rights management, performance, and quality control
issues (Yang et al. 2005).

Intelligence in DGIP is important to many geographic information processing
applications and is of specific interest to domains utilizing geographic knowledge.
Some knowledge has been captured in books, computer systems, applications, and
human expertise, but making it available in a machine process-able form for auto-
mated geographic processing remains a daunting challenge. Recent developments on
the semantic web (Egenhofer 2002) provide description languages, such as Web
Ontology Language (OWL) and Resource Description Framework (RDF), to cap-
ture basic concepts and simple relationships (Yi et al. 2007). But complex logic is not
representable using standard languages and research is required to produce a reason-
ing engine that provides high-quality decision support and automated geographic
information processes, and no native representations of spatial concepts are available
in RDF or OWL.

Applications will demonstrate the successes of DGIP compared with previous
geographic information-processing environments. Current success stories include:
(a) SDI has made finding geospatial data much easier and (b) Google Earth and
Virtual Earth provide very convenient platforms for integrating geographic informa-
tion and a simple logic to support targeted mapping applications (such as viewing real
estate) for general users. The latter application has driven geographic information
processing as a mainstream information technology. However, most of these suc-
cesses are limited to simple applications. Critical infrastructure is required to support
applications that deploy complex logic and assist advanced decision making in a
global context with rapid response, for example, where to search and rescue victims
after an earthquake or tsunami. This cyberinfrastructure should integrate complex
data to include space, time, and physical parameters (Huang and Yi 2006) to make
more accurate predictions and to support better decisions for drought and flooding
prediction, public health resource allocation, and other applications.

3.

Introduction to the papers

Each of the five papers in this special issue reflects more than one of the six research areas.
Utilizing a forest fire risk map scenario, the paper by Friis-Christensen et al.
demonstrates service chaining and relevant aspects of (a) serving geographic data
and information in an interoperable manner, (b) utilizing SOA-based architecture for
service chaining, and (c) supporting a DGIP application. They also investigate issues,
patterns, and workflow within the service chaining architecture.

The paper by Chen et al. introduces an Abstract Information Model (AIM) to
express DGIP conceptual models using XML. AIM can be instantiated into a work-
flow in the form of Grid service chaining and executed by a Grid workflow engine to
generate virtual geographic products on-the-fly. Grid computing is also presented for
supporting the workflow engine.

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 Distributed geographic information processing

557

To support a geospatial cyberinfrastructure, Zhang and Tsou introduce a four-tier
framework including presentation tier, logic tier, service tier, and grid tier. Using the
framework, they implemented a spatial Web portal to demonstrate performance of
grid-enabled DGIP services, integration of Internet GIService resources, and techni-
cal challenges for implementing spatial Web portals.

Wang and Liu describe how to utilize HPC to support time-consuming geographic
processes for empowering GIScience research and education. The authors base their
research on the development of the TeraGrid GIScience Gateway and on case studies of
Bayesian geostatistical modeling and a spatial statistic for detecting local clustering.

An important emerging topic of DGIP is model interoperability, or eventually,
forming a common model framework for geographic data, information, and proces-
sing. Hu and Bian introduce their research on formal concept analysis in semantic
reference systems at the function level of interoperability in environmental models,
using hydrological modeling as an example.

4. Toward a research agenda

The emerging need for effective DGIP suggest many important research subareas for
the evolution of DGIP research.

4.1 Architecture

l FEA;
l SOA;
l Service combination, service chaining/cascading for integrating applications;
l Work flow and artificial intelligence (AI) support for automating service chaining;
l Quality of services;
l Seamless integration of services, data, and resources;
l Geobrowser and Spatial Web Portal;
l Resource-oriented architecture and model-driven architecture.

4.2 Spatial computing

l How to utilize available computing platforms, such as high-end computing
(HEC) and grid computing, for geographic information processing; or how to
geo-enable different computing platforms for DGIP.

l Fundamental capabilities and limitations of available computing platforms to
support computing-intensive DGIP, such as global high-resolution modeling.
l What DGIP programming abstractions (including models, languages, and algo-
rithms) can accentuate DGIP across platforms for such a data- or computing-
intensive application?

l Processing bottlenecks, such as data transfer and geovisualization, and

l GeoMiddleware for integrating, scheduling, and optimizing the computing

performance.

platforms.

4.3 Models

l Establish a model framework for processing geographic information.
l Model description, decouple, integration, atomic, modular, sub, model, and

model framework.

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 558

C. Yang and R. Raskin

l Model accuracy, quality, reliability.
l Model data input/output, content and format.
l Model specification for reference model of models.

4.4

Interoperability

l Data interoperability: content and format;
l Processing interoperability;
l Service interoperability: content and interface;
l Computing interoperability: scheduling and utilizing;
l Model interoperability: sub-model interaction;
l Standards for all interoperable components;
l Semantic interoperability.

4.5

Intelligence in DGIP

l Semantic representations and ontologies;
l Knowledge base of spatial principles and domain sciences;
l Description mechanisms for capturing needed knowledge;
l Intelligent resource discovery: semantic searching, ranking, navigating, and

reasoning;

l Intelligent understanding and utilization;
l Automated data fusion;
l Complex reasoning using computation over large spatial data holdings;
l Service security.

4.6 Application sciences

Earth and Virtual Earth;

l Human computer interaction (HCI): popular visualization tools, such as Google

l GeoCollaboration;
l Scientific applications, such as climate change and global water cycle;
l Engineering applications, such as near real-time applications, emergency response;
l Social applications, such as virtual organizations;
l Environment applications, such as planning and public participation;
l Popular applications, such as routing and real estate with massive concurrent

accesses;

l Decision making and capture of uncertainty.

5. Discussion and conclusion

This special issue of the International Journal of Geographic Information Science
(IJGIS) is a reflection of the scientific community response to the recent active
developments and advancements in DGIP. The ultimate goal is to provide an infor-
mation infrastructure to solve comprehensive global to local level problems/questions
such as ‘What is the possibility of flooding for Mississippi river in 2020 and how can
we best prepare for it?’ (NRC 2007). Required are further research and advancements
in all aspects of DGIP and the seamless integration of DGIP components. The
resulting vision requires (a) a flexible and robust architecture, such as one based on
that supports integrating mature interoperable services for a
SOA or FEA,

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 Distributed geographic information processing

559

comprehensive application on the fly; (b) computing power that is easily utilized and
well scheduled to support geographic information processing so that processing can
be conducted in the most efficient manner to meet time demands; (c) an integrative
and interoperable model framework that integrates all needed geographic informa-
tion collected through observations and generated through needed model-based
simulations; (d) interoperability at a level of maturity where we can plug and play
processing units to share geographic information resources; (e) geographic knowledge
capture and spatial reasoning engines developed to automate the work flow and
integrate the processing units intelligently (Li et al. 2008); and (f) application science
issues addressing the reasonable quality of output for decision support.

Advancements in the DGIP research areas are continuing, driven from both scientific
and application needs, such as understanding how future global climate change will
impact water resources in the US Southwest. Examples of ongoing advancements
include (1) Organizations, who are obligated to share geographic information
resources, are self-motivated to conduct DGIP research and development; (2) the
interoperability research and development actively conducted at OGC; (3) computer
network-based research and development actively conducted in academic research
institutions and industry; (4) the increased recognition of the importance of managing
knowledge within large institutions; and (5) the SOA and FEA being built into enter-
prise architectures for both industrial and government operations. With this special
issue, we hope that DGIP relevant research can be further stimulated and accelerated
with more participation from academia, industry, and government entities, and more
collaborations across disciplinary domains and jurisdictional boundaries. A well-
developed, technologically mature DGIP infrastructure will enable us to share distrib-
uted geographic information resources seamlessly, and solve complex, information-rich
twenty-first century problems ranging from global to local scales.

Acknowledgements
The participants of the AAG DGIP sessions contributed to the formation of the
special issue. The anonymous reviewers are greatly acknowledged for their support in
providing insights and critical comments for maturing the papers. We also thank
Profs. Brian Lees and Mark Gahegan, who helped greatly in the process of developing
the special issue toward publication. The activities are sponsored by a national 973
project (2006CB701306) and a NASA project (NNX07AD99G).

References
ANDERSON, K. and BLACKHURST, R., 1993, Regional Integration and the Global Trading System

(New York: St. Martin’s Press).

BAMBACUS, M., YANG, C., EVANS, J., COLE, M., ALAMEH, N., and MARLEY, S., 2007, ESG: an

interoperable portal for prototyping applications. URISA Journal, 19(2), pp. 15–21.

BUTLER, D., 2006, Virtual globes: the web-wide world. Nature, 439(7078), pp. 776–778.
CHEN, A., DI, L., WEI, Y. and BAI, Y., 2009, Use of grid computing to model virtual geospatial
products. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23(5), pp. 581–604.
EGENHOFER, M.J., 2002, Toward the semantic geospatial web. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
International Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pp. 1–4
(Virginia: ACM Press).

FRIIS-CHRISTENSEN, A., LUCCHI, R., LUTZ, M. and OSTLANDER, N., 2009, Service chaining
architecture for implementing distributed geoprocessing applications. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23(5), pp. 561–580.

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 560

C. Yang and R. Raskin

GOODCHILD, M.F., EGENHOFER, M.J., FEGEAS, R., and KOTTMAN, C., 1999, Interoperating

Geographic Information System (Norwell, MA: Springer).

HU, S. and BIAN, L., 2009, Interoperability of functions in environmental models: a case study
in hydrological modeling. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
23(5), pp. 657–681.

HUANG, B. and YI, S.Z., 2006, A geospatial web service model with application to traffic noise

simulation. Geomatica, 60(1), pp. 21–34.

KAFATOS, M., YANG, R., YANG, C., GOMEZ, R. and BOYBEYI, Z., 2002, Utilizing remote sensed
data in a quick response system. In ISPRS Commission I/FIEOS 2002 Conference
Proceedings, pp. 1–15 (Boulder, CO).

KATES, R.W., CLARK, W.C., CORELL, R., HALL, J.M., JAEGER, C.C., LOWE, I., MCCARTHY, J.J.,
SCHELLNHUBER, H.J., BOLIN, B., DICKSON, N.M., FAUCHEUX, S., GALLOPIN, G.C.,
GRU¨ BLER, A., HUNTLEY, B., JA¨ GER, J., JODHA, N.S., KASPERSON, R.E., MABOGUNJE, A.,
MATSON, P., MOONEY, H., MOORE, B., O’RIORDAN, T., SVEDIN, U., 2001, Environment
and development: sustainability science, Science, 292(5517), pp. 641–642.

LI, W., YANG, C. and RASKIN, R., 2008, A semantic enhanced search for spatial web portals,
AAAI 2008 Spring Symposium Technical Report SS-08-05, pp. 47–50 (Palo Alto: AAAI
Press).

MEYER, W.B. and TURNER, B.L., 1991, Changes in Land Use and Land Cover: A Global

Perspective (New York: Cambridge University Press).

NRC, 1993, Toward a Coordinated Spatial Data Infrastructure for the Nation (Washington:

National Academies Press).

NRC, 2007, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next

Decade and Beyond (Washington: National Academies Press).

PEUQUET, D., 1984, A conceptual framework and comparison of spatial data models.
and

for Geographic

International

Information

Journal

Cartographica: The
Geovisualization, 21(4), pp. 66–113.

SCHILLER, J.H. and VOISARD, A., 2004, Location-Based Services (San Francisco: Elsevier).
SHEKHAR, S., COYLE, M., GOYAL, B., LIU, D.-R., and SARKAR, S., 1997, Data models in

geographic information systems. Communications of the ACM, 40(4), pp. 103–110.

TOMLINSON, R., 1990, Geographic information systems: a new frontier. In D.J. Peuquet, and
D.F. Marble (Eds), Introductory Readings in Geographic Information Systems, pp.
18–29 (Bristol, PA:CRC Press).

WANG, S. and LIU, Y., 2009, TeraGrid GIScience gateway: bridging cyberinfrastructure and
GIScience, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23(5), pp.
631–656.

YANG, P., EVANS, J., COLE, M., ALAMEH, N., MARLEY, S. and BAMBACUS, M., 2007, The
emerging concepts and applications of the spatial web portal. Photogrammetric
Engineering & Remote Sensing, 73(6), pp. 691–698.

YANG, C., LI, W., XIE, J. and ZHOU B., 2008, Distributed geospatial information processing:
sharing distributed geospatial resources to support Digital Earth. International Journal
of Digital Earth, 1(3), pp. 259–278.

YANG, C., WONG, D.W., YANG, R., KAFATOS, M. and LI, Q., 2005, Performance-improving
techniques in web-based GIS. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 19(3), pp. 319–342.

YI, S.Z., HUANG, B. and WANG, C., 2007, Pattern matching for heterogeneous geodata sources
using attributed relational graph and probabilistic relaxation. Photogrammetric
Engineering & Remote Sensing, 73(6), pp. 663–670.

ZHANG, T. and TSOU, M.H., 2009, Developing a grid-enabled spatial web portal for Internet
GIServices and geospatial cyberinfrastructure. International Journal of Geographic
Information Science, 23(5), pp. 605–630.

Downloaded by [North Carolina State University] at 09:52 20 January 2013 