The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 265–268 December 2003

265

S U R V E Y

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Real World Map Reading Strategies

Chris Perkins* and Ann Gardiner**

*School of Geography, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.
**Tactility, 5 Greenacres, Frodsham WA6 6BU, UK.

INTRODUCTION

Table 1. Factors in(cid:143)uencing reading strategies

This paper reports an ongoing series of investigations into
the nature of tactile map reading and use. There is general
agreement that reading maps for sighted or visually impaired
people involves a three stage process in which visual or
tactile signs need to be detected and discriminated prior to
being interpreted (Perkins, 2002). Researchers also concur
that the tactile reading process is less precise than sight
and it has been suggested that tactile map reading is best
theorized as a serial process, in which the (cid:142)ngers follow
raised symbols and gradually build up an overview of spatial
relationships (Tatham, 1991). In contrast sight allows
information to be processed as whole rather than the sums
of parts. There has however been little investigation into
the ‘ecology of reading’ or detailed observational studies
of the strategies involved in real world use of tactile maps.
Advice about the best techniques to use is general and
often not backed up by systematic empirical evidence. Nolan
and Morris (1971) suggest that tactile map reading should
start from the edges of the image and with a gross scan
of the map, to be followed by using both hands to trace
map detail. In contrast studies by Berla` and his associates
recommend the use of just the index (cid:142)nger (Berla` & Murr,
1976a and b; Berla`, Butter(cid:142)eld & Murr, 1976). Bentzen
(1980) encourages the use of free exploration of the map’s
detail, whilst Kikuza (1989) suggests gaining an overview,
with systematic investigation using two hands, followed up
by more detailed investigation. Best (1992) also suggests
using two hands.

One reason for this contradictory advice is likely to
be insuf(cid:142)cient attention given to the wider context of map
reading, in other words how, when, and where the map is
used, and who is using it. Table 1 shows that there are
diverse in(cid:143)uences, reasons and contexts for use that impact
upon reading. By ‘placing’ the reading process we might
be able to gain a more informed understanding of which
strategies work best.

This paper is concerned with documenting how tactile
maps are read in a real world context and offers a frame-
work for deciding on the ‘best’ methods of reading a tactile
map. It implicitly adopts a cultural and ecological stance
informed by observing how visually impaired individuals
relate to tactile maps, rather than one derived from con-

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225012970

Timing

Sighted guidance

Context of use

Reading environment

Complexity of image

Prior
During
After

Assisted
Unaided

Free
Constrained
Rule bound

Real world

Lab
Real maps
Simpli(cid:142)ed

trolled and simpli(cid:142)ed experiment. We are concerned with
a number of possible strategies. For example should both
hands be used and in the context of our work is index
(cid:142)nger alone best? We are also concerned with the similarities
between map use for visually impaired and sighted people
and the potential uses that visually impaired people might
make of maps. What ‘real’ difference does sight make?
Broadly these questions might be reduced to an investi-
gation of how reading and use are linked, whether universal
recommendations are possible and perhaps crucially what
the implications might be for education and training.

CASE STUDY METHODOLOGIES

The research reported here is drawn from a series of investi-
gations of recreational and educational map use involving
a mix of directed and free reading, guided and unaided,
before during and after a number of activities in areas of
managed countryside in the North West of England. Case
studies were carried out during golf tournaments, and in
country parks. Vacuum form-based maps were designed to
serve as working representations with differing complexities
following practices detailed in Gardiner and Perkins (2002).
More information about
is given in
Gardiner (2001).

the case studies

Multiple methods were employed in the case studies
for the collection and analysis of data. For the reading case
study reported here 16 visually impaired map readers used

266

The Cartographic Journal

the maps to plan routes across a country park. Video record-
ings were made of individual map reading, complemented
by still photography. Map readers were encouraged to
talk aloud about their reading during the process. In some
contexts a more extensive questionnaire was used to
generalize results.

From the video and audio evidence types of reading were
identi(cid:142)ed and coded. The time sequences and frequency
of links between categories were analysed and follow up
interviews were used to tease out explanations for reading
behaviour that could be related to use. A number of different
indices were used to judge the ‘best’ reading strategies and
in the main these were derived from spoken comments.
For example success might involve identifying a symbol
and relating it to an environmental feature, or it might
involve more complex route planning activities.

RESULTS

There are many different ways of reading a tactile map
(see Figure 1). The hands may be employed singly or
together and may be (cid:142)xed or move across the map. They

may be held (cid:143)at, with the palm used to gain an overview.
The (cid:142)ngertips are clearly, however the most important
sense organs in tactile map reading. Our readers used a
single (cid:142)nger for (cid:142)ne discrimination of raised detail, with
up to four (cid:142)ngers for exploration. A pincer movement of
a single (cid:142)nger with the thumb was sometimes used for
sensing point symbols.

The use of (cid:142)ngers or hands seemed to be directed
towards a number of functional activities. Distances were
estimated by using the width of one, two, three or some-
times four (cid:142)ngers in combination, or sometimes a span
between a (cid:142)nger and thumb or between two (cid:142)ngers. For
gross exploration of the layout of the map the whole hand
seemed to be employed, with palms as well as (cid:142)ngers
gathering information. Sometimes people used their (cid:142)ngers
constantly to move over the surface of the map, whereas at
other times (cid:142)ngertips repetitively tracked back and forward
along a symbol. Tracing a line was a common approach,
and some visually impaired readers used the (cid:142)ngertips to
walk across the image. Figure 1 illustrates some of these
techniques.

Tables 2 and 3 show the frequency of reading strategies
and also indicate whether the technique appeared to be a

Figure 1. Map reading strategies

Reading World Map Reading Strategies

267

Table 2. Successful tactile map reading techniques

Technique

Success

Frequency of use

Constant exploration
Both hands
4 (cid:142)ngers together
1 (cid:142)nger for detail
Whole hand (cid:143)at
1 (cid:142)xed other moves
1 hand
Repetitive movements

Most frequently used

Least frequently used

Table 3. Other less frequently used techniques

Span for shape
Span for distance
Pincer
Finger width for distance
Thumb (cid:142)xed
Thumb explores
Walking (cid:142)ngers
Thumb to trace

Success

?
X
X
X
X
X

successful approach for our readers. Children, who were
sometimes playing with the map rather than reading it in a
functional way, demonstrated the least successful strategies
in the sample.

IMPLICATIONS FOR READING STRATEGIES

An interesting result in our study was the common use of
both hands and of more than one (cid:142)nger. There are signi(cid:142)-
cant advantages in terms of the amount of information
that can be processed if more than one (cid:142)nger is used to
read. Our results imply that the amount of information
provided and processed by readers does indeed depend
upon the number of (cid:142)ngers used. In our studies four
(cid:142)ngers seem to be more effective for some reading tasks
than just index (cid:142)nger, an interesting contrast to Berla`’s
(1976a and b) results. Perhaps there is a more obvious
analogy with eye movement studies than has been suggested
in the past? Sight may appear to offer synoptic possibilities,
but in practice is still a serial perceptual process. The pre-
cision and speed that come with sight create the difference
and make it appear that sight offers a synoptic reading, unlike
the very slow and coarse tactile sensing of information.

Our map readers processed tactile edges early and these
received most attention in the reading process. Paths and
land use boundaries were examined in detail, large areas
of consistent textures received less attention. It might be
argued that the importance of edge processing is a function
of the production technology employed. Vacuum formed
maps support multiple levels and clearly discriminated tex-
tures: perhaps edges become more important simply because
they may be read more easily (Gardiner, 2001)? However
research suggests edge processing plays an important
cognitive role in sighted map reading (MacEachren, 1995)
and these arguments would equally apply to the tactile
process. So its signi(cid:142)cance is likely to be independent of
the production system and design.

tactile designers ought

These results imply that

to
pay particular attention to the representation of textural
contrast and to how levels interact in the tactile map.
Perhaps too much attention has been given to the design
individual symbols and too little to the interaction
of
between symbols?

Some obvious associations were clearly observed, notably
that when two hands were used, one was often (cid:142)xed as an
anchor, but in general there were no clear associations
between type of reading and articulated reason for employ-
ing that method. The maps were complex representations
and the unstructured tasks carried out in real world map
reading meant it was dif(cid:142)cult to draw (cid:142)rm conclusions in
this area. We were also unable to identify the better overall
map reading strategies.

We suggest a pragmatic approach rather than a single

best method.

2.

1. Methods should follow context rather than being
prescribed. For example the question of whether one
or two hands should be used is clearly a function
of whether the map has to be held, whether it is to
be used indoors or outdoors, in warm, cold, wet or
dry weather. Children have different expectations and
responses to adults. A simple map may be successfully
read with a single hand, whilst a larger more complex
image might best be read with two hands.
the visually
If context matters then the views of
impaired map reader matter too: design, reading and
use ought to empower them, to enable rather than
impose standards (Perkins and Gardiner 1997).
In the contexts we explored (free and unaided use
with complex maps in the (cid:142)eld) the best map readers
employed a mix of single (cid:142)nger, multiple (cid:142)ngers
and whole hand-based techniques, but explored in
a systematic manner, investigating the whole image
(cid:142)rst, then processing the edges and (cid:142)nishing by (cid:142)lling
in the detail.

3.

4. A number of other important factors in(cid:143)uenced the
strategy used. Knowledge of the area or of the map
design alters the reading strategy and prior training
to adopt differing
clearly also in(cid:143)uences
approaches. Differing abilities in map reading seem
to be related to the strategy. Readers who articulated
most links were also the most effective readers. The
least systematic found it hardest to achieve task success.

readers

This focus upon the nature of the connections between
map reading tasks mirrors the results of a study of orienteers
using maps to articulate navigational decisions (Crampton
1992). His conclusions about differences
in map use
between sighted experts novices strike a chord in our tactile
reading research and prompt questions about the supposed
differences between tactile and sighted perception.

IMPLICATIONS FOR USING TACTILE MAPS

So far as the similarities between tactile and sighted map use
are concerned our research offers optimistic conclusions.
The tasks involved in reading and using tactile maps are
similar to those employed by sighted people. The uses
to which maps may be put also seem similar for visually

268

The Cartographic Journal

Table 4. Comments on the use of tactile maps made by users in the
(cid:142)eld

Explore
Search
Locate symbol
Follow line
Trace route
Recall route
Locate self on route
Relate self to land feature
Relate land feature to land feature
Relate map to land in the (cid:142)eld
NSEW
Scale
Direction egocentric
Comparison
Anticipation
Interpretation
Route visualization
Layout visualization
Enhancement
Independence
Emotion
Imagination

impaired and sighted people. Both groups are able to choose
appropriate maps, use short term memory to scan the
image, understand abstract symbols and the ways in which
maps generalize data. Both sighted and visually impaired
users can interpret scale and understand orientation and
direction. Both can distinguish land cover and interpret
the symbolic representation of the tactile or conventional
map. Both are able to use the map as a way of updating
existing knowledge about the world.

Table 4 shows some of the kinds of observed use that
we videoed in our case studies: clearly these do not differ
signi(cid:142)cantly from the kinds of use of sighted maps docu-
mented by researchers such as Catling (1980).

We would argue therefore, that the well documented
differences between tactile and sighted map use are more
a function of social than perceptual or cognitive factors.
As a result of limited tactile map availability and many
poor designs, negative views prevail about the potential of
tactile maps. Visually impaired people have low expectations
of tactile maps and only rarely have much experience of
relevant training in reading skills.

CONCLUSIONS

Our research has drawn attention to the need for complex
and individual strategies to be employed by individual
readers of tactile maps. We suggest that the most success-
ful readers make most links and articulate a more strategic
approach, and that the best approaches are likely to vary
according to context and product. We believe the similarities
between potential uses by visually impaired and sighted
people are a reason to be optimistic, but caution that the
social context of tactile map use remains a signi(cid:142)cant limit-

ing factor. Universal training solutions are just as unlikely
to be appropriate as universal map design solutions: the
context matters and more real world research involving
the opinions of visually impaired people is needed to deter-
mine the best approaches for different groups, different
representations and different user tasks.

REFERENCES

Bentzen, B.

(1980).

in Foundations of
‘Orientation aids’,
Orientation and Mobility, ed. by Welsh, R. L., and Blasch, B. B.,
pp. 291–355, American Foundation for the Blind, New York.

Berla`, E. P., and Murr, M. J. (1976a).

Berla`, E. P., Butter(cid:142)eld, L. H. Jr, and Murr, M. J.

(1976).
‘Tactual reading of political maps by blind students: a videomatic
behavioural analysis’, Journal of Special Education, 10, 265–76.
‘Tactual scanning and
memory for a spatial display by blind students’, in Facilitating the
Education of the Visually Handicapped through Research in
Communications: Final Report, Part Three: Facilitating Tactile
Map Reading, ed. by Nolan, C. Y., pp. 51–64, United States
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Washington, DC.
Berla`, E. P., and Murr, M. J. (1976b). ‘Locating symbols on a tactile
pseudomap by braille readers operating under different frames
in Facilitating the Education of the Visually
of reference’,
Handicapped through Research in Communications: Final
Report, Part Three: Facilitating Tactile Map Reading, ed. by
Nolan, C. Y., pp. 25–38, United States Department of Health,
Education and Welfare, Washington, DC.

Best, A. B. (1992). Teaching Children with Visual Impairments,

Open University Press, Buckingham.

Catling, S. J. (1980). ‘For the junior and middle school: map use and
objectives for map learning’, Teaching Geography, 6, 15–17.
Crampton, J. (1992). ‘A cognitive analysis of way(cid:142)nding expertise’,

Cartographica, 29, 46–65.

Gardiner, A. (2001). The role of the tactile map in countryside
recreation and environmental education, Unpublished PhD
Thesis, University of Manchester.

Gardiner, A., and Perkins, C. R. (2002). Best practice guidelines for
the design, production and presentation of vacuum formed
tactile maps,
at http://www.art.man.ac.uk/Geog/
tactileguidelines.htm.

available

ideas’,

(1989).

Kizuka, Y.

‘The recognition strategy by touch and
in Proceedings of the Third
the geographical spatial
International Symposium on Maps and Graphics for the
Visually Handicapped People: Yokohama 25–26 July 1989,
ed. by Ishido, Y., pp. 40–44, International Executive Committee
of Tactual Maps for Visually Handicapped People, Yokohama.
MacEachren, A. (1995). How Maps Work, Guildford Press, New

York.

Nolan, C. Y., and Morris, J. E. (1971). Improvement of Tactual
Symbols for Blind Children, 1 June–28 February 1969:
Final Report, Department of Health, Education and Welfare,
Washington, DC.

Perkins, C. R. (2002). ‘Cartography: progress in tactile mapping’,

Progress in Human Geography, 26, 521–30.

Perkins, C., and Gardiner, A. (1997). ‘ ‘‘What I really, really want. . .’’:
how visually impaired people can improve tactile map design’,
in ICC 97. Proceedings of 18th ICA/ACI International
Cartographic Conference. Stockholm, Sweden 23–27 June
1997, 2, 1167–75.
Tatham, A. F. (1991).

theoretical
in Proceedings of ICA 15th
and practical considerations’,
Conference and 9th General Assembly; Mapping the Nations:
Bournemouth, U.K., 1991,
and
Blakemore, M., 1, 157–66, ICA, London.

ed. by Rybaczuk, K.,

‘The design of

tactile maps:

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

