This article was downloaded by: [Fondren Library, Rice University ]
On: 29 November 2012, At: 23:27
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer
House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Maximizing spatial congruence of observed and DEM-
delineated overland flow networks
Theodore A. Endreny a & Eric F. Wood b
a Program in Hydrological Systems Science and Engineering, College of Environmental
Science & Forestry, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA E-mail:
b Program in Environmental Engineering & Water Resources, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
Version of record first published: 19 May 2010.

To cite this article: Theodore A. Endreny & Eric F. Wood (2003): Maximizing spatial congruence of observed and DEM-
delineated overland flow networks, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17:7, 699-713

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1365881031000135483

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to
anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions,
claims, proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

. .   , 2003
. 17, . 7, 699–713

Research Article

Maximizing spatial congruence of observed and DEM-delineated
overland ﬂow networks

THEODORE A. ENDRENY
Program in Hydrological Systems Science and Engineering, College of
Environmental Science & Forestry, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA
e-mail: te@esf.edu

and ERIC F. WOOD
Program in Environmental Engineering & Water Resources, Princeton
University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA

(Received 15 October 2001; accepted 18 February 2003)

Abstract. Model simulated overland ﬂow is traditionally routed by the terrain-
based algorithms that read 90 to 10-m pixel data, yet observed ﬂow is often
inﬂuenced by sub-meter micro-terrain features. While sub-meter terrain maps are
not available for most watersheds, routing algorithms that bifurcate ﬂow through
multiple pixel boundaries may function to match observed runoﬀ patterns. This
paper assesses the spatial congruence between observed overland ﬂow from two
agricultural hillslopes in New Jersey with 30-m pixel ﬂowpaths predicted by ﬁve
common routing algorithms known as D8, Multiple Flow, 2D-Lea, (a building
block in DEMON), 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity. The lowest congruence ratings
were assigned to D8, which constrained ﬂow to a single neighbour, and MF,
which bifurcated ﬂow into all neighbours lower in elevation. 2D-Lea and
D-Inﬁnity, algorithms that bifurcated ﬂow to a maximum of two neighbours,
achieved the highest accuracy rankings. Simple algorithm modiﬁcations that
increased D8 bifurcation, and constrained MF bifurcation, resulted in congruence
rankings that rivaled the more sophisticated 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity
results. These experiments support the use of ﬂow bifurcation schemes that pass
ﬂow into a maximum of between two and three pixels when routing polluted
runoﬀ.

1.

Introduction
Many divisions of environmental science and engineering use overland ﬂowpath
predictions to map how water, soil, nutrients, or other materials are routed across a
landscape. In water quality modelling, for example, predictions of pollutant loading to
receiving waters are contingent on the accuracy of the mapped overland ﬂowpaths, which
determine the details of pollutant transport. As water quality specialists are challenged
to augment control of overland ﬂow containing non-point source (NPS) pollutants
(UNEP 1997, USEPA 1998, Novotny 1999), isolating the location of this diﬀuse pollutant
type remains elusive. One promising management approach involves intercepting polluted
runoﬀ along its overland ﬂowpath (Mass et al. 1987, USEPA 1998), which ﬁrst requires

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1365881031000135483

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 700

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

the accurate identiﬁcation of the terrestrial ﬂowpaths and then the construction of runoﬀ
control practices. Similarly, other environmental scientists and engineers would enjoy
advances in their discipline with more accurate ﬂowpath maps.

A variety of terrain-based algorithms are currently available for processing raster
digital elevation model (DEM) data and delineating overland ﬂowpaths, and each
algorithm incorporates a unique level of ﬂowpath bifurcation in areas where ﬂow
could leave the pixel in more than one direction. Inter-comparisons of these routines
have focused on spatially aggregated ﬂowpath products, such as topographic indices
(see Costa-Cabral and Burges 1994), and performance across geometric surfaces for
which analytic solutions exist (Tarboton 1997). For the environmental scientist, such
as an NPS modeler, concerned with the degree of spatial congruence between
observed and algorithm delineated ﬂowpaths, however, the terrain-based ﬂowpath
algorithms have not received adequate performance reviews and analyses.

This paper compares the spatial congruence of overland ﬂowpaths observed in
the ﬁeld with those delineated from 30 m DEM data using the D8 (O’Callaghan and
Mark 1984), Multiple Flow (MF) (Quinn et al. 1991), Two Directional Edge-Centred
Routing (2D-Lea) (Lea 1992), Two Directional Block-Centred Routing (2D-Jensen)
(Jensen 1996), and D-Inﬁnity (Tarboton 1997) ﬂowpath algorithms. These algorithms
provided varying degrees of ﬂow bifurcation from a single DEM pixel, where bifurca-
tion is deﬁned as partitioning ﬂow from a single DEM pixel into two or more
adjacent DEM pixels. It is the hypothesis of this study that some optimum bifurcation
enables the algorithm to best match observed ﬂow. The above algorithms provided
a range of bifurcation, from none with D8, to one division into two cells in 2D-Lea,
2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity, to the multiple divisions in MF that could enter all eight
neighbouring pixels. Additionally, the paper explores hybridizations of these algo-
rithms to provide levels of ﬂow bifurcation that split ﬂow into more than two, but
less than eight, neighbouring pixels.

Congruence is deﬁned as the overlap between ﬁeld-sketched ﬂowpath networks
observed during a storm, represented by the DEM pixels through which they run,
with the network derived with 30 m DEM data. The focus of this research is to
identify the level of algorithm ﬂowpath bifurcation that optimally balances omission
and commission errors, and examine modiﬁcations to the existing algorithms that
improve their spatial congruence. While omission and commission error may balance
each other in statistical assessments of the watershed terrain, such as in computation
of a contributing area probability density function (e.g. 30% commission error and
35% omission error make a smaller 5% error), in mapping exercises each might have
a more signiﬁcant impact. Two such cases involve pollutant mapping, where omission
error might result in a remediation crew missing important clean-up opportunities,
and commission error would likewise cause unnecessary expenditures.

The paper proceeds as follows. The next section of the paper examines how sub-
meter overland ﬂow dynamics create sub-pixel bifurcations in ﬂowpaths in directions
transverse to the predominant multi-pixel slope. The third section presents the
mechanics of how the D8, MF, 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity algorithms predict
ﬂowpaths. In the fourth section of the paper the ﬁeld sites and DEM accuracy are
discussed, and the ﬁfth section provides the results and analysis of the runoﬀ data.

2. Congruence of observed and algorithm delineated overland ﬂowpaths
2.1. Observations of ﬂowpath bifurcation

A series of ﬁeld investigations has documented that landscape heterogeneities at
sub-meter length scales induce runoﬀ to travel, and rills to form along paths other

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

701

than those of steepest descent. When mapped back onto the raster grid used by
DEM-based models, these observations indicate that runoﬀ would cross into areas
represented by more than one of the eight neighbouring DEM pixels. At a rather
large scale, Dunne and Aubry (1986) created maps of ﬂow across a 2 m×6 m plot
that clearly illustrated how sub-meter topographic features bifurcated and redirected
ﬂow in paths other than steepest descent (see ﬁgure 1), and the work of Parsons
et al. (1997) described this same eﬀect as a ‘lateral movement superimposed on the
general downslope movement’. Morgan et al. (1986), in photo-documented laborat-
ory tests, exposed how sub-meter vegetative heterogeneities caused ﬂowpath meander
that bisected paths of steepest descent, while Souchere et al. (1998) were able to
illustrate how cropping and tillage patterns
in 20 agricultural watersheds
re-directed ﬂow along pathways transverse to the predominant slope (ﬁgure 1).

Seven sets of ﬁeld recordings of Emmett (1980) from 3 m×15 m plots further
documented how sub-meter topographic and vegetative heterogeneities created
ﬂowpath networks that could exit raster pixels across boundaries other than those
of steepest descent. In short, the dilemma tackled by a ﬂowpath algorithm is the
relative importance of small spatial scale lateral displacements and bifurcations
compared with the larger spatial scale trends in downslope displacement (see ﬁgure 1).
It is obvious that a spatial scale mismatch exists between common modelling data,
such as 30 m DEMs, and the length scale of sub-pixel rill dynamics. Field research
has not yet deﬁned the scale dependence of this problem pixel to sub-pixel problem.
The current work only considers spatial scales of 30 m and ﬁner, and only for a
limited set of hill slopes.

Sub-meter landscape features are known to redirect ﬂow into paths other than
steepest descent, yet watershed models of pollutant transport encounter data and
computational constraints that prevent precise delineation of these networks. While
Dunne and Aubry (1986) successfully used 1 cm (0.01 m) contoured elevation data
for modelling runoﬀ across their 2 m×6 m plot, such detailed data are both unavail-
able (USGS 1993), and unwieldy at a watershed scale (i.e. a ten-billion pixel array
would need processing for every 1-km2 of watershed). Pixel length scales used in

Figure 1. Schematic of overland ﬂow illustrating the ﬂow bifurcation created by heterogeneity
in micro-topography and in vegetation. Each numeric value is a DEM pixel
elevation (metres).

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 702

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

spatially distributed runoﬀ simulations are traditionally determined by the DEM
scale (Moore et al. 1991), which in the United States is publicly available at both
30 m and 90 m resolutions (USGS 1993). While investigations into algorithm accu-
racy might consider this DEM pixel scale as a constraint for algorithm performance,
certain topographic features at ﬁner scales, such as pits or abrupt cliﬀs, could cause
a decrease in algorithm accuracy.

2.2. Omission and commission error

Two basic terrain features are fundamentally responsible for bifurcating or redir-
ecting runoﬀ along smaller spatial scale ﬂow paths transverse to the larger spatial
scale of the predominant slope, and these are (1) the sub-meter terrain feature
triggering ﬂow bifurcation or redirection, and (2) the presence of more than one
neighbouring area that is lower in elevation. Although 30 m ﬂowpath algorithms
cannot resolve the sub-meter features, they can identify and pass ﬂow into multiple
lower elevation pixel neighbours. Hence, while sub-meter terrain maps are not available
for most watersheds, routing algorithms that bifurcate or redirect ﬂow through multiple
pixel boundaries may function to match observed runoV patterns.

There is a cost for bifurcating or redirecting ﬂow. The practice of delineating
bifurcated ﬂowpaths based on neighbourhood terrain and not the micro-terrain
actually redirecting the runoﬀ could lead to erroneously predicting ﬂow that was
not observed (errors of commission) and/or erroneously excluding ﬂow that was
observed (errors of omission). An algorithm that operates only on pixel data, and
minimizes these two errors, would maximize the spatial congruence between the
observed and predicted runoﬀ network.

3. Methods to test grid-based ﬂowpath accuracy
3.1. Standard algorithms and their bifurcation

D8, MF, 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity are automated terrain processing
algorithms used to delineate runoﬀ networks. A partial description of each algorithm
is provided in this paper, and for more information the reader is referred to
O’Callaghan and Mark (1984) for D8, Quinn et al. (1991) for MF, Lea (1992) for
the edge-centred 2D-Lea, Jensen (1996)
for the block-centred 2D-Jensen, and
Tarboton (1997) for D-Inﬁnity. The 2D-Lea and 2D-Jensen routines were created
in this research, based on ﬂow angle computations provided by Lea (1992) and
Jensen (1996) and two-dimensional ﬂow routing ideas formulated in DEMON by
Costa-Cabral and Burges (1994). Since this research intends to inter-compare raster
DEM ﬂowpath maps, the ﬂow tubes used in DEMON were excluded from the study
and replaced by 2D-Lea and 2D-Jensen.

In delineating the ﬂowpath, each algorithm computed the ﬂow vector of steepest
descent and determined how many neighbouring DEM pixels would be used to
represent the ﬂowpath. This process of selecting one to eight neighbouring pixels is
referred to as a decision of ﬂow bifurcation about the ﬂow vector of steepest descent
(ﬁgure 2). Both D8 and MF use the ‘nearest neighbour’ method to determine the
path of steepest descent, but each uses extremely diﬀerent ﬂow allocation approaches.
D8 does not allow bifurcation about the main ﬂowpath, while MF, in contrast,
apportions ﬂow to all neighbours lower in elevation, regardless of their adjacency
to the path of steepest descent. 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity use distinct surface
ﬁtting schemes to compute the ﬂow vector. The 2D-Lea method is edge-centred,
using 4 DEM pixels to create the surface upon which a 360° aspect angle is computed.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

703

Figure 2. Schematic of the ﬂow angle computation and ﬂow routing performed by the D8,
MF, 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, D-Inﬁnity, and 2D-Facet algorithms for a sample digital
elevation model (DEM). Both block-centred and edge-centred DEM neighbourhoods
are shown.

The 2D-Jensen method is block-centred and uses 9 DEM pixels to compute slopes
and 360° aspect angles. The D-Inﬁnity method is also block-centred, but constructs
eight facet-shaped planes encircling the central pixel to identify the 360° aspect angle.
After 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity identify an aspect angle, each uses an
additional step to determine which pixels will contain ﬂow from the source pixel,
limiting the downslope pixels to a maximum of two neighbours. Both 2D methods
(Lea and Jensen) interpret all aspect vectors not aligned along cardinal paths (e.g.
North, South, East, West) as dividing ﬂow between the two most proximate cardinal
pixels bounding the ﬂow vector. In areas where the ﬂow vector is along a cardinal
direction, or the terrain has become convergent, the 2D methods allow for ﬂow to
enter a single diagonal or cardinal pixel. D-Inﬁnity interprets ﬂow aspect vectors as
either directing ﬂow into the appropriate diagonal-cardinal pairs, or into either the
diagonal or cardinal pixel with the greatest slope. D-Inﬁnity only routes ﬂow into
the diagonal pixel if that DEM pixel is lower in elevation than the adjacent cardinal
neighbour in the selected facet.

3.2. Hybrid algorithms and their bifurcation

Four hybridized routing algorithms were also created to determine whether the
congruence between observed and simulated ﬂow networks improved with changes

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 704

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

in the method for allocating ﬂow about the path of steepest descent. Hence, these
algorithms allow for a more reﬁned test of the hypothesis that some optimal ﬂow
bifurcation will minimize both commission and omission error. Algorithm hybridiza-
tions were directed toward the simpler D8 and MF algorithms.

D8 was ﬁrst modiﬁed into D8-buf, which used the ﬂow path of steepest descent
and also allowed for ﬂow into all lower adjacent, or buﬀer, grid cells along that D8
path. The second D8 hybrid, D8-2x, allowed for ﬂow to split into two lower
neighbours at the source pixel and then each ﬂowpath followed a non-bifurcating
path of steepest descent. Constraining the eight possible ﬂow paths available in the
MF algorithm generated the MF(5) and MF(3) algorithms. Both MF(5) and MF(3)
identiﬁed the path of steepest descent and then constrained bifurcation to the adjacent
ﬁve, in MF(5), or three, in MF(3), pixels enclosing that path given that they were
lower in elevation.

4. Study site

Field investigations of the spatial congruence between observed and predicted
ﬂow networks were conducted on agricultural hillslopes in Princeton, New Jersey,
an area draining into the Stony Brook River. The 115 km2 Stony Brook River
watershed has an average annual precipitation of 100 cm and has had a sediment
load from agricultural areas of nearly 115 000 kg km-2 yr-1 (USGS 1974), creating
ample opportunity for observing overland ﬂow rill networks. The two hillslopes were
located on the Valen farm (ﬁgure 3), which is on the fall line between the Piedmont
and Coastal Plane, has slightly eroded silt loam soils (USDA 1969), and elevations
that range between 15 m and 50 m above sea level. Overland ﬂow paths were ﬁeld
observed and recorded on 26 October, 1997 during the third day of a widespread
and stratiform precipitation event that totalled nearly 4 cm and created numerous
overland ﬂowpaths. The ﬁeld was temporarily demarcated into 30 m×30 m areas by
wooden poles and interconnecting tape, where the 30 m×30 m areas coincided with
the 30 m DEM grid. Each overland pathway was then translated onto a map of
geo-referenced 30-m grid-cells taken from the USGS Princeton DEM (USGS 1993).
Both study areas, one that was planted in corn (Zea mays) and another that was
used by diary cattle (Bos taurus) between the feedlot pasture, contained sub-grid
topographic heterogeneities that went unresolved by the 30 m DEM data. These
heterogeneities included rows of corn tillage running parallel with the elevation
contours along with various cow paths and clumps of grass that were observed to
bifurcate and redirect overland ﬂow. For the cornﬁeld and pasture sites runoﬀ was
traced from its origin in an upper elevation 30-m sided area, which was coincident
with a 30 m DEM pixel, until the path was no longer resolvable (Endreny and Wood
1998). Runoﬀ was mapped across 14 grid cells in the cornﬁeld (ﬁgure 4(a)) and across
23 grid cells in the feedlot-to-pasture transition area (ﬁgure 4(b)). After the storm
event the two sites were then revisited to ensure that the mapped networks matched
the pathways delineated by the incised overland rills.

4.1. Elevation data accuracy assessment

Two qualitative analyses were performed to assess the relative vertical accuracy
of the Valen farm DEM prior to testing the predictive accuracy of the ﬂowpath
algorithms. Relative vertical errors, which are grid cell ‘elevations in obvious error
(Carter 1989), will create discrepancies
relative to the neighbouring elevations’
between observed and modeled ﬂow paths. Relative errors are traditionally found

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

705

Figure 3. Map of the study site showing the road network surrounding the Valen Farm,
Mercer County, New Jersey. Elevation values range from 55-m (lightest grey) to 20-m
(darkest grey). The location of the cornﬁeld, the feedlot and the pasture are delineated.
Map projection is in Zone 18 of the Universal Transverse Mercator system.

in DEMs produced by digitizing topographic maps with crowded contour lines and
abrupt peaks (Carter 1989), two features absent from the USGS 7.5-minute topo-
graphic maps for the Valen Farm site. DEM relative vertical accuracy was further
inferred from the aerial photographs used in generating the 7.5-minute topographic
maps (USDA 1968), which were free of vegetative obstructions and considered
optimal for constraining relative elevation errors (Jensen 1996).

Two DEM attributes that can further impact the accuracy of ﬂowpath predictions
are the relative alignment of the north-to-south oriented DEM grid with the hillslope
(Tarboton 1997). In both ﬁeld sites the predominant slope was aligned approximately
20° oﬀ of the DEM’s north-to-south axis (ﬁgures 4(a) and (b)) creating cases where
diagonal ﬂow was the preferred path of steepest descent. The issue of overland ﬂow
passing from a pixel into its diagonal neighbour via a single point in space is
discussed by Costa-Cabral and Burges (1994), and its impact on the accuracy of
NPS pollutant fate and transport studies is not examined in this paper. In the runoﬀ
simulations each algorithm assumed saturated soils, no downslope inﬁltration or
ponding, and an initial volume of runoﬀ equal to unity in the pixel corresponding
to the observed source pixel. Finally, it should be noted that the DEM was created

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 706

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

many years prior to the overland ﬂowpath ﬁeld study, creating opportunities for
large spatial scale unmapped slope erosion along certain ﬁeld areas.

5. Results and discussion

The observed ﬂowpath was deﬁned as overland rills that left the source area
pixel and entered into subsequent downslope pixels, and the path was terminated
when ﬂow re-inﬁltrated (a low probability given the 3-day rain event), entered a
receiving waterbody, or was obstructed by a hedgerow. Maps comparing the nine
algorithm ﬂowpath predictions and the observed path are shown for the cornﬁeld
(ﬁgure 5(a)) and pasture area (ﬁgure 5(b)), where the source pixel for each map is
outlined in black and erroneous predictions are denoted with a diﬀerent shade of grey.
Spatial congruence between the predicted path and observed path was measured
as the minimization of commission (e.g. erroneous inclusion of runoﬀ ) and omission
(e.g. erroneous exclusion of runoﬀ ) error. Standardized error matrices are a widely
adopted statistical technique for analyzing multivariate data (Jensen 1996) such as
binomial data created when recording the presence or absence of overland ﬂow. In
these investigations an error matrix, which used rows to present observed data and
columns to present modeled data, measured algorithm performance with omission
and commission errors (Congalton and Mead 1983, Congalton 1991). The error
matrix rows and columns oﬀered two options, ﬂow was present or ﬂow was absent.
These errors were computed as the quotient of the diagonal matrix value (e.g. where
observed and modeled are congruent) and the row total for commission error, or
the column total for omission error.

KAPPA analysis uses the Kˆ -statistic as an estimate of the total accuracy of the
predicted classiﬁcations (e.g. presence or absence of ﬂow) and is based on the analysis
of diagonal and oﬀ-diagonal elements from the error matrix (Congalton and Mead
1983).

Kˆ =

X

− ∑r
i=1
(X

∑r
ii
i=1
N2− ∑r
i=1

(X

i+ · X+i

)

i+ · X+i

)

(1)

where r is the number of rows and columns in the error matrix, X
is the number
of observations in row i and column i, X+i
i+ is the
marginal total of column i, and N is the total number of observations. Errors of
commission and omission (table 1) as well as the Kˆ -statistic (table 2) were used to
rank the performance of each of the eleven overland ﬂow algorithms used on the
Valen Farm sites.

is the marginal total of row i, X

ii

5.1. Discussion of the performance of ﬂowpath algorithms

The D8 algorithm predicted non-diverging runoﬀ networks that followed a path
of steepest descent and constrained commission errors to zero in the feedlot-to-
pasture area and to 20% in the cornﬁeld, the lowest for all algorithms studied. The

Figure 4.

Illustrations of the observed overland ﬂow network for (a) the cornﬁeld area, and
(b) the feedlot-to-pasture transition area. Each arrow represents a recorded ﬂow-
path, and terminal arrows indicate that the runoﬀ either re-inﬁltrated or exited the
observation area.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

707

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 708

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

Figure 5. The observed and nine-modeled ﬂow networks for overland ﬂow in (a) the cornﬁeld,
and (b) the feedlot-to-pasture. The runoﬀ source pixel is denoted with a black border.
Black pixels denote commission error, light grey cells denote omission error, and
medium grey cells are those correctly predicted.

algorithm only once predicted ﬂow that did not occur when cornﬁeld tillage rows
obstructed ﬂow from continuing down the path of steepest descent and instead
directed ﬂow along the contour. There were many instances where ﬂow went both
along the cornﬁeld contour and the path of steepest descent, and D8 incurred
numerous omission errors, resulting in its placement near the bottom of the Kˆ
accuracy ranking. Although each of the D8 hybridizations improved omission errors,
the greatest improvements were obtained with D8-buf, which decreased omission
errors to below 10% while keeping the average commission error below 35%. D8-buf

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

709

Table 1. Commission error and omission error analysis for overland ﬂow across the corn
and feedlot-to pasture study areas.

Corn overland ﬂow

Feedlot-to-pasture overland ﬂow

Routing
algorithm commission Rank

Error of

Error of
omission Rank

Error of

commission Rank

Error of
omission Rank

—
1
9
6
4
8
7
1
3
5

%
69
0
8
54
8
8
8
15
39

—
9
1
2
8
2
2
2
6
7

—
1
9
5
4
8
7
3
6
2

%
57
0
10
33
10
10
29
24
52

Table 2. Assessing overall accuracy using K(hat) for predicted overland ﬂow across the corn
and feedlot-to-pasture study areas.

Corn overland ﬂow

Corn/feedlot averaged

Feedlot-to-pasture
overland ﬂow

K(hat)

Rank

K(hat)

Rank

K(hat)

Rank

D8
MF
D8-buf
D8-2x
MF(5)
MF(3)
2D-Lea
2D-Jensen
D-Inﬁnity

Routing
algorithm

D8
MF
D8-buf
D8-2x
MF(5)
MF(3)
2D-Lea
2D-Jensen
D-Inﬁnity

%
20
72
43
33
52
46
20
21
39

%
41
40
70
51
58
64
84
80
58

—
8
9
3
7
5
4
1
2
6

%
51
30
65
61
49
52
66
58
54

%
48
41
73
60
63
66
80
73
57

%
0
60
27
18
39
37
12
33
9

—
8
9
1
3
5
4
2
6
9

—
9
1
2
7
2
2
6
5
8

—
8
9
2
6
5
4
1
2
7

was ranked second among the nine algorithms in Kˆ accuracy rating (table 2),
indicating that ﬂowpath buﬀering improved the accuracy of ﬂowpath predictions,
despite the small increases in commission error.

MF allowed for maximum ﬂow bifurcation and redirection, and predicted ﬂow
across all pixels lower in elevation, thereby avoiding omission errors but simultan-
eously generating commission errors greater than 70%, the worst of all nine
algorithms. Averaging the KAPPA accuracy analysis for the cornﬁeld and the feedlot-
to-pasture area resulted in a Kˆ rating of 35% accuracy, again the worst of all nine
algorithms. Constraints on MF bifurcation lowered commission error, with MF(5)
ranking eighth and MF(3) ranking seventh, while omission error remained below
10%, or second place, for both MF hybrid algorithms. The combined cornﬁeld
and feedlot-to-pasture Kˆ accuracy values for MF(5) and MF(3) were both at
approximately 65%, placing them at ﬁfth and fourth for the nine algorithms.

2D-Lea generated omission errors below 10% in the cornﬁeld and ranked second
of the nine algorithms, while in the more convergent terrain of the feedlot-to-pasture

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 710

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

area these errors increased to nearly 30%, placing the algorithm among the worst
performers. 2D-Lea commission errors, however, remained below 20% in both ﬁeld
areas, and in the Kˆ accuracy rating 2D-Lea placed ﬁrst among all algorithms.
2D-Jensen, which utilized a block-centred steepest slope computation, placed second
in the Kˆ accuracy ranking and had commission and omission errors that were similar
to 2D-Lea.

Both 2D algorithms (e.g. Lea and Jensen) initially chose to bifurcate ﬂow into
adjacent cardinals rather than a cardinal-diagonal pair and had greater ﬂow spread
than D-Inﬁnity. This increased spread, or splitting, resulted in greater commission
error in the convergent terrain of the feedlot-to-pasture area, and did not improve
omission error in the cornﬁeld, making a cross-terrain distinction in spatial congru-
ence between D-Inﬁnity and the 2D algorithms unclear. In Kˆ accuracy rankings
2D-Jensen placed second while D-Inﬁnity placed seventh, despite each receiving top
rankings in commission error tests. D-Inﬁnity’s second place commission error rank
for ﬂow across the convergent terrain in the feedlot-to-pasture area illustrates that
each algorithm has the capability for enhanced performance across certain terrain
types.

5.2. Flow bifurcation controlling model congruence

Averaging the results from the corn and feedlot-to-pasture runoﬀ studies and
then grouping the ﬂowpath algorithms by their maximum allowable bifurcation
allowed for an analysis of algorithm accuracy as a function of the number of
neighbouring pixels receiving ﬂow (ﬁgure 6). The trend in overall accuracy, which is
highest for increased values of Kˆ , follows a convex curve, with D8 and MF located
at the two end points and with 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, D-Inﬁnity, D8-buf, and MF(3)
located at the maximum. Omission errors followed a negatively sloping decay curve
that decreased from D8’s maximum error of 63% to MF’s low error of 0%. The
sharpest decrease in error was achieved by simply moving from the D8, a non-
bifurcating algorithm, to the D8-buf and MF(3) series, each constraining ﬂow to
three pixel sides. The trend for commission errors was positive linear, and it rose
steadily from D8’s lowest error of 10% to MF’s maximum of 66%. Data from the
Valen farm site, therefore, suggested that an optimal 30 m DEM-derived ﬂowpath
network is obtained by allowing for ﬂow to pass into at most two or three neigh-
bouring pixels.

6. Conclusions

Field tests have shown that small spatial scale terrain heterogeneities, such as
micro-topography smaller than the 30 m pixel, direct runoﬀ into neighbour pixels
other than those aligned with the larger spatial scale path of steepest descent. Most
DEM data are unable to resolve these small spatial scale features, and the algorithms
have been written to direct ﬂow along DEM observed paths of steepest descent.
Algorithms use various methods to route the ﬂow, however, and some use the larger
spatial scale terrain features to split, or bifurcate, ﬂow from a single pixel into more
than one neighbouring pixels. In this research, ﬂowpath algorithms that utilize larger
spatial scale neighbourhood terrain data and bifurcate ﬂow into pixels bordering
the path of steepest descent were shown to increase their chance for representing
observed ﬂow while simultaneously risking the prediction of paths that did not
occur. By using omission and commission error to quantify the spatial congruence
of observed and predicted overland ﬂow generated by the D8, MF, 2D-Lea,

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

711

Figure 6. General trends in algorithm functionality when grouped by maximum ﬂow bifurca-
tion, or number of pixel sides crossed. Peak performance occurs with a maximum
number of pixel sides crossed between 2 and 3, which included the 2D-based (Lea
and Jensen), D-Inﬁnity, D8-buf, and MF(3) algorithms. Errors of omission and com-
mission are shown on the left axis while accuracy is shown on the right axis. Standard
deviations are shown with each point estimate.

2D-Jensen, D-Inﬁnity, and four hybrid algorithms this research was able to identify
the maximum ﬂow bifurcation that was associated with peak spatial congruence.

Spatial congruence between observed and predicted ﬂowpaths was highest for
algorithms that bifurcated ﬂow into a maximum of two to three neighbouring pixels.
Of the currently available algorithms, only 2D-Lea, 2D-Jensen, and D-Inﬁnity routes
ﬂow into a maximum of two neighbours. The lowest congruence ratings were assigned
to D8, which constrained ﬂow to a single neighbour, and MF, which allocated ﬂow
into all neighbours lower in elevation. Creation of D8-buf increased D8’s ﬂow

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 712

T . A. Endreny and E. F. Wood

bifurcation into pixels buﬀering the path of steepest descent and decreased omission
error by ﬁve times the amount it increased commission error. Creation of MF(3)
constrained MF’s maximum bifurcation to three neighbours, including the path of
steepest descent, and signiﬁcantly decreased commission error while keeping omission
error at very low levels. These experiments support the use of ﬂow bifurcation
schemes that pass ﬂow into a maximum of two to three pixels when routing polluted
runoﬀ across a watershed.

Acknowledgments

This research was conducted with support from the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration Graduate Student Researchers Program Grant NGT 5-56.
The authors thank Mariza Costa-Cabral and David Tarboton for their insightful
comments on the use of the DEMON and D-Inﬁnity routing algorithms, and John
Wainwright for helpful editorial comments.

References
C, J. R., 1989, Relative errors identiﬁed in USGS gridded DEMs. In Auto-Carto 9:
North International Symposium on Computer Assisted Cartography (Bethesda: American
Congress on Surveying and Mapping).

C, R. G., 1991, A review of assessing the accuracy of classiﬁcations of remotely

sensed data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 37, 35–46.

C, R. G., and M, R. A., 1983, A quantitative method to test for consistency and
correctness in photointerpretation. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing,
49, 69–74.

C-C, M. C., and B, S. J., 1994, Digital elevation model networks (DEMON):
A model of ﬂow over hillslopes for computation of contributing and dispersal areas.
Water Resources Research, 30, 1681–1692.

D, T., and A, B. F., 1986, Evaluation of Hoton’s theory of sheetwash and rill erosion
on the basis of ﬁeld experiments, In Hillslope Processes, edited by A. D. Abrahams
(London: Allen and Unwin), pp. 31–53.

E, W. W., 1980, Overland ﬂow. In Hillslope Hydrology, edited by M. J. Kirkby (New

York: John Wiley & Sons), pp. 145–176.

E, T. A., and W, E. F., 1998, Optimal grid-cell routing for ﬂow across inaccurate
terrain maps, Eos Transactions, AGU 79(45), Fall Meeting Supplement, F249.
J, J. R., 1996, Introductory Digital Image Processing: A Remote Sensing Perspective

(Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall).

L, N. L., 1992, An aspect driven kinematic routing algorithm. In Overland Flow: Hydraulics
and Erosion Mechanics, edited by A. J. Parsons and A. D. Abrahams (New York:
Chapman and Hall), pp. 393–407.

M, R. P., S, M. D., J, C. A., and W, A. C., 1987, Setting priorities:
the key to nonpoint source control. US Environmental Protection Agency, Oﬃce
of Water Regulations and Standards. Cooperative Agreement CR813100-01-0,
Washington, DC.

M, I. D., G, R. B., and L, A. R., 1991, Digital terrain modelling: a review
of hydrological, geomorphological, and biological applications. Water Resources
Research, 5, 3–30.

M, R. P. C., F, H. J., L, H., M, E., and N, C. A., 1986, Plant cover
eﬀects on hillside runoﬀ and erosion: evidence from two laboratory experiments. In
Hillslope Processes, edited by A. D. Abrahams (Boston: Allen and Unwin), pp. 31–53.
N, V., 1999, Diﬀuse pollution from agriculture—a worldwide outlook. Water Science

and T echnology, 39, 1–13.

O’C, J. F., and M, D. M., 1984, The extraction of drainage networks from
digital elevation data. Computer V ision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 28, 323–344.
P, A. J., W, J., A, A. D., and S, J. R., 1997, Distributed
dynamic modelling of interrill overland ﬂow. Hydrological Processess, 11, 1833–1859.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 Assessing spatial congruence

713

Q, P., B, K., C, P., and P, O., 1991, The prediction of hillslope
terrain models.

ﬂow paths for distributed hydrological modelling using digital
Hydrological Processes, 5, 59–79.

S, V., K, D., D, J., P, F., and C, A., 1998, Eﬀects of tillage
on runoﬀ directions: consequences of runoﬀ contributing area within agricultural
catchments. Journal of Hydrology, 206, 256–267.

T, D. G., 1997, A new method for the determination of ﬂow directions and upslope
areas in grid digital elevation models. Water Resources Research, 33, 309–319.
UNEP, 1997, Report of the United Nations Environment Programme workshop on global
and regional food production and land use and the long-term impact of degradation
of land and water resources, Bilthoven, the Netherlands, 20–22 May 1996, UNEP
Publication 97-2.

USDA, 1969, Mercer County, New Jersey soil map no. 13, US Department of Agriculture—
Soil Conservation Service and the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station,
Trenton, NJ.

USEPA, 1998, National water quality inventory: 1996 report to congress, EPA841-R-97-008,

US Environmental Protection Agency, Oﬃce of Water, Washington, DC.

USGS, 1974, Eﬀects of land use and retention practices on sediment yields in the Stony
Brook Basin, New Jersey, US Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 1798-L, US
Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, DC.

USGS, 1993, Digital elevation models: data users guide 5, National Mapping Program Technical

Instructions, Department of Interior, US Geological Survey, Reston, VA.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 23:27 29 November 2012 