This article was downloaded by: [University of Sydney]
On: 28 April 2013, At: 23:43
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Transiogram: A spatial relationship
measure for categorical data
Li Weidong a
a Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706
Version of record first published: 20 Feb 2007.

To cite this article: Li Weidong (2006): Transiogram: A spatial relationship measure for categorical
data, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 20:6, 693-699

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810600607816

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 20, No. 6, July 2006, 693–699

Technical Note

Transiogram: A spatial relationship measure for categorical data

WEIDONG LI*
Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA

(Received 28 February 2005 )

1.

Introduction

Categorical geographical variables are normally classified into multinomial classes
which are mutually exclusive and visualized as area-class maps. Typical categorical
variables such as soil types and land cover classes are multinomial and exhibit
complex interclass
relationships may include three
Interclass
relationships.
situations: cross-correlation (i.e.
interdependency), neighbouring situation (i.e.
juxtaposition), and directional asymmetry of class patterns. In a space, some classes
may be cross-correlated with apparent correlation ranges, but some classes may not
be cross-correlated in the traditional sense. For example, if class A and class B occur
at two separate subareas of a watershed, respectively, it may be difficult to say they
are cross-correlated; but we still can define their interclass relationship as non-
neighbouring. If this interclass relationship is effectively incorporated into a
geostatistical model, class A and class B will not occur closely as neighbours in
simulated results; but if this interclass relationship is ignored in a simulation
conditioned on sparse samples, they may occur as neighbours in simulation results.
This means that any class has a relationship with another class existing in the same
space, and quantifying various spatial relationships of classes and incorporating
them into simulation models are helpful in generating realistic realizations of the
real spatial distribution of multinomial classes and decreasing spatial uncertainty
associated with simulated results.

the physical meanings of

To describe the auto-correlations within single classes and the relationships
between different classes, we need practical spatial measures. So far, indicator
variograms have been widely used as two-point spatial measures for characterizing
the spatial correlations of discrete geographic data in the geosciences (Chiles and
indicator variograms,
Delfiner 1999). However,
particularly indicator cross-variograms, are difficult to interpret. Variograms are
widely used mainly because of the wide application and acceptance of kriging-based
(or variogram-based) geostatistics as interpolation and simulation techniques for
spatial variables, which normally use variograms as input parameters (Deutsch and
Journel 1998). Recent studies (Li et al. 2004, 2005, Zhang and Li 2005) and further
progress in the development of practical multidimensional (multi-D) Markov chain
conditional simulation models and algorithms will suggest a Markov chain-based
geostatistics for simulating categorical variables. As the accompanying spatial
measure with this new geostatistics, the author proposes the concept of the
transiogram (i.e. 1-D transition probability diagram) and suggests using transio-
grams to replace Markov transition probability matrices (TPMs) as parameter

*Email: weidong6616@yahoo.com

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2006 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810600607816

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 694

W. Li

inputs to Markov chain models, so that transition probabilities can be estimated
from a variety of data types, and complex spatial variations of multinomial classes
can be incorporated into simulation. Similar to variograms, transiograms can also
be used as independent spatial measures for characterizing spatial variability of
discrete variables.

Idealized transiograms (i.e. 1-D transition probability diagrams derived from one-
step TPMs based on the first-order Markovian assumption) have been used in
describing spatial variation of lithofacies (Schwarzacher 1969, Lou 1996) and in
indicator kriging for modelling 3-D hydrofacies (Weissmann and Fogg 1999). Carle
and Fogg (1996) discussed several properties of idealized transiograms. Ritzi (2000)
explored the behaviour of an auto-transiogram from idealized data in relation to the
variance in lengths of hydrofacies. However, so far, transiograms have been neither
estimated from sampled point data nor effectively used as independent spatial
measures for heterogeneity characterization as variograms have been used. The
major reason may be that Markov chains were never developed into independent
(from kriging) geostatistical approaches for conditional simulation before the recent
emergence of the 2-D Markov chain conditional simulation approach (Li et al. 2004,
2005). With the further development and applications of Markov chain-based
geostatistics, estimation of transiograms from various data (e.g. points, lines, and
patches) and their interpretation and applications will become important issues.

features of

This note provides a simple introduction of the transiogram concept and some
basic characteristics of typical transiograms. Complex issues such as the theoretical
background,
transiograms of complex categorical variables, and
transiogram estimation and modelling from sparse data and expert knowledge will
be addressed with case studies in Li (2006). The objective of this note is to introduce
a new spatial relationship measure—the transiogram—to readers in geographical
information science as an alternative for describing the spatial variability of
categorical variables.

2. Transiogram

2.1 Definition

A transiogram is defined as a diagram of 1-D Markov transition probabilities over
the distance lag. The term is an analogy to variogram (i.e. semivariance diagram)
used in kriging geostatistics, since both are spatial measures representing spatial
correlations. Theoretically, a transiogram can be represented as a two-point
conditional probability function:

pij hð Þ~Pr z xzh

ð

ð

Þ~j z xð Þ

j ~i

Þ,

ð1Þ

where pij(h) represents the transition probability of random variable Z from state i
to state j over a distance lag h. With increasing lag h from zero to a further distance,
values of pij(h) form a diagram—a transiogram. The lag h may be an exact distance
measure (e.g. metres) or the number of spatial steps (i.e. pixels or grid cells). Here,
the random variable Z is assumed to be second-order stationary, that is, the
transition probability pij(h) is only dependent on the lag h and not on any specific
location x, so that transiograms can be estimated from data pairs in a space. pii(h) is
called an auto-transiogram and pij(h) (i?j) a cross-transiogram. Auto-transiograms
represent auto-correlations of individual classes, and cross-transiograms represent
cross-correlations (more accurately interclass relationships) between different

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 Transiogram: A spatial relationship measure

695

classes. Class i in a transiogram pij(h) is called the head class and class j the tail class.
The head class and the tail class in a cross-transiogram are not interchangeable
because of the asymmetric property of cross-transiograms. Transiograms may be
estimated unidirectionally, multidirectionally, or omnidirectionally. If transiograms
are estimated unidirectionally, a direction symbol d may be added to the notation of
a transiogram as pd

ij hð Þ.

2.2 Basic properties

As transition probability diagrams, transiograms have the following basic proper-
ties: (1) they are non-negative; (2) at any specific lag, values of transiograms headed
by the same class sum to 1; (3) for mutually exclusive classes, transiograms should
not have nuggets, because pii(0)51 for auto-transiograms and pij(0)50 for cross-
transiograms always hold. These basic properties are also constraint conditions for
transiogram modelling in Markov chain simulation, because they may be violated in
the processes of model fitting and adjustment of transiogram models. To meet the
third property, I suggest that the start point (i.e. point (0, 1) for auto-transiograms
and point (0, 0) for cross-transiograms) should always be respected in transiogram
modelling, so that a transiogram model always begins from the start point. To meet
the second property, I suggest that when modelling experimental transiograms, one
should always leave a single experimental transiogram among those headed by the
same class not fitted by any mathematical model and infer its model as the left
portion (i.e. 1 minus the sum of values of other fitted models at every lag). As to the
first property, it normally follows if the second and third properties are met, and
experimental transiograms are properly modelled.

2.3 Basic features and physical meanings

Transiograms may be calculated from one-step TPMs based on the first-order
Markovian assumption, or directly estimated from observed data. The transiograms
derived from a one-step TPM are called idealized transiograms because by this we
implicitly assume that the data are spatially stationary and first-order Markovian,
which are normally not true for real observed data. Idealized transiograms can
capture some basic spatial variation characteristics of discrete variables in a large
area and are smooth curves. Therefore, they were used in describing the spatial
variation of lithofacies (Schwarzacher 1969) and modelling experimental transio-
grams estimated from borehole data (Weissmann and Fogg 1999). They were also
implicitly used in previous multi-D Markov chain simulations (Li et al. 2004).

For the convenience of understanding transiograms and interpreting the spatial
variation information conveyed by transiograms, we need to know the physical
meanings of basic transiogram features. An auto-transiogram represents the change
in transition probabilities of a class from one location to another location with
increasing lag. An idealized auto-transiogram pii(h) starts from the point (0, 1) and
gradually decreases to a stable value—the sill (figure 1(a)). This sill, for an area
sufficiently large, should be equal to the proportion pi of that class in the area. The
lag h at the place where the auto-transiogram stably approaches its sill is called the
auto-correlation range, denoted by ai. While the auto-correlation range represents
the distance of self-dependence of the class i, it does not directly indicate the size of
polygons (i.e. boundary spacing) of that class. From the start point (0, 1), we may

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 696

W. Li

Illustration of typical features of idealized transiograms. (a) Typical auto-
Figure 1.
transiogram. (b) Typical cross-transiogram. (c) Two classes that are frequent neighbors.
(d) Two classes that are infrequent neighbors. Scales along the x-axis are numbers of pixels.

draw a tangent of the auto-transiogram to the x-axis. The lag h where the tangent
crosses the x-axis is equal to the mean polygon size (i.e. mean boundary spacing) of
the class, denoted by l¯

i (also see figure 1(a)) (Carle and Fogg 1996).

Cross-transiograms convey information of relationships between classes. A cross-
transiogram represents the change in transition probabilities between two different
classes from one location to another location with increasing lags. An idealized
cross-transiogram pii(h) starts from the point (0, 0) and gradually increases to a
stable value—the sill (figure 1(b)). The sill, for an area sufficiently large, should be
equal to the proportion pj of the tail class j. Similarly, we have a cross-correlation
range aij at the distance where the sill is stably reached (or approached), which
represents the distance of the interdependence of the two classes. At the section
before a cross-transiogram stably approaches its sill, depending on the spatial
distribution of the two involved classes—whether they are frequent neighbours or
not—the shape of the cross-transiogram may be very different. If class j frequently
occurs adjacent to class i, the transiogram pii(h) will have a peak first and then
approach its sill (figure 1(c)); if class j seldom occurs close to class i, transiogram
pij(h) normally will have a low-value section first and then approach its sill
(figure 1(d )).

Real transiograms (i.e. transiograms directly estimated from data) have nothing
to do with the first-order Markovian assumption; therefore, they normally show a
wealth of spatial variation information typical of classes in the real world. Real
auto-transiograms may reveal a series of peaks and troughs as regular or irregular
periodicities. This feature is also called ‘hole effect’ in variograms because this form
of auto-variogram is commonly observed in drill-holes that penetrate layered
deposits (Jones and Ma 2001). The hole effect is a reflection of cyclic occurrence of a

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 Transiogram: A spatial relationship measure

697

Figure 2. Experimental transiograms of alluvial soil textural layer classes in the lateral
direction (west to east) estimated from borehole logs along a long soil transect, showing
irregular periodicities. (a) Experimental auto-transiogram. (b) Experimental cross-transio-
gram. Scales along the x-axis are numbers of pixels.

lithology in the vertical direction. Such an effect may also reasonably appear in
classes of categorical geographical variables on the ground surface, because the
changes in the landscape may be periodic but may not be strong and regular. My
study shows that such a hole effect exists but is not obvious in auto-transiograms of
soil types and land-cover classes. However, it may be strong, for example, in auto-
transiograms estimated from borehole data of alluvial soil textural layer classes in
the lateral direction (figure 2(a)). Strong and irregular peaks and troughs appear in
cross-transiograms of typical categorical geographical variables such as soil types
and land-cover classes over large areas. These irregular peaks and troughs should be
a reflection of the irregular alternate occurrence of different landscapes. The relative
height of the low-lag section and the position of the first peak in cross-transiograms
are especially valuable in reflecting the neighbouring relationship of two classes.
Similar features in real cross-transiograms of soil layers are observed from alluvial
soil borehole data in the lateral direction (soil boreholes are normally too shallow
for vertical transiograms to show vertical rhythms) (figure 2(b)). It should be noticed
that, similar to variograms, real transiograms may not clearly show a stable sill and
a correlation range within their maximum lags. This is normal, particularly when a
study area is relatively small, and the spatial distribution of classes is strongly non-
stationary. But their heights are still a reflection of the proportions of the
corresponding tail classes.

In addition, in a small area, sills of transiograms, particularly cross-transiograms
estimated unidirectionally, may not be equal to proportions of corresponding tail
classes. This is because of the boundary effect of small areas. The boundary effect refers
to the fact that a class may have statistically biased smaller frequencies of transitions if
it has a higher chance of occurring at boundaries of the study area, because boundary
polygons are not complete and have no transition to other classes beyond the
boundary. However, in a large study area, such a problem is not apparent.

3. Conclusion

Transiograms provide an alternative spatial relationship measure for categorical
geographical data. For describing complex relationships of multinomial classes,
transiograms have several advantages over indicator variograms:

1. Cross-transiograms can detect

the directional asymmetry of occurrence
sequences of classes and the juxtaposition relationships between classes
because of their asymmetric and unidirectionally irreversible properties.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 698

W. Li

2. Transiograms are more interpretable physically and intuitively as direct

probability representations.

3. Transiograms have more explicit relationships with characteristic parameters

of classes such as proportions and parcel mean lengths.

The application of

tools or as
parameter inputs in multi-D conditional simulation of categorical variables, will
increase with the further development and applications of practical Markov chain
models.

transiograms, whether as

independent

A special advantage for transiograms is that they can be simply derived from one-
step TPMs when TPMs are available. Although such idealized transiograms can
capture only some basic spatial variation characteristics of classes, they are helpful
in interpreting real transiograms and may be used as simplified transiogram models.
However, idealized transiograms have limited uses because they cannot effectively
reflect the complex features of spatial relationships of multinomial classes and are
also not widely available due to the difficulty in estimating one-step TPMs from
sparse samples. Therefore, it is preferable to estimate transiograms directly from
sample data or from expert knowledge in applications.

Acknowledgements
I want to thank Prof. Mark Gahegan, Prof. Michael F. Goodchild, Prof. Jan Feyen,
Dr C. Zhang, Prof. J. E. Burt, and many other colleagues for their encouragement
and/or support on the development of Markov chain-based geostatistics. Insightful
comments from Prof. Mark Gahegan and help from Mr Stephen D. Weaver on this
technical note are greatly appreciated.

References
CARLE, S.F. and FOGG, G.E., 1996, Transition probability-based indicator geostatistics.

Mathematical Geology, 28, pp. 453–477.

CHILES, J-P. and DELFINER, P., 1999, Geostatistics—Modeling Spatial Uncertainty (New

York: Wiley).

DEUTSCH, C.V. and JOURNEL, A.G., 1998, GSLIB: Geostatistics Software Library and User’s

Guide (New York: Oxford University Press).

JONES, T.A. and MA, Y.Z., 2001, Teacher’s aide: Geologic characteristics of hole-effect
variograms calculated from lithology-indicator variables. Mathematical Geology, 33,
pp. 615–629.

LI, W., 2006, Transiograms for characterizing spatial variability of soil classes. Soil Science

Society of America Journal (in further review).

LI, W., ZHANG, C., BURT, J.E. and ZHU, A-X., 2005, A Markov chain-based probability
vector approach for modeling spatial uncertainty of soil classes. Soil Science Society
of America Journal, 69, pp. 1931–1942.

LI, W., ZHANG, C., BURT, J.E., ZHU, A-X. and FEYEN, J., 2004, Two-dimensional Markov
chain simulation of soil type spatial distribution. Soil Science Society of America
Journal, 68, pp. 1479–1490.

LOU, J., 1996, Transition probability approach to statistical analysis of spatial qualitative
variables in geology. In Geologic Modeling and Mapping, edited by A. Forster
and D.F. Merriam (New York: Plenum Press), pp. 281–299.

RITZI, R.W., 2000, Behavior of indicator variograms and transition probabilities in relation to
the variance in lengths of hydrofacies. Water Resources Research, 36, pp. 3375–3381.
SCHWARZACHER, W., 1969, The use of Markov chains in the study of sedimentary cycles.

Mathematical Geology, 1, pp. 17–39.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 Transiogram: A spatial relationship measure

699

WEISSMANN, G.S. and FOGG, G.E., 1999, Multi-scale alluvial fan heterogeneity modeled with
transition probability geostatistics in a sequence stratigraphic framework. Journal of
Hydrology, 226, pp. 48–65.

ZHANG, C. and LI, W., 2005, Markov chain modeling of multinomial land-cover classes.

GIScience and Remote Sensing, 42, pp. 1–18.

Downloaded by [University of Sydney] at 23:43 28 April 2013 