International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Automating the administration boundary design
process using hierarchical spatial reasoning theory
and geographical information systems

Serryn Eagleson , Francisco Escobar & Ian Williamson

To cite this article: Serryn Eagleson , Francisco Escobar & Ian Williamson (2003) Automating
the administration boundary design process using hierarchical spatial reasoning theory and
geographical information systems, International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
17:2, 99-118, DOI: 10.1080/713811748

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/713811748

Published online: 03 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 62

View related articles 

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [New York University]

Date: 18 February 2016, At: 07:24

. .   , 2003
. 17, . 2, 99–118

Research Article

Automating the administration boundary design process using
hierarchical spatial reasoning theory and geographical information
systems

SERRYN EAGLESON
Department of Geomatics, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia

FRANCISCO ESCOBAR
Senior Lecturer, Department of Geospatial Science, RMIT University, Australia

and IAN WILLIAMSON
Professor of Surveying and Land Information, Department of Geomatics,
The University of Melbourne, Australia; e-mail: ianpw@unimelb.edu.au

(Received 16 February 2001; accepted 29 April 2002)

Abstract. This paper addresses the problems associated with the integration of
data between incongruent boundary systems. Currently, the majority of spatial
boundaries are designed in an uncoordinated manner with individual organiza-
tions generating individual boundaries to meet individual needs. As a result,
current technologies for analysing geospatial information, such as geographical
information systems (GISs), are not reaching their full potential. In response to
the problem of uncoordinated boundaries, the authors present an algorithm for
the hierarchical structuring of administrative boundaries. This algorithm applies
hierarchical spatial reasoning (HSR) theory to the automated structuring of
polygons. In turn, these structured boundary systems facilitate accurate data
integration and analysis whilst meeting the spatial requirements of selected agen-
cies. The algorithm is presented in two parts. The ﬁrst part outlines previous
research undertaken by the authors into the delineation of administrative bound-
aries in metropolitan regions. The second part outlines the distinctly diﬀerent
constraints required for administrative-boundary design in rural areas. The
development of the algorithm has taken place in a GIS environment utilizing
Avenue, an object-orientated programming language that operates under ArcView,
the desktop software developed and distributed by ESRI.

1.

Introduction
Spatial data infrastructure (SDI) is an initiative intended to create an environment
for easy and secure access to complete and consistent data sets (Rajabifard et al.
2000). One fundamental problem restricting the objectives of SDI is the fragmenta-
tion of data between incongruent boundary systems. Essentially, this problem has
occurred because organizations historically hand drafted the majority of boundaries

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810210157804

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 100

S. Eagleson et al.

on hardcopy maps. With advances in technology, these hand-drafted maps have
been digitized for incorporation into GIS, a technology for which they have not
been adequately designed. As a result, administrative boundaries are a product of
the era in which they were developed, and change is now required to meet the needs
of geospatial information analysts. To achieve this goal, new methodologies for
administrative design are required.

In response to the problem of incongruent boundaries, this paper focuses on
providing a new generic model, based on hierarchical spatial reasoning (HSR) theory,
for the delineation of administrative boundaries. In the past, the authors have
focussed on the design of administrative boundaries in metropolitan regions
(Eagleson et al. 2002); however, as Haslam-McKenzie (2001) highlights, the problem
of incongruent boundaries in rural regions is heightened by the large variation in
boundary sizes. For example, small-area census polygons in rural regions are gener-
ally much larger than those in urban areas. As a result of the large variation in the
physical size and shape of rural boundaries, they are an odd assortment of ‘building
blocks’ to make comparisons with non-census spatial units. Therefore this research
aims to introduce a hierarchical model to aid in the transparency between data
layers—both horizontally between agencies and vertically between layers in the rural
administrative-boundary hierarchy.

In presenting the new model for administrative-boundary design in rural regions,
the paper expands on both the theory and technical design of administrative-
boundary-hierarchy research previously published by the authors (Eagleson et al.
2002). The paper incorporates the properties of zero- and one-dimensional hier-
archical structures, embedded within the proposed three-dimensional admini-
strative-boundary hierarchy. This new model must also strike a balance between the
increasing geospatial requirements of GIS users and the business rules of selected
agencies in the rural landscape.

2. The spatial-hierarchy problem

Administrative boundaries are frequently used for the display and analysis of
spatial information. Health, wealth and population distributions are all examples of
spatial information commonly attached to administrative polygons. There are numer-
ous advantages in using administrative boundaries for the collection and collation
of data. For example, once the administrative boundaries are established, the data
is easily collected and eﬃcient to store. Even in the light of technological advance-
ments in using other forms of geographical data, such as address point and line data,
these data structures are still relatively expensive to produce, diﬃcult to manipulate
and require large amounts of memory to store (Rajabifard and Williamson 2001).
Many organizations are thus utilizing established polygon-based administrative
boundaries as a base for the collection and collation of spatial data. As the majority
of diﬀerent agency boundaries are incongruent, however, when the boundaries are
superimposed they do not coincide. As a result, data remains fragmented between
the diﬀerent administrative units and technologies for analysing the data attributed
to the administrative boundaries such as GIS are not able to utilize the data to its
full potential.

Figure 1 illustrates the spatial-hierarchy problem where each agency uses the
common baselayer (i e. land parcel) to establish a diﬀerent size or shape of adminis-
trative unit, based on their unique requirements. In turn, each agency aggregates
fashion across the state. Data
their administrative boundaries in a hierarchical

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

101

Figure 1. Current hierarchical spatial structures: the problem.

integration is possible for each organisation; however, statistical approximations
must be employed to facilitate the cross analysis between the incongruent boundaries
of diﬀerent agencies (Eagleson et al. 2002).

3. Current solutions to facilitate data transfer between incongruent boundary layers
Although incompatible boundary units restrict GIS analysis, GIS technology is
proving valuable in the formulation of solutions. As detailed below, researchers have
investigated data interpolation, derived boundaries and data aggregation techniques,
each aimed at alleviating problems associated with collecting and analysing data
attached to incongruent boundary systems.

3.1. T he ﬁrst solution: data interpolation

Interpolation is a widely researched technique involving the transfer of attribute
data between incongruent boundary systems. Data interpolation methods often
utilize mathematical algorithms within the GIS environment for the transfer of data
from the boundaries on a source map to boundaries on a target map (Goodchild
et al. 1993, Trinidad and Crawford 1996, Martin 1998). Although the interpolation
process appears to provide a valid solution to the problem, many assumptions are
made throughout the process. One, often invalid, assumption is that the distribution
of values in the source map is constant (Goodchild, et al. 1993).

In an eﬀort to increase the accuracy of interpolation, and minimize the number
of assumptions, supplementary data such as road networks, land-use maps, satellite
imagery and administration boundaries are often used as ‘control’ for the inter-
polation process. Although interpolation techniques are valuable for providing a
basis for analysis not currently possible on a single boundary layer, the errors and
assumptions inherent in the techniques result in a less than optimum solution.

3.2. T he second solution: derived boundaries

In an attempt to make data readily usable, some organizations have created
derived boundaries. Derived boundaries are formed through the aggregation of

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 102

S. Eagleson et al.

agency boundaries that approximately nest within more publicly recognizable admin-
istrative units. One prime example is the derived postcode, where for operational
reasons the Australia Post postcode boundaries do not necessarily match the
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), census collection district (CCD) boundaries.
In recognition of the separate functions undertaken by these agencies, the ABS
aggregates CCDs to approximate the Australia Post postcode boundaries thereby
producing ABS derived postal areas. Discrepancies between the boundaries of these
two postal ’zones’ can easily arise since the two systems are not coordinated. The
derived postal areas may be quite diﬀerent from the actual postcode boundaries
both in terms of shape and area (see ﬁgure 2). The two sets of spatial entities (postal
zones) are nevertheless given the same identiﬁer by the agencies, consequently leading
to the misinterpretation of data by users. If users remain uninformed about the
origin of the data boundaries, subsequent decisions will not be well supported. A
discussion on this issue can be found in Jones et al. (in press).

3.3. T he third solution: aggregation

A third method for the dissemination of data sets across incompatible boundary

regions is the aggregation of point and polygon data.

3.3.1. Point aggregation

The aggregation of point data requires data to be stored at each parcel or address
point and when required aggregated to a diﬀerent spatial unit. Although the process
of aggregation accurately solves the problem, other problems exist. First, this solution
is not viable in Australia and many other countries, primarily due to stringent laws
protecting conﬁdentiality. For instance, once household data is collected by the ABS,

Figure 2. An illustration of two incongruent boundary systems: Australia Post postcodes
and ABS postal areas (derived postcodes), (Eagleson et al. 2001).

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

103

it must be aggregated to the CCD boundaries (approximately 220 households) and
the individual household data destroyed (ABS 1996., Blanchﬁeld 2001). If conﬁden-
tiality is not guaranteed, it is probable that people will not complete census forms
truthfully, degrading the accuracy and reliability of census information for planning
purposes.

Second, a large quantity of storage space is required to store data associated
with individual land parcels, and each aggregation of data to new boundaries would
be extremely time consuming and costly. Additionally, problems such as diﬀerencing
exist when data is aggregated to a number of diﬀerent boundaries. As Duke-Williams
and Rees (1998) explain, if polygons containing conﬁdential information are overlap-
ping, in some circumstances it may be possible to subtract one set of polygons from
the other to obtain statistics for subthreshold areas thus breaching conﬁdentiality

3.3.2. Polygon aggregation

The aggregation of polygon data involves the reaggregation of existing units into
new spatial units, more suitable for speciﬁc analysis techniques. For example,
Openshaw (1977) devised the automated-zone-design program (AZP) for investiga-
ting the modiﬁable area unit problem (MAUP). With the introduction of new
technology, digital data and improved algorithms during the 1990s, AZP was further
reﬁned and extended forming the zone-design system ZDES (Openshaw and Rao
1995, Openshaw and Alvandies 1999). These zone design systems allow the data
analyst the freedom to start with data at one scale and then reaggreagate it to create
a new set of regions designed to be suitable for a speciﬁc purpose, independent of
the collection boundaries used (Openshaw and Rao 1995). If these initial boundaries
are not designed as layers within a hierarchy, however, the problem of data integra-
tion between overlapping polygons remains (Eagleson et al. 2002). As an alternative
to the above-mentioned interpolation, derived boundary and aggregation
approaches—which each have problems associated with conﬁdentiality, accuracy
and cost—this paper proposes the adoption of an HSR-based model for the redesign
of administrative boundaries.

3.4. T he proposed solution: boundary reorganisation

The solution proposed within this research involves the reorganisation of bound-
aries into a structured system based on HSR theory. The model adopts a common
base layer to build individual hierarchical systems based on the properties of HSR.
Figure 3 illustrates this approach. Each agency has spatial units that fulﬁl their
individual requirements at the smallest scale, yet when aggregated, one common
boundary is formed. Once contained within the second layer, data is easily transferred
and cross analysed by each agency. Although this paper only deals with the integra-
tion of two agencies, Australia Post and the ABS, it is enough to demonstrate
the concept.

3.5. Hierarchical spatial reasoning (HSR) theory

HSR is deﬁned by Car (1997) as the part of spatial information theory that
utilises the hierarchical structuring of space for eﬃcient reasoning. It is through the
works of Car (1997) for wayﬁnding, Glasgow (1995) for spatial planning, and Frank
and Timpf (1994) devising the intelligent zoom, that this theory has been applied
in the spatial industry. Consequently HSR theory has predominantly focused on
zero- and one-dimensional structures to model urban systems (as points), road and

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 104

S. Eagleson et al.

Figure 3. Future hierarchical spatial structures: the solution.

drainage networks (as lines), and to a certain extent, simple bi-dimensional objects
such as square polygons in quadtrees (Rajibifard et al. 2000). This research paper
aims to extend the properties of HSR theory to include the unique relationship
between elements and lower-order hierarchies inherent within a three-dimensional
administrative-boundary hierarchy.

There are three global properties inherent to hierarchies that make them adapt-
able to boundary design. The ﬁrst of these properties is part-whole (see ﬁgure 4) This
property relates directly to the relationship between elements as each element within
the hierarchy forms a part of the elements on the layers above and also constitutes
a whole of the elements below (Palmer 1977). This property is directly related to
administrative boundaries as each boundary is formed through the successive
aggregation of smaller units to form a whole administrative unit. At the same time

Figure 4. Part whole.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

105

the administrative unit only forms a part of the overall system. For example, provinces
are a ‘whole’ made out of localities but it constitutes a part if we look at the
whole country.

The second property is the Janus eVect. This property was ﬁrst introduced by
Koestler (1968) and is named after the Roman god with two faces (see ﬁgure 5).
Each level in the hierarchy possesses two faces: one facing the levels below and one
facing the levels above. In eﬀect, each administration polygon has two faces: one
looking to the smaller unit from which it is formed and a second looking towards
the larger administration units it supports. For example, the CCD layer of boundaries
has two faces: one facing the cadastral parcels that support it and one facing the
statistical local areas (SLAs) that it supports.

The third property is near decomposability. This property is related to the nesting
of systems and is based on the fact that interactions between various kinds of systems
decrease as distance increases (Simon 1973) (see ﬁgure 6). Near decomposability also
applies to administrative polygons as administrative polygons are often nested within
one another from the parcel base through to the national border. Additionally, the
relationship between elements decreases with distance. For example adjoining land
parcels are more likely to share the same attributes, such as a common boundary
and the same postal delivery service. In contrast it is unlikely that two land parcels
located on the opposite sides of the state will share as many common attributes.

The fourth property, embeddedness, relates to the development of a three-
dimensional spatial hierarchy. Embeddedness implies that each lower-dimensional
structure is always algebraically and geometrically ‘embedded’ in the next higher-
dimensional structure (Feltz 2001). In the development of administrative boundaries,
the model is constructed based on zero- and one-dimensional hierarchical structures,
such as the town and road network. Consequently, the properties inherent within

Figure 5. The Janus eﬀect.

Figure 6. Near decomposability.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 106

S. Eagleson et al.

the town and road network hierarchies are embedded within the three-dimensional
administrative boundary hierarchy.

Incorporating HSR theory within a model for the automated design of

4.
administrative boundaries

Due to the complexities of spatial entities, there are often many alternatives to
the simplest of problems. The objective of HSR theory, therefore, is not to obtain
an ‘optimum’ result but one which meets user speciﬁcations at each level with
minimal eﬀort (Car 1997, Timpf and Frank 1997).

To be consistent with HSR theory and the geospatial requirements of administrat-

ive agencies, it is envisaged that this algorithm will need to have the ability to:

(a) Automatically subdivide the territory in compliance with the geospatial

requirements stipulated by the relevant agency; and

(b) be recursive and re-applicable to the outputs in order to produce new levels

of the hierarchy (Eagleson et al. 2002).

5. HSR-based prototype development

In order to eﬀectively integrate HSR theory and GIS technology for the design
of administrative boundaries, a model incorporating the requirements of agencies at
each layer of the hierarchy must be established. Hugo et al. (1997) have compiled
data (see table 1) detailing criteria for establishing small-unit boundaries in a number
of countries.

Table 1. A list of criteria used or recommended by six countries for the delineation of basic
spatial units (BSUs) used for the dissemination of statistics.

Criteria

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8

9
10

11

12
13

14

15

BSU must not cross any higher-order boundary
BSU boundaries must be clearly shown on maps
Newly deﬁned BSU boundaries must be as consistent as possible
with those used in previous census
BSU boundaries should separate out urban settlements from rural
BSU boundaries should conform to some population range
BSU boundaries must be clearly visible on the ground
BSU areas should not be too large
Road or communication line should form central artery of BSU,
binding it together by giving accessibility
Larger uninhabited areas may/should form zero population BSUs
BSU should be homogeneous as possible in their physical and
economic attributes
BSU should form connected agricultural areas suitable for
agricultural planning
Each BSU must constitute a convenient collector workload
BSU are to consist of all polygons whose edges are formed by the
intersection of visible linear features
Physical barriers like forests, ridges etc. should be used as BSU
boundaries
BSU boundaries should be chosen to be acceptable to as many
government departments as possible

Countries

CFNSUZ
CFSUZ
CNSUZ

CSUZ
CNUZ
CUZ
NUZ
CNS

ZN
N

N

C
U

S

S

C=Canada, F=Finland, N=Norway, Z=New Zealand, U=USA and S=Switzerland.
(Source: Hugo et al.1997)

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

107

As expected, the criteria vary between countries depending on their level of
geocoding of individual parcel information and conﬁdentiality restrictions (Hugo
et al. 1997). Additionally, it has been concluded that within the study site of Victoria,
Australia, metropolitan and rural landscapes are diﬀerent, and as a result, so are the
business rules of the selected agencies operating within each of these regions. Thus
the following section of the paper highlights the diﬀerences between these two
landscapes, and the business rules of the administrative agencies operating in these
regions.

6. A summary of the metropolitan boundary project

Previously, research has been undertaken by the authors into the delineation of
administrative boundaries within metropolitan regions (Eagleson et al. 2002). This
research involved the formalisation of business rules established by two administrat-
ive agencies (namely, Australia Post and the ABS) within a prototype for the
automated delineation of administrative boundaries.

Due to the uniform density of the population in metropolitan regions, road
centrelines were used to form meshblocks for the aggregation of boundaries
according to a range of agency constraints. (Meshblocks are spatial units formed
through the intersection of road centreline data). These constraints were based on
the requirements of Australia Post and the ABS and include:

$ Topographic barriers are to be preserved. Examples of barriers include large
rivers and roads that may obstruct delivery mechanisms. Additionally, these
boundaries often divide diﬀerent community groups. Because preserving the
diﬀerence between community groups is imperative to many planning activities,
topographic features, which appear as barriers, are preserved within the
prototype.

$ In order to protect conﬁdentially, the ABS states that each CCD unit must

cover approximately 200 households (ABS 1996).

$ To facilitate delivery mechanisms, it is important that the boundaries are in
alignment with the road network and are identiﬁable on the ground. Using
the meshblock for the aggregation assures this constraint is met.

$ To ensure uniformity across the area, it is important that the boundaries are
contiguous and provide complete coverage across the area without gaps or
overlaps.

$ Although there is no formal deﬁnition of boundary shape, it was decided that
the boundaries should be constructed in a manner that enabled them to be
compact. To ensure the boundaries established are compact, the model tests
each boundary based on the circularity index devised by Tomlin (1992)

(Eagleson, et al. 2001).

In undertaking this initial research, it became apparent that it is possible to
design a spatial hierarchy of administrative boundaries within the metropolitan
landscape; however, metropolitan and rural landscapes are very diﬀerent. In direct
contrast to the metropolitan landscape, the rural landscape is large, parcel sizes vary
and roads often unite rural communities instead of dividing them. Table 2 highlights
some of the diﬀerences in the infrastructure of rural and metropolitan landscapes in
Victoria.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 108

S. Eagleson et al.

Table 2. Diﬀerences between the rural and urban landscape.

Urban

Rural

Address point database:
Cadastral parcel size:
Large topographic features:
Administrative boundary: accuracy High
Meshblock:
Roads:

Complete
Typically small
Divide communities

Uniform unit size
Divide Communities

Incomplete
Highly variable
Unite and divide communities
Low
Variable unit size
Unite Communities

7. The function of administrative agencies in rural environments
7.1. Australian Bureau of Statistics census collector district boundaries

In Australia, some organizations are currently utilizing hierarchically ordered
units for the collection and dissemination of data. The ABS has deﬁned a unique
hierarchy for the collection of demographic data called the Australian Standard
Geographic Classiﬁcation (ASGC). The ASGC divides Australia into numerous
hierarchical levels to facilitate statistical functions. These levels are based on six
interrelated classiﬁcation structures. These are:

$ main structure;
$ local government area structure;
$ statistical district structure;
$ statistical region structure;
$ urban centre/locality structure; and
$ section-of-the-state structure. (ABS, 1996)

The main, statistical region and section-of-the-state structures each cover the
whole of Australia with out gaps or overlaps. The remaining structures cover only
part of Australia. In the formation of the ASGC, the smallest of the spatially deﬁned
units is the CCD. Consequently, the CCD has been used in the aggregation of the
six classiﬁcation structures outlined above. Due to the importance of the CCD in
underpinning the ASGC hierarchy, this research incorporates this unit and the ﬁrst
aggregated layer of the hierarchy.

In designing CCD boundaries, there are a number of speciﬁc criteria that are
imperative to their eﬀectiveness—both operationally and as display units for the
analysis of statistics such as population, income, health and culture. To be eﬀective
as CCDs, it must be possible for census collectors to cover the entire area of the
CCD within a two-day period. To guarantee conﬁdentiality, each CCD must contain
an aggregation of approximately 220 households (Blanchﬁeld 2001). To reach this
number of dwellings in the rural environment is often a practical impossibility.
However, in these instances, the ABS imposes conﬁdentiality at the processing stage
by suppressing any cell that has less than three contributors (Blanchﬁeld 2001). For
example, in a table of income by occupation, if there were only two teachers within
the CCD the income for this group would be suppressed.

In addition to maintaining conﬁdentiality for the CCD boundaries, to be eﬀective
for the display of demographic related data, the boundary design must ensure the
heterogeneity of the rural population can be represented. One way to achieve this is
through the appropriate use of road centrelines for delineation. In the past, road
centrelines were used in the delineation of CCDs, dividing rural communities of
similar constitution and combining them with the diverse outer rural regions. As a

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

109

result, the overall aggregation of population statistics to the demographic boundaries
reveals homogeneity between units, when in fact they are very diﬀerent. Therefore
the design of CCD boundaries must aim to reﬂect the heterogeneity of rural
communities whilst ensuring conﬁdentiality restrictions are maintained.

7.2. Australia Post postcode boundaries

Australia Post has derived postcode boundaries to facilitate the delivery of mail.
The initial allocation of postcode boundaries was on a somewhat ad hoc basis, and
the allocation method varied between states. Today postcodes are (where possible)
being brought into alignment with suburb and locality boundaries. Postcodes are
extremely important administrative units as they are often used as a common
identiﬁer for the aggregation and storage of diﬀerent information types. For example:
‘…with postcodes you can locate people and see the hows, wheres and whys of
markets, customers and prospects, competitors, prices, suppliers, routes and proﬁts.
Postcodes neatly deﬁne convenient demographic zones and are familiar to everyone’
(AUSLIG 2000).

7.3. Summary of rural administrative boundary constraints

When deﬁning spatial boundaries it is important that the administration units
created are not only functional, but may also be used for the display and analysis
of a wide number of social and economic characteristics. In an attempt to meet these
requirements, in rural areas the following constraints have been established:

$ The primary importance to each agency is the preservation of town boundaries.
therefore be delineated according to population density.
Towns
Alternatively, if town or locality boundaries exist, these will be used as input
into the model.

shall

$ Individual catchment areas around each town are important within rural
regions. These catchments often link the populations outside of towns with the
town and necessary services. For planning purposes, therefore, it is important
to consider the requirements of the surrounding regions.

$ As each administrative agency uses the boundaries to facilitate the distribution
of resources, the distance travelled along the road network within a unit will
be crucial
for determining functional administrative boundaries. The ABS
speciﬁes that for CCDs to be eﬀective as collection districts it must be possible
for census collectors to cover the entire area of the CCD within a two-day
period (ABS 1996, Blanchﬁeld 2001).

$ Large topographic features that form natural barriers between communities
should be preserved. As Morphet (1993) explains, major topographic features
not only present barriers that limit routing, but they often segment demographic
classes. It is thus important to ensure that major topographical barriers are
preserved in order to facilitate accurate statistical analysis.

$ As outlined in §7.1 road centrelines are important in the delineation of rural
administrative boundaries. In the past, road centrelines were used as dividing
features in the delineation of CCDs, often dividing communities and combining
them with the outer rural regions. Consequently, the overall aggregation of
population statistics to the boundaries reﬂected a demographic homogeneity
between units when in fact they were very diﬀerent. This research project
utilizes road centrelines as uniting features in the rural landscape. The additional

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 110

S. Eagleson et al.

beneﬁt of incorporating road centreline data as uniting features in administrat-
ive boundary design, is the implicit representation of major non-traversable
topographical barriers such as mountains and rivers (Zoltners and Sinha 1983).
$ To ensure complete coverage across the region, the newly formed administrative
boundary layer shall be contiguous across the state without gaps or overlaps.

8. Prototype development
8.1. Algorithm mechanics

The implementation of a spatial hierarchy requires a technical solution. This
section of the paper details the boundary-allocation prototype that has been
developed. The workings of the prototype are hidden from the user. An algorithm
runs through a series of routines ensuring that the requirements of agencies are met.
Steps 1–3 outline the datasets required as input to the prototype. Steps 4–6 detail
each of the decisions and processes operating behind the prototype.

Step 1: Rural regions (input 1)

To obtain the rural data it is important to ﬁlter out any regions that are classiﬁed
as urban. In this research, predeﬁned locality boundaries are used to ﬁlter out the
urban areas. The locality boundaries have been obtained from Land Victoria, which
maintains a representation of the State’s suburb, town and rural-district boundaries.
The dataset contains representations of suburb, town and rural-district names and
boundaries as approved by the Registrar of Geographic Names and published in
the Victoria Government Gazette (Land Victoria 2001) (see ﬁgure 7). To prepare
the data as input into the prototype the road layer is clipped based on these locality
boundaries. As a result, the metropolitan model (Eagleson et al. 2002) can be used
to design boundaries within the metropolitan regions, whilst the remaining rural
regions can be segmented based on the rural model as detailed in the prototype.

Figure 7. Locality boundaries in Victoria.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

111

Step 2: T he road network (input 2)

As discussed in §7.3, the road network is fundamental to the design of rural
administrative boundaries. Within the prototype, the road network is converted to
a grid, and each cell within the grid is assigned an impedance value. This value is a
unit measurement that depicts the cost involved in moving through each cell. The
value of each cell in the cost grid is assumed to represent the cost per unit of distance
of passing through the cell, where a unit distance corresponds to the cell width
(ESRI 2001). Within the model, the impedance value is assigned based on the road
hierarchy, where highways are 1, major roads are 2 and minor roads are 3.

Step 3: Cadastre (input 3)

Within this research paper the cadastre is used as the base layer for all adminis-
trative-boundary design. The following points highlight the importance of the
cadastre as an input layer into the boundary allocation prototype:

$ A spatial hierarchy can only be broken down to the smallest unit from which
it is composed. From an administrative-boundary perspective, this smallest
unit is the cadastral land parcel.

$ Dale and McLaughlin (1988) argue: ‘Due to the fact that almost all activities
take place within a land parcel, it makes sense that this parcel should form
the basic spatial unit
social, economic, administration and other
boundaries’.

for

$ It would be impractical for any parcel to be dissected by an administration
boundary as this would render the parcel with two postcodes or two collector-
district numbers. Hugo et al. (1997) reinforce the usage of the cadastre as the
primary unit on the basis that cadastral boundaries are already unequivocally
determined on the ground. The ability to identify the boundaries on the ground
is an important factor as boundaries will be used to facilitate the collection of
data including display and dissemination. To ensure maximum eﬃciency of
the cadastre within the model, it is thus important that the cadastre is accurately
maintained and that each parcel is structured as a polygon.

Once the input data has been prepared as detailed above, the boundary-allocation

algorithm can be run. This algorithm is detailed in steps 4–6 below.

Step 4: Cost–distance allocation

The boundary allocation algorithm ﬁrstly initiates the ESRI-developed cost–
distance subroutine. This subroutine calculates the least-accumulative-cost distance
to a designated source for each cell.

The subroutine requires two input grids. The ﬁrst input grid is a source grid. In
this instance the source grid is the town; however, agencies could use their distribution
points. The second input grid is a cost grid. For the purpose of this application, the
cost grid is based on the road network incorporating the costs associated with
travelling along the road network.

Using both the source and cost grids, the algorithm is then able to calculate the
least-accumulative-cost distance, assigning each element of the road network to a
town. To determine the accumulative cost of moving from cells in the road network
to cells in the source grid, the algorithm utilises a node-and-link cell representation.
In the node-and-link representation, each centre of a cell is considered a node, and
each node is connected by links to its adjacent nodes, (see ﬁgure 8).

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 112

S. Eagleson et al.

Figure 8. Nodes and links: a view of a grid through graph theory (ESRI 2001).

Creating an accumulative cost-distance grid using graph theory is an iterative
process. In the ﬁrst iteration, the source cells are identiﬁed and assigned the value
zero, since there is no accumulative cost to return to themselves. Next, all the source
cell’s neighbours are activated, and a cost is assigned to the links between the source
cell’s nodes and the neighbourhood cells’ nodes based on accumulative-cost formulas
(ESRI 2001). Each of these neighbourhood cells are then assigned a value based on
the accumulative cost to reach a source. The accumulative values are arranged in a
list from the lowest accumulative cost to the highest. The result of this process is a
grid identifying which cells will be allocated to which source on the basis of the
lowest accumulative cost to reach a source (ESRI 2001).

By taking this approach, each segment of the road network is allocated to a

town based on the most cost-eﬀective route along the road network.

Step 5: Road proximity boundaries

Following the assignment of road segments to distribution points in step 4, a
road proximity grid is established. Each cell is assigned the value of the nearest road
network feature to create the grid. Once the grid is established, the boundary-
allocation algorithm converts the grid from a raster to a vector shapeﬁle (ﬁgure 9).

Step 6: Boundary alignment

To ﬁnalize the boundaries so they are practical and well deﬁned on the ground,
the boundary-alignment subroutine aligns the boundaries designed in step 5 with

Figure 9. Boundaries are established for each distribution point.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

113

the cadastre. This process facilitates the alignment of boundaries from the smallest
spatial unit, in this instance the cadastre, to the newly established boundaries (see
ﬁgure 10).

Once the boundary-allocation algorithm has been run, the result is a new adminis-
trative boundary layer. This layer can be used as an input layer for the next
administrative boundary layer, as required by the operator. At this point, the operator
may add additional data sets or criteria to the boundary-allocation process, meeting
the next set of requirements at the next layer of the hierarchy.

8.2. Advantages of automated boundary design within an HSR-based model.

Hierarchical structures are imposed on space to facilitate eﬃcient spatial
reasoning. The approach adopted within this research was to utilise and expand
upon current HSR theory for the purpose of administrative-boundary design. As
discussed in §3.5, in the past, HSR theory has predominantly focused on zero- and
one-dimensional structures. The design of an administrative-boundary hierarchy is
three dimensional, however, and must incorporate the properties of the zero- and
one-dimensional structures (such as the town regions and road network structures),
which through the process of aggregation, become embedded within each subsequent
layer of the hierarchy. It is important to note that from the data-analysis perspective
the behaviour of a layer within the hierarchy is often a reﬂection of the relationship
between elements and lower-dimensional hierarchies that are embedded within it.

In order to comply with HSR theory, the prototype has been derived using a
model through which a ﬂat non-hierarchical system (i.e. cadastre) can be transformed
using business rules in the development of new administration boundaries. The
development of the rural prototype demonstrates the beneﬁts of automated boundary
design as each new boundary unit is created in a co-ordinated systematic and
rigorous manner. Additionally, the process is repeatable and can be used to generate
higher-order boundary layers depending upon agency constraints.

In comparison to the metropolitan model derived in earlier research, which was
based on the iterative aggregation of units, this algorithm, derived for the allocation
of rural administrative boundaries, is unique. The model is based on a raster data

Figure 10. Boundaries formed in step 5 aligned with the cadastre.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 114

S. Eagleson et al.

structure, which is fast to operate, and takes into account many of the constraints
applicable only in sparsely populated rural landscapes. As a result, the algorithm
aims to complement previous research and facilitate eﬀective data management so
that the full potential of geospatial data collected within rural environments can
be realized.

8.3. T he Modiﬁable Area Unit Problem

The MAUP is classic problem associated with the design and display of boundar-
ies. The MAUP is ‘a form of ecological fallacy associated with the aggregation of
data into areal units for geographical analysis. This aggregated data is then treated
as individuals in analysis’ (Openshaw and Taylor 1981). An example of this process
is census data, which is collected from every household but released only at CCD
boundaries. When values are averaged through the process of aggregation, variability
in the dataset is lost, and values of statistics computed at various resolutions will be
diﬀerent. This is called the scale eVect. Additionally, the data analyst gets diﬀerent
results depending on how the spatial aggregation occurs. This is called the zoning
eVect. This problem is integral to the display of demographic data as the information
displayed is a product of the size, shape and scale of the administrative boundaries
used in the data collection (Fotheringham and Wong 1991). In the past, because
boundaries were assumed to be ﬁxed, researchers had to use whatever boundaries
were available (Openshaw et al. 1998). Consequently, the user has little, if any,
control over the MAUP.

It is expected that the proposed hierarchical-reorganization model will allow GIS
analysts to have greater ﬂexibility over the level of aggregation and zoning conﬁgura-
tion of spatial units used in analysis. Using a common base layer, the model allows
analysts to start from the smallest divisions available, or the smallest they can process
and aggregate these in a fashion relevant to their investigation (Openshaw and
Taylor 1979). This freedom to re-aggregate spatial units gives the GIS analyst greater
control over the MAUP, which has not been possible in the past.

8.4. Implementation issues

The aim of this research project has been to develop new methods through which
space can be divided into administrative boundaries in a structured manner. In
undertaking this research, it has become clear that it is possible to align administrative
boundaries based on HSR theory. This was further supported by the development
of prototypes for the automated delineation of administration boundaries using GIS
in both urban and rural environments. Whilst the theoretical framework is strong,
there are some technical and institutional issues requiring further investigation to
ensure the model can be eﬀectively implemented.

8.4.1. T echnical issues

As established in §3.4, the boundary-allocation algorithm for the rural application
is required to meet the criteria of the two agencies under investigation; i.e. Australia
Post and the ABS. From a practical perspective, the boundary-allocation program
meets these criteria. The town catchment areas are incorporated within the cost–
distance algorithm (step 4). The boundaries are contiguous and complete, without
gaps or overlaps, and once clipped to the cadastre, they are identiﬁable on the ground.
From a mathematical perspective, however, the boundary allocation program
does not fulﬁl the criteria of distance to be travelled by an agency. The reason for

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

115

this is that each boundary is established based on the position of the town. Practically,
the solution to this would be for the program to assign a new point source of
distribution for the agency. Due to the sparseness of the rural landscape, however,
it is not practical for agencies to set up new distribution points in sparsely populated
regions; and therefore, it is more practical for the agency to be ﬂexible with this
criterion.

The model derived in this research is highly dependent upon accurate and current
data sets as input for data analysis; however, it is recognized that this level of data
sophistication may not always be available for boundary design. Alternative methods
of boundary design may thus be required to automate the boundary-design process
in regions where accurate spatial data does not exist. Similarly, these models must
be ﬂexible so that, as data does become available, it can be incorporated within
the model.

Technology is impacting the way agencies do business. For example the Internet
has been suggested as a future tool to conduct censuses (Mobbs 1998). If the Internet
does become the primary source of data collection, the boundary-delineation criteria
adopted for establishing boundaries will no longer need to consider the distance and
time taken by census collectors. The method established for boundary design will
thus need to contain a mechanism for recording boundary change over time, allowing
analysts to track changes and accomplish more accurate time-series analysis than
currently available.

Additionally, future research is required to understand the social relationships
between rural communities and their spatial boundaries. As a result of this research
it is anticipated that the model will be reﬁned to incorporate social issues in boundary
delineation, such as the identity of place and spatial cognition.

8.4.2. Institutional issues

Developing a technical solution alone cannot ensure the development of a
statewide hierarchy of administrative boundaries. Unless institutional and political
issues are addressed, administrative boundaries will continue to be developed by
individual agencies, further compounding the spatial-hierarchy problem. In order to
begin addressing these issues, a better understanding of the complex nature of SDIs
is required together with an extension of their current function so as to promote the
implementation of new methods for designing administrative boundaries.

Additionally, it is proposed that incentives for agencies to participate in the
hierarchical design framework need to be established. These incentives may include
the accreditation of agencies establishing boundaries within the hierarchy standard
and/or benchmarking administrative-boundary hierarchies to assess the comparative
eﬀectiveness of the systems.

9. Conclusion

This paper identiﬁes current problems associated with incongruent boundary
systems. In response to these problems the primary objective of this research has
been to develop a new method through which space can be divided into administrat-
ive boundaries in a structured manner. In contrast to metropolitan regions, the
landscape are vastly diﬀerent. As a result, the model
attributes of the rural
developed aims to incorporate the diﬀerences in the rural landscape along with
agency requirements for the eﬀective development of a rural spatial hierarchy.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 116

S. Eagleson et al.

The proposed solution involves the reorganization of the spatial environment
using the properties of HSR theory. To achieve an administrative boundary hierarchy,
the properties of HSR theory have been extended to incorporate the complexities of
zero- and one-dimensional point and line data structures within a three-dimensional
administrative boundary hierarchy.

This model has been formalized within the GIS environment by automating the
process of administrative-boundary design. By using this approach, it is anticipated
that administrative, political and commercial marketing boundaries can be formed
through the aggregation of smaller units, where the smallest spatial unit is the land
parcel. Importantly, this system would enable rapid and eﬃcient cross analysis
between data sets.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Land Victoria (LV), the
Victorian Government,
(ARC, Grant No.
the Australian Research Council
C00106797), National Mapping Division, Geoscience Australia and the members of
the Centre for Spatial Data Infrastructures and Land Administration at the
Department of Geomatics, the University of Melbourne, in the preparation of this
paper and the associated research. The views expressed in the paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of LV, ARC, National Mapping
Division, Geoscience Australia or the Department of Geomatics.

The authors also wish to acknowledge the encouragement and support of
Professor Don Grant (former Surveyor General of New South Wales, Australia, and
Chairman of the Public Sector Mapping Agencies of Australia) in the investigations
into spatial hierarchy problems.

References
AUSLIG, 2001, Australian Spatial Data Infrastructure, AUSL IG.
http://www.auslig.gov.au/asdi/(17/10/2001, 2001).

ABS, 1996, Statistical Geography Volume 2 Census Geographic Areas Australia, Australian

Bureau of Statistics, Commonwealth of Australia.

B, F., 2001, AURISA paper Personal Communication (4/12/2001)
C, A., 1997, Hierarchical Spatial Reasoning: Theoretical Consideration and its Application
to Modeling Wayﬁnding, PhD Thesis, Department of Geoinformation, Technical
University, Vienna.

D, P. D., and M L, J. D., 1988, L and Information Managemen (Oxford:

Clarendon Press).

D-W, O., and R, P., 1998, Can Census Oﬃces publish statistics for more than
one small area geography? An analysis of the diﬀerencing problem in statistical
disclosure. International Journal Geographical Information Science, 12, 579–605.
E, S., E, F., and W, I. P., 2001, Developing a theoretical framework
for the delineation of administrative boundaries within a rural context, In Proceedings
of AURISA 2001—T he Grand Hyatt, Melbourne, V IC, 19–23 November (CD-ROM).
E, S., E, F., and W, I. P., 2002, Hierarchical spatial reasoning theory
and GIS technology applied to the automated delineation of administrative boundaries.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 26, 185–200.

ESRI, 2001, Cost Distance Modeling Discussion, ArcV iew Online Help (Ann Arbor:

Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc.).

F, M.,

2001, Essay

of StructuresCircle/Sphere/Hypersphere
(http://www.geocities.com /CapeCanaveral /7997/essay1.html) (date of access, 27 Sept-
ember 2002).

#1: A Hierarchy

F, A., and W, D., 1991, The Modiﬁable Area Unit Problem. Environment

and Planning A, 23, 1025–1044.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 Automating the administration boundary design process

117

F, A. U., and T, S. 1994, Multiple representations for cartographic objects in a multi-
scale tree—an intelligent graphical zoom. Computers and Graphics; Special Issue on
Modelling and V isualization of Spatial Data in GIS, 18, 823–829.

G, J., 1995, A formalism for model-based spatial planning. In Spatial Information
T heory-A T heoretical basis for GIS, edited by A. Frank and W. Kuhn (Berlin-
Heiderberg, New York: Springer), pp. 501–518.

G, M., A, L., and D, U., 1993, A framework for the areal interpola-

tion of socioeconomic data. Environment and Planning A, 25, 383–397.

H-MK, F. M., 2001, Statistical boundaries: a means by which the realities
of
in the Western Australian wheat-belt has been hidden.
http://www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/conferen/abstracts/haslam2.htm (date of access
22 June 2001).

rural decline

H, G., G, D., R, P., S, P., B, B., and S, R., 1997, Rethinking
the ASGC: some conceptual and practical issues. In Final Report for Review of the
Australian Standard Geographical Classiﬁcation Project (Adelaide: National Key Centre
for Teaching and Research in Social Applications of Geographical Information
Systems, University of Adelaide), p. 191.

J, S. D., E, S., E, F., and H, G. J., in press, Lost in the mail: the
inherent errors of mapping Australia Post postcodes to ABS derived postal areas.
Australian Geographical Studies.

K, A., 1968, Das Gespent in der Maschine (A ghost in the machine), (Wien-Munchen-

Zurich, Verlag Fritz Molden).

L V, 2001, L GA, L ocality and Suburb Boundaries.

(http://www.giconnections.vic.gov.au/content/digital/lgabdy/lga.htm)
13 November 2001).

(date of access

M, J., 1998, Australia comes to its census. FIG 7, Melbourne Australia (web access

http://www.sli.unimelb.edu.au/ﬁg7/Brighton98/Comm7Papers/SS34-Mobbs.html).

M, C., 1993, The mapping of small area census data—a consideration of the eﬀects of
enumeration district boundaries. Environment and Planning A, 25, 1267–1277.
O, S., 1977, A geographical solution to scale and aggregation problems in region-
building, partitioning, and spatial modelling. In T ransactions of the Institute of British
Geographers New Series 2, pp.459–472.

O, S., and A, S., 1999, Applying geocomputation to the analysis of spatial
distributions. In Geographic Information Systems: Principles and T echnical Issues, edited
by P. Longley, M. Goodchild, D. Maguire, D. Rhind (New York: John Wiley and
Sons Inc.), 2nd Ed., pp. 267–282.

O, S., and R, L., 1995, Algorithms for re-engineering 1991 Census Geography.

Environment and Planning A, 27, pp. 425–446.

O, S., and T, P. J., 1979, A million or so correlation coeﬃcients: three experi-
ments on the Modiﬁable areal unit problem. In Statistical Applications in the Spatial
Sciences, edited by N. Wrigley (Pion: London), pp. 127–144.

O, S., and T, P. J., 1981, The modiﬁable areal unit problem. In Quantitative
Geography: A British V iew, edited by N. Wrigley and R. J. Bennett (London:
Routledge).

O, S., A, S., and W, S., 1998, Some further experiments with designing
output areas for the 2001 UK census. Paper presented at the 4th of the ESRC/
JISC supported workshops,
(date of access,
27 September 2002).

(www.geog.leeds.ac.uk/papers/98–9),

P, E. S., 1977, Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation. In Cognitive

Psychology, 9, 441–474.

R, A., W, I. P., H, P., and J, G., 2000, From local to
global SDI initiatives: a pyramid building blocks. In Proceedings of the 4 th GSDI
Conference, Cape T own South Africa (http://www.gsdi.org/docs.html, date of access
26 April 2000).

R, A., and W, I. P., 2001, Regional administrative boundaries pilot project
report Presented at 7th Meeting of
the Permanent Committee on GIS Infra-
structure for Asia and the Paciﬁc (PCGIAP), 23–27 April 2001,T sukuba, Japan,
(http://www.gsi.go.jp/PCGIAP/tsukuba/Draft_User.pdf ),
(date of access, 27 Sept-
ember 2002).

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 118

Automating the administration boundary design process

S, H. A., 1973, The organisation of complex systems. In Hierarchy T heory, edited by

H. Pattee (New York: Braziller), pp. 1–27.

T, S., and F, A. U., 1997, Using hierarchical spatial data structures for hierarchical
spatial reasoning. In Spatial Information T heory—A T heoretical Basis for GIS
(International Conference COSIT ’97), edited by S. C. Hirtle and A. U. Frank, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 1329, (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag), pp. 69–83.
T, C., 1992, Geographic Information Systems and Cartographic Modeling (Englewood

T, G., and C, J., 1996, A tool for transferring attributes across thematic maps.

Cliﬀs: Prentice Hall).

AM/FM, 127–137.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:24 18 February 2016 