Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2): 125–142

Research Article

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral
Maps: The Web C.A.R.T.E. Project

Maria A. Brovelli
DIIAR, Politecnico di Milano
Campus Como, Italy

Marco Minghini
DIIAR, Politecnico di Milano
Campus Como, Italy

Gianluca Giori
Imagogeo srl
Como, Italy

Michele Beretta
Imagogeo srl
Como, Italy

Abstract
In the State Archive of Como, Northern Italy, about 15,000 historical maps belong-
ing to different national cadastral productions are preserved. The Web C.A.R.T.E.
project was started to enhance the accessibility of this valuable cartographic heritage
using FOSS (Free and Open Source Software) technologies. The system, which
implements speciﬁc web geoservices for cataloguing and visualization, should assist
the State Archive of Como in the digital management of its cartographic resources
and related information. After the high-resolution digitization step, maps undergo a
georeferencing operation. A special statistical procedure for choosing the best math-
ematical model was developed, verifying also strengths and weaknesses of georefer-
encing with a common free and Open Source GIS. Next, metadata consistent with
current Italian standards were added to the georeferenced maps using an ad hoc
localized version of GeoNetwork Opensource (recently provided as the ofﬁcial
Italian version of the software). A dedicated WebGIS system was built for publishing
the georeferenced cadastral maps. This system is capable of navigating large raster
data in a georeferenced framework and easily retrieving their metadata. The WebGIS
system for the State Archive of Como is an important contribution for the preser-
vation of the original historical paper maps and also a great modernization and
simpliﬁcation of the end user’s access to this archive.

1 Introduction

Interest in the digital management of historical maps on the web has recently increased.
Ancient cartography has for a long time been considered pure archival documentation

Address for correspondence: Maria A. Brovelli: Politecnico di Milano, Campus Como, via Natta
12/14, 22100 Como, Italy. E-mail maria.brovelli@polimi.it

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01311.x

126 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

representing the past, and hence an exclusive domain of study of literary scholars and
historians (Balletti 2006). Instead, old maps can be of invaluable importance for a much
wider range of applications, such as landscape change analysis (Azzari et al. 1999), urban
development studies (Bitelli and Gatta 2011), territorial planning (Oreni et al. 2010) and
archaeological research (Guarducci et al. 2011).

Modern developments in digital technologies allow a new and previously inconceiv-
able utilization of historical maps preserved in libraries, museums and archives world-
wide, making it possible not only to keep the paper originals safe from deterioration, but
also to exploit the old maps’ metric information in a GIS or webGIS environment (Gatta
2010, Grosso 2010, Minghini 2010). As organizations started to put their historical
digital archives on the Internet, a series of problems arose regarding the ways in which
data had to be processed, published and web-cataloged, giving birth to an established
and shared process related to the utilization of ancient maps in digital format.

After a contextualization of the cartographic document in terms of author, buyer,
content, objective of the representation, surveying and drawing techniques, original
maps must be transformed to digital form, with a detailed documentation of the pres-
ervation condition (ICCU 2006a) and of all the digitization parameters such as instru-
ments used, resolution and output format (Fleet 2009). This allows posteriori analyses
of possible distortions created by the digitization process. Then maps need a georef-
erencing step to transform them from digital images into real geographic data enabling
all the analysis and processing capabilities provided by GIS (Gatta 2010, Minghini
2010). For easy search and retrieval of old maps and their related information on the
web, a set of shared and standards-compliant metadata is crucial (CNIPA 2006). Geo-
referenced maps accompanied by metadata can ﬁnally be published online through
webGIS systems that provide immediate and simple access to a wide range of end users
(e.g. Brovelli et al. 2011).

Past research on the use of historical maps has concentrated on the following topics:
digitization (Allen 1998, Buonora 2009), georeferencing (Balletti et al. 2000, Baiocchi
and Lelo 2005, Livieratos 2006), metadata catalog implementation of Italian standards
(Gatta 2010, Brovelli et al. 2011) and web-based information systems for data publica-
tion and access (Oreni et al. 2010, Grosso 2011). In these publications attention was
often given only to one of these topics at the time, partially losing sight of the overall
process necessary to convert historical paper maps to digital form and then make them
available through a webGIS system. In addition, these research projects used a highly
heterogeneous set of software tools, both proprietary and Open Source, to perform the
different steps necessary to achieve this goal.

The purpose of this study is to test the use of Free and Open Source software to
achieve the following objectives: (1) Determine an optimal georeferencing procedure for
the type of historical maps available in the State Archive of Como; (2) create metadata
for these maps that is compliant with current Italian standards and develop an ad hoc
web geocatalog for retrieval of this information; and (3) create a webGIS for providing
access to the historical maps and the associated web geocatalog.

The results of this research should provide common map users with a new and easy
way of consulting maps and getting the related information. The high modernization
level of tools and the archive availability through the web should also enlarge the
potential public with respect to the current one.

This study was conducted as part of the Web C.A.R.T.E. project (Web Catalogo e
Archivio delle Rappresentazioni del Territorio e delle sue Evoluzioni, Web Catalog and

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

127

Archive of the Territory and its Evolutions Representations) started in 2010 in collabo-
ration with the State Archive of Como.

The remainder of the article is structured as follows. First, the extant literature
relevant to historical maps digital acquisition, georeferencing, metadata management and
web publication is reviewed. This is followed by a description of the Web C.A.R.T.E.
system architecture. Finally implications, limitations, and directions for future research are
offered.

2 Background

Next we will present the context and state of the art of each of the following steps
required to create the webGIS described in this article: (1) Digitization of historical maps;
(2) georeferencing of these maps; (3) creation of a web geocatalog for metadata man-
agement and access; and (4) creation of the webGIS application. Given that there are
multiple ways in which historical maps can be processed and published (i.e. maps
georeferenced but not published, not georeferenced and published, maps with or without
metadata) and to provide a better understanding of the methods we used, we will
concentrate here on studies that have been carried out in the Italian context (in other
Italian State Archives, using historical maps of comparable characteristics, and using
speciﬁc Italian metadata standards).

Digitization of paper historical maps is usually performed with high resolution
scanners which produce raster images. According to Fleet (2009), four important param-
eters must be set in the digitization phase: resolution, pixel bit depth, color and ﬁle
format. A precise speciﬁcation of these parameters for historical map digitization does
not exist. As suggested by Allen (1998) and by ICCU (2006a) (which identiﬁes common
rules for the standardization of Italian digitization processes) a resolution of 300 dpi and
a bit depth of 24 bits in an RGB system have become a de facto standard for historical
map digitization projects. In Italy, these values were used for instance in the Imago II
project at the State Archive of Rome (Buonora 2009), the project ‘Creare e divulgare
cultura attraverso gli archivi storici’ at the State Archive of Bologna (Gatta 2010), the
CIPRO project at the Biblioteca Herziana in Rome (http://fmdb.biblhertz.it/cipro) and
the ancient map digitization process of the Istituto Geograﬁco Militare (IGM) (http://
www.igmi.org/ancient). Regarding image format the most common choice of digital
libraries is to store copies of each map in different formats, namely a full resolution
master ﬁle (usually in TIFF format) for internal institutional use and one or more low
resolution access ﬁles (usually in JPEG format) for web visualization. In recent years
there has been an increasing trend towards the use of multi-resolution formats for storing
historical cartography (ICCU 2006a). Thanks to a lossless wavelet compression
(Salomon 1998), these formats are able to memorize several resolutions of the image in
a single ﬁle, requiring much less storage space than TIFF. The most used multi-resolution
formats are MrSID, ECW, XL Image and JPEG2000. Most institutions use the traditional
double-format storage technique (TIFF and JPEG) (e.g. the State Archive of Cagliari for
the CARSTOS project http://www.archiviostatocagliari.it, the Biblioteca Herziana and
the IGM). Other institutions, such as the State Archive of Bologna, are converting the
primary TIFF ﬁles to JPEG2000. Few projects chose to use a multi-resolution format (e.g.
the State Archive of Rome which adopted ﬁrst MrSID and then JPEG2000).

Georeferencing of historical maps is the process of assigning a metric reference
related to a system of Earth coordinates and projection to these maps (Balletti 2006). The

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

128 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

transformation is performed through the use of Ground Control Points (GCPs) (i.e.
points with known coordinates on both the digitized map and in a current reference
system). Many types of map features can in principle be used as GCPs (Brovelli et al.
2011), but the process of identiﬁcation of these points is usually difﬁcult in ancient maps
due to changes that have occurred over time (Gatta 2010). Georeferencing techniques are
usually classiﬁed into global and local, approximate and exact. Global techniques use all
GCPs to perform a unique transformation on the whole image; local techniques are
instead applied systematically to ﬁnite areas of the image using a limited number of GCPs
each time. In approximate techniques, estimated positions of GCPs do not coincide with
observed ones, while exact techniques produce a surface that exactly ﬁts all the GCPs
locations (Laurini and Thompson 1992). The most used global approximate techniques
are the polynomial models, the afﬁne and Helmert transformations (which are special
cases of polynomials) and the projective transformation (Maling 1991, Boutoura and
Livieratos 2006). The most widely used local exact techniques are thin plate splines (TPS)
(Mitas and Mitasova 1999), ﬁnite element transformations (Balletti 2006), warping and
morphing (Gomes et al. 1999) and back propagation artiﬁcial neural networks (BP
ANN) (Rumelhart et al. 1986).

The quality of georeferencing can be quantitatively evaluated through the computa-
tion of global statistics, typically the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) on GCP residuals.
It is also possible to introduce Check Points (CPs) (i.e. points of known coordinates which
are not used for model training but just for validation). The same statistics can then be
computed on CP residuals: for exact techniques, in which residuals on GCPs are all zero,
CPs are the only way to access georeferencing quality (Minghini 2010). The performance
of transformations can be also evaluated qualitatively by overlapping the georeferenced
historical map on current cartography (Gatta 2010, Oreni et al. 2010, Brovelli et al. 2011)
or by visualizing a map distortion grid through dedicated software (Jenny 2006). The
published literature provides examples of historical map georeferencing using all the
previously mentioned techniques (e.g. Balletti 2000, Baiocchi and Lelo 2005, Grosso
2010, Yilmaz and Gullu 2011). Little information is given about the software used, but a
preference for proprietary ones can be noticed. Two recent studies (Gatta 2010, Oreni et
al. 2010) deal with georeferencing of historical cadastral maps. In both studies polynomial
transformations are applied on each cadastral sheet separately. In the ﬁrst study, a
subsequent mosaicking of georeferenced sheets was also performed.

Historical cartography published on the web must be accompanied by metadata (i.e.
identiﬁcation and description information) (CNIPA 2006) which is considered an inte-
gral part of every digital object (ICCU 2006b). Maps and related metadata are managed
through web catalogs or, if maps are georeferenced, web geocatalogs. To provide data
accessibility, sharing and exchange, which in turn promote system interoperability,
metadata must comply with uniform and recognized standards. Currently there are two
different Italian standards regulating historical map metadata implementation (see sub-
section 3.4 for detailed description). The ﬁrst one is related to maps as simple digital
images derived from digitization (ICCU 2006a), the second one is related to georefer-
enced maps as geographic data (CNIPA 2006). Currently, there are several projects
working on the publication of georeferenced historical maps on the web. The David
Rumsey Map Collection (http://www.davidrumsey.com), the National Library of Scot-
land (http://www.nls.uk) and the Hypercities project (http://hypercities.com) are some of
the most internationally signiﬁcant. The state of the art in the Italian context is repre-
sented by several projects developed by local State Archives in collaboration with

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

129

universities. Examples are Atl@nte dei Catasti Storici e delle Carte Topograﬁche
della Lombardia (http://www.atlantestoricolombardia.it) (Oreni et al. 2010), Imago
Tusciae (http://www.imagotusciae.it), CASTORE (http://web.rete.toscana.it/castoreapp),
a webGIS for the Gregorian Cadastre (http://www.dipsuwebGIS.uniroma3.it), a catalog
of Venice cadastral maps (http://157.138.209.20/catasti_storici.html), and the previously
mentioned CARSTOS project. The systems developed in these projects have been built
using FOSS. They provide navigation of ancient cadastral sheets (separately georefer-
enced and visualized as independent layers) superimposed on current cartography. The
major weakness of these systems is their limited interactivity with the end user, especially
due to the absence of a direct link between the webGIS and the geocatalog portion of the
system. Historical maps’ metadata can generally be accessed only through parallel,
separate web pages (normally on State Archive websites). In addition, metadata are not
always compliant with Italian standards and almost no implementation of CNIPA
standards currently exists.

3 Web C.A.R.T.E. Design and Development

Next we describe the architecture of the Web C.A.R.T.E. system (Figure 1) together with
the techniques and software used to develop it. Each procedure (digitization, georefer-
encing and web publication of maps) is discussed in a separate subsection.

3.1 Data

The historical cartography used to perform and evaluate the previously mentioned
procedure comes from the huge collection of the State Archive of Como, which preserves
about 15,000 cadastral maps corresponding to 246 current municipalities. Maps belong
to four distinct cadastral productions: (1) the Theresian Cadastre of XVIII century
(Como municipality and State Archive of Como 1980); (2) the Lombardo-Veneto Cadas-
tre of mid-XIX century and (3) its updates of 1898 (Signori 2002); (4) the New Lands
Cadastre of 1905 (Signori 2002). For each cadastral series, maps are divided in sheets
and are related to single municipalities (an example is provided in Figure 2). With few
exceptions, map scale is equal to 1:2000.

3.2 Digitization and Mosaicking

The cadastral maps preserved in the State Archive of Como were reproduced on micro-
ﬁlm during the 1990s. This operation, at that time futuristic, scanned the maps into
low-resolution, black and white PDF ﬁles. The consultation of these reproductions has
become totally unsatisfactory (see Figure 3). In 2010 the State Archive of Como pro-
moted a new digitization campaign of historical maps based on contracts with interested
municipalities. The digitization work was performed by a private company using ad hoc
ﬂatbed cold-light planetary scanners. The adopted scan resolution was 300 dpi in
accordance with the current de facto standard (ICCU 2006a), while the bit depth was 36
bits in an RGB system to achieve greater color detail. Both TIFF master ﬁles and JPEG
access ﬁles were produced, postponing the possible migration to JPEG2000 for a later
time. Figure 3 shows a comparison between an old microﬁlm reproduction and the
corresponding recent high-resolution scanned version.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

130 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

Figure 1 Architecture of the Web C.A.R.T.E. system

Before describing the georeferencing procedure, the fact that all available cadastral
maps are divided into sheets must be taken into account. As a matter of fact, sheets were
drawn directly on the ﬁeld independently of each other; moreover the topographic work
usually started from the central part of each sheet, producing a progressive decrease in
accuracy when moving to the borders. One consequence is that features (buildings, streets,
administrative boundaries, etc) represented at the borders between adjacent sheets gener-
ally do not match. In addition, since maps referred to single municipalities, there are many

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

131

Figure 2 Example of a cadastral sheet belonging to a Theresian Cadastre map

Figure 3 Comparison between two corresponding old and recent digitized maps

partial cadastral sheets (like the bottom one in Figure 4) which contain very small portions
of map drawings. Sometimes it also happens that urban structures represented on
historical maps have completely changed in time, making it very difﬁcult (and sometimes
impossible) to ﬁnd even the minimum number of GCPs to georeference each sheet
separately. For these reasons, and in contrast to the literature (Gatta 2010, Oreni et al.
2010), it was decided to ﬁrst mosaic the cadastral sheets of every municipality by applying
to each of them a roto-translation and, when needed, also a scale variation (Maling 1991).
The FOSS image processing tool GIMP (http://www.gimp.org) was used to perform this
operation. In this way, as shown in Figure 4, the details located on the edges between
contiguous sheets are more likely to coincide. It should be noted that, for large

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

132 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

Figure 4 Mosaicking of the cadastral sheets of a municipality in a single map

municipalities whose maps are composed of tens of sheets (the maximum is around 45), the
ﬁnal mosaicked images can reach signiﬁcant sizes up to several GBs.

3.3 Georeferencing

To georeference the mosaicked cadastral maps (see subsection 3.2), it was decided to test
and compare two different models. The ﬁrst one is the polynomial model (Maling 1991),
a global approximate interpolator which links ground coordinates (X,Y) to image
coordinates (x,y), for a generic order m, by the following relationships:

⎧
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

2

01

+

+

=
+
+
X a
a x a y
a x
10
00
20
+
+
+
−
1
m
m
a
a x
y
−
0
m
,
m
+
+
b x b y b x
10
20
01
+
+
−
1
m
y b
x
1
,

=
Y b
00
+
b
m

x
+
m

a y
a xy
11
02
− +
1
a
xy
a
0
11
,
m
,
m
+
+
+
2
b xy b y
02
11
+
1
m
xy

+
m

b
m

x

+

1 1
,

1 1
,

m

0

1

2

2

1

−

−

−

−

,,

b y
,
0
m

. . .
m
y
. . .
m

(1)

The second model is the thin plate spline (TPS), a local exact technique that

minimizes the interpolating surface curvature (Mitas and Mitasova 1999).

GCP and CP collection on mosaicked cadastral maps was performed using the
Georeferencer plugin of the FOSS Quantum GIS. In comparison with other GIS packages,
it shows excellent performance in managing the large raster ﬁles of historical maps,
especially for zoom and pan operations that have to be constantly repeated in the point
collimation step. Ground coordinates of GCPs and CPs were derived from the Topo-
graphic Databases of current municipalities, which are composed of a large number of
vector layers and are available at scales between 1:1,000 and 1:5,000. Applying the
traditional cross-validation technique (Hastie et al. 2001), GCPs and CPs are selected as
the 80% and the remaining 20% of the total number of points, respectively. Both GCPs
and CPs should be well spread over the entire raster images according to a random
stratiﬁed sampling technique (Devore and Peck 1993). An example of point collimation on
the historical cadastral map and the corresponding current cartography is shown in
Figure 5.

The next step consists of the evaluation and comparison of results provided by
the different models, the choice of the best model, and the ﬁnal generation of the

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

133

Figure 5 Example of QGIS point collimation on cadastral map (left) and current cartog-
raphy (right)

georeferenced image. In this regard the QGIS Georeferencer plugin showed some notable
drawbacks: (1) the maximum implemented order of the polynomial model is the third
one; (2) as there is no possibility to set the region of the desired georeferenced map (i.e.
the minimum and maximum X and Y coordinates), sometimes it happens that part of the
output map is cut; (3) for the second and third order polynomials, residuals are provided
only in image units (pixels) and not in map units (meters); and (4) the generated PDF ﬁle
summarizing the residuals on GCPs and CPs is always incomplete, because the ﬁle is by
default only one page long and, if there are many points in the list, only the ﬁrst ones
(located in the ﬁrst page) are reported. Since a direct modiﬁcation of the QGIS source
code was outside the scope of this study, it was decided to import the list of collimated
GCPs and CPs in a proprietary software (PCI Geomatica OrthoEngine; http://www.
pcigeomatics.com). This package implements TPS and polynomial models up to a ﬁfth
order and does not suffer from the previous QGIS drawbacks.

The choice of the most suitable model to georeference each map was based on both
qualitative and quantitative evaluations. From a pure visual point of view, as clearly
shown in Figure 6, thin plate splines were revealed to be unsuitable for historical map
georeferencing. In fact, due to their nature of exact interpolators, the estimated surface
has to ﬁt exactly the positions of each GCP and produces as a result inadmissible
distortions in areas where those points are absent. This behavior is conﬁrmed also from
the quantitative point of view by the deﬁnitely larger maximum values of residuals (with
respect to polynomial model ones) measured on CPs (Minghini 2010).

Once the usage of TPS is ruled out, a speciﬁc procedure to determine the optimal
polynomial order for the georeferencing of each map was developed by evaluating the
residuals on both GCPs (which measure model precision) and CPs (which measure model
accuracy). More precisely, the most suitable order was established as the minimum
between the one that produces the lowest RMSE on CP residuals modules, and the one
that results from a statistical Fisher test on GCP residuals (Minghini 2010). This test
compares the precision of each pair of consecutive-order polynomials and determines if
the higher order one is able to explain the observations in a signiﬁcantly better way than
the other; if not, the conclusion is to stop at the lower order one. Implementation of this
procedure on cadastral maps showed that, even if the accuracy generally increases at the
increase of polynomial order, the Fisher test usually limits the ﬁnal choice to a low order
polynomial (1st, 2nd or at the most 3rd). This led to the conclusion that higher order

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

134 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

Figure 6 Visual comparison of georeferencing with polynomial (left) and thin plate
spline (right)

polynomials do not signiﬁcantly improve the quality of the global interpolation, but are
responsible only for local effects.

Finally, only in the case in which the resulting polynomial is the ﬁrst order one,
another ad hoc test on least squares parameters was developed to evaluate if the afﬁne
transformation can be reduced to a Helmert model, that is a conformal transformation
(Minghini 2010). If the test hypothesis is accepted, assuming of course the Topographic
Databases to be conformal, it is possible to conclude that the georeferenced image
obtained from the 1st order polynomial transformation is also conformal.

Quantitative results of georeferencing depend on the selected number and distribu-
tion of GCPs and CPs on each map (Boutoura and Livieratos 2006). In any case, at least
the order of magnitude of the obtained RMSE can be taken as an approximate measure
of the quality of single historical maps. To have a general idea about the performance of
polynomial georeferencing it is useful to consider two extreme cases: the walled city of
Como, an area of about 0.5 km2 with lots of historical buildings that have been preserved
quite unchanged in time, and the Bellagio municipality, a wide mountainous area of
26 km2 with a lower density of buildings (see Figure 7). The consequence, as shown in
Table 1, is that in the ﬁrst case it is possible to identify a large number of GCPs and CPs
in a very small area, while in the second case a similar quantity of these points is collected
in a much larger area. It is also possible to consider the Lombardo-Veneto cadastral maps
as representative of the updates of 1898 and the maps of 1905, making it reasonable to
compare its performance with the Theresian Cadastre one. Table 2 shows that, in the
worst case of Bellagio municipality and Theresian map (whose accuracy and precision
are always lower than the Lombardo-Veneto ones) the magnitude of RMSE is a few tens
of meters. At the opposite, with more recent historical maps related to small areas, the
RMSE drops down to just a little more than a meter.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

135

Figure 7 Current view of the walled city of Como (left) and the Bellagio municipality
(right)

Table 1 Number of sheets, GCPs and CPs for two extreme cases of cadastral maps

Theresian

Lombardo-Veneto

Como walled city

Bellagio municipality

N° sheets
N° GCPs – N° CPs
N° sheets
N° GCPs – N° CPs

6
98–26
44
88–21

6
97–25
28
168–43

Table 2 RMSE of residuals module on GCPs and CPs for two extreme cases of cadastral
maps

Theresian

Lombardo-Veneto

Como walled city

Bellagio municipality

RMSE GCPs [m]
RMSE CPs [m]
RMSE GCPs [m]
RMSE CPs [m]

2.67
4.87
25.89
34.96

1.42
1.75
9.38
8.84

3.4 Metadata Management

Taking into account the institutional purposes of the State Archive of Como, carto-
graphic documents deriving from digitization and georeferencing must be documented
through appropriate metadata. This enables the possibility to search for and access
them online, as required by the European INSPIRE Directive (European Parliament
2007) which was recently implemented in Italy (President of Italian Republic 2010). As
mentioned, the Italian context deals with two macro reference areas, which have inde-
pendent purposes and only a partial overlap. The ﬁrst aims at the care and preserva-
tion of the Italian cultural heritage and is carried out by the Archival Administration,

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

136 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

which is organized into a network of State Archives and Archival Superintendents.
The second focuses on any kind of geographic data owned and managed by Italian
institutions.

The management of digitized cultural heritage is regulated by archival standards and
guidelines suggested by ICCU (2006a), which recommends the use of the MAG 2.0.1
standard for documenting scanned maps. MAG (Metadati Amministrativi e Gestionali,
Administrative and Management Metadata), is an application proﬁle which aims to
provide formal speciﬁcations for collecting, transferring and disseminating metadata and
digital data in their archives (ICCU 2006b). MAG is expressed in XML syntax and is
normally associated with the digital resource as a whole. It is an open standard, docu-
mented, freely available and independent of hardware and software platforms in order to
facilitate general use.

For the purposes of our project, it is important to emphasize that the MAG standard
consists of several sections. The ﬁrst includes some descriptive metadata which are
speciﬁed according to the international Dublin Core standard (http://dublincore.org/
documents/dces), while the others vary depending on the type of document. For digital
images, MAG IMG section collects administrative and management metadata related to
still images. The IMG section uses the namespace Nisus IMG which is a scheme that
translates the NISO Data Dictionary guidelines speciﬁed in ANSI/NISO Z39.87-2006
Data Dictionary – Technical Metadata for Digital Still Images (NISO 2006).

The metadata standard reference for maps considered as geographic data is the ISO
19115:2003 Geographic information – Metadata (ISO/TC211 2003), with its implemen-
tation in XML format deﬁned in ISO/TS 19139:2007 (ISO/TC211 2007). These stan-
dards are identiﬁed as references to be used for the spatial metadata management in the
Italian Repertorio Nazionale dei Dati Territoriali (National Inventory of Territorial
Data), established by CNIPA (2006) and regulated by a subsequent Draft Decree (Presi-
dent of the Ministers Council 2009), which must implement the legislative provision
described in Art. 59 of the Digital Administration Code (President of Italian Republic
2005). Historical maps are explicitly considered among the geospatial data to be
included in the National Inventory of Territorial Data.

As mentioned above, in the Web C.A.R.T.E. framework both a sheet-by-sheet
digitization of each municipality cadastral series and a georeferenced mosaic of each set
of sheets have been performed, so it was decided to adopt a dual approach for producing
descriptive metadata. Digital reproductions of historical paper map sheets (which have
not undergone any processing operation and therefore can be treated as simple digital
scanned images) were documented using the MAG archival standard. On the other hand,
for georeferenced maps resulting from the mosaic of individual cadastral sheets (which
can be treated as real geographic data), the ISO 19115 standard was used.

The selected software tool for metadata insertion and management was GeoNet-
work Opensource (http://geonetwork-opensource.org), which is based on the principles
of FOSS and on international open standards for services and protocols (ISO and OGC).
GeoNetwork is a cataloguing system able to construct a powerful and low cost archi-
tecture for web-based geographic metadata. Nowadays it is also the OSGeo Foundation
(http://www.osgeo.org) reference application for metadata management. GeoNetwork is
natively able to handle both ISO 19139 and Dublin Core standards. A localized Italian
version of the software was created ﬁrst. The two standard templates were then trans-
lated and adapted to the national dispositions to allow, ﬁnally, the use of the Dublin Core
and ISO 19115 (19139) standards in Italian for digital scanned images and georeferenced

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

137

maps, respectively. Our implementation of GeoNetwork Opensource was recently pro-
vided as the ofﬁcial Italian version of the software.

The GeoNetwork architecture has two main features that proved to be very useful
in the Web C.A.R.T.E. framework. First, it provides a true portal that allows State
Archive operators to easily access and manage metadata by means of a graphical, fast
and intuitive user interface (Figure 8). In addition, it implements the OGC CSW (Catalog
Service for the Web) (Open Geospatial Consortium 2007) that the Implementing Rules
of INSPIRE Directive deﬁned as a European standard for geographic metadata searching
services (European Commission 2009). CSW allows easy extraction of the metadata
associated with each historical map, enabling the ﬁnal integration between the geocata-
log and the Web C.A.R.T.E. client (webGIS).

3.5 Web C.A.R.T.E. webGIS

A webGIS platform was ﬁnally created to publish the georeferenced historical maps.
When developing the web application, choices were made by paying attention to the
needs and peculiarities of the project: visualization and management of large dimension
raster maps, organization of cartographic resources for easy consultation, and links
between historical maps and related metadata.

Different FOSS solutions were considered for both the server and client-side imple-
mentation. The server-side software used was MapServer (http://mapserver.org), a pow-
erful Open Source platform for publishing spatial data and interactive mapping
applications on the web. MapServer allows the visualization of the historical cadastral
maps through the use of an OGC standard Web Map Service (WMS). The time needed
for loading and navigating data represents the biggest challenge in accessing and dis-
playing large raster maps in an efﬁcient way; however, this problem has become less
important with the use of the most recent powerful servers.

Figure 8 Example of GeoNetwork Opensource interface for metadata management

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

138 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

Two different software were tried to develop the client-side of the system: p.mapper
(http://www.pmapper.net) and MapFish (http://mapﬁsh.org). The last one is a JavaScript-
based framework combining OpenLayers (http://openlayers.org) for the mapping part
and ExtJS (http://www.sencha.com/products/extjs) for building rich client applications. It
was decided to use MapFish for two reasons: (1) OpenLayers gives to the web applica-
tion a fast loading and a smooth motion of maps in the pan operation, in contrast
p.mapper recharges the selected cartography for any zoom and pan request, thus result-
ing in a slow, non-ﬂuid motion; and (2) ExtJS, together with the MapFish widgets, allows
great freedom in developing the web application structure and layout, p.mapper is more
rigid in the layout design, offering limited customization capabilities.

The Web C.A.R.T.E. web client consists of three main parts: layer menu, main map

panel and comparison map panel (see Figure 9).

The layer menu allows users to view and select all the georeferenced historical maps
which are ordered in two separate trees, the ﬁrst refers to the main map and the second
to the comparison one. Each cadastral municipality represents a layer tree node and
allows the selection of all the corresponding available maps, which are easily recogniz-
able thanks to their different icons. Furthermore, each layer can be viewed as more or less
opaque through a transparency slider and, if the layer is selected, users can also request
its metadata.

The implementation of two separate panels for cadastral map comparison represents
one of the most signiﬁcant innovations of our system with respect to other currently
existing ones. For example users can visualize, for the same municipality, a Theresian
Cadastre map on one panel and the corresponding Lombardo-Veneto one, or even a
current cartographic layer (ortophoto, OpenStreetMap), on the other, and can move and
zoom them at the same time and in the same way (see Figure 9). An ad hoc GIS toolbar
placed in the main map panel offers navigation controls, which are designed to manage
both the main map and the comparison one. For instance, a zoom operation performed

Figure 9 Web C.A.R.T.E. web client with layer menu (left), main map panel (center),
comparison map panel (right)

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

139

with this toolbar produces the same result on both the panels. In addition, an alignment
control gives the possibility of aligning the main map to the comparison cartography
after an independent movement of this second one. Users can also zoom and navigate the
comparison map separately, using the dedicated toolbar in the second panel.

As mentioned in subsection 3.4, metadata requests are managed using the CSW
standard. When users select the metadata item by right-clicking on a map in the layer
tree, an ad hoc developed function records the map name and inserts it into a GetRecords
request sent to the CSW. The service returns an XML ﬁle containing the corresponding
map identiﬁcation which has been previously deﬁned in the metadata. An XML parsing
function allows the user to extrapolate map identiﬁcation and use it as key information
for a second request (GetRecordById) to the CSW, which in turn returns another XML
ﬁle showing a predeﬁned set of map metadata. After parsing this ﬁle, metadata are
displayed in a dedicated pop-up window containing the link to the corresponding map
metadata page in the geocatalog. Metadata accessed in this way are related to all the
mosaicked georeferenced maps, which are the only data published in the webGIS. In
contrast, access to metadata of the single non-georeferenced historical map sheets is
possible through a second link (located in the pop-up window), which redirects the user
to the geocatalog.

4 Discussion and Conclusions

This study investigated the potential of the use of FOSS in preserving and distributing
historical cartography on the web. Our implementation focussed on the valuable cultural
heritage of the State Archive of Como in the frame of the Web C.A.R.T.E. (Web Catalogo
e Archivio delle Rappresentazioni del Territorio e delle sue Evoluzioni) project. To our
knowledge, it is the ﬁrst study that explicitly explores the use of FOSS to carry out all the
steps of historical maps processing and publishing.

Unlike previous studies carried out on the same type of historical maps (Gatta 2010,
Oreni et al. 2010), a preliminary mosaic of digitized cadastral sheets for each munici-
pality was performed. Mosaicked maps were then georeferenced using a polynomial
model. This choice is in line with other applications using historical maps (e.g. Baiocchi
and Lelo 2005, Balletti 2006). In this study, however, the optimal polynomial degree was
determined from time to time through an ad hoc statistical procedure to achieve the best
possible result in terms of both precision and accuracy. Some notable weaknesses were
found in the QGIS Georeferencer plugin, forcing us to migrate to a proprietary software
only for the ﬁnal georeferenced image generation. A possible explanation might be that
the Georeferencer tool is not yet a mature software due to its recent release. It is therefore
reasonable to expect that problems will be solved soon and software performance will
improve.

Both single digitized map sheets and georeferenced mosaicked historical maps were
provided with metadata. FOSS allowed us to set up a dedicated Italian-language web
geocatalog implementing current national metadata standards (CNIPA 2006, ICCU
2006b) and providing users with simple functions for metadata search and access. This
represents a signiﬁcant innovation in the ﬁeld of historical cartography, as literature on
metadata usually conceives ancient maps only as archival documents and not as georef-
erenced data.

Finally, a web geo-portal was built in order to provide easy and interactive access to
the historical georeferenced maps, compare them with each other and with current

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

140 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

cartography, and retrieve their metadata. Again using FOSS, it was possible to implement
a customized two-panel system interface allowing a useful and immediate comparison
between maps. The most notable improvement with respect to related previous studies
was the link between the webGIS and the geocatalog. Thanks to the CSW standard, users
can directly access the metadata of any map starting from its navigation into the webGIS
instead of searching them in a separate catalog.

This study has at least a couple of practical implications. First, it opens new
perspectives about the usage of historical cartography, not only allowing the paper
originals to be kept safe, but also widening the possibilities of using these maps for
spatial analysis in GIS systems. Map users at the State Archive of Como should then
beneﬁt greatly from the system, thanks to its interactivity and ease of use. Further-
more, user-friendly technologies and web access to historical maps will enlarge the
potential users of this information beyond experts and historians. Second, FOSS tools
(with the exception of QGIS Georeferencer) proved to be suitable for use in the spe-
ciﬁc context of historical maps. Thanks to their free availability and strong versatility,
FOSS can thus become a potentially efﬁcient instrument for public institutions in man-
aging ancient cartography.

The major limitation of our study might be related to the future maintenance and
updating of the system (for instance, to add a new map and its metadata) which would
have to be performed at the State Archive of Como, the ﬁnal Web C.A.R.T.E. owner and
manager. The system architecture consists of a complex set of elements and connections
between the georeferenced information, system geocatalog, the server and client. As
system maintenance will probably be done by non-experts, with no programming skills,
future work should develop simpliﬁed managing procedures, in order to assist this
personnel without requiring it to modify the source code.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the State Archive of Como, especially Dr. Lucia
Ronchetti, for providing the maps used in the study. The research was partially supported
by grants of the ‘Fondazione Provinciale della Comunità Comasca Onlus’ in the frame of
the Web C.A.R.T.E. project (Web Catalogo e Archivio delle Rappresentazioni del Terri-
torio e delle sue Evoluzioni).

References

Allen D Y 1998 Creating and distributing high resolution cartographic images. RLG DigiNews
at http://worldcat.org/arcviewer/1/OCC/2007/09/28/0000073852/viewer/

(available
2(4)
ﬁle1145.html#feature)

Azzari M, Marcaccini P, and Pizziolo G 1999 A geographical information system in Tuscan coastal
wetlands. In Actes du II Congres International sur la Science et la Technologie pour la
Sauveguarde du Patrimoine Culturel dans les Pays du Bassin Méditerranéen. Paris, Elsevier:
1189–92

Baiocchi V and Lelo K 2005 Georeferencing the historical maps of Rome between the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. In Proceedings of CIPA XX International Symposium, Torino, Italy
Balletti C 2000 Analytical and quantitative methods for the analysis of the geometrical content of
historical cartography. International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 33(B5/
1): 30–37

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Web Geoservices and Ancient Cadastral Maps

141

Balletti C, Guerra F, and Monti C 2000 Analytical methods and new technologies for geometrical
analysis and georeferenced visualisation of historical maps. International Archives of Photo-
grammetry and Remote Sensing 32(6W8/1): 1–7

Balletti C 2006 Georeference in the analysis of the geometric content of early maps. e-Perimetron

1(1): 32–42

Bitelli G and Gatta C 2011 Digital processing and 3D modelling of an 18th century scenographic
map of Bologna. In Ruas A (ed) Advances in Cartography and GIScience (Volume 2). Berlin,
Springer: 129–46

Boutoura C and Livieratos E 2006 Some fundamentals for the study of the geometry of early maps

by comparative methods. e-Perimetron 1(1): 60–70

Brovelli M A, Minghini M, and Valentini L 2011 Web services and historical cadastral maps: The
ﬁrst step in the implementation of the Web C.A.R.T.E. system. In Ruas A (ed) Advances in
Cartography and GIScience (Volume 2). Berlin, Springer: 147–61

Buonora P 2009 Digitization, online utilization and preservation of cadastral very large format

cartography. e-Perimetron 4(3): 192–98

CNIPA – Segreteria tecnica del Comitato tecnico nazionale per il coordinamento informatico
dei dati territoriali 2006 Repertorio Nazionale dei Dati Territoriali – Linee guida per
l’applicazione dello (ISO Standard 19115 – Geographic Information – Metadata v. 0.3). Rome,
Centro Nazionale per l’Informatica nella Pubblica Amministrazione (available at http://
sitap1.comune.ﬁ.it/catalogo/allegati/Repertorio_LineeGuida_ISO19115_v03.pdf)

Como Municipality and State Archive of Como 1980 La misura generale dello Stato – Storia e
attualità del Catasto di Maria Teresa d’Austria nel territorio di Como. Como, Italy, New Press
Devore J L and Peck R 1993 Statistics: The Exploration and Analysis of Data. Belmont, CA,

Duxbury Press

European Commission – Drafting Team Metadata and European Commission Joint Research
Centre 2009 INSPIRE Metadata Implementing Rules: Technical Guidelines based on EN ISO
19115 and EN ISO 19119 (available at http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/Metadata/
INSPIRE_MD_IR_and_ISO_v1_2_20100616.pdf)

European Parliament 2007 Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 March 2007 establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Com-
munity (INSPIRE). Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union, L 108 Volume 50 25 April 2007
(available at http://eurlex.europa.eu/JOHtml.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:108:SOM:EN:HTML)
Fleet C 2009 The ABC of map digitization. Edinburgh, Map Library, National Library of Scotland
(available at http://help.oldmapsonline.org/scan/07LocScot_Map_digitisation.doc?attredirects
=0)

Gatta G 2010 Valorizzazione di cartograﬁa storica attraverso moderne tecniche geomatiche:
recupero metrico, elaborazione e consultazione in ambiente digitale. Unpublished PhD Dis-
sertation, Università di Bologna, Italy (available at http://amsdottorato.cib.unibo.it/3148/1/
gatta_giorgia_tesi.pdf)

Gomes J, Darsa L, Costa B, and Velho L 1999 Warping and Morphing of Graphical Objects. San

Francisco, CA, Morgan Kaufmann

Grosso E 2010 Integration of historical geographic data into current georeferenced frameworks: A

user-centred approach. e-Perimetron 5(3): 107–17

Grosso E 2011 SEREDONA: A web platform to integrate historical geographic data into current
georeferenced frameworks. In Ruas A (ed) Advances in Cartography and GIScience (Volume
2). Berlin, Springer: 117–28

Guarducci A, Rombai L, and Piccardi M 2011 Mare Oraque Tusciae. e-Perimetron, 6(2): 114–21
Hastie T, Tibshirani R, and Friedman J 2001 The Elements of Statistical Learning. New York,

Springer-Verlag

ICCU – Gruppo di lavoro sulla digitalizzazione del materiale cartograﬁco 2006a Linee guida per la
digitalizzazione del materiale cartograﬁco. Rome, Istituto Centrale per il Catalogo Unico delle
biblioteche italiane e per le informazioni bibliograﬁche (available at http://www.iccu.sbn.it/
upload/documenti/linee_guida_digit_cartograﬁa_05_2006.pdf)

ICCU – Comitato MAG 2006b MAG Metadati Amministrativi e Gestionali – Manuale Utente.
Rome, Istituto Centrale per il Catalogo Unico delle biblioteche italiane e per le informa-
zioni bibliograﬁche (available at http://www.iccu.sbn.it/opencms/export/sites/iccu/documenti/
Manuale.pdf)

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

142 M A Brovelli, M Minghini, G Giori and M Beretta

ISO/TC211 2003 ISO 19115:2003 Geographic information – Metadata. Geneva, International

Standards Organization

ISO/TC211 2007 ISO/TS 19139:2007 Geographic information – Metadata – XML Schema Imple-

mentation. Geneva, International Standards Organization

Jenny B 2006 MapAnalyst: A digital tool for the analysis of the planimetric accuracy of historical

Laurini R and Thompson D 1992 Fundamentals of Spatial Information Systems. New York,

Livieratos E 2006 On the study of the geometric properties of historical cartographic representa-

maps. e-Perimetron 1(3): 239–45

Academic Press

tion. Cartographica 41(2): 165–75

Maling D H 1991 Coordinates systems and map projections for GIS. In Maguire D J, Goodchild
M F, and Rhind D W (eds) Geographical Information Systems: Principles and Applications.
London, Longman: 135–46

Minghini M 2010 Trasformazioni cartograﬁche, geocatalogo e servizio web di visualizzazione dei

catasti storici di Como. Unpublished Graduation Thesis, Politecnico di Milano, Italy

Mitas L and Mitasova H 1999 Spatial interpolation. In Longley P A, Goodchild M F, Maguire D
J, and Rhind D W (eds) Geographical Information Systems: Principles, Techniques, Manage-
ment and Applications. London, John Wiley and Sons: 481–92

NISO (National Information Standards Organization) 2006 ANSI/NISO Z39.87-2006 Data Dic-
tionary – Technical Metadata for Digital Still Images. Bethesda, MD, NISO Press (available
at
http://www.niso.org/apps/group_public/download.php/6502/Data%20Dictionary%20-
%20Technical%20Metadata%20for%20Digital%20Still%20Images.pdf)

Open Geospatial Consortium 2007 OpenGIS Catalogue Services Speciﬁcation. WWW document,
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/modules/admin/license_agreement.php?suppressHeaders=0&
access_license_id=3&target=http://portal.opengeospatial.org/ﬁles/?artifact_id=20555)

Oreni D, Brumana F, Scaioni M, and Prandi F 2010 Navigating on the past, as a bird ﬂight, in the
territorial scale of historical topographic maps: WMS on the “Corograﬁe delle Province del
Regno Lombardo-Veneto”, for accessing cadastral map catalogue. e-Perimetron 5(4): 194–
211

President of Italian Republic 2005 D.Lgs. 7 marzo 2005, n. 82 aggiornato con le modiﬁche
introdotte dal D.Lgs. 4 aprile 2006 recante disposizioni integrative e correttive – Codice
dell’Amministrazione Digitale. Supplemento Ordinario n. 93 alla Gazzetta Ufﬁciale n .112 del
16-5-2005 (available at http://www.istitutoitalianoprivacy.it/it/doc/3.pdf)

President of Italian Republic 2010 Decreto Legislativo 27 gennaio 2010, n. 32. Attuazione della
direttiva 2007/2/CE, che istituisce un’infrastruttura per l’informazione territoriale nella Comu-
nità europea (INSPIRE). Supplemento ordinario n. 47/L alla Gazzetta Ufﬁciale del 9-3-2010
(available at http://www.digitpa.gov.it/sites/default/ﬁles/normativa/DLgs_32_2010_INSPIRE.
pdf)

President of the Ministers Council 2009 Regolamento recante regole tecniche per la deﬁnizione del
contenuto del Repertorio nazionale dei dati territoriali, nonché delle modalità di prima
costituzione e di aggiornamento dello stesso. Draft Decree of President of the Ministers
Council 2 April 2009 (available at http://www.digitpa.gov.it/altre-attivit%C3%A0/repertorio-
nazionale-dati-territoriali)

Rumelhart D E, Hinton G E, and Williams R J 1986 Learning Internal Representations by

Back-Propagation Errors. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press

Salomon D 1998 Data Compression: The Complete Reference. New York, Springer-Verlag
Signori M 2002 I lavori del Catasto Lombardo-Veneto nei territori lombardi. In Ricci G and
D’Amia G (eds) La cultura architettonica nell’età della Restaurazione. Milano, Mimesis
Edizioni: 85–100

Yilmaz I and Gullu M 2011 Georeferencing of historical maps using back propagation artiﬁcial

neural network. Experimental Techniques 35: in press

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

