This article was downloaded by: [University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign]
On: 18 July 2013, At: 03:14
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Aoristic crime analysis
JERRY H. RATCLIFFE & MICHAEL J. McCULLAGH
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: JERRY H. RATCLIFFE & MICHAEL J. McCULLAGH (1998)
Aoristic crime analysis, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 12:7, 751-764, DOI: 10.1080/136588198241644

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241644

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access

and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 7, 751± 764

Research Article

Aoristic

crime analysis

JERRY H. RATCLIFFE
Geography Department, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, England, UK
email: jerry.ratcli(cid:128) e@nottingham.ac.uk

and MICHAEL J. McCULLAGH
Geography Department, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, England, UK
email: michael.mccullagh@n ottingham.ac.uk

(Received 14 January 1998; accepted 17 May 1998 )

Abstract. Crime pattern analysis has tended to focus on `hotspot’ analysis tech-
niques; the identi® cation of areas with higher densities of criminal activity. This
paper documents a di(cid:128) erent approach to determination of hotspots and aims to
present a conceptual framework for the temporal analysis of aoristic crime data.
This analysis monitors the change in crime patterns over time and can be applied
to arbitrary areas, especially those smaller than police beat boundaries, which
have been traditionally the smallest resolution areal unit studied within most
British police forces. It also clari® es examination of lower crime areas, which can
be overlooked in other forms of analysis. Crime data often lacks temporal de® ni-
tion and three di(cid:128) erent methods of temporal search technique are compared.
Results from a new aoristic approach highlight a weekly Monday peak in motor
vehicle crime on one division of Nottinghamshire Constabulary. In another
example a historically weighted temporal model helps identify rising or falling
crime rates.

1.

Introduction
The encoding of police crime records has created opportunities for computerised
crime pattern analysis where only variations on pin-mapping existed before
( Hirsch® eld et al. 1995 ). The digital revolution has now been embraced by police
forces and much more commercial and academic e(cid:128) ort is currently being expended
to ® nd new methods of crime analysis. The spatial element of crime has also been
recognised and geographical information is often linked with crime data records
( Ratcli(cid:128) e and McCullagh 1998 ) enabling GIS to become an additional tool in the
war on crime. Work in spatial analysis has emphasised the detection of concentrations
of crime incidents. STAC (Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Crime) is one system
developed in Chicago which o(cid:128) ers a simple system to detect crime `Hot Clusters’
( Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority 1998). This type of analysis is more
commonly referred to as `hotspot’ analysis. A map of crime locations is searched for

² Aoristic, without de® ned occurrence in time, f rom ; Aorist (SOED); one of the past tenses
of the Greek verb, which denotes a simple past occurrence, with none of the limitations of
the other [past] tenses.

1365-8816 /98 $12.00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 ²
752

J. H. Ratcli(cid:128) e and M. J. McCullagh

areas of increased density, sometimes moderated against a background of population
density or other factors. The theory shares similarities with studies into epidemiology
and many of the tools originate in the medical
® eld. Examples of this include
Openshaw’s GAM (Openshaw and Charlton, 1987 ) and the development of new
spatial algorithms (Gatrell et al. 1996). With these tools, GIS has been used for
crime mapping and analysis with varying degrees of success ( Hirsch® eld et al. 1995,
1997, Openshaw et al. 1990). The temporal aspect of crime pattern analysis has
received less attention even though active police o(cid:129) cers know where crime is, but
not necessarily whether it is rising or falling. The analysis presented here may allow
them to monitor changing patterns obscured by other methods.

Temporal analysis of crime already takes place at national and regional levels.
The annual publication of Home O(cid:129) ce crime ® gures is a regular media event and
local communities can compare the rise and fall in crime ® gures with the results for
previous years at the county and national level. On a local level a crime analyst at
a police division might plot the change in numbers of crime `events’ across the
various beats of a station if the beat information is included with the crime record.
The term `event’ has become accepted as a way of distinguishing the position of an
individual observation within the study area (Gatrell et al. 1996 ). Temporal analysis
is valuable for a number of reasons. There may be value in detecting the change in
crime level over time and moving the focus away from those areas with the highest
concentrations in crime. Lower concentration areas may be interesting if the crime
rate has suddenly risen or fallen, not in relation to other areas, but in relation to
the historical pattern in that area. If changes are evident, then one explanation may
be presented by Cohen and Felson’s routine activity theory (Cohen and Felson 1979 )
which argues that most crime requires the convergence in space and time of a
motivated o(cid:128) ender, a suitable target and the absence of a capable guardian. Spatially
constrained non-temporal hotspot analysis can obscure the variation in areas with
lower levels of crime. Until the introduction of detailed spatially referenced crime
data the police beat was generally the smallest resolution available for temporal and
spatial analysis. This article aims to suggest a methodology for variable scale tem-
poral analysis of crime data and in the process identi® es some of the bene® ts and
pitfalls which the user can expect from applying aoristic spatiotemporal process
models. Examples from a police division of Nottinghamshire Constabulary provide
real world case studies of the process in action. During the course of the study a
signi® cant temporal relationship was uncovered, unobserved using other analytical
techniques.

2. Temporal analysis

Increasingly it has been recognised that data models should incorporate a time
element to re¯ ect the changing nature of the world ( Raafat et al. 1994). Much of the
research considered varying methodologies of recording change within a temporal
database and the problems of how much historical information to retain and in
what format ( Langran 1989, 1993, Peuquet and Niu 1995). These papers contain
some of the more thorough reviews of recent temporal analysis. In one article, Donna
Peuquet presents a model for representing temporal change and likens the passage
of time to an elastic line, with events appearing as knots at di(cid:128) erent places along
the time-line ( Peuquet 1994). This is a useful analogy and allows us to conceptualise
temporal events as having a start point, a duration and an end point. Temporal
topological relationships can be de® ned with Boolean operators used to quantify

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 Aoristic crime analysis

753

the dynamics of any interaction between events ( Peuquet and Niu 1995). Di(cid:128) erent
organisational approaches include time based methods where the temporal dimension
is the main organisational factor, and the more straight-forward `snapshot’ approach
presented here.

The snapshot method is not only the most easily comprehended data model, it
is also fairly easy to integrate into current GIS. A sequence of spatially-registered
grids is employed to record the `world state’ at a given time. At di(cid:128) erent times the
same grid is employed to record the `world state’ at another time and in this manner
a collection of images is recorded, each at a unique time. Figure 1 shows S i, a
snapshot of a given state taken at a time t i. As Peuquet and Niu point out, the
temporal distance between snapshots does not necessarily have to be uniform. Each
pixel on the grid records the state of the desired variable at the chosen time, for just
that location within the grid. It should be noted that each `snapshot’ records a given
state and not the changes that have taken place. These methods are most e(cid:128) ective
when temporal events have a de® nite structure. This is unfortunately rarely the case
with crime incidents.

3. Temporal analysis of crime data

Temporal queries of crime databases are more involved because of the complex
nature of crime recording. Unless the criminal is disturbed or captured, it is unlikely
that the exact time of the o(cid:128) ence will be known. Although rarely an issue for crimes
like robbery (where victims tend to know when they were robbed) this is a problem
for incidents like motor vehicle theft and burglaryÐ
crimes which are often identi® ed
as high prevention and detection priorities for police forces. Daytime burglaries can
occur when the occupants are at work and are episodes which rarely take longer
than a few minutes. When interviewed by the police the victims are unable to narrow
the incident down to any time more speci® c than a number of hours. Police crime
recording practices re¯ ect this by documenting a number of ® elds for the time of
incident. Although ® eld names vary from force to force, variations on on_date ,
at_tim e, f rom_date , f rom_tim e, to_date and to_tim e allow the crime record sheet to
incorporate a range of possible incident times. This can vary from an exact event
time to a number of weeks or longer, if the unfortunate occupants of a burgled
premises have been on holiday, for example. This creates problems when it is desired
to search a crime database for events that occurred during a speci® c time period. A
number of solutions to this problem are possible, however each has limitations on
its functionality. During the course of this study three di(cid:128) erent methods of temporal
search were considered; an averaging temporal search which averages the date and
time ® elds, a rigid temporal search which only contains de® nite records within the

Figure 1. Snapshot temporal analysis approach ( Peuquet and Niu 1995, with permission).

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 754

J. H. Ratcli(cid:128) e and M. J. McCullagh

search criteria, and an aoristic search which considers all records which m ight have
occurred within the search criteria time.

One of the simplest solutions is to take the average of the start and end event
times. For example, if the victims of a burglary leave their house at noon and return
to their burgled house at 6pm, the time of 3pm would be used by an averaging
temporal method for any crime analysis. This process is summarised in ® gure 2
where horizontal bars represent crime incidents which have a start time, a duration
(the length of the bar) and an end time. The search criteria similarly has a start and
end time shown by the vertical arrows. The small vertical arrows in the middle of
each event represent the location of the average along the time line. Although a
considerable amount of the second incident takes place within the search parameters,
it is not included because the location of the average is outside the search criteria.
Averaging the date ® eld has been used in studies of the burglary repeat victimisation
( Johnson et al. 1997). Although computationally simple and an adequate solution
for the longer time periods of repeat victimisation studies, this is a compromise
answer and ties the event time to one possible time which, although the mean of the
possible event times, is no likelier than any other time. A search based on ® xed
temporal windows adds emphasis to only one search period and denies the incident
the chance to register with other equally applicable categories. The advantage of this
system is that each event will be recorded as one de® nite time and the results of the
temporal query should have the same number of incidents as the originating database.
Another possibility is to record those incidents which fall within the search
period. This will be called the rigid temporal search method. Search queries have to
be constructed more carefully to re¯ ect the more in¯ exible nature of the search
engine. This process is summarised in ® gure 2 where the horizontal bars again
represent crime incidents which have a start time, a duration ( the length of the bar)
and an end time. The search criterion similarly has a start and end time shown by
the vertical arrows. Only the fourth incident is returned by the search method. All
of the others have timelines which extend beyond the con® nes of the search criteria.
The outcome of this type of search method is a result with generally lower numbers
than the originating database, but with a higher degree of accuracy in the tem-
poral search.

Aoristic crime presents a particular problem in that it is temporally uncertain
and can fall either side of the search boundary. The third approach, called here the
aoristic search method, is to record crime incidents that m ight have occurred within
the search time. Conceptually it is more complicated because a single incident can
simultaneously register in a number of search categories if it covers an extended

Figure 2. Summary of averaging, rigid and aoristic temporal search processes.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 Aoristic crime analysis

755

time period. In this manner an incident will appear in each time category where the
slightest possibility exists that it might have occurred in that search block, however
small a percentage of the incident time covered the search category. The resulting
table will show a larger number of `hits’ than existed in the originating database,
each `hit’ registering the possibility of an incident rather than a de® nite incident as
in the previous method. This process is also summarised in ® gure 2.

The second and third approaches o(cid:128) er more accurate and elegant solutions than
the averaging method ® rst described. The averaging temporal search method is
acceptable for long term studies such as repeat victimisation and annual or monthly
comparisons, but for shorter time scales it lacks accuracy and can easily generate
erroneous results because it ® xes the crime incidents at a totally arbitrary date and
time. The second more rigid method presents the more precise means of identifying
temporal events, while the last method allows for the exploration of all possible
events from the originating database.

As their name suggests, the rigid and aoristic search methods o(cid:128) er di(cid:128) erent
interpretations of the data in their results. The following factors should be considered
in choosing which method to use. The size of the database generated might have
repercussions for later statistical operations. The temporal vagueness of the original
database is also important. The more accurate the temporal ® elds in the database,
the less a method like aoristic search becomes necessary.

Figure 3 and ® gure 4 were generated from a daily analysis of crime records from
Trent division, Nottingham Constabulary in November 1996. Trent division is a
large division of Nottinghamshire Constabulary situated in the South and West of
the City of Nottingham, the beats of which can be seen in the right-hand diagram
on ® gure 6. Both aoristic and rigid methods were employed to examine the daily
crime rate for assault and motor vehicle crime. For de® nition purposes assault
includes all counts of actual and grievous bodily harm. Car crime includes all counts
of motor vehicle theft, theft from motor vehicle, and TWOCing (taking without
consideration)Ð

often referred to as joyriding.

Figure 3 shows the number of records recovered by both the aoristic and rigid
search methods when querying all assaults on Trent division during November 1996.

Figure 3. Rigid and aoristic search of assaults over 1996.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 756

J. H. Ratcli(cid:128) e and M. J. McCullagh

Figure 4. Rigid and aoristic search of car crime over 1996.

The curves show a strong positive correlation. The main di(cid:128) erence between the
results are the existence of three crime records which detailed cases of domestic
assault lasting a period of years. In these circumstances the police often use one
crime sheet to record an ongoing catalogue of incidents. Removal of these three
incidents from the graph would bring the aoristic and rigid crimes into almost exact
correspondence. With this type of crime it is clear that the rigid search method is
su(cid:129) cient. Figure 4 shows the di(cid:128) erence between rigid and aoristic search processes
for car crime over the same study area and time. Note the di(cid:128) erence in vertical scale
from ® gure 3. The absolute di(cid:128) erence between the values is indicative of the lack of
temporal accuracy in police crime reports due to the inability to tie down the time
of incident. This temporal inaccuracy is most evident with the apparent regular 7-
day peaks in the aoristic data. These occur on the 11, 18 and 25 of November 1996
and are not detectable in the rigid data (with the exception of the 25 November).
The original data was re-examined in an attempt to discover why these Monday
peaks existed. It was originally thought that the victims might have been away for
the weekend and returned in the early hours of Monday morning to ® nd their car
stolen or stolen from. This was not the case and it appears from detailed crime
record inspection that Sunday and Monday nights were simply the most popular
with local car thieves in November 1996. This trend is not visible in the rigid
temporal search method. A full statistical analysis was conducted with a larger time
sample of data to determine if the Monday pattern was signi® cant.

Six months’ worth of car crime events were extracted from the crime database
for both rigid and aoristic search methods and are displayed in ® gure 5. To prevent
replication in the data, the results from the aoristic temporal search were weighted
according to their temporal length to form the adjusted aoristic set shown in ® gure 5.
A crime taking place on a single particular day contributes a score of one to the
result, but an event with an end date four days after the start date would contribute
0.25 to each of the intervening days, as the exact day is unknown and there is no
hypothesis as to the likely distribution of the occurrence of the event within those
four days.

The selection of appropriate statistical analysis was complicated by the unknown

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 Aoristic crime analysis

757

Figure 5. Daily count of car crime for Trent division for 6 month period.

distribution of the data, the potential lack of sample independence in the aoristic
data sets, and uncertainty as to the underlying data generation process. Two tests
were used; a standard single factor exploratory ANOVA, considered by some authors
(e.g. Alder and Roessler 1962, p. 245) robust under adverse distributional conditions;
and the less powerful non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test which is designed to use
non-normally distributed data of diverse variability. The problem of sample inde-
pendence remains, but in the authors’ view is not greatly infringed. A comparison
of the results of the two approaches is given below.

Four ANOVA single factor ( by day of week) tests were calculated, two using the
rigid data and two using the adjusted aoristic data. Table 1 shows the number of
car crimes committed each day of the week and the means and variances for both
the rigid and adjusted aoristic data sets. Inspection of the table would suggest that
more car crimes occur on Mondays. The null hypothesis was that Mondays were
no di(cid:128) erent to other days of the week in terms of crime occurrence. The rejection
level was set at 0.05. The results can be seen in table 2 for all days of the week for
rigid and aoristic searches, and on all days of the week except Mondays for both

Table 1. Basic counts by day of week using adjusted aoristic search for Trent division car
crime records.

Groups

Count

Mean

Variance

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

26
26
26
26
26
25
26

Sum

355.87
268.35
272.80
316.77
281.92
292.03
288.60

13.69
10.32
10.49
12.18
10.84
11.68
11.10

12.06
14.03
6.83
13.42
13.27
19.69
10.63

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 758

J. H. Ratcli(cid:128) e and M. J. McCullagh

Table 2. Single factor ANOVA tests of search results from Trent division car crime events Ð
September 1996 to February 1997.

Test
number

Test of variance
between groups

F value
(calculated )

Fcrit value
( p = 0.05)

Probability Ho

level

rejected

(1 )
(2 )
(3 )
(4 )

Rigid all days
Rigid not Mondays
Aoristic all days
Aoristic not Mondays

1.94
1.45
2.80
1.02

2.15
2.27
2.15
2.27

0.08
0.21
0.01
0.41

No
No
YES
No

df

6
5
6
5

rigid and aoristic search methods. Test results in table 2 were calculated for all days
of the week for rigid ( 1) and aoristic ( 3) searches, and a further test was conducted
again for both rigid ( 2 ) and aoristic ( 4)
on all days of the week except MondaysÐ
search methods. The purpose of ( 1) and (3 ) was to test whether signi® cant Monday
peaks occurred in the data, and in ( 2) and ( 4) to show that the other days of the
week were undi(cid:128) erentiated.

There is no signi® cant di(cid:128) erence in either of the rigid search results ( 1) and ( 2 ).
No variation in the pattern of crime, and speci® cally no Monday peak, has been
detected by the rigid search method. Many records are excluded from the rigid
search as they have timelines which extend beyond the daily search criteria (i.e.
overnight). The aoristic method shows that Monday peaks are present ( 3). If
Mondays are excluded ( 4), there is no signi® cant di(cid:128) erence between the daily means
in the dataset and no pattern emerges. This study shows that there is a statistically
strong Monday peak over the six month period. This result would not have come
to light if only a purely rigid search for exact records had been performed. The
results of the equivalent Kruskal-Wallis test are shown in table 3 for the aoristic
data set alone. The same conclusions are reached with much the same signi® cance
levels as before. This would indicate some con® dence in the results.

4. E(cid:128) ects of boundaries

This type of analysis has to use a geographical

framework and small scale
boundaries such as enumeration districts or generated grids are adequate for the
task. Grid patterns are easy to generate in programmable GIS. Software houses such
as MapInfo even provide freeware packages for grid creation and other functions
which are available to download from their web site ( http://www.mapinfo.com).
Regular grids have an additional advantage in crime pattern analysis as they allow
the generalisation of point data which preserves the anonymity of the original event
locations. In this manner, results of crime analysis can be passed to outside agencies
such as council crime prevention panels without compromising the sensitivity of the
original data. Whatever the chosen boundaries, it is not a requirement that they be

Table 3. Single factor Kruskal-Wallis tests of search results from Trent division car crime

events Ð

September 1996 to February 1997.

Test
number

Test of variance
between groups

H value
( Distributed as
(Chi Square)

Chi square
( p = 0.05)

Probability Ho

level

rejected

(1 )
(2 )

Aoristic all days
Aoristic not Mondays

17.69
5.76

12.59
11.07

<0.01
>0.40

YES
No

df

6
5

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 Aoristic crime analysis

759

the same shape or volume. A temporal analysis will compare crimes within one
polygon with the same boundary at another time, and not with neighbouring
locations. For example, if two grid squares are next to each other, one of them could
be mostly parkland. A search of motor vehicle crime in a parkland square will
usually exhibit a low score. This is not an issue unless environmental change leads
to the building of new housing estates where the parkland used to be. Grids can
cause problems when the grid referencing system of the crime data is considered.

Within Nottinghamshire Constabulary most grid references are attached to crime
records by querying the postcode and address and then attaching the AddressPoint
0.1 m resolution Ordnance Survey grid reference from a central gazetteer. However
the AddressPoint catalogue at Nottinghamshire Constabulary is not complete and
any unknown locations have the Postcode Address File ( PAF) 100 m resolution grid
reference merged with the crime event record as a back-up procedure. If a grid uses
a similar 100 m resolution, a number of crime events can ® nd themselves on the
exact location of grid intersections and either included in two or more grid results,
or excluded from any grid location dependent on the GIS areal search procedure
employed. Using grid co-ordinates that are not rounded to the nearest 100 m reduces
this e(cid:128) ect, although complete alleviation of
the problem is only possible by
reprogramming the areal selection tool in the GIS used.

Figure 6 shows the study area, a one kilometre resolution grid square over part
of West Bridgford, a suburb of Nottingham. A year’s worth of data ( 1996) was used
to produce a pattern of all crimes over 52 weeks. The grid corners were deliberately

Figure 6. One kilometre resolution grid over West Bridgford station area, Trent Divison,
Nottingham Constabulary, UK. Study cell within the grid is outlined. Large map
shows the current Trent division beatsÐ
the smallest resolution for local spatial crime
analysis prior to the use of GIS.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 760

J. H. Ratcli(cid:128) e and M. J. McCullagh

programmed to avoid the 100 m resolution problem mentioned earlier. To examine
the extent of this problem, the grid was converted to polylines and the database
interrogated to ® nd how many crime events intersected the lines of the grid. From
a database of 8,267 records, 62 were found to exactly intersect the lines of the grid,
only 0.8%. With a su(cid:129) ciently large database, this is an acceptably low percentage,
but caution must be exercised if much smaller grids with ® ner resolution are
employed, increasing the number of lines and raising the probability of intersection.

5. Analysis of mixed spatial and temporal studies

Useful o(cid:128) -the-shelf spatial and temporal crime analysis software is rare. Manual
programming of a GIS with a Standard Query Language (SQL) is easily possible,
though it can be laborious and time-consuming. Fortunately most proprietary GIS
packages such as ArcView and MapInfo have programming languages which can
automate many tasks. Once the temporal analysis process has been programmed,
there are a variety of ways to analyse the results of a temporal crime pattern query.
Two realistic aims are to monitor the trend in crime rate for an area over time
(often achieved using some form of regression analysis), and to identify time periods
of particularly high or low rates to enable further investigation of their causes. The
data takes on added complexity because the grid or boundary framework has a two-
dimensional structure with time added as the third dimension. During this study it
was felt that the most e(cid:128) ective means of analysing the data was by using the variety
of techniques available within a database program. Each geographical unit can be
examined individually and the change in crime rate plotted against time.

Figure 7 shows the result of a year long sample of the target grid square when
it was `aoristically’ searched for all crimes which occurred on a weekly basis during
1996. While regression analysis has applications in policework for mapping the
general trend of the crime patterns in grid cells, one possible alternative could be an
adaptive running mean. Figure 7 shows the count of all crimes in the target grid

Figure 7. A simple adaptive monitoring model.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 Aoristic crime analysis

761

square for the same study period, as before. It also shows the running mean adjust-
ment as each new value is received by the system. With every new value a revised
standard deviation is calculated and two guidelines show the average plus and minus
one standard deviation. This adaptive process enables monitoring of crime rates to
determine highs and lows on a continuously variable basis.

The advantage of this system is that a threshold can be set and an alert given if
exceeded. These unusual values can then be examined to ® nd the cause. A `settling
down’ period can be seen at the start during which time the system is of limited
value owing to insu(cid:129) cient values being included in the mean. A further extension
of this process was considered in this study by using a linear weighting system over
the most recent 15 values in the running mean, weighted in a descending linear
pattern which gives emphasis to the most recent values. The result can be seen in
® gure 8. There are obvious bene® ts to this system. The process is much better able
to react to unusual values which are immediately absorbed by the system but lose
signi® cance the further they proceed away from the newest values down the time line.
After the initial `settling-down’ period, the unusual values at the start mean that
the model has a high standard deviation, represented by the two lines either side of
the central mean which show the mean plus and minus one standard deviation.
Once more stable values are entered to the system for weeks 11 to 35, the standard
deviation rapidly reduces and the lines converge on the mean, indicating that the
unusual values are exerting less in¯ uence. Weeks 37 to 39 are again unusually high
and the system adapts to re¯ ect this, though the standard deviation is dropping by
the end of the graph as more stable values are received by the system. Although a
standard deviation is used here as the threshold, any measure of weighted sample
variability could be employed.

6. Display of results

The results of the analysis of one grid cell were presented in ® gure 8, but the one
kilometre resolution search area in ® gure 6 contained a 9 by 7 grid of 63 squares.

Figure 8. Linear weighting adaptive threshold process.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 762

J. H. Ratcli(cid:128) e and M. J. McCullagh

le, an AVI ®

This presents a problem for presenting the results. Animation has been suggested as
the solution to many GIS problems involving time as a variable ( Dorling and
Openshaw 1992, MacEachren 1994 ). This is a ® eld where animation might be
particularly useful. GIS packages can be easily programmed to output selected
les of screen captures. A repeated number of these images can be
screens as image ®
moulded together into a FLI ®
le or a number of other computer
movie/animation formats. A number of programs are available to perform this
operation, including a number of free or shareware products like Dave’s Targa
Animator (available through HENSA). It is beyond the scope of this paper to
describe the full animation process, but a suggested animation sequence might be
the de® nition of a map surface with the grid hidden over the top of it. As the
sequence (and therefore the weeks) progresses grid cells only become `active’ if they
are either above or below the tolerance threshold. E(cid:128) ective use of colour could code
cells as one colour for being above and a di(cid:128) erent colour for being below the
threshold. For a more thorough treatment of the complete animation process (see
McCullagh 1998). This technique has a number of advantages. It is an e(cid:128) ective
means of displaying a large quantity of numerical information in an easily under-
standable format. It is also an e(cid:129) cient means of explaining the temporal aspect, and
utilises a grid base which preserves the anonymity of the original data. Modern
processors and algorithms have speeded up the animation process to the extent that
a 100 frame animation can be created on a domestic PC in a few minutes.

The temporal change can be summarised in a more limited but accessible means
by showing the number of threshold crossings within each grid square on a simple
choropleth map. Figure 9 shows a number of choropleth maps of West Bridgford
station beats, a sub-division of Trent division. Figure 9(a) shows the summary of all
crimes on the sub-division for 1996. This type of map is one of the standard range
of simple distribution maps commonly employed in police work, but which can
mislead the user as to changes in more complex crime patterns. Figure 9 (b) and
® gure 9(c) depict the number of times over the year that the grid squares aoristic
temporal count exceeded the weighted running mean by more than one standard
deviation. The combination of these two images in ® gure 9(d ) shows areas with
complex rapidly changing weekly crime rates, and also the areas with more stable
crime event patterns. The temporal analysis in ® gure 9 allows a much more detailed
interpretation of the temporal crime pattern and shows that changes in pattern are
occurring in very di(cid:128) erent locations from those of major crime. The picture is much
more complex than that given by the single display of total crime in ® gure 9(a).

7. Conclusions

This paper has presented a basic conceptual framework for aoristic analysis of
crime data, and documented the process from accurate selection of the records
through to presentation of some analytical results. Crime data frequently lacks
temporal de® nition and two methods of performing temporal searches have been
tested. Rigid temporal searches pick only those records which fall exactly within the
search period, while aoristic methods can be used to explore a fuller range of temporal
possibilities. The example of Monday car crime peaks brings to light patterns
obscured by simpler methods, but begs the unresolved question of the causes of
Monday car crime. The approach in this paper has been to examine the historical
pattern and identify thresholds around present variation outside which abnormalities
can be evaluated.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 Aoristic crime analysis

763

Figure 9. West Bridgford station beats overlaid with one kilometre square grids showing
general crime and temporal analysis summaries. (a) Standard police crime mapping
practice using totals for the year.
(b) Aoristic search generated data set used to
determine weighted running mean thresholded results. Here the number of times the
upper threshold has been exceeded during the year is mapped. (c) The same data as
for (b) but a count of the number of times the lower threshold has been crossed. (d )
The di(cid:128) erence between (b) and (c) to show the predominance of upper or lower
threshold crossings. A negative class on the map indicates more signi® cant reductions
in crime and a positive class indicates signi® cant increases.

Aoristic crime analysis is a method of charting the historical pattern over variable
small areal units, independent of in¯ uence from neighbouring cells. Each cell can be
plotted to examine the rise and fall of crime compared with a variable threshold
over time. Temporal trends in extrem a can be examined for patterns and can be
correlated against other intelligence gathered at the police station. The adjusted
aoristic search procedure, added to adaptive thresholding techniques, provides new
tools for crime analysis.

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank the Nottinghamshire Constabulary for access
to the data and co-operation in this research. The authors would also like to express
their appreciation to the reviewers of this manuscript for helpful comments.

References
Alder, H. L., and Roessler, E. B., 1962, Introduction to probability and statistics (San

Francisco, London: Freeman).

Cohen, L. E., and Felson, M., 1979, Social change and crime rate trends: A Routine Activity

Approach. American Sociological Review, 44, 588± 608.

Dorling, D., and Openshaw, S., 1992, Using computer animation to visualize space-time

patterns. Environment and Planning B Ð Planning & Design, 19, 639± 650.

Gatrell, A. C., Bailey, T. C., Diggle, P. J., and Rowlingson, B. S., 1996, Spatial point

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 764

Aoristic crime analysis

pattern analysis and its application in geographical epidemiology. T ransactions,
Institute of British Geographers, NS 21, 256± 274.

Hirschfield, A., Brown, P., and Todd, P., 1995, GIS and the analysis of spatially-referenced
crime data: Experiences in Merseyside, UK. International Journal of Geographical
Information Systems, 9, 191± 210.

Hirschfield, A., Yarwood, D., and Bowers, K., 1997, Crime pattern analysis, spatial targeting
and GIS: The development of new approaches for use in evaluating community safety
initiatives. In Crime and health data analysis using GIS (She(cid:129) eld: SCGISA ).
Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority, 1998, STAC user manuals. (Chicago).
Johnson, S. D., Bowers, K., and Hirschfield, A., 1997, New insights into the spatial and
temporal distribution of repeat victimization. British Journal of Criminology, 37,
224± 241.

Langran, G., 1989, A review of temporal database research and its use in GIS applications.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 3, 215± 232.

Langran, G., 1993, Issues of implementing a spatiotemporal system. International Journal of

Geographical Information Systems, 7, 305± 314.

MacEachren, A., 1994, Time as a cartographic variable. In H. Hearnshaw and D. Unwin,

eds., V isualisation in Geographical
pp. 115± 130.

Information Systems

(London: John Wiley),

McCullagh, M. J., 1998, Quality, use and visualisation in terrain modelling. In L andform
monitoring, modelling and analysis, edited by S. N. Lane, K. S. Richards and
J. H. Chandler (London: Wiley), Chapter 5, 95± 117.

Openshaw, S., and Charlton, M., 1987, A Mark 1 Geographical Analysis Machine for the
automated analysis of point data sets. International Journal of Geographical Information
Systems, 1, 335± 358.

Openshaw, S., Cross, A., Charlton, M., and Brunsdon, C., 1990, Lessons learnt from a
Post Mortem of a failed GIS. In 2nd National Conference and Exhibition of the AGI
( Brighton: AGI ), 2.3.1± 2.3.5.

Peuquet, D. J., 1994, It’s about time Ð

framework for the representation of
temporal dynamics in Geographical Information Systems. Annals of the Association
of American Geographers, 84, 441± 461.

a conceptual

Peuquet, D. J., and Niu, D. A., 1995, An event-based spatiotemporal data model (ESTDM )
for temporal analysis of geographical data. International Journal of Geographical
Information Systems, 9, 7± 24.

Raafat, H., Yang, Z. S., and Gauthier, D., 1994, Relational spatial topologies for historical
geographical information. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems,
8, 163± 173.

Ratcliffe, J. H., and McCullagh, M. J., 1998, Identifying repeat victimisation with GIS.

British Journal of Criminology, 38 ( 4), 651± 662.

Downloaded by [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] at 03:14 18 July 2013 