Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299
DOI 10.1007/s10707-012-0152-0

Footprint generation using fuzzy-neighborhood clustering

Jonathon K. Parker & Joni A. Downs

Received: 14 June 2010 / Revised: 13 November 2011
Accepted: 23 January 2012 / Published online: 6 March 2012
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

Abstract Geometric footprints, which delineate the region occupied by a spatial point pattern,
serve a variety of functions in GIScience. This research explores the use of two density-based
clustering algorithms for footprint generation. First, the Density-Based Spatial Clustering with
Noise (DBSCAN) algorithm is used to classify points as core points, non-core points, or statistical
noise; then a footprint is created from the core and non-core points in each cluster using convex
hulls. Second, a Fuzzy-Neighborhood (FN)-DBSCAN algorithm, which incorporates fuzzy set
theory, is used to assign points to clusters based on membership values. Then, two methods are
presented for delineating footprints with FN-DBSCAN: (1) hull-based techniques and (2) con-
touring methods based on interpolated membership values. The latter approach offers increased
flexibility for footprint generation, as it provides a continuous surface of membership values from
which precise contours can be delineated. Then, a heuristic parameter selection method is
described for FN-DBSCAN, and the approach is demonstrated in the context of wildlife home
range estimation, where the goal is to a generate footprint of an animal’s movements from
tracking data. Additionally, FN-DBSCAN is applied to produce crime footprints for a county in
Florida. The results are used to guide a discussion of the relative merits of the new techniques. In
summary, the fuzzy clustering approach offers a novel method of footprint generation that can be
applied to characterize a variety of point patterns in GIScience.

Keywords Point pattern analysis . Clustering algorithms . Geometric footprints . Fuzzy logic

1 Introduction

A common task in spatial point pattern analysis in GIScience is to delineate the region
occupied by a set of points [14]. These regions are termed geometric footprints but are also

J. K. Parker
Department of Computer Science, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
e-mail: jkparker@mail.usf.edu

J. A. Downs (*)
Department of Geography, Environment, and Planning, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
e-mail: downs@usf.edu

286

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

referred to as hulls, shapes, outlines, or crusts. A footprint can be generated using a variety of
methods depending on its desired properties, such as whether the boundary is completely
connected or disconnected, whether the boundary coincides with known points or is
extended to include a larger area of influence, and if the region contains all points in the
set or excludes outliers [14]. Dupenois and Galton [10] provide a systematic review of types
of footprints and their methods of generation. Popular examples in GIS include minimum
convex hulls [6], alpha-hulls [11], and characteristic shapes [9], although no single method is
preferred for all applications.

Footprints serve a variety of functions in GIScience. The most widely noted is for
cartographic generalization of points to regions for creating maps at multiple scales [14].
Secondly, footprints are used to approximate imprecise areal regions from known point
locations [17]. For example, Alani et al. [1] and Grothe and Schaube [18] used footprints for
regional approximation in gazetteering applications, and Agosto et al. [2] reconstructed
crime scenes from blood splatters represented as points using geometric footprints. Downs
and Horner [7] used footprints to approximate areal home ranges of animals from point
locations recorded periodically over time. Additionally, Harris and Johnston [19] used
geometric footprints to delineate school catchment areas. Footprinting is also widely used
for shape reconstruction. In this case, a sample of points from the boundary or surface of an
object is extracted in order to reduce its complexity and data storage requirements, and then
the sample points are later used to approximate the original shape of the object by creating a
footprint [5]. Finally, footprints can be used to identify clusters of points within a larger
pattern [14].

Galton and Duckham [14] discuss the potential relationship between footprints and
traditional methods of cluster analysis and note this linkage remains largely uninvestigated.
The authors suggest that GIS-based methods for creating footprints can result in cluster
formation if the region is disconnected, although the clusters produced may be suboptimal
compared to those created by clustering algorithms. Duckham et al. [9] first illustrated a
strategy where a clustering algorithm, such as the popular DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise) [12], is used to identify clusters and then a footprint
is generated based on the cluster assignments. Tang et al. [30] used such an approach to
delineate migratory bird routes using a combination of the DBSCAN clustering algorithm
and convex hulls. The advantage of this approach is that the clusters are determined
algorithmically and that a footprint can be generated using whatever GIS-based technique
is desired, whether a simple convex hull or a more sophisticated shape.

The combined clustering and footprint approach shows promise for numerous applica-
tions to spatial point patterns, although this area of research remains largely unexplored in
GIScience. The choice of clustering algorithm is important; different clustering algorithms
have different strengths and limitations [22]. One particular limitation imposed by most
clustering algorithms, including DBSCAN, is the rigid nature of assigning a point to a
cluster, i.e. there is no gradation in cluster membership. One solution to this problem is the
application of fuzzy set theory to the clustering algorithm [33]. Nasibov and Ulutagay [27]
developed a new clustering algorithm, FN (Fuzzy Neighborhood)-DBSCAN, that incorpo-
rates a fuzzy neighborhood function to assign points to clusters based on membership
values. However, FN-DBSCAN has not been applied in the context of footprint generation
for spatial point patterns in GIScience.

This research develops fuzzy neighborhood clustering techniques for generating foot-
prints for spatial point patterns using FN-DBSCAN and contrasts them with similar
approaches using traditional DBSCAN. Section 2 reviews the original DBSCAN algorithm
in the context of footprint generation in order to provide the necessary background for the

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

287

research. Then, Section 3 describes the FN-DBSCAN algorithm and presents two methods
for delineating fuzzy footprints: (1) hull-based techniques and (2) contouring methods based
on interpolated membership values. Section 4 describes a heuristic method for selecting
input parameters for FN-DBSCAN, while Section 5 illustrates parameter selection using a
sample dataset of Florida panther locations where the goal of the analysis to delineate a
footprint of the animal’s space-use patterns or its ‘home range’. Section 6 further explores
and compares the discrete and fuzzy neighborhood approaches in the context of generating a
crime footprint for Hillsborough County, Florida. Finally, a discussion of the applicability of
the footprint generation routines in GIScience is provided in Section 7.

2 Footprint Generation using DBSCAN

Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN), a well known
clustering algorithm, can be used for spatial point pattern analysis [12]. DBSCAN assigns
points to particular clusters or designates them as statistical noise if they are not sufficiently
close to other points. DBSCAN determines cluster assignments by assessing the local
density at each point using two parameters: distance (epsilon) and minimum number of
points (minPoints). A single point which meets the minimum density criterion, namely that
there are minPoints located within distance epsilon, is designated a “core point”. All points
within epsilon distance of a core point are considered non-core members of a cluster, while
points that are not part of a cluster are considered noise (Fig. 1). When two core points are
less than epsilon distance from each other, they are considered members of the same cluster
(Fig. 2). Large, irregularly shaped clusters are formed when multiple core points, each
located within epsilon distance of another, are chained together, as shown in Fig. 3, which
illustrates core, non-core, and noise assignments for a point pattern.

Once the cluster assignments have been generated using DBSCAN, a geometric footprint
can be created using whatever GIS-based method the user chooses. The simplest method
employs a minimum convex hull to enclose each cluster. Other possible techniques include
alpha-hulls [11], characteristic shapes [9], and gift-wrapping algorithms [14], among others.
For instance, in Fig. 4 minimum convex hulls are used to create a footprint for the points
from the previous example. This figure illustrates the main advantages of the clustering
approach. First, points within clusters are distinguished from ‘noise’, so only clustered
points are included within the footprint. Second, rather than creating a single polygon about
a set of points, unique clusters of points are delineated individually; in this case, the footprint
includes three disjoint regions.

The DBSCAN algorithm is designed to cluster points that meet the prescribed minimum
density threshold, as defined by epsilon and minPts. However, a deficiency of DBSCAN is

Fig. 1 Point p is a core point,
defining a cluster, if
minPoints ≤6 (after Ester 1996)

288

Fig. 2 Points p and q are both
core points. Because they are less
than epsilon distance from each
other, they define a single cluster
(Ester 1996)

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

that all points contribute equally to the density calculation for a core point, regardless of the
distance. Consider a candidate core point, Cp. A point at a distance slightly less than epsilon
from Cp contributes the same to the density calculation as a point coincident with Cp, which
means that the algorithm does not quantify point density as precisely as might be possible.
Examine the two core points illustrated in Fig. 5. The core point on the left is in a denser
region than the one on the right, but the DBSCAN algorithm considers the points to be
equally dense. Another deficiency in DBSCAN, as well as many other clustering algorithms,
is that cluster membership is a discrete and binary affair. In other words, a point is either
assigned to a specific cluster or it is not; partial membership to one or more clusters is not
possible. However, in spatial point pattern analysis, it might be useful to assess the degree to
which a point belongs in various clusters. Such an approach would give the user more
flexibility in cluster definition and, therefore, footprint generation as well. These two
limitations of DBSCAN can be partially rectified by application of fuzzy set theory to the
clustering algorithm.

3 Footprint Generation Using FN-DBSCAN

Fuzzy set theory has been applied to a variety of problems in GIScience where a binary
approach to measurement is undesirable [5, 23, 31]. A complete description of fuzzy set

Fig. 3 Cluster assignments by
the DBSCAN algorithm: core
points (solid circle), non-core
points (open circle), and noise (×)

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

Fig. 4 Footprint generated for a
point pattern using a combined
DBSCAN and minimum convex
hull approach

289

theory is beyond the scope of this paper; the curious are referred to Zadeh’s seminal work on
the subject [33]. Essentially, in fuzzy set theory, an object can have varying grades of
membership in multiple sets. A membership function assigns set membership to candidate
objects with a real number in the range [0, 1]. Thus, a single object can belong to multiple
sets with different degrees of membership. In point pattern analysis, this could be analogous
to each point having varying grades of membership in each cluster. The DBSCAN algorithm
can be modified to utilize fuzzy set theory. Fuzzy Neighborhood Density-Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise (FN-DBSCAN) uses a fuzzy neighborhood function
to assess density rather than the rigid definition in DBSCAN [27]. FN-DBSCAN requires
three parameters: the fuzzy membership function, a distance parameter epsilon (ε) and a
minimum set cardinality (minCard). The fuzzy membership function must be based on
distance for spatial point pattern analysis, but many types of functions are possible. The
authors of FN-DBSCAN discuss several possible options, the simplest and most intuitive
being the linear function [16], because a zero is assigned to any points beyond the specified
epsilon distance. The fuzzy linear membership function is defined as:

(cid:1)

ð
M x; y

Þ ¼ 1 (cid:2) ðdðx; yÞ="Þ;

0;

if dðx; yÞ (cid:3) "
otherwise

;

ð1Þ

where M(x, y) is the membership function value for y with respect to x, and d(x, y) is the
distance between x and y. Instead of using the sum of points within distance epsilon to

Fig. 5 DBSCAN assesses points
p and q as having the same
density (after Nasibov and
Ulutagay 2009)

290

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

calculate minPts as in traditional DBSCAN, FN-DBSCAN uses the sum of the fuzzy
neighborhood function calculations for each point to calculate the fuzzy set cardinality:

FSCard ¼

M ðx; yiÞ:

Xn

i¼1

ð2Þ

If the computed fuzzy set cardinality (FSCard) is greater than minCard for point x, the
point is considered a “fuzzy core point”. In Eq. 2, the fuzzy set cardinality is calculated for
point x in a system with n points (yi≠x). Besides the use of fuzzy set cardinality, FN-
DBSCAN behaves identically to DBSCAN as described in the previous section, and it
likewise designates each point as a core point, non-core point, or noise.

One important result from fuzzy set theory that pertains to point pattern analysis is the
definition of the union of fuzzy sets. Let us consider each core point in the point pattern to
define its own fuzzy set, with its own membership function M(x,y). Once a subset of core
points is grouped into the same cluster by FN-DBSCAN, let us consider this cluster the
union of each core point’s fuzzy set. For a cluster with n core points (xi) and m non-core
points (yj), the union operation is defined as [33]:

M xið Þ ¼ 1

(cid:3) (cid:4)
M yj

(cid:5)
¼ Max M x1; yj

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)
; M x2; yj

(cid:4)

(cid:3)
. . . M xn; yj

(cid:4)

(cid:6)

:

ð3Þ

This means each core point is assigned maximal membership in the cluster and each non-
core point is assigned the fuzzy neighborhood membership value based on the nearest core
point. Figure 6 illustrates membership values for a sample point pattern computed using FN-
DBSCAN. The algorithm itself was implemented in the WEKA Data Mining Software in
Java [18] with O (n2) run time complexity.

This quantification of cluster membership using fuzzy set theory can allow for greater
flexibility when generating footprints for point patterns. Rather than bounding individual
clusters according to a binary rule, as in the previous example using DBSCAN, footprints
can be created based on any specified membership value. For instance, minimum convex
hulls are used to delineate clusters for the point pattern used in previous examples based on

Fig. 6 Fuzzy membership values
for an FN-DBSCAN cluster

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

291

minimum cluster membership values of 0.05 and 0.50 in Fig. 7. As with traditional
DBSCAN, individual clusters are demarcated, although with the fuzzy approach there is
increased flexibility about which non-core points are included in the footprint. In the case of
membership values>0.05, nearly all non-core points are included in the footprint, while a
greater number are excluded at the 0.5 level.

While bounding polygons, like convex hulls, provide simple methods for footprint gener-
ation, sometimes extended footprints, which include an area of influence beyond each point,
might be desired. For such cases, the following contouring method is proposed for generating
extended footprints from the fuzzy membership values assigned by FN-DBSCAN. First, fuzzy
membership values at each point in the dataset are interpolated to a continuous raster surface.
These values are determined by computing the fuzzy union of membership values for each
raster cell in the map. In GIS, this can be accomplished by calculating the Euclidian distance
from each cell to the nearest core point of a cluster. Then, the distance raster is reclassified using
the membership function used in the FN-DBSCAN algorithm (Eq. 1) such that each cell holds a
value in the range [0, 1]. The calculations must be performed over a sufficiently large area so
that the buffer around all core points is greater than epsilon. This method of interpolation
ensures that grid cells beyond epsilon distance of a core point do not receive membership values
greater than zero, since a linear function is used in the calculations. Second, since the surface
provides a continuous density map of the point pattern, a footprint can be generated at any
specified membership value by creating contour lines. For example, contours might be drawn
where the cell values equal 0.50 and 0.05 to create footprints at two different levels of
membership (Fig. 8). Note in the figure that the inclusion of non-core points in clusters depends
on their fuzzy membership values so not all are necessarily included in the footprint. A footprint
created from membership values >0.0 would include all core and non-core points, while one
delineated at 1.0 would only include core points.

4 Parameter Selection

Density-based clustering algorithms are sensitive to the specified input parameters. In
DBSCAN, the parameters epsilon and minPoints define the minimum local density required
for a set of points to be considered a cluster. Different settings for these parameters can result
in very different cluster and noise assignments. The same observation is true for FN-

Fig. 7 Cluster delineation based
on minimum fuzzy membership
values of 0.05 (dotted) and 0.50
(solid)

292

Fig. 8 Footprint delineation
using 0.05 (dotted) and 0.50
(solid) fuzzy membership value
contours

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

DBSCAN and its parameters [27]. As what constitutes a cluster is subjective [13], there
exists no method for finding true optimal parameter values for either algorithm for all
possible uses. However, heuristic methods are often used to select parameters such that
the clusters will have a ‘natural’ density [28].

For example, a useful heuristic for setting epsilon for a fixed value of minPoints for
DBSCAN has been developed by Ester [12]. For example, let us assume that minPoints is set
to a value of 6. This means that a point is a core point if there are 6 or more points within
epsilon distance of it. The heuristic consists of calculating the distance from each point to the
6th nearest point to it. Ester refers to this as “k-dist”, with k06 [12]. The choice of 6 for k-
dist is arbitrary, although the authors, in subsequent work [27], report that they observed
little difference in clusters when k is in the range of 2 to 10. Once the distances to the kth
point are calculated for each point in the data set, they are plotted at equal intervals
ascending in order as shown in Fig. 9. Note the sharp change in slope at point P at a

Fig. 9 A 6-dist graph for a system of points

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

293

distance of 3000m; this marks a significant change in density. Assigning epsilon this
distance, with MinPoints06, will result in clusters that have a ‘natural’ density. The authors
state that the point at which the slope changes abruptly is difficult to detect algorithmically
but simple to do visually. They recommend use of a graph similar to Fig. 9 to find the change
in slope and select epsilon [12].

Ester’s heuristic selection method could also be used in conjunction with FN-DBSCAN.
In the same manner, k is specified and distances from each point to the kth nearest point are
calculated and plotted in ascending order. Once the change in slope is detected, the FN-
DBSCAN algorithm can be applied using the appropriate distance for epsilon. In fact, this
parameter selection method was used in generating Fig. 8 from the previous section. Based
on these preliminary results, the k-dist graph provides at least a reasonable heuristic for
selecting epsilon for FN-DBSCAN. The next sections explore the use of FN-DBSCAN with
the k-dist graph for footprint generation in two practical applications—animal home range
and crime analysis.

5 Application to Home Range Estimation

One of the more popular applications of spatial point pattern analysis in GIS is for wildlife
home range estimation. In ecology, an animal’s home range is defined as the area physically
occupied by an animal during its normal activities, excluding any unusual movements or
atypical excursions [4]. Thus, the goal of home range analysis is to derive a geometric
footprint from tracking data that delineates where an individual animal was typically located
during a specified time period. In most studies, the ‘typical’ area is assumed to contain either
90 or 95% of the animal’s activity [32]. A variety of GIS-based footprint techniques have
been utilized to delineate home ranges, including minimum convex hulls [26], local nearest-
neighbor convex hulls [15], and characteristic shapes [7]. However, kernel density estima-
tion (KDE), a popular data smoothing technique [29], is by far the most widely applied
method of home range estimation, since it generates a continuous density surface from
which contours of relative intensity (e.g. 90 or 95%) can be derived and used as the footprint
[24]. Despite its widespread usage, several authors recently document KDE’s poor perfor-
mance as a home range estimator [8, 20, 25]. One disadvantage of KDE is that it is very
sensitive to outlying points [29], and thus home ranges estimated using this method often
inappropriately include areas visited very infrequently since all point locations are almost
always included in the estimated home range. For this reason, the fuzzy-neighborhood
footprint generation routine described in this research might offer a viable alternative for
home range estimation as it could explicitly exclude any outlying areas.

For illustration, both KDE and the new fuzzy-neighborhood approach were applied for
home range estimation using tracking data for a Florida panther (Puma concolor). The
dataset included 437 point locations that were obtained using radio-telemetry by the Florida
Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. For the KDE analysis, a fixed bandwidth was
selected using a least-squares cross-validation algorithm, a heuristic which chooses the best-
fitting smoothing parameter for a given dataset [29]. From the resulting continuous density
surface, the home range was delineated using the 95% contour, a value commonly applied in
ecology [32]. For the fuzzy-neighborhood technique, parameter epsilon was selected from a
6-dist distance graph, as described in Section 4 and illustrated in Fig. 9. The panther’s home
range was then delineated using contours of 0.05 and 0.5 membership values. These values
were arbitrarily selected as two possible options that include different numbers of non-core
points within the footprint, as there are no established criteria for this application.

294

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

The results for this application to animal tracking data highlight the advantages of the
fuzzy neighborhood approach over traditional methods of KDE for footprint generation with
regards to outlying point locations. While both methods produce continuous surfaces that
characterize the relative density of points, the two methods produce very different results in
terms of the delineated home range. The footprint generated by KDE includes all points
within the animal’s home range, even if the areas were seldom visited or were the result of an
uncharacteristic excursion (Fig. 10). Meanwhile, the fuzzy approach excludes outlying
points from the home range, since those locations were identified by the FN-DBSCAN
algorithm as noise (Fig. 11). Approximately 10% of the points were located outside the
delineated home range based on the 0.05 membership contour and 15% for the 0.5 contour.
While there is no ‘known’ home range for comparison, given the home range is defined as the
area ‘typically’ occupied by an animal—encompassing 90–95% of the animal’s activity—these
results suggest that the fuzzy-neighborhood approach produced more reasonable results using
minimum membership values of 0.5 compared to KDE for this example since it excluded
outlying points from the home range.

6 Application for Crime Analysis

Another popular application of spatial point pattern analysis in GIScience is crime hotspot
analysis. Here, the goal is often to identify clusters of criminal activity or to delineate a crime
footprint for a geographic region [3]. In this section, we illustrate how the fuzzy neighbor-
hood clustering approach can be used to generate meaningful crime footprints. In this
context, we analyzed patterns of crime for Hillsborough County, Florida. The crime dataset
used in the analysis included 1240 narcotics trafficking arrests in Hillsborough County
during the calendar years 2008 and 2009. First, we applied the FN-DBSCAN algorithm to
the narcotics dataset using the k-dist parameter selection approach described in Section 4.
Plotting the 6-dist graph for the dataset revealed a change in cluster density occurred at
approximately 2.3 km or 1.5 miles. We applied FN-DBSCAN using this value for epsilon.
Then, we generated footprints using both the minimum convex hull and contouring
approaches previously described. For both methods, footprints were generated at minimum
membership values (FSCard) of 0.01 and 0.5; the first value was specified such that all non-
core points would be included in the footprint, while the latter only would only include a
subset.

The FN-DBSCAN algorithm identified nine clusters of narcotics arrests in Hillsborough
County. The largest cluster contained 758 arrests, while the remaining clusters included

Fig. 10 Home range of a Florida
panther as delineated using kernel
density estimation

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

Fig. 11 Home range of a Florida
panther as delineated using a
fuzzy-neighborhood approach.

295

between 14 and 58 points each. Just below 200 arrests were classified as noise and not
included in any cluster. Figure 12 illustrates the narcotics footprints created using minimum
convex hulls (12a, 12b) and contouring (12c, 12d). While all four examples are very similar,
in that they highlight clusters of narcotics arrests, the footprints vary in size and shape.

Fig. 12 Footprints of narcotics arrests in Hillsborough county using the FN-DBSCAN algorithm and
delineated using: a minimum convex hulls where FSCARD ≥ 0.01, b minimum convex hulls with
FSCARD≥0.5, c contouring with FSCARD≥0.01, and d contouring with FSCARD≥0.5

296

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

Higher minimum membership values (12b, 12d) create relatively smaller regions since fewer
points are used to generate the footprint. The most notable difference between the two
approaches is that the contouring method produces extended footprints, while minimum
convex hulls delineate clusters such that the boundary coincides with known points. While
the choice between these two methods is left to the user’s discretion for a particular
application, one consideration is whether it is desirable for footprints of individual clusters
to overlap. Since contouring produces extended footprints, demarcations of individual
clusters are more likely to overlap compared to minimum convex hulls. Overlap is possible,
since individual non-core points can belong to multiple clusters. For example, a point might
have a membership value of 0.7 to one cluster and 0.2 to another. In cases such as this, it is
intuitive to map cluster overlap as it occurs, as in the case of Fig. 12a and c where minimum
membership values are ≥0.01. If the user decides cluster overlap in the mapped footprint is
undesirable, there are three potential solutions. One option is to dissolve the borders of any
overlapping polygons, as was done in the case of Fig. 8 in the previous section. A second
possibility is to use relatively high minimum membership values to generate the footprint,
since overlap will be less likely as the delineated regions are smaller. An alternative solution
would be to use characteristic shapes [14], which can have concave edges, to delineate non-
overlapping clusters.

7 Discussion and Conclusions

The density-based clustering algorithms, DBSCAN and FN-DBSCAN, can serve as the
cornerstone techniques for generating footprints from spatial point patterns in GIS-
cience. The main advantage of the fuzzy approach is flexibility. Clusters of significant
points can be determined algorithmically while footprints can still be delineated using
whatever GIS-based techniques are desired. While Galton and Duckham [14] first
suggested that using DBSCAN for footprint generation might be possible—with Duck-
ham et al. [9] and Tang et al. [30] applying it in a limited context—this paper provides
the theoretical background necessary to guide application of this algorithm, including
this paper
parameter selection, for footprint generation in GIScience. Specifically,
provides a simple example of the use of DBSCAN in the creation of minimum convex
hulls around clustered points. The main advantage of this approach is that it determines
which points should be considered statistical noise in addition to assigning points to
individual clusters. While footprints were created using minimum convex polygons,
other techniques commonly used in GIScience could also be easily applied for the same
purpose. For instance, a characteristic shape could be used to generate a footprint with
concave edges such that
individual clusters do not overlap [9], while a Voronoi
tessellation might be utilized to create an extended footprint [14].

In addition to providing an overview of footprint generation routines using the original
DBSCAN, this paper is the first to apply the fuzzy-neighborhood version of DBSCAN in the
context of spatial point pattern analysis and footprinting. As such, this research presents a
novel set of techniques for generating fuzzy footprints in GIScience. Let us review the
technique:

1. Use Ester’s parameter selection technique to determine epsilon for a fixed minimum

cardinality.

2. Apply FN-DBSCAN to the set of points using the linear membership function.
3. Plot the set of points, retaining cluster assignments and membership values.

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

297

a.
b.

If extended footprints are desired, move to step 4.
If extended footprints are not desired, delineate the footprint using minimum
convex hulls or other polygonal method.

4. Generate a Euclidean distance raster from the core points.
5. Create a density map by reclassifiying the distance raster using Eq. 1. This creates a

membership value density map scaled in the range [0, 1].

6. Generate footprint using contours of the density map.

By applying fuzzy set theory to assign membership values to each point, the approach
offers more flexibility in footprint generation than existing methods and the DBSCAN
approach. If a simple method is desired, steps 1–3 above can be completed, and a minimum
convex hull can be used to generate a footprint from points that meet a specified minimum
membership value. However, the real utility of this approach is when steps 4–5 are used to
generate a continuous density map for the spatial point pattern and footprints are delineated
based on interpolated membership values. In this paper, minimum membership values of
0.50, 0.05, and 0.01 were specified as example contours, although other values would be
equally appropriate depending on the desired outcome of the footprints. Additionally, the
density surface offers a method for visualizing the relative density of points within the
footprint itself.

that

In summary, this paper introduces the fuzzy-neighborhood footprinting approach and
explores its applicability in the context of animal home range estimation and generating
crime footprints. The limited application to animal tracking data suggests the fuzzy
clustering approach may offer an improvement over existing methods, such as density
likewise produce continuous density surfaces. Since kernel density
estimation,
estimation does not distinguish between points in clusters from outliers,
the results
often incorrectly include outlying areas and accordingly produce inaccurate home range
estimates. As the fuzzy method explicitly excludes outlying points that should not be
included in the animal’s home range,
it may offer improvements for home range
estimation. Furthermore, the density surface of fuzzy membership values might lend
itself to a more detailed analysis of animal space use patterns through the identification
of ‘core areas’ [32]. One possibility might be to delineate an animal’s core area using a
footprint generated from only core points, although this is left
to future research.
Similarly, FN-DBSCAN was used to generate meaningful crime footprints for a county
in Florida; this application further illustrates the flexibility of the approach in terms of
generating footprints of different shapes and sizes.

Furthermore, the method is also potentially applicable for analyzing numerous other
types of point patterns, such as mapping disease patterns or plant distributions. Since
footprints are used in GIScience for a variety of diverse applications, from regional
approximation [1] to cartographic generalization [14] to shape reconstruction [16], this
research contributes techniques that may be broadly applicable in the discipline. Future
work might evaluate the utility of the fuzzy footprint approach in these diverse spatial
contexts as well as evaluate other clustering approaches. For example, additional
research might explore the applicability of other clustering algorithms for footprint
generation such as DENCLUE [21] as well as adaptations of these algorithms to non-
Euclidean spaces like networks.

Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Dave Onorato, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation
Commission, for providing the panther locational data used in this paper and Mr. John Chaffin, Hillsborough
County Sheriff’s Office, for his assistance in acquiring the arrest data.

298

References

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

113:19–36

13:527–537

72:1813–1818

5756, pp. 227–244

1. Alani H, Jones C, Tudhope D (2001) Voroni-based region approximation for geographical information

retrieval with gazetteers. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 15:278–306

2. Agosto E, Ajmar A, Boccardo P, Tonolo F, Lingua A (2008) Crime scene reconstruction using a fully

geomatic approach. Sensors 8:6280–6302

3. Bailey T, Gatrell A (1995) Interactive spatial data analysis. Longman Scientific and Technical, Essex
4. Burt WH (1943) Territoriality and home range as applied to mammals. J Mammal 24:346–352
5. Cross V, Firat A (2000) Fuzzy objects for geographical

information systems. Fuzzy Set Syst

6. de Berg M, Schwarzkopf O, van Kreveld M, Overmars M (2000) Computational geometry: Algorithms

and applications, 2nd edn. Springer, Berlin

7. Downs J, Horner M (2009) A characteristic-hull based method for home range estimation. Trans GIS

8. Downs J, Horner W (2007) Effects of point pattern shape on home range estimates. J Wildl Manag

9. Duckham M, Kulik L, Worboys M, Galton A (2008) Efficient generation of simple polygons for

characterizing the shape of a set of points in the plane. Pattern Recogn 41:3224–3236

10. Dupenois M, Galton A (2009) Assigning footprints to dot sets: an analytical survey. COSIT 2009, LNCS

11. Edelsbrunner H, Kirkpatrick DG, Seidel R (1983) On the shape of a set of points in the plane. In:

Computer Vision and Image Understanding, vol. IT-29, pp. 551–559. IEEE, Los Alamitos

12. Ester M, Kriegel H, Sander J, Xu X (1996) A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial
databases with noise. Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, pp. 2226–231

13. Estivill-Castro V (2002) Why so many clustering algorithms: a position paper. ACM SIGKDD Explor

Newslett 4(1):65–75

4197:91–98

14. Galton A, Duckham M (2006) What is the region occupied by a set of points? GIScience 2006, LNCS,

15. Getz WM, Wilmers CC (2004) A local nearest-neighbor convex-hull construction of home ranges and

utilization distributions. Ecography 27:489–505

16. Gold C (1999) Crust and anti-crust: a one-step boundary and skeleton extraction algorithm. Proceedings

of the ACM Conference on Computational Geometry, pp. 189–196

17. Grothe C, Schaab J (2009) Automated footprint generation from geotags with kernel density estimation

and support vector machines. Spat Cogn Comput 9:195–211

18. Hall M, Frank E, Holmes G, Pfahringer B, Reutemann P, Witten IH (2009) The WEKA data mining

software: an update; SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1)

19. Harris RJ, Johnston RJ (2008) Primary schools, markets and choice: studying polarization and the core

catchment areas of schools. Appl Spat Anal Policy 1:59–84

20. Hemson G, Johnson P, South A, Kenward R, Ripley R, Macdonald D (2005) Are kernels the mustard?
Data from global positioning system (GPS) collars suggests problems for kernel home-range analyses
with least-squares cross-validation. J Anim Ecol 74:455–463

21. Hinneberg A, Keim D (1998) An efficient approach to clustering in large multimedia databases
with noise, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, New York City, NY,
pp. 58–65

22. Jain A, Murty M, Flynn P (1999) Data clustering: a review. ACM Comput Surv 31:264–323
23. Jiang H, Eastman J (2000) Application of fuzzy measures in multi-criteria evaluation in GIS. Int J Geogr

Inf Sci 14:173–184

24. Kernohan BJ, Gitzen RA, Millspaugh JJ (2001) Analysis of animal space use and movements. In:
Millspaugh JJ, Marzluff JM (eds) Radio tracking animals and populations. Academic, San Diego, pp
125–166

25. Mitchell MS, Powell RA (2008) Estimated home ranges can misrepresent habitat relationships on patchy

26. Mohr CO (1947) Table of equivalent populations of North American small mammals. Am Midl Nat

27. Nasibov E, Ulutagay G. Robustness of density-based clustering methods with various neighborhood

landscapes. Ecol Model 216:409–414

37:223–249

relations. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, in press

28. Sander J, Ester M, Kriegel H, Xu X (1998) Density-based clustering in spatial databases: the algorithm

GDBSCAN and its applications. Data Min Knowl Disc 2(2):169–194

29. Silverman BW (1986) Density estimation for statistics and data analysis. Chapman Hall, London

Geoinformatica (2013) 17:285–299

299

30. Tang M, Zhou Y, Cui P, Wang W, Li J, Zhang H, Hou Y, Yan B (2009) Discovery of migration habitats
and routes of wild bird species by clustering and association analysis. Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Advanced Data Mining and Applications, pp. 288–301

31. Wang F, Hall G (1996) Fuzzy representation of geographical boundaries in GIS. Int J Geogr Inf Sci

10:573–590

32. White GC, Garrott RA (1990) Analysis of wildlife radio-tracking data. Academic, San Diego
33. Zadeh L (1965) Fuzzy sets. Inf Control 8:338–353

Jonathon Parker is a software developer who resides in Tampa, FL. He received a BS in Chemistry (Honors
Course) from the University of Wisconsin (1988) and an MS in Computer Science from Bowie State
University (1997). He is currently a Doctoral Candidate in Computer Science and Engineering at the
University of South Florida. His interests include data mining, data clustering and designing applications.

Joni Downs is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography, Environment, and Planning at the
University of South Florida. She holds a PhD in Geography from the Florida State University and a MS in
Natural Resources from the Ohio State University. Joni’s research interests include spatial point pattern
analysis, time geography, and ecological modelling.

