The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 000 No. 000

pp. 1–12 Month 2014

O B S E R V A T I O N S

Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy’s Nineteenth Century Map of
Africa at a Scale of 1 : 2 000 000

Olivier Loiseaux

Map Department, Bibliothe`que Nationale de France, Paris, France
Email: olivier.loiseaux@bnf.fr

Cartographic projects of national importance are often only reported on in local journals which are published in the language
of the author or mapping organisation. Owing to this, important maps and map series often stay unknown outside their
country of origin. A case in point is the important Carte d’Afrique on a scale of 1 : 2 000 000 which, during the last decades
of the nineteenth century, was compiled by the French army officer Captain Richard de Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy. The
map made an enormous contribution to the history of cartography of Africa with regard to not only the discovery and
exploration of the continent, but also the expansion of colonial control and the political rivalry between European powers. It
was an impressive project to be executed by one man and at the time guaranteed a prominent position for the author in
geographic and cartographic circles worldwide. Although afterwards superceded by many more accurate maps, Lannoy de
Bissy’s map to date remains a lasting witness to the mapping of the ‘dark continent’ and of the fragile, hesitating progress
made during the search for geographical knowledge before the advent of aerial photography and satellite imagery.

Keywords: Lannoy de Bissy, French cartography, mapping of Africa, travellers, exploration, Service ge´ographique de
l’arme´e

INTRODUCTION

One of the most ambitious mapping projects of the end of
the nineteenth century was the ﬁrst general map of Africa
(Carte d’ Afrique) at a scale of 1 : 2 000 000, the compila-
tion and publication of which took place during the entire
last quarter of the century. This map, which was one of the
ﬁrst cartographic projects outside metropolitan France
undertaken by the Service Ge´ographique de l’Arme´e, was
due to the personal
initiative of a French Army ofﬁcer,
Captain Richard de Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy.

Lannoy de Bissy was an ofﬁcer in the Corps of Engineers
(Ge´nie) and a member of the Cartographic Section of the
French General Staff (E´ tat-Major). He was also a member
of the Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie where he managed to solicit the
necessary support for his project. In France, the Socie´te´ was
at this time the focal point for national and international
networks of correspondents: travellers, explorers, cartogra-
phers, librarians of geographical societies, and editors of
geographical
journals. Lannoy de Bissy conscientiously
collected geographical information from these sources over
a period of nearly ﬁfteen years.

This major contribution to the history of cartography of
Africa is to be seen not only in the context of the discovery
and exploration of the continent, but also the expansion of
colonial control and the political rivalry between European
the
powers. Lauded, cited, and included in many of

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000097

geographical and cartographical publications of the period,
Lannoy de Bissy’s Carte d’Afrique on a scale of 1 : 2 000 000
guaranteed a prominent position for the author in geo-
graphic and cartographic circles worldwide1.

ORIGIN OF THE PROJECT

Victor-Ame´de´e-Richard de Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy
(see Figure 1) was born at Valence on 4 January 18442. After
his studies at Grenoble, he moved to the Lyce´e Saint-Louis in
Paris and later entered the E´ cole Polytechnique in 1864. When
he left, he joined the Corps of Engineers and spent two years
at the E´ cole d’Artillerie et du Ge´nie in Metz. In 1868 he was
appointed Lieutenant Engineer at Montpellier. During his
ﬁrst posting in Algeria in 1869, he undertook his ﬁrst ﬁeld
survey in the footsteps of his father who used to be chief civil
engineer of the Highways Department for the Province of
Constantine. The Franco-Prussian War necessitated Lannoy
de Bissy’s return to France after which, in June 1871, he was
posted back to Constantine where he served for a further
three years.

At the end of 1872 Lannoy de Bissy was appointed
commander of
the engineering branch of General de
Gallifet’s column which was ordered to occupy the Oasis of
El Golea in southern Algeria. The column left Ouargla on 8
January 1873 and reached El Golea on 24 January. Once

2

The Cartographic Journal

global map for studying the continent when I read, a few
years ago, the accounts of Livingstone’s journeys […] the
different publications had detailed maps which clearly
depicted the several stages of the journey taken by the
great explorer. However, the general map which summar-
ized the results of his journeys over so many years was so
reduced in scale that it gave no idea of the importance of
the lands he had visited’3. Being aware of the need for such
information, Lannoy de Bissy conceived the idea of
combining the many maps illustrating the accounts of
explorers’ journeys as published in geographical journals,
starting with southern Africa.

CREATION OF THE MAP

In 1876 Lannoy de Bissy was appointed aide de camp to
General Durand de Villers and sent to Paris. This new
posting gave him more free time which he put to good use
collecting as much documentation as possible and establish-
ing valuable connections in the geographical circles of the
capital. Encouraged by Charles Maunoir, he joined the
Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie in 1877 where his project was strongly
supported. Among his champions were Henri Duveyrier, a
respected specialist on the geography of Africa and a Vice
President of the Society; the geographer Alfred Grandidier
who was at that time undertaking several cartographic
projects in Madagascar, and Louis Vivien de Saint-Martin
who was working on the Dictionnaire de Ge´ographie
Universelle. Last but not least, he managed to establish
close contact with Commandant Perrier4,
the Deputy
Director of the Geographical Section of the French War
Ofﬁce (De´poˆt de la Guerre).

On 3 December 1880 Lannoy de Bissy presented a
progress report on his project5 to the Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie
in the form of a manuscript map of 25 sheets covering Africa
south of the Sahara. The regions he had mapped were those
explored by Brazza in the west and Speke in the east, as far
south as the Cape Colony. The eventual aim of his project was
to cover the entire African continent and to make it possible
to show in exact detail, at a sufﬁciently readable scale, the
routes taken by explorers. His report was enthusiastically
received although the Secretary-General, Charles Maunoir,
while stressing the value of Lannoy de Bissy’s accurate maps,
seemed somewhat disconcerted by ‘how clearly the maps
reveal many unknown blank spaces. Viewing the maps, one
may clearly see where detail was lacking and realise the
amount of work still to be done’6. At the conclusion of the
conference, the President, Admiral La Roncie`re-le-Noury,
strongly urged Lannoy de Bissy to carry on with his project
and it was decided that the Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie would bring
his map to the attention of the Ministers of Public Education
and of War. Three months later on 15 March 1881, the then
Minister of War, General Farre, appointed Lannoy de Bissy to
the cartographic section of the De´poˆt de la Guerre. In the
same year, the General Staff decided to undertake the
publication of the map. From then on, the directors of
the Service Ge´ographique de l’Arme´e, Colonel Bugnot and
Colonel Perrier, also supported the project.

As a result of the interest generated by his map, Lannoy
de Bissy now began to set up a network of correspondents.

Figure 1. Portrait of Victor Ame´de´e Richard de Re´gnauld de
Lannoy de Bissy by H. Perla (BnF, De´partement des Cartes et
Plans, Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, SG Portrait 958)

established there, Lannoy de Bissy was responsible for the
reconstruction of the bordj (residence) which had been
destroyed by rebels. He undertook the ﬁrst surveys of the
oases and the citadel of El Golea and had two of his maps
(Figure 2) incorporated as insets in Itine´raires dans le pays des
Cha’anba by Henri Duveyrier and Captain Parisot who were
also members of the 1873 expedition. Upon his return in
April 1873, he was appointed Commandant Engineer at
Tebessa. In March 1874, he was recalled to France to head
operations in the Chefferie (military district) of Grenoble
where he conducted topographic work for establishing the
defences facing the frontier with Italy.

Apart

surveys,
from conducting these topographical
Lannoy de Bissy worked on a project on which he had set
his heart – a general map of Africa sufﬁciently large to
include all the routes taken by explorers. Frequent stays in
Algeria in his childhood, and the 3 years he had spent in
Algeria accounted for his interest in the African continent.
The decisive event in his career, however, was the death of
the Scottish explorer David Livingstone on 1 May 1873.
Commenting on Livingstone’s cartographical heritage, he
later wrote: ‘I was above all struck by the absence of a good

de Bissy’s Map of Africa

3

Figure 2. Two maps by Lannoy de Bissy as insets in the map ‘Itine´raires dans le pays des Cha’anba’ by Henri Duveyrier and Captain Parisot,
Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 1876, 6e serie, XI

He encouraged would-be travellers to proceed with the
projects they envisaged, furnished them with the ﬁnal proofs
of his map of the regions which they were going to visit, and
asked them to, on their return, provide him with all the
information they had been able to collect. On 9 March 1883
Dr Bayol, whose journeys Lannoy de Bissy followed in
Guinea and the Sudan7, wrote to him from Bafoulabe´ (Mali):
‘I would like to thank you for the map you sent me. It will be
very useful as I shall be going to Be´le´dougou….whilst in
Tichit, Oualata and the Country of El Hodh, I shall collect
any information you want. You can count on me’8. In the
same vein, Lannoy de Bissy kept track of Vicomte Charles de
Foucauld’s expeditions to the Sahara, established contact
with Colonel Vincent, explorer of the Mauritanian Adrar,
and with Victor Giraud who travelled to the Great Lakes of
Africa. His correspondents were, however, not only
restricted to French travellers, as he was also in contact with

the Portuguese explorer Roberto Ivens who regularly sent
him the astronomically observed coordinates of geographical
positions in Angola and Mozambique9. In 1879, he also met
Serpa Pinto10 with whom he was soon corresponding on the
orthography of Portuguese place names11. For the transli-
teration of Arabic names, he was indebted to the Service de
Conservation des Antiquite´s de l’E´ gypte through the proof-
reading by a specialist, Gaston Maspe´ro, who sent him
comments on the sheets of Cairo and Aswan12. It was also
through this erudite intermediary that Lannoy de Bissy came
into contact with the German explorer Schweinfurth with
whom he exchanged information and documents. Other
cartographers he corresponded with were, among others,
Richard Kiepert in Berlin, Ernst George Ravenstein in
London and Philipp Paulitschke in Vienna.

In 1884 Colonel Perrier presented the ﬁrst 23 sheets of the
Map of Africa (Carte d’Afrique) to the French Acade´mie des

4

The Cartographic Journal

Sciences and paid tribute to Lannoy de Bissy: ‘The Map of
Africa is, I repeat, the personal achievement of Captain de
Lannoy. It attests to the author’s extensive geographical
knowledge, great care in the assessment of texts and maps
provided by travellers, and extraordinary artistic skills. It is a
work of painstaking scholarship which confers great honour
on this Ofﬁcer and also on the De´poˆt de la Guerre which has
the good fortune of having him as a collaborator’13.

From then onwards, the various sheets of the Carte
d’Afrique were strongly in demand from the moment they
became available. The sheets of Senegal and Niger were
attached to documents made available to the Chamber of
Deputies in 1884. Several sheets covering the River Niger
Basin (Se´gou Sikoro, Gogo, Sokoto and Benin) and
the Congo Basin (Libreville, Bangala, San Salvador,
Loulouabourg, Kabebe) were requested for use by the
Berlin Conference. As it were, some of the maps were either
published in 1884 or reprinted just before the Conference
in November of that year.

Lannoy de Bissy was now invited to report on the
progress of his work. In 1884 and 1887 he spoke at the
conferences of
the French Societies of Geography at
Toulouse and Le Havre respectively, and in 1885 he
addressed the meeting of the Association Franc¸aise pour
l’Avancement des Sciences in Grenoble. At the meeting of
the British Association which took place in Birmingham
from 1 to 7 September 1886, he read a paper on the French
exploration in the Gabon-Congo region14. Finally, after
fourteen years of intensive work, his Carte d’Afrique was
completed in 1888. It was exhibited in its entirety at the
Exposition Universelle of 1889 in the section organized by
the Ministry of War at the Esplanade des Invalides.

Lannoy de Bissy received his ﬁrst accolade from the
Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie commerciale who awarded him its
Caillie´ medal. Apart from its contents, the map also owed its
success to its cost and the size of its sheets. At the modest
price of 0.30 Fr or 0.50 Fr (depending on which version,
and 0.30 Fr for the notices), and in a practical format
(40650 cm), it was an assortment easily promulgated.

The following year, at its meeting on 25 April 1890, the
Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie awarded Lannoy de Bissy its gold
medal for geographical work, an award which elevated his
name to the same level as that of other, equally honoured
famous travellers associated with African exploration such as
Louis-Gustave Binger for his journey to the Upper Niger,
Jules Borelli for his journey to Choa, and Paul Crampel for
his exploration in the northern Ogowe15.

IMPORTANCE OF THE MAP

Lannoy de Bissy’s Carte d’Afrique comprises 63 sheets
numbered 1–62, plus the sheet Mahe´
(Archipelago of
Seychelles) numbered 42 bis. Mounted together, the entire
map measures 4.20 m in height by 4 m wide (Figure 3). The
scale of 1 : 2 000 000 allows for simple conversions,
i.e.
1 cm520 km. The map is constructed on an orthographic
meridional projection with the tenth meridian east of the
meridian of Paris (12u209E of Greenwich) as the central axis, a
feature which evens out the distortions in longitude from
Senegal to Somalia.

The Carte d’Afrique was a gigantic project which required
compilation on a massive scale. Although Lannoy de Bissy
was able to call on the resources of the library of the Socie´te´ de
Ge´ographie, he still needed many published sources as well as
manuscript material which were not in the library. His
correspondents regularly sent him articles, maps and records
of geographical positions, but he enhanced his source
material by copying, in his own hand, articles or other
publications he had borrowed from his correspondents or
had consulted during his travels. Concerning the carto-
graphic material, Lannoy de Bissy estimated that he had used
between ﬁfteen and eighteen hundred maps and sketches16.
Four principal sources were consulted, namely the maps
published in the Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie;
Petermanns Geographische Mitteilungen; the Journal and
Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society; and also the
framework of locations determined by means of precise
methods by Henri Duveyrier as listed in his Liste des positions
ge´ographiques en Afrique. While the mass of documentation
available for certain sheets demanded an extremely heavy
workload of compilation and comparison, as was the case
with the Gondar sheet in Ethiopia which required more than
the
5 months of
compilation of other sheets such as those of the Congo
Basin or the Ubangi suffered from a lack of information.

study, Lannoy de Bissy found that

Lannoy de Bissy marked the routes of travellers who
crossed the area concerned on each sheet, together with the
dates of their expeditions. The Timbuctu sheet (Figure 4) for
example, mentions ﬁve names, namely those of Paul Imbert
(1630), Major Laing (an Englishman, 1826); Rene´ Caillie´
(1828); and the German explorers Heinrich Barth (1853–
1854) and Oscar Lenz (1880). Altogether more than 600
names appear on the 63 sheets, with the names of travellers,
explorers, military men and missionaries recorded in a
separate list kept at the Institut Ge´ographique National17.

Lannoy de Bissy enhanced his cartographic work by
systematically extracting from many accounts of journeys
and personal notebooks supplementary information on
ethnic groups, the territorial organisation of African states
and kingdoms and the fauna and ﬂora. All this information
had to be screened and occasionally depicted on his maps.
The Sudanese empire of Sokoto, which was traversed by
German and British travellers, was mapped accurately and
for certain parts the precise coordinates and altitude,
together with the date when the information was obtained
and by whom, were added. In some cases, however, the
map data were derived only from a single source, the
notebooks of one traveller (Figure 5).

On the sheet Bir El Abbas in the Erg Iguidi between
Algeria, Mauritania and Mali, the routes of Rene´ Caillie´ and
Oscar Lenz intersect, each one recording different kinds of
detail. Caillie´ noted the water sources and mentioned
phenomena such as ‘shallow wells’, ‘very good water in a
deep ravine shaded by date palms’ and ‘sweet water not
plentiful’. Half a century later Oscar Lenz, a trained
geologist, was more interested in the potential of the soil
and in the geology of the area, with the result that he often
referred to features, such as ‘fossil corals in schistose rocks’,
‘plains without vegetation’, ‘barren terrain’ and ‘rocky soil’.
For the River Congo, Lannoy de Bissy used Stanley’s
account and inserted a whole sentence on the map to

de Bissy’s Map of Africa

5

Figure 3.

Index map of the Carte d’Afrique at the scale of 1 : 2 000 000

Figure 4. Carte d’Afrique, 1 : 2 000 000, detail of sheet 17, Timbouctou, 1883

6

The Cartographic Journal

rather than to undertake the long and sensitive task of
harmonising orthographies’18. This prudent approach did
not do much to alleviate the complex reality Lannoy de
Bissy had to deal with. The Bar-el-Ghazal region of the
Upper Nile Basin, traversed by travellers for a very long
time, winds its complex hydrography among the languages
of several ethnic groups: the Shilluk, the Nuer, and the
Dinka who all give different names to the river. The result
was that Lannoy de Bissy faced considerable discrepancies in
the area. On the sheet El Obeid
the toponymy of
(Figure 7), the Bar el-Zeraf, a branch of the White Nile,
is also referred to by its three other vernacular names: ‘Koue´
of the Nuer, Piou of the Dinka, Aouei by the Touitch’ whereas
the River Lol, another branch of the same river, is referred
to by eight different names, each of which was reported by a
different explorer. It also occurred that different authors
reported differently with regard to the same point on the
map. Although they generally agreed on the latitude of a
certain place, Lannoy de Bissy had to face large variations in
the longitude reported. It was not uncommon for the
longitude of a geographical position on the map to change
from one edition to another as it got more precise, while its
latitude remained stable most of the time19.

individual notices for four of

From the outset Lannoy de Bissy intended each sheet, as
published,
to be accompanied by a published notice
(Figure 8). He planned the publication programme of the
map to be in ten instalments, comprising six or seven
notices each. After the ﬁrst ﬁve instalments had been
published,
those sheets
followed. Unfortunately, the work remained incomplete
as only 35 of the 63 maps were published with their
corresponding notices. Twenty-eight notices were never
published and remained in either manuscript or preliminary
draft form.20 The notices provided information on the
geography and populations of the region that was mapped
and also indicated the sources which were consulted:

Figure 5. Carte d’Afrique, 1 : 2 000 000, detail of sheet 10, Bir el
Abbas, 1889

describe a stretch of the river’s course: ‘This great river
often has different names for opposite banks which may be
the names of nearby villages, but the word ‘Ibari’ or ‘river’
is sufﬁciently explicit between 18uE and 20uE0 (Figure 6).
Toponymy remains a great problem facing cartographers.
When presenting his map to the Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie in
1880, Lannoy de Bissy offered the following precautionary
qualiﬁcation: ‘[…] I preferred to retain the transcriptions
which appeared in the documents I used (for compilation)

Figure 6. Carte d’Afrique, 1 : 2 000 000, detail of sheet 35, Inguimma, 1884

de Bissy’s Map of Africa

7

Figure 7. Carte d’Afrique, 1 : 2 000 000, details of sheet 28, El Obeı¨d, 1888

written records, maps and books. The notices explain,
where necessary, the main problems encountered by the
cartographer and the various choices made during the
compilation process.

The ﬁrst edition of the map carries only planimetric
information in black, whereas the second edition combines
the black planimetry with relief in bluish grey or bistre.
These two ﬁrst editions were published between 1881 and
1890 under the direct control of Lannoy de Bissy whose
name appears on the maps. The correcting and editing of
these editions was undertaken from 1890 to 1903 under
the supervision of Commandant Edouard Rouby, resulting
in the third edition in colour, with black planimetry; blue

hydrography and relief in bistre. Before the publication of
this deﬁnitive edition, the planimetry and relief of earlier
editions were often revised, which resulted in several
distinct printings for a single sheet. The ability to easily
reprint the same sheets was the result of a new printing
method for cartographic material adopted by the De´poˆt de
la Guerre which involved the use of zinc plates. Previously,
copper plates or lithographic stones had been used. The
new technique had several advantages, as zinc plates were
easier to handle compared with litho stones, they were
much cheaper and also allowed quick printings to be made
at a lower cost. This innovation had an immediate impact
on the supply of printed maps and allowed the De´poˆt de la

8

The Cartographic Journal

Lannoy de Bissy, they covered only part of the continent. One
such example was the map of Equatorial East Africa in 25
sheets, compiled by Ernst George Ravenstein, which was
published from 1881 to 1883 by the Royal Geographical
Society on a scale of 1 : 1 000 000. Lannoy de Bissy’s map
therefore had no equivalent outside France until the end of the
First World War, when the Service Ge´ographique de l’Arme´e
collaborated with the Geographical Section, General Staff of
the British War Ofﬁce to produce a new general map of Africa
in 36 sheets at a scale of 1 : 2 000 00021.

It is evident that Lannoy de Bissy’s project found support
in the ‘corridors of power’ because it came into being at just
the right time. Ten years after the disaster of Sedan, France
threw herself into a grand colonial adventure. Since a short
while she had been involved in Gabon with the treaty
signed by Savorgnan de Brazza in 1880, and in 1881, she
established a protectorate over Tunisia. Two years later, she
launched the ﬁrst military operations in Madagascar which
ended with a treaty signed in 1885. In the Sudan, Gallie´ni
and then Borgnis-Desbordes,
led
campaigns in the upper basin of the River Niger. Within
one decade, France was present in all theatres of operations
in Africa, from the Coast of Guinea in the west to the
Somali coast in the east, from the Niger to Madagascar, and
from Tunisia to the Congo. The publication of Lannoy de
Bissy’s map thus coincided with an era of increased French
colonial expansion in Africa during the 1880s.

followed by Binger,

Although France’s new interest in Africa clashed with the
concurrent ambitions of the British, Germans, Belgians and,
to a lesser extent, the Portuguese in the race for colonial
possessions,
it seems as if the cartography which was
produced at the time ignored national frontiers and brought
together a community of cartographers. At the time when
France and Belgium confronted each other in the Congo,
Lannoy de Bissy was in touch with Lieutenant Van de Velde
of the International Association of the Congo with whom he
regularly corresponded. In a letter dated 9 July 1884, the
Lieutenant confessed that he did not know ‘whether the
De´poˆt de la Guerre in France was distributing maps for
the public good’ and asked Lannoy de Bissy to send him
speciﬁc copies of his maps on pelure (onion skin) paper, in
preparation of a voyage to the Congo22. In exchange, he
promised to send him the most recent and useful details
which he was going to collect in the ﬁeld. The cartographer
Ernst George Ravenstein who worked for
the Royal
Geographical Society, was another person with whom
Lannoy de Bissy had excellent connections. From 1881,
Lannoy de Bissy had exchanged cartographic information
with him and engaged in mutual encouragement of their
labours. ‘I hope your map is making fair progress’, wrote
Ravenstein on a postcard of 21 May 1881. Lannoy de Bissy
sent him new sheets of his map as soon as they were issued,
and by doing so made sure that his maps were more rapidly
distributed than when ordered from the relevant carto-
graphic establishments. In a letter dated 25 October 1886,
Ravenstein complained of the tardiness with which the War
Ofﬁce had distributed some maps under the false pretext that
they were not completely accurate, adding that he had had
the same problem with the Ministry of Public Education in
France23. Thus, when some ofﬁcials jibbed and delayed the
distribution of certain of the most up-to-date maps, it is

Figure 8. Title sheet of
d’Afrique at a scale of 1 : 2 000 000

the published notices on the Carte

Guerre to undertake the printing at its location on the Rue
de Grenelle. Hitherto printing had been entrusted to
outside ﬁrms. The ﬁrst printing of these sheets carries the
note Imprimerie zincographique du De´poˆt de la Guerre. This
new technique allowed for the widespread circulation of the
map and at the same time enabled Lannoy de Bissy to make
frequent revisions or pinpoint corrections to the various
sheets, such as the correction of place names as submitted
by the users of the map. In summary, it permitted him to
keep the maps up to date as much as possible which helped
to ensure their very large distribution.

CONTEXT AND IMPACT OF THE MAP

It is debatable whether any other European cartographer who
had undertaken the task of compiling a similar map in the last
quarter of the nineteenth century would have achieved the
level of scope and accuracy of Lannoy de Bissy’s effort. When
he presented his completed work in 1889, the majority of
general maps of Africa which were available were on scales of
between 1 : 8 000 000 and 1 : 12 000 000. Only two maps
depicted the African continent more accurately, namely, Keith
Johnston’s map of 1866 (revised in 1878 and 1883) in four
sheets on a scale of 1 : 5 500 000, and Hermann Habenicht’s
10-sheet map of 1885 which was published by Justus Perthes
in Gotha on a scale of 1 : 4 000 000. Although there were
maps available which were more accurate than those of

de Bissy’s Map of Africa

9

Figure 9. Carte d’Afrique, 1 : 2 000 000, detail of sheet 35, Bangala, 1889, with ms. corrections (BnF, De´partement des Cartes et Plans,
Ge BB 1122)

interesting to note that geographical information circulated
speedily and efﬁciently among the cartographers of different
countries.

In October 1889 Lannoy de Bissy left his post at the
General Staff. He was appointed head of the Army Engineers
(Ge´nie) at Lyon, and in 1891 at E´ pinal, but remained in
touch with his correspondents and they continued to write to
him to clarify various aspects of the geography of Africa. He
was either a member or corresponding member of the
Geographical Societies of Vienna, Rome, Madrid and Cairo.
In the case of the latter, he had a valuable contact, the Italian
Federico Bonola, the Secretary General of the Khedival
Society of Geography who met many passing African
travellers24. At the Paris Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, he remained
in touch with Charles Maunoir, and also, through him, with
the cartographer of the Socie´te´, Jules Hansen. Hansen, like
Lannoy de Bissy, worked from sketch maps, manuscript
notebooks and notes brought back from the ﬁeld by
explorers in order to compile maps which were then
published in the Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie. A
permanent two-way trafﬁc between the ﬁeld and the ofﬁce
marked the circulation of geographical
information: a
printed map was taken into the ﬁeld and compared with
geographical reality, then annotated, amended, completed
and referred back to the cartographer to compile a new up-
to a second
to-date map which was

sometimes

sent

cartographer to incorporate into a more general map. The
detail of the printed sheet of Bangala dated 1889 (Figure 9)
annotated by Savorgnan de Brazza’s agent in the Congo,
Jules Berton, is a case in point. Berton travelled in these
regions in 1890 and noted: ‘It must be mentioned that the
course of the Ubangi on this map is not traced far enough to
the north’. These observations, transmitted to Jules Hansen
to update the map of the area, were later sent to the Service
Ge´ographique de l’Arme´e and incorporated in the next
edition of the Bangala sheet (Figure 10), which was in turn
subjected to new corrections.

Even if the third coloured edition of the map was no
longer the direct responsibility of Lannoy de Bissy, his name
remained linked to the map and it was to him that the
directors of the great geographical journals turned to obtain
new sheets as they were published. This was the case with
the director of Petermann’s in Gotha, Hugo Wichmann,
and also with the director of Le Mouvement Ge´ographique in
Brussels, Alphonse Jules Wauters who informed his readers
about every dispatch of new sheets and never failed
reminding them of ‘the science and professional integrity
of the most highly reputed of French cartographers’25.

Renowned as a specialist on the geography of Africa,
Lannoy de Bissy was often invited to give lectures. In 1891
he presented a paper to the Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie de Lyon on
French possessions from the Mediterranean to the Sudan26.

10

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 10. Carte d’Afrique, 1 : 2 000 000, detail of sheet 35, Bangala, 1892, with ms. corrections (BnF, De´partement des Cartes et Plans,
Ge BB 1122)

In the same year, he was also invited, as an expert, to attend
the International Congress of Geographical Sciences in
Berne.

As Lannoy de Bissy’s cartographic work gained recogni-
tion, links with other geographical enterprises were estab-
lished. Often cited as a reference map for Africa, his Carte
d’Afrique became the cartographic basis for many other
cartographic publications, such as atlases. Franz Schrader,
Director of Cartography at the publisher Hachette, made
contact with Lannoy de Bissy in 1888 and asked him for his
support and advice27. Lannoy de Bissy’s map was the principal
cartographic source used by Schrader for the compilation of
the three plates on Africa in the Atlas Universel28, even if he
acknowledged that ‘several recently published maps were
already becoming rather obsolete due to the continuous
ﬂood of revised cartographic documents’29.

Lannoy de Bissy’s map was also an extremely rich source
for toponyms which found their way into various dictionaries
of place names. The Dictionnaire de Ge´ographie Universelle,
published by Vivien de Saint-Martin, obviously followed the
progress made with the compilation of Lannoy de Bissy’s
map and developed in its entries the toponyms and principal
ethnic names derived from the map. David Kaltbrunner,
author of the Manuel du Voyageur and responsible for the

African part of
information with Lannoy de Bissy.

the Dictionnaire,

regularly exchanged

The publication of Lannoy de Bissy’s Carte d’Afrique
played a signiﬁcant role in France’s drive for colonial
expansion. The map revealed a great number of blank
spaces still remaining which were, at the time, a powerful
invitation to explorers. One can imagine that the map was
scrutinized by students and professors of the E´ cole Coloniale
which was founded in 1889, and that it featured in many
the Comite´ de l’Afrique
meetings and conferences of
Franc¸aise which was set up in 1890. Except for Europe,
no other continent had ever been the subject of such a
synthesis. The publication of
thorough cartographic
Lannoy de Bissy’s map propelled French colonial mapping
into the ﬁrst league in Europe, conﬁrmed France’s African
aspirations and provided the country with the necessary tool
to match its ambitions.

After he had been promoted to Lieutenant Colonel in
1894, Lannoy de Bissy was posted to Grenoble and later to
E´ pinal. In 1897, he was promoted to Colonel whereafter he
rejoined the Fifth Regiment of Engineers at Versailles.
When he was considered for promotion to General, health
problems forced him to retire in 1903. He went to live in
his Chaˆteau de Bissy in Savoy where he died in 190630.

de Bissy’s Map of Africa

CONCLUSION

Although Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy’s Carte d’Afrique on
a scale of 1 : 2 000 000 has been long since replaced by more
precise and more accurate maps, it is still a major source of
information and a primary tool for studying the history of
African exploration. His Carte D’Afrique reminds us of the
narrow, almost intimate link between the cartographer and
the explorer which is the dream of every cartographer.
‘The
Lannoy de Bissy himself phrased this as follows:
cartographer undertakes a journey in the footsteps of the
traveller whose report he has before him, stopping where the
traveller did, sharing in the latter’s pleasures and disappoint-
ments. This bond is enhanced when the cartographer
undertakes the task of transforming into an itinerary the
traveller’s notes which were written from day to day. The
cartographer cannot but identify himself with the traveller
when following him around the tightest corners of his route.
When the route has been drawn, its course and the varying
terrain features experienced by the traveller become so vivid in
one’s mind that one actually visualizes them […]. Thanks to
the appeal of
resulting from the
examination of ever changing regions, the creation of a map
is by no means a monotonous or boring pursuit. Additionally,
as the cartographer moves forward, the overall view becomes
more clear and he can, to a certain extent, guess what should
appear in the spaces which are still blank on the map’31.

renewed challenges,

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

the curator

Olivier Loiseaux is Chief
Curator at the Map Depart-
ment of the Bibliothe`que
Nationale de France
in
Paris. He joined the BnF in
in
1990 as
charge of legal deposit car-
tographic materials. Cur-
rently, he is in charge of
the
the
Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie. He
is a map librarian and a
photo librarian who specia-
lizes in the nineteenth cen-
tury cartography of Africa
and in historical photo-
graphs. In 2011, Olivier curated the exhibition on Carnets
de route d’explorateurs en Afrique (African Explorers’
itineraries) at the BnF which coincided with the Twenty-
ﬁfth International Cartographic Conference (ICC 2011) of
the ICA which was held in Paris from 3 to 8 June 2011. He is
also a co-author of L’Afrique au cœur, carnets d’explorateurs
franc¸ais au XIXe sie`cle (Seuil/BnF, 2005).

collections

of

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper was originally published in Le Monde des Cartes:
Revue du Comite´ Franc¸ais de Cartographie, no. 180 of June
2004, under the title La Carte d’Afrique a` 1 : 2 000 000 de
Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy. The author would like to

11

thank Elri Liebenberg, Chair of the ICA Commission on
the History of Cartography, for having been instrumental in
promoting the publication of this article in English. My
sincere thanks also go to Dr Christopher Board OBE,
formerly from the London School of Economics who
translation, and to both Wulf
undertook the actual
Bodenstein, Honorary President of
the Brussels Map
Circle, and Lisette Danckaert, former Map Librarian of
the Royal Library of Belgium in Brussels, who provided
much help with the translation and provided valuable
editorial advice.

NOTES

1. This paper on the compilation and importance of Lannoy de
Bissy’s map is based on printed and manuscript cartographic
documents held at the De´partement des Cartes et Plans of the
Bibliothe`que Nationale de France (BnF), the French Socie´te´ de
Ge´ographie, the Service Historique de l’Arme´e de Terre, the
Institut Ge´ographique National and Lannoy de Bissy’s own
cartographic archive which has been deposited at
the
Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry. Since the publication of the original
paper in French in 2004, an inventory of the Re´gnauld de Lannoy
de Bissy Collection at the Me´diathe`que in Chambe´ry has been
taken place (http://www.bm-chambery.fr/opacwebaloes/index.-
aspx?idpage5856). The references below, however, still refer to
the original numbering of the files.

2. Biographical data are drawn from a manuscript note written by
‘Colonel Victor
General Pierre Vincent on 24 March 1986:
Ame´de´e Richard de Re´gnauld de Lannoy de Bissy, cartographe
1844-1906’ (kept at the Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry) published
subsequently in the Me´moires de l’Acade´mie des Sciences, Belles
Lettres et Arts de Savoie, 1991, no. 7, V, pp. 153–158. The
me´moire includes numerous items mentioned in the service record
of Lannoy de Bissy (Service Historique de l’Arme´e de Terre,
Vincennes).

3. Lannoy de Bissy. ‘Pre´sentation d’une carte de l’Afrique australe et
e´quatoriale’. Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 7e`me se´rie, I, p.
231.

4. General Franc¸ois Perrier (1834–1888) was initially Deputy
Director of
the Service
Ge´ographique du De´poˆt de la Guerre from 1882 to 1887, and
then first Director of the Service Ge´ographique de l’Arme´e from
1887 to 1888.

the Section Ge´ographique,

then of

5. Lannoy de Bissy. ‘Pre´sentation d’une carte de l’Afrique australe et
e´quatoriale’. Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 7e`me se´rie, I, pp.
230–238.

6. Charles Maunoir. ‘Proce`s-verbal de la se´ance du 3 de´cembre
1880’, Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 7e`me se´rie, I, p.90.
7. See Lannoy de Bissy. ‘Note sur l’itine´raire du Dr Bayol au Fouta
Djallon’. Comptes-rendus des se´ances de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie,
1882, no. 20, pp. 512–517.

8. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-

spondence file 25, letter of 9 March 1883.

9. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-

spondence file 40.

10. See Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 1881, 7e`me se´rie, I, p. 235.
11. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-

spondence file 19, letter of 18 March 1881.

12. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-

spondence file 52, letter of 12 May 1886.

13. F Perrier. ‘Sur la carte d’Afrique au 1/2 000 000’. Comptes-rendus

de l’Acade´mie des Sciences, 98, session of 19 May 1884.

14. Lannoy de Bissy: ‘Recent French explorations in the Ogowe-
Congo region’. Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and
Monthly Record of Geography, December 1886, pp. 770.

15. Charles Maunoir: ‘Rapport sur le concours au prix annuel fait a` la
Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie dans sa se´ance ge´ne´rale du 25 avril 1890’,
Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 7e`me se´rie, 1890, I , pp. 145–
168.

12

The Cartographic Journal

16. Lannoy de Bissy:

‘Quelques de´tails sur la carte d’Afrique au
2,000,000 a` propos de le´laboration d’une carte de la terre a`
l’e´chelle du 1,000,000’, in Congre`s international des sciences ge´o-
graphiques de Berne, se´ance ge´ne´rale [du] of 10 August 1891, p. 12.
17. Carte de l’Afrique au 1 : 2 000 000 par R. de Lannoy de Bissy. (1)
Re´pertoire des itine´raires des explorateurs. (2) Re´pertoire des
noms des explorateurs. 1953. This index with double listing gives
first for each sheet the names of all the explorers and the dates of
their expeditions, then for each explorer the numbers of sheets on
which their routes are drawn. This index describes only the sheets
kept at the IGN.

18. Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie, 1881, 7e`me se´rie, I, p. 232.
19. For example, Lake Leopold II, on the sheet of Loulouabourg (40).
20. Notices remaining in manuscript form, foreseen for publication in
instalments (Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy
Collection. Notices de la carte d’Afrique).

21. On this topic, see, Ed. de Martonne: Les cartes d’Afrique du
Service Ge´ographique de l’Arme´e. Paris. Publications du Comite´ de
l’Afrique Franc¸aise, 1936.

22. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-

spondence in unnumbered file, letter of 9 July 1884.

23. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-
spondence file 23, postcard of 21 May 1881 and letter of 25
October 1886.

24. See Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection,

correspondence file 52.

25. Le Mouvement Ge´ographique, 1889, p. 83.
26. Lannoy de Bissy: ‘Afrique occidentale-septentrionale: les posses-
sions franc¸aises de la Me´diterrane´e au Soudan (Niger)’. Bulletin de
la Socie´te´ de Ge´ographie de Lyon, 1891, pp. 137–169.

27. Me´diathe`que de Chambe´ry, Lannoy de Bissy Collection, corre-

spondence file 14, letter of 17 April 1888.

28. Le Tour du Monde: Nouvelles ge´ographiques 1893, p. 89. ‘For both
this sheet and the preceding one, the excellent compilation by
Major Lannoy de Bissy […] served as source material’.
29. Le Tour du Monde: Nouvelles ge´ographiques, 1892, p. 35.
30. See the obituary written by General Derre´cagaix. La Ge´ographie,

1906, 8e`me se´rie XIV, pp. 179–180.

31. Lannoy de Bissy:

‘La carte d’Afrique au 1/2 000 000’,

in:
Association franc¸aise pour l’avancement des sciences. Congre`s
de Grenoble 1885. Paris: Secre´tariat of the Association, 1885,
p. 3.

