The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 2

pp. 86–91

International Cartographic Conference, Paris 2011-Special Issue May 2011

V I E W P O I N T

Reflections on the Works of Jacques Bertin: From Sign
Theory to Cartographic Discourse

Takashi Morita

Hosei University, Tokyo, Japan
Email: morita@hosei.ac.jp

Jacques Bertin passed away in May 2010. He published three significant books: Semiology of Graphics (1967), The
Graphics and Graphic Information Processing (1977), and Atlas of World History (1997). They represent three stages of
his works, namely the semiotic approach, the map as a process, and cartographic discourse. The author of this article (a
PhD student in Bertin’s laboratory in the mid-1970s) has monitored Bertin’s achievements for about 40 years. Bertin’s
theories may be easier to apply in the digital information era and may help to create the ideal image of today’s
cartographer: that is, a ‘complete cartographer’.

INTRODUCTION

Every International Cartographic Association (ICA) mem-
ber accepts the importance of Jacques Bertin’s achievements
in the domain of cartography, but it seems there are few
documents that describe the evolution of his achievements.
Each of his books could be seen as representing three stages
(Figure 1): the semiotic approach in Semiology of Graphics
(in French 1967, in English 1983 and 2010), the map as a
process in The Graphics and Graphic Information Processing
(1977), and cartographic discourse in Atlas of World History
(1997). Among them, the semiotic approach is the most
well-known achievement because of the development of the
concept of visual variables. Graphic information processing is
also the key concept for the use of the map for dynamic
extraction of meanings by the manipulation of images using
human visual perception. Cartographic discourse is the
superstructure of a set of maps ordered like a story with
text, which is not a simple collection of different maps but a
form of storytelling consisting of maps. These represent an
evolution,
from sign theory; how to make a map, to
cartographic discourse; and how to communicate a set of
maps in a holistic way as a ‘complete’ cartographer.

BRIEF CHRONOLOGY

Figure 2 shows an overall image of the different periods of
Bertin’s life. He was born in 1918 just after World War I
(1914–1918). After studying geography/cartography, he
obtained a superior license in cartography (1937) from the
University of Paris and then started work for Hachette (a
publishing company). Meanwhile, World War II (1939–
1945) broke out. After the war, from 1947 to 1957, while in
his thirties, he worked at the National Scientiﬁc Research

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13038059668604

Center and founded the Laboratory of Cartography at the
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes (Sorbonne) in 1954. He
published his ﬁrst book, Semiology of Graphics, after 10 years
of running his laboratory. In the 1970s, there was economic
stagnation caused by the energy crisis, but this did not prevent
him publishing his second book, Graphics and Graphic
Information Processing, 10 years after his ﬁrst book. This
development was assisted by his colleagues of the laboratory to
publish two books (Bonin, 1975; Gimeno, 1980). This latter
book was on the method of graphic processing in the dawn of
use of the personal computer. He retired in 1985 but
continued his work, and his efforts came to fruition with the
Atlas of World History via the chief cartographer of Humanity
Atlas from Prehistory to the XX Century (in French 1986, in
English 1992). The fall of the Berlin wall (1989), the spread of
the Internet after the appearance of the Internet browser
(1990) and the development of multimedia and dynamic
information and communication technology
bidirectional
have led to a new era of graphic communication. We should
re-evaluate Bertin’s works in this context.

CARTOGRAPHIC SYMBOLS

It is well known that cartography uses two kinds of quantitative
data, one for positional data deﬁned by geometry, and the
other for attribute data describing quantitative characteristics
of each position. A topographic map is the result of surveying
and mapping, and uses positional data. A thematic map, such
as a statistical map, represents the distribution of attribute data
on a base map that is already geometrically ﬁxed. Both types of
map use cartographic symbols that are either quantitative or
qualitative. The selection and use of cartographic symbols for
each objective is thus essential for the articulation of a map.

Reflections on the Works of Jacques Bertin

87

Figure 1. Three stages of Bertin’s approach to the domain of cartography

The systematic use of quantitative information for attribute
data was already common in the French school of thematic
mapping in nineteenth century (Palsky and Robic, 2009). It
was used, for example, by Charles Dupin (1784–1873) for the
choropleth map, and by Charles Minard (1781–1870) for
different statistical maps (Figure 3). They were both engineers
who used statistical maps as basic sources in general surveying
for the pre-planning of infrastructure or as materials to assist
with justiﬁcation of their planning or persuasion of the public
in regard to it. In a statistical map, the notion of proportional
representation conforming to the gravity of the value, the
distribution of dots represents density, the size of the sign

Figure 2. Brief chronology of Jacques Bertin

represents the importance of the value, the width of line
represents the quantity of ﬂow between two points, and the
different values of zones represent the proportional values of
different regions. The last work of Minard was on the ex-
pedition of Napoleon to Moscow in 1812–1813 (Figure 4),
which used a ﬂow map to show the difﬁculties caused by the
signiﬁcant reduction in the number of soldiers in his army
before reaching Moscow. It is really a map designed for visual
communication based on information from the reports of
generals who were present.

As for geographers, they made efforts to make synthetic maps
of regions using topographic base maps composed of mainly
qualitative symbols for the discrimination of different geogra-
phical phenomena. As for the legend, we can see the notion of
systematic classiﬁcation of cartographic symbols by point, line
and zone. Furthermore, there are often textual notes inside the
same map for the description of the method of codiﬁcation of
symbols and the form of observation that was expected to be
discovered, which is not usual in contemporary cartography.
there was an
the nineteenth century,
accumulation of techniques of cartographic representation,
especially for quantitative information, but an overall
theoretical framework of making and using cartographic
symbols as a sign system was not proposed.

Throughout

SEMIOLOGY OF GRAPHICS

In his lecture in the mid-1970s at Ecole des Hautes Etudes
en Sciences Sociales in Paris, the author of this article was a

88

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Statistic Maps of Charles Minard (source: Library of ENPC)

PhD student in his laboratory at that time, Bertin explained
how he had arrived at the concept of visual variables. He
said that he had begun to collect different maps and
diagrams and when the stacks reached his own height, he
sorted these examples into two groups: good (reasonable)
and bad (aberrant). Then he studied what was common in
the good group and the bad group until he arrived at the
concept of visual variables. For Bertin, ‘good’ and ‘bad’
maps are distinguished by the notion of the efﬁciency of
legibility: a map to ‘see’ provides instant perception, while a
map to ‘read’ requires more effort to perceive. To verify the
efﬁciency of
the author made a
psychophysical examination through the eye movement
measurement method (Figure 5), which was reported by
Morita in Mexico (1987).

the visual variables,

Bertin’s study was meta-sign research, but he said that
he had no idea in advance about the semiotic approach.
He gradually summarized the properties of the graphic
image (Figure 6) by the XY plane and the Z attribute:

six visual variables (size, value, texture, colour, orienta-
tion and shape), three meanings (quantitative, ordi-
nal and differential) and three types of sign (point, line
and zone). Minard used these elements one century ago,
but never developed a comprehensive notion of a sign
system.

Bertin had also insisted on the ubiquitousness of visual
perception. When we read an image, we have three levels
of perception: a whole image, a partial area and an
element. For visual perception, switching between them is
almost automatic without special effort, from detail to the
whole level. This instance is the essential characteristic of a
visual image. Bertin said that vision is ubiquitous. The
author was very impressed by the word ‘ubiquitous’ so
that
the ICA Commission on Ubiquitous Mapping
(established in 2003 by the author) was named adopting
this special word 20 years later from Bertin’s lecture.
Now, the notion of ‘ubiquitous’ is more than variations in
scale, but it includes the concept of responding to the

Reflections on the Works of Jacques Bertin

89

Figure 4. Expedition of Napoleon to Moscow in 1812–1813 by Charles Minard (source: Library of ENPC)

Figure 5. Eye movement of visual variables

90

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. Property of the image (source: http://cartographie.sciences-po.fr/en/image_et_variables_visuelles)

needs for immediate contextual adaptation of making and
using maps, namely, mapping as a dynamic process using
contemporary ITC devices. Bertin conceived the sign
system as a form of operational graphics to discover the
hidden structure of the phenomena derived from the
articulation of visual patterns. This dynamic process then
led the next step.

GRAPHIC PROCESSING

Transcription of data by a sign system into a graphic image is a
basic way of visualizing spatial information, but in general it is
thought that the image is ﬁxed once it is transcribed. Bertin
proposed that a graphic image could be utilized to support the
dynamic process of thinking by arranging both the XY
position and Z attribute sign according to the advancements in
understanding of analysis and objective. Use of these functions
is the operational graphics and graphic thinking. The structure
of a diagram and network could be altered so that they are

more understandable, multivariate analysis could be visualized
by an orderable matrix to make visual groups in permutations
of columns and lines, and the interval distance between classes
of a statistic map could be changeable so that a signiﬁcant
structure was uncovered. Moreover, if the orderable matrix
contained spatial information, the results could be synchro-
nized with the spatial distribution on a map, and vice versa.

At Bertin’s laboratory, these methods were implemented
using old media such as sheets of paper, cards and plastic
cubes employing an orderable matrix. Nowadays, this could
be transposed to new media, such as to the displays of
electronic information devices.

CARTOGRAPHIC DISCOURSE

the objective is

to make a topographic map,

If
the
transcription from surveying data to a map is relatively
simple because the use of cartographic symbols is usually
ﬁxed in advance. However, if a thematic map is being made,

Reflections on the Works of Jacques Bertin

91

information and
of maps for providing urgent spatial
facilitating communication. Moreover, the importance of
the ‘map to see’ instead of the ‘map to read’ has been
shown, as well as the necessity of cartographic discourse
instead of fragmented verbal information without clear geo-
spatial meaning. The legacy of Bertin is to provide a
framework to enable people to make clear maps.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Takashi Morita is currently
a Professor at Faculty of
Engineering and Design,
Hosei University in Tokyo,
where he teaches cartogra-
phy/geographic information
science, visual communica-
tion and visualisation of
planning. He got his PhD
degree in France under the
direction of Jacques Bertin
from Ecole des Hautes
en Sciences So-
Etudes
ciales, Paris,
in the late
1970s, and he has translated
Bertin’s book La graphique et le traitement graphique de
l’information into Japanese (1982) after going back to Japan.
He was a Vice President of ICA (1999–2003), a Chair of ICA
Commission on Ubiquitous Mapping (2003–2011), and he
is a Chair of National Committee for Cartography, Japan
Science Council, since 2000.

REFERENCES

Bertin, J. (1967). Se´miologie graphique: Les diagrammes,

les

re´seaux, les cartes, Mouton, Paris.

Bertin, J. (1977). La graphique et le traitement graphique de

l’information, Flammarion, Paris.

Bertin, J. (1981). Graphics and Graphic Information Processing, de
Gruyter, Berlin/New York (in German translated by Scharfe, W.
and in Japanese translated by Morita, T., 1982).

Bertin, J. (1983). Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks,

Maps, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Bertin, J. (1997). Atlas Historique Universel -Panorama de

l’histoire du monde, Editions de Minerva SA, Geneva.

Bertin, J. (2010). Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams Networks

Maps, ESRI Press, Redlands, CA.

Bertin, J. and Vidal-Naquet, P. (1992). The Harper Atlas of World

History, Harper Collins, New York.

Bonin, S. (1975). Initiation a` la Graphiques, L’Epi, Paris.
Giemeno, R. (1980). Apprendre a` l’e´cole par la graphique, Retz,
Paris. (Gimeno, R. 1978, L’enseignement par la graphique -Les
cahiers de la graphique, Laboratoire de la Graphique de l’EHESS,
Paris).

Morita, T. (1987). ‘Measurement of eye movements for the map
design evaluation’, in 13th ICA Conference, Vol. 1, Morelia,
Mexico, Oct 12–21, pp. 578–590.

Palsky, G. and Robic, M.-C. (2009). ‘Aux sources de la se´miology
graphique’, Cybergeo: European Journal of Geography,
Colloque ‘30 ans de se´miology graphique’, article 147, mis en
ligne le 17 novembre 2000, modifie le 14 mai 2009. http://
cybergeo.revues.org/554

Vidal-Naquet, P. and Bertin, J. (1986). Le Grand Livre de l’Histoire

du Monde, Hachette, Paris.

Figure 7. Primitive/complete cartographer

trial and error is required, which is a dynamic process of
proposition and veriﬁcation of a sign system. If there are
many maps to consider under a theme, it is necessary to
describe the development of the story. There are probably
three types of cartographer: the topographic map carto-
grapher, the thematic map cartographer and the storytelling
cartographer. Bertin became a storytelling cartographer
through his Atlas of World History – Panorama of World
History. There, the spatial framework is the world map and
it is possible to zoom in on regions if necessary. The time
framework goes back seven million years and is sliced
basically into centuries, but because of the difference in
density of given knowledge, the time span is wider before
the tenth century BC and closer after the eighteenth
century AD. Thus, the time–space framework is clear, and
the development of humanity is represented by a compre-
hensive schema. In every time section, a slice is described by
a world map and the text is supported by diagrams, photos,
and detailed maps. By this system, we can understand the
location of each event, and discover the distance between
events in time–space, and the presence or absence of
synchronisation between events. Bertin has ﬁnally become a
holistic and complete cartographer.

The completeness might be like a person who draws a
map on the ground with a stick explaining a story
(Figure 7), who is a primitive but real and complete
cartographer. This situation contains the elements of sender
and recipient, map, verbal explication, real world and a
dynamic process of communication.

CONCLUSIONS

Bertin’s work could be divided into three parts. He seems
to recognize cartography (and graphics) as a dynamic
graphic information system: making a map (from data/
information to graphic symbols), manipulating a map (re-
ordering graphic symbols in their position and conﬁgura-
tion of visual groups) and communicating a map (proposing
a cartographic story). His theory is easier to apply in the
digital information era and may help to create the ideal
image of today’s cartographer, a ‘complete cartographer’.
The great earthquake occurred in the east part of Japan
on 11 March 2011. People are recognizing the signiﬁcance

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

