This article was downloaded by: [Southern Illinois University]
On: 27 December 2014, At: 20:32
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Towards a unifying formalisation
of geographic representation: the
object–field model with uncertainty
and semantics
Vlasios Voudouris a
a Centre for International Business & Sustainability, London
Metropolitan Business School, London Metropolitan University ,
London, UK
Published online: 26 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Vlasios Voudouris (2010) Towards a unifying formalisation of geographic
representation: the object–field model with uncertainty and semantics, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 24:12, 1811-1828, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2010.488237

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2010.488237

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 24, No. 12, December 2010, 1811–1828

Towards a unifying formalisation of geographic representation: the
object–field model with uncertainty and semantics

Vlasios Voudouris*

Centre for International Business & Sustainability, London Metropolitan Business School, London
Metropolitan University, London, UK

(Received 2 March 2009; final version received 4 April 2010)

The need for a conceptually unifying data model for the representation of geographic
phenomena is widely understood. Although some successes have been reported, progress
has been slow, especially at the conceptual and logical levels of abstraction. Drawing on
and combining existing successes, this article suggests the object–field model with
uncertainty and semantics at the conceptual and logical levels of abstraction. The logical
level has been formalised in the Unified Modelling Language (UML) class diagram. It is
shown that the concepts required to better represent geographic phenomena can be
derived from a single foundation that is termed the Elementary_geoParticle with asso-
ciated uncertainty and semantics by means of aggregation. The town centre phenomenon
is used as an application of the conceptual framework being proposed.

Keywords: field-based models; field–object representation; geographic information
science; object-oriented approach; uncertainty

Introduction

1.
The need for a unifying geographic representation has been acknowledged by a number of
researchers such as Peuquet (1988) and Couclelis (1992) and recently by Cova and
Goodchild (2002), Voudouris et al. (2005), Kjenstad (2006) and Goodchild et al. (2007).
Indeed, Raper (1999) argues that representation is essential to science as it provides the
means to establish correspondence between theories and the world, so that the form of
representation employed largely determines the analytical and methodological framework in
which scientists do their work. Thus there has been some activity in developing unifying
geospatial representations in digital form at different levels of abstraction, namely the
conceptual, logical and physical levels of abstraction.

Although there are numerous ways in which geographic phenomena can be represented,
there are currently two dual conceptual models which dominate: the discrete object model
(or just object-based model) and continuous-field model (or just field-based model). The
work presented here aims to explore the assumptions of conventional geographic data
models, in the way they are used to represent and think about geographic phenomena,
particularly indeterminate phenomena exhibiting conceptual duality (=a combination of
field- and object-like properties). This exploration results in the formalisation of the unified
object–field model with uncertainty and semantics, using the Unified Modelling Language
(UML) class diagram and set of object-oriented principles. This article does not address

*Email: v.voudouris@londonmet.ac.uk

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
# 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2010.488237
http://www.informaworld.com

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1812

V. Voudouris

explicitly the temporal dimension, but it is envisaged that further work will incorporate time
as a fundamental aspect of the approach.

Sections 2 and 3 are concerned with the UML formalisation of the conventional object-
and field-based models at the conceptual and logical levels of abstraction. Section 4 dis-
cusses different approaches to unify or map the object- and field-based models and the
fundamental elements of the proposed object–field model with uncertainty and semantics.
Section 5 uses an example to demonstrate the qualities of the proposed model and Section 6
concludes.

2. The discrete object model

The discrete object model is perceived as representing an empty space which is occupied by
a number of well-defined phenomena, sometimes called entities or things. These well-
defined phenomena have different dimensions, attributes and identity. ‘Objects’, as func-
tions of scale and intentionality, are ‘things’ in the digital world, which represent real-world
phenomena as instances of generally recognised categories. Mark (1999) argues that ‘objects
gain their meaning from the relationships between their internal formalisms and some aspect
of the external world’.

Using the UML class diagrams, a formalism of the object-based model is developed and
presented in Figure 1. Derived from Kjenstad’s proposal (Kjenstad 2006), the shaded classes
and bold lines in Figure 1 are extensions or modifications argued for in this article, indicating
that a phenomenon can have a number of attributes, as demonstrated by the multiplicity
property of the UML class diagram. Multiplicity provides a concise way to express con-
straints relating to the number of participating concepts in a relationship. For example, each
Phenomenon can be associated with more than one AttributeSets while each AttributeSet is
associated with more than one Attribute. An AttributeSet is a collection of attributes (see
Figure 2), such as used to define a town centre. This collection of attributes can be a
the nature of a
reflection of
Phenomenon can be defined by more than one conceptualisation (groupings of attributes).
Thus, AttributeSets serve to qualify, identify, classify, quantify or express the state of a
phenomenon of significance, whether real or imagined, about which data need to be known
or held. Note that there is no direct association relationship between Phenomenon and
Attribute. The reasoning for this is discussed below.

the conceptualisation process of a subject. Clearly,

Reflexive association to represent
hierarchical or network representations

Behaviour

BehaviourSet

1..*

1

1..*

1

1..*

Phenomenon

1..*

1

1..*

1

1..*

AttributeSet

Attribute

1..*

Geometry

Figure 1. Proposed UML class diagram of the object-based model (adopted from Kjenstad 2006).

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1813

3 Town centre land
use

Civle
Office
Retail

Civle
Commercial Office
Creative Industry
Hotels
Non Specialist Retail
Taxi and Courier

6 Town centre types

4 Non Town centre types

2 Town centre types

Primary Industry
Utilities
Manufacturing Industry
Transport & Warehousing

Arts, Culture &
Entertainment

Specialist Retail

Floorspace

Employment

Employment

PROPERTY

ECONOMY

DIVERSITY

VISITOR
ATTRACTIONS

INDEX OF TOWN CENTREDNESS

Figure 2. Concept-oriented diagram of Town Centre.
(Source: Thurstain-Goodwin and Unwin 2000, # John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 2000. Used with permission.)

The composition association relationship (represented by the filled diamond in UML)
assumes the following semantics: (i) the parts (Attribute, AttributeSet and Geometry) belong
to exactly one composite (Phenomenon) at a time; (ii) the composite may release parts,
provided that responsibility for them is assumed by another composite phenomenon; and
(iii) if the composite is destroyed, it must either destroy all of its parts or pass responsibility
for them to some other composite (Arlow and Neustadt 2002). This is a very strong type of
relationship that makes less clear the representation of indeterminate phenomena, associated
with more than one but equally valid interpretations or conceptualisations. The need to
accommodate more than one conceptualisation of a single phenomenon is the justification
for having more than one grouping of AttributeSets associated with a Phenomenon rather
than a direct association between Attribute and Phenomenon. An important property of the
discrete object model is the geometry, which plays a fundamental role as shown by the
composition relationship between Phenomenon and Geometry. The associated multiplicity
also implies that a phenomenon can have more than one geometry associated with it,
reflecting the idea that the same phenomenon can have different spatial dimensions
(e.g., two dimensions or three dimensions) and/or geometries depending on the scale of
the analysis (this assumes a many-to-many relationship between geometry and spatial
dimension). Thus, the geometric dimension plays a key role in the representation of and
reasoning about geographic phenomena, constituting a geometrically indexed approach to
geographic representation.

An extension suggested here is the need to explicitly represent the dynamic change of the
phenomenon, as demonstrated by the composition association between Behaviour and
BehaviourSet and between BehaviourSet and Phenomenon. This is important in scenarios

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1814

V. Voudouris

that require a set of attributes rather than a single attribute to co-evolve, to have an effect on
the phenomenon as a whole. In other words, the Behaviour and BehaviourSet are used to
capture the processes of modelling of a Phenomenon. For example, Figure 2 is a concept-
oriented representation of the town centre phenomenon. This means that the dynamic change
of four high-level concepts co-evolve to (re)define a town centre. In particular, to redefine
the spatial extent of a town centre the property, economic, diversity and visitor attractions
need to co-evolve according to Thurstain-Goodwin and Unwin (2000). Dynamic changes in
one of these concepts may not qualify for the redefinition of the town centre phenomenon. It
is also important to note that others may identify a different but equally valid set of concepts
for the identification of the town centre phenomenon. In fact, the ODPM (2000) used only
the economic, property and diversity concepts to define a town centre. This justifies the
approach to have more than one AttributeSet and BehaviourSet associated with the
Phenomenon as a means of supporting multiple conceptualisations and dynamic changes
of the same phenomenon.

As Behaviour and BehaviourSet represent the dynamic process of changes associated
with a phenomenon, they represent sequential changes associated with the nature of a
phenomenon. One way to represent this sequential change is to explicitly record (i) the
decision criteria (both factors and constraints); (ii) the decision rule (i.e. choice function or
choice heuristics); (iii) objectives (both conflicting and complementary); and (iv) the
evaluation process (i.e. multi-criteria/multi-objective evaluation). ‘Decision’ is defined
here with respect to the ‘prescriptive decision analysis’, which emphasises the development,
evaluation and application of techniques to facilitate decision making by replying on the
logic of mathematics and statistics. Thus, changes of representational reality to these four
decision aspects also represent changes in the conceptualisation of the phenomenon, which
can be non-temporal. In the context of Figure 2 this means that it is necessary for the four
criteria not only to be identified and selected, but also to be shown how they are summarised
(e.g. index of town centredness) using an appropriate mathematical function (e.g. order
weighted average). Of considerable importance here are the discrete rather than the con-
tinuous changes in the direction of the decision, reflected by the four aspects just outlined.
The emphasis given to the discrete decision has also been identified by Batten (2000) who
argues ‘decisions made by human agents tend to be discrete, like grains of sand, not
continuous, like levels of tank water’ (p. 10).

Making explicit the manner in which the temporal and non-temporal change of a
phenomenon is recorded is also important as it emphasises the need to model not only the
form (look) but also the process (works) aspects of geographic phenomena. Batty (2005),
among other researchers, questioned the emphasis on locations and the lack of modelling of
the process of change in traditional geographic representations, which is also reflected by
Kjenstad’s formalisation of the object-based model. Indeed, this shortfall makes it difficult
for analysts to accommodate developments in complex systems science, which emphasises a
bottom-up approach to the generation of macroscopic order from microspecifications, with
Batty (2005) arguing that ‘. . . the inability of GIS to embrace spatial relations, interactions,
and their connectivity is posing a major barrier to its continued development’ (pp. 149–150).
In summary, it is argued here that Figure 1 represents a formalised model of the
conventional object-based model. This formalisation also represents the reflexive associa-
tion at the Phenomenon level to enable the building of hierarchical or network relationships
between phenomena such as the interactions between town centres or interactions between
retail cores and town centres (see ODPM 2002 for details of the interactions between the
concepts of retail cores and town centres).

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1815

3. The continuous-field model

The field-based model is the second conceptual model of geographic representation and the
basis for much scientific modelling (Angel and Hyman 1976).

Broadly speaking, a field is defined as any single-valued function of location and the
field-based model, also referred to as the location-based model, is characterised by the
domain and range of its defining function (Peuquet 2002). However, Kemp and Vckovski
(1998) argue that fields may have many definitions and meanings, which make problematic
the formalisation of the concept field. Mark (1999) argues,

fields can be classified according to the levels of measurement (data types) of the dependent
variable. Two of the most important types are continuous fields, in which the dependent variable
is on interval or ratio level, and discrete fields, with nominal dependent variables. (p. 81)

Accordingly, field-based models can be further decomposed into two types, namely
continuous-field models and discrete field models. This implies that certain types of fields
can be used to represent discrete phenomena such as land ownership, where each field
location is mapped to a legal subject. However, geometric units ‘utilized to represent a field
normally have no meaning in reality but exist solely for the purposes of the representation’
(Goodchild et al. 2007, p. 246). Thus, Goodchild et al. (2007) also propose the term geo-
object (representation of real-world phenomena) and object (representational form to dis-
cretise geo-fields). This distinguishes the discrete field–based model from the object-based
model as they represent different conceptualisations of the world.

As the key characteristics of the field model are continuity and self-definition, subjects
are not forced to identify objects and their boundaries, an important source of difference to
the object-based model. This means that a field can be regarded as a collection of certain
kinds of measurements that are used to define a value everywhere within the study area,
which can be viewed as a fiat object (Smith 1994, 2001, Smith and Varzi 2000). In other
words, the field-based model represents properties of geographic phenomena in terms of
continuous Cartesian coordinates. In the continuous-field type, the properties are assumed to
vary smoothly and continuously over the space as some continuous smooth mathematical
function (e.g. an interpolation function to compute values on locations other than the sample
locations). This is to say that the continuous field is continuous in terms of the differential
calculus, as the attribute value can be approximated by a continuous mathematical function.
Because this is considered to be continuous in terms of differential calculus, derivatives, for
example a slope surface, can be computed which enable subjects to characterise different
aspects of the geographic phenomena (sometimes referred to as ‘things’ or ‘features’ under
the field model heading) which are regarded as significant clusters of like attribute values.
These phenomena (or ‘features’) are measurement dependent, which means that a different
range of measurements may not reveal these same phenomena/features.1 Couclelis (1992)
argues that these

. . . features [phenomena] may be purely accidental clusters or patterns of values, they may be
unstable at the relevant time-scale, they may or may not be bounded in Euclidean space, they
may be part of an object, or themselves contain several objects (p. 69)

or they may be artefacts of the process used to identify them (Voudouris et al. 2006). Thus,
these phenomena should not be expected to behave in the same way even if they are
abstractions from the same real thing (Couclelis 1992).

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1816

V. Voudouris

Figure 3. Proposed UML class diagram of the field-based model (adopted from Kjenstad 2006).

Returning to the town centre example, the continuous-field model represents it as a value
of index of town centredness, which is assumed to be mathematically continuous and
location dependent over the study area. In other words, a town centre is a continuous
distribution of single-valued geographic variables where every location must have one and
only one value.

Following the argument made in the previous section, a formalised representation of the
continuous-field model is given in Figure 3. As in Figure 1, the shaded classes of Behaviour
and BehaviourSet and bold lines represent extension or modifications made in this article,
the remainder represents Kjenstad’s proposal.

Like the case of the object-based model, the temporal and non-temporal changes to the
field have been explicitly addressed. Using the example of the town centre, this means that
processes that affect both the existence of town centres, such as (i) the value of the index of
town centre or (ii) the mathematical function that summaries the components of the index,
and the extent of town centres, such as threshold used to classify the location, are handled
explicitly. Thus, the construction of new retail buildings clearly affects one of the compo-
nents that define a town centre.

The Behaviour and BehaviourSet have been added to represent this temporal and non-
temporal process of changes as discussed in Section 2 above. This is to say that the
Behaviour and BehaviourSet of Figure 3 share similar properties with the corresponding
classes of Figure 1. However, the Behaviour and BehaviourSet of Figure 3 can affect the
field value only, as the conventional field-based model does not recognise the existence of
the objects in an explicit way, nor the geometry used to demarcate them. Following
Mandelbrot (1997) the geometry element of the field-based model is a mathematical fiction.
In the words of Goodchild et al. (2007), the Behaviour and BehaviourSet do not affect the
object (representational form of geo-field), just the value of the geo-field.

These formalisations of the two conceptual models enable this work to suggest a
formalisation of the unified object–field model with uncertainty and semantics, which is
the main contribution made by the research presented here. It is important to emphasise that

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1817

the object–field model suggested here has been developed in the light of supporting
phenomena exhibiting conceptual duality such as town centres.

According to Couclelis (1992) and Worboys (1995) field- and object-based modelling
should not be considered as mutually exclusive, thus enabling the development of concep-
tual mappings between the two models as suggested by Peuquet (1988) and Cova and
Goodchild (2002) or conceptual integrations as suggested by Voudouris et al. (2005),
Kjenstad (2006) and Goodchild et al. (2007). This object- or field-based models debate
parallels the atomic (objects exist in space–time somehow independently of their properties)
and the plenum (space–time clusters of like attribute values are the objects) ontologies
debate (Couclelis 1992), which is defined as a specification of a conceptualisation or a
definition of concepts and relationships used to represent domain knowledge (Kemp and
Vckovski 1998).

It is argued here that new data models should try to integrate rather than map the object-
based model which ‘over-determines the geographic work by forcing it into a uniform mold
of geometric objects . . .’ with the field-based model which is ‘. . . a maximal ignorance as to
the nature of things . . .’ (Couclelis 1992, p. 68). In other words, it is important to integrate the
strong individuality of the object-based model with the fleeting nature of the field-based
model. Goodchild (1987) and Anselin and Getis (1992) argue that the power of Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) lies in dealing with complex analytical questions of ‘why’ and
‘what if’. ‘These are explanatory and predictive modelling questions that require the
combination of location [field]- and object-based information, and their attributes, in com-
plex ways’ (Peuquet 2002, p. 265). The fused object–field model offers this integration.

4. The object–field model with uncertainty and semantics

This section starts by discussing how others have approached the object–field distinction.
This is followed by an account of the fundamental properties of the object–field model in
which uncertainty and semantics feature prominently.

4.1. Relevant literature to mapping or integration of object- and field-based models

Schaefer (1953), Berry (1964), Ballard (1981) and Peuquet (1984) are early attempts to
propose hybrid representations. These attempts, as well as relatively recent attempts, such as
Winter (1998), Winter and Frank (2000) and Camara et al. (2000), propose the mapping for
specific implementations of the conceptual object- and field-based models, such as the
vector and raster models. This is not the focus of the work presented here. However, these
integrations, although narrow in scope, can provide useful insights for the integration of the
conceptual object-and field-based models, moving the research towards finding a solution to
the ‘overall’ problem (Peuquet 1988). It has also been argued that conversion of vector and
raster models has proved to be awkward because of the operational difficulties resulting from
the fundamental differences in the conceptualisations of the world from which they are
derived (Burrough and McDonnell 2004).

Peuquet (1988) also argues that perceptual and cognitive psychologists, such as
Jackendoff (1983) and Neisser (1987), recognise the duality of how the world is seen
(image – associated with the field-based view) and understood (structure – associated with
the object-based view). Using earlier cognitive theories such as the ‘multi-store’ model of
Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968) or recent theories such as the ‘intelligent memory’ of Gordon
and Berger (2003), it is evident that what we ‘see’ and ‘understand’ is partially influenced by
the knowledge stored in our memory. This is to say that the individual pieces of knowledge,

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1818

V. Voudouris

the connections and the mental process form the justification for how we ‘see’ and ‘under-
stand’ the world.

Within the GIS literature, it was not until the late 1980s or early 1990s that the concepts
of the object- and field-based models were generally acknowledged and investigated
(Peuquet 1988, Goodchild 1991, Couclelis 1992). Marr (1982) asserted that the processing
of data must begin with the field-based view, which has also been argued by Liu et al. (2008)
by proposing the general field (G-field) model in which primitive field-based features are
selected and abstracted to obtain sketch-like representations – the ‘primal sketch’ is the first
process in extracting meaning and cognitive structure from field-based observational data.
These sketch-like representations are interpreted using pre-existing knowledge to form
individual objects by using grouping processes (hierarchies of objects). These are then
placed in the object-based representation so as to become derived knowledge, which is
then used to interpret the field-based view. This allows the dual representations to co-evolve
in a controlled fashion (Peuquet 1988). Marr’s suggestion has been extended to include the
acquisition of higher-level properties, for example that a location contains someone’s
favourite restaurant, concerning the location-based side of the representation (Peuquet
1988). It is important to emphasise that Peuquet’s suggestion is grounded in mapping rather
than integration between the object- and field-based models.

Peuquet (1988) emphasised that a critical area of research is the functional linkages
between the field- and object-based representations to derive formalised transformation
procedures between varying representational forms. It is argued here that this issue has
been addressed by Cova and Goodchild (2002) who propose a dual conceptual model that is
grounded in mapping between the object- and field-based models, by suggesting exact
functional linkages between fields and objects. In other words, ‘the mappings serve as a
conceptual bridge between the two perspectives’ and as a ‘natural extension of the traditional
field perspective where every location determines a scalar, vector, or tensor to one where
every location determines a set of discrete, geo-referenced objects’ (Cova and Goodchild
2002, pp. 512–513). The authors specify four types of relationships between the field and
object representations:

l The concept of the single-valued function of location is maintained but that value is a
reference to an object instead of a value of an attribute as is the case with the
conventional field-based model.

l Bona fide and fiat objects with well-defined outer boundaries only are accommodated.

Inexactness has not been addressed.

l The representational forms of fields and objects are independent and not necessarily

the same which justifies the emphasis on mapping instead of ‘integration’.

l Every location in a field (restricted or not) must be associated with at least one

geographic object.

Implicit in these four types of relationships are three stages in the formation of the object
field: namely, the definition and representation of the field; the definition and representation
of the objects; and finally the establishment of the relationships between fields and objects
(Cova and Goodchild 2002). This implies that the definition and representation of objects
and fields are independent, which re-emphasises the concept of ‘mapping’ rather than
‘integration’ between the two conceptual GIS models.

It is also argued that this area of research needs to accommodate ‘inexactness’ for the
representation of indeterminate phenomena, particularly those exhibiting conceptual duality
such as town centres. In other words, a unifying model needs to represent not only ‘necessary

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1819

conditions’ but also ‘graded conditions’, as defined by Jackendoff (1983). These points have
been addressed by Voudouris et al. (2005, 2006). Voudouris et al. (2005) propose what is
perhaps the first attempt to integrate (rather than map) the object- and field-based models.
However, some of their original terminology does not communicate this thinking very
effectively. These notations and terms have been replaced and new concepts have also
been added as shown in Section 4.2 below.

Kjenstad (2006) proposes the parameterised geographic object model (PGOModel) and
PGOAtom concepts as a way of integrating the object- and field-based models. Kjenstad
(2006) shows that the PGOModel encompasses object- and field-based models by applying
selective ‘constraints’ to the PGOModel to derive either fields or objects. This is a top-down
approach which starts from a ‘complex’ model that is simplified to represent fields or objects
without supporting their simultaneous coexistence, which is required to represent phenom-
ena exhibiting conceptual duality such as mountains, town centres and epidemics. In the
PGOModel, objects are defined as a set of parameters that include both attributes and
geometry, with the number of parameters used to define the object dependent on the
dimensionality of the object and the Euclidean space it is found in. This means that an
object can be a point, line, area or volume. As we shall see below, this approach is different
from the way objects and fields are defined in the object–field model.

Goodchild et al. (2007) also propose a way of integrating the object- and field-based
models using the atomic form of geographic information (geo-atom), which was originally
introduced by Goodchild et al. (1999), and the geo-dipole concepts. The rationale behind the
geo-atom is that geographic representation is becoming more complex as new concepts are
added, which is leading to apparently endless proliferation. This implies that a simplification
is probably required. This simplification is achieved by demonstrating that many concepts
can be derived from the geo-atom which is a tuple of ,x,Z,z(x). where x defines a point in
space–time, Z identifies the property and z(x) defines the value of the property. This means
that the geo-atom, as a primitive form, can only ‘carry’ one property and one value per point
in space–time. Section 4.2 proposes the Elementary_geoParticle concepts, which can
‘carry’ many properties with many values as semantic and uncertainty dimensions. Thus,
the ‘mass’ of the Elementary_geoParticle is not restricted to a single attribute, single value
convention which is fundamental in supporting multiple interpretations of the same phe-
nomenon (town centre) as discussed earlier. Goodchild et al. (2007) also propose the geo-
dipole which is

a tuple connecting a property and value not to one location in space–time as in the case of the
geo-atom but to two,x1,x2,Z,z(x1,x2).. Geo-dipoles capture the properties of pairs of points, or
properties that are associated with two points rather than one. (p. 251)

4.2. Properties of the object–field model with uncertainty and semantics

The unified object–field model with uncertainty and semantics suggested here has the
following properties (see also Figure 4 below):

l For the representation of the fields and objects, a basic building block with no
single building block is called the
predefined substructure is used. This
Elementary_geoParticle which is the elementary constituent for a given application.
The Elementary_geoParticle is similar to what atomists term amera, which is truly
indivisible, has no parts and serves as the standard for measuring matter within space
(Peuquet 2002). As discussed above, the geo-atom is a spatially embedded concept as

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 a

b

1..*

1..*

1..*

1..*

1820

V. Voudouris

1..*

Phenomenon

1

1.

1

1..*

1..*

Elementary_geoParticle

BehaviourSet

1..*

1

1..*

AttributeSet

1..*

1..*

1

1..*

1..*

1

0..*

1..*

0..*

Attribute

FieldValue

ObjectReference

Behaviour

Semantics

1..*

1..*

11

1

1

1..*

Phenomenon

1

1

1

1..*

1..*

1..*

1..*
1
1

1..*

1

1..*

Uncertainty

AttributeSet

Elementary_geoParticle

BehaviourSet

1..*

1

1..

1

1..*

1..*

1

1
FieldValue

1

1
0..*

1..*

0..*

1

Attribute

ObjectReference

Behaviour

Figure 4. Proposed formalisation of the object–field model.

it has predefined point geometry. The Elementary_geoParticle does not have pre-
defined geometry, which means that its geometric representation is not fundamental in
its definition, as its geometry is acquired at the time when the representation is
specified. This implies a shift from a geometrically indexed approach to a concept-
oriented approach.

l In doing so, a shift is suggested from mapping between objects and fields to unifica-
tion (hence the ‘object–field’ notation). This implies that there are three conceptuali-
sations of the world instead of two as currently supported by the GIScience literature.
This ‘unification’, which is more (and possibly different) than the sum of its parts, is

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1821

not fixed, say 50% field-based and 50% object-based, as it depends on the phenom-
enon under investigation, the scale of analysis and the school of thought supported by
the investigators. The other two conceptualisations are the objects or fields.

l The Elementary_geoParticle is associated with a location value and a variable
number of object references. This means that the concept of the single-valued function
of location is not maintained to allow both multiple interpretations of observational
data and hierarchical or network relationships between the elements of the model.
l All objects represented in Figure 4 by the Phenomenon term are aggregations of the
Elementary_geoParticle. This means that the four relationship types proposed by
Cova and Goodchild (2002) are replaced by a single aggregation relationship. Thus,
the Elementary_geoParticle is the constituent component of the object and the field by
maintaining its ‘independence’.

l The field space and object space distinction of Cova and Goodchild (2002) is main-
tained, but has been refocused. The field space is now the traditional scientific space,
which is a mathematical representation of space with a coordinate reference system
(also known as precise space), and the object space is now the concept space, which
represents conceptualisations, meaning and interpretations of the traditional scientific
space. This formulation integrates the ideas of Marr (1982), Peuquet (1988) and Cova
and Goodchild (2002) in a single model. The concept space, represented in Figure 4
by the semantics and uncertainty terms, is applied at three levels.

l Hierarchical Uncertainty and Semantic components are introduced to better support
representation and reasoning of indeterminate phenomena by populating the concept
space, fields and objects. This also suggests that the objects have ‘emergent’ proper-
is more (and different) than the sum of its constituent components
ties, as it
(Elementary_geoParticle).

These fundamental properties of the object–field model enable the representation and
multiple reasoning of geographic phenomena. In particular, the object–field model is
flexible enough to represent fields, objects, object fields (O-field) and field objects
(F-object). O-field (i.e. peak) is a field which is conceptualised as object (Cova and
Goodchild 2002), and F-object (i.e. fire) is an object which is conceptualised as a field
(Yuan 1999). Thus, the object–field model enables subjects to think outside of the con-
ceptual straightjacket of fields or objects by allowing mixtures of fields and objects. For
example, an O-field, which is represented by the Phenomenon in Figure 4, is an aggregation
of Elementary_geoParticles. The field side, say elevation data, of the O-field is represented
by the FieldValue component of the Elementary_geoParticle, whereas the object side, say
‘the Helvellyn’ peak in the Lake District in United Kingdom, of the O-field is represented
by the ObjectReference component of
the Elementary_geoParticle. The Semantics
and Uncertainty components of Figure 4, which provide a formalisation of the proposed
object–field model with uncertainty and semantics using the UML class diagram, can
represent the ‘Feature Classification’ function used to identify peak features and database
and decision rule uncertainties. Note that Figure 4a concentrates on presenting the basic
elements and their multiplicities of the object–field model and Figure 4b concentrates on
presenting the rest of the elements of the model, which means that the multiplicities of the
basic elements is not shown for simplicity.

Thus, Figure 4 in total presents a formalised framework through which coordinated
object- and field-based models and associated semantics and uncertainty can be system-
atically integrated to represent (i) objects, field, O-fields and F-objects and (ii) inexactness.
This formalisation is achieved by aggregating the Elementary_geoParticle to form fields,

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1822

V. Voudouris

objects, F-objects and O-fields with associated Semantics and Uncertainty at three levels.
The aggregation association instead of composition association is used, as the same
Elementary_geoParticle can be shared by many objects at any point in time while the
Elementary_geoParticle may exist independently of the objects. This is important to
represent fields where, for example, the object may not be conceptualised by subjects.

Figure 4 also shows that each field, object, F-object and O-field, which represents aspects
of the Phenomenon, is more than the sum of the Elementary_geoParticle as Semantics and
Uncertainty is also associated with them. The Elementary_geoParticle is composed of the
FieldValue and a variable number of ObjectReferences, which collectively define the
composite value as discussed above. There are semantic differences expressed by the
aggregation associations (represented as empty diamonds in UML) as (i) the aggregate
may or may not exist independently of the parts; (ii) the parts can exist independently of the
aggregate; (iii) the aggregate is in some sense incomplete if some parts are missing; and (iv)
shared ownership of the parts by several aggregates is allowed (Arlow and Neustadt 2002).
It is also important to emphasise that although Cova and Goodchild (2002) proposed the
concept of object fields (O-fields) as a model in which every point in geographic space is
mapped not to a value but to an entire discrete object, the object–field model proposed here is
a model in which every point is mapped both to a value and to a variable number of discrete
or indeterminate objects (the ‘object–field’ notation), signalling a methodological shift to
‘integration’ rather than ‘mapping’ (object field).

Although violating the conventional premise that a field can be defined, in mathematical
terms, as a single-valued function of location, it can thus be argued that a location is
associated with multiple composite values. However, this violation is consistent with the
conceptual basis for the unified object–field model. The Elementary_geoParticle and its
FieldValues and ObjectReferences are associated with Semantics and Uncertainty to express
inexactness.

Through this fused approach it will be possible to identify where uncertainty informs the
geographic description of the objects, F-objects and O-fields and how the semantics are
informed by this. In particular, the Elementary_geoParticle, Semantics and Uncertainty can
form fields, objects, F-objects and O-fields that justify their existence on exceptional
circumstances by overriding the uncertainties and semantics, for example, the identification
of town centres not justified by mathematical calculations, but rather by expert or local
knowledge of the study area. In this case, semantics can be used as additional classification
conditions.

It is also important to point out that in the object–field model proposed, the space an
object, F-object and O-field occupies is not primarily found by means of its definition, unlike
in most current GIS data models. The advantage of this non-space-centred approach is that
dynamic changes to them do not require new identifiers. This enables subjects to monitor, for
example, changes in town centres over time more effectively. It goes without saying that the
aggregation of the Elementary_geoParticles to form objects, F-objects or O-fields can be
based on simple rules such as homogeneity, or more complex and vague rules such as
interaction and complementarity. Hierarchical or network relationships are established using
the ObjectReference class. This means that the Elementary_geoParticle can be associated
with a variable number of ObjectReferences, which establish the hierarchical or network
relationships. This is shown diagrammatically using the concept of reflexive association.

This is particularly important, as the field may itself be as interesting to study as the
objects, F-objects and O-fields themselves. The object–field model is also compatible with a
meta-relational map which assigns a binary field to each location in a field (Takeyama 1997,
Takeyama and Couclelis 1997). Here it is also proposed that the object–field can be a field of

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1823

fields and a field of objects, whereas the uncertainty dimension of the object–field can
associate not only binary but also fuzzy fields with each location in a field.

5. Example: town centres

Figure 5 below represents a hypothetical example of a town centre using the FieldValue
the Elementary_geoParticle of Figure 4. The
and ObjectReference components of
Elementary_geoParticle is represented here as raster cells with composites values, namely
the FieldValue (to represent the index of town centredness of Figure 2) and ObjectReference
(to represent the identity of town centres’ object/features). This reflects that subjects can
identify and demarcate specific town centres, say Hampstead in North London, using ‘a’
value for the ObjectReference of Figure 4. Note that Town Centre A (obj A) and the Town
Centre B (obj B) of Figure 5 have been demarcated interactively. However, they can also be
defined by thresholding the index of town centredness of Figure 2.

the

Figure 6, which is a simplified design class diagram2 of Figure 5, shows a specific
implementation of Figure 4. The GISOFMap establishes the relationships between the
elements of
object–field model, namely the RasterCell, GISObjectField,
GISRasterField, Uncertainty and Semantics. The GISObjectField represents fields and O-
fields by aggregating RasterCells using either the pixelID or objRef attributes. The
RasterCell
the Elementary_geoParticle of Figure 4. The
GISRasterObject represents the objects and F-objects by aggregating RasterCells. The
Semantics and Uncertainty represent the conceptualisation and interpretation of the elements
of the GISOFMap. Note also the Java and LandSerf 2.2 data structures used for this
implementation of the object–field model.

is an implementation of

Figure 5. An object–field GISystems prototype for the representation of town centres.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1824

V. Voudouris

Cell

RasterCell

Attributes

Private Footprint pixellDSeriable

Uncertainty

Attributes

Uncert

Private Footprint pixellD

Private int objRef

Private Footprint fp

Private float uncertainty = 0

Uncertainty Uncertainty

Uncertainty

Cell

GISRasterObject

Attributes

GISObjectField

Attributes

OF

Private int id

Private Vector cells

Private String title

Private int id

Private Vector cells

Private String title

Semantics

Cell

GISOFMap

Attributes

Private RasterMap baseRaster

Private Vector GISObjectMap

Private VectorMap tmpVectorMap

Private VectorMap vectorMap

Semantics

Semantics

Semantics

Attributes

Private String Semantic

Semantics

Figure 6. A simplified implementation of the object–field model.

To represent interactions between town centres, such as flows of goods and service, the
two aggregations (obj A and obj B) can be further aggregated using the objRef attribute of the
RasterCell. Thus, using a growable array of ObjectReferences, the object–field model estab-
lishes hierarchies of representation. To paraphrase Martin (1999), the Elementary_geoParticle
with its composite value offers an ideal basis for purpose-specific object aggregations in which
the size and shape of the units could be redesigned as required. This implies that the
aggregation relationship has a functional meaning. The word ‘functional’ is borrowed from
the term ‘functional
(Johnston et al. 2000) which implies interaction and
complementarity.

region’

Uncertainty and Semantics can also be attached to the RasterCell, which is the consti-
tuent component of obj A and obj B. For example, the Uncertainty can be used to quantify the
likelihood of a RasterCell being part of obj A. This reflects that the Uncertainty dimension of
the proposed object–field model recognises in an explicit way the concepts of existential and
extensional uncertainty, which are discussed in Molenaar (1994, 1996, 1998).

The above example also demonstrates how the traditional scientific space (i.e. index of
town centredness represented by the RasterCell using the baseRaster attribute of the
GISOFMap) and the concept space (i.e. represented by the network of GISRasterObject,
GISObjectField, Uncertainty and Semantics) are integrated, which suggests a correspondence
between the world we ‘see’ and the world we ‘understand’ even if this understanding is
subjective. This integration is important because ‘people’s reasoning and decisions cannot be
better than their knowledge of situations’ (Mark 1999, p. 82). Thus, a subject’s knowledge of a
phenomenon under study must be explicitly communicated to improve the reasoning and
communication of geographic analysis. In particular, the concept space of the object–field
model represents what subjects perceive from traditional scientific space and relates it to our
knowledge, which is reflected in the decision criteria and decision rule as well as the evaluation
process as discussed in Section 2 above. This means that concept space augments the
traditional scientific space by imposing a relativist view of space.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1825

It is important to emphasise that the concept of ‘aggregation relationships’ is fundamental
in the definition of the object–field model, as it is used not only to bind locations together, but
also to bind uncertainty and semantics at various levels of the hierarchy which is important
when indeterminate phenomena, such as town centres, are analysed. This means that unified
representations should represent phenomena in ways that are flexible. The way demonstrated
here is to use the composite attribute values of the Elementary_geoParticle. The first part of
this value can be used to represent the field side of the phenomenon and the second part of this
value can be used to represent the object side of the phenomenon. Thus, depending on the
decision-making stage, the whole or part of the composite of the Elementary_geoParticle
value can be used in the analysis. For example, if causality is investigated between town
centres, then the ObjectReference of the Elementary_geoParticle is only analysed. This is
because when providing an explanation of effects (e.g. Town Centre A) as the result of causes
(e.g. Town Centre B), the ObjectReference of the Elementary_geoParticle enables subjects to
select those objects, O-fields or F-objects that are potential determinants of the effects.

It is hoped that this example addresses some of the desiderata identified by Galton
(2003), namely a form of representation that (i) encompasses the rich network of intercon-
nections between the field- and object-based conceptual models and (ii) handles different
views of phenomena (town centre) which seem to present dual aspects as both object-like
and field-like using a basic building block (Elementary_geoParticle). Furthermore, some of
the research challenges proposed by Cova and Goodchild (2002) are also addressed. In
particular, the objects (town centres) do not need to be homogeneous, as internally variable
levels of data (index of town centredness), semantics and uncertainty can be represented.
The type of object can be more than one type, provided that its constituent element is of one
type as suggested by the Elementary_geoParticle concept. Furthermore, geographic embed-
ding can be crisp or fuzzy depending on the needs of the application or the stage of the
decision-making process. It is argued here that decision-making models should be flexible to
accommodate the different information and data needs of the decision-making process. For
example, a Boolean approach can be used to generate binary (crisp) representations (i.e.
delineation of town centres) that may be necessary towards the end of a decision process
when decisions need to be taken and fuzzy representations are not permitted because of,
say, practical or legal constraints. This is particularly important to time-critical applica-
tions. Even when a Boolean decision needs to be taken, fuzzy approaches are appropriate
at the early stages of the investigation to avoid the risk of an early focused analysis that
may well be wrong. This mixed Boolean and fuzzy approach (e.g. multiplicity between
Elementary_geoParticle and FieldValue) is accommodated by the ‘richness’ of the
object–field model suggested here.

6. Conclusion

There are two fundamental differences between the approaches suggested by the other
researchers and the approach suggested here. The first difference is related to the perspective
employed in the discussion of the object–field dichotomy and their possible integration. The
object–field model proposed here supports the simultaneous coexistence of objects and
fields in a single, integrated and combined model as a means to better support the repre-
sentation and reasoning of geographic phenomena, particularly indeterminate phenomena
such as town centres. In other words, not only does the object–field model integrate the two
conceptual GIS models, but in doing so it also integrates observational data (stored in
traditional scientific space of the object–field model) and interpretations and conceptualisa-
tion (stored in the concepts space of the object–field model).

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1826

V. Voudouris

Another important difference is that for the Elementary_geoParticle concept of the
object–field model, its geometric representation plays a minor role in the model. For
example, geometric representation plays a major role in the geo-atom concept proposed
by Goodchild et al. (2007), explicitly defined as a ‘point in space–time’ while the
Elementary_geoParticle can be any elementary representational unit appropriate for a
given application. This implies that the Elementary_geoParticle is dimensionless as its
dimension is not central in its definition. For example, the geo-atom concept, unless it is
assumed that ‘points’ have some sort of meaningful granularity, cannot be used to model
some concepts, such as employment rate, whereas the Elementary_geoParticle can be used,
because it can have meaningful granularity. It makes little sense to attach spatially extensive
properties, defined by Longley et al. (2005), to constituent geo-atoms (Goodchild et al.
2007). This emphasises the different perspectives employed in searching for a solution to
integrate the object- and field-based models to better support the representation and analysis
of geographic phenomena.

The fact is that the conclusions and recommendations of these approaches have simila-
rities (although they have a comparatively minor or major role in their corresponding
models):

. . . a general theory [which] might bring all of these ideas under a single umbrella that includes
all three geospatial dimensions and time [including associated semantics and uncertainties]; and
whether such a theory might eventually simplify the design and construction of GIS [, especially
as a decision-making tool]. (Goodchild et al. 2007, p. 240)

Peuquet et al. (1999) also state that

the idea of integrated object-field data models will be a solution to the problem of vagueness and
gradation. This would make it more possible for us to switch between models without simplify-
ing too much, i.e., in such a way that we can preserve the details. (p. 21).

It is hoped that the flexible approach demonstrated here can be built upon to enhance the

representation and reasoning of geographic phenomena.

Acknowledgements
The author thanks Jo Wood and Peter Fisher for co-supervising the PhD work that resulted in this
publication and John Sedgwick for streamlining the argument of the article. Many thanks to the two
anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.

Notes
1. The ‘features’ (fleeting individuality) in the field model are not and should not be treated the same

as the ‘objects’ (strong individuality) in the object model.

2. The completed design diagrams and associated Java codes can be accessed from http://

papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1292262.

References
Angel, S. and Hyman, G.M., 1976. Urban fields: a geometry of movement for regional science.

London: Pion.

Anselin, L. and Getis, A., 1992. Spatial statistical analysis and geographic information systems. The

Annals of Regional Science, 26, 19–33.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1827

Arlow, J. and Neustadt, I., 2002. UML and the unified process: practical object-oriented analysis &

design. London: Addison-Wesley.

Atkinson, R.C. and Shiffrin, R.M., 1968. Human memory: a proposed system and its control processes.
In: K.W. Spence and J.T. Spence, eds. The psychology of learning and motivation: advances in
research and theory. New York: Academic Press.

Ballard, D., 1981. Strip trees: a hierarchical representation for curves. New York: Communications of

Batten, D.F., 2000. Discovering artificial economics: how agents learn and economies evolve.

Batty, M., 2005. Network geography: relations, interactions, scaling and spatial processes in GIS. In:

P.F. Fisher and D. Unwin, eds. Re-presenting GIS. Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Berry, B., 1964. Approaches to regional analysis: a synthesis. Annals of the Association of American

the ACM, ACM.

Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Geographers, 54, 2–11.

Oxford University Press.

Burrough, P.A. and McDonnell, R.A., 2004. Principles of geographical information systems. Oxford:

Camara, G., et al., 2000. Towards a unified framework for geographical data models. Geoinfo 2000:

workshop Brasileiro de geoinformatica, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Couclelis, H., 1992. People manipulate objects (but cultivate fields): beyond the raster-vector debate in
GIS. In: A.U. Frank and I. Campari, eds. Theories and methods of spatio-temporal reasoning in
geographic space. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 639. Berlin: Springer, 65–77.

Cova, J. and Goodchild, M., 2002. Extending geographical representations to include fields of spatial

objects. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16, 509–532.

Galton, A.P., 2003. Desiderata for a spatio-temporal geo-ontology. In: W. Kuhn, M.F. Worboys, and S.
Timpf, eds. Spatial information theory: foundations of geographic information science. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2825. Berlin: Springer.

Goodchild, M.F., 1987. Towards an enumeration and classification of GIS functions. In: International
geographic information systems (IGIS) symposium: the research agenda proceedings, 15–18
November 1987, Arlington, VA. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Goodchild, M.F., 1991. Geographical data modeling. Computers and Geosciences, 18, 401–408.
Goodchild, M.F., et al., 1999. Introduction to the Varenius project. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 13, 731–745.

Goodchild, M.F., Yuan, M., and Cova, T.J., 2007. Towards a general theory of geographic representa-

tion in GIS. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 21, 239–260.

Gordon, B. and Berger, L., 2003. Intelligent memory. New York: Viking.
Jackendoff, R., 1983. Semantics and cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johnston, R.J., et al., eds., 2000. The dictionary of human geography. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kemp, K.K. and Vckovski, A., 1998. Towards an ontology of fields. In: Proceedings of the third

international conference on GeoComputation, 17–19th September 1998, Bristol, UK.

Kjenstad, K., 2006. On the integration of object-based models and field-based models in GIS.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 20, 491–509.

Liu, Y., et al., 2008. Towards a general field model and its order in GIS. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 22 (6), 623–643.

Longley, P.A., Goodchild, M.F., Maguire, D.J. and Rhind, D.W., 2005. Geographical Information

Systems and Science (2nd Edition), New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Mandelbrot, B.B., 1997. Fractals and scaling in finance: discontinuity, concentration, risk. New York:

Springer.

Mark, D.M., 1999. Spatial representation: a cognitive view. In: P.A. Longley, et al., eds. Geographical

information systems. Volume 1: Principles and technical issues. London: Wiley.

Marr, D., 1982. Vision. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Martin, D.J., 1999. Spatial representation: the social scientist’s perspective. In: P.A. Longley, et al., eds.
Geographical information systems. Volume 1: Principles and technical issues, 1. London: Wiley.
Molenaar, M., 1994. A syntax for the representation of fuzzy spatial objects. In: M. Molenaar and S. de

Hoop, eds. Advanced geographic data modelling. The Netherlands: Delft.

Molenaar, M., 1996. A syntactic approach for handling the semantics of fuzzy spatial objects. In: P.A.
Burrough and A.U. Frank, eds. Geographic objects with indeterminate boundaries. London:
Taylor and Francis, 207–224.

Molenaar, M., 1998. An introduction to the theory of spatial object modelling for GIS. London: Taylor

and Francis.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 1828

V. Voudouris

Neisser, U., 1987. Concepts and conceptual developments. In: U. Neisser, eds. Ecological and

intellectual factors in categorization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ODPM, 2000. Producing boundaries and statistics for town centres, Interim Report, Queen’s Printer

and Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.

ODPM, 2002. Producing boundaries and statistics for town centres: London pilot study. London:

Peuquet, D., 1984. A conceptual framework and comparison of spatial data models. Cartographica,

TSO.

21, 66–113.

Peuquet, D., 1988. Representations of geographic space: toward a conceptual synthesis. Annals of the

Association of American Geographers, 78, 375–394.

Peuquet, D., Smith, B. and Brogaard, B., 1998. Ontology of Fields. Report of a Specialist Meeting held
under the Auspices of the Varenius Project, Panel on Computational Implementations of
Geographic Concepts, National Center for Geographic Information Analysis (NCGIA).

Peuquet, D., 2002. Representations of space and time. New York: Guilford.
Raper, J.F., 1999. Spatial representation: the scientist’s perspective. In: P.A. Longley, et al., eds.
Geographical information systems. Volume 1: Principles and technical issues, 1. London: Wiley.
Schaefer, F., 1953. Exceptionalism in geography: a methodological examination. Annals of the

Association of American Geographers, 43, 226–245.

Smith, B., 1994. Fiat objects. In: N. Guarino, L. Vieu, and S. Pribbenow, eds. Parts and wholes:
conceptual part-whole relations and formal mereology, 11th European conference on artificial
intelligence, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, August 1994.

Smith, B., 2001. Fiat objects. Topoi, 20, 131–148.
Smith, B. and Varzi, A., 2000. Fiat and bona fide boundaries. Philosophy and Phenomenological

Research, 60, 401–420.

245–256.

Takeyama, M., 1997. Building spatial models within GIS through geo-algebra. Transactions in GIS, 2,

Takeyama, M. and Couclelis, H., 1997. Map dynamics: integrating cellular automata and GIS through

Geo-Algebra. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 11, 73–91.

Thurstain-Goodwin, M. and Unwin, D., 2000. Defining and delineating the central areas of towns for
statistical monitoring using continuous surface representations. Transactions in GIS, 4, 305–317.
Voudouris, V., Fisher, P.F., and Wood, J., 2006. Capturing conceptualization uncertainty interactively
using object-fields. In: W. Kainz, A. Reid, and G. Elmes, eds. 12th international symposium on
geospatial data handling, Vienna, Austria. Berlin: Springer.

Voudouris, V., Wood, J., and Fisher, P.F., 2005. Collaborative geoVisualization: object-field represen-
tations with semantic and uncertainty information. In: R. Meersman, et al., eds. On the move to
meaningful internet systems OTM 2005. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3762. Berlin:
Springer.

Winter, S., 1998. Bridging vector and raster representations in GIS. In: R. Laurini, K. Makki, and N.
Pissinou, eds. 6th international symposium on advances in geographic information systems, 6–7
November 1998, Washington, DC: ACM Press, 57–62.

Winter, S. and Frank, A.U., 2000. Topology in raster and vector representation. GeoInformatica, 4,

35–65.

Francis.

Worboys, M.F., 1995. Geographic information systems: a computing perspective. London: Taylor and

Yuan, M., 1999. Representing geographic information to enhance GIS support for complex spatio-

temporal queries. Transactions in GIS, 3, 137–160.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 20:32 27 December 2014 