GEOMATICS AND THE LAW

Geospatial Data: Balancing Private Ownership and Public Interest

The  topic  of  intellectual  property
(“IP”)  and  the  preservation  of  owner-
ship rights to geospatial data continues
to  appear  as  a  subtext  in  the  broader
geomatics community. Examples can be
found in the concern about liability for
geospatial  data  that  may  be  “posted”
and  made  available  to  the  public
through open data portals: if I no longer
“own”  the  data,  am  I  liable  for  errors
which it may contain? Another example
can be found in the electronic registra-
tion of cadastral plans of survey into a
land  registration  system  portal:  does  it
mean  that  surveyors  have  a  right  to
share in the revenues resulting from the
sale of copies of the plan to the public?
A  recent  decision  in  Ontario  has
addressed this issue in a class proceed-
ing  which  claimed  that  land  surveyors
retained  copyright  in  the  plans  of  sur-
vey they prepare and register in the land
registry  system,  and  that  the  provision
of copies of surveys to users of the sys-
tem  infringes  the  surveyors’  copyright.
In dismissing the claim brought by land
in  Keatley  Surveying  v
surveyors 
Teranet,1 the court noted,

As  a  result  of  the  registration  or
deposit  of  the  plans  of  survey  in
the land registry office, the owner-
ship of the property in this material,
including  the  copyright,  is  trans-
ferred  to  the  province.  At  that
point,  the  province  has  “control”
of  the  plans  of  survey.  The  plans
of  survey  are  then  published  “by
or under the direction or control of
Her Majesty.” When this happens,

by Megan Mills and Izaak de Rijcke

to 

s. 12  of 

the
according 
Copyright  Act,  the  copyright  in
these  works  belongs 
the
province for the term of years that
is prescribed.2

to 

The  implications  of  his  decision
will no doubt be relevant to the practices
of land surveyors in Canada for years to
come.  The  underlying  effect  of  section
12 of the Copyright Act was not specifi-
cally addressed by the court in Keatley:
does  the  result  mean  that  private  prop-
er ty  has  been  expropriated?  If  so,  is
there  a  public  interest  consideration  at
play in this implicit result?

For  answers,  a  second  recent
deci sion in Alberta considered some of
these  deeper  questions.  The  Alberta
Court  of  Queen’s  Bench  decision  in
Geophysical  Service  Incorporated  v
Encana  Corporation3 (“GSI”) dealt
with two issues of particular interest to
the  geomatics  community.  First—is
seismic data, as it is collected and com-
piled, an original work that can be pro-
tected  under  copyright  law?  Second—
the  court  examined  the  regulatory
regime  governing  the  submission  and
disclosure  of  geological  surveying
information  as  filed  with  certain  gov-
ernment  authorities  concerning  oil  and
gas  exploration.  The  court  ultimately
found that the regulatory regime, devel-
oped to further policy goals considered
to be in the public interest, cut short the
term of statutory copyright protection, a
term  which  can  be  50  or  more  years
under the Copyright Act.4

GSI was a complex case involving
25  actions  started  by  the  plaintiff  in
Alberta  against  numerous  oil  and  gas
exploration companies, seismic compa-
nies,  copying  companies  and  energy
boards.5 The plaintiff,  Geophysical
Services  Incorporated,  was  a  Canadian
company  in  the  business  of  offshore
marine seismic surveys in the Atlantic
and  Arctic  oceans.  This  seismic  data
was licensed to oil and gas companies
for the purposes of explorations. Some
of this seismic data had been deposited
over the years with federal and provin-
cial government authorities such as the
National  Energy  Board  and  various
provincial off-shore petroleum boards.
Copy  of  the  seismic  data  was  made
available  to  the  public  following  the
expiration  of  confidentiality  periods
set  out  in  various  regulatory  schemes.
The  plaintiff,  Geophysical  Services
Incorporated, claimed a copyright inter-
est  in  the  seismic  data  deposited  with
the  boards  and  further  claimed  that  its
copyright  had  been  breached  through
the reproduction of the material without
its  consent  and  without  compensation
for further dissemination.

In  determining  whether  there  was
copyright  protection  for  GSI’s  seismic
data,  the  first  question  the  court
addressed  involved  an  evaluation  of
whether the material—raw and processed
seismic  data—met  the  conditions  to
qual ify  as  a  “work”  for  the  purposes  of
the  Copyright  Act.  The  court  identified
the following statutory provisions:

Ibid., at para. 40.

1 Keatley Surveying v Teranet, 2016 ONSC 1717 (CanLII).
2
3 Geophysical Service Incorporated v Encana Corporation, 2016 ABQB 49 (CanLII).
4 Copyright Act, RSC 1985, c. C-42.
5 Similar actions on the same issues were also started by the Plaintiff in other jurisdictions including the federal, Newfoundland and

Nova Scotia Courts. Geophysical Service Incorporated v Encana Corporation, 2016 ABQB 49 (CanLII), at para. 5. 

Vol. 70, No. 2, 2016                                                                                       dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2016-212

GEOMATICA  145

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by 5.188.216.134 on 11/29/18For personal use only. The relevant portion of s. 3 of the
Copyright Act states as follows:

3(1)  For  the  purposes  of  the Act,
“copyright,”  in  relation  to  a
work, means the sole right to
produce  or  reproduce  the
work  or  any  substantial  part
thereof  in  any  material  form
whatever, ....

Section  5  sets  out  the  necessary
conditions for copyright to exist:

5(1) Subject to this Act, copyright
shall  subsist  in  Canada,  for
the  term  hereinafter  men-
tioned, in every original liter-
ary,  dramatic,  musical  and
artistic work if any one of the
following conditions are met:

(a) In the case of a work, the
author was, at the date of the
making of the work, a citizen
or  subject  of,  or  a  person
ordinarily resident in, a treaty
country;

Section  2  defines  “every  original
literary,  dramatic,  musical  and
artistic work:”

literary,
original 
“every 
dra matic, musical and artistic
work”  includes  every  origi-
nal production in the literary,
scientific  or  artistic  domain,
whatever may be the mode or
form  of  its  expression,  such
as compilations, books, pam-
phlets  and  other  writings,
lectures, dramatic or dramati-
co-musical  works,  musical
works,  translations,  illustra-
tions,  sketches  and  plastic
works  relative  to  geography,
topography,  architecture  or
science.

Section  2  also  defines  “literary
work” and “artistic work:”

“literary work” includes tables,
computer programs, and com-
pilations of literary works

“artistic  work” 
includes
paintings,  drawings,  maps,
charts,  plans,  photographs,

engravings, 
sculptures,
works  of  artistic  craftsman-
ship, architectural works, and
compilations of artistic works.

“Compilation” is defined to mean
(a)  a  work  resulting  from  the
selection  or  arrangement  of  liter-
ary,  dramatic,  musical  or  artistic
works or of parts thereof, or (b) a
work  resulting  from  the  selection
or arrangement of data.

Thus, the question became one of
whether  GSI’s  seismic  material
can be considered an original pro-
duction in the literary, scientific or
artistic domain in its various forms
of expression, which include tapes,
CDs,  computer  sticks,  seismic
sections, and written final reports,
and as such constitute an original
literary or artistic work.

Section  34.1(1)  of  the  Copyright
Act provides  that  in  any  civil
pro ceedings  under  the  Act  in
which the defendant puts in issue
either  the  existence  of  the  copy-
right  or  the  plaintiff’s  title  to  it,
“(a) copyright shall be presumed,
unless  the  contrary  is  proved,  to
subsist 
the  work...sound
recording...as  the  case  may  be.”
So I must start with a presumption
that  GSI  has  copyright  in  the
seis mic material in issue.6 

in 

The main  point  of  contention
between  the  parties  was  whether  the
seismic  material  could  be  considered
“original.”  The  Supreme  Court  of
Canada’s decision in CCH Canadian Ltd.
v  Law  Society  of  Upper  Canada,7
pro vid ed the  following  definition  of
“original” which, in turn, was relied upon
by the Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench: 

I conclude that the correct position
falls between these extremes [pure
labour  versus  creativity].  For  a
work  to  be  “original”  within  the
meaning  of  the  Copyright  Act,  it
must be more than a mere copy of
another work. At the same time, it
need not be creative, in the sense
of being novel or unique. What is

required  to  attract  copyright  pro-
tection in the expression of an idea
is  an  exercise  of  skill  and  judg-
ment.  By  skill,  I  mean  the  use  of
one’s knowledge, developed apti-
tude or practised ability in produc-
ing  the  work.  By  judgment,  I
mean the use of one’s capacity for
discernment  or  ability  to  form  an
opinion or evaluation by compar-
ing  different  possible  options  in
producing the work. This exercise
of  skill  and  judgment  will  neces-
sarily  involve  intellectual  effort.
The exercise of skill and judgment
required to produce the work must
not  be  so  trivial  that  it  could  be
characterized as a purely mechan-
ical  exercise.  For  example,  any
skill  and  judgment  that  might  be
involved  in  simply  changing  the
font of a work to produce “anoth-
er”  work  would  be  too  trivial  to
merit  copyright  protection  as  an
“original” work.8 

In  exploring  the  original  work
question,  the  Alberta  court  took  a
detailed look at the nature of field seis-
mic  data  and  the  data  acquisition
process,  noting  the  planning  and  deci-
sion making needed at every stage from
determining  the  locations  where  data
was to be acquired, to the methodology
for  imaging  the  Earth’s  floor,  to  the
source array and seismic receiver array,
and the monitoring of factors during the
recording  of  acoustic  signals.9 The
court  found  that  the  raw  seismic  field
data  and  written  reports  are  literary
works for the purposes of the Copyright
Act and in doing so stated:

I find the seismic sections, i.e. the
squiggly or zebra lines, fit within
the  definition  of  an  artistic  work,
similar to a map, plan or chart, or
a  compilation  of  an  artistic  work
since  the  product  is  the  result  of
selection  or  arrangement  of  the
data,  or  sound  recordings,  from
the geology of the subsurface.

Based on the evidence before this
Court, the data becomes a “work”

6 GSI, at paras. 31–37.
7 CCH Canadian Ltd. v Law Society of Upper Canada, [2004] 1 SCR 339, 2004 SCC 13 (CanLII), 236 DLR (4th) 395; 30 CPR (4th) 1;

317 NR 107; AZ-50223890; JE 2004-602; [2004] SCJ No 12 (QL); 129 ACWS (3d) 177; 247 FTR 318.
8 CCH Canadian Ltd. v Law Society of Upper Canada, at paragraph 16, and as quoted at para. 40 of GSI.
9 GSI, at paras. 49–54.

146  GEOMATICA                                                                                                                    

Vol. 70, No. 2, 2016

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by 5.188.216.134 on 11/29/18For personal use only. when  it  is  compiled.  One  ping
from a hydrophone would not suf-
fice;  it  is  the  collection,  arrange-
ment, distillation and compilation
that creates the work—both at the
raw  data  level  and  then  at  the
more refined processed data level
(see  too  Robertson  v  Thompson
Corp.,  2006  SCC  43  (CanLII)  at
paras  36  and  37).The  more  diffi-
cult question is whether these lit-
erary  or  artistic  products  are
“original,” as defined in CCH, so
as to qualify as “works” within the
meaning of the Act.

In my view, based on the evidence
presented,  both  the  raw  or  field
data  and  the  processed  data  meet
the  “skill  and  judgment”  test  laid
out by the Supreme Court in CCH
and  should  be  considered  “origi-
nal” artistic or literary productions
in the scientific domain, therefore
protected “works.”10

On the skill and judgment questions,
the  court  reiterated  the  following
illus trative  comparisons  given  by  the
plaintiff and one of the expert witnesses,
noting  the  skill  and  decision  making
that  is  required  at  various  stages  in
order to create a valuable end-product: 

The  Plaintiff  argued  that  data
cre ation is akin to taking a photo-
graph.  I  agree.  In  this  case,  the
photograph  is  not  just  a  quick
snapshot;  rather,  it  is  one  that
requires  careful  selection  of  the
location,  angle  of  technological
instruments  (e.g.  the  size  and
depth  of  the  airguns,  the  length
and  depth  of  the  streamers,  and
the  number  and  placement  of
hydrophones),  and  finally  the  fil-
tering and refining of the product.

Dr.  Wren’s  comparison  is  even
more  compelling—he  suggests
the  creative  effort  compares  to
that of the conductor of an orches-
tra, who ensures that some instru-
ments are played louder, or softer,

or  faster  or  slower,  to  make  a
beau tiful creation. The same types
of decisions are made on board the
seismic  acquisition  ship  to  obtain
“beautiful” raw seismic data.11

Skill and  judgment  were  also
found to be a necessary component of
the  processed  data—through  the  work
of processors converting raw data into
a  usable  end-product.  The  act  of  pro-
cessing  data  is  not  merely  a  mechani-
cal  one;  human  input  is  required
throughout  the  different  stages  of
pro cessing  and  the  quality  of  the  end
product  of  processed  data  is  largely
dependent on the skill of those individ-
uals involved in the acts of processing.
The court elaborated:

that 

[ … ] The raw data is not simply
pumped  into  a  computer  and  a
useful  product  comes  out.  The
evidence 
the
is  clear 
processed  product  can  be  quite
different depending on the skill of
the processor and that exploration
companies  have  their  favourite
processors  who  create  the  best
quality product for their pur poses.

The fact that on a gross basis the
product  may  be  similar—like  in
cases  where  a  geological  forma-
tion  is  as  big  as  Everest,  to  use
the  Defendants’  example,  does
not  take  away  from  the  fact  that
to  get  a  more  refined  product,
(i.e.  one  that  can  be  relied  upon
by  exploration  companies  for
their exploration investment), the
best  image  will  be  made  by  the
processor with the most skill.12

Decision  making  was  a  necessary
component  of  the  process  even  in  the
presence of industry standards:

[…]  Although  there  are  certain
industry  standards  in  play  for
some  of  the  decisions  made  dur-
ing the acquisition and processing
of seismic data, they do not form
the  substantial  amount  of  the

product  here.  In  other  words,  the
original  skill  and  judgment  that
comes to bear on the final product
of the seismic work far outweighs
the  portion  of  “hard  wired”
indus try standards in play.13

A 

raised 

further  question 

in
deter mining  the  copyright  issue  was
whether  a  human  author  was  involved
in the creation of the original work. In
GSI,  the  defendants  had  advanced  an
argument  based  on  an Australian  deci-
sion  in  Telstra  Corporation  Limited  v
Phone Directories Company PTY Ltd.14
that “copyright  does  not  subsist  in  a
work  which  is  created  by  a  computer
with  little  if  any  human  input.”15 Here
the Alberta  court  found  that  “the  seis-
mic  data  produced  through  this  exer-
cise  of  skill  and  judgment  is  ‘tailored
and unique’ to the author.” And further,
it  noted  that  “the  human  authorship
ele ment has been satisfied.”16 

[  …  ]  The seismic  data  is  an
expression of GSI’s views of what
the image of the subsurface of the
surveyed  areas  represents.  The
creation is obtained by a series of
sounds  emanating  from  the  sub-
surface  that  have  been  collected,
selected  and  arranged  in  a  very
particular  fashion  and  stored  on
various  media.  The  facts  them-
selves,  the  rocks,  are  still  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea  available  for
anyone else to survey.

Alternatively,  if  one  says  that  an
individual  ping  of  sound  is  a
“fact”  then  these  too  can  be
obtained  by  someone  else  who
wants  to  go  to  the  same  location
and  bounce  sound  waves  off  the
bottom  of  the  sea  (although  it  is
unlikely  that  the  new  person
would get exactly the same sound
for  the  reasons  discussed  above).
The  tapes  of  the  collections  of
sounds are no different from a neg-
ative  of  a  photograph  or  the  tape

10 GSI, at paras. 76–78.
11 GSI, at paras. 80–81.
12 GSI, at paras. 83–84.
13 GSI, at para. 105.
14 Telstra Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company PTY Ltd, (2010) FCAFC 149.
15 GSI, at para. 88.
16 GSI, at para. 91.

Vol. 70, No. 2, 2016                                                                                                                   

GEOMATICA    147

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by 5.188.216.134 on 11/29/18For personal use only. recording of a symphony. It is the
compilation  that  makes  them  a
protected work. The Copyright Act
does  not  require  a  “preconceived”
idea to protect its expression.17

also  found  to  be  germane.  Legislation
passed at the provincial level and simi-
lar to the federal regime, also included a
five-year  period.  The  relevant  sections
in the CPRA state:

As  has  been  pointed  out  in  a
com mentary  written  about  the  GSI
deci sion,  there  is  a  certain  subjective
element in the collection of data in the
form of choices that are made as to the
manner in which that data is collected.18
The  plaintiffs  were  successful  on
the copyright issue, with the court find-
ing that raw or field seismic data is an
original  literary  compilation  work  and
the processed data is also an original lit-
erary  work  and  an  artistic  compilation
work  in  the  scientific  domain.  With
such a finding, there is protection under
the  Copyright  Act. Having  made  this
determination,  the  court  then  turned  to
the issue of whether the defendants had
breached the copyright in the plaintiff’s
seismic  data  by  copying  or  allowing
others  to  copy  data  that  had  been  sub-
mitted  to  various  government  entities
under the regulatory regime.  To address
this  question  the  court  then  examined
the regulatory regime. 

The 

Petroleum
Canadian 
Resources  Act,19 (“CPRA”)  sets  out  a
thorough and specific code applying to
all  oil  and gas property in offshore and
frontier  lands,  including  seismic  data.
The court explored the legislative history
of the regime dating back into the 1950s
through  various  pieces  of  predecessor
legislation  and  finally  the  clause  by
clause description of the CPRA, then Bill
C-5,  in  order  to  confirm  that  there  is  a
general principle that all information or
documentation  provided  under  the Act
is privileged, but this is balanced against
the  objectives  of  promoting  natural
resource  exploration  and  development.
The key sections of the CPRA relate to
privilege  and  disclosure.  Furthermore,
the exemption set out in section 101(7),
which allows for disclosure of geophys-
ical  work  after  a  five-year  period  was

101.  (2)  Subject  to  this  section,
information  or  documentation  is
privileged if it is provided for the
purposes of this Act or the Canada
Oil and Gas Operations Act, other
than  Part  0.1  of  that  Act,  or  any
regulation made under either Act,
or for the purposes of Part II.1 of
the  National  Energy  Board  Act,
whether or not the information or
documentation  is  required  to  be
provided.

101.  (2.1)  Subject to this  section,
information or documentation that
is privileged under subsection (2)
shall  not  knowingly  be  disclosed
without  the  consent  in  writing  of
the person who provided it, except
for the purposes of the administra-
tion  or  enforcement  of  this  Act,
the  Canada  Oil  and  Gas
Operations Act or Part II.1 of the
National Energy Board Act or for
the purposes of legal proceedings
relating  to  its  administration  or
enforcement.

101.  (7)  Subsection  (2)  does  not
apply  in  respect  of  the  following
classes  of  information  or  docu-
mentation  obtained  as  a  result  of
carrying on a work or activity that
is  authorized  under  the  Canada
Oil  and  Gas  Operations  Act,
namely, information or documen-
tation in respect of …

(d)  geological  work  or
geo physical  work  performed
on  or  in  relation  to  any
fron tier lands,

(i) in the case of a well site
seabed  survey  where  the
well has been drilled, after
the expiration of the period
referred to in paragraph (a)
or the later period referred
to in subparagraph (b)(i) or
(ii),
(ii)  or 

(c)(i)  or 

accord ing 
to  whether
para graph (a), (b) or (c) is
applicable  in  respect  of
that well, or

(ii) in any other case, after
the expiration of five years
the  date  of
following 
com pletion of the work.

The court found that the exemption
in subsection 101(7) was not a general
provision  linked  only  to  governmental
uses  of  the  material—it  dealt  with
dis closure  after  the  expiration  of  a
five-year period of privilege. The five-
year  period,  rather  than  something
comparable  to  the  50-year  period
under the Copyright Act, was selected
as  a  reasonable  amount  of  time  to
allow  those  engaged  to  recoup  their
investment  through  charging  licence
fees  before  the  data  became  publicly
available.  The  Court’s  historical
review  of  the  CPRA  and  its  predeces-
sor,  the  Canada  Oil  and  Gas  Act,20
also led  to  the  conclusion  that  parlia-
ment was aware that the regime would
impact  property  rights  related  to  seis-
mic data and other information, but the
choice  was  made  in  an  effort  to
bal ance  property  interests  with  the
pol i cy  objective  of  promoting  early
resource exploration. 

I  am  of  the  view  that  the  CPRA
expressly  affects  GSI’s  rights  in
its  data  once  the  five-year  privi-
lege period is expired. The section
says  so  plainly.  The  historical
review  of  the  implementation  of
COGA (1982) and later the CPRA
makes it clear that Parliament was
aware  it  would  be  treading  on
property rights of the owners, not
only of seismic data, but also very
confidential and valuable well and
other  exploration  data.  Senator
Hays  in  particular  complained  of
the  “confiscatory  nature”  of  the
legislation especially in regards to
the  speculative  data  of  seismic
companies who did not enjoy tax
incentives.

17 Telstra Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company PTY Ltd, (2010) FCAFC 149.
18 Teresa Scassa, Court decision finds copyright in compilation of seismic data, at: http://www.teresascassa.ca, accessed June 13, 2016.
19 Canadian Petroleum Resources Act, RSC 1985, c. 36 (2nd Supp).
20 Canada Oil and Gas Act, SC 1980-81-82, c. 81.

148  GEOMATICA                                                                                                                    

Vol. 70, No. 2, 2016

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by 5.188.216.134 on 11/29/18For personal use only. Indeed,  both  COGA  (1982) and
later  the  CPRA incorporated  “no
compensation” clauses in its legis-
lation  (s  61(2)  and  s  111(2)
respectively).  In  my  view,  this
acknowledges  Parliament’s  intent
to  confiscate  private  property  in
return for a policy it believed to be
in  the  public  interest  to  promote
early  exploration  of  its  resources
in the offshore and frontier lands.
Section  101(7)  must  be  interpret-
ed with this intent in mind, unfair
as it may be to GSI.21

The effect of the legislative regime
has been described by one commentator
as  providing  “for  an  expropriation—
without compensation—of the remainder
of  the  term  of  copyright  protection.”22
But this is done, as the court describes, to
achieve  “an  internal  balance  between
allowing  for  commercialization  of  the
information and the public interest in the
wider  dissemination  of  that  informa-
tion.”23 The  court  concluded  that  there
was an awareness on part of Parliament
that  the  seismic  data  held  commercial
value and an effort to take this into con-
sideration  in  the  development  of  the
regime. As Justice Eidsvik described, 

[… ] The considerations balanced
in this regard are the same as those
in the Copyright Act, i.e. the rights
of the creator versus the rights of
the  public  to  access  data.  To  the
extent  that  GSI  feels  that  this
pol i cy  is  misplaced,  its  rights  are
political  ones—it  is  not  for  this
Court  to  change  the  intent  of
Parliament, unfair as it may be to
GSI’s interests.24

There is clearly a conflict between the
Copyright Act protections of property in a
creation,  and  the  regulatory  regime  that
contemplates  disclosure  of  a  cre ation—
such as seismic data (and other informa-
tion)—without  the  consent  of  the  owner.
The court turned to earlier findings: 

Justice  Rothstein’s  discussion  on
the statutory interpretation of such
in  Re
conflicting  provision 
Broadcasting at paras 41 to 45 is
helpful  here.  He  points  out  that
conflict  is  defined  narrowly  and
that  unavoidable  conflicts  only
occur  when  two  pieces  of  legisla-
tion  are  directly  contradictory,
when  their  concurrent  application
would  lead  to  absurd  results,  or
where  the  practical  effect  of  one
the  purpose
would 
intend ed by Parliament of the other.

frustrate 

Here, the rights afforded to owners
of  copyrightable  material  created
in  the  Canadian  offshore  conflict
head  on  with  the  rights  and  obli-
gations  under  the  Regulatory
Regime. In simple terms, it is the
difference  of  a  few  decades  of
(approximately  50
protection 
years)  under  the  Copyright  Act
versus  5  to  15  years  under  the
Regulatory  Regime  (as 
is
presently applied).25 

it 

How is this conflict resolved? The
general rule for statutory interpretation
is  that  the  more  specific  regime  is
applied  over  the  more  general  one.  In
the GSI example, the legislative provi-
sions were found by the court to be part
of  a  regulatory  regime  specific  to  oil

and  gas  exploration 
that  strictly
reg u lates the creation and disclosure of
exploration data. A specific regime that,
Justice  Eidsvik  found,  prevailed  over
the  general  regime  set  out  in  the
Copyright  Act.  Other  commentary  on
the  decision  in GSI has  taken  an
alter native  position,  suggesting  a  dis-
tinction  between  confidentiality  and
disclosure on one hand (the subject of
the CPRA), and copying and property
on  the  other  (the  subject  of  the
Copyright  Act).26 Although it  is  true
that the regulatory regime does not use
the  word  “copy,”  the  trial  judge  held
that  the  right  to  dis closure  included
the  ability  to  access  and  copy  the
information. This may become a ques-
tion before an appellate court at a later
date. Other circumstances may benefit
from clarity in this overall area of the
nature  of  property  in  geospatial  data:
does  the  owner  of  IP  in  derivative
products  created  from  an  author’s
ini tial contribution have an obligation
to share in the resulting revenue? Can
a  land  surveyor  refuse  to  share  origi-
nal field notes on grounds of IP rights,
in the face of a regulatory regime that
requires  disclosure?  On  more  than  one
occasion,  the  court  in  Geophysical
v  Encana
Service 
Corporation mentioned that the state of
the law may be unfair to the interests of
GSI.  Yes,  the  law  may  not  always  be
entirely  fair.  However,  what  the  limits
may  be  to  the  expropriatory  effect  of
such a regulatory regime, remains to be
determined. q

Incorporated 

21 At paras. 236–237.
22 Teresa Scassa, Expropriating Copyrights in the Public Interest? Recent Court Decision Addresses Interesting Issue 

http://www.teresascassa.ca, accessed June 13, 2016. 

23 GSI at para. 298.
24 GSI at para. 297.
25 GSI at paras. 295–296.
26 Nigel Bankes, Expiration of Confidentiality also give Boards the Liberty to Copy and Distribute, 

http://ablawg.ca, accessed June 13, 2016.

Vol. 70, No. 2, 2016                                                                                                                   

GEOMATICA  149

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by 5.188.216.134 on 11/29/18For personal use only. 