This article was downloaded by: [Fordham University]
On: 20 April 2013, At: 07:43
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

A GIS-based environmental
decision support system
to assess the transfer of
long-lived radiocaesium
through food chains in
areas contaminated by the
Chernobyl accident
M. Van Der Perk a , J. R. Burema a , P. A.
Burrough a , A. G. Gillett b & M. B. Van Der
Meer a
a The Utrecht Centre for Environment and
Landscape Dynamics - UCEL, Faculty of
Geographical Sciences, Utrecht University, P.O.
Box 80115, 3508 TC Utrecht.
b Environmental Science Division, School of
Biological Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Sutton-Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12
5RD, England, UK.
Version of record first published: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: M. Van Der Perk , J. R. Burema , P. A. Burrough , A. G. Gillett
& M. B. Van Der Meer (2001): A GIS-based environmental decision support system
to assess the transfer of long-lived radiocaesium through food chains in areas
contaminated by the Chernobyl accident, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 15:1, 43-64

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810010005552

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/
terms-and-conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make
any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or
up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher
shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or
costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 1, 43± 64

Research Article

A GIS-based environmental decision support system to assess the
transfer of long-lived radiocaesium through food chains in areas
contaminated by the Chernobyl accident

M. VAN DER PERK1 , J. R. BUREMA1 , P. A. BURROUGH1 ,
A. G. GILLETT2 and M. B. VAN DER MEER1
1 The Utrecht Centre for Environment and Landscape Dynamics—UCEL,
Faculty of Geographical Sciences, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80115,
3508 TC Utrecht
2 Environmental Science Division, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Nottingham, Sutton-Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD,
England, UK

(Received 12 December 1999; accepted 4 May 2000)

Abstract. As part of the EC-(cid:142) nanced RESTORE project (‘Restoration of radio-
actively contaminated ecosystems’), an operational, user-friendly GIS-based
Environmental Decision Support System (EDSS) has been developed. The
RESTORE EDSS comprises a GIS-embedded modelling tool to assess the transfer
of radiocaesium via food chains and external radiation exposures to humans
based on an understanding of the nature of contamination, geo-chemical, hydrolo-
gical, and biological processes, the diŒerent pathways for radiocaesium, and
human behaviour. The EDSS accounts for spatial and temporal variation of these
factors and is applicable to a variety of ecosystems. The overall aim of the EDSS
is to identify vulnerable areas in terms of enhanced radionuclide transfer into
food chains and/or the presence of ‘critical population groups’ that suŒer enhanced
internal and/or external exposure to radionuclides. Therefore, it provides informa-
tion to support decisions about where to implement countermeasures and where
to restore contaminated land most eŒectively. Predictions made by the EDSS use
maps of soil contamination, soil type, and land use, production and production
rates, and consumption habits of the aŒected population. The EDSS is illustrated
by an analysis of the entire contaminated area of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia.

1.

Introduction
The Chernobyl accident on 26 April, 1986, caused soil contamination by various
radionuclides over large parts of Europe. Today, more than 14 years after the
Chernobyl accident, the resulting soil contamination is still a source for the transfer
of long-lived radiocaesium (1 3 7 Cs; physical half-life 30 years) and radiostrontium
(9 0 Sr; physical half life 28.5 years) into human food chains (Alexakhin et al. 1996 ).
The transfer of long-lived radionuclides from soil to humans varies in space and
time depending on deposition level, physical decay, soil type, land use, the resulting
contamination in food products, and consumption habits. Present day radioactivity
levels in food produced on collective farm systems and sold in state shops in Ukraine,

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810010005552

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 44

M. van der Perk et al.

Belarus, and Russia are usually below national intervention limits, but this may
change as these limits become more stringent. Moreover, less money is available for
implementing countermeasures on the collective farms in order to reduce radiocae-
sium transfer to agricultural products. In addition, the proportion of relatively ‘clean’
food products from state shops in the average diet of the local population has been
reduced because many people supplement their food by private foodstuŒs (Skuterud
et al. 1997). These foodstuŒs are privately produced or collected on marginal unim-
proved farmlands and semi-natural lands where countermeasures have not been
applied and are sold locally.

Local scientists, environmental engineers, and policy makers need to know which
food sources provide the largest contributions of radiocaesium, so that they can
implement countermeasures (e.g. fertilisers, ploughing, land use restrictions, feed
additives for animals, consumption advice) to reduce radiation doses most eŒectively.
To help them to identify these food sources, an environmental decision support tool
is needed that assists in the investigation of the pathways and rates by which
radionuclides are transferred through food chains. To account for the spatial and
temporal variation of the factors governing radionuclide transfer, such a tool needs
to be based on a dynamic geographical information system (GIS). In recent years,
GIS use in radioecological research has increased and various GIS-based decision
support systems have been developed (e.g. Arutyunyan et al. 1996, Ehrhardt and
Shershakov 1996, Yatsalo et al. 1998 ). However, most existing systems have been
largely based on information relevant to western conditions and agricultural systems,
they do not include the dynamics of radionuclide transfer, nor can they easily be
applied to areas other than those for which they have been developed. Moreover,
these systems merely consist of point models and do not or scarcely include spatial
operations, for example to de(cid:142) ne the origin of consumed food products.

This paper describes the development and structure of an advanced, generic,
user-friendly, and operational GIS-based environmental decision support system
(EDSS) that has been developed as part of the EC funded projects RESTORE
(‘Restoration strategies for radioactively contaminate d ecosystems’) and STRESS
(‘Spatial and temporal radioecological survey systems’) (Van der Perk et al. 1998 ).
The principal aim of the EDSS is to provide decision makers with an innovative
spatio-tempora l modelling and analysis system for radioecological data at various
levels of scale, which addresses the following questions:

E Where does

the food product contamination by radiocaesium exceed

E Which areas are safe for producing or collecting food products and which

E Which areas exceed external dose levels for residence or stay?
E Whether and when is it safe to bring previously abandoned land into

intervention limits?

areas should be avoided?

agricultural use?

Answers to these questions enable decision makers to identify the most vulnerable
areas with enhanced radionuclide transfer into food chains and/or the presence of
‘critical population groups’ that suŒer enhanced internal and/or external exposure.
With this information, they can develop appropriate strategies to prevent radiation
doses exceeding intervention limits and to restore contaminate d land.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

45

2. Structure of the EDSS

The core of the EDSS consists of various sub-models to calculate radiocaesium
transfer through parts of the food chain and external exposure (see (cid:142) gure 1). All
models have been implemented in the spatio-tempora l modelling language of
PCRaster, a GIS-based modelling toolkit including cartographic, geostatistical and
dynamic modelling (PCRaster 1996, Wesseling et al. 1996). This raster GIS package
was chosen because:

E The PCRaster package is based on ‘desk-top PC’ technology widely available

in the countries concerned (Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia);

E The PCRaster spatial modelling language allows the development of generic,
area independent models, so they can be applied to any appropriate available
spatial data set;

E The PCRaster modelling language allows the construction of dynamic models

within a GIS environment;

E To represent continuous (cid:142) elds (e.g. soil contamination data or soil attribute
data), it is preferable to use a regular raster grid (Burrough and McDonnell
1998) above irregular polygons that, at (cid:142) rst, represent geographical entities
such as agricultural (cid:142) elds, forest plots, and built-up areas.

The (cid:142) rst step in the EDSS is to simulate radiocaesium transfer from soil to the
most important agricultural and semi-natural food products (milk, potatoes, grain,
meat, mushrooms, and berries) using maps of soil type, land use and soil contamina-
tion. Two types of models are available for predicting the soil to food product
transfer: a simple steady state transfer factor model and a semi-mechanistic dynamic
soil-plant transfer model. The choice of which model to use depends upon the scale
and quality of the input data: the availability of detailed information of various soil
attributes permits the user to use the more complex semi-mechanistic transfer model.
Where such detailed information is not available, a simpler transfer factor model
can be used. If soil contamination is only available at point locations, contamination

Figure 1. Schematic overview of the Environmental Decision Support System to model
radionuclide transfer through food chains.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 46

M. van der Perk et al.

values can be interpolated using the Gstat geostatistical package (Pebesma and
Wesseling 1998). Subsequently, the radiocaesium intake by humans is calculated
using the previously calculated food product contamination and dietary habits
information and radiocaesium (cid:143) uxes are calculated using agricultural production
data. In addition, external exposure is calculated based on the soil contamination
by radiocaesium and human residence time in various environments.

A user-friendly interface has been developed based on HTML documents and
model dialog boxes, which allows the user to select the model area, adjust model
input parameters, run the models, display model inputs and outputs, and browse
detailed descriptions of available data and models accounting for data sources, model
concepts, and default parameter values. In this way, the model results for various
food production and consumption scenarios can be compared. At present, the
language of the EDSS interface is English. Figure 2 shows an example of the EDSS
interface showing the HTML interface, a model dialog box and PCRaster display.

3. Spatial data

To demonstrate the EDSS, digital spatial databases of areas contaminate d by
the Chernobyl accident in Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia have been built and collated
in close collaboration with the RESTORE project participants and project partners
from Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia. At present, spatial data from 48 areas have been
incorporated into the EDSS (see table 1). The scales of these areas range between
the entire contaminate d zone of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia (about 30 000 km2 ), the
district level (about 1000 km2 ), and the farm level (about 50 km2 ). In addition to

Figure 2. User-friendly interface of the RESTORE EDSS showing an example of the HTML
documents, a model dialog box, and PCRaster display.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

47

Table 1. Areas that have been implemented into the RESTORE EDSS.

Area

Data source

Scale
level

Map
resolution

Entire contaminated zone of
Ukraine, Belarus and Russia Centre, US Geological Survey)

Various (amongst EC Joint Research National

1000 m

Ukraine
Chernigov
30 km zone

Chliborob

Spilna Pracya

Belarus
Vetka

Russia
Novozybkov

Klintsy

All 20 farms of Klintsy
district

Institute of Radioecology—UAAS
Chernobyl Scienti(cid:142) c and Technical
Centre, Ukraine
Ukrainian Institute of Agricultural
Radiology, NERC Institute of
Terrestrial Ecology, UK
Institute of Radioecology—UAAS

District
District

Farm

400 m
250 m

50 m

Farm

50 m

Belarussian State University

District

100 m

Vernadsky Institute of Chemistry and District
Analytical Chemistry—RAS; PRANA
project (see Yatsalo et al. 1998)

Analytical Chemistry—RAS; PRANA
project (see Yatsalo et al. 1998)
Vernadsky Institute of Chemistry and District
Analytical Chemistry—RAS; PRANA
project (see Yatsalo et al. 1998)
Vernadsky Institute of Chemistry and Farm
Analytical Chemistry—RAS; PRANA
project (see Yatsalo et al. 1998)

100 m

50 m

100 m

50 m

All 18 farms of Novozybkov Vernadsky Institute of Chemistry and Farm
district

5

2

O

O), and phosphate (P
2

the listed areas, the generic models of the EDSS can be run for other areas. The
spatial databases include maps of soil contamination by radiocaesium, soil type, soil
texture, physical and chemical soil properties (clay content, organic matter content,
bulk density, pH, soil potassium (K
)) (at the district and
farm levels only), land use, crop type, farms (only at the district level), and settlements.
All original spatial data have been converted into generic classi(cid:142) cations and/or
map units. In most cases the original attribute soil data were used to convert the
original soil maps into generic maps of soil properties, otherwise external sources
from the literature were used (e.g. Dokuchaev Institute of Soil Science 1986 ).
Furthermore, all maps have a common Albers equal-area conic projection and the
maps for the diŒerent areas have the same (cid:142) le names to enable the running of generic
EDSS models. In the countries concerned it is not common to provide detailed
meta-data on how the map data were collated (e.g. number and locations of original
samples, interpolation method, data quality). Nevertheless, within the EDSS all steps
made in converting from the original digital data (as they were made available) to
the (cid:142) nal PCRaster maps (map and unit conversions, projections, reclassi(cid:142) cations)
have been documented and summarised in meta-data documents for each available
map.

The EDSS also provides the possibility to enter new generic data sets. For these,
an additional data directory is reserved, from which all available generic models can

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 48

M. van der Perk et al.

be run. The help menu guides the user in creating generic data sets in the required
PCRaster format.

4. Spatial models
4.1. Steady state transfer factor model

The steady state radiocaesium transfer factor model calculates annual average
food product contamination by radiocaesium (Bq/kg) based on soil contamination
by radiocaesium and soil texture class (peat—sand—loam—clay). Two steady state
transfer factor models have been implemented into the EDSS: a single food product
model to calculate radiocaesium transfer to any food product and a multiple food
product model to calculate radiocaesium transfer to milk, potatoes, grain, meat,
mushrooms and berries.

The radiocaesium transfer from soil to food products is calculated using soil type
and food product dependent so-called aggregated transfer factors (Eriksson 1994)
(m2 /kg):

CsF 5 T agt Ö CsS Ö 103

(1)

where: CsF 5
ated transfer factor (m2 /kg) and CsS 5

radiocaesium contamination of food product (Bq/kg), T agt 5 aggreg-
radiocaesium contamination of soil (kBq/m2 ).

Soil contamination by radiocaesium is corrected for physical decay (half-life 5
30 yr). Studies of contaminate d agricultural products have indicated that the initial
rate of decline in radiocaesium uptake may be described by a ‘fast pool’ with an
eŒective ecological half-life of around 1 year (Smith et al. 1999 ) while, concurrently,
long term reduction rates may be modelled by a ‘slow pool’ using a 10 year half-life
(Jacob and Likhtarev 1996). The decline in transfer factor values through time is
predicted using a double exponential equation using these half-lives:

T agt 5

(A1Ö

exp (Õ k1 Ö

t) 1 A2Ö

exp(Õ k
2

t))Ö T ag0

(2)

where: T agt 5 aggregated transfer factor at time 5
transfer factor at time 5 0 (1986 ) (m2 kgÕ
A2 5 Empirical parameter (1Õ A1 5 0.186 ) k
fast pool (0.6935 yrÕ
(0.06935 yrÕ

1 ), T ag0 5 aggregated
empirical parameter ((cid:142) xed to 0.814),
5 Empirical (cid:142) rst order decay constant
5 Empirical (cid:142) rst order decay constant slow pool

1 ) and k

1 ), A1 5

1 ).

1

2

t (m2 kgÕ

The model allows for input of transfer factor values that apply to years other
than 1986. The model corrects these transfer factor values to the year of prediction
using equation (2). By default, transfer factor values for 1993 are used, because this
year is represented most frequently in data reported the literature (e.g. Jacob and
Likhtarev 1996, Strand et al. 1996, Fesenko et al. 1997, Voigt and Semiochkina
2000 ). These default transfer factors represent average values for soils under ‘normal’
practice, including common countermeasures and have been derived from mostly
Russian sites. Contamination of food products is calculated only for those areas
where food production or collection occurs. These areas are selected from the
appropriate classes of either land use or crop type.

The model output consists of three maps for each food product considered:

E Food product contamination by radiocaesium in the areas where product is

produced or collected;

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 Ö
EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

49

E Food product contamination by radiocaesium; area averages for the selected

areas (farms or entire modelling area);

E Excedance of intervention limit.

4.2. Semi-mechanistic dynamic transfer model

The semi-mechanistic dynamic transfer model simultaneously predicts radiocae-
sium contamination of ten agricultural products (pasture grass, hay, grain, straw,
potatoes, silage (maize), leafy vegetation, cows’ milk, beef, and pork) over time at
the scale of a single collective farm using a time step of one month. The temporal
prediction of radiocaesium transfer is calculated using the level of radiocaesium
deposition and soil characteristics, such as soil clay content, soil potassium content,
organic matter content, and pH, and, for the transfer to animals, the feed intake
rates for the various products. The EDSS allows the user to de(cid:142) ne the time step for
which product contamination is displayed. Two versions of the semi-mechanistic
dynamic transfer model have been included within the EDSS. The (cid:142) rst model
developed described by Absalom et al. (1999) was found to perform well for mineral
soils but inadequately described results for organic soils (Sanchez et al. 1999 ).
Consequently, an extended version of the (cid:142) rst ‘mineral’ model was developed to
include organic soils (Absalom et al. 2001). Whilst the parameterisation of the
extended model suggests it can be applied to any soil, there is evidence that it does
not always predict as eŒectively as the mineral model for soils with a high clay
content and very low organic matter.

Figure 3 schematically represents the overall structure of the mineral soil submo-
del. From inputs of soil exchangeable K, clay and radiocaesium inventory, estimates
of plant activity may be made.

Plant activity concentration (Bq kgÕ

1 ) is calculated from the product of a concen-
tration factor (CF, dm3 kgÕ
1 ) and the radiocaesium activity concentration in soil
solution. CF is related to soil solution potassium concentration as observed experi-
mentally by Smolders et al. (1997). As the value of soil solution potassium concentra-
tion for a soil is unlikely to be recorded in spatial data sets, it is necessary to estimate
this soil property within the model. For this purpose, a relationship between soil
solution potassium concentration and both exchangeable potassium and soil inor-
ganic CEC (a function of soil clay content) was derived on the basis of published
data from several sources for a wide range of soil types (Absalom et al. 1999 ).

The soil clay content is also used to predict the so-called radiocaesium intercep-
tion potential (RIP) (Cremers et al. 1988) which is the product of the radiocaesium
distribution coe(cid:141) cient (kd , dm3 kgÕ
1 ) and soil solution potassium concentration
(Smolders et al. 1997). The RIP and the soil solution potassium concentration can
be used to estimate the soil kd value; kd may then be used to estimate soil solution
radiocaesium activity concentration for use in conjunction with CF (see above) in
order to predict plant radiocaesium activity. The decline in solution radiocaesium
through time is predicted using a double exponential equation analogous to the
equation used to simulate the time-dependency of transfer factor values in the transfer
factor model (see equation (1)).

The model described above is applicable to agricultural soils with low to moderate
organic matter contents but the eŒect of organic matter must be incorporated in
order to use it for organic soils. The major adaptations involve the partitioning of
sorbed K and radiocaesium between organic ( humus) and inorganic (clay) soil

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 50

M. van der Perk et al.

Figure 3. Schematic representation of the soil-plant transfer model (mineral version). Model
inputs which are required maps of % Clay, Exchangeable K and Total Soil Cs
(shaded boxes).

fractions to predict the soil solution potassium concentration and kd from the relative
quantities of clay and humus in the soil. CEC values for humus and clay are estimated
from pH and clay content respectively. Radiocaesium adsorption is partitioned
between sorption to (cid:142) xing (clay kd) and non-(cid:142) xing (humus kd) sites. This allows the
double exponential equation that describes (cid:142) xation to be applied only to the
radiocaesium which is sorbed at (cid:142) xing (clay) sites. The model has been parameterised
by combining the data set of Smolders et al. (1997 ) for mineral soils with data sets
of Sanchez et al. (1999) (organic soils). The results have been described by Absalom
et al. (2001 ).

To predict activity concentration of animal products (cows’ milk, beef, and pork)
a conventional equilibrium transfer factor approach is used, so the daily radiocaesium
intake is simply the product of the animals daily intake of pasture grass and fodder

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

51

products, which changes over the seasons, and the activity concentrations of the
animal food products. This has the advantage of numerical simplicity but the disad-
vantage that the changes in radiocaesium activity concentration in animal products
will show step changes in response to changes in diet. However this eŒect is relatively
unimportant, especially as the models are to be used to estimate ingestion rates over
time periods of months-years.

The semi-mechanistic dynamic transfer model provides the following output for

each product considered:

E Time series of product contamination by radiocaesium; the model yields four
time series, namely farm average, and the 5-, 50- and 95 percentile values of
all pixels where the product is produced;

E Spatial distribution of radiocaesium contamination of product at the last time

step (except for animal products) ;

4.3. Flux model

1 ) and product contamination by radiocaesium (Bq kgÕ

The steady state radiocaesium (cid:143) ux model is used to calculate radiocaesium (cid:143) uxes
(Bq yrÕ
1 ) from areas through agricultural production based on agricultural produc-
tion ( kg yrÕ
1 ) calculated by
either the transfer factor model or the semi-mechanistic dynamic transfer model. The
following agricultural products are considered: milk, potatoes, grain, and meat. The
agricultural production for each subarea is obtained via a lookup table referring to
an area map (in most cases collective farm areas). The model output per food product
consists of three maps:

E The surface area of agricultural production per subarea. This map is derived
from the input map of food product contamination assuming that only in the
areas the food contamination was calculated, the product was produced.
E The radiocaesium (cid:143) ux through agricultural products from each subarea;
E The radiocaesium (cid:143) ux density from each subarea. This map is derived by

dividing the (cid:143) ux (map b) by the surface area (map a).

4.4. Intake model

1 ) and the accompanying individual internal dose (mSv yÕ

The radiocaesium intake model, including diet and origin of food product, calcu-
lates individual annually averaged daily radiocaesium intake through foodstuŒs (Bq
dÕ
1 ) on the basis of the
diet of an individual living in a given settlement. The food products that are consid-
ered are the same as for the steady state transfer factor model (milk, potatoes, grain,
meat, mushrooms, and berries). The spatial distribution of the radiocaesium contam-
ination of the considered food products is either calculated by the steady state
food products) or by the dynamic
radiocaesium transfer
(all
semi-mechanistic radiocaesium transfer model
(milk, potatoes, grain, and/or
meat ).

factor model

There are two versions of the intake model, at the district and farm level and at
the entire contaminate d area level. In the district and farm level version, four types
of food product origin are considered, namely (a) state shop, (b) collective farm
products, (c) local market, and (d) private production or collection. For each type of

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 52

M. van der Perk et al.

food product origin, the accompanying average product contamination is calculated
as follows:

State shop product

User-de(cid:142) ned (cid:142) xed value; no spatial features of state shop
product contamination are considered

Collective farm product
Local market
Private production or
collection

Collective farm average
Average over entire modelled area
(a) User-de(cid:142) ned (cid:142) eld, or
(b) Spatial weighting function using a so-called half
weight distance

The weighting function utilised in the model to spatially weight private production

or collection is calculated by:

W F 5

exp(Õ

ln (2)Ö

L )/H )

(3)

where: W F 5 Weight function for food product F (Õ
(m) and H 5 Half-weight distance (m).

), L 5 Distance from settlement

The weight W F decreases by a factor 2 with every distance H from the settlement
of residence. The half-weight function (equation (3)) is scaled so that the sum of W F
over the entire area where the food product is grown or collected (areas where the
map of food product contamination has no missing values) is equal to 1.

Subsequently, the average contamination of privately produced or collected

foodstuŒs is calculated by:

CsP 5 W FCsF
where: CsP 5 Area average radiocaesium contamination of food product from private
production (Bq kgÕ
1 ), W F 5 Weight function for food product F scaled so that
radiocaesium contamination of food product from private
SW F 5 1 (Õ
production (Bq kgÕ

) and CsF 5
1 ).

(4)

The default value for the half-weight distance for collection of wild forest food
products (mushrooms and berries) has been established based on data collected by
the Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority (Voigt and Semiochkina 2000) in
the Klintsy district, Russia. Twenty-three people from Klintsy town and surrounding
settlements were interviewed about the mode of transport used and the time spent
travelling to the forest. For each mode of transport, the average travel distance to
the forest was derived by multiplying travel time by an estimated travelling speed
(table 2). The number of persons that exceed the derived distances were plotted
against the travel distance. Subsequently, a negative exponential function was (cid:142) tted

Table 2. Estimated average speed for the diŒerent types of transport.

Walk
Bike
Car
Train
Other (mainly Motorbike)

Speed ( km hrÕ

1 )

4
10
35
20
20

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

53

to the observed data, from which an average half-weight distance of 8 km was
calculated ((cid:142) gure 4).

If a half-weight distance of zero is entered in the model, the half-weight function
(equation (3)) is ignored and the private food product is considered to be produced
or collected at a given (cid:142) eld that has to be entered separately.

The daily radiocaesium intake by an individual person via a food product is the
product of the daily food product consumption and the radiocaesium contamination
of the food product from the various sources weighted for the contribution of these
sources (state shop, collective farm, local market, private production or collection)
to the total consumption. The accompanying eŒective internal dose is calculated
by multiplying the calculated daily radiocaesium intake by a dose conversion
factor. This dose conversion factor depends on age and the default is set at
1.3Ö 10Õ

5 mSv/Bq (adults > 17 years) (European Communities 1996).

In the entire contaminate d level version of the intake model, the food product
origin is always weighted according to the spatial weighting function (equation (3))
as used in the origin of private food stuŒs in the district and farm level version of
the model.

The model output consists of the following maps per considered food product:
(a) Spatial distribution of the origin of ingested radiocaesium through consump-
tion of the considered product from the collective farm, local market, and
private production of collection (Bq haÕ
1 ), (not at the entire contamin-
ated area scale level);

1 dÕ

(b) Spatial distribution of the origin of the total ingested radiocaesium through

consumption of the considered food product (Bq haÕ

1 dÕ

1 );

(c) patial distribution of annual dose based on consumption of considered food

product excluding products from state shops (nSv haÕ

1 yÕ

1 );

Figure 4. Observed number of persons that exceed travel distance to the forest and the (cid:142) tted
function with half-weight distance of 8 km.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 54

M. van der Perk et al.

(d) Total daily radiocaesium intake through intake of considered food product
1 ), (result shown as single value in settlement of residence);
(e) otal annual internal dose through intake of considered food product (mSv

(Bq dÕ

yÕ

1 ), (result shown as single value in settlement of residence)

The output maps (a) through to (d) can be considered as a radiocaesium (cid:143) ux
based on individual consumption of the product under consideration. The intake
model also provides a table showing the total daily intake from the diŒerent sources
(state shop, collective farm, local market, and private production or collection), which
can be displayed as a graph or imported into a spreadsheet programme for further
data processing.

4.5. External dose model

The steady state radiocaesium external dose model calculates individual external
doses from various environments from soil contamination by radiocaesium using a
dose rate factor, de(cid:142) ned as the ratio between external dose rate (mSv yÕ
1 ) and soil
contamination by radiocaesium (kBq mÕ
2 ). The external dose from (cid:142) ve diŒerent
environments is calculated, namely home settlement, work settlement, grassland
(cid:142) elds, arable (cid:142) elds, and forests. The location of the settlements is derived from the
settlement ID map and the location of grasslands, arable lands and forests is derived
from the land use map. To calculate the total external dose the external doses from
these (cid:142) ve environments are weighted according to the residence time and a correction
factor for the dose rate factor. This correction factor has been introduced to account
for, for example, housing conditions, reduction of doses as a result of countermeasures
(e.g. decontamination of settlement areas) or increased radiation doses in forests. In
this way, the model allows diŒering individual lifestyles to be considered and com-
pared. The residence time for grasslands, arable lands, and forests is either equal for
the entire surface area of the farm in which the settlement of residence is located
or weighted according to the distance from the settlement of residence using a
half-weight distance similar to equation (3).

The model output per environment type consists of two maps:
(a) The spatial distribution of the individual external dose from the concerned
1 ). This map shows the origin of the external dose

environment (nSv haÕ
weighted by the time of residence in each grid cell;

1 yÕ

(b) The total or accumulated individual external dose from the concerned envir-
1 ). This map shows the accumulated annual external dose

onment (mSv yÕ
as one value per environment (settlement or land use type).

The external doses from the diŒerent environments are summed up and

summarised in three maps:

(c) The spatial distribution of the total external dose (nSv haÕ

1 ); This map
is the sum of all maps of the spatial distribution of the external dose per
environment type.

1 yÕ

(d) The total or accumulated external dose from the diŒerent environments (mSv
1 ). This map is an overlay of the accumulated external doses from the

yÕ
diŒerent environments.

(e) The total external dose from the concerned environment (mSv yÕ
result is shown as a single value in the settlement of residence.

1 ). The

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

55

5. An example analysis

Although it is not the aim of this paper to present case studies for all the diŒerent
areas available in the EDSS, the input and output of some of the submodels is
illustrated here by using the EDSS for the entire contaminate d area of Ukraine,
Belarus, and Russia. In these examples, we also discuss how the output of the EDSS
could be used in the decision making process with regard to whether and where
countermeasures could be implemented and contaminate d land could be restored.
Van der Perk et al. (2000) give a description of the validation and application of the
various models comprising the EDSS.

5.1. Steady state transfer factor model

For the entire contaminate d area of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia, milk contam-
ination by radiocaesium was predicted using the steady state transfer factor model.
Figure 5(a) and 5(b) present the basic input maps of soil contamination by radiocae-
sium and soil texture respectively. In contrast to the continuous soil contamination
maps at the district and farm levels, the soil contamination map ((cid:142) gure 5(a)) at the

Figure 5. Example of spatial input for the EDSS (steady state transfer factor model ) for the
entire contaminated area of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia: (a) soil contamination by
1 3 7 Cs ( kBq mÕ

2 ); (b) soil texture input.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 56

M. van der Perk et al.

entire contaminate d area level is a classi(cid:142) ed map (De Cort et al. 1998). Using a
lookup table, mean radiocaesium contamination values are assigned by contamina-
tion class. The map shows the two radiocaesium deposition ‘spots’ around the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant at the border between Ukraine and Belarus and in
the Gomel-Novozybko v area at the border between Belarus and Russia. These areas
have mainly sandy and loamy soils. Peaty soils are abundant in the western part of
the study area, known as the Pripyat marshes. In this particular case we did not use
the land use map to distinguish between the land use classes pasture, arable land,
and forest, because the available land use map derived from satellite imagery (US
Geological Survey 1999) does not distinguish well between these classes.

3 m2 kgÕ

3 m2 kgÕ

1 for clayey soils and 0.60Ö 10Õ

For calculation of milk contamination we used the default transfer factor values
for 1993 as used in the EDSS. These transfer factor values range between
0.05Ö 10Õ
1 for peaty soils. Figure 6
shows the model output for milk contamination by radiocaesium in 1999. As
expected, the pattern of milk contamination re(cid:143) ects that of the soil contamination,
since the latter radiocaesium varies by a factor of more than one thousand over the
entire area whereas transfer factors vary by a factor of only 12. Nevertheless, locally
milk contamination patterns may depart from the soil contamination as a result of
diŒerences in soil type. Figure 7(a) shows those areas where the 1999 milk contamina-
tion exceeds 100 Bq lÕ
1 . Taking account of the eŒects of radioactive decay and decline
in transfer factor values, the same calculation has been carried out for the situation
in 2010 ((cid:142) gure 7(b)). Comparison of (cid:142) gure 7(a) with 7(b) indicates the area producing
milk exceeding the intervention limit of 100 Bq lÕ
1 has declined to about one third
of the original surface area (11 280 km2 ), over the period of 111 years. The spatial
pattern of milk contamination remains the same but is a factor of 2.1 lower than in
1999. Application of additional countermeasures resulting in a reduction of radiocae-
sium transfer to cow’s milk by a same factor of about 2, such as the application of
potassium fertilisers or feed additives (Jacob and Likhtarev 1996), have the same
eŒect in the short-term.

Areas that were abandoned after the Chernobyl accident and have a predicted

Figure 6. Example of spatial output from the EDSS (steady state transfer factor model ) for
the entire contaminated area of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia: milk contamination by
1 3 7 Cs (Bq lÕ

1 ) in 1999.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

57

Figure 7. Example of spatial output from the EDSS (steady state transfer factor model )
for the entire contaminated area of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia: (a) areas that
exceed the intervention limit for milk contamination by 1 3 7 Cs (100 Bq lÕ
1 ) in 1999;
(b) contamination by 1 3 7 Cs in 2010.

milk contamination below the intervention limit in 2010 need further analysis. As
predicted by the model, these areas could safely produce milk within 10 years, but
more detailed investigation at the district or farm scale is necessary to select (cid:142) elds
which could be returned to agricultural production.

5.2. Radiocaesium intake model

Using food product contamination maps calculated by the transfer factor model,
the aggregated individual radiocaesium intake, internal dose, and the spatial distribu-
tion of their origin are calculated. In this example, we calculated radiocaesium
ingestion for a person living in Vetka town, Belarus, for three scenarios of food
product origin given a (cid:142) xed diet. The (cid:142) rst scenario comprised an average diet with

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 58

M. van der Perk et al.

both private products and products from state shops (see table 3). The radiocaesium
contamination of private products was calculated using the spatial weighting function
with the default half-weight distance of 8 km. The radiocaesium contamination of
state shop products was calculated by assuming that production occurred on a
loamy soil with a contamination value of 20 kBq mÕ
2 . The second and third scenario
comprised the same diet but maximised for private and state shop products, respect-
ively. Figure 8 shows the calculated contribution of the considered food products to
the total radiocaesium ingestion for the three diŒerent scenarios. The eŒect of
increased radiocaesium ingestion by consumption of private products, mushrooms
and milk in particular, is evident. The diŒerence between the calculated contamina-
tion of state shop and private products in Vetka town amounts to a factor of
almost 20.

Figure 9 shows part of the spatial output from this example calculation, namely
the origin of ingested radiocaesium from 0.002 kg day-1 consumption of privately

Table 3. Consumption rates (kg dayÕ

1 ) and origin of food products for the 1 3 7 Cs intake
model example calculation derived from data collated by the Norwegian Radiation
Protection Authority in Voigt and Semiochkina (2000) .

Private

State shop

Milk
Grain
Potato
Meat
Mushrooms
Berries

0.2
0
0.5
0.05
0.002
0.002

0.3
0.35
0.3
0.3
0
0

Total

0.5
0.35
0.8
0.35
0.002
0.002

Figure 8. Example of non-spatial output from the EDSS (1 3 7 Cs intake model ): 1 3 7 Cs ingestion
by a person in Vetka town, Belarus, in 1999 through an average diet with private and
state shop products ( left), the same diet with solely private products (middle) and
solely state shop products (right).

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

59

Figure 9. Example of spatial output from the EDSS (1 3 7 Cs intake model ): origin of ingested
1 ) through consumption of mushrooms by a person living in Vetka

1 3 7 Cs (Bq haÕ
town, Belarus in 1999. The location of Vetka town is indicated by an arrow.

1 dÕ

ingestion rate of radiocaesium via mushrooms
collected mushrooms. The total
amounts to 103 Bq dayÕ
1 (see also (cid:142) gure 8). The ingested radiocaesium originates
primarily from the most contaminate d area north-east of Vetka town. The area
south-west of Vetka town contributes very little to the radiocaesium ingestion, whilst
the pattern of mushroom collection from this area is assumed to be the same as for
the area north-east of the town.

To reduce radiocaesium ingestion and, accordingly, internal radiation doses, it is
essential to know the origin of radiocaesium. In this example, the radiocaesium
ingested by a person from Vetka town mainly originated from private milk and
mushrooms collected from the area north-east of Vetka town. In reality, the origin
of wild food products is likely to be much more variable than can be modelled using
the spatial weighting function (equation (3 )) and depends on the growing conditions
the considered product and personal preferences for wild food collection.
of
Nevertheless, (cid:142) gure 9 indicates which areas should be avoided for collection of such
foodstuŒs. In this way, such spatial output could be helpful for local authorities and
organisations to provide self-help advice to the local population where safe food
products can be collected and which areas should be avoided.

5.3. External dose model

Based on the map of soil contamination, individual external body burden is
calculated using additional information on the behaviour of the person concerned.
This behaviour regards the residence time in various environments derived from the
land use map. The available land use map did not allow further distinction between
(see above). For weighting the residence time
grassland, pasture, and forest

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 60

M. van der Perk et al.

spent outside the town, the same half weight distance of 8 km as adopted for the
radiocaesium intake model was used.

Analogous to the radiocaesium intake model, the spatial distribution of the origin
of the external dose can be modelled. In this example we calculated the external
dose incurred by an individual living in Gomel town, Belarus, spending 60% of the
time in the town of residence and 40% of the time outside. Figure 10 shows the
origin of the external dose that integrally amounts to 0.22 mSv yÕ
1 . The dark spot
represents the surface area of Gomel town, which accounts for about 30% of the
total external dose. The remaining 70% is mainly incurred in the area north-east
from Gomel town, with a local maximum several kilometres away from the town.
As with the radiocaesium intake model, such information could also be used in
self-help advice for residents in contaminate d areas to reduce external radiation dose.

6. Discussion and conclusions

The EDSS presented in this paper has resulted in the implementation of a range
of straightforward and widely accepted radioecological models into a spatio-tempora l
modelling environment and, accordingly, has highlighted the variation of the environ-
mental transfer of radiocaesium in both space and time. These models have been
adopted at various spatial scales in the literature (e.g. Eriksson 1994, Jacob and
Likhtarev 1996, Strand et al. 1996, Fesenko et al. 1997, Strand et al. 1999, Skuterud
et al. 1997, Absalom et al. 1999). Nevertheless, the implications of changes in spatial
scale for the eŒective values of the model parameters are not yet fully understood.
For example, prediction of food product contamination by radiocaesium by the
steady state transfer factor model relies strongly on the transfer factor values assigned
by soil texture class. Compared to the farm scale these soil texture classes become

Figure 10. Example of spatial output from the EDSS (external dose model ): origin of external
1 ). The location of Gomel

dose of a person living in Gomel town, Belarus (nSv haÕ
town is indicated by an arrow.

1 yÕ

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

61

increasingly spatially aggregated at the district and entire contaminate d area scale
as a result of both tessellation from the digitised vector maps to raster maps and
diŒerences in scale of the data sources adopted. It is likely that the internal variation
of soil texture and transfer factor values within grid cells increases with increasing
cell size and, accordingly, the variation between the grid cells decreases with increas-
ing cell size. This eŒect on the transfer factor values at various scales has not been
quanti(cid:142) ed yet and needs further investigation. In any case, the EDSS allows the user
to choose model parameter values suited to the area and scale of the problem.

The EDSS was developed to provide a PC-based platform that accomplishes a
full integration of geographical and radioecological base data sets and models for
interactive data analysis and modelling to identify the key pathways of radiocaesium
exposure. The linkages to the data sets and models through HTML documents has
created a (cid:143) exible system facilitating the implementation of new data and the accessib-
ility of available meta-data and help topics. The spatio-tempora l radioecological
models comprising the EDSS have the following novel
features compared to
existing systems:

E Dynamic transfer models can be run within the raster GIS environment. This
feature and the possibility to correct for ageing eŒects on soil contamination
and transfer factors facilititates the evaluation of contamination and exposure
changes with time

E Spatial routines are included to model the origin of radioactivity to which
people are exposed. The spatial weighting function as used in the radiocaesium
intake model is thought to be a (cid:142) rst attempt to model lateral (cid:143) uxes of radionuc-
lides in the environment as an extra dimension to the classical analysis of
vertical (cid:143) uxes as performed by, for instance, Alexakhin et al. (1996) and Strand
et al. (1996), and as implemented in the EDSS (cid:143) ux model.

E Both average and individual behaviour concerning the consumption of food
products and residence time in various environments can be modelled. This
feature provides a tool to predict the consequences of realistic and easily
implemented countermeasures for reducing dietary radiocaesium intake by
modifying customs of
food production and collection. Therefore, self-help
strategies for aŒected local populations can be designed which promise to be
cheap and eŒective in restricting radiocaesium intake (Beresford et al. 1999 ).

This paper has demonstrate d that the EDSS may assist decisions made by local

scientists, environmental engineers, or policy makers, by showing the following:

(a) Where the food product contamination by radiocaesium exceeds intervention
limits, which is a direct output from the steady state transfer factor model.
(b) Which areas are safe for producing or collecting food products and which
areas should be avoided. This information is derived from the exceedance of
the intervention limits of the food products considered (output from the
steady state transfer factor model ) and/or from the origin of the ingested
radiocaesium (output from the radiocaesium intake model).

(c) The areas exceeding external dose levels for residence or stay, which are
derived from the origin of the external dose (output from the external dose
model ).

(d) Whether and when it is safe to bring previously abandoned land into agricul-
tural use. This information can be derived by comparing current and future

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 62

M. van der Perk et al.

food product contamination by radiocaesium calculated by the transfer
factor model.

Although the EDSS does not give direct solutions for the problems of enhanced
radiation exposure, it provides a means whereby the implications of land use changes,
human diet and behaviour on radiocaesium ingestion and exposure may be assessed
and the location, extent, and spatial context of problems can be identi(cid:142) ed. In this
way, it supports decisions about the application of most appropriate countermeasures
to reduce radiation exposure to population groups tailored to local and even indi-
vidual circumstances and to design optimal management strategies for radioactively
contaminate d areas.

As the EDSS software and data have been issued and distributed on CD-ROM
( Van der Perk 1999), the EDSS is already able to satisfy many of the needs of local
research institutes. Most of these institutes have the capacity and expertise to use
the radioecological models and GIS technology. The cartographic output comprising
the principal output of the EDSS as well as the graphical output of time series can
be directly used for reports, whereas the output can also be easily transferred to
other computer packages, such as commercial GIS packages or spreadsheets for
further processing. For a wider dissemination of the modelling results amongst local
policy makers, planners, and farm managers, several remaining problems have to be
resolved, such as legal liability, data ownership, and political and institutional issues.
The experiences gained point out that this approach might be successfully adopted
in other environmental studies on transfer of pollutants into food chains, such as for
instance heavy metals and organic contaminants.

Acknowledgments

This study was carried out in the framework of the EC-funded projects RESTORE
(EC Contract No. FI4 CT95 0021c) and STRESS (EC Contract No. IC15 CT96
0215 ). The authors thank the RESTORE project participants for their thoughts,
ideas, and comments on the EDSS. In particular we acknowledge the contribution
of G. Voigt and N. Semiochkina (GSF-ISS, Germany), N. J. M. Crout and
J. P. Absalom (University of Nottingham, UK), N. A. Beresford, S. M. Wright, and
B. J. Howard (ITE, UK), H. Mehli and P. Strand (NRPA, Norway). The EDSS
could not have been developed without the indispensable contributions from partners
from the NIS countries. In particular we thank E. M. Korobova and V. G. Linnik
( Vernadsky Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry—RAS, Moscow),
G. Sokolik, S. Leinova, and V. V. Zakharenkov (Belarussian State University, Minsk),
T. Lev, E. K. Garger, and Y. Stephanishin (Institute of Radioecology–UAAS, Kiev),
G. V. Laptev and O. V. Voitsekhovitch (Ukrainian Hydro-meteorologica l Research
Institute, Kiev), B. Yatsalo (PRANA project, Obninsk), S. Firsakova (Belarussian
Institute of Radioecology, Gomel), B. S. Prister (Ukrainian Institute of Agricultural
Radiology), A. N. Arkhipov and S. Gashchak (Chernobyl Scienti(cid:142) c and Technical
Centre, Chernobyl). We also acknowledge M. de Cort from the EC Joint Research
Centre (Ispra, Italy) for providing the radiocaesium atlas data and C. G. Wesseling
(PCRaster Environmental Software) and K. de Jong (Utrecht University) for their
essential programming work. Three anonymous reviewers are acknowledged for
their valuable comments on the manuscript.

A copy of the EDSS can be requested by e-mail at M.vanderPerk@geog.uu.nl .

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

63

References
Absalom, J. P., Young, S. D, and Crout, N. M. J., 1995, Radiocaesium (cid:142) xation dynamics:

Measurement in six Cumbrian soils. European Journal of Soil Science, 46, 461–469.

Absalom, J. P., Young, S. D., Crout, N. M. J., Nisbet, A. F., Woodman, R. F. M.,
Smolders, E., and Gillett, A. G., 1999, Predicting soil to plant transfer of radiocesium
using soil characteristics. Environmental Science and T echnology, 33, 1218–1223.

Absalom, J. P., Young, S. D., Crout, N. M. J., Sanchez, A., Wright, S. M., Smolders, E.,
Nisbet, A. F., and Gillett, A. G., 2001, Predicting the transfer of radiocaesium from
organic soils to plants using soil characteristics. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity,
52, 31–43.

Alexakhin, R., Firsakova, S., Rauret, G., Dalmau, I., Arkhipov, N., Vandencasteele, C.,
Ivanov, Y., Fesenko, S., and Sanzharova, N., 1996, Fluxes of radionuclides in agricul-
tural environment – Main results and still unsolved problems. In T he Radiological
Consequences of
the First International
Conference Minsk, Belarus, 18–22 March 1996, edited by A. Karaoglou, G. Desmet,
G. N. Kelly and H. G. Menzel (Luxembourg: European Commission Report EUR
16544), pp. 39–48.

the Chernobyl Accident, Proceedings of

Arutyunyan, G. M., Bolshov, L. A., Demyanov, V. V., Glushko, A. V., Kabalevsky, S. A.,
Kanevsky, M. F., Kiselyov, V. P., Koptelova, N. A., Krylov, S. F., Linge, I. I.,
Martynenko, E. D., Pechyonova, O. I., Savel’eva, E., Serov, A. N., Haas, T. C., and
Maignan, M., 1996, Environmental decision support system on base of geoinform-
ational technologies for the analysis of nuclear accident consequences. In T he
Radiological Consequences of
the First
International Conference Minsk, Belarus, 18–22 March 1996, edited by A. Karaoglou,
G. Desmet, G. N. Kelly and H. G. Menzel (Luxembourg: European Commission
Report EUR 16544) , pp. 539–542.

the Chernobyl Accident, Proceedings of

Beresford N. A., Howard, B. J., Barnett, C. L., Voigt, G., Semiochkina, N., Ratnikov, A.,
Travnikova, I., Gillett, A. G., Melhi, H., and Skuterud, L., 1999, Reducing the
consumption of radiocaesium via forest mushrooms—provision of ‘self-help’ advice.
In Recent Developments in Risk Identi(cid:142) cation and Future Perspectives, Proceedings
NAT O Workshop on Contaminated Forests, edited by I. Linkov and W. R. Schell
(Amsterdam: Kluwer), pp 359–368.

Burrough, P. A., and McDonnell, R. A., 1998, Principles of Geographical Information

Cremers, A., Elsen, A., and De Preter, P., 1988, Quantitative analysis of radiocaesium

Systems (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

retention in soils. Nature, 335, 247–249.

De Cort, M., Dubois, G., Fridman, S. D., Germenchuk, M. G., Izrael, Y. A., Janssens, A.,
Jones, A. R., Kelly, G. N., Kvasnikova, E. V., Matveenko, I. I., Nazarov, I. M.,
Pokumeiko, Y. M., Sitak, V. A., Stukin, E. D., Tabachny, L. Y.., Tsaturov, Y. S.,
and Avdyushin, S. I., 1998, Atlas of Caesium Deposition on Europe after the Chernobyl
Accident (Luxembourg: European Commission Report EUR 16733) .

Dokuchaev Institute of Soil Science, 1986, Classi(cid:142) cation and Diagnostics of Soils of the

USSR (New Dehli: Oxonian Press).

Ehrhardt, J., and Shershakov, V. M., 1996, Real time On-line Decision Support Systems
(RODOS) for OŒ-site Emergency Management following a Nuclear Accident, Final
Report of Joint Study Project No 1 (Luxembourg: European Commission Report
EUR 16533).

Eriksson, A· , 1994, Nuclide transfer in the agricultural ecosystem. In Radioecology—L ectures
(Singapore: World Scienti(cid:142) c),

in Environmental Radioactivity edited by E. Holm,
pp. 139-149.

European Communities, 1996, COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 96/29/EURATOM of 13 May 1996
laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the
general public against
the dangers arising from ionizing radiation. Document
JOL1996/159-2EN.

Fesenko, S. V., Colgan, P. A., Sanzharova, N. I., Lissianski, K. B., Vasquez, C., and
Guardans, R., 1997, The dynamics of the transfer of Caesium-137 to animal fodder
in areas of Russia aŒected by the Chernobyl accident and doses resulting from the
consumption of milk and milk products. Radiation Protection Dosimetry, 69, 289–298.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 64

EDSS analysis of contamination f rom Chernobyl accident

Jacob, P., and Likhtarev, I., (editors), 1996, Pathway analysis and dose distributions. Final
report Joint Study Project No. 5 (Luxembourg: European Commission Report EUR
16541).

Pebesma, E. J., and Wesseling, C. G., 1998, Gstat: A program for geostatistical modelling,

prediction and simulation. Computers and Geosciences, 24, 17–31.

PCRaster, 1996, PCRaster Version 2 Manual (Utrecht: Department of Physical Geography,

Utrecht University/PCRaster Environmental software).

Sanchez A. L., Wright, S. M., Smolders, E., Naylor, C., Stevens, P. A., Kennedy, V. H.,
Dodd, B. A., Singleton, D. L., and Barnett, C. L., 1999, High plant uptake of
radiocesium from organic soils due to Cs mobility and low soil K content.
Environmental Science and T echnology, 33, 2752–2757.

Skuterud, L., Travnikova, I. G., Balonov, M. I., Strand, P., and Howard, B. J., 1997,
Contribution of fungi to radiocesium intake by rural populations in Russia. T he
Science of the T otal Environment, 193, 237–242.

Smith, J. T., Fesenko, S. V., Howard, B. J., Horrill, A., Sanzharova, N.

I.,
Alexakhin, R. M., Elder, D. G., and Naylor, C., 1999, Temporal change in fallout
1 3 7 Cs in terrestrial and aquatic systems: a whole ecosystem approach. Environmental
Science and T echnology, 33, 49–54.

Smolders, E., Van Den Brande, K., and Merckx, R., 1997, The concentrations of 1 3 7 Cs and
K in soil solution predict the plant availability of 1 3 7 Cs in soils. Environmental Science
and T echnology, 31, 3432–3438.

Strand, P., Howard, B., and Averin, V., 1996, Transfer of Radionuclides to Animals, their
Comparative Importance under DiŒerent Agricultural Ecosystems and Appropriate
Countermeasures, Final
project No. 9
(Luxembourg: European Commission Report EUR 16539) .

report Experimental

collaboration

Strand, P., Balonov, M., Travnikova, I., Skuterud, L., Ratnikov, A., Prister, B.,
Howard, B., and Hove, K., 1999, Fluxes of radiocaesium in selected rural study sites
in Russia and Ukraine. T he Science of the T otal Environment, 231, 159–171.
US Geological Survey, 1999, Eurasia Land Cover Characteristics Data Base; URL:

http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/landdaac/glcc/eadoc1Õ 2.html.

Van der Perk, M., Burrough, P. A., and Voigt, G., 1998, GIS-based modelling to identify
regions of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia aŒected by residues of the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant accident. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 61, 85–90.

Van der Perk, M., Burema, J. R., Gillett, A. G., Jong, K. de K., van der Meer, M., and
Wesseling, C. G., 1999, REST ORE Environmental Decision Support System, CD-ROM,
Deliverable for the RESTORE project (EC Contract No. FI4 CT95 0021c) (Utrecht:
Utrecht University).

Van der Perk, M, Lev, T., Gillett, A. G., Absalom, J. P., Burrough, P. A., Crout, N. M. J.,
Garger, E. K., Semiochkina, N., Stephanishin, Y. V., and Voigt, G., 2000, Spatial
modelling of transfer of long-lived radionuclides from soil to agricultural products in
the Chernigov region, Ukraine. Ecological Modelling, 128, 25–50.

Voigt, G., and Semiochkina, N., (editors), 2000, Restoration strategies for radioactively
contaminated ecosystems (RESTORE), Final report 1996-1999 (EC Contract No. FI4
CT95 0021c) (Neuherberg, Germany: GSF-Bericht 7/2000).

Wauters, J., Sweek, L., Valcke, E., Elsen, A., and Cremers, A., 1994, Availability of
radiocaesium in soils : a new methodology. T he Science of the T otal Environment,
157, 239–248.

Wesseling, C. G., Karssenberg, D., Burrough, P. A., and Van Deursen, W. P. A., 1996,
Integrating dynamic environmental models in GIS: the development of a dynamic
modelling language. T ransaction in GIS, 1, 40–48.

Yatsalo, B. I., Mirzeabassov, O., Okhrimenko, I., Pichugina, I., and Lisyansky, B., 1998,
PRANA: geoinformation decision support system for protection and rehabilitation of
agrosphere after nuclear accident. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 61, 381–384.

Downloaded by [Fordham University] at 07:43 20 April 2013 