The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Some Reflections on Judging Maps

To cite this article: (2015) Some Reflections on Judging Maps, The Cartographic Journal, 52:4,
303-304, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1115220

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1115220

Published online: 30 Jan 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 126

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [65.19.167.131]

Date: 18 March 2016, At: 21:38

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 52 No. 4
© The British Cartographic Society 2015

pp. 303–304

November 2015

Editorial

Some Reflections on Judging Maps

Many cartographic societies and organizations run map
design competitions where entries are judged by a panel, or
by the public, or both. Such competitions tend to support
the paradigm that an optimum mapping solution can be
achieved and that
its merit can be successfully judged
outside the context of its intended use. While published
reviews usually offer a better opportunity for in-depth evalu-
ation and critical appraisal than can be attempted in a compe-
tition, there is a surprising lack of research into the wider
impact of map design competitions on cartography. A brief
reflection on my experiences this year in judging maps for
the British Cartographic Society (BCS), the Society of Carto-
graphers (SoC), and the International Cartographic Associ-
ation (ICA), raises some possible questions to explore. If,
for example, the process of judging often involves isolating
the map from both its use and its users, what contribution
can map-design competitions offer to the advancement of
cartography, particularly when the need to consider the
requirements of both map use and map user is a key
element of map-design education? What do the winning
designs – over time and/or space – have in common? To
what extent have they influenced the design of subsequent
maps within and/or beyond their category?

Whether the maps have been made by schoolchildren (e.g.
at one of the Society’s Restless Earth events) or by highly
trained professionals, what struck me – as well as the other
judges in each circumstance – is how easily we were able to
reach a consensus of opinion despite our differences in cul-
tural background, cartographic experience, age, and gender.
Indeed, the words of Robinson (1952, p. 25), that ‘[ … ]
few cartographers are entirely pleased with lettering, and
together with color it is frequently the butt of criticism
leveled at any map’ still appear to ring true over sixty years
later. Yet, if an understanding of cartographic principles and
ideals are supposed to inform judges’ opinions, such criteria
are not always made available to competition entrants;
some organizations publish their judging criteria openly
(e.g.
Information
Society) while others restrict them to the judging panel
(e.g. the BCS). Terms like originality, creativity, visual hierar-
chy, clarity, and others feature regularly, but there is seldom
enough time available to thoroughly assess the standing of
each map against every criterion. Indeed, one common con-
straint of the judging process is the short time available to
assess each entry, so judges are keenly aware of the need to
reach a decision quickly.

the Cartography

and Geographic

So, would judges arrive at a different result if we were
given more time to make up our minds? I suspect not.

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1115220

Without access to the raw data (as is usually the case), the
process of judging map design necessarily has to rely on intui-
tion rather than any scrutiny of the data used in creating the
map. The establishment of different categories (according to
map use or format, for example), can refine expectations
regarding fitness-for-purpose, but the reader – be they
judge or user – first reacts to the map as a whole (see Petch-
enik, 1974, and, more recently, Fabrikant et al., 2012). Fur-
thermore, experienced cartographers maintain that a map
tends to ‘look wrong’ when it contains errors, at least in
terms of design (M. Spence, pers. comm., 06/10/2015). The
cartographic intuition demonstrated by Colonel Sir George
Everest (1790–1866) when commenting on a topographic
map of the Kashmir Valley that was presented at the Royal
Geographical Society in 1859 goes so far as to encompass
an appraisal of scientific truth: ‘The beautiful map behind
the chair, which could not be characterized in terms that
were too high, was a good proof of the knowledge and
skill employed in the survey’ (Purdon, 1859, p. 32).

Cartographic intuition seems to be formed by a com-
bined understanding of the relationship between carto-
graphic ideals and principles with accumulated experience
of good cartographic practice. That a consensus between
judges seems to be reached with relative ease (at least in
my experience) suggests that the ingredients of carto-
graphic intuition are less diverse than perhaps expected.
This would be worth exploring, as would be testing for a
correlation between panel and public voting results (in
competitions involving both). If the aim of such compe-
titions is to recognize and inspire excellence in cartographic
design, any insight into the identification and celebration of
best practice is valuable and should be shared. Cartogra-
phers believe that attractive maps invite further exploration
(Kent, 2013), but in order to succeed within and beyond
the judges’ gallery, their design must both start and end
with the user in mind. Otherwise, what do map design
competitions offer to the wider cartographic world? The
best maps deserve more than simply to be hung on the
wall of a gallery.

Volume 52 has been my first as Editor of The Cartographic
Journal and it has been a privilege to work with those
involved in writing or reviewing the many submissions we
have received over the course of the year. Your diligence,
time and attention to detail have ensured that the Journal
remains at
the forefront of publishing in cartographic
research, and on behalf of Associate Editors Peter Vujakovic
and Ken Field and the whole Editorial Board, I offer you our
sincere thanks.

Downloaded by [65.19.167.131] at 21:38 18 March 2016 304

The Cartographic Journal

The Volume has included two Issues associated with the
27th International Cartographic Conference held in Rio de
Janeiro in August, one of which being the UK’s National
Report to the 16th General Assembly of the ICA. The pub-
lication of these two Issues suffered some delay after the
acquisition of Maney Publishing by Taylor & Francis in
June, but I am pleased that turnaround times are returning
to normal. I have enjoyed working with the staff at Maney
immensely and wish any moving to pastures new the very
best. Turning to Volume 53, I look forward to working
with our new colleagues in T&F, particularly as we consider
new ways to improve the quality and impact of the Journal,
including its design.

This last Issue of the Volume presents an excellent selection
of papers on topics that encompass the gamut of cartographic
research,
from charting the Adriatic to using SatNavs.
I am also pleased to see several reviews included in this
Issue, which have been coordinated and edited by our
Editorial Assistant, Martin Davis. The Reviews section
(which incorporates reviews of maps and atlases as well as
books) makes an important contribution to the evaluation
of new cartographic publications, and if you are interested
in reviewing a new publication, or, as a publisher, you
are seeking an honest
review, please contact Martin
directly
(martin.davis@canterbury.ac.uk). Volume 52.4
also incorporates, as is usual for this time of year, the
Society Report and a record of the Society’s Awards, as
joint
presented at
BCS-SoC conference that was held in York from 8th to
10th September.

‘Mapping Together’,

the successful

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Alex is Reader in Cartography and Geo-
graphic Information Science at Canter-
bury Christ Church University in the
UK, where he lectures on map design,
GIS, remote sensing, and on European
and Political Geography. His research
explores
between
maps and society, and in particular, the
inter-cultural aspects of topographic map design and the aes-
thetics of cartography. Alex is currently the Vice President of
the BCS and the Chair of the recently established ICA Com-
mission on Topographic Mapping.

relationship

the

REFERENCES

response

Fabrikant, S.I., Christophe, S., Papastefanou, G. and Maggi, S. (2012).
‘Emotional
to map design aesthetics’, Proceedings
(Extended Abstracts) of the 7th International Conference on
Geographic Information Science, Columbus, OH. 18–21 September.
‘Understanding aesthetics: The cartographers’
response’, The Bulletin of the Society of Cartographers, 46, 1
and 2, pp. 31–43.

Kent, A.J. (2013).

Petchenik, B. B. (1974). ‘A verbal approach to characterizing the look of

maps’, The American Cartographer, 1, pp. 63–71.

Purdon, W. H. (1859). ‘On the trigonometrical survey and physical con-
figuration of the valley of Kashmir’, The Geographical Journal, 4,
1, pp. 31–33.

Robinson, A. H. (1952). The Look of Maps: An Examination of
Cartographic Design Madison, The University of Wisconsin
Press, Wisconsin.

Downloaded by [65.19.167.131] at 21:38 18 March 2016 