The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2015

Vol. 52 No. 4

pp. 318– 324

November 2015

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

How Large Was the Earth in the Sixteenth Century? The
Length of the Degree of Latitude in the Iberian Cartography
of the Renaissance

Joaquim Alves Gaspar

Inter-university  Centre for the History of Sciences and Technology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
Email: alvesgaspar@netcabo.pt

 Iberian  

 nautical  

In this paper, the results of a cartometric analysis of a number of Portuguese and Spanish charts of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries are presented and conclusions are drawn concerning the length of the degree of latitude adopted in
the  
 charting
methods of the time, a new interpretation of the textual and cartographic sources is proposed. Rather than being the result
of technical considerations or precise measurements, the adoption of the various standards during this long period appears
to be no more than the echoes of the traditional models of the Earth and of the political disputes between Portugal and
Spain.

 Renaissance.  

 navigational  

 cartography  

 about  

 know  

 what  

 light  

 and  

 the  

 the  

 we  

 of  

 of  

 In 

Keywords: history of cartography, Iberian cartography of the Renaissance,
cartometric methods

length of the degree of latitude,

INTRODUCTION

When the systematic maritime exploration of the Atlantic
started during the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth century, the
shape and size of our planet was not an important subject.
Although most educated people knew that the Earth was
round, such knowledge was not relevant for the routine
practice of navigation and chart-making. Even after the
rebirth of scientiﬁc cartography, following the translation
and dissemination of Ptolemy’s Geography, nautical charts
continued to be constructed exactly as before, under the
implicit assumption of a ﬂat Earth. Not because the pilots
and cartographers were ignorant about the real shape of our
planet but owing to the constraints imposed by the
navigational methods of the time, which were based on
magnetic directions and estimated distances.

The introduction of astronomical navigation made things 
change, as pilots began to determine latitude at sea and on 
incorporation  of  the  new  element  of 
land,  and  the 
into  the  charts  was  reﬂected  upon  their 
information 
geometric 
particular 
properties.  However, 
improvement did not affect radically the basic cartographic 
model  and  the  improved  charts  continued  to  be  drawn  by 
transferring directly to the plane the observations of courses 
and distances made on the spherical surface of the Earth, as 
if  it  were  ﬂat.  Few  Atlantic  charts  are  extant  from  the 
transitional period during which the astronomical methods 
of navigation started to be used, around the

this 

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1108657

middle of the ﬁfteenth century. We have strong reasons to
believe that the process was slow and smooth, and that the
pilots continued to use the old charts, based on courses
and distances, to which a scale of latitudes was overlaid1.
Only after an astronomical survey of the coast of Africa was
completed, near the end of the century, it became possible
to construct new representations incorporating observed
latitudes2.

The ﬁrst time a scale of latitudes was depicted on a chart,
together with its scale of distances, a standard length for the
degree of latitude was implicitly assumed. That ratio (or
module), expressed as the number of leagues contained in
each degree of latitude, was directly related to the size of
the Earth. For example, to the module of 17K leagues per
degree, which became a de facto standard in the Iberian
nautical cartography of the sixteenth century, corresponds
an Earth radius of 360617.5/2p<1003 leagues. Assuming
a metric length of 5573 m for the league, this is about
5588 km, a value which is some 12% shorter than the
average Earth radius (6368 km)3.

In this paper, a new interpretation of the historical
sources (textual and cartographic) is proposed concerning
the standard length of the degree of latitude adopted in the
Iberian cartography of the Renaissance. The analysis made
to a sample of Iberian charts is presented and the results are
discussed in the light of what we know about
the
navigational and charting methods of the time.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Degree of Latitude in the  Iberian Cartography of the Renaissance

319

Figure 2. Distance bar in a chart by Pedro Reinel, ca 1504. Each
section (log) contains 12K leagues and is subdivided into ﬁve parts
of 2K leagues

scale  became  common 

or  in  any  other  empty  space  inside  the  chart’s  area,  in  the 
form  of  a  distance  bar.  Very  early  a  standardised  form  of 
in  portolan  charts, 
distance 
consisting  of  a  series  of  rectangular  sections  of  50  miles 
(‘logs’)  subdivided  in  ﬁve  parts  of  10  miles  each.  The 
distance unit usually considered as having been used in those 
charts is the Italian mile of about 1480 m6. With the advent 
of  an  Iberian  cartographic  school  for  the  Atlantic,  around 
1435,  the  Italian  mile  gave  place  to  the  Castilian  league  of 
four  miles.  But  the  same  type  of  distance  bar  continued  to 
be  used,  with  each  log  now  containing  12K  leagues550 
miles (Figure 2).

When astronomical navigation was introduced and a scale
of latitudes started to be added to the charts, a standard
value had to be chosen for the length of the degree of
latitude, expressed in leagues. Three different standards, or
‘modules’, are known to have been adopted in the Iberian
nautical cartography of the Atlantic: 16O, 17K and 18
leagues per degree. It is consensually accepted that the ﬁrst
module to be adopted in Portugal was 16O leagues per
degree. The modules of 18 and 17K leagues, used in most
Iberian charts from the beginning of the sixteenth century
on, would have followed (Costa, 1983, pp. 213–215). We
know, from the work of Garcı´a Franco (1957, pp. 42–86),
that there is an old and complex tradition associated with
these numbers. For example, the degree of 16O leagues has
its likely origin in the model of Abul Hassan, who lived in
the eleventh century and estimated the circumference of the
Earth in 24,000 miles, to which correspond a degree of
66O miles. However, this model was originally based on
Arab miles, which were signiﬁcantly larger than the miles
used by the Italians and Iberians, and when these units are
used instead a smaller degree results7. Similar problems
affect the other two modules, in the sense that different
units of distance of uncertain values were certainly
associated to their traditional deﬁnitions.

This diversity of standards poses a problem in which the
routine practice of navigation and chart making is
concerned. Either the pilots or the cartographers assumed
that the physical length of the degree (and consequently the
radius
the Earth) was the same for all models, and
considered a different league for each module; or they did
not care about the physical
length of the degree and
implicitly assumed a league with a constant length.

Let us examine the ﬁrst hypothesis (Table 1,

left).
Assuming that the perimeter of the Earth is correct in the
three models (remember that to an interval of one degree of
latitude corresponds a length of about 111 km on the
surface) implies that different leagues were associated with
the different modules, so that this length is kept constant.
Although it cannot be denied that different units of distance

Figure 1. The length of an arc of meridian on a spherical model
of the Earth. DQ is the latitude difference between places A and B.
Ds is the length of the correspondent arc of meridian

THE LENGTH OF THE DEGREE ON A SPHERICAL EARTH

We deﬁne latitude Q of a place A situated on the surface of a
spherical Earth as the angle between the plane of the
equator and the radius OA connecting the center of the
sphere to the place (Figure 1). Two places, A and B,
situated on the same meridian are represented in the ﬁgure,
with latitudes QA and QB. The latitude difference between
them is the quantity DQ5QB2QA. To determine the length
Ds of the arc of meridian connecting A and B we use the
expression Ds5RDQ, where R is the radius of the Earth and
DQ is expressed in radians4. Knowing that the average radius
of the Earth is 6,367,566 m, it is easy to calculate the value
of L5Ds1 corresponding to a latitude difference of 1u,
which is about 111,135 m.

Now suppose that R is unknown and we want to estimate
the value of L making measurements on the surface of the
Earth. The obvious approach is to determine the latitudes
of two points situated on the same meridian, measure the
distance Ds between them and divide Ds by DQ, L5Ds/DQ,
with DQ expressed in degrees. However straightforward this
procedure may appear to us, it was not easy to carry out
during the Renaissance. Not only it was near to impossible
to locate accurately two places on the same meridian but
also the estimation of the distance between them, along the
physical surface of the Earth, was a tricky process. The
method was used in the antiquity to determine the radius of
the Earth by Aristotle, Eratosthenes, Arquimedes and
others. Although some of their estimates survived to our
days, it is not possible to assess their accuracy with precision
due to the uncertainty associated with the metric values of
the units of the past. When astronomical navigation was
introduced, during the ﬁfteenth century, various models of
the Earth were known, expressed in different units of
length5.

MILES, LEAGUES AND DEGREES

All pre-Mercator nautical charts depict, at
least, one
graphical scale of distances placed either along the margins

320

The Cartographic Journal

Table 1. Leagues and degrees. On the left, it is considered that
the physical length of the degree is the same for the
three modules; on the right, a league with a constant
length is considered. In the last line, a hypothetical cor-
rect module of 19.9 leagues per degree is considered

Length
of
degree
(m)

Length
of
league
(m)

Module
(leagues)

Length
of
degree
(m)

Length
of
league
(m)

111,135
111,135
111,135

6668
6351
6174

16O
17K
18

92,885
97,528
100,314

5573
5573
5573

111,135

5573

19.9

111,135

5573

Module
(leagues)

16O
17K
18

19.9

Why these three particular modules were adopted by the
Iberian navigators at this particular historical period is not
clear. The usual explanation is that this diversity of standards
reﬂects a continuous attempt to improve the accuracy of
charts and navigation. That was the suggestion of Costa
(1983, p. 214), who asserted that the adoption of the 17K
module, in the beginning of the sixteenth century, may have
been driven by the realization of the exiguity of the 16O one,
during the voyages made by the Portuguese along the coast
of Africa. Next, we will see how this hypothesis is not
conﬁrmed by historical fact and that the adoption of those
modules was not based on technical reasons.

were  originally  associated  with  the  various  traditional
models  of  the  Earth,  this  hypothesis  cannot  be  accepted.
Not  only  has  no  written  evidence  has  come  to  us  on  the 
association  of  different  leagues  with  the  different  modules,
but also the adoption of such system would have caused an
in  the  minds  of  pilots  and
unacceptable  confusion 
cartographers.  We  do  know  that  the 
length  of  the
equatorial  degree  became  a  critical  matter  in  the  end  of
the  ﬁfteenth  century,  due  to  Columbus  pretension  of
reaching  the  Indies  by  sailing  west,  and  again,  in  the  ﬁrst
quarter of the sixteenth, with the dispute over the location
and  control  of  the  Moluccas.  In  both  cases,  the  relevant
issue was the perimeter of Earth, not the physical length of
the league8.

,

Having rejected the ﬁrst hypothesis – leagues of different
lengths – we are left the second, in which the metric length
of the league is kept constant, but not the length of the
degree (Table 1, right). For the reasons explained before,
this is the interpretation which conforms best to the
navigational and charting methods of the time. When we
assume a metric length of 5573 m for the Castilian league,
notice how all modules underestimate the real perimeter of
the Earth by as much as 17.5% (for the module of 16O
leagues). To obtain the correct length of 111 km per
degree, the value of the module should be increased to
about 19.9 leagues per degree (bottom line).

THE USE OF THE TRADITIONAL MODULES

Table  2  lists  some  Iberian  sources  of  the  sixteenth  century
to which the three standards refer9. As already mentioned, it 
is consensually accepted that the ﬁrst value to be adopted in
Portugal was 16O
 leagues. This module is mentioned in the
Livro de Marinharia  de  Joa˜ o  de Lisboa, i n  a section which
is  considered  to  have  been  written  in  the  ﬁfteenth  century
(Rebelo,  1903),  and  was  probably  adopted  by  Bartolomeu
Dias  in  his  exploration  voyage  of  1487–1488,  when  he
surveyed  the  southern  coast  of  Africa  (Mota,  1961).
According  to  Costa  (1983,  p.  214),  the  module  of  17K
leagues  would  have  followed,  in  the  beginning  of  the
sixteenth  century,  as  a  result  of  more  accurate  measure-
ments  made  by  the  Portuguese.  The  module  of  18  leagues
per  degree  was  ﬁrst  mentioned  by  Duarte  Pacheco  Pereira,
in his Esmeraldo de Situ Orbis, o f 
ca 1505–1508 (Pereira,
1954).  Mota  (1961,  p.  3)  suggests  that  this  value  was
determined  during  the  astronomical  survey  of  the  African
coast ordered by King Joa˜o II at about 1485 (see note 2). I
disagree  with  both  interpretations  for  the  reasons  that  will
be explained next.

Two features are to be noticed in the table: the presence
of the 17K module in almost all sources, conﬁrming its
consensual acceptance by the Iberian pilots and cartogra-
phers of both countries (see note 8); and the absence of any
apparent evolution with time, with the old 16O standard
continuing to be referred to up to 1566.

Table 2. Some Iberian sources of the sixteenth century with references to the length of the degree of latitude. Adapted from Mota (1961,

p. 2) and Casaca (2005, p. 45)

Source

Author

Esmeraldo de Situ Orbis
Regimento de Munique
Regimento de E´ vora
Reporto´rio dos Tempos
Suma de Geografia
Tratado da Sphera
Tratado da Esfera
Arte de Navegar
Tratado da Esfera
Livro de Marinharia
Livro de Marinharia
Livro de Marinharia
Breve Compendio de la Sphera
De Regulis Instrumentis

Duarte Pacheco Pereira

Valentim Fernandes
Martin de Enciso
Francisco Faleiro
Pedro Nunes
Pedro de Medina
Joa˜o de Castro
Bernardo Fernandes
Joa˜o de Lisboa
Andre´ Pires
Martin Corte´s de Albacar
Pedro Nunes

Date

ca 1505
ca 1509
ca 1517
1518
1519
1535
1537
1545
1545
ca 1548
ca 1550
ca 15501
1551
1566

16O

Modules

17K

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

18

X

X

X

Degree of Latitude in the  Iberian Cartography of the Renaissance

321

The cosmographer and mathematician Pedro Nunes
(1502–78) referred to two of these modules in 1537, in
his Tratado da Sphera:

Sailing north and south the navigators say that correspond
to the degree ten and seven leagues and a half10

And again, in 1566, in De Regulis Instrumentis:

According to the Portuguese, on the surface of the earth
one degree of great circle has 17½ leagues. But there is,
that [a degree] only
among them, who considers
contains 16 and two thirds,
so that in the whole
terrestrial circuit there are 6000 leagues11

Notice  how  lightly  the  subject  is  mentioned,  notwith-
standing  Nunes’  position  as  a  cosmographer  and,  from 
1544 on, as the Cosmographer Major. Considering that he 
was  probably  too  young  to  have  been  involved  in  the 
dispute  around  the  location  of  the  Moluccas,  which  was 
solved  in  1529  with  the  Treaty  of  Saragoza,  his  apparent 
detachment  may  be  interpreted  in  two  ways:  either  he 
considered the problem to be of the exclusive responsibility 
of  pilots  and  cartographers12;  and/or  he  did  not      
acknowledge scientiﬁc relevance to the subject13.  I am not 
aware  of  any  contemporary  source  which  offers  a  technical 
discussion    of  the  historical  modules.  When  Hernando  
Colo´n,    during  the   discussions   held   in   the   Junta   de 
Badajoz-Elvas  about  the 
location  of  the  Moluccas, 
defended  the  16O
  module,  he  did  so  invoking  the 
authority  of  the  ancients,  not  any  technical  argument  
(Garcı´a  Franco, 1957, p. 44).

Surprisingly, a correct value of 20 Spanish leagues per
degree was determined by Antonio de Nebrija ca 1510,
making measurements on land (Randles, 1998, p. 48).
However, there is no evidence that his result was ever
considered by the Spanish cartographers or that similar
initiatives were taken with the purpose of improving on
the cartographic and navigational standards. In 1528, the
French physician Jean Franc¸ois Fernel
(1497–1558)
estimated the length of the degree with a remarkable
accuracy, of better
than one in one thousand, by
measuring the distance between Paris and Amiens using
the wheel of a cart. Once again, no practical effect is
known of his determination on the Iberian cartography of
the time. Clearly,
the explanation for the apparently
indifferent use of the modules in the Iberian cartography
lies elsewhere.

Figure 3 represents the distribution of the adopted
length of the degree of latitude in a sample of 65 charts of
Spanish and Portuguese origin, between 1502 and 164614.
The values were calculated by dividing the length of one
degree of latitude, measured in the latitude scale of each
chart (in millimetres), by the length of one league,
measured in the distance bar of the same chart. Three
important features are apparent in the distribution: the
strong dispersion of the values, most of them concentrated
in the interval [17.0, 18.5], around two of the historical
modules (17K and 18 leagues); the almost total absence
of the 16O module (with the exception of the Atlas Miller,
1519); and the lack of any signiﬁcant trend with time. The
dispersion of the values can be explained by several factors,
relevant being the mistakes made by the
the most

Figure 3. Length of the degree of latitude in a sample of about
65 charts of Spanish and Portuguese origin. Notice the large dis-
persion of the values around two of the historical standards, 17K
and 18 leagues per degree, and the absence of the 16O module
after 1519. The three historical modules are represented by blue
horizontal segments

cartographers (most of these charts are richly decorated
and were intended to be shown in libraries rather than
used at sea), the imprecision associated with the drawing of
the scales, the distortions due to the parchment’s ageing
and the signiﬁcant uncertainty of many measurements,
made on small scale reproductions of the charts. Some of
the values are difﬁcult to explain as is the case of the
anonymous chart known as Kunstmann III (ca 1506),
with a module of 20 leagues, the chart of the Indian Ocean
and Philippines by Nun˜o Garcia de Toreno (1522), with a
module of 19.6 leagues, the anonymous chart of ca 1535
attributed to Pedro Reinel and a group of Portuguese
charts between 1554 and 1561, with values larger than
18.5 leagues15. Whatever
these
anomalous values might be, the lack of any apparent
evolution suggests, once more, that the adoption of any of
the three standards had little relevance to cartography and
navigation.

the explanation for

SCIENCE, TRADITION OR POLITICS?

sailings

We now come back to the suggestions made by Costa
(1983, p. 124) and Mota (1961, p. 3), who both agreed
that the module of 17K leagues per degree was an
improvement on the older standard of 16O, made by the
in the north–south
Portuguese during their
direction. Although this theory is historically tempting, it
is contradicted by the long and paciﬁc coexistence of the
various modules in the Iberian cartography of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, with no apparent
rational
criterion. On the other hand, and considering the
interpretation of
the two authors, why make new
measurements at sea and so far from home (in Africa, as
Teixeira da Mota suggested) when a voluminous set of
data was already available in the existing charts, from which
a good estimate of the length of the degree could be
derived?

322

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Estimating the length of the degree of latitude implicit in Jorge de Aguiar’s portolan chart of 1492 using the north–south distance
Ds and the latitude difference DQ between two places of known latitudes In this case Ds5122 leagues and DQ55.9u, from which a module of
20.7 leagues per degree results

Figure 4 is an excerpt of Jorge de Aguiar chart of 1492,
representing the Iberian Peninsula. This is a typical portolan
chart, in the sense that it was constructed on the basis of
magnetic courses and estimated distances, like any other
chart produced by the cartographic workshops of the
Mediterranean16. Assuming that the relative north–south
positions of the places are approximately conserved, all we
have to do to estimate the length of the degree of latitude
implicit in the representation is to choose two places
approximately north–south to each other, for example,
Cape Fisterra (Q542.9uN) and the Cape of Sa˜o Vicente
(Q537.0uN), measure the north–south distance between
(121.5 leagues) and divide the result by the
them,
corresponding latitude difference (5.9u). The module
obtained this way is 122/5.9520.7 leagues per degree.
I have done this experiment using the ﬁve earliest
Portuguese charts that are extant. The average value is
close to 20 leagues per degree, which is much closer to the
exact value than any of the historical modules17. This result
proves that it was possible at the end of the ﬁfteenth
century to obtain a good estimate of the length of the
degree using the information available in the charts. Why
such straightforward procedure was (apparently) not used
is uncertain.

My interpretation is that the adoption of a speciﬁc
length for the degree of latitude was not critical for the
routine practice of navigation during the sixteenth
century. That is, on the one hand, because the estimation
of the distance sailed was probably not accurate enough
to discriminate a difference of less than 10% in the length
of the degree; and on the other hand, because navigation
in the open sea was based, whenever possible, on
magnetic courses and observed latitudes rather than on
estimated distances. It is worth noticing that, unlike the
portolan charts of the Mediterranean, latitude charts were
constructed on the basis of observed latitudes and
the errors caused on the charted
courses, and that
distances by the effect of magnetic declination could be
very large. That was acknowledged by the noblemen,
Vice-Roy of India and navigator D. Joa˜o de Castro in
1538, in his Roteiro de Lisboa a Goa (Castro, 1538, p.
200), who realised that the places on the African coast
were represented, on the charts of his time, to the east of
their correct positions due to the effect of an easterly
magnetic declination on the courses measured with the
marine compass18.

Figure 5 illustrates the effect of the magnetic declination
the graphical

in the ‘set point’ (ponto de esquadria),

Degree of Latitude in the  Iberian Cartography of the Renaissance

323

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

the

Joaquim Alves Gaspar is
a Captain of the Portu-
guese Navy
(retired),
Master of Science in
Physical Oceanography
and a specialist in marine
navigation. He
com-
pleted recently his Ph.D
with
dissertation:
From the Portolan Chart
of the Mediterranean to
the Latitude Chart of the
Atlantic:CartometricAnalysis
and Modeling (ISEGI –
Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, 2010). He pub-
lished two text books on theoretical Cartography aimed at
university   teaching   (                                                
¸ ˜
Cartes e  Projeccoes  Catograficas
and
                                                                                
ˆ
) and various papers in
Dicionario  de  Ciencias  Cartograficas
international peer-reviewed journals. His most recent pub-
lished works are ‘Blunders, Errors and Entanglements:
Scrutinizing the Cantino Planisphere with a Cartometric
Eye’ (Imago Mundi, Vol. 64, Part 2: 181–200, 2012) and ‘De
la Me´diterrane´e a` l’Oce´an: Nouveaux proble`mes, nouvelles
solutions’, in Catherine Hofmann et al. (dir) – L’Aˆ ge D’or des
Cartes Maritimes – Quand L’Europe De´couvrait le Monde.
Paris: Seuil & Bibliothe`que nationale de France, 2012, 126–
135. Joaquim Alves Gaspar is presently working as a post-
doctoral researcher at the ‘Inter-university Centre for the
History of Sciences and Technology’ – Faculty of Sciences,
University of Lisbon. Together with Henrique Leita˜o, he
he  h  as r  ecently w  r itten tw o  pape  r s where    the    method
used  by  Gerhard   Mercator   to   construct   his   projection
in 1569 is explained, both historically and technically.

´

´

NOTES

1 This  expedient  was  facilitated  by  the  small  values  of 
magnetic  declination  in  the  western  coasts  of  Europe, 
during  the  fourteenth  and  ﬁfteenth  centuries,  which 
allowed  the  north–south  relative  positions  of  the  places 
represented  on  the  charts  to  be  approximately  conserved. 
That  was  not  the  case  of  the  western  coast  of  Africa  to  the 
south  of  Cabo  Verde,  where  magnetic  declination  was 
much  larger.  For  a  detailed  explanation,  see  Gaspar 
(2010,  pp. 34–36)

2 An order given by the Portuguese King Joa˜o II,
about 1485, to make an astronomical survey in the coast
of Africa is known from an handwritten note attributed
to Columbus, or his brother Bartolomeo, in the margin
of Aeneae Sylvii episcopi Sinensis, postea Pii Papae II
(Venice,
Historia rerum Friderici Tertii
1447).

imperatoris

3 The length of 5573 m for the Castilian league is

proposed by Garcı´a Franco (1957, pp. 186, 200).

4 A radian is the measure of an angle subtending an arc
whose length is the radius R of a circumference. Knowing
that the perimeter P of a circumference is given by the
expression P52pR and that a circumference has 360u52p

Figure 5. The inﬂuence of magnetic declination (d) on the set
point. SP-0 is the position determined on the basis of the true
(geographic) course steered and the latitude Q; SP-2 is the position
determined on the basis of the magnetic course steered and the
latitude. In the absence of any errors (including magnetic declina-
tion), the three navigational elements of information (latitude, dis-
tance and course) all agree on the position SP-0. When magnetic
declination is present and the position is determined using the lati-
tude and the magnetic course, the distance between the point of
departure and SP-1 is distorted

procedure used by the pilots during the sixteenth century to 
determine  the  position  of  the  ship,  on  the  basis  of  the 
observed  latitude  and  magnetic  course.  Notice  how  large 
the  distance  error  can  be  for  courses  close  to  east  or  west. 
Being  aware  of  the  problem,  a  set  of  rules  was  established 
during  the  sixteenth  century  for  minimizing  the  effect  of 
magnetic  declination,  called  the  ‘amendments  of  the  point 
of fantasy’. According to these rules the position of the ship 
was determined using the course or the estimated distance, 
together  with  the  latitude,  whether  the  course  steered  was 
closer  to  the  north–south  or  to  the  east–west  directions, 
respectively.  However,  such  a  procedure  was  used  for 
navigational purposes only and the latitude charts continued 
to  be  constructed  using  magnetic  courses  because  the 
information  on  courses  was  much  more  important  to  the 
pilots  than  on  distances.  The  price  to  pay  was,  as  D.  Joa ˜o 
de  Castro  noticed  in  1538,  considerable  distortions  in  the 
charted distances between places.

CONCLUSION

the adoption of

Having rejected that
the historical
modules was driven by technical considerations, we are
left with the alternative explanation, which is that they are
little more than the echoes of the traditional models of
the Earth and of the political disputes between Portugal
and Spain over the size of the Earth and the location of
the Moluccas. The use of the historical modules, which
we have just discussed, may well be a good historical
example of how politics sometimes prevails over scientiﬁc
soundness.

324

The Cartographic Journal

radians, to an arch length of R will correspond an angle of
1 rad5360/2p5180/p<57.29u.

5 An introduction to the subject is in Garcı´a Franco

(1957, pp. 11–41).

6 However, measurements taken on a sample of portolan
charts of the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries show strongly
varying results, not only among charts but also among
regions. In general, the length of the mile deduced from
those measurements is larger in the Atlantic, varying from
more than 1600 m in the coast of Morocco to about 1350 m
north of Cape Fisterra, and smaller in the Mediterranean (less
than 1300 m). See Gaspar (2010, pp. 106–108, 240).

7 According to Garcı´a Franco (1957, p. 29), the metric
length of the old Arabian mile was about 1973 m, while the
length of the Castilian mile was about 1393 m (a quarter of
a Castilian league of 5573 m).

8 Columbus defended the model of Alfraganus, with a
degree of only 56O miles (14F leagues), because he wanted
to convince the Spanish monarchs of the feasibility of
reaching India by sailing west, ignoring the fact this model
was based on Arab miles of about 1973 m and not on Italian
miles of 1480 m. A smaller Earth was also advantageous for
the Spanish during the dispute over the control of the
Moluccas because it would locate the spicy islands inside
their hemisphere of inﬂuence, according to the Treaty of
Tordesillas. However, the module of 17K leagues prevailed
at the end and was ofﬁcially recognized by both countries in
the agreement of Zaragoza, in 1529, despite the opposition
of Hernando Co´lon (Columbus’ son) in the Junta de
Badajoz-Elvas in 1524 (Garcı´a Franco, 1957, pp. 43–45).

9 Much more are extant. See, in particular, the references
given by Garcı´a Franco (1957, pp. 47–60) on the 16O and
17K modules.

10 The original reads: Nauegando norte e sul dizem os
nauegantes que respo˜dem ao grao dez e sete legoas e mea
(Nunes, 2002, p. 173).

11 Translated into English from the Portuguese version.
The original Latin text reads (Nunes, 2008, pp. 301):
Continet autem unus gradus circuli maximi in terrestri
superﬁcie leucas 17. cum semisse ut Lusitani aiunt.

12 On this respect, the social gap between the post of
cosmographer and the crafts of pilot and cartographer
should also be taken into account.

13 Nunes was, above all, a theoretical mathematician. His
analyses and suggestions in the ﬁelds of navigation and
cartography often reveal some detachment, when not
ignorance, on the practical aspects of the disciplines. See
Gaspar (2011).

14 Whenever possible the measurements were made on
high resolution digital copies of the charts. Most of the
values relative to the Spanish charts were determined by
Garcı´a Franco (1957, p. 162).

15 Concerning the Kunstmann III, it is my opinion that
this chart was started before 1500, prior to the advent of the
latitude chart, and later completed with new information on

the Americas. The scale of latitudes, which only applies to the
northern hemisphere, would have been added at that late
time. The implicit module of about 20 leagues per degree,
estimated for this chart, is close to the values measured in the
non-astronomical charts of the ﬁfteenth century. See Gaspar
(2010, pp. 99–108).

16 This is the earliest extant signed and dated chart of
Portuguese origin. Its style and geographic coverage are typical
of the Catalan-Majorcan school, from which an autonomous
Portuguese nautical cartography has likely evolved around 1450.
17 Assuming a league of 5573 m, the exact value would

be 19.9 leagues as shown in Table 1.

18 The position of the Cape of Good Hope in the Cantino
planisphere (1502) and in most nautical charts of the
sixteenth century result from the use of a route bordering
the western coast of Africa, following the exploratory voyages
of Diogo Ca˜o (1482–1486), Bartolomeu Dias (1487–1488)
and others. Because at the time the magnetic compass
pointed to the east of the geographic north in the southern
Atlantic (eastward magnetic declination), the western coast of
Africa appears rotated clockwise in those charts. See Gaspar
(2010, pp. 157–174).

REFERENCES

Casaca, J. M. (2005). A Le´gua Na´utica Portuguesa do se´c. XV ao se´c.
XVIII. Memo´ ria No. 5, Sociedade de Geografia de Lisboa, Lisboa.
Castro, J. de (1538). ‘Roteiro de Lisboa a Goa’, in Obras completas
de D. Joa˜o de Castro, ed. by Cortesa˜o, A. and Albuquerque, L.,
Vol. II, pp. 1–169, Academia Internacional de Cultura Portuguesa,
Coimbra.

Costa, A. F. da (1983). A Marinharia dos Descobrimentos, 4th ed.,

Edic¸o˜es Culturais da Marinha, Lisboa.

Mota, A. T. da (1961). ‘Bartolomeu Dias e o valor do grau terrestre’,
Separata das Actas do Congresso Internacional de Histo´ ria dos
Descobrimentos, II, pp. 299–309.

Garcı´a Franco, S. (1957). La Le´gua Nautica en la Edad Media,

Instituto Historico de Marina, Madrid.

Gaspar, J. A. (2010). From the Portolan chart of the Mediterranean
to the latitude chart of the Atlantic. Cartometric analysis and
modeling. Doctoral dissertation. ISEGI – Universidade Nova de
Lisboa. Lisboa, Portugal.

Gaspar, J. A. (2013). ‘Pedro Nunes e a Carta de Marear’, in Fiolhais,
C., Simo˜es, C. and Martins, D. (ed.), Histo ´ria da Cie ˆncia Luso -
Brasileira, pp. 35–49, Coimbra, Imprensa da Universidade de
Coimbra.

Nunes, P. (2002). Obras, Vol. I: Tratado da Sphera; astronomici
Fundac¸a˜o Calouste
Spaere Epitome,

Introductorii
Gulbenkian, Lisboa [1st edition: Lisboa, 1537].

de

Nunes, P. (2008). Obras, Vol. IV: De arte Atque Ratione
Navigandii, Fundac¸a˜o Calouste Gulbenkian, Lisboa [1st edition:
Basel, 1566].

Pereira, D. P. (1954). Esmeraldo de Situ Orbis. Introduc¸a˜o e
anotac¸o˜es por Damia˜o Peres, 3rd ed., Academia Portuguesa de
Histo´ ria, Lisboa [original edition ca 1505–1508].

Randles, W. G. L. (1998). ‘The emergency of nautical astronomy in
Portugal in the XVth century’, Journal of Navigation, 51, pp. 46–57.
Rebelo, J. de B. (e.) (1903). Livro de Marinharia. Tratado da
Agulha de Marear de Joa˜o de Lisboa, Impernsa de Libaˆnio da
Silva, Lisboa.

