Transactions in GIS, 1999, 3(3): 259–283

Research Article

Theoretical Model of Multipurpose Land
Information Systems Development

David L Tulloch
Grant F Walton Center for Remote Sensing and Spatial Analysis
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, USA

Abstract
Historically, multipurpose land information systems have often been designed for
use as community-wide enterprises. Before becoming useful to the community,
however, many of
these systems encounter prohibitive factors delaying or
preventing the satisfaction of the ultimate goals for which they were designed. A
criticism of current models is that system developers seeking to build publicly
accessible systems do not use them. Since most systems are developed without the
guidance of a formal model, system developers often do not fully anticipate likely
system issues. Many systems, designed on an ad hoc basis, fail to achieve their full
potential, because they have not used an appropriate model to determine a final
system outcome. This paper presents a theoretical model describing the stages
systems experience during development. These stages are: no development, system
initiation, database development, recordkeeping, analysis, and democratization.
Additionally, the factors promoting or prohibiting movement from one stage to the
next, and the indicators or outcomes of each stage are described. Not only are the
individual elements described but also their relationships are described as part of
the model. The Multipurpose Land Information System (MPLIS) development
model is designed both as a guide for system developers and a tool for discussing
and comparing systems.

1 Introduction

As the result of a collaborative and evolving process, a model of Multipurpose Land
Information System (MPLIS) development has emerged through an iterative process
(Tulloch et al 1995, 1996) in an effort to describe the manner in which community-wide

Address for correspondence: David L Tulloch, Grant F Walton Center for Remote Sensing and
Spatial Analysis, 14 College Farm Road, Cook College, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901. Email: dtulloch@crssa.rutgers.edu

(cid:223) 1999 Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

260

David L Tulloch

systems are developed. The rationale for the proposed model of MPLIS development
relies upon a wide variety of concepts that have emerged from the literature – the two
most prominent being the concepts of MPLIS and issues affecting system development.
The MPLIS development model emphasizes the stages of GIS/LIS development in a
community context and the forces that impede or facilitate change from one stage to
another. The model consists of three elements – stages, forces for change (consisting of
factors), and indicators (including benefits). Benefits are categorized in a manner that
associates them with the latter stages of MPLIS development.

This paper presents the background from which the model has emerged, defines
and describes stages and forces in the model, describes factors that determine the forces
the model, and provides a graphical
and relationships between elements of
representation of those relationships.

2 Background

2.1 Multipurpose Land Information Systems

In contrast with a single-project system, the MPLIS concept relies upon the idea of a
comprehensive system serving a wide variety of users and applications (Brown and
Moyer 1989). Early descriptions (e.g. Epstein and Brown 1989) reflect a parcel-based
approach to MPLIS development, but many recent efforts have turned towards
developing systems based on geo-referenced systems. MPLIS is often characterized by a
wide variety of data types and data sources comprising these systems as shown in
Figure 1.

The concept of the MPLIS can be traced back as the 1966 Comprehensive Unified
Land Data (CULDATA) Conference (Cook and Kennedy 1966, Moyer 1980) and
followed in 1972 by Compatible Land Identifiers – Problems, Prospects, and Payoffs
(CLIPPP)(Moyer and Fisher 1973). Meetings continued through the 1970s along with
research, as evidenced by dissertations completed at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison by McLaughlin (1975) and Moyer (1977). In the early 1980s more formal
recognition of these issues came in the form of reports by the National Research
Council’s Panel on a Multipurpose Cadastre (National Research Council 1980, 1983).
Together, these two documents provide much of the foundation for the emerging
concept of MPLIS, offering a conceptual model (originating in McLaughlin 1975) for
systems, technical recommendations for dealing with issues such as geo-referencing,
and organizational recommendations such as roles and funding. Recently, the concept
of Multipurpose Land Information Systems fully emerged in the Federal Geodetic
Control Committee’s MPLIS: The Guidebook (Brown and Moyer 1989), a
collaborative effort directed at potential developers of MPLIS.

The MPLIS concept has become widespread throughout the GIS/LIS community.
While not entirely intact, the MPLIS concept is reflected throughout much of the
planning for the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (National Research Council
1993, Federal Geographic Data Committee 1995) which is envisioned by some as one
very large MPLIS.

Most descriptions of MPLIS focus on these systems serving a community through
the mechanism of a local government organization. Many local government agencies
rely on the same land information (Niemann and Chrisman 1983). The role of land

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

261

Figure 1 MPLIS ideogram illustrating the many types of land information comprising a
multi-purpose land information system as it existed for the town of Westport, WI
(Niemann and Chrisman 1983, Niemann et al 1987, Niemann and Niemann 1994, Chrisman
1997). The ideogram was originally developed and promoted as a nationally distributed
poster for a seminar led by Professor Bernard J Niemann, Jr, entitled ‘‘Seminar on the
Multipurpose Cadastre: Modernizing Land Information Systems in North America’’ (1984).

records and land information in local governments is seen in their many activities
dependent upon geospatial data. Local governments play a central role in creating,
transactionally maintaining, and distributing land information (often in the form of
land records) that support the entire real estate economy. Land records are used as a
primary source for determining property rights, ownership and taxes. Infrastructure
development and maintenance requires a significant amount of land information while
also contributing new information. Environmental, agricultural, recreational and
urban planners all rely on land information as a primary source of data. Land
information also plays a secondary but important role for activities like emergency
services, social services and crime prevention (Vonderohe et al 1991).

Within the democratic context most commonly associated with MPLIS, concerns
about LIS/GIS and local government and the relationship with the broader community
or society are inevitable. While some have argued the ethical and legal imperative of
providing open access to public land records (e.g. Epstein 1991), it is clear that through
the rarely enforced state open records laws and untested local policies some local
governments persist in attempting to recover implementation costs by charging for data
(Dando 1993, Onsrud et al 1996, Craig and Johnson 1997). Despite continuing

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

262

David L Tulloch

discussion in the professional community, there seems to be little disagreement in the
academic and legal communities that public access is necessary and preferable for these
Information Systems
systems (Epstein 1991, Brown 1992, Urban and Regional
Association 1993, Onsrud and Rushton 1995, Onsrud et al 1995), thus its use as an
assumption for community-wide MPLIS. Whether in a broad societal context, or
specific communities, it has been widely established that local governments will serve
as the stewards of land information and as the basis for MPLIS development. This only
seems natural considering the transactional, higher resolution, hands-on, community
and social aspects of local governments and communities.

2.2 Existing Models

To understand the nature and scope of models that system developers currently
consider when initiating or evaluating a system, it is quite useful to consider the
background from which these models have emerged. Many of the models describing
the GIS/LIS development process cite early sociological studies of the adoption and
diffusion of technological innovations. Fundamental ideas in this area emerged in
research concerned with technological innovations in agriculture (Ryan and Gross
1943), geography (Ha¨ gerstrand 1952), and economics (Brown 1981) but the seminal
work in diffusion comes from Rogers (1962, 1995).

The concept of stages was introduced into the sociological

literature with
Rogers’ work on The Diffusion of Innovations (1962, 1995) and his widely used five
stage ‘‘innovation-decision process’’ which describes how an individual (or other
decision-making unit) progresses through the process of adopting or rejecting an
innovation.
Initially identified in 1962 and paralleled for collective-innovation
decisions (Rogers and Shoemaker 1971), the five stages in the process have most
recently been redefined as knowledge, persuasion, decision,
implementation, and
confirmation (Rogers 1995).

Aside from the traditional social science approaches to diffusion, research in
management information systems (MIS), information technologies (IT), operations
research (OR), and the broad field of organizational change contributed many models.
Mayo’s (1985) model of technology development and diffusion described the ‘‘push of
technology’’ (e.g. all feasible innovations) and the ‘‘pull of society’’ (e.g. comfort)
(Figure 2) suggesting that there are two barriers for innovations to overcome:
technological issues (e.g. standards) and social issues (e.g. common good). This model
has also subsequently been altered to reflect a geospatial technology perspective of this
symbiotic relationship between technology and society (Niemann et al 1988).

Eason (1988, 29) describes the ‘‘traditional data processing approach’’ as an eight-
phase process intended to identify the steps by which ‘‘a data processing application is
created for a mainframe computer within an organisation.’’ In discussing MIS, Laudon
and Laudon (1995) suggest a six-stage division of the systems life cycle – systems
analysis, systems design, programming, testing, conversion, and production and
maintenance. At least twelve distinct stage models of the innovation process are
compared and contrasted by Zaltman et al (1984) showing the many ways of describing
this basic process. More so than traditional diffusion research, MIS/IT/OR study of the
diffusion process does not generate a strong cohesive theory, as shown by the many
approaches taken (e.g. Churchman and Schainblatt, 1965, Raghaven and Chand 1989,
Cooper and Zmud 1990, Schultz et al 1987, Kolb and Frohman 1970).

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

263

Figure 2
The successful flow of innovations must past through two separate gates:
technology and social (from Mayo 1985). A technology has not been successfully accepted
until it has passed through both the technology and social gates.

While some of the more notable and particularly relevant papers on various
aspects of GIS/LIS implementation have included multiple-stage models, it should be
noted that many key implementation papers have not. There have been numerous
studies of implementation status, including those performed by French and Wiggins
(1990), Campbell and Masser (1992), Nedovic-Budic (Budic 1993a, 1993b, 1994;
Nedovic-Budic 1995), May (1994), Cullis (1995a, 1995b), and Tulloch et al (1995).
issues of
these researchers have focused more on the organizational
Many of
implementation (Budic 1993b; Cullis 1994, 1995a, 1995b; Campbell and Masser 1995).
The first significant GIS process model appears to come from Crain and
MacDonald (1984) who produced a long-term, empirically-based analysis of the
Canadian Geographic Information System, identifying the inventory, analysis, and
management stages. The Crain and MacDonald model focuses on the 25-year evolution
of the Canadian national GIS from its inception in 1970 to a projected level of
operation in 1995. It suggests that as a land information system is in its earliest stage of
use, it is used primarily for inventory applications (Table 1). As it develops further, the
system is used for analytical purposes. Finally, it is at its fullest or final stage of use
when it becomes a system for management purposes. This model is important because
it draws attention to the fact that systems continue to change after some aspects
become operational and, therefore, do not produce the bulk of their benefits until they

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

264

David L Tulloch

System Capabilities

Inventory
- data input
- editing
- simple retrieval
- routine reporting

Analysis
all above plus:
- complex retrievals
- ad hoc queries
- statistical processing
- derived reporting (e.g.

graphics)

Management
all above plus:
- modeling, simulation
- decision support tools

(e.g. forecasting)

- integration of local data

sets

Table 1 Characteristics of the three stages or phases of the evolution of an operational
GIS (from Crain and MacDonald 1984)

Phase
Primary Activity

User/Supplier relationship

- data input

- clear division between client

and supplier

- data retrieval and

manipulation

- supplier involved in

determining output needs

- derived data sets
- interactive retrievals and

direct data access by user

- data exploration and

modeling

- user and supplier
indistinguishable
- fully interactive
- distributed responsibility

reach a later stage of development. The major drawback of the Crain and MacDonald
model is that it begins after the system is operational.

One of the primary sources of support for the concept of stage models for GIS/LIS
implementation has been practitioners offering guidance to other practitioners. One
example of this is the five-phase description of GIS implementation by Somers (1996):
planning, analysis, design, acquisition and development, and operation and
maintenance. Vastag et al (1994) provide a detailed description of the five pre-
feasibility, conceptualization, development, and
operational stages – awareness,
operation – and twenty-two specific steps of land records modernization. Similarly,
Aronoff (1989, 251) describes six phases of implementation: awareness, development of
system requirements, system evaluation, development of an implementation plan,
system acquisition and start-up, and the operational phase. Finishing implementation
with the operational phase satisfies the text’s basic educational needs but fails to
address the practical needs of a public system.

Thrall (1995) proposes five ‘‘stages of GIS reasoning’’ as an unusual structure for
expressing his ‘‘general philosophy of GIS analysis and management.’’ These stages are
description, explanation, prediction, judgment, and implementation and management.
Rather than describing the actions involved in achieving each of the stages in the
development of a new system, these labels depict the types of outcomes associated with
several of the stages of GIS development.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

265

Campbell and Masser (1995) provide ‘‘a conceptualization of diffusion’’ that
regards ‘‘diffusion as an umbrella concept.’’ The ‘‘umbrella’’ covers the six processes of
awareness, adoption, implementation, utilization, routinization and outcome which
are ‘‘not considered to be linear in nature.’’ While not a stage model in the strictest
sense, their conceptualization provides an indication of the actions an organization
must take in its GIS development process.

initiation, adoption,

Although not specific about the type of activities or organizations to be included,
Azad (1993, 65) suggests that the literature could be applied to GIS with a four-stage
model. Selected ‘‘due to its parsimony and clarity,’’ Azad proposes a model consisting
of the following stages:
implementation, and routinization.
Anderson (1996) recently produced a research summary of much of the GIS/LIS
implementation literature. She proposes a multi-stage model consisting of initiation,
acquisition, and incorporation. This model has two useful features – the emphasis on
stages and a practical set of actions that apply to the development within each stage.
She also calls attention to the need to consider the impact of these systems but focuses
on the organization and staff impacted without serious attention to the impacts on the
community.

These models demonstrate a recognition that an important part of a system’s
development occurs after it is implemented. Whether it is called operation (Aronoff
1989, Vastag et al 1994, Somers 1996), incorporation (Anderson 1996), maintenance
(Thrall 1995, Somers 1996), routinization (Azad 1993, Campbell and Masser 1995), or
utilization and outcome (Campbell and Masser 1995) these models all express a
concern about continuing to contribute to a system after its implementation is
complete. However, only Crain and MacDonald (1984) present a view of systems
experiencing significant development after implementation.

2.2.1 Factors Affecting Success or Failure of Systems
The development of GIS/LIS is accompanied by a considerable interest in the reasons
for success or failure of particular systems. Papers often discuss the most common
barriers to system development and ‘‘tips’’ or steps for achieving the system designers’
goals. Whether the discussion is formal or informal, anecdotal or universal, these
inhibiting barriers and promoting steps are most commonly described as factors.

In their reports, practitioners have provided a rich and profuse literature describing
their practical experiences. Some of these summarize a specific project, providing
anecdotal evidence based on a single experience (e.g. Huxhold 1982, Coffeen 1994).
Others report experiences from a series of projects and attempt to produce broader
conclusions (e.g. Croswell 1989, 1991, McRae 1989, Antenucci et al 1991, Vastag et al
1994). In contrast, academic studies focus on a specific category of factors affecting
system development. Meanwhile, others stress the importance of the organizational
factors in the success of system development (Budic 1994, Cullis 1995a,b, Ventura
1995). There is also research examining who is more likely to adopt GIS (Nedovic-
Budic 1998) and the importance that disciplinary belief and autonomous behavior play
as factors affecting system development (Portner and Niemann 1982).

Recently there was an important effort to develop a comprehensive list of factors
and measure the perceived role played by each factor (Onsrud and Pinto 1993). This
work evaluated systems once the decision had been made to implement a GIS within an
organization and asked about steps taken to further develop the system. Onsrud and
Pinto’s work included identifying not only the factors but also an attempt at identifying

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

266

David L Tulloch

some indicators of implementation. Although ideas regarding system implementation
have undergone change in the interim, this paper is still generally regarded as the
seminal work in factors of implementation.

In Wisconsin, the adoption and diffusion of these technologies have been shown to
depend significantly on organizational and institutional factors and moderately on
other social and technological factors (Kuhlman 1994). Kuhlman’s research created an
important foundation for this research by showing the importance of communication
in the modernization process. Her work also suggested that the next step should be to
explore ‘‘the relationship of independent variables to various stages of the diffusion
process, rather than focusing on a single stage of the diffusion process’’ (p 93).

2.2.2 System Benefits
Among the outcomes of MPLIS development are a set of indicators referred to as
benefits. The current concept of system benefits emphasizes those things of measurable
value accruing to the organization developing the system, or to the organization
incurring costs of system development. The concept is driven by the need in public and
private organizations to justify development expenses to investors, whether they are
taxpayers or stockholders. For lack of a better method, some researchers have relied
largely upon conjecture (Cook and Kennedy 1966) while others have used case studies
(Onsrud et al 1992, 1993, Gillespie 1994, Craig and Johnson 1997) and still others have
attempted an extensive spreadsheet (Antenucci et al 1991) in order to document these
benefits. Additional economic information regarding the nature of assessing the costs
and benefits of GIS/LIS have been provided as a theoretical foundation for broader
studies (Wunderlich and Moyer 1984, Moyer 1993), but few broad economic studies
appear to have been performed. An especially notable study was conducted in the mid-
1970s assessing the total cost of traditional land records activities to citizens of the State
of Wisconsin (Larsen et al 1978).

While economists recognize that system benefits are both internal and external,
tangible and intangible, others, with the need to justify the cost to decision-makers,
have focused on categorizing benefits
later measurement. Efficiency and
effectiveness benefits have been the object of attention in efforts to measure the value
of investments in GIS/LIS (e.g. Antenucci et al 1991, Dickinson and Calkins 1988,
Dickinson 1989a,b, Obermeyer 1989, Onsrud et al 1989, Epstein and Duchesneau 1984,
1990, Moyer and Niemann 1991, Smith and Tomlinson 1992, Gillespe 1994, Korte
1996, Moyer 1990, Rourk 1993).

for

Recently attention has turned to the benefits associated with the broader use of
system products beyond the organization and throughout the community. These
related outcomes have been characterized as equity (Kishor et al 1990, Cowen 1994),
decision making (Pinto and Onsrud 1995), or democratization (Mead 1994, Lang 1995).
As a general trend, this attention is evidenced by the amount of research concerning
community issues such as public access (e.g. Roitman 1990, Stipek and Torraca 1993),
changes in democratic participation brought about by GIS (Morain and Budge 1996),
and concerns about outcomes of the growing relationships between GIS and society
(e.g. Pickles 1995, Sheppard 1995). Here the set of product users is potentially much
greater in number and type than those users in the organizations that initiate and
develop the system.

One of the few comprehensive attempts to capture the efficiency, effectiveness, and
equity resulting from a project comes from Kishor et al (1990). A multi-agency effort,

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

267

Conservation of Natural Resources
Information Layers
(CONSOIL), was assessed according to the extent to which it satisfied these ‘‘three
E’s.’’ Many of the specified benefits of the CONSOIL project included components of
each of the three benefits, which indicated an especially high potential value to the
authors.

through Sharing Of

It is generally believed that much of the financial burden of system development is
borne in the earlier stages while the benefits tend to accrue as the process progresses
(Antenucci et al 1991, Moyer 1993). This creates a problem for measurement of
benefits when relying on models which do not allow for the full accrual of benefits.

2.3 Discussion of Existing Models

The many different models described so far have been important for many purposes,
but are not ideal as models for MPLIS development. This is hardly a criticism of many
of the models since they have so often been designed and developed for other purposes.
Aside from those from other fields, some models were offered by practitioners (e.g.
Somers 1996) who proposed their models based on anecdotal experiences or offered
them simply as illustrative examples for very specific circumstances.

A major criticism is that virtually every model, except one (Crain and MacDonald
1984), either ignores ‘‘operationalization’’ stages or wraps them up as a single stage.
Whether it is called ‘‘routinization’’ (Azad 1993), or ‘‘operation’’ (Vastag et al 1994)
and ‘‘operational phase’’ (Aronoff 1989), these models trivialize the essential activities
that make up those stages. Moreover, they send a message to system developers that
there is limited development work after the system reaches some initial point of
operation.

Each of the concerns mentioned thus far could be overcome by reworking the
existing stage models, however, the greatest limitation has been the emphasis on stages
in isolation. The results is that there is one fundamental function which has not yet
been presented in any model, that is the full integration of the following three elements:

•
•
•

Stages,
Factors (existing conditions impacting system development), and
Indicators (system outcomes including benefits).

The remainder of this paper presents an alternative model to the many existing models
that offers an integration of these three elements. It differs from earlier work in that it
emphasizes the later stages of implementation and use. The proposed model also
describes the system within the broader context of the community rather than an
organization.

3 Proposed Model

In this model, stages are definable and measurable states of MPLIS development. The
stage portion of the model was developed from a consideration and comparison of
related models described in the literature. Concepts in each of the earlier models are
retained in a new combination designed to reflect general areas of agreement between
the models. The three models playing the most direct role in the delineation of stages
are: Rogers (1962), Crain and MacDonald (1984), and LOCALIS (Vastag et al 1994).

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

268

David L Tulloch

Table 2 Comparison of three process models from the literature and the model of MPLIS
development proposed in this research.

Rogers
(1962, 1995)

Crain and MacDonald
(1984)

LOCALIS
(Vastag et al 1994)

knowledge
persuasion
decision

implementation

confirmation

inventory
analysis
management

awareness
feasibility
conceptualization
development

operational

Proposed model
of MPLIS
development

no modernization

system initiation

database
development
recordkeeping
analysis

democratization

Additional guidance for model development came from the results of a series of
modernization status surveys administered to Wisconsin’s 72 counties (Tulloch and
Niemann 1996).

labeled: no modernization,

The result of this review is a development continuum divided into six separate
stages
system initiation, database development,
recordkeeping, analysis, and democratization. A rough comparison of the three
existing models and the proposed model shown in Table 2 illustrates the contrast
between each model as well as gaps suggesting the need for a new model.

The nature of the relationships between stages of development is summarized in
the diagram of MPLIS development (Figure 3). This diagram suggests that the typical
community progresses from the first to the last stage sequentially, with significant
progress in each stage a necessary requirement for advancement to the next. As
suggested in Figure 3, the development stages often overlap because progress in each
stage occurs over time, and many of the requirements for the next stage emerge before
the stage itself is completely developed. This leads to the satisfaction of more
sophisticated demands. It also generates movement from one stage to another. This
causes an overlap of some stages. Some communities may attempt to skip stages,
develop stages out of order, address multiple stages simultaneously or even retreat
briefly in a direction contrary to that suggested in the model. However, attempts to
alter the natural development sequence described may often cause problems associated
with unsuccessful and slowly developing systems. Dramatic deviations from this
sequential model are rare. These rare deviations may be more apparent than real. For
example, a particular community may claim or appear to go from no activity to an
advanced stage. However, this can only occur when MPLIS development exists in other
organizations in the community, so that information or equipment needed by the
organization has already been made available somewhere within the community of
organizations.

It is important, at this point, to remember that any model is a generalization of
reality, not a precise description of the process. Like previous models, this model
describes the system primarily as a single, homogenous entity, not fully reflecting the

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

269

Figure 3 A diagram of the MPLIS development conceptual model showing the sequential
development of stages (i.e. no modernization through democratization), their overlapping
nature, and the accrual of benefits with time. The factors combine to create the forces for
change in development, with upward and downward arrows suggesting both positive or
promoting factors and negative or prohibitive factors. The indicators are the occurrences
that characterize each stage which include benefits.

complexity of a community system in which the transportation component may be
completed to a different level than the natural resource components. This gross
simplification is necessary, but allows for an overall characterization of the system. For
some purposes, a community might choose to describe each of its major system
components as a separate community MPLIS for the purposes of status reports.
Eventually, however, many communities will find that the development of one
component will be somewhat limited until other components are also developed. The
ultimate measure of that model is how well it helps us understand what is happening.
The concept of the stages, which is a common aspect of previous research, is
developed in greater detail in this model than in earlier, related models. Indicators, the
first element of this greater detail, are defined as the measurable variables and their
combination that determine each stage of MPLIS development (e.g. availability of data
to the public). They represent an effort to identify independent, measurable variables
that define and characterize the stages. The indicators, represented by the arrows along
the left side of Figure 3, provide outcomes by which system status can be monitored.
The indicators are outcomes of MPLIS development that define the stages.

Another element of the MPLIS development model is the force for change from
one stage to another. The forces for change, represented in the diagram by the two-way
vertical arrows, is the sum of the overall conditions at a given time determining the
nature and pace of change from one stage to another. The forces may be positive or

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

270

David L Tulloch

negative, either promoting or inhibiting development. Although absent from the
diagram, factors are important because they combine to form the element of the forces
legal, organizational,
for change. Factors are the measurable social, economic,
technological, political, and cultural variables that determine the forces for change
(Figure 3).

Benefits, a category within the larger set of indicators, are broadly defined as the
components of the eventual or anticipated community well-being achieved through
MPLIS development. It is not simply the well-being of a particular organization.
Benefits to the community are composed of three categories: efficiency, effectiveness,
and equity. Efficiency is the result of performing traditional activities at a reduced cost,
generating more products with the same resources, performing tasks in reduced time or
some combination of these. Effectiveness results from performing new tasks not
previously feasible. Equity results from a perceived or real increase in the actual
participation by citizens and organizations in decisions about land and resources.

3.1 Stages

The first three stages of the model characterize activities generally undertaken before a
system becomes operational. Both the absence of technology and the lack of planning
for or intent to use the new technologies characterize the first stage – no modernization
activity. During this first stage, a growing awareness of the technologies may exist.
However, the stage continues until a decision is made to adopt the technologies. This
stage might also be characterized by events like the loss of historical land records,
redundancy of efforts, or the difficulty of accessing records. This stage is defined as
ending at the moment that system initiation begins.

System initiation, the second stage,

is the first active phase of development
including needs assessment, system design, and budgetary allocations. The stage begins
at the moment at which the decision is made to develop a system and is completed
when the system is fully planned, designed, and budgeted. This stage can vary
dramatically in terms of time because some organizations rush through the process or
develop a system using pieces of the existing structure, while other organizations will
analyze their entire organization and fully restructure to incorporate the technology.
This restructuring may include the elimination, or modification of existing agencies, or
the creation of new agencies. It may also require developing new relationships between
existing agencies relying on the same or similar land information. Finally, it may
include improving support for anticipated activities (e.g. establishing data standards,
improving the geodetic control network). Until
software, and
organizational structure are all in place, the activities comprising this stage are not
complete.

the hardware,

In the database development stage, data are collected and organized. A great deal
of data may already be collected, but will need to be converted into a compatible digital
format. However, there may also be a need during this stage to gather new data,
sometimes replacing existing material. This stage can be considered to extend for a
very long time, in some cases decades or, when new applications are mandated or
evolve, indefinitely. However, it is defined here as beginning with the initial acquisition
or conversion of data specifically intended for use in the newly designed system, and is
completed when the database is sufficient to support those queries for which the new
system was designed, as defined by the organization in the system initiation stage. The

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

271

later additions of maintenance and update of information (not trivial activities in both
cost and commitment) should always exist in a dynamic system and should not be
confused with the activities of this stage.

The last three stages show a progression of systems activities such that they can be
used for increasingly complex applications and they produce increasing benefits as they
incorporate more participants. The portion of
referred to as
implementation ends at the end of the database development stage while the portion
described as operation begins at the beginning of the recordkeeping stage. Reaching
operational status is important for many systems because it increases the flow of
benefits and allows the system to become a more permanent part of an organization
(Hamilton 1996).

the process

In the recordkeeping stage, the improved or automated land records or databases
are used to respond to routine queries and data retrieval. This begins at the time that
the system can support basic recordkeeping activities and ends when the system begins
to generate and maintains greater efficiency in the management or handling of data for
traditional recordkeeping activities. The use of new technologies allows for these
recordkeeping activities to occur faster, easier, at a reduced cost, with reduced space,
with reduced redundancy, and with reduced risk of damaged or lost of documents.
While mere efficiency and recordkeeping may categorize the benefits associated with
this stage, a few specific outcomes might include digital property records and reduced
taxes and fees (or reduced increases in taxes and fees) and cheaper title insurance
directly attributable to more easily managed and rapidly accessed records (Tulloch and
Niemann 1996).

When data are used for spatial analysis and complex queries, the analysis stage
begins. The analysis stage includes two- and three-dimensional spatial analysis of the
existing data, complex linkages of information and multiple databases, and use of
various modeling techniques, all of which depend upon deriving more information than
previously feasible from the same data. Specific examples include the use of terrain
modeling to determine more precise floodplain boundaries (Tulloch et al 1997),
combination of infrastructure and demographic data to show neighborhoods needing
public assistance (Craig and Johnson 1997), route analysis for scheduling rapid transit
(Craig and Johnson 1997), and spatial analysis for comparison of proposed land use
actions (Heinzel et al 1996). These different forms of analyses enable existing
government agencies to more successfully complete their increasingly complex assigned
mandates and missions. Thus, this stage is associated with the delivery of a substantial
level of benefits at increased levels of effectiveness. The analysis stage is defined as
beginning when the system can support some analysis activities and is defined as ending
when the system achieves a substantial level of effectiveness.

Finally, when people’s relationships with governments and among themselves in
land and resources are altered as a result of the system
regard to use of data,
development, the democratization stage has been reached. The altered relationship can
be real or perceived. This stage begins when the system produces outcomes of
improved equity. It should be noted the term ‘‘democratization’’ (Mead 1994, Lang
1995) is emerging in the literature as an expression of the participatory applications of
the technology. Ideally, this stage would be characterized by improved access to land
records and information, better understanding of both previous and planned
government actions, more widespread effective and equal treatment in the government
decision process (procedural equity), reduced conflict over decisions, and increased

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

272

David L Tulloch

trust in decisions. However democratization benefits may be limited if charges are
levied for access to data or access is limited in other ways (Craig and Johnson 1997).
This stage is closely associated with the distribution of broad social benefits to the
community through the use of the community’s MPLIS.

3.2 Forces for Change and their Factors

At any given time during development, a community-wide MPLIS can experience a
large number of factors, both positive and negative, which combine to exert a single
force for change, either positive or negative, upon the system. This force for change is
the determining force for movement from one stage to another. As previously defined,
the factors are the measurable social, economic, legal, organizational, technological,
political, and cultural variables that determine forces for change.

The literature contains an extensive list of factors that purport to influence the
changes in the status of systems in an organization or community (e.g. Onsrud and
Pinto 1993). Based upon this literature as well as the results of our surveys of
development activity by local governments, the factors are placed in the following
twelve general categories: Federal Mandates or Standards, State Mandates or
Standards, County Mandates or Standards, Municipal Mandates or Standards,
Incentives, Costs, Government Operations, Programs and Issues, Characteristics of
the Technology, Characteristics of Data and Information, Leadership, Institutional
Factors, and Beliefs (Table 3).

In previous

these have included factors

The first four categories of factors are Federal, State, County and Municipal
Mandates or Standards involving laws or standards that apply to various MPLIS
development activities.
like
research,
‘‘inadequate high-level support or mandate’’, ‘‘the user community should encourage
the adoption of standards’’ (Croswell 1989, 19), ‘‘GIS consistency with corporate
goals’’, and ‘‘the extent of consensus on methods and standards’’ (Obermeyer and
Pinto 1994, 27). The specific mandates and standards factors identified for the model of
MPLIS development are (federal) Spatial Data Transfer Standard, National Map
Accuracy Standard, FGCC Standards for geodetic control, (state) Parcel ID Standards,
Property Survey Standards, PLSS Remonumentation Standards, Statutes promoting
land records modernization, (county) ordinances enabling land records modernization,
subdivision regulations, survey plat review, surveying standards, zoning ordinances,
(municipal) ordinances enabling land records modernization, subdivision regulations,
survey plat review, surveying standards, and zoning ordinances.

The fifth category of factors is Incentives, and is composed of financial factors that
serve as direct means designed to overcome economic, technical, and training barriers
to change. The factor of incentives is identified in the literature as ‘‘availability of
informal methods to cover costs’’, ‘‘benefits to advocates if GIS is a success’’, ‘‘benefits
to extended users’’, ‘‘effects of use, ‘‘perceived value’’, ‘‘utility’’, ‘‘relative advantage of
the innovation over the product, process, or idea it supersedes’’, and ‘‘visibility of
benefits’’ (Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, 27). Specific incentives of the model of MPLIS
development are benefits to users, funding, hardware and software endowments, and
technical support.

Costs is another category of financial factors associated with the existing system
and with new hardware and software which determine whether there will be MPLIS
development. They appear in the literature as ‘‘cost of data entry’’, ‘‘cost of hardware

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

273

Table 3 A list of the categories of factors (in bold) and the specific factors proposed as
part of the model of MPLIS development

Federal Mandates for Standards
Spatial Data Transfer Standard
National Map Accuracy Standard
FGCC Standards for geodetic control
State Mandates or Standards
Parcel ID Standards
Property Survey Standards
PLSS Remonumentation Standards
Statutes promoting land records

modernization

Subdivision regulations
survey plat review
surveying standards
zoning ordinances
Municipal Mandates or Standards
ordinances enabling land records

modernization

subdivision regulations
survey plat review
surveying standards
zoning ordinances
Incentives
benefits to users
funding
hardware and software endowments
technical support
Costs
cost of technology
cost of continuation of existing system
cost of data acquisition
cost of data conversion
cost of data maintenance
Characteristics of the Technology
compatibility with existing structures and

procedures

complexity of the modernization process
ease of use
resource commitment required for

lack of supporting documentation or

modernization

metadata

Characteristics of Data and Information
Incompatiblity of data from different

sources
data accuracy
data timeliness (up-to-date)
data acessibility
data completeness
data redundancy
Government Operations, Programs and
Issues
economic development
environment regulation/protection
growth management
tax assessment
emergency services
Institutional Factors
ability to revert to traditional or alternative

methods in the event of failure

access to educational programs
communication between participants
distance from other users
modernization efforts of other counties
past failures with modernization activities
time and expense in locating and
assembling desired information

Leadership
county agency
elected officials
federal agency
individual leader(s)
management team
professional organizations promoting

modernization
public interest group
state agency
university
Beliefs
attitudes and beliefs about innovation
perceived benefits of modernization
perceived risks of modernization
pressure from users of land information
personal frustration and inconvenience

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

274

David L Tulloch

and software’’, ‘‘cost to retrain staff’’, ‘‘costs’’ (Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27), ‘‘funding
ability or justification’’, and ‘‘insufficient funding’’ (Croswell 1989, 19). The specific
costs include the cost of technology, cost of continuation of existing system, cost of
data acquisition, cost of data conversion, and cost of data maintenance.

Another category of

(Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27),

the Technology which is
factors is Characteristics of
concerned with important attributes inherent in the hardware and software of the
information systems. Examples include ‘‘ability to expand types of uses’’, ‘‘ability to
revert in case of GIS failure’’, ‘‘ability to serve several units of the organization’’,
‘‘ability to serve those outside the organization’’, ‘‘adapting GIS to meet your specific
needs’’, ‘‘advantages of GIS over existing process’’, ‘‘ease of generating results’’, ‘‘ease
‘‘lack of
of use’’
understanding of technology’’, ‘‘poor system documentation’’, ‘‘software complexity/
maturity of technology’’, ‘‘software or hardware not suited to desired application’’
(Croswell 1989, 19), ‘‘visibility of uses and benefits’’ (Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27),
‘‘volatility of technology’’ (Croswell 1989, 19), ‘‘complexity in learning or using the
innovation’’, ‘‘‘trialability’ of the innovation’’ (Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, 27) and
‘‘number of GIS applications’’ (Budic 1994). The specific factors used for the model of
MPLIS development are compatibility with existing structure and procedures,
complexity of the modernization process, ease of use, resource commitment required
for modernization, and lack of supporting documentation or metadata.

‘‘immaturity of

technology’’,

(Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27),

‘‘compatibility of GIS with existing computer system’’,

A similar category of factors is Characteristics of Data and Information which are
concerned with important attributes inherent in the data and information in the
MPLIS. The literature has included examples like ‘‘availability of existing data’’,
‘‘data
‘‘compatibility’’,
accuracy’’
‘‘data and software standards/data
integration’’, ‘‘data communications and networking’’, ‘‘data communications and
networking problems’’, ‘‘data integration or inconsistency problems’’, ‘‘data structure
and source materials’’, ‘‘database maintenance issues not addressed’’ (Croswell 1989,
19), ‘‘ease of transferring data’’ (Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27), ‘‘hardware operation/
communication problems’’,
for procedures or data’’,
‘‘no accepted standards
‘‘problems in database design/data conversion’’,
‘‘problems in managing large
databases’’, ‘‘problems in quality or format of source data’’ (Croswell 1989, 19) and
‘‘database comprehensiveness’’ (Budic 1994). The specific factors used in the model of
MPLIS development are incompatibility of data from different sources, data accuracy,
data timeliness
(up-to-date), data accessibility, data completeness, and data
redundancy.

Government Operations, Programs and Issues is a category of factors fundamental
and basic to land related activities common in local government. Examples from
previous research include ‘‘GIS consistency with corporate goals’’ (Onsrud and Pinto
1993, 27), and ‘‘planning/management support’’ (Croswell 1989, 19). The specific
factors are economic development, environmental regulation/protection, growth
management, tax assessment, and emergency services.

Institutional Factors is a separate category of factors concerned with important
attributes inherent in relationships within and among organizations and people.
Previous research has included factors like ‘‘ability to talk to previous adopters’’,
‘‘access to learning’’,
‘‘accessibility to informal
formal educational opportunities’’,
educational opportunities’’,
‘‘close
‘‘availability of learning materials’’,

‘‘availability of skilled GIS people’’,

‘‘accessibility to GIS vendors’’,

‘‘availability of

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

275

systems

failure’’,

computer

successful

‘‘history of

‘‘extent of existing computer usage skills’’,

proximity to other GIS users’’, ‘‘communication channels’’ (Onsrud and Pinto 1993,
27), ‘‘existence of formal and informal communication channels’’ (Obermeyer and
Pinto 1994), ‘‘existence of formal communication channels’’, ‘‘existence of informal
‘‘fallback
communication channels’’,
options’’,
in
‘‘history of
organization’’, ‘‘history of unsuccessful computer systems in organization’’ (Onsrud
and Pinto 1993, 27), ‘‘inadequate communication/coordination among participants’’,
‘‘internal power struggles’’, ‘‘organizational coordination and conflicts’’ (Croswell
1989, 19), ‘‘memory of past failures’’ (Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, 27), ‘‘previous failure
in information system development’’ (Croswell 1989, 19), ‘‘proximity to other users’’
‘‘training/
(Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27),
understanding of technology’’ (Croswell 1989, 19), ‘‘experience with GIS (length of
time GIS used),’’ and ‘‘GIS sharing (multi-departmental GIS)’’ (Budic 1994). The
specific institutional factors in the proposed model are ability to revert to traditional or
to educational programs,
alternative methods
communication between participants, distance from other users, modernization efforts
of other counties, past failures with modernization activities, past successes with
modernization activities, and time and expense in locating and assembling desired
information.

‘‘staffing availability/recruitment’’,

in the event of

failure, access

from management’’

(Croswell 1989, 19),

(Croswell 1989, 19),

(Onsrud and Pinto 1993, 27),
‘‘lack of management commitment’’,

Leadership is a category of factors which distinguishes the role of individuals in
MPLIS development based upon their organizational position within an MPLIS.
Examples from the literature include ‘‘assign a GIS manager early in project’’, ‘‘get
commitment
‘‘importance of GIS
‘‘inadequate high-level support or
champion’’
mandate’’,
‘‘lack of understanding by
management’’
‘‘the presence or absence of champions,
reinventors, and opinion leaders in organization or in the professional community’’
(Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, 27), ‘‘upper management MUST be involved in major
automation decisions’’, the importance of working with ‘‘city councils’’ (Wellar
1988, 376) ‘‘political support for GIS,’’ and ‘‘staff support for GIS’’ (Budic 1994).
The specific leadership factors for the model of MPLIS development proposed here
are county agency, elected officials, federal agency, individual leader(s), management
team, professional organizations promoting modernization, public interest group,
state agency, and university.

The final category is Beliefs which is composed of factors about attitudes,
perceptions and beliefs about various aspects of MPLIS development. Examples from
the literature include ‘‘apathy/fear of change’’, ‘‘benefits not well quantified’’, ‘‘too
conservative/lack of innovation’’ (Croswell 1989, 19), and innovativeness of adopters
(Rogers 1995). The specific belief factors are attitudes and beliefs about innovation,
perceived benefit of modernization, perceived risks of modernization, pressure from
users of land information, and personal frustration and inconvenience.

3.3 Indicators of Stages

In addition to research about stages and their determinative factors, the literature
contains many examples and descriptions of outcomes of system development. This
literature and our previous research were used to develop a list of outcomes to signify
various stages of MPLIS development. It should be noted that, unlike many uses of

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

276

David L Tulloch

factors in the previous literature, examples of indicators from the literature were
generally not offered specifically as indicators but simply as descriptions of general
outcomes. The indicators and their measures are used to describe each stage of MPLIS
development. The seven categories of indicators are Use of Technology, Transfer of
Data, Improved Data Quality, Improved Agency Data Management, Education and
Training Opportunities, Change in Decision Making Processes, and Impacts on Land
Related Decisions (Table 4).

The first category of indicators is Use of Technology which describes the nature
and extent of the technologies utilized in the MPLIS. Examples of this from the

Table 4 A list of the categories of indicators (in bold) and the specific indicators proposed
as part of the model of MPLIS Development

Use of Technology
hardware/software for data analysis
hardware/software for data conversion
public access terminals
communication linkages between

convenience of collecting your own

computers

information

convenience of using information collected

by other agencies

on-site measurement of feature locations
image-based measurement of feature

Transfer of Data
arrangements for sharing data between

locations

agencies

use of a common data exchange format
data available to general public
data transferred in new formats
data available in formats not previously

feasible

Improved Data Quality
data collection and input standards
data in digital format
consistency of data format
use of common datum and projection
more complete data
Improved Agency Data Management
generation of new products and tasks
cost of traditional products and services
fast information input and output
reduction of duplicate information
fast delivery of traditional services and

products

sophistication of tasks
uniform information management

procedures

Education and Training Opportunities
education of agency managers
education of elected officials
education of citizens and non-technical

users

training programs for personnel
Change in Decision Making Process
trust when decisions are based on land

information technology

changed political power distribution due to

land information technology
support for sustaining systems
cheap and fast access to land information
information accessed and used by more

people

altered personnel costs and activities
Impacts on Land Related Decisions
reduced conflict over resource decisions
measured improvements in environmental

quality

regulations

improved ability to assess cost of land

create predictive and retrospective

resource models

provide early identification of resource

problems

encouraging economic development
improved zoning compliance
improved tax assessment
improved infrastructure management
protection of private property rights

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

277

literature include the presence of computer systems (French and Wiggins 1989, 1990,
Huxhold 1993, Tulloch et al 1995), and physical conditions permitting sharing of and
public access to data and information (Onsrud and Rushton 1995, Smith and Gluck
1996). The specific indicators are hardware/software for data analysis, hardware/
software for data conversion, public access terminals, communication linkages between
computers, convenience of collecting your own information, convenience of using
information collected by other agencies, on-site measurement of feature locations, and
image-based measurement of feature locations.

Another category of indicators is the Transfer of Data which describes the manner
in which data are shared with other organizations and individuals. Examples from
other research include sharing of data (Onsrud and Rushton 1995), policies requiring
sharing (Lerner 1992, Onsrud and Rushton 1995, Lopez 1996, Onsrud et al 1996), and
policies mandating the use of standards for exchange of data (e.g. National Institute of
Standards and Technology 1992, Croswell 1994). The specific indicators are
arrangements for sharing data between agencies, use of a common data exchange
format, data available to general public, data transferred in new formats, and data
available in formats not previously feasible.

Improved Data Quality is the category of indicators that reflects the extent of data
collection and storage. Examples from previous research include the presence of digital
data (French and Wiggins 1989, 1990; Tulloch et al 1995) and improved data accuracy
(Budic 1993a). The specific indicators are data collection and input standards, data in
digital format, consistency of data format, use of common datum and projection, and
more complete data.

The category of Improved Agency Data Management combines a series of specific
organization activities concerned with the management and use of the data. The
literature includes examples of a variety of system and data management procedural
issues (Huxhold 1993) and case study examples with these outcomes from systems like
Milwaukee (Somers 1989) and Dane County (Tulloch and Niemann 1996). The specific
indicators of improved agency data management are generation of new products and
tasks, cost of traditional products and services, fast information input and output,
reduction of duplicate information, fast delivery of traditional services and products,
sophistication of tasks, and uniform information management procedures.

Education and Training Opportunities is a category of indicators that describes
activities directed to the education and training of different groups of participants in
the MPLIS. Examples of this indicator from previous research include an increased
level of training and education for staff (Tulloch et al 1995) and programs for teaching
basic GIS to the general public (Smith and Gluck 1996). The specific indicators are
education of agency managers, education of elected officials, education of citizens and
non-technical users, training programs for personnel.

The category of Change in Decision Making Process reflects conditions that
encourage a change in the role participants play in community decisions. Examples
identified in the literature include altered outcomes in political resource conflicts due to
defensible resource models (Gatti et al 1994), ‘‘confidence in analyses,’’ ‘‘identification
of conflicts,’’ and ‘‘explicitness of decision’’ (Budic 1993a). The specific indicators are
trust when decisions are based on land information technology, changed political
power distribution due to land information technology, support for sustaining systems,
cheap and fast access to land information, information accessed and used by more
people, and altered personnel costs and activities.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

278

David L Tulloch

The final category Impacts on Land Related Decisions consists of measurable
conditions that result from MPLIS-driven changes in land and resource allocation
decisions. Examples from previous literature include ‘‘identification of conflicts’’
(Budic 1993a), altered outcomes in political resource conflicts due to defensible
resource models (Gatti et al 1994) and support of hydrological modeling (Spence et al
1995). The specific indicators of impacts on land related decisions are reduced conflict
over resource decisions, measured improvements in environmental quality, improved
ability to assess cost of land regulations, create predictive and retrospective resource
models, provide early identification of resource problems, encouraging economic
development,
improved
infrastructure management, and protection of private property rights.

improved zoning compliance,

improved tax assessment,

4 Conclusions

A model is a generalization of a complex reality, not a precise predictor of the countless
outcomes resulting from development processes. As such, it is limited to a greater or
lesser extent in its ability to predict the future. Some may desire a more complex, multi-
dimensional model, however, the MPLIS development model proposed here is designed
to serve a number of purposes.
for anticipation of system
development issues, with emphasis on the long-term nature of the development
process. Much like Java serves as a common language for computers of many different
operating systems, the model provides a common language for system developers in a
variety of situations. Successful system development requires a full awareness of the
many aspects of the process, complete with all of the associated steps, pitfalls, and
opportunities; the model offers a framework for discussion of, and summary of, these
elements.

It provides a tool

One of the critical lessons that can result through the application of the MPLIS
development model regards the latter stages of development. The realization that the
development of a system may not be complete at
some initial moment of
operationalization is not
trivial. As suggested by the relationship between the
indicators and the stages, the community does not accrue the greatest benefits until the
latter stages. This is the crux of a growing area of research – studies of the impacts of
system development – for which the proposed model provides a context and structure.
Certainly the specification of the benefits of efficiency, effectiveness, and equity and the
connection drawn to the stages of recordkeeping, analysis, and democratization can
provide a foundation for future assessments of benefits.

As a tool designed to support both academic exploration (of benefits and costs)
and practical evaluations of community system applications, the proposed model
system developers, managers, users,
provides a simple, unified language for
researchers, and members of the community. This model must, in turn, be implemented
to evaluate its strengths and weaknesses and identify additional improvements.

Acknowledgements

The work represented in this paper has been produced over a period of several years
emerging out of a variety of projects with several different funding sources. Support for

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

279

previous projects leading to the proposal of the MPLIS development model came from
the National Center for Resource Innovations - Great Lakes and the National Center
for Geographic Information and Analysis. The final manuscript was written with
support provided by the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station (Hatch Grant
No. 84101).

Much of the material for this paper was developed as part of a doctoral
dissertation. As such, a special thanks goes to both official and non-signing committee
members who provided particularly significant contributions through review and
comment: Earl Epstein, D David Moyer, and Steve Ventura. Finally, a special thanks to
the author’s advisor and employer throughout this research process, Ben Niemann,
who stressed the importance of balancing the basic and applied research components to
produce something that was both intellectually meaningful and practically useful.

References

Anderson C 1996 GIS development process: A framework for considering the initiation,

acquisition, and incorporation of GIS technology. URISA Journal 8: 10–26

Antenucci J, Brown K, Croswell P, Kevany M, and Archer H 1991 Geographic Information

Systems: A Guide to the Technology. New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold

Aronoff S 1989 Geographic Information Systems: A Management Perspective. Ottawa, WDL

Publications

Azad B 1993 Theory and Measurement In GIS Implementation Research: Critique and Proposals.
In Klosterman R E and French S P (ed) Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on Computers in Urban Planning and Urban Management (Atlanta, GA, July 23–25, 1993).
Atlanta, GA, City Planning Program, Georgia Institute of Technology: 51–87

Brown K 1992 A Response to Earl Epstein. URISA Journal 4: 6–8
Brown L 1981 Innovation Diffusion: A New Perspective. London, Methuen
Brown P and Moyer D (eds) 1989 Multipurpose Land Information Systems: The Guidebook.

Washington DC, Federal Geodetic Control Committee

Budic Z 1993a GIS use among southeastern local governments. URISA Journal 5: 4–17
Budic Z 1993b Human and Institutional Factors in GIS Implementation by Local Governments.

Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Budic Z 1994 Effectiveness of geographic information systems in local government planning.

Journal of the American Planning Association 6: 244–63

Campbell H and Masser I 1992 GIS in local government: Some findings from Great Britain.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 6: 529–46

Campbell H and Masser I 1995 GIS and Organizations: How Effective Are GIS in Practice?

London, Taylor and Francis

and Sons

Chrisman N R 1997 Exploring Geographic Information Systems. New York, NY, John Wiley

Churchman C and Schainblatt A 1965 The researcher and the manager: A dialectic of

implementation. Management Science 11: B69–87

Coffeen S 1994 Using GIS to support the ‘reverse urbanization’ process: A case study of the

Presidio. URISA Proceedings 9: 517–26

Cook R and Kennedy J 1966 Proceedings of the Tri-State Conference on a Comprehensive
Unified Land Data System (CULDATA). Cincinnati, OH, University of Cincinnati College
of Law

Cooper R and Zmud R 1990 Information technology implementation research: A technology

diffusion approach. Management Science 36: 123–39

Cowen D 1994 The importance of GIS for the average person. In GIS in Government, The
Federal Perspective: Proceedings of the First Federal Geographic Technology Conference
Washington DC. Fort Collins, CO, GIS World Books: 7–11

Craig W and Johnson D 1997 Maximizing GIS benefits to society. Geo Info Systems 7: 14–8

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

280

David L Tulloch

Crain I and MacDonald C 1984 From land inventory to land management. Cartographica 21: 40–6
Croswell P (ed) 1994 Annotated Bibliography: Concepts, Issues, and Developments on GIS
Related Standards. Washington DC, Urban and Regional Information Systems Association
Croswell P 1989 Facing reality in GIS implementation: Lessons learned and obstacles to be

Croswell P 1991 Obstacles to GIS implementation and guidelines to increase the opportunities for

overcome. URISA Proceedings 4: 15–35

success. URISA Journal 3: 43–56

Cullis B 1994 A strategy for assessing organizational GIS adoption success. In Proceedings of
GIS/LIS ‘94. Bethesda, MD, American Congress of Surveying and Mapping: 208–17
Cullis B 1995a Modeling Innovation Adoption Responses: An Exploratory Analysis of
Geographic Information System Implementation at Defense Installations. Unpublished
PhD Dissertation, University of South Carolina

Cullis B 1995b An Exploratory Analysis of Responses to Geographic Information System
Adoption on Tri-Service Military Installations. Vicksburg, MS, US Army Engineer
Waterways Experiment Station

Dando L 1993 A case for the commercialization of public information. In Marketing Government
Geographic Information: Issues and Guidelines. Washington DC, Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association: 105–8

Dickinson H 1989a Selective Bibliography: Value of Information. Santa Barbara, University of
California, CA, National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis Technical Paper
No 89-8

Dickinson H 1989b Techniques for establishing the value of geographic information and
geographic information systems. In Proceedings of GIS/LIS ‘89. Bethesda, MD, American
Congress of Surveying and Mapping: 412–20

Dickinson H and Calkins H 1988 The economic evaluation of implementing a GIS. International

Journal of Geographic Information Systems 4: 307–27

Eason K 1988 Information Technology and Organisational Change. London, Taylor and Francis
Epstein E 1991 In My Opinion. URISA Journal 3: 2–4
Epstein E and Brown P 1989 Introduction to multipurpose land information systems. In Brown P
and Moyer D (eds) Multipurpose Land Information Systems: The Guidebook. Washington
DC, Federal Geodetic Control Committee: 1.1–1.8

Epstein E and Duchesneau T 1984 The Use and Value of a Geodetic Reference System. Rockville,

MD, National Geodetic Control Committee, US Department of Commerce

Epstein E and Duchesneau T 1990 Use and value of a geodetic reference system. URISA Journal

2: 11–25

Federal Geographic Data Committee 1995 Development of a National Digital Geospatial Data

Framework. Washington DC, Federal Geographic Data Committee

French S and Wiggins L 1989 Computer adoption and use in California planning agencies:

Implications for education. Journal of Planning Education and Research 8: 97–108

French S and L Wiggins 1990 California planning agency experiences with automated mapping

and geographic information systems. Environment and Planning B 17: 441–50

Gatti R, Sample D, Barth E, Crossley E, Miller S, and Peterson T 1994 Integrated grassland bird
habitat restoration in Wisconsin using GIS habitat modeling. Transactions of the 59th
North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference: 309–16

Gillespie S 1994 Measuring the benefits of GIS use: Two transportation case studies. URISA

Journal 6: 62–7

Ha¨ gerstrand T 1952 The Propagation of Innovation Waves. Lund, The Royal University of
Lund, Department of Geography, Lund Studies in Geography: Ser. B Human Geography
No 4

Hamilton W 1996 Beyond functionality: Striving for operational GIS. URISA Journal 8: 76–7
Heinzel W, Niemann B, and Ventura S 1996 Integration of spatial technology: Land tenure and
land-use change. In Proceedings of GIS ‘96. Fort Collins, CO, GIS World Books (CD-ROM)
Huxhold W 1982 An evaluation of the City of Milwaukee automated geographic information
In Proceedings of Seminar on Land-Related

and cartographic system in retrospect.
Information Systems, Municipal/Provincial Integration, Toronto, Canada: 67–93

Huxhold W 1993 The application of research and development from the information systems
field to GIS implementation in local government: Some theories on successful adoption and

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

281

use of GIS technology. In Masser I and Onsrud H (eds) Diffusion and Use of Geographic
Information Technologies. Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Press: 61–75

Kishor P, Niemann B, Moyer D, Ventura S, Martin R, and Thum P 1990 Lessons from

CONSOIL: Evaluating GIS/LIS. Wisconsin Land Information Newsletter 6: 1–13

Kolb D and Frohman A 1970 An organization development approach to consulting. Sloan

Management Review 12: 51–65

Korte G 1996 Weighing GIS benefits with financial analysis. GIS World 9: 48–52
Kuhlman K 1994 Measuring the Influences on Land Records Modernization in Wisconsin

Counties. Unpublished MS Thesis, University of Wisconsin–Madison

Lang L 1995 The democratization of GIS. GIS World 8: 62–7
Larsen B, Clapp J, Miller A, Niemann B, and Ziegler A 1978 Land Records: The Cost to the
Citizen to Maintain the Present Land Information Base: A Case Study of Wisconsin.
Madison, WI, Department of Administration, Office of Program and Management Analysis
Laudon K and Laudon J 1995 Essentials of Management Information Systems: Organization and

Technology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall

Lerner N 1992 Developing a successful information access policy. URISA Conference Proceedings

4: 79–84

URISA Journal 8: 24–37

Lopez X 1996 Stimulating GIS innovation through the dissemination of geographic information.

May J 1994 Automated Mapping and GIS in Florida Local Planning Agencies. URISA

Conference Proceedings 6: 755–70

Mayo J 1985 The evolution of

Information
information technologies.
Technologies and Social Transformation. Washington DC, National Academy Press: 7–33
McLaughlin J 1975 The Nature, Design, and Development of Multi–Purpose Cadastres.

In Guile B (ed)

Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison

McRae S 1989 GIS design and the questions users should be asking. In GIS/LIS ’89, Volume 2.

Bethesda, MD, American Congress of Surveying and Mapping: 528–37

Mead R 1994 Field–level diffusion eases GIS implementation efforts. GIS World, 7: 50–2
Morain S and Budge A 1996 GIS models could strengthen democracy. GIS World 9: 102–3
Moyer D 1977 An Economic Analysis of the Land Title Record System. Unpublished PhD

Dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison

Moyer D 1980 Land Records Reform and the Future of Land Records Systems. Stamford, CT,

Auerbach Publishers

Moyer D 1990 White Paper: The Benefits and Costs of Modernizing Local Land Information
Systems in Wisconsin. University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, Land Information
and Computer Graphics Facility

Moyer D 1993 Economics of MPLIS: Concepts and tools. In Brown P and Moyer D (eds)
Multipurpose Land Information Systems: The Guidebook. Washington DC, Federal
Geodetic Control Committee: 15.1–15.25

Moyer D and Fisher K 1973 Land Parcel Identifiers for Information Systems. Chicago, American

Bar Foundation

Moyer D and Niemann B 1991 Economic impacts of LIS technology upon sustainable natural
resource and agricultural management. Surveying and Land Information Systems 51: 17–21
National Institute of Standards and Technology 1992 Federal Information Processing Standard
Publication 173 (Spatial Data Transfer Standard). Washington DC, Department of
Commerce

National Research Council 1980 Need for a Multipurpose Cadastre. Washington DC, National

Academy Press

National Research Council 1983 Procedures and Standards for a Multipurpose Cadastre.

Washington DC, National Academy Press

National Research Council 1993 Toward a Coordinated Spatial Data Infrastructure. Washington

DC, National Academy Press

Nedovic-Budic Z 1995 Mechanisms for coordinating development and use of GIS databases: A
research framework. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association 1: 662–74

Nedovic-Budic Z 1998 The likelihood of becoming a GIS user. URISA Journal 10: 6–21
Niemann B (ed) 1984 Seminar on the Multipurpose Cadastre: Modernizing Land Information

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

282

David L Tulloch

Systems in North America. University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, Institute for
Environmental Studies

Niemann B and Chrisman N 1983 Westport land records project: Subdivision planning scenario.

Wisconsin Land Information Newsletter, 1: 1–2

Niemann B and Niemann S 1994 Nicholas Chrisman: Innovation with Affect – Part Two. Geo

Info Systems 4: 46–52

Niemann B, Sullivan J, Ventura S, Chrisman N, Vonderohe A, Mezera D, and Moyer D 1987
Results of the Dane County land records project. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote
Sensing 53: 1371–78

Niemann B, Ventura S, Moyer D, Licht J, Chatterton W and Jacobs H 1988 Research Needs: The
interaction of
In
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Urban and Regional Information Systems
Association 1: 1–16

land and geographic information system technology and society.

Obermeyer N 1989 A systematic approach to the taxonomy of geographic information use. In
GIS/LIS ’89, Volume 2. Bethesda, MD, American Congress of Surveying and Mapping: 2:
421–9

Obermeyer N and Pinto J 1994 Managing Geographic Information Systems. New York, Guilford

Press

Onsrud H and Pinto J 1993 Evaluating correlates of GIS adoption success and the decision

process of GIS acquisition. URISA Journal 5: 18–39

Onsrud H and Rushton G (eds) 1995 Sharing Geographic Information. New Brunswick, NJ,

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey Center for Urban Policy Research

Onsrud H, Calkins H, and Obermeyer N (eds) 1989 Use and Value of Geographic Information:
Initiative 4 Specialist Meeting Summary Report and Proceedings. Santa Barbara, CA,
University of California, National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
Onsrud H, Johnson J and Winnecki J 1996 GIS dissemination policy: Two surveys and a

suggested approach. URISA Journal 8: 8–23

Onsrud H, Pinto J and Azad B 1992 Case study research methods for geographic information

systems. URISA Journal 4: 32–44

Onsrud H, Pinto J and Azad B 1993 Testing Technology Transfer Hypotheses in GIS
Environments Using a Case Study Approach. Santa Barbara, CA, University of California,
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis Technical Report 93–8

Onsrud H, Azad B, Brown M, Budic Z, Calkins H, Godschalk D, French S, Johnson J, Niemann
B, Pinto J, Sandberg B, Ventura S, Wetherbee R, Wiggins L 1995 Experiences in acquisition,
implementation, and use of GIS in US local governments: A sampler of academic studies and
findings. In URISA Conference Proceedings 7: 626–36

Pickles J (ed) 1995 Ground Truth: The Social Implications of Geographic Information Systems.

New York, The Guilford Press

Pinto J and Onsrud H 1995 Sharing geographic information across organizational boundaries: A
research framework. In Annual Conference Proceedings of the Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association: 688–94

Portner J and Niemann B 1982 Beliefs regarding issues relating to land information. In Annual
Conference Proceedings of the Urban and Regional Information Systems Association: 325–31
Raghaven S and Chand D 1989 Diffusing software-engineering methods. IEEE Software 6: 81–90
Rogers E 1962 The Diffusion of Innovations. New York, Free Press of Glencoe
Rogers E 1995 Diffusion of Innovations. New York, The Free Press
Rogers E and Shoemaker F 1971 Communications of Innovations: A Cross–Cultural Approach.

Roitman H 1990 Legal issues in providing public access to an AMS: Case studies and variances.

New York, The Free Press

URISA Journal 2: 38–45

Rourk R 1993 How good is GIS? An evaluation of GIS operational effectiveness on local
government. In Proceedings of the Urban and Regional Information Systems Association
Annual Conference 2: 10–23

Ryan B and Gross N 1943 The diffusion of hybrid seed corn in two Iowa communities. Rural

Schultz R, Slevin D, and Pinto J 1987 Strategy and tactics in a process model of project

Sociology 8: 15–24

implementation. Interfaces 17: 34–46

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Land Information Systems Development

283

Sheppard E 1995 GIS and society: Towards a research agenda. Cartography and Geographic

Information Systems 22: 5–16

Smith L and Gluck M (eds) 1996 Geographic Information Systems and Libraries: Patrons, Maps,
and Spatial Information: Papers presented at the 1995 Clinic on Library Applications of
Data Processing. Urbana-Champaign, IL, University of Illinois, Graduate School of Library
and Information Science

Smith D and Tomlinson R 1992 Assessing the costs and benefits of geographical information
systems: Methodological and implementation issues. International Journal of Geographic
Information Systems, 6: 247–56

Somers R 1989 Milwaukee: A GIS pioneer. GIS World 27: 52–3
Somers R 1996 How to implement a GIS. Geo Info Systems 6: 18–21
Spence C, Dalton A, and Kite G 1995 GIS supports hydrological modeling. GIS World 8: 62–5
Stipek L and Torraca D 1993 Implementing and assessing the value of direct public access to the
Loudon County, Virginia Geographic Information System. In Proceedings of the URISA
Annual Conference 2: 202–8

Thrall G 1995 The stages of reasoning. Geo Info Systems 5: 46–51
Tulloch D and Niemann B 1996 Evaluating innovation: The Wisconsin Land Information

Program. Geo Info Systems 6: 40–4

Tulloch D, Epstein E and Niemann B 1997 Will concern for equity be a defining trend in LIS/GIS
in the next decade? In Proceedings of Auto-Carto 13. Falls Church, VA, American Congress
of Surveying and Mapping: 429–38

Tulloch D, Niemann B, Ventura S, and Epstein E 1996 The Final Stages of Land Records
Modernization and Their Associated Benefits: The Pot at the End of the Rainbow?
Unpublished White Paper for the Workshop on the Future of Spatial Data and Society,
Mapping Science Committee, National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council

Tulloch D, Niemann B, Ventura S, Harmans-Shah A, Epstein E and Holland W 1995 Land
records modernization in local governments. In Annual Conference Proceedings of the
Urban and Regional Information Systems Association: 487–96

Urban and Regional Information Systems Association 1993 Marketing Government Geographic
Information. Washington DC, Urban and Regional Information Systems Association
Vastag P, Thum P and Niemann B 1994 Project LOCALIS: Implementing LIS/GIS in local

Ventura S 1995 The use of geographic information systems in local government. Public

government. URISA Journal 6: 78–83

Administration Review 55: 461–7

Vonderohe A, Gurda R, Ventura S, and Thum P 1991 Introduction to Local Land Information
Systems for Wisconsin’s Future. Madison, WI, Wisconsin State Cartographer’s Office
Wellar B 1988 Institutional maxims and conditions for needs-sensitive information systems and
services in local governments. In Annual Conference Proceedings of the Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association 4: 371–8

Wunderlich G and Moyer D 1984 Economic features of land information systems. In Niemann B
(ed) Seminar on the Multipurpose Cadastre: Modernizing Land Information Systems in
North America. Madison, WI, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
for
Environmental Studies Report No 123

Institute

Zaltman G, Duncan R, and Holbek J 1984 Innovations and Organization. New York, John

Wiley and Sons

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

