bs_bs_banner

Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2): 183–200

Combining the Arc Marine Framework with Geographic
Metadata to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

Anthony W. Isenor* and Tobias W. Spears†

*Defence R&D Canada–Atlantic, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia
†Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Bedford Institute of Oceanography

Abstract
A data model for use in a rapid environmental assessment system is constructed. The data model is used
in an information layer that supports acoustic assessments of the ocean environment. Such an assessment
requires use of both historic and real-time oceanographic data. The foundation of the data model is Arc
Marine, a framework speciﬁcation for geospatial oceanographic databases that provides structures for
containing the basic data types used in oceanographic research. Arc Marine also allows design extensions
to account for application speciﬁc data structures as demonstrated through incorporation of aspects of
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 19115 Geographic Information–Metadata
standard. The ISO 19115 standard provides structures for recording the historic processing of the data
sets. The data model is used to construct a database in the open source database management system
(DBMS) PostgreSQL. The resulting system also incorporates the concept of user exits, the seamless exten-
sion of the DBMS through inclusion of application-speciﬁc software.

1 Introduction

As a vessel moves either on or below the ocean’s surface, sound emanates from the vessel and
propagates through the water. This acoustic signal may be detected by distant acoustic sensors
and used in acoustic models that estimate the location of the sound source (i.e. location of the
vessel). The acoustic modeling of the sound propagation requires an understanding of the
physical laws governing underwater acoustic propagation and environmental data for the spe-
ciﬁc operating area (Chapman et al. 1997, Hutt et al. 2002, Osler et al. 2002). As well as the
data, understanding the context in which the data are collected is also important. The context
provides the acoustic researcher with a better understanding of the natural variability in the
environment and how this variability inﬂuences the acoustic model performance.

Recent acoustic modeling research conducted at Defence Research and Development
Canada (DRDC) has been aimed at improving tools and data collection practices for better
assessment of acoustic conditions. One aspect of this work is focused on the rapid assessment
of the local ocean environment, including characteristics such as ocean and air temperature,
ocean salinity, ocean ambient noise levels, and sound transmission loss through the water
(Pecknold and Osler 2012). The data collected during the rapid assessment can then be com-
pared or combined with legacy data to better characterize the local environmental state, and
also the natural variability in the state. These legacy data sets represent the historic component
of the rapid environmental assessment (REA) system.

Address for correspondence: Anthony W. Isenor, Defence R&D Canada – Atlantic, PO Box 1012, 9 Grove Street, Dartmouth, Nova
Scotia, Canada B2Y 3Z7. E-mail: anthony.isenor@drdc-rddc.gc.ca

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12029

184

A W Isenor and T W Spears

The data represent a critical component of the modeling research. The data, composed of
water column and ocean bottom characteristics, can be used in both the calibration and vali-
dation of the acoustic models. The spatial and temporal variations in ocean conditions also
impact the validity of acoustic model output. To better identify spatial-temporal variations in
ocean conditions, the models need access to broad area historic data sets concurrent with data
collected during the rapid assessment, which describes the local, present ocean conditions.

The utilization of historic data and associated metadata is important for the research com-
munity, but it is also important from the perspective of the laboratory’s cost-effectiveness, as
at-sea data collection is expensive. However, the most effective manner in which to organize the
data to allow efﬁcient access and use remains a topic in the oceanographic community (Bechini
and Vetrano 2013, McCann and Gomes 2008). The ability to manage a diverse data collection
within a single information infrastructure is also a topic of interest (Parsons et al. 2011).

This work is motivated by a desire to properly manage the local oceanographic data
thereby encouraging use by the user community. Combined with this is the premise that imple-
mentation of open speciﬁcations are important for identifying the necessary data and metadata
to be managed. Recent work by Aliprandi (2011) suggests that the use of open standards is
also a positive step towards interoperability. Interoperability is recognized as a critical compo-
nent when supporting the needs of the broader community (Baker and Chandler 2008).

At the laboratory level, this work also aims to improve data consistency and reduce dupli-
cation of user effort. Issues involving data consistency appear when user analyses result in mul-
tiple data set versions. Duplication of user effort is an issue when each user is creating their
own applications to execute tasks that are common to many users; for example, to read and
parse the output data format from an instrument.

The desire to properly manage the data collection results in several questions related to
the structure within which the data are managed. These questions relate to how the data
should be organized to promote common data structures,
interoperability, and common
processing applications while allowing the ﬂexibility to manage new data types that emerge as
at-sea instrumentation is developed. The data structures should also promote convergence of
the structures within the community of use, through the utilization of existing standards and
speciﬁcations and also through the identiﬁcation of the major information components
required of a geospatial system to support the data management.

Finally there is the question involving the use of the Arc Marine speciﬁcation in an effort
that focuses on open speciﬁcations. Speciﬁcally, can the logical information structure presented
in Arc Marine be applied outside the Esri technology. Bechini and Vetrano (2013) suggested
that Arc Marine is an infrastructure linked directly to the proprietary Esri application. Related
to this is whether or not Arc Marine will be sufﬁciently ﬂexible to allow the logical separation
of internal and external data sets from a management perspective.

The information organization in the REA system is the focus of this article and speciﬁcally
how the system is designed using open speciﬁcations. There are several objectives to this work
including:

• Design and implement the data and information layer of the REA system leveraging open
standards (e.g. data models, content standards) to the extent possible to support ashore
and at-sea operations. This includes leveraging open standards to maximize the extensibil-
ity of the system.

• Test the data structures by incorporating existing data sets into the database built from the
data model and provide these data to the local user community. This includes incorporat-
ing metadata pertinent to the procedures and sensors used to collect the data.

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

185

• Allow for portability of information in the system. The portability aspect will allow a
portion of the data relevant to the local area of operation to be moved to an isolated (i.e.
no Internet connectivity) at-sea computing environment, while not including data from
distant marine areas that are irrelevant to the at-sea activities.
• Manage only those data for which the laboratory is responsible.

The information model presented here brings together three key components under the REA
system: the Arc Marine framework; the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
Geographic Information-Metadata standard 19115; and the open source database manage-
ment system (DBMS) PostgreSQL with Geographic Information System (GIS) extensions.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section 2 provides an introduction
to the major components including the Arc Marine framework, the ISO 19115 standard and
the PostgreSQL DBMS. Sections 3 and 4 describe the data structures that support point and
numerical model data. Section 5 introduces the lineage components of the system and the use
of ISO 19115 for the tracking of lineage, responsible parties, citations, and geospatial extents.
Section 6 describes the concept of a user exit, an application used to access external data sets
supported by other organizations. Section 7 is a discussion section while Section 8 provides
concluding remarks.

This section brieﬂy introduces data modeling, followed by descriptions of the major compo-
nents used in the design (see Figure 1).

2 Components

2.1 Data Modeling

A data model represents a precise deﬁnition of an information structure that pertains to a par-
ticular organization (Kim and March 1995). The process of developing a data model is aided
through the use of data modeling software (Baker 1990). During this investigation, the data
model was constructed in the CA ERwin® Data Modeler software (CA 2010). ERwin® allows
the total speciﬁcation of a data model including visualization of data structures, deﬁnition of
data types, full commenting on entities and attributes, speciﬁcation of validity lists, SQL gen-
eration for database creation, etc. ERwin® also allows development of table-level scripts that
allow the inclusion of unique table creation instructions that are particular to the DBMS.

The entity-relationship model developed in ERwin® provides a data-centric view of the
structure. For this article, the object-centric view is presented using uniﬁed modeling language
(UML) (Fowler and Scott 1999). Note that UML was also the modeling language used in the
initial design of Arc Marine (Wright et al. 2007).

2.2 Arc Marine Framework

A framework is an underlying structure or concept around which something is constructed.
The Arc Marine framework (Wright et al. 2007) identiﬁes data structures relevant to the
general marine community. These data structures can then be used as the core of a data system
for managing diverse oceanographic data, such as required by the REA system.

The Arc Marine development group consisted of physical oceanographers and marine
geologists and biologists. Initial work showed how the Arc Marine framework could be used

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

186

A W Isenor and T W Spears

Figure 1 Illustration of components that lead to the ﬁnal database in the PostgreSQL DBMS

to create a data model (Lord-Castillo et al. 2009, Wright et al. 2007), with the implementation
of the data model in the Esri® GIS product line (Esri 2010). However, many of the concepts
and design techniques from the framework are vendor independent. This means the data struc-
tures that make up the framework may be applied to other development environments. In
turn, this means Arc Marine may be considered an open framework, applicable to many devel-
opment and application scenarios.

As a framework, Arc Marine is not a single data model but rather a conceptual data struc-
ture for developing a use-speciﬁc or application-oriented data model. The Arc Marine frame-
work includes data structures that support
the management of oceanographic point
measurements, time series, proﬁle lines, etc. (Figure 2). Using these generalized objects, data
model entities can be constructed for the speciﬁc application area. As well, Arc Marine deﬁnes
a formal thought process to be used in deﬁning any additional entities.

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

187

Figure 2 Arc Marine concepts included in this investigation. These concepts represent a subset of
the Arc Marine framework presented in Wright et al. (2007)

There are numerous beneﬁts to using an open framework such as Arc Marine. The open
framework allows the option of sharing data content across other applications that also imple-
ment the framework as well as the potential for sharing application software that uses data
within the system. Use also promotes teams to extend the framework, such as the case in the
present investigation.

Arc Marine provides the framework for the storage of two primary categories of data:
point and mesh data. The categories for geospatial lines and areas are also present in the data
model, but these categories are supported by the primary point and mesh environmental data.

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

188

A W Isenor and T W Spears

Mesh data are a particular form of point data. A mesh is a series of points in a deﬁned
and predictable order that represents a regularly or irregularly interpolated surface (Wright
et al. 2007). Data sets that have been projected onto a grid constitute a form of mesh data.

Output from an ocean numerical hydrodynamic model would also be an example of mesh
data. However, in the REA data model the inclusion of ocean numerical model output is a
non-standard case. This is because in typical applications, the output from a single ocean
model is contained within the database. However, we have the unique requirement to access
and store ocean model results from numerous providers. Accessing multiple model results
allows the utilization of modeling expertise at the centers that specialize in model develop-
ment. To accommodate the storage of multiple numerical model forecasts, an extension to the
Arc Marine concept of mesh data was developed.

The ﬂexibility of data models resulting from the Arc Marine framework can be judged in
part by the resulting application diversity. This diversity indicates that reuse of the structure is
possible with minimal adjustments to its core form. For example, Wright et al. (2007) describe
13 Arc Marine use cases for implementations covering topics such as oceanographic time
series, shoreline analysis, and chemical/physical oceanographic measurements. Other use cases
examined the application of Arc Marine to seaﬂoor mapping (Andrews 2006), coastal environ-
mental quality (Brenner and Jimémez 2007), and whale tracking (Lord-Castillo et al. 2007,
2009).

2.3 ISO 19115

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO 2003) 19115 standard for Geo-
graphic Information-Metadata consists of a structured set of information objects (Figure 3)
that cover the analysis, storage, distribution and responsibilities associated with geospatial
information. ISO 19115 was designed to be extendable, thus allowing application speciﬁc
metadata to be added to the base proﬁle. As a result, community-of-interest (COI) extensions
have been created for data-speciﬁc applications such as imagery and gridded data (Xu et al.
2008), broader spatial data infrastructure developments (INSPIRE 2010), land-based environ-
mental assessment (Peccol 2004), meteorology (WMO 2009) and oceanography (Australian
Ocean Data Centre 2008).

The complete ISO 19115 consists of 13 information packages that make up the metadata
set information. From these 13 packages, partial implementation of four packages meets the
requirements of the acoustic modeling researchers (e.g. system portability and data processing
history). From the Data Quality Information package, the lineage aspect is implemented,
allowing the processing history to be recorded. The Extent Information package is utilized to
provide information on the area covered by the data set. Parties responsible for the processing
and citation information are obtained from the Citation and Responsible Party package. The
Reference System Information package provides information regarding the reference system
used by the data set. Collectively, this implementation will be referred to as Lineage, Extent,
Citation and Reference (LECR).

2.4 PostgrSQL Database Management System

PostgreSQL (PostgreSQL 2011) is an open source object relational DBMS that has been
applied to a wide assortment of applications related to the ocean. Beare et al. (2006) and
Kupca (2004) used PostgreSQL in ecosystem assessment applications, combining diverse data
sets such as surface meteorological, oceanographic, species, and acoustic data in a single data-

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

189

Figure 3 Information packages contained within the ISO 19115 Standard (ISO 2003). Portions of
those packages shown in bold are included in the REA data model

base structure. PostgreSQL has also been used as the backbone for an ocean observing system
(Fletcher et al. 2008), and in applications spanning the ﬁelds of medicine (Aloisio et al. 2004),
space physics (Syrjasuo and Donovan 2005), air quality modeling (Houyoux et al. 2006),
oceanography (Aoyama and Hirose 2004) and meteorology (Kokkonen et al. 2003).

PostgreSQL serves as the basis for PostGIS (PostGIS 2009), an add-on that spatially
enables the PostgreSQL database. This means the speciﬁc geometry types (e.g. point, line, area)
relevant to a GIS may be included as data types in the database. As a result, a PostgreSQL
database with PostGIS may be used as the database to support a GIS application. In turn, the
GIS provides a wide range of data visualization possibilities, allowing one to incorporate their
data with electronic charts (Goralski and Gold 2007), wikis and portals (Heavner et al. 2011)
or virtual globes (Ballagh et al. 2011).

PostGIS follows OpenGIS® standards as developed by the Open Geospatial Consortium
(OGC 1994). By following the open standards, the construction of a PostGIS database allows
the addition of other open-source developments that follow the same standards. Open source
desktop GIS applications such as uDig (User-friendly Desktop Internet GIS) (Refractions
Research 2009) or Quantum GIS (QGIS) (Quantum GIS Develoment Team 2011) also adhere

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

190

A W Isenor and T W Spears

to OpenGIS®. These tools provide an assortment of capabilities such as the ability to visualize
Web Map Services (WMS) and Web Feature Services (WFS) an important aspect for data
acquisition for both ashore and at-sea analysis (Isenor and Stuart 2007).

3 The Arc Marine Framework

Data modeling is largely considered a design activity (Simsion 2007) where creative thinking
during the activity can result in design diversity amongst data models that are intended for
similar purposes. Applying a common framework to the design helps reduce this diversity. The
Arc Marine framework was selected as the core of the design because it represents one of the
few documented frameworks speciﬁc to the oceanographic context.

The diversity of data models for similar applications could be addressed if an objective
assessment of data model quality was possible. There has been research into the quality of
data models (Moody and Shanks 1994, 2003, Moody et al. 2003, Leung and Bolloju 2005,
Simsion 2007) that indicates from the user perspective, the important underlying qualities are:
ﬂexibility; integrity; completeness; and understandability.

Used as a framework, the integrity and completeness (Moody and Shanks 2003) of Arc
Marine are both difﬁcult to judge. This is because, as a framework, the dynamic characteristics
(i.e. integrity) and domain wide statements regarding data relationships (i.e. completeness) are
left to the speciﬁc implementation. The ﬂexibility of the framework is satisﬁed based on the
diversity of applications (noted previously), while understandability is met through the use of
common terminology. This includes both oceanographic and GIS related terms.

As a result, Arc Marine is considered a viable framework to deﬁne the basic content of the
data model entities, and ultimately the database tables. The complete data model developed
for this application consists of 65 entities. Rather than describe the entire data model, here we
present the point data entities based on the Arc Marine framework and extensions to Arc
Marine for the inclusion of numerical model data.

3.1 The Arc Marine Instantaneous Point Structure

In an oceanographic context, data from a vertical proﬁle consists of discrete data values at spe-
ciﬁc vertical points in the water column, typically measured as pressure (or depth) from the
surface. As an example, a device lowered from the side of a ship to measure water temperature
would obtain a vertical proﬁle of data. Examples of such devices would be the expendable
bathy-thermograph (XBT) (Rual 1989), ship-based conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD)
proﬁlers (Cochrane 2007), or expendable CTD proﬁlers (Shi et al. 2011). Data collected from
these devices can be stored as a sequence of related points. For this type of data, the Arc
Marine instantaneous point structure can be used.

The classes related to the instantaneous point structure are shown in Figure 4. The data
set is ﬁrst described using the DataPackage class. This class stores a numeric identiﬁer for the
data set. This identiﬁer is linked directly to a sea trial identiﬁer as contained in cruiseID in the
Cruise class. The dataPackageID present in DataPackage is renamed to cruiseID in the Cruise
class (in other words, the database relationship links dataPackageID and cruiseID). The Cruise
class is completely speciﬁed by Arc Marine.

There are numerous relationships in Figure 4 that extend to classes not shown in the
ﬁgure. For example, the speciﬁc cruise record can have associated tracks. A track record, con-
tained in a Track class (not shown), is simply a description of one leg of a ship track with the

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

191

Figure 4 The initial classes used for vertical proﬁle data

leg being a single or multi-segment line. Multiple tracks can make up the entire cruise. Along
any track, a vehicle may be used to collect data; as contained in the Vehicle class. A vehicle can
carry many devices (i.e. instruments or sensors) to measure particular oceanographic param-
eters. Classes indicating tracks, vehicles, and devices have been omitted for clarity.

The InstantaneousPoint class in Figure 4 accounts for the fact that during the cruise,
instrumentation makes point measurements. However, some metadata will only be associated
with speciﬁc proﬁling techniques. For XBT data, these metadata are in the Xbt class. Similarly,

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

192

A W Isenor and T W Spears

other device speciﬁc metadata classes (not shown) would exist for metadata related to CTD
casts, transmission loss measurements, etc.

Each point in InstantaneousPoint is assigned a featureID. This identiﬁer is used in the rela-
tionship to the MeasurementLocation class, where the x,y,z values for all measurements are
stored. The x,y,z values are encoded within a PostGIS geom (i.e. geometry) column to facilitate
their use by PostGIS-aware client applications. The geometry ﬁeld contains an encoding of the
x,y (i.e. longitude, latitude) position, and optionally the z positional component. Each set of
measurements at a single x,y,z is assigned a measurementLocationID. The database relation-
ship to the Data class establishes a link between measurementLocationID in MeasurementLo-
cation and the measurementLocationID ﬁeld in the Data class.

The actual data values will be stored in the dataValue attribute within the Data class. The
type of data is identiﬁed using parameterID. Each environmental parameter (e.g. water tem-
perature, salinity and water oxygen content) is described using the records in the Parameter
class. The replicateID ﬁeld is simply a counter to identify replicate measurements of the same
parameter. Quality ﬂags may be assigned to individual values using the quality ﬂags stored the
QualityFlag class. Quality ﬂags are an extension to Arc Marine.

For the oceanographic community, the useful features of this model stem from the loose
coupling of the entities. Such coupling, recognized from the use of identiﬁer numbers (e.g.
attribute names that include ID) allows for diversity in the packaging of the data sets into units
(e.g. DataPackage class at the top of the ﬁgure), through to quality and parameter deﬁnitions
(e.g. see Parameter class at bottom of ﬁgure). Also, the metadata speciﬁc to proﬁle type are
maintained via a speciﬁc class (e.g. Xbt class in this ﬁgure). This allows for diversity in meas-
urements while allowing easy expansion to proﬁles collected from other devices.

4 An Application Speciﬁc Extension – Numerical Model Data

One application of the rapid environmental assessment database will be the storage of data
required to forecast underwater acoustic conditions. To obtain estimates of acoustic conditions
at future times, environmental output from ocean numerical forecasting models is used. Such
numerical models produce regular forecasts of ocean temperature and salinity throughout the
water column, which can then be used to forecast the acoustic conditions.

The Arc Marine framework contains structures for the storage of numerical model data.
However, this application is sufﬁciently different to warrant the construction of specialized
classes. These classes extend the functionality of the Arc Marine framework to meet the spe-
ciﬁc needs of the research team performing the acoustic modeling. Speciﬁcally, the acoustic
modelers wish to compare acoustic predictions when using input from independent ocean
environmental models, with the observed acoustic conditions. The resulting classes are shown
in Figure 5.

There are three classes speciﬁc to the ocean numerical model forecasts, with two support-
ing classes. The supporting classes are MeshSource (Figure 5) and ModelAsset (not shown).
MeshSource contains data set metadata as represented by a simple name identiﬁer for a spe-
ciﬁc numerical model region. This class is effectively a data set inventory, with the name iden-
tiﬁer being used in the data model to indicate output from a speciﬁc numerical model for a
speciﬁc geographic region. This class may also be used to name any mesh associated with
averaged data (i.e. tables not shown), such as climatological averages. The ModelAsset class
provides the link between the named numerical model and the data package identiﬁer, used to
track the entire data set associated with the numerical model.

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

193

Figure 5 Data from numerical ocean models are stored in classes that are extensions to Arc Marine.
The numerical ocean model classes allow for the storage of simulation results from multiple ocean
numerical models, all providing multiple forecasts for each numerical model execution or run time

The main classes for the ocean numerical model forecasts are contained in ModelGrid,
ModelTime and ModelData. ModelGrid contains the speciﬁcation of the grid for the particu-
lar numerical model source. The gridX and gridY attributes indicate the x and y indices of the
model cell. The vertical component is stored in the depth ﬁeld. This speciﬁc implementation
utilizes the array storage type of the PostgreSQL DBMS. This allows the storage of an array
within a single database table row, in a ﬁeld called depth.

The ModelTime class is used to contain the particulars on the numerical model execution
and forecast time. The acoustic modelers wish to access, use, and assess multiple oceano-
graphic numerical models, which imposes a requirement for many time stamps to distinguish
the forecasts. The execution date of the numerical model is used to distinguish between the
many numerical model executions. The forecasted date and time is then used to speciﬁcally
identify the forecasted data. Finally, the attribute stdDataItem provides a link to the System
Test Bed (STB; Johnson 2007) application environment, used for the acoustic modeling.

The details of this class structure are best understood using an example. This structure
was recently used to store numerical model data acquired from the Canada-Newfoundland
Operational Ocean Forecasting System (C-NOOFS) (Dombrowsky et al. 2009, Fisheries and
Oceans Canada 2008). C-NOOFS had numerical data available from two different
numerical model domains; one domain with a 1/4°grid resolution and a second with a 1/12°
resolution. These two numerical models were designated as sources CN04 and CN12. On any
particular day, the numerical results generated by C-NOOFS were acquired onboard the ship
via a satellite connection. Each numerical model produced a forecast that included water tem-
perature and salinity ﬁelds at six hour intervals for the next ﬁve days. Note that for a speciﬁc
download, today’s execution of a forecast of the fourth day into the future represents the same

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

194

A W Isenor and T W Spears

forecast time as tomorrow’s execution of a forecast for the third day into the future. Thus, the
numerical model source name, the execution time of the numerical model, the forecasted date
and hour are all required to uniquely identify the speciﬁc forecast.

The ﬁnal class is ModelData. This class contains the ocean numerical model data. Again,
the source name, numerical model execution time, forecast date, and forecast time represent
the primary key for the class. The parameter being stored is identiﬁed using the Arc Marine
attribute parameterID, while the actual value is contained in dataValue.

For the acoustic researchers, this set of classes allows considerable diversity in the
managed ocean model data. Multiple grids from multiple ocean models, each providing fore-
casts covering different periods into the future, can be assembled in this class structure.

5 LECR from ISO 19115

Lineage is the term that describes the provenance or history associated with a data set. Lineage
information is a form of metadata that describes the source and business processes used to
produce or modify the data set. Lineage metadata keeps an account of the processing history
from data collection to ﬁnal product.

This historical processing information is an important component of the data set quality.
The history provides data set users with the ability to assess the completeness of the process-
ing, and identify issues with processing methods, coefﬁcients used in the processing, or those
people involved in the processing. This type of metadata provides users with the information
required to better understand the data set, including the reliability and usefulness of the data
set. These characteristics are factors in building trust (Adams et al. 2003) which is an impor-
tant aspect of the next generation of the World Wide Web (Mahmood 2007).

The lineage model presented here represents a subset of the ISO (2003) 19115 for lineage
metadata and is shown in Figure 6. The lineage begins with an identiﬁer within the LI_Lineage
class. The identiﬁer maintains the relationship for a speciﬁc history line (i.e. the lineage). This
lineage can be applied to one or many data sets, as indicated by the relationship to LI_Source.
LI_Source provides information regarding individual data sets in the data package. This class
is the equivalent to ISO 19115 element #92. The unique identiﬁer liSourceID represents a
single source of data. The sequence of liLineageID identiﬁers in the LI_Source class then repre-
sents a series of alterations to the data. Each source, as represented by a single liSourceID, has
a description, scaleDenominator and identiﬁers for the reference system, citations and geospa-
tial and temporal extent.

A lineage can be constructed from a sequence of process steps. Within the REA database,
lineage statements are stored as an attribute of lineage. Lineage process steps are stored within
a detail table linked to lineage. This allows for each process step to be stored separately, but
also allows each major action within a process step to be time stamped individually. In the
relational model, this relationship is maintained in the JO_Process_Steps_Lineage entity (note
that JO indicates a join entity and is not shown here).

The process steps that are applied to the data are described in class LI_ProcessStep. The
processing steps are numbered using the unique identiﬁer of liProcessStepID. Each process step
has a description, a rationale, and a dateTime of application.

A person with some role in the individual processing steps can be identiﬁed in class
CI_ResponsibleParty. Role examples would include the person responsible for the creation of
the processing step, or the application of the processing step.

The CI_Citation class allows the storage of the metadata associated with a report, article
or paper. The citationID ﬁeld uniquely identiﬁes the citation and also links the citation to the

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

195

Figure 6 The ISO (2003) standard for geographic metadata is used to deﬁne a set of classes used for
process tracking of a data set. Join entities present in the relational model, provide the linkage
between ISO 19115 elements

liSourceID. This means the citation can be linked to the data set used in the publication.
Including the citation to papers within the database allows the tracking of both data sources
and data products. The citation metadata includes the title, alternateTitle, the referenceDate,
edition information, the form of the presentation material, citation details, and international
standard numbers for books or serials. This set of metadata collectively mimics ISO 19115
element #359.

6 User Exits

In some cases it is useful to incorporate and utilize a data asset created and managed by an
external source. An example of such a data asset would be the two minute resolution bathym-
etry data provided by the National Geophysical Data Centre (ETOPO2v2 2010). Typically,
such data assets are managed by the external source through a series of updates, with updates
provided in a consistent or standard form.

Although it would be possible to incorporate the data asset directly into the database, manag-
ing the resource external to the database does provide certain advantages. First, the size of the

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

196

A W Isenor and T W Spears

database does not become large due to incorporation of the external assets. Second, since the
original form of the external asset is maintained within the system, the upgrade path for the asset
amounts to a ﬁle replacement (assuming the upgrade maintains the format of the original asset).
The concept of user exits is introduced as a means of managing such external data assets.
User exits allow user software to be attached to the DBMS, similar to functions that exist
within the DBMS. This capability is particularly useful for accessing external data sets in a
manner consistent with the SQL standard (Digital Equipment Corporation 1992).

A user exit involves the creation of a link between an external data asset and the REA
system. The management of this link is controlled by the DBMS. Effectively, the DBMS is used
to direct the processing software to the external data asset, and to control which processing
software is used to acquire the data asset.

For the ETOPO2 asset, a user exit was created using a combination of PL/PerlU and Java.
The PL/PerlU code, which is named loadEtopo2Table, exists within the DBMS. This code per-
forms simple error checking on the user supplied parameters, these parameters representing
the upper-left and lower-right latitude/longitude bounds of a geospatial box. This code also
manages the interface to the Java software. Williams et al. (2003) provide an example of a
similar usage of PL/PerlU in the ﬁeld of education.

The Java software accepts the bounding box coordinates and interacts directly with the
ﬁle format of the external data asset to acquire the data. The software extracts a region of
bathymetry data from the ETOPO2 asset and places the extracted data in a table within the
database. The user exit is initiated via a SQL-like command, as shown below:

SELECT loadEtopo2Table(45.0, −64.0, 40.0, −60.0);

Application of the above statement results in the creation of a bathymetric table contain-
ing the ETOPO2 depths values in the described region. Accessing these depths using QGIS,
including a coastline, and color coding the points according to depth results in Figure 7.

7 Discussion

The current REA system is being used extensively in a lab environment. The user base for the
system is small, consisting of about ﬁve dedicated users and an additional ﬁve occasional users.
The REA system as described here represents Version 2 (V2) of the system. The ﬁrst
version (V1), has been used both ashore and at-sea, while V2 has thus far only been used in
the lab (planned for at-sea use in 2013). The Version 2 design incorporated Arc Marine and
ISO 19115, while incorporating the V1 numerical model classes. The user exit concept was
also a V2 addition.

The introduction of Arc Marine into V2 was in response to a requirement placed on V1
for improved ﬂexibility when incorporating new point data sources. The Arc Marine common
structure for point data (Figure 4) fulﬁlls this requirement. The InstantaneousPoint class
allows the incorporation of diverse point data into the database through the addition of the
appropriate parameter type deﬁnition for the speciﬁc point measurement. For example, incor-
porating ocean sediment data obtained from developed instrumentation (Osler et al. 2006)
requires the addition of the parameter type and a metadata class to support the instrument-
speciﬁc metadata. However, the limitation with this approach is the deﬁnition of the metadata
class to support the speciﬁc instrumentation. At the moment, no design templates or tools are
provided for at-sea users intending to extend the table structure to include instrument speciﬁc
metadata.

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

197

Figure 7 Depth points obtained from the user exit function. The coastline of Nova Scotia, Sable
Island, and a bathymetric feature named Emerald Basin are also shown. Grid lines indicate latitude
in degrees north and longitude in degrees east

The historic use of Arc Marine has been in the Esri GIS environment. However we have
shown that the Arc Marine framework can be used to build an information system in a non-
Esri environment. Also, we have shown that Arc Marine is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to allow the
separation of internal and external data sets as demonstrated through the method of including
the bathymetric data set. The user exit concept provides the mechanism for this separation.
This is similar in concept to a Web Feature Service that would access a remote data resource,
managed by the remote authority. The user exit also enhanced portability of the system. The
bathymetry data set in V1 accounted for 62% (20 GB) of the database disk usage and
restricted system mobility. In V2, the bathymetry data may be moved as an entire data set, or
more typically is moved as a geographic region after applying the user exit.

However, the current data structure does suffer from under-utilization of complex geom-
etry types. The current structure utilizes 2-dimensional geospatial point and mesh structures
with the third dimension (i.e. z) being independent of the geospatial data type. Utilizing
3-dimesional point geometries would provide efﬁciencies when connected to GIS tools capable
of utilizing these geometry types and improve processing capabilities and visualization such as
surface representation.

The information layer would also beneﬁt from an investigation into the use of the Arc
Marine class dealing with animations and photographs. Of particular interest here would be
the geospatial referencing of objects in video streams. This would be of interest in both the
marine and land environment.

The standards-based approach used here for the information layer of the REA system is
essential if interoperability of data sets between systems is to be realized. However, it must be
noted that interoperability of data structures does not necessarily address semantic interoper-
ability, which is required to consolidate data assets across multiple laboratories (Graybeal
et al. 2012).

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

198

A W Isenor and T W Spears

8 Conclusions

We have constructed a data model as part of the REA system, combining an oceanographic
speciﬁcation (Arc Marine) and an international metadata standard (ISO 19115) in an open
source database management system (PostgreSQL) that allows GIS add-ons (PostGIS). Arc
Marine provides the oceanographic speciﬁc components of the data model using a set of well
deﬁned entities and attributes. The ISO 19115 standard contributes those aspects related to
the lineage or processing history of a data set. Although database applications of ISO 19115
have been constructed by others, the harmonization of relevant ISO components in a relational
data model based on the Arc Marine framework is unique. Also, the utilization of user exits
for incorporating external data sets into the REA system represents a method for seamlessly
utilizing large data sets that are externally managed.

This work has shown that the data structures within the Arc Marine framework provide
the ﬂexibility for on-shore and at-sea processing of oceanographic data, outside the Esri envi-
ronment. Arc Marine is also sufﬁciently ﬂexible to allow the joining of the framework with
other standards, such as ISO 19115. Combined with the user exit concept, we have also
shown that Arc Marine allows the separation of internal and external data sets. This separa-
tion means the management of the data sets remains the responsibility of the originator and
thus not necessarily the responsibility of the REA system.

References

Adams B D, Bruyn L E, Houde S, and Angelopoulos P 2003 Trust In Automated Systems Literature Review.

Toronto, ON, Defence R&D Canada

Aliprandi S 2011 Interoperability and open standards: The key to true openness and innovation. International

Free and Open Source Software Law Review 3: 5–24

Aloisio G, Barba M C, Blasi E, Cafaro M, Fiore S, and Mirto M 2004 BIG: A grid portal for biomedical data

and images. Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics, and Informatics 2: 10–8

Andrews B 2006 Managing seaﬂoor mapping data using the Arc Marine data model. In Proceedings of the Geo-
graphic Information Systems and Ocean Mapping in Support of Fisheries Research and Management,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: 30–3

Aoyama M and Hirose K 2004 Artiﬁcial radionuclides database in the Paciﬁc Ocean: HAM database. The Sci-

entiﬁc World 4: 200–15

Ocean Data Centre

Australian Ocean Data Centre 2008 Marine Community Proﬁle of ISO 19115. Canberra, ACT, Australian

Baker K S and Chandler C L 2008 Enabling long-term oceanographic research: Changing data practices, infor-

mation management strategies and informatics. Deep Sea Research II 55: 2132–42

Baker R 1990 CASE* Method: Entity Relationship Modelling. Cambridge, MA, Addison-Wesley
Ballagh L M, Raup B H, Duerr R E, Khalsa S J S, Helm C, Fowler D, and Gupte A 2011 Representing scientiﬁc

data sets in KML: Methods and challenges. Computers and Geosciences 37: 57–64

Beare D, Kenny A, Kershaw P, McKenzie E, Devlin M, Reid J, Licandro P, Winpenny K, Haughton C, Langston
M, Skjoldal H R, and Perkins A 2006 Building multi-discipline, multivariate databases for use in integrated
ecosystem assessments: Experiences and recommendations. In Proceedings of the ICES 2006 Annual
Science Conference, Maastricht, The Netherlands

Bechini A and Vetrano A 2013 Management and storage of in situ oceanographic data: An ECM-based

approach. Information Systems 38: 351–68

Brenner J and Jimémez J A 2007 Spatial database model of ichthyofauna bioindicators of coastal environmental
quality. In Proceedings of Ocean Biodiversity Informatics: An International Conference on Marine Biodi-
versity Data Management, Hamburg, Germany: 25–35

CA 2010 CA ERwin® Data Modeler. WWW document, http://www.ca.com/us/data-modeling.aspx
Chapman D M F, Ellis D D, and Staal P R 1997 Assessing the bottom-interacting sonar environment. In Pro-

ceedings of the Conference on Rapid Environmental Assessment, La Spezia, Italy

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

Arc Marine to Support Ocean Acoustic Modeling

199

Cochrane N A 2007 Ocean Bottom Acoustic Observations in the Scotian Shelf Gully During an Exploration
Seismic Survey: A Detailed Study. Dartmouth, NS, Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences No. 2747

Digital Equipment Corporation (ed) 1992 Information Technology – Database Language SQL. Geneva, Switzer-

land, International Organization for Standardization

Dombrowsky E, Bertino L, Brassington G, Chassignet E, Davidson F, Hurlburt 1 H, Kamachi M, Lee T, Martin

M, Mei S, and Tonani M 2009 GODAE systems in operation. Oceanography 22: 80–95

Esri 2010 Esri: The GIS Software Leader. WWW document, http://www.esri.com/
ETOPO2v2 2010 ETOPO2v2 Global Gridded 2-minute Database. Washington, D.C., National Geophysical
Data Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce (available
at http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/global/etopo2.html)

Fisheries and Oceans Canada 2008 Canada-Newfoundland Operational Ocean Forecasting System. WWW

document, http://www.c-noofs.gc.ca/php/home_e.php

Fletcher M, Cleary J, Cothran J, and Porter D 2008 Southeast Atlantic Coastal Ocean Observation System
(SEACOOS) information management: Evolution of a distributed community system. Marine Technology
Society Journal 42: 28–34

Fowler M and Scott K 1999 UML Distilled: A brief Guide to the Standard Object Modeling Language (Second

Edition). Harlow, Addison Wesley Longman

Goralski R I and Gold C M 2007 The development of a dynamic GIS for maritime navigation safety. In Pro-
ceedings of the ISPRS Workshop on Updating Geo-spatial Databases with Imagery and the Fifth ISPRS
Workshop on DMGISs, Urumchi, China: 47–50

Graybeal J, Isenor A W, and Reuda C 2012 Semantic mediation of vocabularies for ocean observing systems.

Computers and Geosciences 40: 120–31

Heavner M J, Fatland D R, Hood E, and Conner C 2011 SEAMONSTER: A demonstration sensor web operat-

ing in virtual globes. Computers and Geosciences 37: 93–9

Houyoux M, Strum M, and Mason R 2006 Data management using the emissions modeling framework. In Pro-

ceedings of the Fifteenth International Emission Inventory Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana

Hutt D, Osler J, and Ellis D 2002 Effect of Hurricane Michael on the underwater acoustic environment of the
Scotian Shelf. In Proceedings of the Impact of Littoral Environmental Variability of Acoustic Predictions
and Sonar Performance, Lerici, Italy: 27–34

INSPIRE 2010 INSPIRE Metadata Implementing Rules: Technical Guidelines based on EN ISO 19115 and EN

ISO 19119. Ispra, Italy, European Commission Joint Research Centre

Isenor A W and Stuart R A 2007 The utilization of web services while at sea. CMOS Bulletin 35: 17–9
ISO 2003 Geographic Information – Metadata. Geneva, Switzerland,

International Organization for

Johnson T 2007 DRDC Atlantic System Test Bed (STB) Overview. Ottawa, ON, Defence R&D Canada
Kim Y-G and March S T 1995 Comparing data modeling formalisms. Communications of the ACM 38: 103–

Kokkonen T, Jolma A, and Koivusalo H 2003 Interfacing environmental simulation models and databases using

XML. Environmental Modelling and Software 18: 463–71

Kupca V 2004 A standardized database for ﬁsheries data. In Proceedings of the ICES 2004 Annual Science Con-

Leung F and Bolloju N 2005 Analyzing the quality of domain models developed by novice systems analysts. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-eighth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, Hawaii:
188

Lord-Castillo B K, Follet T M, Weiss A, Mate B R, and Wright D J 2007 Tracking the Great Whales: An Arc
Marine case study. In Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Annual Esri International User Conference, San
Diego, California

Lord-Castillo B K, Wright D J, Mate B R, and Follett T 2009 A customization of the Arc Marine data model to

support whale tracking via satellite telemetry. Transactions in GIS 13: 63–83

Mahmood O 2007 Developing Web 2.0 applications for semantic web of trust. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, Las Vegas, Nevada, 819–24
McCann M and Gomes K 2008 Oceanographic data provenance tracking with the shore side data system. In
Freire J, Koop D, and Moreau L (eds) IPAW 2008. Berlin, Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer
Science Vol. 5272: 309–22

Moody D L and Shanks G G 1994 What makes a good data model?: Evaluating the quality of entity-
relationship models. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on the Entity-Relationship
Approach, Manchester, United Kingdom: 94–111

Moody D L and Shanks G G 2003 Improving the quality of data models: Empirical validation of a quality man-

agement framework. Information Systems 28: 619–50

Standardization

13

ference. Vigo, Spain

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

200

A W Isenor and T W Spears

Moody D L, Sindre G, Brasethvik T, and Solvberg A 2003 Evaluating the quality of information models:
Empirical testing of a conceptual model quality framework. In Proceedings of the Twenty-ﬁfth Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering, Portland, Oregon: 295–305

OGC 1994 Open Geospatial Consortium. WWW document, http://www.opengeospatial.org/
Osler J, Furlong A, Christian H, and Lamplugh M 2006 The integration of the free fall cone penetrometer
(FFCPT) with the moving vessel proﬁler (MVP) for the rapid assessment of seabed characteristics. Interna-
tional Hydrographic Review 7(3): 45–54

Osler J C, Hines P C, and Trevorrow M V 2002 Acoustic and in-situ techniques for measuring the spatial vari-
ability of seabed geoacoustic parameters in littoral environments. In Proceedings of the Impact of Littoral
Environmental Variability of Acoustic Predictions and Sonar Performance, Lerici, Italy: 83–90

Parsons M A, Godøy Ø, LeDrew E, Bruin T F D, Danis B, Tomlinson S, and Carlson D 2011 A conceptual
framework for managing very diverse data for complex, interdisciplinary science. Journal of Information
Science 37: 555–69

Peccol E 2004 An ISO 19115 discovery metadata proﬁle for spatial and non-spatial environmental datasets. In

Proceedings of the Tenth EC-GI GIS Workshop, Warsaw, Poland

Pecknold S P and Osler J C 2012 Sensitivity of acoustic propagation to uncertainties in the marine environment
as characterized by various rapid environmental assessment methods. Ocean Dynamics 62: 265–281

PostGIS 2009 PostGIS. WWW document, http://postgis.refractions.net/
PostgreSQL 2011 PostgreSQL: The World’s Most Advanced Open Source Database. WWW document, http://

Quantum GIS Development Team 2011 Quantum GIS. WWW document, http://www.qgis.org/
Refractions Research 2009 uDig User-friendly Desktop Internet GIS. WWW document, http://udig.refractions.

www.postgresql.org/

net/

Rual P 1989 For a better XBT bathy-message onboard quality control, plus a new data reduction method. In
Proceedings of the Western Paciﬁc International Meeting and Workshop on TOGA Coare, Bondy, France:
823–33

Shi J, Hou J, and Jiao Y 2011 Observing thermohaline structure of Polar Ocean with XCTD launched from heli-
copter. In Proceedings of the Twenty-ﬁrst International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference, Maui,
Hawaii: 998–1002

Simsion G 2007 Data Modeling Theory and Practice. Bradley Beach, NJ, Technics Publications
Syrjasuo M T and Donovan E F 2005 Using relevance feedback in retrieving auroral images. In Proceedings of
the Fourth IASTED International Conference on Computational Intelligence, Calgary, Alberta: 420–25
Williams K, Calvo R A, and Bell D 2003 Automatic categorization of questions for a mathematics education
service. In Hoppe U, Verdejo F, and Kay J (eds) Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education: Shaping the Future of
Learning through Intelligent Technologies. Amsterdam, The Netherlands, IOS Press: 1–9

WMO 2009 Report of the CCI Expert Team on WCP Requirements for Metadata. Geneva, Switzerland, World

Meteorological Organization

Esri Press

Wright D J, Blongewicz M J, Halpin P N, and Breman J 2007 Arc Marine GIS for a Blue Planet. Redlands, CA,

Xu C, Xinyan Z, and Daosheng D 2008 Ontology based semantic metadata for imagery and gridded data. In

Proceedings of the ISPRS Congress, Beijing, China: 743–48

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2013.
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of National Defence.

Transactions in GIS, 2014, 18(2)

