Every single street? Rethinking full coverage 
across street‐level imagery platforms

Sterling Quinn1  |   Luis Alvarez León2

DOI: 10.1111/tgis.12571  

R E S E A R C H   A R T I C L E

1Department of Geography, Central 
Washington University, Ellensburg, 
Washington

2Department of Geography, Dartmouth 
College, Hanover, New Hampshire

Correspondence
Sterling Quinn, Department of Geography, 
Central Washington University, 400 E. 
University Way, Ellensburg, WA 98926.
Email: sterling.quinn@cwu.edu

Abstract

Street‐level images taken by vehicles and pedestrians have 

found  a  role  in  various  companies’  location‐based  intelli‐

gence  services.  Some  platforms  collect  their  images  using 

their own cars and drivers, while others rely on crowdsourc‐

ing; however, to what extent can we expect crowdsourced 

approaches to reach the imagery coverage levels obtained 

by paid drivers? Is capturing every single street a useful or 

obtainable goal? We use online coverage maps to compare 

Google  Street  View,  Mapillary,  and  OpenStreetCam  in  24 

major world cities and 25 differently sized cities in Brazil. We 

find that Google has often taken an all‐or‐nothing approach 

to  collecting  coverage  in  world  cities,  whereas  crowd‐

sourced platforms have achieved a more even distribution 

of coverage across space. Extremely low‐ and high‐income 

neighborhoods  are  sometimes  omitted  due  to  visible  and 

invisible barriers. Coverage patterns are influenced by how 

and why each company procures imagery, along with other 

social, economic, and geographic factors.

1 |  I NTRO D U C TI O N : S TR E E T‐ LE V E L I M AG E RY A N D TH E PRO B LE M  O F 
FU LL COV E R AG E

Collections of street‐level images taken by vehicles and pedestrians have found a role in the business practices of 

various companies’ location‐based search, intelligence, and navigation services. Google’s Street View service of‐

fers images throughout many countries of the world, Microsoft Streetside has covered extensive parts of the U.S. 

and some locations in Europe, and Baidu Total View displays urban streetscapes throughout China. At the same 

time, new entrants are bringing alternative models of data collection that not only pose the threat of competition, 

Transactions in GIS. 2019;00:1–22. 

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/tgis 

  |  1

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd2  |    

but also have the potential to disrupt how street‐level imagery is collected, assembled into a product, and mar‐

keted. Mapillary and OpenStreetCam are two new street‐level imagery platforms that, while commercially ori‐

ented, rely on crowdsourced image collection. This model is a significant departure from Google’s and Microsoft’s 

approaches, since it eschews heavy data collection infrastructure costs by outsourcing them to a decentralized 

network of volunteers around the world.

In order to build their product, both Mapillary and OpenStreetCam rely heavily on the existing global commu‐

nity of mappers that has developed around OpenStreetMap (OSM), a crowdsourced online database of geographic 

information that has been under construction for over 10 years. Furthermore, this crowdsourced approach has 

allowed  Mapillary  and  OpenStreetCam  to  target  areas  of  the  world  where  Google  and  Microsoft  coverage  is 

scarce (even though Google Street View does have a limited ‘local guides’ feature that allows advanced users to 

submit imagery). Yet, while they still lag in terms of comprehensiveness, the business models of Mapillary and 

OpenStreetCam suggest that the collection of imagery is not necessarily an end in itself, but an input to a variety 

of secondary products.

In  addition  to  allowing  the  expansion  of  coverage,  the  emphasis  placed  by  Mapillary  and  OpenStreetCam 

on collective collaboration constitutes a powerful rhetorical device connecting their products with community 

projects such as OSM, while articulating the creation of various types of economic value (Alvarez León & Quinn, 

2019).  Mapillary’s  business  model  largely  relies  on  business‐to‐business  (B2B)  sales  of  data  extracted  through 

computer vision from the street‐level imagery. In the case of OpenStreetCam, the imagery and associated GPS 

tracks  help  its  parent  company,  Telenav,  to  develop  navigation  technologies  by  improving  the  integrity  of  the 

company’s street data.

The  emerging  competition  between  Mapillary  and  OpenStreetCam  to  garner  image  contributions  (Alvarez 

León & Quinn, 2019) leads to questions about the levels of road coverage obtainable through crowdsourced proj‐

ects. At what scale and scope is “full coverage” of all streets a realistic goal, is this level of coverage even needed or 

desirable, and what would it take to achieve it? Also, what degree of coverage have these platforms reached at the 

city, state, or national levels, and what methods could we use to learn this? In the course of assessing how cover‐

age takes place across platforms, it becomes necessary to examine how we understand coverage in the first place.

1.1 | Critiquing “full coverage”

At the core of this article’s arguments is a re‐examination of the idea of “full coverage.” In the following paragraphs 

we explore this term through some of the key problems it presents. First, it is necessary to define the kinds of 

roads that are included when we assess the fullness of the coverage. For example, should driveways, private roads, 

and unpaved roads be included? When assessing coverage levels in this article, we have chosen to consider only 

public roads navigable by car, but other studies could be broader in nature, since there are many cities throughout 

the world that have large areas which are accessible by other means.

Second, coverage across all parts of the world has not been achieved by any platform and likely will not in 

the near future. Reasons include legal prohibitions on collecting images or geographic data, logistical challenges, 

safety considerations with navigating particular areas with panoramic camera equipment, and the desire to avoid 

expending resources in places where the imagery is expected to generate little revenue or useable information. 

Additionally, some uses of the imagery do not require comprehensive coverage, such as training autonomous ve‐

hicles about how to handle different intersection types and environmental conditions.

Finally, due to the personal, often intimate nature of the imagery, and the blurring boundaries between public 

and private space, street‐level images carry with them an important potential for harm toward those who appear 

in them. Such images, enhanced by their geolocation and assemblage into a navigable online platform, are readily 

applicable toward urban warfare, surveillance, forced displacement, and other violent purposes, or undesirable 

side‐effects such as gawking, targeted marketing, stalking, or harassment.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  3

Full coverage must then be understood as scale‐dependent, highly contextual, politically sensitive, and neces‐

sarily limited in scope. This is because coverage is technically more achievable at a bounded scale and in concrete 

locations, and its ethical and political implications are much more tangible when dealing with a concept such as 

“full coverage of public streets within Denver city limits” rather than the much broader “full coverage of Brazil.” To 

illustrate, for years the Wikipedia article for Coverage of Google Street View has included a map of coverage levels 

by country. The most comprehensive coverage level on this map used to be “full coverage,” but the category name 

was eventually changed to “mostly full coverage,” reflecting the difficulty of achieving a level of coverage that the 

community can agree upon as “full” at the scale of an entire country.

Although full worldwide coverage (and even country‐level coverage in most places) seems out of reach, plat‐

forms that collect street‐level images appear to be collecting as much as possible, as fast as they can do it. In the 

case of OpenStreetCam and Mapillary, they are competing for a limited labor pool that volunteers free resources to 

acquire the data (Alvarez León & Quinn, 2019). If platforms were complacent enough to let crowdsourced images 

trickle in, they would probably not have incorporated the systems of points, leaderboards, and other elements of 

gamification that incentivize users of these two platforms to contribute imagery. Instead, OpenStreetCam and 

Mapillary  are  racing  to  acquire  coverage,  and  when  the  flow  of  images  is  insufficient  to  meet  the  demands  of 

immediate  business  opportunities,  we  see  phenomena  such  as  paid  drivers  collecting  and  submitting  imagery. 

For example, Telenav (OpenStreetCam’s parent company) sent employees to collect imagery in targeted locations 

across Canada, Peru, and Mexico (Gonzalez, 2017). In a similar vein, Mapillary has at times deployed staff and 

other resources to assist clients with the filling in of local coverage (Esri, 2017).

Yet  even  Google  and  Microsoft,  for  all  the  paid  drivers  they  have  deployed,  have  made  business  decisions 

that stop short of acquiring imagery on all the world’s streets. A quick look at today’s worldwide coverage map 

shows that Microsoft Streetside’s only presence outside the U.S. is in several Western European countries, while 

Google Street View is almost entirely absent from Central and North Africa, Central Asia, and vast areas of Russia. 

Even within relatively wealthy and legally friendly countries such as the U.S., there are some places where Google 

and Microsoft have not achieved full coverage. In many of those instances, when zooming in to examine in detail 

specific tracks on the map, one can detect that at some point—and for no reason apparent in the imagery—the car 

stops and turns around. Where and why does this happen, and how common is it?

One way to achieve a more systematic understanding of how coverage works is through repeated, detailed, 

and  comparative  observation  of  coverage  patterns.  We  begin  exploring  these  patterns  in  the  next  section,  by 

comparing research on the growth of crowdsourced maps, such as OSM, with what we know (and want to know) 

about the ways crowdsourced street‐level imagery platforms acquire coverage. We then draw insights from this 

exercise to develop a systematic and scalable method of in‐depth coverage comparison across street‐level imag‐

ery platforms, which we test using Google Street View, Mapillary, and OpenStreetCam.

1.2 | Studies of coverage in crowdsourced maps and imagery

Studies  of  coverage  levels  specifically  dedicated  to  crowdsourced  street‐level  imagery  platforms  have  been 

sparse; however, Juhász and Hochmair (2016) were able to evaluate Mapillary and Street View completeness by 

comparing coverage of these platforms against base datasets of Esri and OSM roads at different scales. This was 

possible because the authors obtained a full data dump of coverage tracks directly from the Mapillary developer 

team. To get the Street View coverage, the authors scraped PNG coverage tiles from Google’s servers. They found 

that Street View coverage exceeded that of Mapillary in most study areas, but that pockets of Mapillary coverage 

were superior in some microgeographies where particularly active contributors had been at work. In both plat‐

forms, coverage of main roads exceeded that of residential roads, and results suggested an urban–rural divide. A 

few small countries and territories such as Barbados, Hong Kong, and Nicaragua had the highest percentages of 

coverage, followed by a group of European countries.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN4  |    

In spite of important qualitative, technical, and logistical differences, research on OSM development patterns 

could be informative for studying crowdsourced street‐level imagery. Corcoran, Mooney, and Bertolotto (2013) 

demonstrated for three regions in Ireland that the growth of the OSM street network followed known patterns of 

exploration and densification that are present in the expansion of physical street networks. In new areas, major 

roads were first added to the road network and eventually filled in by minor streets.

New computational techniques have proven useful to trace growth patterns in OSM coverage. One approach 

is to aggregate past contributions onto a grid and examine the spatial distribution of covered cells from year to 

year. In this way, Jokar Arsanjani, Helbich, Bakillah, and Loos (2015) used a cellular automata (CA) model to predict 

the future expansion of the map, concluding that features would eventually cover the urban fabric while leveling 

off in some types of rural environments such as farms and forests. Hotspot mapping statistics such as Getis and 

Ord’s G* can also be calculated on such cells and compared across time slices (Jokar Arsanjani, Mooney, Helbich, 

& Zipf, 2015).

Understanding how coverage spreads across space would be helpful for developing a method to assess the 

completeness of coverage in any given city. This, in turn, might elucidate links between coverage levels and urban 

morphology that could provide insights into a city’s spatial organization, as well as transportation networks and 

even social dynamics. For example, do major highways tend to get coverage before minor streets? Do streets in 

the urban core get added before streets on the periphery? Or is the appearance of coverage more unpredictable 

in nature? Because the public does not have access to historical coverage maps, one way to understand coverage 

growth tendencies is to observe current coverage patterns in many cities with different forms of spatial organiza‐

tion. This is the approach we take here.

As we look at coverage maps, we must also consider the possibility that the particular characteristics of each 

platform exert a mediating process on where, how, and how rapidly coverage takes place. For this reason, our 

assessment of coverage entails a comparison not only between cities themselves, but also between the platform‐

specific mechanisms that enable such coverage.

1.3 | Differences between crowdsourced maps and street‐level imagery when 
assessing coverage

On the surface, one reason that full coverage of crowdsourced street‐level imagery may seem feasible is that OSM 

has been able to achieve near‐comprehensive mapping of road networks in much of Europe, other urban centers, 

and places where the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team has initiated projects (Neis & Zipf, 2012; Sima, 2018). 

It may be tempting to believe that volunteers will navigate all the roads and contribute photographs to street‐level 

imagery platforms in the same way that they mapped the roads on OSM; however, some circumstances that con‐

tributed to extensive road coverage in OSM do not apply to the collection of street‐level imagery. For example, 

OSM allows contributors to trace high‐resolution satellite imagery of any area, regardless of their own physical 

locations. So‐called “armchair mappers” look for places in the map with empty road networks, which they fill in by 

heads‐up digitizing and image interpretation. The mapper can do this even when living thousands of miles away 

from the streets being mapped. Such remote contributions have played an important role in expanding the cover‐

age of crowdsourced mapping platforms such as OSM. However, they are not possible with street‐level imagery 

because volunteers must physically travel the roads to capture photographs. This introduces barriers of mobility, 

time, expenses, and safety, among others.

OSM has found some success in filling coverage gaps through organized “mapping parties,” where people go 

out on foot or by bicycle to collect data (Hristova, Quattrone, Mashhadi, & Capra, 2013; Perkins & Dodge, 2008), 

yet these are necessarily limited in scope to the neighborhood level. In the realm of crowdsourced street‐level im‐

agery, achieving majority coverage of a provincial or national road network would require scaling up such efforts 

in a systematic fashion across broad geographies. As we will see in the coverage comparisons undertaken later in 

this article, this is challenging even for relatively cohesive and accessible networks within urban agglomerations.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  5

A final factor that makes crowdsourced mapping more feasible than its street‐level imagery counterpart is the 

resource asymmetry between these two activities. Contributing to a platform like OSM requires relatively few 

technical, financial, and logistical resources from the volunteer. Armchair mappers only need time and a computer 

with an internet connection. Edits can be made relatively easily, and they are saved immediately to the database. 

In contrast, contributors to crowdsourced street‐level imagery platforms who are going to cover broad areas with 

a motor vehicle require mounting equipment and a camera (which can be a smartphone), the vehicle itself, vehicle 

fuel, along with the storage and bandwidth necessary to upload imagery sets reaching gigabytes in size (Alvarez 
León & Quinn, 2019).1  Covering an area with street‐level imagery takes much longer than digitizing it in OSM, as 

the contributor must drive the lengths of each street in a systematic fashion that is not conducive to point‐to‐point 

travel or integration into routine commutes. If a full view of the streetscape is desired, this must be done in both 

directions of traffic. In addition to expending these resources, street‐level photographers must also ensure their 

continuous operation under changing conditions: phones overheat, batteries die, memories fill up, rain and bugs 

splatter the windshield, and the sun sets.

Even when considering all the factors above that have made it comparatively easier to amass large amounts 

of road data in OSM, it is important to note that the road coverage in this platform is still far from comprehensive. 

The  personal  interests  and  biases  of  contributors  can  systematically  affect  which  areas  receive  contributions, 

and  which  remain  unmapped.  Rural  locations  and  small  cities  are  often  missing  or  lacking  in  attention  in  OSM 

(Camboim, Bravo, & Sluter, 2015; Quinn, 2017). Haklay (2010) reported a pattern of less mapping activity in areas 

of  higher  socioeconomic  deprivation,  perhaps  lending  validity  to  OSM  founder  Steve  Coast’s  infamous  remark 

that “Nobody wants to do council estates” (GisPro, 2007). Another bias can come from the source and method of 

data input, which can have unanticipated consequences for patterns of coverage. For example, importing roads 

directly from U.S. Census TIGER files can cause the map to appear full of data, leading mappers to move on to new 

locations without inserting updates. Furthermore, factors such as the gender (Stephens, 2013) and geographic or‐

igins of the contributors (Quinn, 2016) can cause imbalances in the types of features that are included in the map.

Interestingly,  the  factors  that  introduce  bias  in  crowdsourced  mapping  play  a  different  role  in  the  case  of 

street‐level imagery. At the individual road segment scale, biases in feature selection may be less of a concern 

because street‐level photography generally captures everything along its path. When slightly zoomed out to the 

scale of the city or neighborhood, the story changes. The social factors of street‐level imagery influence where 

people are willing or able to go, and not so much what they are willing or able to map once they are there—al‐

though it is possible that some aspects of the streetscape may cause a driver to modify a planned route. Therefore, 

on‐the‐ground  everyday  dynamics  such  as  spatialized  gendered,  classed,  or  racialized  exclusion  or  harassment 

may influence who can collect imagery and where they can go. These influences may be just as strong as financial 

and logistical constraints related to the time and resources necessary to undertake the task.

These considerations make clear that in the process of evaluating the extent of coverage on any particular 

platform, we must simultaneously consider the challenges specific to street‐level imagery collection and those 

that affect crowdsourced maps such as OSM. Given these struggles with achieving comprehensive road cover‐

age—and considering some of the extra difficulties with collecting street‐level imagery—the possibility of achiev‐

ing full coverage even at the city scale seems unlikely when relying on volunteers alone. For this reason, as well as 

the fact that full coverage may not be the objective of imagery collection in the first place, it becomes necessary to 

evaluate coverage within the context of each particular platform, and consider the specific motivations and mech‐

anisms by which the process of achieving coverage is carried out. For example, while Google Street View consti‐

tutes another arm of the ad‐centered business model of Google, as noted above, Mapillary and OpenStreetCam 

both have different corporate orientations, and different ways of integrating the collection of street‐level imagery 

into their business models. This affects not only how much coverage each platform is able to achieve, but also 

how they carry out the task of amassing coverage. Finally, some contributors to the crowdsourced platforms are 

corporations themselves, whose business objectives shape the patterns of coverage they contribute.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN6  |    

In the following section we present a scalable method for systematic coverage comparison that allows for an 

examination of the extent of coverage as well as a qualitative analysis of the imagery. We illustrate this method 

through a comparison of the coverage between Google Street View, Mapillary, and OpenStreetCam across a range 

of geographic settings. We then discuss the results in the context of the drivers behind each platform, and address 

the merits of alternative ways of understanding coverage. We do not examine Microsoft Streetside in this part of 

the study, due to the platform’s limited presence outside the U.S.

2 |  A  M E TH O D FO R E VA LUATI N G  COV E R AG E

To evaluate the extent of coverage in a given metropolitan area, we examined the online coverage maps of Google 

Street View, Mapillary, and OpenStreetCam. Each of these presents an interactive zoomable basemap with tracks 

of street‐level imagery coverage overlaid as polylines. Because none of these platforms provides a public interface 

for conducting mass downloads of data or coverage tracks, we did not construct or measure our own coverage 

map. Even if we were to construct the data through scraping, the raw number of tracks or kilometers of coverage 

would be of limited usefulness when considering the diversity of city forms and coverage acquisition practices. 

For example, a single long track could cover many kilometers of high‐speed limited access highways, while dozens 

of smaller tracks might be more indicative of a diverse and active body of local contributors without reaching the 

same raw distance. At some point, interpretation of the results would still require engagement with subjective 

concepts such as the differences between the urban core and periphery, major and minor streets, and so forth.

Leveraging  the  public  visibility  of  the  platforms’  own  browsable  coverage  maps,  we  developed  a  heuristic 

approach that allows anyone with internet access to empirically assess the extent of coverage. This scalable ap‐

proach enables an engagement with the imagery at three different levels: the city networks, the individual tracks, 

and the photographs themselves.

2.1 | Study of world cities

We began by studying coverage levels in some of the largest metropolitan agglomerations throughout the world. 

For each of the cities evaluated, we considered five classes of roads: major highways, major arterials (arteries) in 

the urban core, major arterials in the urban periphery, minor streets in the urban core, and minor streets in the 

urban periphery. We defined road types as follows.

•  Major highways—limited access highways or roads that connect to distant cities throughout the region. In gen‐

eral,  these  are  tagged  as  motorways  or  trunk  roads  in  OSM  (see  the  definitions  and  examples  for  the  OSM 

“highway”  tag  defining  how  all  roads  are  classified:  https ://wiki.opens treet map.org/wiki/Key:highway).  They 

also include primary roads extending to neighboring regions.

•  Major arterials—through roads connecting neighborhoods or conducting the majority of traffic through a neigh‐

borhood. They also connect the urban periphery to the urban core. In general, these are marked as secondary 

or tertiary roads in OSM. They also include primary roads within the metropolitan area, but not motorways or 

trunk roads.

•  Minor streets—streets  whose  purpose  is  to  provide  immediate  access  to  individual  residences  or  businesses, 

rather than through travel. In general, these are marked as residential or unclassified roads in OSM.

We avoided rigid definitions for the terms “urban core” and “urban periphery,” so that they could be applied to cities 

of different sizes or urban forms, and because city and highway layouts and design patterns differ so much across the 

globe. We left the judgment of whether a road was in the core or the periphery to personal discretion, and it should be 

kept in mind that differing interpretations of these terms could affect the results. We recommend the implementation 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  7

of the method by multiple analysts, with a comparison and reconciliation process or the use of measures of central 

tendency to arrive at a final result. To test this approach, we followed this pattern ourselves, with three evaluators 

independently reviewing all cities.

For each of the road categories, the analyst classified coverage on a scale of 0 to 4 using the process shown 

in Figure 1. The presence of any coverage at all was enough to warrant a score of 1. Evidence of clusters of tracks 

or systematic attempts to gather data increased the score to 2. If most (that is to say, clearly more than half) of 

the available roads had coverage, the score was increased to 3. If all publicly accessible roads appeared to have 

coverage, a score of 4 was awarded.

To understand differences in coverage across the world, we evaluated 24 major cities.2  To ensure a diverse 

group of cities selected without bias or reference to our own pre‐existing knowledge of coverage patterns, we 

chose the study areas as follows: the four most populated metropolitan areas of North America, South America, 

Europe, and Africa; the six most populated in Asia; and the two most populated in Oceania, with the additional 

rule that a maximum of one city would be studied from any one country. Population numbers were obtained from 

F I G U R E   1  Process for assigning a coverage score for each category of road

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN8  |    

United Nations estimates (United Nations, 2016). We examined the entire street network of the metropolitan area 

in the street‐level imagery coverage maps of the three platforms until countryside, water, or a neighboring major 

metropolitan area was reached. Figures 6, 7, and 11 later contain examples of coverage maps like the ones we 

evaluated across each city. The world cities selected for evaluation are shown in the map in Figure 2.

Matrices like the one in Table 1 were independently filled out by three analysts (the two authors and a research 

assistant) who were already familiar with Google Street View, Mapillary, and OpenStreetCam. Each analyst gave 

a score for each city in each platform using matrices like the one in Table 1. The evaluation was performed over a 

period of three weeks during October–November 2018.

2.2 | Study of different‐sized cities within a single country

To understand the differences in coverage across city sizes, we also evaluated 25 cities in Brazil.3  We selected 

cities  from  five  tiers  of  the  urban  hierarchy.  We  took  the  largest  city  in  the  population  category  from  each  of 

the five regions of Brazil: North, Center‐West, Northeast, Southeast, and South, with one exception—São Paulo 

was omitted because it was covered in the analysis of world cities. We used the regions defined by the Brazilian 

Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). Population data was taken from the 2010 Brazilian census results, 

obtained from the IBGE website.

different population tiers.

We ranked the coverage levels using the same methodology as for the world cities, as observed during the 

same time period. Figure 3 shows a map of the selected cities. Table 2 shows how the cities were selected from 

Brazil was chosen because it is a large country, diverse in both physical and cultural resources, with a region‐

ally  (and  increasingly  globally)  influential  economy  and  a  variety  of  city  sizes  throughout  its  different  regions. 

Selecting Brazil also allows us to remove some of the over‐coverage biases that might be found in North American 

or European countries, where the mapping platforms are based.

When implementing this method, we were careful to consider that the Mapillary and OpenStreetCam cov‐

erage maps rely on OSM as a basemap. Because OSM is built by volunteers, it is subject to uneven development 

based on internet access, participation divides, and human biases. If areas of the street network are missing in 

F I G U R E   2  Map of world cities selected for study

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  9

TA B L E   1  Coverage scoring matrix completed for each platform

 

Major highways

Major arteri‐
als—urban 
core

Major arteri‐
als—urban 
periphery

Minor 
streets—
urban core

Minor streets—
urban periphery

Mexico City

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

New York/Newark

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

(Similar rows for all 

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

0/1/2/3/4

other cities studied)

F I G U R E   3  Map of Brazilian cities selected for study

OSM, then an analyst might incorrectly assess the proportion of streets where coverage exists. It is even possible 

that coverage may appear in places where there are no streets in the basemap. In areas where the completeness 

of the basemap is a concern, analysts can use satellite imagery such as the freely visible layers in Google Maps or 

the iD OpenStreetMap editor to verify the extent of the street network.

3 |  R E S U LT S A N D D I S CU S S I O N  O F  C IT Y COV E R AG E E VA LUATI O N S

When considering all five road categories for 49 cities across three platforms, there were 735 scores given by 

each  analyst.  Due  to  individual  differences  in  interpreting  coverage  patterns,  the  scoring  workflow,  the  street 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN10  |    

TA B L E   2  Population tiers of Brazilian cities selected for study

Urban hierarchy tier

Population range

City, state

Tier 1

Over 1,500,000

Rio de Janeiro, RJ

Tier 2

500,000–1,500,000

Porto Alegre, RS

Tier 3

250,000–500,000

Tier 4

100,000–250,000

Tier 5

50,000–100,000

Salvador, BA

Brasília, DF

Manaus, AM

Curitiba, PR

Belém, PA

Goiânia, GO

Guarulhos, SP

São Luís, MA

Niterói, RJ

Ananindeua, PA

Aparecida de Goiânia, GO

Caxias do Sul, RS

Campinha Grande, PB

Juazeiro do Norte, CE

Taboão da Serra, SP

Viamão, RS

Marabá, PA

Dourados, MS

Barcarena, PA

Bayeux, PB

Tubarão, SC

Ituiutaba, MG

Novo Gama, GO

categories, and the terms “core” and “periphery,” it was expected that there would be some difference in scoring 

between the analysts; however, we felt that there was enough convergence in scores to be useful. At least two 

analysts agreed on the score in 95.1% of cases.

In this study, we report the results using the median score when looking at individual cities, and mean scores 

when looking at larger groupings of cities across region or city rank. The scalable nature of this approach means 

that more analysts could be added if additional opinions were desired for converging on a score. With a larger 

number of analysts, measures such as variance and standard deviations in scores could help identify any analysts 

whose scoring trends differed significantly from the rest of the group.

3.1 | World cities results

Figure 4 shows the median of scores given by all analysts for each road category for each city. When considering 

coverage in the world cities, it appears that Google Street View has often taken an all or nothing approach. This is 

reflected in the enormous asymmetry of coverage found between regions. With the exception of Santo Domingo, 

extensive coverage blankets all the cities we studied in the Americas, Europe, and Oceania. In contrast, African 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  11

F I G U R E   4  Coverage scores in world cities (median score of all analysts)

and Asian cities exhibited stark variations in coverage. For instance, there is little or no coverage at all in Cairo, 

Kinshasa,  Delhi,  Shanghai,  and  Karachi.  Any  coverage  in  these  areas  originated  from  users  who  took  imagery 

with their own cameras and contributed it to Google, a relatively minor element of Google’s model for collecting 

imagery.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN12  |    

The presence of Google Street View coverage seems connected with the size of a national economy, market 

potential, and geographical proximity to the company’s core of operations. These considerations are absent from 

Google’s own public explanation of Street View, which mentions merely the weather and population density as 

factors  (https ://www.google.com/stree tview/ under stand ).  In  contrast,  local  or  regional  competition,  legal  hur‐

dles, and ideological considerations are at play in other jurisdictions. For example, in China, where Google’s op‐

erations are currently limited, the Baidu Total View service provides street‐level imagery for many urban areas, 

although some of this imagery is censored (Manthorpe, 2016).

We found only a few cities where Google coverage seems to be in a partially built state. These include Dhaka 

and Lagos, where coverage is extensive but misses large patches of the metropolitan area. These areas are not 

under immediate construction. We identified distinct stages of collection in the case of Dhaka, and Lagos, where 

blocks of imagery were from 2013 and 2017, respectively, but Google’s published future data collection plans do 

not include these cities (https ://www.google.com/stree tview/ under stand ).

Figure 5 shows how the cities’ coverage levels compare across the platforms in each continent. When com‐

pared with Google Street View, Mapillary’s coverage throughout the world is more consistent: every city has at 

least some kind of track, in core and peripheral areas. This is perhaps expected when using a crowdsourced model 

open to the world, instead of a market‐oriented approach. The geographical spread of Mapillary, combined with 

the regional asymmetry of Google’s coverage, helps explain the former’s relative success. In our analysis, consid‐

ering the mean scores from all reviewers, the only category wherein Mapillary topped Google Street View was 

major highways in Asia and Africa.

In  no  city  has  Mapillary  reached  the  level  of  comprehensiveness  that  Google  has  in  places  like  New  York, 

London, and Sydney, where virtually no navigable road has escaped the gaze of Street View. The most complete 

cities we observed in Mapillary were Moscow, Toronto, and Bogotá. These cities have majority coverage of the 

highway and arterial networks, but still lack comprehensive coverage along minor street capillaries.

OpenStreetCam scores were generally lower than both Google Street View and Mapillary scores on most 

categories. This is unsurprising, given that OpenStreetCam is a newer platform than Mapillary and has not 

had as much time to amass imagery. Nevertheless, in the North American cities, OpenStreetCam coverage 

rivals Mapillary in several categories. Toronto has the best coverage of any city studied in OpenStreetCam, 

and Mexico City’s coverage is also well developed due to the influence of Telenav’s paid drivers (Gonzalez, 

2017).

have coverage.

In  OpenStreetCam,  Tokyo,  London,  and  Paris  show  high  levels  of  coverage  for  highways,  and  moderate 

levels in all other categories. In contrast, Johannesburg shows evenly spread medium/low levels of coverage 

throughout the entire street network, while avoiding any significant gaps. Unlike Mapillary, OpenStreetCam 

is  missing  coverage  entirely  in  several  cities,  including  Santo  Domingo,  Cairo,  Kinshasa,  Dhaka,  and  Karachi. 

All of these are cities where Google Street View is also relatively light on coverage. Thus, while we see that 

coverage patterns may differ across locations, there is often a convergence between those cities that do not 

In all three platforms studied, mean coverage scores were higher for streets in the urban core than for streets 

of a similar size on the urban periphery. Similarly, scores tended to be higher for highways and major arterials than 

for minor streets. While there are clear regional, as well as platform‐specific, disparities in coverage, we did not 

find that any platform was solely concentrated in a single world region. Mapillary had the widest coverage across 

regions, Google Street View had comprehensive coverage in the geographies it selected (and very sparse in those 

it neglected), and all three platforms showed lower levels of coverage in Asia and Africa relative to other regions. 

One city where all three platforms showed moderate to high levels of coverage was São Paulo. In the following 

paragraphs we discuss our analysis of coverage in Brazil as a way to put each city into context and explore the 

distribution of street‐level imagery coverage across the regional structure and urban hierarchy of a single large 

country.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  13

F I G U R E   5  Mean world city coverage scores by platform across regions. Source:  Authors’ elaboration and data

3.2 | Brazil results

In the year 2010, when Google launched Street View in 51 Brazilian cities (its first presence in South America), 

the company stated that its goal was to cover 90% of the country’s roads within 2 years (Petró, 2010). Our results 

confirm that Google has either reached—or at least made significant progress toward reaching—that goal. Median 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN14  |    

have coverage.

scores for each city in Brazil are shown later in Figure 8. In every city we studied, most streets of each category 

The approach advanced in this article is well positioned to identify potentially significant patterns in data col‐

lection decisions on the ground, as well as provide initial clues to their potential relation with the socioeconomic 

forces that shape specific geographies at various scales—from neighborhoods to metropolitan regions. For exam‐

ple, when there are spots of missing coverage, they tend to occur at the extremes of wealth and poverty. Figure 6 

shows the coverage ending at the entrance of the Maré favela in Rio de Janeiro. When examining the images, 

we  observed  no  physical  barrier  preventing  the  car  from  entering  the  neighborhood,  but  the  drivers  (or  those 

directing them) made a decision not to collect coverage in this place. Collectors of crowdsourced images may also 

make the same decisions, but coverage on those platforms is generally not yet extensive enough to see patterns 

of willful avoidance in such a stark manner.

Our analysis revealed that relatively wealthy gated neighborhoods are also missing coverage, as it appears that 

Google would not go through gates or enter private roads to collect images. In these situations, the privacy af‐

forded by the walled community includes the privilege of not being photographed. Figure 7 shows a typical gated 

neighborhood of condominiums representing a local gap in coverage. We observed this in the city of Goiânia, but 

F I G U R E   6  Image of Google Street View coverage stopping at the edges of Maré favela in Rio de Janeiro. 
Source: Authors’ screenshot from Google Maps taken November 21, 2018. Google and the Google logo are 
registered trademarks of Google LLC, used with permission

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  15

F I G U R E   7  Image of Google Street View coverage stopping at the edges of Granville gated neighborhood in 
Goiânia. Source: Authors’ screenshot from Google Maps taken November 21, 2018. Google and the Google logo 
are registered trademarks of Google LLC, used with permission

such neighborhoods are common throughout urban Brazil. Note that we did not deduct points on our assessment 

for places where the car was physically or legally unable to go, although discerning the type of barrier in all cases 

is  prohibitive.  Some  industrial  complexes  were  also  inaccessible  because  of  gates  and  other  security  barriers. 

Individual collectors of crowdsourced imagery may have fewer qualms about entering limited‐access areas, espe‐

cially if they live there.

Beyond gated areas, where Google is missing coverage in Brazil (Figure 8), it is typically for minor streets on 

the urban periphery where population density is low, places where the road quality is poor, or situations where 

the car was skirting a favela or other low‐income neighborhood.

Figure 9 shows how the cities’ coverage levels compare among the three platforms across Brazil’s five regions. 

Figure  10  shows  the  same  data,  but  tabulated  across  tiers  of  city  sizes.  Mapillary  coverage  varies  across  the 

Brazilian cities we studied. It is most extensive in the South and Southeast region cities, where most of the wealth 

and economic activity of the country is located. The North region cities had the lowest Mapillary coverage, with 

some cities having no coverage at all or just a few roads. Cities with the most consistently high coverage across 

the different categories were Brasília, Porto Alegre, Bayeux, and Ituitaba, yet even these were far from achieving 

coverage on a majority of minor streets in either the urban core or the periphery.

OpenStreetCam coverage was low or nonexistent in most Brazilian cities. The only Brazilian cities in our study 

that had organized or clustered OpenStreetCam coverage were Taboão da Serra and Guarulhos, both suburbs of 

São Paulo. Other cities just had a smattering of tracks, or nothing.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN16  |    

F I G U R E   8  Coverage scores in Brazilian cities (median score of all analysts)

3.3 | General results

When the scores given by all reviewers were averaged in each category, coverage in the Brazilian cities was high‐

est  in  the  following  order  for  both  Google  Street  View  and  Mapillary.  OpenStreetCam  was  disregarded  in  this 

instance, due to low coverage amounts.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  17

F I G U R E   9  Mean Brazilian city coverage scores by platform across regions. Source: Authors’ elaboration and data

1.  Major  highways.

2.  Major arterials in the urban core.

3.  Minor streets in the urban core.

4.  Major arterials in the urban periphery.

5.  Minor streets in the urban periphery.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN18  |    

F I G U R E   1 0  Mean Brazilian city coverage scores by platform across the urban hierarchy. Source:  Authors’ 
elaboration and data

For world cities, the pattern was similar in Google Street View, with major arterials in the urban core barely edging 

out major highways for the top spot. However, in the crowdsourced platforms, major arterials in both the urban core 

and the periphery had higher mean scores than minor streets in either the core or the periphery. In these large world 

cities, coverage seems to begin with the major roads in the core and periphery, followed by a densification pattern in 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  19

the minor roads, as has been observed in OSM (Corcoran et al., 2013). This is different from the Brazilian cities, which 

saw more coverage development at all levels of the core before the periphery.

When considering all the platforms studied, it is easier to get near full coverage in a smaller city than in a larger 

one, due to there being fewer roads to drive. A balancing factor is that large cities attract more resources and 

attention. Another variable to consider is who undertakes the coverage in the context of each platform. When 

analyzing coverage in Mapillary and OpenStreetCam, we found that the presence of a single very active contrib‐

utor could increase the score to substantially more than it would otherwise have been. This influence of powerful 

contributors on crowdsourced geographic content has also been observed in OSM (Quinn, 2017).

A frequent imagery contributor we observed was the Kaart group (user “kaartcam” in both platforms). This 

company offers services in ground‐based validation of OpenStreetMap through images that it captures with its 

own fleet of vehicles, focusing on areas of the world where data is incomplete or missing. It does not disclose its 

client list, but it has shared over 11 million images with Mapillary and 13,000 km of tracks with OpenStreetCam in 

countries such as Panama, Argentina, and South Africa (Aguirre, 2018; Ziola, 2018).

The track shapes offered by Kaart are unpredictable in form (Figure 11) and in some cases resemble a space‐

filling curve. Because Kaart focuses on validating the classifications and names of streets (Ziola, 2018), our spec‐

ulation is that the tracks represent an attempt to find street signs and/or sample the sizes and capacity of streets 

without  driving  the  entire  network.  If  this  is  the  case,  it  would  explain  why  no  attempt  is  made  to  approach 

full coverage. The presence of contributors like Kaart, with specific data collection logics and motivations and 

F I G U R E   1 1  Image tracks of unpredictable shape near Johannesburg, mostly contributed by Kaart. Source:  
Authors’ screenshot from Mapillary on November 21, 2018

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN20  |    

significant coverage capabilities, underscores the need to investigate platform‐specific dynamics while examining 

the street‐level imagery from a variety of quantitative and qualitative perspectives.

4 |  CO N C LU S I O N : R E TH I N K I N G  COV E R AG E

Beyond numerical evaluation of current coverage levels (which will surely change over time), at the core of this 

article is a proposition to rethink what we mean by the idea of coverage and how we approach it empirically. Our 

above analysis has highlighted the close relationship between coverage and the particular technologies by which 

it is carried out, accessed, displayed, and distributed. In other words, there is a highly specific mediation of cover‐

age that operates simultaneously at the level of a particular technology (crowdsourced mapping vs. crowdsourced 

street‐level imagery) and at the level of a specific product, or variant of that technology.

As documented by Alvarez León and Quinn (2019), the factors shaping such technological variants are para‐

mount in understanding how coverage is achieved, who undertakes this task, and the reasons that motivate this 

enterprise—as well as how the benefits and economic value derived from coverage may be appropriated. With 

street‐level imagery, this means the corporate orientations, resource allocations, business models, and strategies 

of specific platforms like Google Street View, Microsoft Streetside, Mapillary, and OpenStreetCam play a crucial 

role in defining the terms of coverage, as well as its spatial distribution and, ultimately, its utility. Coverage thus has 

to be understood as part of a larger sociotechnical project such as a firm or a collaborative community, and guided 

by its own internal logics, as well as external forces and constraints, such as competition, regulation, and financial 

or logistical limitations. For these reasons, we argue that a more multifaceted, and contextually nuanced, idea of 

coverage is necessary in order to understand the drivers behind it, the factors that shape how it is carried out, and 

its relationships with the on‐the‐ground realities of particular places.

We illustrate how coverage operates as part of broader strategies by showing how an all‐or‐nothing collection 

approach  tied  to  a  large  multipurpose  corporation  such  as  Google  will  produce  a  map  of  coverage  different  in 

depth, breadth, and regional focus from one produced by a crowdsourced strategy that views street‐level imagery 

coverage as an input to a more focused product or service (such as is the case with Mapillary and OpenStreetCam’s 

orientation  toward  computer  vision  and  navigation  technologies).  The  role  of  diverse  data  collection  logics  in 

street‐level imagery in shaping coverage patterns—such as its use for the development of secondary products—is 

a good reason to be cautious about the inferences drawn from these datasets for other analytical purposes. We 

propose that in light of such differences affecting the form, content, and structure of coverage in any single plat‐

form, we evaluate coverage through a judiciously weighted mix of contextual knowledge, data exploration, and 

generally applicable rules. In the present case, this entails an understanding of how each platform operates (and 

to what ends) at the organization as well as the data collection level. Furthermore, this approach also calls for a 

back‐and‐forth exploratory navigation between the various dimensions of a coverage map. In other words, we 

call for more evaluations that consider not only the track on the map, but the imagery contained within it and the 

meanings of that imagery in the socio‐spatial context of a place. This helps illuminate and qualitatively weigh a 

specific location’s nuances and their relationships to coverage.

Our approach assesses coverage in quantitative as well as qualitative ways that help to both establish a base‐

line as well as disentangle the extent of coverage from its meaning. We have asked questions that might help us 

better understand both the shape of the map, and the places that it represents: Why are some roads covered 

and not others? What is behind coverage choices and patterns? How and why do coverage footprints vary from 

platform to platform? To continue addressing these questions in future studies, we propose deeper exploration 

of the set of imagery contributors within a given geography. This includes trying to understand how many people 

contributed, how much work each contributor did, the motives of the contributors, and how those motives inter‐

sect with the livelihoods of the people and the landscapes being photographed. Possible questions include: Why 

do volunteers expend so much effort collecting images for free? How similar are these motives to the ones we 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN    |  21

know about for crowdsourced geographic information in general (Budhathoki, 2010)? Are any of these sacrifices 

of time and resources tied to sentimental connections to place? What aspects of a place make it more likely to be 

photographed, or missed?

We also call for additional inquiry into the ethical implications of photographing the streetscape, especially 

in high‐density neighborhoods where livelihoods spill onto the sidewalk and doors and windows into private ac‐

tivities sit just a few meters away from the camera. What kinds of unanticipated harm or good might the images 

enable, and to what degree are the contributors and platforms responsible? Is a universal code of conduct for 

collecting street‐level imagery possible or desirable, what might it look like, and to what extent does one already 

exist in practice? In this article we have identified at least a few geographies where individuals and corporations 

have come close to photographing every single street. The societal costs and benefits of such extraordinary un‐

dertakings certainly merit further investigation.

Sterling Quinn 

 https://orcid.org/0000‐0002‐4900‐8885 

1  The tools and resources required to systematically capture street‐level imagery are explored and explained in greater depth 
in Alvarez León and Quinn (2019). See especially Table 1, where the following key resources are described in greater detail: 
time and labor, vehicle, vehicle upkeep, energy resources, supporting technical equipment, and internet resources. 

2  The purpose of selecting these cities is to explore coverage in a wide range of major urban agglomerations across geograph‐
ical contexts. While we find this sample helpful to understand coverage dynamics in a variety of settings, we caution against 
interpreting it as representative of coverage across larger regions, or cities in general. 

3  See previous footnote for considerations on sample size and geographical representativeness. 

O R C I D

E N D N OT E S

R E F E R E N C E S

Anon. (2007). The GiSPro interview with Steve Coast. GiSPro, 18, 20–23.
Aguirre, J. (2018). KAART en el mundo de OSM. Retrieved from https ://www.youtu be.com/watch ?v=otf‐ge4z‐nE
Alvarez León, L. F., & Quinn, S. (2019). The value of crowdsourced street‐level imagery: Examining the shifting property 

regimes of OpenStreetCam and Mapillary. GeoJournal, 84(2), 395–414.

Budhathoki, N. R. (2010). Participants’ motivations to contribute geographic information in an online community (Unpublished 

PhD dissertation). University of Illinois at Urbana‐Champaign, Illinois.

Camboim,  S.  P.,  Bravo,  J.  V.  M.,  &  Sluter,  C.  R.  (2015).  An  investigation  into  the  completeness  of,  and  the  updates  to, 
OpenStreetMap data in a heterogeneous area in Brazil. ISPRS International Journal of Geo‐Information, 4(3), 1366–1388.
Corcoran, P., Mooney, P., & Bertolotto, M. (2013). Analysing the growth of OpenStreetMap networks. Spatial Statistics, 

3, 21–32.

Esri. (2017). With street‐level imagery, property reappraisals go virtual. ArcNews, 39(4), 28.
Gonzalez, M. (2017). Mejorando datos de caminos y carreteras usando OpenStreetCam. Retrieved from https ://www.slide 

share.net/Miria mGonz alez4 9/mejor ando‐datos‐de‐camin os‐y‐carre teras‐usando‐opens treetcam

Haklay, M. (2010). How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of OpenStreetMap and ord‐

nance survey datasets. Environment & Planning B, 37(4), 682–703.

Hristova,  D.,  Quattrone,  G.,  Mashhadi,  A.,  &  Capra,  L.  (2013).  The  life  of  the  party:  Impact  of  social  mapping  in 
OpenStreetMap.  In  Proceedings  of  the  AAAI  International  Conference  on  Weblogs  and  Social  Media.  Ann  Arbor,  MI: 
AAAI.

Jokar Arsanjani, J., Helbich, M., Bakillah, M., & Loos, L. (2015). The emergence and evolution of OpenStreetMap: A cellu‐

lar automata approach. International Journal of Digital Earth, 8(1), 76–90.

Jokar Arsanjani, J., Mooney, P., Helbich, M., & Zipf, A. (2015). An exploration of future patterns of the contributions to 

OpenStreetMap and development of a contribution index. Transactions in GIS, 19(6), 896–914.

Juhász,  L.,  &  Hochmair,  H.  H.  (2016).  User  contribution  patterns  and  completeness  evaluation  of  Mapillary,  a  crowd‐

sourced street level photo service. Transactions in GIS, 20(6), 925–947.

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN22  |    

Manthorpe, R. (2016). Entire buildings are being deleted from China’s “Street View” and no one knows why. Retrieved from 

https ://www.wired.co.uk/artic le/china‐street‐view‐baidu‐total‐view

Neis, P., & Zipf, A. (2012). Analyzing the contributor activity of a volunteered geographic information project: The case of 

OpenStreetMap. ISPRS International Journal of Geo‐Information, 1(2), 146–165.

Perkins, C., & Dodge, M. (2008). The potential of user‐generated cartography: A case study of the OpenStreetMap proj‐

ect and Mapchester mapping party. North West Geography, 8(1), 19–32.

Petró, G. (2010). Street View estreia na América do Sul com 51 cidades brasileiras. Retrieved from http://g1.globo.com/tecno 

logia/ notic ia/2010/09/street‐view‐chega‐ao‐brasil‐mostr ando‐ruas‐de‐15‐munic ipios.html

Quinn, S. (2016). A geolinguistic approach for comprehending local influence in OpenStreetMap. Cartographica, 51(2), 

67–83.

Quinn, S. (2017). Using small cities to understand the crowd behind OpenStreetMap. GeoJournal, 82(3), 455–473.
Sima,  B.  (2018).  HOT  InAWARE  project  relocates  to  mapping  lifeline  infrastructures  in  Semarang.  Retrieved  from  https :// 
w w w.hotosm.org/updat es/2018‐03‐12_hot_inawa re_proje ct_reloc ates_to_mappi ng _lifel ine_infra struc 
tures_in_semarang

Stephens, M. (2013). Gender and the geoweb: Divisions in the production of user‐generated cartographic information. 

United Nations. (2016). The world’s cities in 2016. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/en/devel opmen t/desa/popul ation/ 

publi catio ns/pdf/urban izati on/the_worlds_cities_in_2016_data_bookl et.pdf

Ziola,  K.  (2018).  Building a broad community.  Retrieved  from  https ://2018.state ofthe map.us/progr am/build ing‐abroad‐

GeoJournal, 78(6), 981–996.

commu nity.html

How to cite this article: Quinn S, Alvarez León L. Every single street? Rethinking full coverage across 

street‐level imagery platforms. Transactions in GIS. 2019;00:1–22. https ://doi.org/10.1111/tgis.12571 

QUINN aNd aLVaREZ LEÓN