rmnsactions  GIS, ~ 9 9 6 ,  vo/  I ,  no.  2, p. 82 

A GIS for  hydrological modelling in the semi-arid, 
HAPEX-Sahel experiment area of Niger,  Africa 
J C DESCONNETS, B E VIEUX,  B CAPPELAERE AND F  DELCIAUX 

J  C  Desconnets, B  Cappelaere, F Delclaux  Laboratoire d'hydrologie,  ORSTOM, BP 5045, 
34032 Montpellier Cedex 01, France 
B E Vieux Associate Professor, School of Civil Engineering and Environmental  Science, 
University of Oklahoma, Norman  OK, 7301 9, USA. 

During  the  HAPEX-Sahel  experiment  ( 199 1-94),  water  redistribution  processes 
were  studied  at the  meso-scale  (10 000 h2) near  Niamey,  Niger.  A  project  now 
under  way  at  ORSTOM  aims  at  modelling  the  regional water  balance  through  a 
spatial  approach  combining  GIS  data  organization  and  distributed  hydrological 
modelling.  The  main  objective  is  to  extend  the  surface  water  balance,  by  now 
available only on a few, small (around 1 km2) unconnected  endoreic catchments,  to 
a more significant part of the HAPEX-Sahel square degree, a  1500 h2 region called 
SSZ that includes most of the environmental and hydrology measurqnent sites. GIS 
architecture  and model design consistently  consider data and processes at the local, 
catchment  scale, and at  the  regional  scale. The GIS includes spatial  and  temporal 
hydrological  data  (rainfall,  surface  runoff,  ground  water),  thematic  maps 
(topography, soil,  geomorphology,  vegetation)  and  multi-temporal  remote sensing 
data  (SPOT, aerial  pictures). The  GIS  supports  the  simulation  of  the  composite 
effect  at  the  regional  scale  of  highly  variable  and  discontinuous  component 
hydrologic  processes operating  at  the  catchment  scale, in  order to simulate  inter- 
annual aquifer recharge and response to climatic scenarios at the regional scale. 

Introduction 

rainfall 

temporally  variable 

Considering  the  many  spatial  parameters  affecting 
hydrologic  processes, it is  not surprising char GIS is 
becoming  an  integral  part  of  hydrologic  studies. 
Soils, vegetative cover, topography, climate, spatially 
fields,  and 
and 
anrhropogenic  factors  affect  such  hydrologic 
processes  as  evapotranspiration,  rainfall  runoff, 
infiltration,  and  ground  warer  recharge.  T h e  
advance of hydrologic modelling that  relies on GIS, 
in  turn,  demands  more  detailed  spatial  data  and 
management  capabilities from  the supporting GIS. 
Besides  supporting  hydrologic  simulations,  the 
purpose  of  the  GIS  described  here  is  primarily  the 
storage  and  analysis  of  hydrologic-related  data 
collected  during  the  Hydrologic  and  Atmospheric 
Experiment  (HAPEX) Sahel experiment conducted 
from  1991 to  1994 over  the  Niamey square degree 
(Niger)  (2-3"E,  13-14"N) 
i n   Africa.  The  public 
domain,  UNIX-based  GIS  GRASS  (Geographic 

82 

in 

Resources  Analysis  Support  System)  was  used  to 
manage the spatial data.  In addition to cartographic 
functions, an internally integrated hydrologic model 
is used to simulate hydrologic processes using spatial 
data  contained 
the  system.  Physical  and 
hydrologic characteristics of the region and the data 
collected determine the characteristics of the system. 
Figure  l a   shows  the  location  of  Niger  and  the 
HAPEX  square  degree,  which  is  located  in  the 
south-western  region  of  the  country.  In  Figure  1 b, 
the  enlargement  of  the  HAPEX  square  degree 
reveals  the  capital,  Niamey  o n   the  Niger  River, 
which  flows  from  north-west  to  south-east  across 
the  square  degree.  The  various  study  xeas  of  the 
HAPEX experiment are the South Super Site (SSS), 
the  West  Central  Super  Site  (WCSS),  the  East 
Central Super Site  (ECSS), and  [he larger grouping 
of  the  larrer  simply  called  rhe  Super  Site  Zone 
(SSZ).  The  unique  physical  characrerisrics  of  the 
SSZ  affect 
the  dardb,ise  and 
information  m~n.agemrnr system. 

the  design  of 

A GI5 for hydrological modelling  in  the semi-arid, HAPEX-Sohe/ experimental  urea of Niger  Africa 

1

4

0

N

r

-

 

css 

Figure  1 a.  Location of the HAPEX-Sahel square 
degree  in  Niger on the African  continent. 

Figure  1 b.  Super-sire Zone (SSZ) location with 
the HAPEX-Sahel square degree. 

2 " E  

HAPEX SQUARE DEGREE 

3 " E  

T h e   Sahelian  landscape  is  flat 

to  gently 
undulating.  Within  the  study  area,  relief  between 
plateaux  and  valley  bottoms  is  generally  between 
200 and 250 m above mean sea level. Annual grass, 
scattered  bush  savanna,  and  extensive  rain-fed 
cultivation,  such  as  millet,  typify  the  vegetative 
cover.  T h e   geomorphological  features  include 
plateaux,  sand  plains,  a n d   fossil  river  valleys  and 
drainage  nerworks.  In  fact,  the drainage network  is 
largely  non-functioning  because  of  Pleistocene 
deposits of eolian sands.  Surface runoff in the form 
of overland flow may exist  only over a scale of a few 
hundred  metres  in  small  endoreic  catchments  on 
the  order  of  a  few  square  kilometres  or  less.  T h e  
rainfall  in  this  region  is  isolated  to  a  rainy  season, 
from  May  to  October,  ephemeral  pools  form  in 
sand-clogged  river channels collecting runoff, which 
usually percolates to the ground water or evaporates. 
T h e  persistence of these  pools  to hold water  ranges 
from  going dry between  rain  events,  in  the case of 
pools  with  small  drainage  areas,  to  those  pools 
which supply limited water during the dry season. It 
is  the  water  in  these  pools  that  has  the  most 
potential  to  percolate  to  the  regional  water  table, 
which  is  generally  15 to  40  m  below  ground  level 
and  is  unconfined  except  below  laterite  plateaux. 
The  spatially  and  temporally  variable  hydrologic 
processes  distributed  across  many  endoreic 
catchments,  in  the  composite,  form  the  regional 

water  balance.  T h e   SSZ  study  area,  which  is 
annually in  a rainfall  deficit, falls berween  isohyetal 
lines  of  inter-annual  rainfall  of  500  and  600 
mm/year.  Rainfall 
increases  approximately  1 
mm/km  in  a north-south  direction with  increasing 
rainfall  towards  the equator.  T h e  only other  major 
water  resource  in  the  region  is  the  Niger  River, 
deriving  its  runoff  from  mountains in  Guinea. It  is 
not influenced by runoff processes within the study 
area  since  the sand-clogged  drainage nerwork  does 
not  convey  water.  Although  beyond  the  scope  of 
this  paper,  the  main  hydrologic  studies  that  have 
been  conducted  in  this  region  are  o n   rainfall 
distribution  (Lebel  et  al  1992),  surface  water 
redistribution  at  the  plot  and  hillslope  scales 
(Peugeot et  al  1996), surface  storage  in  temporary 
pools  (Desconnets  1994; Desconnets et  d  1996), 
and aquifer recharge at the local  and regional  scales 
(Leduc et al  1796). 

Two  roles  are  required  of  the  GIs:  one  is 
storage  and  data  management;  the  other  is  the 
support of hydrologic  simulations. Construction  of 
a HAPEX-Sahel  Hydrology GIS for the study area, 
hereafter  denoted  HSH-GIs,  integrates  diverse 
sources of cartographic or satellite data, and derived 
scientific  products  such  as  spatial  rainfall  and 
piezometric  maps,  and  assembles  these  data  in  a 
single  database.  Physically  based,  distributed 
hydrological  modelling  requires  maps  of  data  that 

83 

J  C Desconnets. 5 E  Vieux  6  Cappdaere uric’ F  Dtl/c/uu\ 

parameters.  Thus,  digital 
represent  model 
representations  of  rainfall, 
terrain,  soils,  and 
vegetative cover are used to simulate  the hydrologic 
processes  that  influence  how  much  rainfall  is 
partitioned  into  runoff  by  the  soil,  how  much 
runoff  travels  through  the  drainage  network,  and 
how  much  ultimately  reaches  the  ephemeral  pools 
where  it  either  evaporates  or  percolates  to  the 
regional water table. The major input to the system 
is  rainfall which  is  linked  to  the  fluctuation  of the 
ground-water  and  pool  level  through  complex 
runoff and runoff-loss mechanisms. The catchment- 
scale  simulation  attempts  to  connect  these  two 
phenomena to form  a regional water balance which 
is  the  composite  of  many  such  catchment-scale 
processes. 

Simulations  require  data  collected  at  both 
regional  and  catchment scales.  The GIS  integrates 
results produced by various sources at various scales. 
Scale  in  the  hydrologic  sense,  catchment  versus 
regional,  determines  the  GIS  development  and 
design. Data have been  assembled for three selected 
Catchments which  are on  the order of several  km2, 
and on the regional scale, on the order of 1500 km2. 
The  inherent  difficulties  of  multiple-scale  and 
resolution  data  are  examined  in  the  following 
sections describing  the design of the HSH-GIS and 
the  hydrologic  simulations  supported  by  the 
system. 

Description of  the  HSH-GIS 

Most  of  the  site  observations  and  some  satellite 
information,  gathered  during  the  HAPEX-Sahel 
experiment, are now available through  the HAPEX- 
Sahel  information  system  (HSIS;  http://www 
.orstom.fr/hapex).  Beyond the HSIS,  the HSH-GIS 
is  a  spatial  database  specifically  designed  for 
continental  hydrology  research purposes.  In  several 
ways, the HSH-GIS  is complementary to  HSIS.  In 
particular,  it  includes  both  a  more  complete 
catalogue  of  cartographic  data,  and  elaborated 
hydrologic data maps, relative to rainfall and water- 
table fluctuations. 

Software environment 

The  HSH-GIS  project  has  been  developed  using 
ver.  4.1  of  GRASS,  which  offers  many  raster 
for 
that  are  particularly 
functions 
hydrological applications.  The internally  integrated 

useful 

84 

hydrologic model,  xwatmfia  (Vieux et a1  1396) is  a 
GRASS module that simulates spatially  distributed 
runoff  using  maps  of  parameters  (http://chief.ecn 
.uoknor.edu/r.water.fea.html). The major data types 
and organization are described  below. 

Organization of  the HSHGIS 
The geographical base  is constructed as two nested 
levels  of  information  matching  two  distinct 
observation  scales  within 
the  HAPEX-Sahel 
experimen t: 

A regional entity, denoted as SSZ, consisting of 
the  1500 km’ geographical rectangle  (2 25’  E to 
2 50’ E,  13 25’ N  to  13 40’  N) that contains 
the main  HAPEX-Sahel experiment  areas (East 
and West Central SuperSites; Goutorbe et al 
1994), within the Niamey square degree. 
Several local entities consisting of various 
endoreic catchments  and pools  (e.g., Wankama 
and Sama Dey), that have been  studied during 
the HAPEX-Sahel experiment as part  of the 
long-term  monitoring programme  (Desconnets 
1994), and are included  in  the regional entity. 

Consistent 

are 
resolution 
maintained  for each  entiry.  However, a disparity  in 
scale  and  resolution  exists  between  the  local 
catchment-scale  and regional-scale entities. 

scale 

and 

The  HSHGIS  data 
From  a dimensional  point  of view, three  categories 
of  information  make  up  the  spatial  and  spatio- 
temporal  data  for  the  regional  and  local-scale 
entities: 

1  Site information,  providing a description 

(location and nature)  of measurement  points 
both at the local and regional levels, and the 
non-spatial  hydrological data collected within 
the local  entities (e.g.,  pool-level variations and 
rain-gauge observations  in  the monitored 
endoreic catchments), 

2  Spatial information,  consisting of vector and 
raster maps of the physical environment for 
each entiry of the database, 

3  Spatio-temporal information, both for the input 
(rainfall) and output (water table) hydrological 
variables. 

Though  not  exhaustive,  example  maps 
contained  in  the  regional  and  local  entities  are 

Raster 
Surface feotures: 
Soilcrust classification 
Agricultural  utilization 
Vegetation  classification 
landscape units 
Soils 
Hydrography 
Aerial photography 
Piezometric  levels 
Pluviometric  m a   s 
event and  ten  d&s 

Site 
Roin  gauge locations 
Piezometric well  locations 
Topcgrophy: 
Point  elevations 

Vector 
Topography: 
Vector  contours 

A GIS for  hydro/ogica/ modding in  /he semi-arid, HAP€X-Sohe/ e x p e r i n e n d  area of Niger, A/& 

SSZ region 

Sama  Dey catchment 

Wankama catchmen? 

Raster 
Surface features: 
Soikrust classification 
Landscape units 
Topography: 
Raster surfaced from  point elevations 

Raster 
Surface features: 
Soikrust classification 
Landscape units 
Topography: 
Raster surfaced from  point elevations 

Site 
Topography: 
Surveyed  elevations 

Vector 
None 

Site 
Topography: 
Surveyed elevations 
Rain  gauge locations 12  to  3) 
Piezometric well  locations 

Vector 
Watershed  boundary 

Table  1. Examples of spatial data contained in  the 
HSH-GIS for the regional  and local entities. 

shown  in  Table  1. The  vector  contours  and  point 
elevations at the regional scale are at 1:200 000 with 
contour lines at 200 and 240 m. Thus, only the tops 
of  the  plateaux  and 
the  valley  bottoms  are 
represented  at  this  scale  (recall  that  the  SSZ  lies 
between  200  and  2501-11,  msl).  At  the  local-entity 
scale, the  topography has  been  field-surveyed  for  a 
few  catchments  (Wankama and  Sama  Dey) and  is 
more  representative  of  the  land  surface  than  the 
regional-scale map. 

At  the  local-entity  scales  (under  1:50  OOO), 
there  exist  very  few  topographic  and  cartographic 
documents  in  the  Sahelian  zone,  a  major  limiting 
factor  for  GIS  analysis  and  hydrologic  modelling. 
The  most  important source  of  information  at the 
regional  scale  of  the  SSZ  has  been  the  SPOT and 
aerial  photography  (Table  1).  From  the  SPOT 
imagery, the soil-crust classification, vegetative cover 
(millet, grass,  bare soil, and brush  are major  types), 
maps  were  derived.  From  the  aerial  photography, 
the hydrography was photo-interpreted showing the 
location  of  gullies  and  sand-clogged  river  valleys. 
The local-entity scale data shown in Table  1 is much 
more  limited.  Figure  2  shows  the  primary  spatial 
data consisting of a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) 
and  several  pre-existing  information  maps.  The 
major  part  of  the  HSH-GIS consists  of elaborated 

data sets  produced  for  the  purpose  of  hydrological 
modelling  through  specific  spatial  processing 
procedures  (Figure  2).  Digital  elevation  data  are 
processed  to  form  slope  maps,  drainage  direction, 
accumulation,  stream  nerworks,  and  catchment 
boundaries.  SPOT  imagery  reclassified  into  soil- 
crust  classification  and  vegetative  cover  are 
processed into hydrologic parameters. Soil crusts are 
reclassified  into  hydraulic  conductivity,  using  the 
(1989). 
method  of  Casenave  and  Valentin 
Vegetative  cover  is  reclassified  into  a  map  of 
hydraulic  roughness.  Several  of  the  processing 
procedures shown in Figure 2 are discussed  in more 
detail below. 

Topographic and  cartographic data 
Topography  is  a key data set that often exists at the 
regional scale at a very coarse  resolution,  or only at 
the catchment scale at very fine resolution. This is a 
problem  of  scale  and  extent.  Large-scale  maps  are 
not easily obtained over large areas. At  the xegional 
scale,  description  of  the  physical  environment  is 
based on two main documents: 

1  A  1:200 000 topographic map, which  provides 
a generalized description  of relief (40 m-spaced 
contours, high and low points) and of the major 
hydrological  objects  (residual hydrographic 
network, permanent and temporary ponds, 
depressions). 

85 

1 C Desconnets  B  E  Vieur  5 Cappelaere and  f Delcloux 

F k  F l

1/200 000 

to  m e t e r s  

-

~

~

~

,

r

+

parameters 

I

 INPUT  4 

[

INPUT 

p

hydrological 
model 

~

 

r. water. fea 

rainfall maps 

piezometric 

validation 

L 

measurements 

measurements 

Figure 2.  Data production  for hydrological 
modelling. 

2  Surface-feature maps at  1:2OO  000  (D’herbhs ec 
al  1332), derived  from  1988 and  1992 SPOT 
images. They include soil-crust  classification 
based  on the scheme of Casenave and Valentin 
(19859, and describe the spatial  variabiliry of 
surface  hydrodynamic  characteristics,  from 
which  infiltration  and hydraulic roughness 
parameters were derived. 

At 

the  local-enriry  scale,  topography  and 
landscape  units  have  been  mapped  more  finely 
based  on  field  surveys  at  1:5000  and  1:lO  000, 
respectively,  over  the  Sama  Dey  and  Wankama 
catchments. These maps are more detailed than exist 
at the  regional  scale. 
Finally, 

includes  high- 
resolution  aerial  imagery  (3 x  3  m, panchromatic) 
stored  as  imagery  (only  limited  rectification  has 
been  performed  to  date). T h e  data  shown  in  the 
bottom  three  processing  flow  lines  in  Figure  2  are 
point  data.  At  each  location  in  the  map,  for 

the  HSH-GIS 

86 

calibration 

example,  a  rain  gauge,  there  exists  a  series  of  cexr 
files  for  each  storm  event  giving  rainfall  amount 
recorded  at  break  points.  Point  data  include  the 
locations  of  the  rainfall,  hydrometric  (ephemeral 
pool  level),  and  piezomerric  measurement  sites 
(ground-water fluctuations). Besides  point data and 
corresponding  time  series  of  rainfall,  there  exist 
raster  maps  of  rainfall  produced  by  accumulating 
data  and  kriging  the  data  over  the  SSZ  regional 
scale. 

Hydrological data 
Rainfall  and  water-table  fluctuations  are  major 
hydrologic  variables  a n d   essential  inputs  and 
outputs  in  the  hydrologic  simulation.  Spatially 
distributed  estimates  of these variables  are required 
in order to account for their strong spatio-temporal 
variabiliry in the modelling of hydrological processes 
at the regional scale. All hydrology data in the HSH- 
GIS  are  available  over  the  four-year,  1991-94 
period.  Various  time scales were  used  for  these  cwo 
variables:  namely,  the event  and  ten-day  time steps 
for  rainfall  maps, and the three-monrh  and the one- 
year  time  steps  for  piezomerric  maps  (due  to  the 
longer temporal  response  of the water table). 

A  GI5 b r  hydrological modelling  in  the semi-arid. HAPEX-Sohe/ experimental a r m  of Niger, Africa 

Spatial interpolation  of rainfall was performed 
on site data from the EPSAT-Niger dense network 
(one gauge  per  100 km2, Lebel  et  al  1995), with 
interpolations  kriged  using  variograms  for  each 
event.  A  1  km resolution  was  chosen  for  rainfall 
maps,  which  is  the  finest  acceptable  resolution 
given  the  network density  and  the  known  rainfall 
variabiliry.  Uncertainty  on rainfall  fields is provided 
by  maps  of  estimation  error,  drawn  from  kriging 
interpolarion.  T h e  advantage  of  kriging  for  spatial 
interpolation  is  that  besides  the rainfall  field  itself, 
the  uncercainty  of  the  variate  is  included  in  the 
spatial  data set. To  obtain  the ten-day  rainfall  maps 
from  the event rainfall  maps, the kriged maps were 
accumulated  in  each  ten-day  period.  T h e   rainfall 
spatial  and temporal  distribution is  highly variable. 
T h e  general atmospheric circulation pattern  is from 
east  to  west  during the rainy  season.  Formation  of 
the Intertropical Convergence Zone draws moisture 
from  the  Gulf of  Guinea  into  the Sahelian  region 
beginning  in  June.  Squall  lines  form  producing 
bands of intense  precipitation  oriented  from  north 
to  south  travelling  across  the  Sahel  from  east  to 
west.  Locally  intense storm patterns produce strong 
gradients  in  precipitation.  This  spatial  variability 
makes  regional  estimates  of  the  hydrologic  water 
balance  possible  only  by  kriging 
the  point 
measurements  to  produce a statistical  model of  the 
precipitation over space. 

fluctuations 

Mapping  of  water-table 

is 
derived  from piezometric  monitoring of up  co  300 
wells  (from  1000  to  2000  yearly  measurements) 
covering  the  entire  square  degree.  T h e   spatial 
variabiliry  of  ground-water  recharge,  which  occurs 
mostly  as  local  infiltration  under  endoreic  pools, 
makes  it  necessary  to  map piezomerric variations  in 
regional-scale  water-table 
rwo  different  ways: 
elevation  is  obtained  by  supervised  linear  kriging 
with  a  5  k m   resolution  (the average  density of  the 
gauge  network),  and 
local-scale  water-table 
elevation  represented  by  point  data  reflecting 
fluctuations  in  monitoring  wells  at  the  selected 
pools.  Finally,  stage 
fluctuations  have  been 
monitored  in ten pools from  199 1 to  1995. The rise 
and  fall  of  the stage  in  response  to  rainfall  runoff, 
evaporation,  and  percolation 
is  a  primary 
hydrologic  integrator  used  in the simulation  of the 
catchmenr  scale  water  balance.  The stage  dara  are 
represented  as point dara taken  at five-minute time 
intervals. 

HSH-GIS Supported hydrological 
modelling 

rate 

rate) 

exceeds 

infiltration 

Dominant  hydrologic  processes 
Generally,  intense  and  short-duracion 
rainfall 
produces high runoff o n  poorly covered and crusted 
soils  (including  cultivated  fields),  and  relatively 
impervious plateaux  escarpments. T h e  transport of 
the  runoff  is  largely  by  Hortonian  overland  flow 
(rainfall 
to 
concentrated flow gullies which generally degrade at 
mid-slope  into  spreading  zones.  Runoff  that  does 
not  infiltrate  in  the drainage  network or  spreading 
zones  eventually  reaches  the  pools  where  ic  either 
to  ground  water  or  evaporates. 
percolates 
Desconnets  ( 1  994) estimated  that  temporary pools 
are the dominant contribution to the recharge  of the 
regional  unconfined  aquifer.  Water  that  infiltrates 
into the channels and catchment surfaces is believed 
ro  be largely lost  to subsequent evapotranspiration. 
Only a small fraction of total rainfall actually makes 
it  to  the  aquifer  via  the  pools,  depending  o n   the 
intensity  and distribution of hydrological  events  in 
space and time. 

that  control 

T h e  peculiar environment of the Sahel region, 
where  a  great  number  of  temporary  pools  and 
aquifer  recharge  are  the  only  integrators  of  highly 
intermittent  and  spatially  varying  hydrological 
processes,  makes development of a supporting GIs, 
and regional water balance modelling, a particularly 
difFiculr enterprise.  These balances, and  the aquifer 
recharge  in  particular,  are  the  composite  result  of 
interactions  among  many  spatially  and  temporally 
distributed  processes 
runoff-loss 
mechanisms,  and  therefore  depend strongly o n  the 
effects,  scale,  a n d   spatial  arrangement  of  the 
component  processes.  Further,  the  spatial  and 
temporal scale of rainfall  variability complicates the 
characterization  of  the water  balance  when  scaling 
from 
the  catchment  to  regional  scales.  T h e  
Wankama  and  Sama  Dey  catchments  are  small 
endoreic  catchments  for  which  detailed  data  have 
been  collected in order to gain an understanding of 
the  component  processes  that  control  the  water 
balance.  Simulation  at  the  catchment  and  the 
regional  scale  must  account  for  the  ropogr,aphic, 
pedologic, 
and 
geomorphic  features 
the  runoff 
production,  cransporc,  and  aquifer  recharge.  The 
integrated  GIS  hydrologic  model, 
internally 

anthropogenic, 

that  control 

climatic, 

87 

J  C Desconnets. B  E  Vieux. 6 Cappdaere arid f  Dekloux 

r.water.fea, and  the  data  sets  necessary  to  run  the 
model are described  below. 

The  r. water.fea hydrological model 

The HSH-GIS database  includes  data that  support 
hydrologic  simulations.  Few  hydrologic  models 
utilize  directly the  full  spatial  information content. 
T h e   model  xwutmfia  solves  the  kinematic  wave 
equation  using  finite  element  in  space  and  finite 
difference  in  time.  Each  grid  cell  is  connected 
together  by  a  finite  element which  is  then  used  in 
the routing of water from grid  cell to grid cell. The 
production  of  runoff  by  rainfall  rates  exceeding 
infiltration  rates  is  coupled  with  the  routing  of 
runoff  down  slope.  T h e  resulting  output  includes 
maps of distributed runoff depth and infiltration  at 
intervals  during  the  storm  period,  as  well  as 
hydrographs  at  stream  junctions.  These  maps 
include  Green  and  Ampt  infiltration  parameters, 
slope,  hydraulic  roughness,  and  rainfall  rates. 
Infiltration  maps  incorporate the  effects of various 
land  uses,  soil  crusting,  and  channel  losses.  The 
maps  of  distributed  flow  depth  and  cumulative 
infiltration  result  from  the  interaction  of  rainfall 
rates  with  soil  and  channel  infiltration  rates, 
drainage  networks  defined  by  topography,  and 
hydraulic  roughness  affected  by  land  use/cover 
patterns.  The system of equations derived from  the 
connectiviry of each grid cell in  the DEM results  in 
a  system  of ordinary differential  equations in  time 
which  are then  solved at a time step on the order of 
minutes  with  updated  values  of  rainfall  as 
determined  by  the  rain  gauge  break  points.  This 
numerical  technique  is  used  to  route  flow  (rainfall 
runoff)  from  each  cell  to  the  next.  Thus,  in 
hydrologic  terms,  the  transfer  of  runoff  and  the 
generation  of runoff interact in the model such that 
the two  functions affect  each  other. That is, runoff 
generated in one cell may infiltrate and be lost in the 
next.  The  numerical  solution  of  this  process  is 
described  in Vieux  (1988) and Vieux  et al  (1990); 
the integration of the numerical model within a GIS 
is  described  in  Vieux  (1991) and  View  and  Gaur 
(1994); and  the  influence  of  map  resolution  and 
error  propagation  are  described  in  Vieux  (1993), 
Vieux  and  Farajalla  (1994), Farajalla  and  Vieux 
( 1  995), and Vieux er a1 (1996). Internally integrated 
hydrologic  modelling  greatly 
the 
simulation  of  complex  spatially  and  temporally 
variable  processes  using  maps  of  parameters.  An 

facilitates 

88 

important component of such simulations is having 
adequately detailed information such as a DEM that 
is  sufficient  in  describing  the  land  surface  for  the 
particular scale and hydrologic  process. 

The  resolution  of  the  D E M   has  important 
consequences  on  derived  slope  maps,  resulting 
drainage  network,  and  hydrologic  simulations. 
topographic  maps  or  digital 
While  detailed 
elevation  models  exist  for  the  Sama  Dey  and 
Wankama catchments, the same resolution  data  do 
not exist for the SSZ or the entire square degree.  In 
order to extend  the hydrologic simulations to other 
catchments,  synthetic  generation  of  a.  DEM  with 
suitable topographic detail is  required. 

Synthetic topography for  spa ti a I  hydrologic 
modelling 
In  the  HAPEX-Sahel  area,  only  very  coarse 
topographic  information is available at the regional, 
SSZ  scale,  compared  to  that  which  is  needed  for 
physically based, distributed hydrological modelling 
purposes.  DEMs  covering  regional  to  continental 
scales  such  as those  constructed  by  the  USGS  at 
1 km  resolution,  or  by  Hutchinson  et  a1  (1996) at 
5 km  resolution  for  the African  continent,  are  too 
coarse  for  catchment-scaie  runoff  processes  in  this 
region.  One such  5  km grid  cell  encompasses  the 
entire  scale of  runoff generation  (on the  order of a 
few  hundred  metres)  in  the  SSZ,  rendering  the 
DEM  useless  for  anything  but  the  most  general 
representation  of  continental 
topographic  or 
climatic  studies.  O n   the  other  hand,  fine-scale 
DEMs  produced  from  interpolation  of  field 
surveyed measurements are impractical except at the 
local-entity  catchment  scale.  An 
intermediate 
solution  is  required  where  distributed  physically 
based  hydrologic  models  are  to  be  applied  over 
regional areas where only general  DEMs and coarse 
topographic  maps exist. 

Drawing from the fact :hat  the terrain  surface 
is  very  often  controlled  primarily  by  the  main 
morphological  features  of  the  landscape  for  which 
maps  are  generally  available,  a  method  is  being 
developed  to model relief, based o n  the most readily 
information:  sparse  elevation  data 
obtained 
(contours and scattered  points) and location of  the 
main morphological  elements. In the HAPEX-Sahel 
area,  these  morphological  features  include  koris 
(channels  in  valley  bottoms),  ravines,  spreading 
zones,  and  plateaux  edges.  These  morphological 

A  GI5 for hydrological modelling  in  the semi-arid, HAPEX-Sahel experimental are0 of Niger; Africa 

features  are  interpreted  from  the  panchromatic 
aerial  photography  as  well  as  from  base  maps 
produced  for  the  region.  This  DEM  synthesizing 
method  considers  the  topographic  surface  as a  2 D  
potential  field  which  is  submitted  to  fictitious, 
conservative  fluxes controlled by  the potential  field 
and  by 
is 
constrained  by  imposed  potential  values  at  known 
elevation points. This method amounts to solving a 
boundary-value  problem 
for  distributed  flux 
resistances over  the  various  landscape components; 
plateaux,  ravines, and koris. 

the  morphological 

features,  and 

Figure 3 shows the D E M  generated  using the 
flux  analogy  and  the  morphological  features;  the 
plateaux,  kori, and ravines.  Simulations  are used  to 
compare  the  DEM  generated  by  the  flux  analogy 
and  the  DEM  generated  from  surveyed  data. 
Validation  of the method  is  provided  by comparing 
the  simulated  hydrologic  responses  of  catchments 

Figure 3. Digital elevation model of Wankama 
catchment. 

local  entities),  obtained  with 

(the  GIS 
the 
synthesized  surface  model  v i s - h i s   the  DEMs 
derived  from  field  survey.  In  the  latter  care,  the 
DEM  is  produced  from  the  surveyed  poirit  data 
the  s.surftps  GRASS  command,  which 
using 
performs  spline  interpolation  through  measured 
elevation  points.  T h e   proposed  terrain  modelling 
method can also be used for general interpolation of 
a  set  of  site  elevation  data.  Maps  derived  from 
DEMs  (for  example,  slopes,  sub-basins,  stream 
network,  drainage  accumulation,  and  drainage 
direction), serve as principal  inputs to  hydrological 
models such as  T. watmja. 

Spatially distributed infiltration and runoff 
para meters 
Infiltration  in  rwaterja  is  modelled by  the  Green 
and Ampt  infiltration equation.  Maps  of saturated 
hydraulic  conductivity,  wetting front suction head, 
porosity,  and  initial  soil saturation  are  required.  In 
the  HAPEX-Sahel  area,  infiltration 
largely 
controlled by soil crusting, that is, a thin layer of soil 

is 

89 

J  C Desconnets, B  E  Vieux, 5  Cappelaere and F  Delcloux 

Classification' 

Description2 

Hydraulic conductivity3  (mm/hr) 

LIT/STx 

G/ERO 

DES/DEC 

Litter/nonsultivated  crust  structure consisting 
of  x  micrchorizons. 

Large boulders/crusted  eroded  surface 

Desiccated crust formed  on  sandy soils/ 
crust formed  on  clayey soils. 

15 

2 

20 

Notes: 
1  These  classifications ore used by Casenave and Valentin 

(1 989) to clossih/ soils in the  Sahel according to 
h  drologic chorocteristics. These classifications ore 
oibreviotions of  the  French terms used to  describe the  sail 
crust  type. DES represents une surfoce de fype dessication, 
which  is  nowcultivated with less than  20% vesiculos  (mocra 
droinoge structure), and less than 40% cover  by large 
pebbles or  rocks. The crust  is weakly developed and 
associated with a  sandy soil. The  estimated  range of  the 
infiltration capcity for  DES is  1 C-20  rnm/hr. 

Table  2. Crust classification,  description, and 
infilrrarion capacity. 

sealed  by  soil  particles  dislodged  by  raindrop 
impact.  T h e   crust  formation  occurs  both  o n  
cultivated, fallow fields, and o n  natural soil surfaces. 
Infiltration  parameters  are  mapped  based  o n   a 
reclassification  of  the  HSH-GIS  surface  feature 
maps  for  the  SSZ  area.  Casenave  and  Valentin 
(1989)  classified  nine  major  types  of soil  crusts  in 
the  Sahel.  Estimates  of  infiltration  characteristics 
account for crust type, presence of termites or worm 
vesiculas,  mulch  or gravel  armouring, erosion, and 
cultural  practices.  Several  rypically  associated  soil- 
crust classifications found in the Sahel together wirh 
the corresponding estimates of infiltration  rates  are 
reported  in Table 2. 

These values  were  used  in  a  look-up  table  to 
reclassify each type of crust inrerpreted  from SPOT 
imagery  into a hydraulic conductivity map. 

Figure  4  shows  the  map  derived  from 
supervised  classification  of  S P O T  
imagery. 
Reclassification  of the soil-crust classification  using 
Table  2  as  a  look-up  table  results  in  a  hydraulic 
conducriviry  map  affecting  the  overland  flow 
runoff.  T h e   behaviour  of  the  HAPEX-Sahel 
catchments  is  also  affected  by  the  high  infiltration 
rates  in  the  collecting  ravine  nenvork,  where  large 
amounrs  of  runoff  can  be  lost.  These  rates  are 
estimated  o n   the  order  of  45  cm/hr,  aher  Esteves 
(1995) and Peugeot  (1995). 

Hydrograph  shape  -  that  is,  riming  and 
magnitude  of peak  discharge  - is  largely controlled 

90 

2  The  infiltration copcity wos estimated by Cosenove and 
Valentin (1989) for  each soilcrust type. Their  infiltration 
model utilized a  porometer thot corresponds to the 
saturated hydrologic conductivity. 

3  The  soturated  hydraulic conductivity is achieved  rapidly 

because the  crust controls the  rote at which water  infiltrotes 

'  and soturotes quickly. 

hydraulic 
relative 

by  the  distribution  of  the  hydraulic  roughness 
parameter  governing  overland  and  channel-flow 
rates. A similar approach described for the hydraulic 
conductivity  was  used  for  the  overland  hydraulic 
roughness  parameter.  Hence, an  a priori  roughness 
map  is  produced  by  reclassification  of  the  surface 
feature  maps  (again,  S P O T  classification  was  used 
to  classify  land  surface/cover)  and  assessment  of 
relative 
roughness  magnitudes  by  qualified 
ORSTOM  investigators using a  Delphi  technique. 
That  is,  chose  hydrologists who  have  been  on-site 
were  asked  to  rank  each  surface classification  on a 
relative  scale.  Then  each  surface  was  given  an 
roughness 
estimated 
coefficient 
maintaining 
roughness.  Although 
infiltration  parameters  predominantly  act  o n  
hydrograph  volume  and  roughness  on  shape,  they 
are not independent. Calibration  must therefore  be 
performed  iteratively between  these  parameters,  to 
optimize the objective criteria (volume, timing, and 
peak).  Figure  5  shows  the  hydraulic  conductivity 
map derived for the Wankama catchment from the 
crust classification  map shown in Figure 4. Both the 
infiltration  a n d   hydraulic  roughness  parameter 
maps  are  adjusted  by  multiplying  the  parameter 
map  by  an  adjustment  factor.  If  a  ten  per  cent 
increase  in  hydraulic  conductiviry  is  desired,  then 
the map is  multiplied  by  1.1. This is  done in  order 
to  bring  the volume of  the  runoff event  to  within 
pre-defined  calibration  criteria.  Simulated  and 
observed hydrographs are matched by adjusting the 
maps  of  hydraulic  conductivity  and  hydraulic 
roughness.  T h e   adjusrment  preserves  the  spatial 

A GI5 fur  hydrological  modelling  in  the serni-arid, HPIPEXSahel  experimental ureu of Niger, Ahica 

Figure 4. Surface crust classification  in  the SSZ (based o n   11 September  1992 SPOT image). 

Figure  5 .  Hydraulic conducrivity map of Wankama catchment. 

91 

J  C Desconnets, B  E  Vieux, 5  Cappelaere and F  Delcloux 

pattern  while  changing the  magnitude  of the  map. 
Catchment-scale  Calibration  and  validation  is  used 
to improve the accuracy of these parameters over the 
region. 

Simulation of  the Wankama  catchment 
Calibration  and  validation  of  the  infiltration  and 
hydraulic roughness parameters rely on the measured 
pool data for selected storm events. Hydrographs are 
not  directly  measured  at  any  point  on  the  stream 
network  in  the  catchment  bur,  rather,  they  are 
extracted  from  pool-level  variations.  For 
the 
Wankama pool, estimated hydrographs showed large 
instabilities due to stage-level measurement precision 
and  round-off  errors.  A  smoothing  technique  has 
been  devised  based  on  propagation  of  raw  data 
uncertainties.  These have been  taken  as i 1 cm and 
* 0.5 rnin  for stages and times, respectively. Rainfall 
events have  been  extracted at  I-minute intervals for 
events  that  produced  significant  pool-level  rises. 
Eventually  three  rainy  seasons  will  be  used  in  the 
calibration and validation,  1992, 1993, and  1994. 

The distributed hydrologic model,  r warerja, 
was  used  to  simulate  a  selected  runoff  event,  on 
22  August  1993,  in  the  2.48  km2  Wankama 
catchment at 30 m  resolution.  The hyetograph  and 
simulated  hydrograph  for  this  event  are  shown  in 
Figure 6.  Besides  hydrographs, runoff simulated  by 
r.water.)a  is  computed  in  the  form  of  a  series  of 
maps 
distributed 
throughout  the  basin.  Both  runoff  depth  and 
cumulative  infiltration  maps  are  produced showing 
the  amount  and  location  of  infiltration as  affected 
by  runoff  and  run-on.  Because the production  and 

depicting 

runoff 

depth 

Figure 6. Hyetograph  and resulting simulated 

.-  2 0 

.Y 

0 

30 

60 
Time ( m i n )  

90 

120 

92 

Figure 7. Runoff depth map for the 22 August  1993 
storm  15 minutes from  the beginning of the storm 
where  nearly all of the basin  is contributing runoff. 

routing of runoff are linked  in  the solution process, 
these  maps  are  the  result  of  complex  interactions 
between  soils,  topography,  vegetation,  and  rainfall. 
Figure  7  shows  the  runoff  depth  map  for  the 
selected  storm  that  occurred  on  22  August  1993, 
after  15 minutes into the storm representing  nearly 
complete  coverage  of  the  basin  by  runoff.  Depths 

Figure 8. Runoff depth from 75 minutes after the 
beginning of the storm  representing a recession 
phase where  the basin is  only partially  covered with 
runoff  in  topographically  low areas. 

A GIS for  hydrological modelling  in  the semi-arid, HAPLY-Sahel experimental  urcu of Ni9t.r.  Africa 

the  soil  and 

vary  according  to  the  rainfall  rate in  relation to  the 
hydraulic  conductivity  of 
the 
topography which contributes  run-on  from upslope. 
Figure  8  shows  the  runoff  depth  after 75  minutes 
into the storm, representing a recession phase where 
the basin  is only partially covered with  runoff in  the 
topographically  low  areas.  Future  efforts  will  be 
directed  to  applying  zwaterfea  to  all  of  the 
catchments  in the SSZ. 

Conclusions 

The  first  phase  of  the  HSH-CIS  and  modelling 
project  has  produced 
a  hydrology-oriented 
geographic database  through  spatial  distribution  of 
the main  hydrological variables and parameters that 
are  necessary for  regional water  balance  modelling. 
Inclusion  of  two  information  levels  - namely, 
local  (elemental endoreic systems) and regional (the 
1500 km’  SSZ) entities - has made  it possible, as a 
first  step,  to  test  and  validate  a  physically  based, 
distribured  hydrological  model,  1: watmfia,  on  the 
Wankama  catchment  where  spatial  information  is 
the densest. 

Development  of 

the  HSH-GIS  revealed 
special issues  related to  resolution and scale peculiar 
to  distributed  hydrologic  simulations  at 
the 
catchmenr  and  regional  scales.  These  include  the 
synthetic generation  of  a  DEM  suitable  to  rainfall- 
runoff  simulation;  disparity  of  scale and  resolution 
between  local  and  regional  entities; and  improving 
the  accuracy  of  rhe  HSH-GIS  spatial  database 
through  calibration  and  validation  of  a  hydrologic 
model. 

References 

Casenave A and Valentin C 1989 Les Etats de surface 
Influence  sur 
zone  Sahelienne; 
de 
la 
the 
l’infiltration 
in 
Sahelian  Zone;  Influence  on  Infiltration], 
ORSTOM  (Institut  Franqais  de  Recherche 
Scientifique  pour  le  DCveloppement  en 
CoopCration), Paris 

[Surface  conditions 

Desconnets  J  C  1994  ‘Typohgie  et  caracthisation 
lydrologique des systimes endorPiques en milieu 
sahe‘lien 
(degri  carri  de  Niamey-Niger) 
[Classifiration and characterivltion of endoreic 
hydrologic y t e m s  in the Sahel (Niamry-Niger 
square  degree)].  Unpublished  PhD  thesis  of 

the UniversitC des Sciences et Techniques du 
Languedoc, France 

Desconnets J  C, Taupin J  D,  Lebel T and Leduc C 
1996  Hydrology  of  Hapex-Sahel  central 
super  site:  surface  drainage  and  aquifer 
recharge through  the pool systems. fournal of 
Hydrobg. In  press 

D’herbks J M, Courant D, Timouk F and Valentin C 
1992 Spatio-carte drs itaa dr suface du degri 
carri  de  Niamey  au  1/200000, UnitP  de 
traitement d’images MTT de l’antenne de tplp 
drtertion.  ORSTOM  au  centre  AGRYMET 
(Centre Regional  de  Formation  et  d’Appli- 
cations  en  Agromettorologie  et  Hydrologie 
0ptrationnelle)-Cliss,  ORSTOM,  Numan, 
Niger 

Esteves  M  1995 Rapport dr campagne bydrologique, 
saison  1994  [Report  of field  colkcrion  of 
bydrohgic  data,  I994  season].  ORSTOM, 
Niamey, Niger 

Farajalla  N  S  and  Vieux  B  E  1995  Capturing  the 
essential  spatial  variability  in  distributed 
hydrologic modeling: infiltration parameters. 
Hydrohgical Processes 8 :  55-68 

Goutorbe  J  P,  Lebel  T,  Tinga  A,  Bessemoulin  P, 
Brouwer  J,  Dolman  A  J,  Engman  E  T, 
Gash J  H  C ,  Hoepfher  M, Kabat  P,  Kerr Y 
H ,  Monteny B, Prince S, Said F,  Sellers P and 
Wallace J  S  1994 Hapex-Sahel:  a large scale 
study of land-atmosphere interactions in  the 
semi-arid  tropics.  Annab  Geophysic~ze 12: 
53-64 

GIs 

Hutchinson  M  F,  Nix  H  A,  McMahon  J  P  and 
Ord  K  D  1996  The  development  of  a 
topographic and climate database for . a i c a .  
Proceedings  of 
the  Third  International 
Integrating 
Confrence 
and 
Environmental  Modeling,  Santa  Fe,  New 
Mexico,  21-25  Januav  1996. University  of 
California,  National  Center  for  Geographic 
Information  and Analysis, Santa Barbara 
T,  Sauvageot  H ,   Hoepffner  M,  Desbois  M, 
Guillot  B  and  Hubert  P  1992  Rainfall 
estimation  in  the  Sahel:  The  EPSAT-Niger 
experiment.  Hydrologiral Sciences Journal 37: 
201-15 

Lebel 

Lebel T, Taupin J  D and GrQrd  M  1995 Hydrologie 
et  mttiorologie  de  meso-echelle  dans 
HAPEX-Sahel:  Dispositif  de  mesures  au  sol 
[Hydrology  and 
et  premiers 

risultats 

93 

Vieux B E, Bralts V F, Segerlind L J and Wallace R B 
1990  Finite  element  watershed  modeling: 
one-dimensional elements. ASCE, Journal of 
Water  Resources  Ma nagemen t  Planning 
116: 803-19 

View  B  E,  Farajalla  N  S  and  Gaur  N  1996 
Integrated  GIS  and  distributed  stormwater 
modeling.  In  Goodchild M  F,  Sreyaerr L T, 
Parks  B  0, Johnston  C ,   Maidment  D  R, 
Crane M  and Glendinning S  (eds) GIs and 
Environmental  Modeling:  Progress  and 
Research  issues.  Fort  Collins,  GIS  World, 
Inc.:  199-2  14 

J C Desconnets,  B  E Vieux, B  Cappelaere and f Delclaux 

the  meso-scale 

the 
meteorology  at 
in 
HAPEX-Sahel:  soil  measurements, 
first 
results.  In  Lebel T (ed) Rainfall Monitoring 
The  EPSATNiger  Set-up  and  its  Use f o r  
Hapex-Sahel. ORSTOM, Paris: 43-82 
Leduc  C ,  Bromley J  and  Schroeter  P  1996 Water 
table  fluctuation  and  recharge  in  semi-arid 
climate:  some  results  of  the  Hapex-Sahel 
hydrodynamic  survey  (Niger).  Journal  of 
Hydroloa.  In press 
Peugeot  C  1995  Illfluenre  de 

l’encrottement 
superjciel  dir  sol  sur  le  fonctionnement 
hydrologique  dim  versant  sahelien  (Niger). 
Exphimentations  in  situ  et  modklisation 
[Influence of  sirperfirial  soil crusting  on  the 
hydrological behnuiour of the sahelian hillslope 
(Niger)  - In  situ  experimentations  and 
modelling/.  Unpublished  P h D  thesis  of  the 
UniversirC  de  Joseph  Fourier,  Grenoble  I, 
France 

Peugeot  C ,   Esteves  Pvl,  Galle  S,  Rajot  J  L  and 
Vandervaere  J  P  1996  Runoff  generation 
processes:  results  and  analysis  of  field  data 
collected at the East Central SuperSite of the 
Hapex-Sahel 
experiment. 
of 
HydroloD. In press 

Journal 

Vieux B E  1988 Finite Element Analysis of Hydrologic 
Response Areas  Using Geographic Information 
Systems.  Unpublished 
thesis, 
Department  of  Agricultural  Engineering, 
Michigan  State Universicy 

PhD 

Vieux  B  E  1991  Geographic Information Systems 
source  water  quality 

and  non-point 
modeling.  Hydrological Processes  5:  1 10-23 

Vieux B  E 1993 DEM Aggregation and aggregation 
effects on  surface  runoff  modeling.  ASCE, 
Journal  of  Computing  in  Civil  Engineering 
7: 3 10-38 

Vieux  B  E  and  Farajalla  N  S  1994 Capturing  the 
essential  spatial  variability  in  distributed 
hydrologic  modeling:  hydraulic  roughness. 
Hydrological Processes 8: 22 1-36 

Vieux  B  ‘E  and  Gaur  N  1994  Finite  element 
modeling  of  storm  water  runoff  using 
in  Civil 
GRASS  G I s .   Microcomputers 
Engineering  9: 263-70 

94 

