The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 2
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 131–134

ICA Special Issue 2003

131

S E C T I O N 1

Historical Mapping is Still Under-valued and Under-used

Christopher Roper

Landmark Information Group, 7 Abbey Court, Eagle Way, Sowton, Exeter EX2 7HY, UK

Thanks
to Ordnance Survey’s unbroken commitment
over the past 150 years to surveying mainland Britain at
detailed scales, ranging from 1:10 000 up to 1:500, we
have an extraordinary, as yet hardly tapped, resource for
exploring changing patterns of land use, locally, regionally
and nationally. No other country in the world has anything
remotely equivalent and, as the era of the large-scale paper
map is now over, the record enshrined in the OS map
archive will remain unique, an extraordinary testimony both
to the enduring strength of the institution and to the skill
of its surveyors in the pre-GPS age of triangulation and
plane tables, deserving the same kind of celebration as
accorded to the great Victorian railway and canal engineers.
Indeed, although the origins of OS were military, driven
by the need to suppress the rebellious Scots and to repel
threatened invasion from France, the need for larger scale
mapping, at six inches, 25 inches or even 10 feet to the
mile arose from Victorian investments in the infrastructure
of rapidly growing industrial cities, like Birmingham, Leeds
and Manchester, all of which needed sewers, railways,
tramways and canals. The large-scale OS maps, which (cid:142)rst
appeared in the middle of the century, at around the
time of the (cid:142)rst Great Exhibition, not only made these
developments possible, they left a permanent record of
the transformation of the British Landscape as a result of the
industrial revolution.

Surveyors, engineers and environmental consultants may
raise their eyebrows at the phrase, ‘hardly tapped’. They
have known for many years that OS’s large-scale maps are
an indispensable source of information for any professional
undertaking a detailed site survey. Many of the larger (cid:142)rms
held large collections of such maps, or sent juniors to
consult national collections in one of the deposit libraries
in London, Cambridge, Oxford, Edinburgh or Aberystwyth.
However, they were not widely and readily accessible to
children at school, university students or local history
societies. Copies could be obtained from OS, but they
were relatively expensive and not easily related to present
day mapping.

New life was breathed into the collection in 1995, when
Landmark Information Group launched a pioneering venture
to scan maps held in OS’s map reference library in order
to automate the production of the site-centred environ-
mental reports it produced. The then Director General of
OS, David Rhind, suggested joining forces with Landmark
to speed up the task and to share costs. The work went
on for over four years and now the archive is comprised of

DOI: 10.1179/000870403235001502

more than 700 000 map images, including Victorian Town
Plans (17 000 sheets at 1:500 to 1:1056, Figures 1 and 2);
pre-1945 County Series maps (64 000 sheets at 1:10 560
and 288 000 at 1:2500); post-Second World War National
Grid maps (28 000 sheets at 1:10 560/1:10 000; 199 000
at 1:2500; and 108 000 at 1:1250). When the work began,
it was a challenge to manage a database of this size as each
(cid:142)le occupied 2mb of disk space and databases of over
100gb presented major technical challenges.

These numbers don’t sound alarming today, but at the
time we were pushing the limits of technology. Furthermore,
Landmark was after something much more sophisticated
than a simple collection of images. We wanted to create
seamless layers of historical mapping that could be related
automatically to current OS large-scale digital mapping.
The problem here was that up to 1938, when OS intro-
duced the National Grid, each county had been surveyed
separately, with its own point of origin. Anyone familiar
with OS history will know these pre-Second World War
maps as the County Series. A further complexity arose
from the fact that the Cassini projection was replaced by
Transverse Mercator at the same time as the introduction
of the National Grid. Other problems arose from changes
in country boundaries over the years and the coverage of
each map sheet. OS was exclusively concerned with current
topography, and gave no thought to the use that might be
made of their maps by researchers in future years. In crack-
ing these technical problems Landmark was given expert
assistance by students of OS history, members of the
Charles Close Society, named after a redoubtable Brigadier,
who ran OS with a rod of iron in the early twentieth
century.

Dr Richard Oliver at Exeter University, for example,
who produced indispensable indexes of the County Series
maps, indispensable because OS hadn’t always produced
all the map sheets that appeared on their index maps, so
an apparent gap in the OS collection did not necessarily
mean a real gap. There were gaps, amounting to around
10% of the (cid:142)rst edition and scanning maps borrowed from
one of the deposit libraries (cid:142)lled these. Another major
obstacle to Landmark’s plans emerged when we discovered
OS had lost or destroyed the surveyor’s records that gave
accurate points of origin for all the County Series maps.
Help came from Brian Adams, a retired hydrographer,
who had devoted years of his retirement to recovering
these data from surveyors’ notebooks in the Public Records
Of(cid:142)ce.

132

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. An example of a Victorian Town Plan

By the middle of 1998, Landmark had a sophisticated
database that had cost some millions of pounds to build,
exhausting the patience of the venture capitalists, who
had funded Landmark’s early years, but enabling us to
automate the production of our reports. Exactly how we
use the data lies outside the scope of this article. The point
to make is that until someone conceived of a commercial
use for the mapping that justi(cid:142)ed the cost of scanning,
processing and database building, the maps remained in
fossilized form in libraries.

It is doubtful that any grant-giving body would have
stumped up the money required to assemble such a database
and, even if they had, it would probably have remained for
several more years as no more than a collection of images.
OS took a tremendous risk when they agreed to a partner-
ship with a small start-up company like Landmark, and we
have tried to remain true to that spirit of partnership and
not to forget the wider public interest in the data. This is
demonstrated on a website, www.old-maps.co.uk (Figure 3)
which owes a great deal to the enthusiasm and skill of a
number of Landmark employees. In particular, Kenny Adam,
made the old-maps website his particular crusade, con-
stantly improving it and tracking its widening constituency
of users.

Any one reading this article who is not aware of
www.old-maps.co.uk should stop reading now, log onto
the Internet, and have a look. It costs nothing to look at a

(cid:142)rst edition OS map of any town or village on the British
mainland. You can also check what other OS maps cover
the same area. This site attracts massive interest from around
the world and the response from users, particularly those
researching family histories, was immediate and enthusiastic:

‘Brilliant! This is one of the best sites I’ve been to
in a long time. It’s really interesting to see how my
area looked a hundred years ago. An excellent idea!’

‘What a superb site. The things I have found out
on various sites in Glasgow in minutes that I have
looked for months/years is incredible. Thank you.’

‘Brilliant, just the map I was looking at in Surrey
History Centre in Woking and wanted to show
someone a signi(cid:142)cant change in a place name.’

‘Your site is really terri(cid:142)c. I am not aware of anything
even remotely like it here in the US. Shame. Good
luck.’

‘Your web site could not be better, ideal for searches
particularly on the old maps. I am chasing a Roman
road.’

Some 10 000 unique users continue to log onto the site
every week of the year, and have done since it (cid:142)rst went

Section 1: Historical Mapping

133

Figure 2. Victorian Town Plan

Figure 3. www.old-maps.co.uk

134

The Cartographic Journal

live two and a half years ago and they spend time there,
typically making 10–15 page impressions. Less than 50%
of the site’s visitors in September 2002 came from the
United Kingdom. Others came from all around the globe.
The number of visitors to the site each month probably
exceeds the number of people consulting the paper maps
in all the deposit libraries in a year, and certainly includes
thousands of people who would otherwise be unable
to consult the maps. Dr Peter Raby of Homerton College,
the biographer of Alfred Russel Wallace,
Cambridge,
co-author of the Origin of Species with Charles Darwin,
said, ‘Wallace was a particularly restless subject for a bio-
grapher. He moved house frequently, bought building
land, designed his own houses or converted existing
ones. The map sequences were invaluable in tracking him
through the building boom of
late Victorian England,
establishing precise locations and offering a clear picture of
the surroundings of his homes in Grays, Godalming and
Bournemouth.’

Since the historical map data became available on some
450 CD-ROMS, a number of institutions have acquired
their own sets of data. These include local authorities look-
ing for contaminated land, HM Land Registry (England
and Wales) and Register of Scotland. HMLR justi(cid:142)ed the
purchase initially simply on the grounds of saved shelf
space, but somewhat to the surprise of the senior managers
who authorised the purchase, usage far exceeds the use
of the old collection of paper maps. The fact that the
mapping is available in seamless layers from the computer
desktop means it is in daily use for checking boundary
changes, assisting the registration process and in resolving
disputes. Simon Rafferty of Staffordshire Moorlands District
Council said, ‘Whilst trying to assess the authority’s liability
during our housing transfer, the Landmark historic maps
have been a valuable source of information.’

It isn’t just that access to the data is simpler, and does
not involve pulling sheets from a map chest, only to
discover the area that interests you straddles the corners of
four adjacent sheets, you can use the data in ways that the
Victorian mapmakers could never have imagined in their
wildest dreams. Kent County Council has always been a
pioneer in the use of Geographical Information Systems,
and John Williams, an archaeologist from Kent’s Planning
Department has put Historic Map data to work in three
different areas: archaeology, historic buildings and historic
landscapes. His department combined aerial photography,
historical map layers and modern mapping, together with
derived datasets extracted in different ways from the source
material, to reveal a wealth of new information on changing
patterns of settlement and land use in Kent. The ideas
developed in Kent, in association with specialized consultants,

could be extended across the country by an ambitious
university department, or even by English Heritage or the
National Monuments Records Centre in Swindon.

The Future Coast Project, commissioned by DEFRA, is
equally fascinating and unexpected to anyone accustomed
to think of historical maps as simply a collection of discrete
sheets. Shoreline Management Plans (SMP) were developed
in the 1990s to understand the current pressures on the
British coastline from changing sea levels and weather
patterns. Although a great deal of local data was collected,
it was hard to see how it (cid:142)tted into a longer historical
cycle, and therefore how the coastline might evolve over a
longer time frame (50–100 years).

Rollo Home and his colleagues at Sir William Halcrow
& Partners used coastline data extracted from the different
epochs of OS mapping (pre-1900, 1920+, 1940+, 1960+
and 1980+) to show how the coastline had evolved over
the past 100+ years. Using sophisticated measurement and
modeling techniques, building in data collected for the
SMPs and data from British Geological Survey, they are on
their way to building a tool for coastal local authorities
that could have real predictive value for building coastal
defences for the future.

In another case, a Scottish researcher, Gordon Barclay
from the University of Stirling, Dept of Environmental
Science, combined evidence from aerial photography and
Historical Mapping, to show that crop marks, apparently
showing the sites of Neolithic huts and (cid:142)eld, were in fact
sites where trees and hedges had been grubbed out in
the late nineteenth century. If the archaeologists had been
able to overlay the two data sets before setting out to dig
trenches across the site at Duncrub in Perth and Kinross,
Scotland, saving money for digs that would have proved
more fruitful. In another part of Scotland, an MSc student
used historical mapping to show the erosion of important
wildlife habitats through the expansion of neighbour-
ing villages, and the Severn Wildfowl Trust is looking at
the possibility of using the maps to analyse the loss of
wetlands over the past 100 years.

The point of providing these examples is not simply to
demonstrate the intrinsic interest of the data, but also to
suggest that there are many projects that no one has yet
considered, in terms of data that could be extracted from
the raw mapping. The time has clearly come to go beyond
the simple amassing of data and to see what could be
done with it, outside the specialisms of engineering and
environmental health. For example, the mounting of the
1901 Census on the Internet by the Public Records Of(cid:142)ce
created enormous
interest. How much more interest
might there be, if the data could be linked on a map to
individual buildings?

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

