GeoInformatica
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10707-018-00337-8

Using agent-based modelling to simulate social-ecological
systems across scales

Melvin Lippe 1 & Mike Bithell 2 & Nick Gotts 3 & Davide Natalini 4 &
Peter Barbrook-Johnson 5 & Carlo Giupponi 6 & Mareen Hallier 7 & Gert Jan Hofstede 8 &
Christophe Le Page 9 & Robin B. Matthews 10 & Maja Schlüter 11 & Peter Smith 12 &
Andrea Teglio 6 & Kevin Thellmann 13

Received: 16 May 2018 / Revised: 6 November 2018
Accepted: 30 November 2018

# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
Agent-based modelling (ABM) simulates Social-Ecological-Systems (SESs) based on the
decision-making and actions of individual actors or actor groups, their interactions with each
other, and with ecosystems. Many ABM studies have focused at the scale of villages, rural
landscapes, towns or cities. When considering a geographical, spatially-explicit domain,
current ABM architecture is generally not easily translatable to a regional or global context,
nor does it acknowledge SESs interactions across scales sufficiently; the model extent is
usually determined by pragmatic considerations, which may well cut across dynamical
boundaries. With a few exceptions, the internal structure of governments is not included when
representing them as agents. This is partly due to the lack of theory about how to represent
such as actors, and because they are not static over the time-scales typical for social changes to
have significant effects. Moreover, the relevant scale of analysis is often not known a priori,
being dynamically determined, and may itself vary with time and circumstances. There is a
need for ABM to cross the gap between micro-scale actors and larger-scale environmental,
infrastructural and political systems in a way that allows realistic spatial and temporal
phenomena to emerge; this is vital for models to be useful for policy analysis in an era when
global crises can be triggered by small numbers of micro-level actors. We aim with this
thought-piece to suggest conceptual avenues for implementing ABM to simulate SESs across
scales, and for using big data from social surveys, remote sensing or other sources for this
purpose.

Keywords Agent-based modelling . Social-ecological systems . Cross-scale . ABM . SESs

* Melvin Lippe

melvin.lippe@thuenen.de

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

GeoInformatica

1 Introduction

The social-ecological systems (SESs) concept describes the tight coupling of human and
environmental systems that mutually influence each other [1–4]. An SES in this view includes
the ecological components of an interdependent group of organisms or biological entities,
within a bio-geophysical environment [5, 6]; and a social component including the actors
whose activities directly influence ecosystems and those that govern human-nature interactions
which can be the same or different actors. Resulting interactions are mediated by the broader
social, economic, and political settings and the larger ecosystems within which the SES is
embedded [7]. Interactions are continuously changing due to feedbacks and internal or external
factors, taking place across different temporal and spatial scales, making SESs highly dynamic
systems [8–10].

Agent-based modelling (ABM) has become a well-established computational approach for
studying SESs [11–14]. Many ABM examples have focused on simulating case studies at the
level of villages, rural landscapes, towns or cities [e.g. 12, 15–17]. However, ABM architec-
ture that focussed on case studies is not easily translatable to a regional or global context, nor
does it acknowledge SESs’ interactions across temporal and spatial scales sufficiently [4, 18,
19]. Even within a single domain, such as ecosystem dynamics or economics, models must
deal with cross-scale interactions; for example, models of infectious disease transmission may
need to integrate processes at cellular, host and population level [20]. In economics, conven-
tional models, which ignore agent heterogeneity and cross-scale interactions, cannot capture
such phenomena as the default of a single firm triggering a macroeconomic bankruptcy
avalanche [21, 22]. Moreover, international trade may show both fast and slow dynamics
through coupling between political agreements, international markets, supranational bodies
such as the World Trade Organisation, and biophysical processes that affect crop growth or the
availability of fuel. With the growing active use of ABM in policy, national disaster planning
and even global poverty analyses by the World Bank [23], it is timely to consider how scale
issues might affect the usefulness and validity of model results. The main challenge for
modelling SESs across scales is that the most relevant scales may themselves vary temporally
depending on the system’s dynamics. Near a tipping point or phase change, small fluctuations
in some parts of the system may propagate to affect the whole [e.g. 24], whereas at other times,
change might remain spatially or temporally localised - a point that is generally true for many
kinds of dynamical systems.

In this thought-piece we discuss conceptual avenues for using ABM to simulate SESs
across scales. The growing availability of Big Data such as social panel surveys, earth
observation systems, and other available sources may help, but their partiality and bias could
pose difficulties. Understanding the roles of multiple stakeholders such as political actors,
resource users, citizens or agencies who may have direct or indirect influences and interest in
decision making is integral for understanding SESs across scale. The core proposition is that in
a world that is increasingly connected and multi-scale, solutions that support policy design and
decision making must be as well. We aim to contribute to the ongoing debate on appropriate
approaches for ABM to upscale dynamics emerging from lower level interactions to SESs
representing larger geographical areas and the relevant high-level social structures and insti-
tutions [4, 16, 19, 25, 26].

In the remainder of this paper, section 2 sets the scene and introduces approaches for
representing human behaviour across scales with a particular focus on economics, behaviour,
and governance systems. Section 3 discusses fundamental aspects of using ABM to simulate

GeoInformatica

SESs across scales, e.g. scaling mechanisms, parameterisation and uncertainty assessment.
Section 4 then examines in more detail some specific conceptual and methodological direc-
tions, and section 5 concludes the paper with an outlook on key next development steps.

2 Theoretical considerations and conceptual challenges

Scale is a complex issue: spatial scale in particular has been the subject of considerable
technical development in its analysis [27, 28] and of theoretical debate, with some authors
even suggesting banishing the term [29], although in practice their main point is that the
dynamics of scale are complex. In particular, it is important to distinguish the scale of analysis
from that of processes [30], the danger being that pre-selection of a given spatial unit might
prove to be inappropriate for the underlying dynamical system.

Gibson et al. [31] and Cash et al. [32] have surveyed the cross-scale issue in the light of
global environmental change and governance structures and define scale as “the spatial,
temporal, quantitative, or analytical dimensions to measure and study any phenomenon”,
and levels as “the units of analysis that are located at different positions on a scale” [32].
Assuming that scale implies some sort of hierarchy of organisation, e.g. forms of jurisdiction
from village to country, cross-scale then refers to interactions between different levels in the
hierarchy, whereas referring to cross-size could include horizontal interactions between two
entities of different sizes. Interactions may occur within or across scales, leading to substantial
complexity in dynamics, and change in strength and direction over time. For example,
decentralization reforms can produce periods of strong interaction among national institutions
and local governments during struggles involving power, responsibilities, and accountability
but then settle into a much more modest and steady degree of interaction [33, 34].
Understanding the dynamics of SESs across scales is crucial to support policy design and
the sustainable management of natural resources, because it reveals insights into processes in
both socio-economic and environmental subsystems and the feedbacks between them [8, 16].
SESs modellers, however, need to distinguish between, and deal simultaneously with
spatial, temporal and social scale. For example, modelling a small isolated region for many
years without considering possible cross-scale interactions is likely to lead to substantial error
in future projections; while there may be fast financial dynamics, for other processes (e.g.
access to resources of population migration) situations at greater spatial distance will typically
tend to increase in importance as the simulation time is increased; social scale has both spatial
and temporal aspects, but cannot be reduced to either. People in the modern world typically
belong to many social formations, from households and friendship networks to cultures,
polities and worldwide economic systems; and there is no simple relation between the number
of members and their geographical spread or temporal endurance. Spatial, temporal and spatio-
temporal entities all form tangled hierarchies [35], in which one entity may be a part of several
larger entities which overlap each other, particularly when we consider multiple domains: for
example, the boundaries of hydrologically, ecologically and politically defined regions rarely
coincide. These complexities pose difficulties for the SESs modeller.

2.1 Agent attributes and social interactions

In the social world, organizational scales range from the single individual to all humans, and
from small cooperative groups to large multinational organisations. Various groups of people

GeoInformatica

might be acting in the same space and be independent, in competition, or interdependent at
different scales. These relationships between or within groups can be crucial for the dynamics
of SESs across scale.

Drawing inferences about the behaviour of individuals based on grouped or area-level data
needs to be avoided. On the other hand, individual-level data may not always be available due
to commercial or privacy reasons or their partiality across temporal and spatial scales, in which
case theory-based assumptions, e.g. about distributions of characteristics among agents of a
group, can be used. However, cultural variations that shape norms and values, and which one
acquires in youth may never directly reach consciousness [36], so that the drivers of behaviour
may not be easy to understand. How much these dynamics need to be incorporated in a given
model will depend on model purpose, but the complexities of variation across scale need to be
considered. For example, while social networks are commonplace in many agent models,
people will typically belong to multiple networks with different physical and social reach. The
interaction between these networks is likely to be of as much importance for some phenomena
as the networks on their own (e.g. see also Section 2.3 below).

The anthropocentric nature of the ecosystem service concept has further re-focused atten-
tion in ecosystem analysis from the ecology of nature to the important influence of people on
the environment and the role of ecosystems in supporting human wellbeing [12, 37].
Frameworks for agent-based SESs models increasingly seek to address the characteristics of
people and their dynamic interactions with the environment, e.g. MoHuB (Modelling Human
Behavior) [38]. A recent review by Groeneveld et al. [16] showed that the majority of human-
decision making models focused on land use change were not explicitly based on theory. But
in order to make use of the full potential of ABMs across scales in understanding global
change, model purpose must drive design choices, specifically the modelling of human
decision making and social interaction. Where rich understanding is the purpose, full use
needs to be made of theories from sociology and cultural psychology [39] and any discipline
offering a plausible or structurally valid description of the issue under study. It is particularly
relevant to have a realistic representation of human decision making when one is interested in
future scenarios as this can significantly affect model outcomes.

2.2 Economic structure and interactions

Many authors [e.g. 4, 40, 41] recognize that classical multivariate statistics and general
equilibrium approaches cannot capture the dynamics of SESs. Mainstream macroeconomic
theory, however, remains rooted in general equilibrium micro-foundations, with utility max-
imizing households and profit maximizing companies. Equilibrium is reached by external
imposition of conditions requiring fulfilled expectations and market clearing [42]. The repre-
sentative agent framework is used to provide micro-foundation for aggregate behavior, in a
setting in which equilibria are unique and stable. Several studies, starting from Sonnenschein
[43] and Debreu [44] show that such conditions do not exist, so the representative agent is
actually not representing anyone [45]. In the social simulation literature, similar critiques are
already accepted [46].

Agent-based computational economics [47, 48] aims to go beyond the behavioural as-
sumptions of neoclassical economics and consider both agent-agent and agent-environment
interactions. Equilibrium conditions, homogeneity, or other external coordination devices,
which have no real-world referents need not be imposed [49]. Interactions are not centralized
but related to some concept of proximity, which can be geographical but also behavioral or

GeoInformatica

cultural among other possibilities. Interaction among agents, with balance sheet constraints at
the individual level, allows for a rich out-of-equilibrium dynamics. Endogenously-generated
dynamics can then produce growth and business cycles [50].

ABMs are able to replicate empirical features at many levels. One can check features at the
aggregate level (i.e. GDP, inflation, systemic risk), or at the micro level studying the evolution
of single agents, or in distributions (e.g. firm sizes), comparing them with corresponding
distributions from real economies [51]. In the field of climate change, Farmer et al. [52] declare
the need for a third wave in the economics of integrated assessment modelling, examine the
potential of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models (DSGE) versus ABM, and point
out the huge potential of ABM in particular for estimating damage functions and scenario
analysis. Indeed agent-based analyses suggest climate damage may be greater than standard
integrated assessment models [53]. However, the complexities of generating well validated
ABMs could make policy makers at central banks rather sceptical about fitting ABM macro
models to data, instead of using standard reduced-form models. Thus, policy makers might
turn to ABMs primarily when trying to study economic propagation mechanisms in a
controlled experimental setting. In particular, simulating the economy in extreme situations,
such as financial crashes, where standard models have failed [49], or in assessing the effects of
poverty, where measures such as GDP may miss the plight of the poor [23].

2.3 Governments and governance systems

With a few exceptions [e.g. 54, 55], governments are simulated by agent-based models as
single agents without the consideration of internal structure. The representation of institutional
and governance structures of SESs across organizational entities however is crucial in under-
standing the ways in which organizations and policy provide feedbacks to individual agent
behaviour. Agent-based interactions are affected by an interplay between stakeholders and
institutions at multiple scales and across scales [32]. Adequately representing human decision-
making across scales will be an important prerequisite for future ABM in order to serve as
tools for policy making and avoid unintended consequences [56, 57]. Attempts at modelling
human decision making [38] have tended to concentrate on the behaviour of individuals’ in
households, businesses or agricultural systems. Other approaches see also [4, 9, 12–14] use
‘what-if’ scenarios to evaluate the potential impact of future policy options on SESs vis-a-vis
in using ABM to assess policies in retro perspective with the drawback of not allowing for
feedbacks between modelling outcomes and policies. In other cases, the prospective impact of
a certain policy is assessed by comparing simulation results of selected output parameters or
the behaviour of one or several subsystems [11, 22, 51]. However, some examples of models
that simulate behaviours of governments and international organisations are available [58–63],
and may take into account various hierarchies (typically citizens/ businesses at one level and
governments above, or political parties and the media [64]).

Local decision-making processes can have spillover effects and can influence dynamics at
different scales. Conversely, different types of actors at regional, national or international scale
influence individual livelihoods or localized ecosystems through institutions or market dy-
namics. Brondizio et al. [65] argued that governance of SESs requires social institutions that
link multiple scales in order to be effective [see also: 66, 67]. Usually government action
emerges from a complex set of interactions between state and non-state actors with differing
roles (e.g. politicians versus civil servants) divided and conflicting interests and loyalties (e.g.
conformity to party line versus personal advancement), formal and informal processes

GeoInformatica

(committee structures versus informal alliances, lobbying), legal and regulatory frameworks,
fiscal and financial pressures and influences from media and the public. These interact with
wider actors that constitute the governance system (NGOs, public service organisa-
tions, municipalities, security forces,
local communities etc.) in sets of overlapping
self-organising structures.

Current models thus fail to exploit the full potential of ABMs to represent governance,
where collective behaviours and informal
institutions are generated endogenously
through the interaction of individual agents within institutional and biophysical envi-
ronments. This results partly from a focus on a single scale (often the local village,
town or region) but also from the high complexity involved in the interactions
between the many actors involved and the nature of decisions and processes that
define and characterise them. It is in fact often difficult to identify who is actually
involved in the decision-making process and therefore whose behaviours should be
captured. This complexity can make it difficult to decide for a given model purpose
which actors and dynamics need to be modelled and which do not. Such decisions should
therefore always be guided by the research question and model purpose which drives the choice
what is included in a model.

2.4 Ecosystem structure and processes

Biophysical structures and processes have previously been integrated in ABM using a variety
of approaches, depending on the research question, model purpose, data availability and the
trade-off between model complexity and its expected payoff. In ecology, the IBM acronym
(Individual Based Model) is preferred to ABM [68]. A range of cases is reviewed by Luus
et al. [69], including those where the environment is (i) regarded as static [70, 71] assuming
that environmental change is much slower than other processes, or insufficiently well-known
to model; (ii) treated using statistical regression methods where feedbacks may not be
important, or ecosystem measures are simply outputs; or (iii) regarded as if in equilibrium
(e.g. when cast into a General Equilibrium economic framework, [72]). Other cases include the
modelling of an aggregate stock that changes dynamically through harvesting and population
growth [73], or hybrid models that represent the biophysical side using an equation-based
approach [74].

Dynamical models may also be dealt with using transition rules [75] if ecosystems are not
the main model focus, or are not changing in character in response to human activity; or with
stock and flow (system dynamics) type calculations [76] or more general flow calculations to
look at ecosystem service provision [77]. However, more relevant for the current purposes is
the combination of ABM with IBM [78, 79], as IBMs have been argued to be a necessity for
next-generation ecosystem models to capture the complexity of ecosystem dynamics [68]. The
most complex type of models in this regard are Earth System Models (ESM), incorporating
Earth’s atmosphere, cryosphere, oceans and lands on a global scale [80]. To date, ecosystem
dynamics in ESM have been limited to vegetation on the land surface and plankton-based
biogeochemistry in the oceans, representing only the net primary productivity from photosyn-
thesis. Rounsevell et al. [18] highlight the possibilities of integrating ABMs with ecosystem
and vegetation models over larger geographical areas. More recent work has pointed out the
need for such global models to be process-based and to include animals and marine ecosys-
tems [81, 82]. At least one global scale treatment of coupled animal and vegetative ecosystems
on land and in the ocean has now been created [83]. However, the general vision for

GeoInformatica

development of these models still lacks representation of human agency, decision making and
adaptation [25], and the focus remains on climate change rather than other anthropogenic-
driven factors that affect ecosystems [84].

2.5 Infrastructure and socio-technical systems

Gotts and Polhill [35] propose extending approaches of SESs to socio-techno-ecosystems,
pointing out that human artefacts influence the interactions between people and the natural
environment (the socio- and -ecosystem components of an SES) in both intended and
unintended ways, and that this influence has grown increasingly important over historical
time. In particular, technological change has not only permitted and encouraged the long-term
increase in human populations, it has also, particularly through the construction and mainte-
nance of large-scale infrastructure such as road and rail systems, ports and airports, wired and
wireless signal networks, radically altered the topology of the interaction networks among
individuals, social groups, and ecosystems, by facilitating travel, goods transport and the
accompanying transport of non-human organisms, both intended and unintended, and com-
munication. At present the study of SESs and of socio-technical systems [85] are both
recognised areas of study, but given the significant impact of human structures on ecosystem
degradation as for example represented by roads opening up forested areas [86], we argue for a
unification of the two areas. Whether or not we adopt new terminology such as socio-
ecological-technical systems (SETSs), this points to one of the ways in which the concept of
a SES, and consequently, SESs model design, needs to be re-examined and extended to deal
with cross-scale dynamics.

3 Agent-based modelling for SESs across scale

3.1 Model design

To model SESs across scales adequately, modellers must deal with the dynamics of all the five
aspects of these complex systems described in Section 2: human agency including social
norms and culture, economic structures and processes, governance, ecosystem dynamics, and
technology. All occur at multiple scales, and there is constant interaction not only within the
same scale, but also across different scales.

There are two main approaches in designing cross-scale agent-based models: building one
complex model or the coupling of already existing domain-specific submodels as for
example discussed by Verburg et al. [4] or Millington et al. [87]. In the first case,
modular frameworks have been developed to facilitate modification and reuse of
model components as for example shown with NetLogo (http://ccl.northwestern.
edu/rp/levelspace/), wholeSEM (http://www.wholesem.ac.uk/research-models/linkages)
or by Gilbert et al. [67]. While the modular approach takes advantage of already
there are real challenges with regard to the
recognized disciplinary submodels,
matching of scales and spatial
resolutions, and progress is often hindered by
disciplinary jargon and implicit assumptions as well as the way uncertainties within
components propagate throughout the whole model [19]. Parker et al. [88], discussing
agent-based land use modelling, outline three possible modes of linking the natural
and social components of such models:

GeoInformatica

& Natural science models as inputs to social systems models, with no reciprocal linkage.
& Natural-social-natural linkage in a one-way chain, where the natural systems modelled as
providing inputs to and accepting outputs from the social system may be different (e.g. a
crop growth model affecting modelled land use decisions, which in turn affect modelled
wildlife).

& Endogenous determination of common variables through interactions between natural and

social system models.

In agriculture, linking models of disease spread and mitigation procedures is accepted practice,
as e.g. in the work of [89] that integrates a simplified individual-level model of the spread of
potato late blight (Phytophtora infestans), in a landscape-level model of farmer’s crop choice
and management. First, the natural system was modelled. Then, farmer practices were added,
both in the model and in interactive sessions with farmers [90]. Similarly in [78] an individual
ecosystem model for tree growth provided a dynamic landscape for farmers to both harvest
trees and clear land for crop growth. The modification of the soil permeability then fed a
hydrological model for simulation of the subsequent change in the profile of flooding.
Coupling of these models was achieved through access to the source code for each sub-
model and re-writing them to form a common framework in which the space and timescales
could be matched to the smallest appropriate for the whole model set. However, feedbacks
from the environmental modification into farmer behaviour or forest dynamics from the altered
pattern of flooding, and the potential effects of this downstream of the model catchment, either
in terms of other residents, or on policy for forest conservation or flood management were not
accounted for, despite a nominal model run time of hundreds of years.

The implication we draw is that the last of the three modes discussed above is really a
requirement rather than an option: since the systems modelled are complex and the relative
importance of dynamical aspects are unknown ahead of time, predetermining the direction of
interactions could lead to expensive mistakes if applied to policy.

In all cases, models must be linked via common variables, representing hypothesized causal
connections between the natural and social systems. But the scales at which key processes are
best modelled, and at which data is available, may differ between the natural and social
domains, and causal connections may be indirect, crossing spatial and temporal scales: for
example, the land use decisions of individual farm households may have a noticeable effect on
potential pollution problems only in aggregate, so even if these effects react back on farmers,
individual farms may not feel these secondary results of their own decisions.

Voinov and Shugart [91] advocate integrating the empirical datasets used for calibration
into models with multiple components. When module A feeds into module B, A should first be
run using empirically-derived inputs (the “calibrated base run”), and its output compared with
empirical data. When run in a different scenario, the output of A should then be modified “by
the same increment as the scenario output from module A is different from the calibrated base
run”, in order to avoid the risk of propagating modelling errors between model components. Of
course, this approach assumes the required data are available, which as Parker et al. [88] point
out, may not be the case. Whether Big Data can come to the rescue here we consider below.
Different terminologies and conceptualizations of the involved domains also hinder the
design of an integrated model. ABM requires the expression of concepts in a formal program-
ming language without the residual ambiguities present in the natural language [92].
Therefore, while the integration of domains and scales remains laborious, ABM as a modelling
approach provides a basis for such an integration [93]. Polhill and Gotts [94] and Janssen et al.

GeoInformatica

[95] describe the use of formal ontologies to improve the modularity and conceptual transpar-
ency of models in the area of agricultural systems. Such ontologies consist of a conceptual
hierarchy of classes (generally a tangled hierarchy in which a concept may have multiple
super-concepts or generalizations), and an associated hierarchy of relations which may hold
between members of specified classes. The ontology will typically be constructed using input
from domain experts and/or stakeholders (actors who are relevant because they play a role in
and/or are significantly affected by the SES, including decision makers at a specific scale of
interaction), so that it acts as an intermediate representation between natural language and
computer code, which is frequently opaque to all but the programmer, and generally includes
features such as schedulers and displays, which are necessary to make the model work or to
assist the user, but are not intended to correspond to anything in the system modelled.

A key aspect here is to be sure to adopt sound principles of software engineering (use of
version control, formal repeatable unit testing, continuous integration of software updates and
testing, comprehensive documentation, open source code) as the norm for complex model
development [96]. Otherwise problems with repeatability of model experiments are likely to
persist and potentially become more severe as models are made more complicated.
Establishment of trust for policy purposes must thus rest on a foundation of good model
testing, built in at design time, although considerable challenges remain where software is built
by multiple remote teams [97].

As a further issue, while ABM and IBM in principle allow for the inclusion of all possible
dynamical scales down to the level of individuals, and seem ideally suited for integrated
modelling of SESs, there are a number of difficulties with ecosystem models that go beyond
the issues of commensurability of time and spatial scales that arise when coupling models
together, or the issues of model complexity [69]. The sheer number both of species and of
individuals leads to problems of coverage, especially as the smaller individuals can be both
very numerous and significant in ecosystem change, and we may not have an obvious way to
even make assumptions about their behaviour. By comparison, modelling every person on the
planet is relatively less computationally difficult [98]. Harfoot et al. [83] adopt a functional
type solution for animals, and Arneth et al. [25] suggest a similar approach for human agents.
This at least allows for an encoding of generic behaviours, but still leaves the issue of agent
numbers. An approach to deal with this is to fuse together the more numerous agents into
collectives, (sometimes called cohorts, [83]) or super-individuals, although this can lead to
some changes in the observed model dynamics [99].

3.2 Parameterisation, sensitivity analysis and validation

The parameterisation of agent attributes and behavioural response functions to represent
decision-making processes requires information from qualitative and/or quantitative empirical
sources, e.g. expert knowledge, surveys, or interviews [100]. ABMs of SESs further require
the incorporation of the biophysical environment resulting from natural processes and human
behaviour insofar as it is relevant for the agents’ behaviour and to understand feedbacks
between human behaviour and environmental processes [101].

Many scholars [e.g. 102, 103] argue that Big Data offer new avenues for applications such
as ABM. Big data refers to the increasingly available and abundant information at a near-
continuous timescale that are produced by web-based services, digital earth sources (e.g.
satellites, climate stations), cheap field sensors, telecommunication and social networks, or
open source applications such as OpenStreetMap. Many of these datasets are spatially and

GeoInformatica

temporally referenced and offer many possibilities for enhancing geographical understanding,
as they are directly or indirectly related to geospatial information. A potential drawback of
these datasets is their often commercial character making them sometimes not publicly
available due to commercial reasons, privacy or national security issues.

Using ABM across-scale to simulate behavioural responses of humans would require two
fundamental steps in which empirical data are required: the development of behavioural
categories and scaling to the whole population of agents. Smajgl et al. [100] suggests doing
this by first characterising the existing heterogeneity of agent attributes and behavioural
responses and then providing simplified descriptions of behavioural realities. Arneth et al.
[25] discusses agent functional types, analogous to the plant functional types that are used in
dynamic vegetation models: agent typologies to represent agent roles, attributes and behaviour
in larger populations. With the advent of sufficiently rich data streams and a sufficient
behavioural model the possibility of both improving predictions and obtaining parameter
estimates continuously over time becomes available. These techniques have been used in
weather forecasting models for some time, and allow one to correct model output to bring it
closer to observations. Ward et al. [104] shows how such dynamic data assimilation techniques
(technically, the Ensemble Kalman Filter) can provide more insights into the system state
compared to standard time series or statistical methods. However, they emphasize the need for
more efficient parallel-computation to enable the necessary large number of model runs, and a
careful sensitivity analysis to ensure that model mechanisms are representing the microscopic
dynamics. The software PCRaster (http://pcraster.geo.uu.nl/) can be drawn as an example that
allows for dynamic and spatial-explicit modelling of SESs further allowing error propagation
techniques such as Monte Carlo or Kalman Filter techniques.

There are a few examples of ABM of SESs where extensive sensitivity analysis has been
performed [12]. Often such ABMs focus on scenario comparison where highly aggregated
model outputs, e.g. influence of food prices on policy or institutional arrangements is tested
[19]. However, ABMs cannot be properly understood without exploring the range of behav-
iours exhibited under different parameter settings or structural assumptions (e.g. different
functional forms of presenting human decision making processes) and the variation of model
output measures stemming from both random and parametric variation. Hence, sensitivity
analysis needs to emphasise the model’s entire range of behaviour, and to determine how
sensitive model outputs are to different input variables caused by the (i) nonlinearity of
interactions (at a single, multiple or across scale), (ii) non-normality of output distributions,
and (iii) strength of higher-order effects and variable interdependence [105]. In contrast to
common statistical approaches of sensitivity analysis [e.g. 100], computationally-intensive
approaches are just becoming available, e.g. machine learning [106] or Bayesian inference
[107] to estimate system states and the marginal likelihood of the parameters. Again, such
approaches tend to require many (thousands) of model runs to be effective.

Validation of ABMs that simulate SESs by comparing model results to real-world data or
patterns is still in its infancy and is discussed controversially in literature (see: [19] for a
review). For example, Polhill et al. [8] argue that validation methods appropriate for ABM
could be expert validation or pattern-oriented modelling [108]. Verburg et al. [4] state that
agent-based modelling should be used to explain why SESs behave in an observed pattern,
either spatially or temporally or as combination of both. Once more, a particular challenge for
ABM across scales will be also data availability because information of SESs across scale will
be not always available at all scales considered nor for the interactions between different SES
subsystems, e.g. actors, governance, ecosystems, infrastructure. However, the mechanistic

GeoInformatica

underpinnings of ABMs, which couple together different processes, may mean that partial data
obtained intermittently constrain the model more strongly when using multiple observational
patterns, than when data in different dimensions is considered independently. Where sensitivity
analysis shows interactions between parameters, this may help to pick out the appropriate
datasets, eliminate certain classes of models or reduce the parameter ranges. Here lies the real
power of Big Data, in its use as a model constraint, provided that the model couplings across
different scales and dimensions are included in sufficient detail. Such models, in contrast to
being data-driven, are theory-driven but data-constrained. However, data to approach these
challenges are only now becoming available for implementation.

3.3 Results interpretation and uncertainty assessment

Model application should match the target audience as simulation results can be assessed as
correct or incorrect simply because, e.g. the visualizations do not represent the results in a
manner that is understandable or useful to the user. Besides the technical issues addressed here
in trying to interpreting simulation results and assess inherent uncertainties, there are open
challenges relating to identifying the needs of different decision-makers and communication of
the results in an appropriate manner. Matching these needs to the interpretation of the model
results in an automated fashion could significantly increase the efficacy in the use of the
model, e.g. as a distributed cognition system [105, 108].

There are different challenges specific to synthesizing ABM output across-scale as well as
different sources of uncertainty. It is not only that ABMs may be using Big Data as input or
calibration and validation data, ABMs are also producers of large, high-dimensional data sets.
Thus, while increasing computing power enables us to simulate systems of interest in ever
greater detail, synthesis of model results is far from trivial [105]. This may further require
distributed, parallel computing systems, or server−/cloud-based network architecture to meet
the high computational demands needed to complete simulations in a reasonable time as is
quite common in climate change and hydrological modelling applications to date. On the other
hand, it is not only computational power that might restrict model size; usability and user
understanding which might ‘self-restrict’ the size of the model as well [67, 109]. In addition,
open questions remain as regards the representation and thus identification of spatial structures
across scales in models [110], as well as the uncertainty in results due to the model structure.
For example, inconsistencies in assumptions between different models being coupled might
lead to erroneous results [90], or emergent behaviour might simply be an artefact of the chosen
modularization of the model [111]. Upscaling and downscaling of input data to match
represented scales in the model or of intermediate results to bridge scales is another source
of uncertainty inherent to ABM across-scale [e.g. 112].

One approach to synthesize an ABM across-scale can be to estimate a reduced-form
description of the effective dynamics on a different system level, using for example mean-
field approximations that study the expected trajectory of the system [e.g. 113–115]. Pagel et al.
[116] used this approach to reduce a spatially-explicit ABM in the context of grassland
conservation management, to a spatially non-explicit deterministic matrix population model.
In this way, reduced-form models link microscopic behavior with properties and dynamics on
other scales. Other approaches to reduced-form descriptions of agent-based simulations include
the equation-free framework, which enables the analysis of macroscopic patterns without
requiring an associated equation [117, 118] and approaches that cluster state space in such a
way that the dynamics on the partition are approximately Markovian [119–121]. These

GeoInformatica

reduced-form models not only support the analysis of agent-based models, they lead also to
more efficient simulations over longer time horizons or for larger populations and can be a basis
for bridging across scales. However, care must be taken to ensure that the appropriate dynamics
are adequately captured so that the illusion of simplicity does not lead to misinterpretation. For
example, since model outcomes of spatially-explicit ABMs are scale-dependent, and the scale
dependency may change over time, models may need to be run at various spatial scales, and
possibly nested with coarse scale or reduced form models providing boundary conditions for
more fine-scale or detailed simulations in areas of interest. One pattern matching approach that
builds on fitting multiple resolutions is for example spatial windowing [122, 123].

A number of authors propose using ABMs as virtual laboratories to simplify the view of
SESs to reveal “first principles of human environment interaction” [124], or even suggest
providing “agent based models as a service” [23], or through the use of simplified web
interfaces [125]. What we still lack, however, are the long time series and multiple examples
of ABM run against real-world case studies that are required to reveal which types of model
work well, and which do not. Big Data cannot fix this by itself – we need to keep developing
models in concert with data gathering to build up the necessary experience over time. Even so,
the complexity and boundary/initial condition sensitivity of the models, together with our
limited understanding of human decision making, may fundamentally limit the degree of detail
that our models can reproduce: the types and characteristics of output may be captured, in a
statistical sense, but timing and size of specific individual events are likely to remain beyond
the reach of forecasting.

4 Conceptual and methodological directions

Cross-scale issues have been recognised as challenging for adaptation and climate change
[126, 127], governance and SESs such as the collapse of cooperation across scales when two
groups/communities are connected through resource flows [32, 65], political systems and the
withdrawal of the state [128], political economy and resource management [129], and human
aspects of global change more generally [31]. The idea that social attitudes may be important
for climate change policy modelling goes back at least to Janssen and de Vries [130], although
current integrated assessment models for climate remain fixed in traditional frameworks [131].
However, an exclusive focus on climate misses important factors, such as the environmentally
damaging consequences of cascading collapses of fisheries across the world or global trade
imbalance [e.g. 132]. Consideration of SESs may miss further important aspects of technical
and infrastructural aspects that are so far not well represented in the underlying theories [e.g.
66]. Many modellers are well aware that there are cross-scale interactions between systems
which can considered independent but in the long term impact each other (see also [12, 13, 15,
16, 19]). Hence the overall aim will be to balance model complexity and the simulated
interactions between systems cross-scale to derive outputs that are meaningful and help to
derive implications for decision making and policy design [133, 134]. This leads us to make
the following suggestions:

4.1 Acknowledge scale to be a dynamic issue

What process scale is relevant for a particular SES’s outcomes can change over time and
depend on inter-system couplings. This may mean having to run models at multiple scales in

GeoInformatica

order to capture the possibilities of tipping points, phase changes or cascading failure, for
example. In particular, spatially isolated case studies that need to run for many years should
allow for changes at the boundary, possibly driven by a coarser scale model or equivalent
length time series data. While available computing power enables us to simulate such cross-
scale interactions in ever greater detail, this can only be made possible using modular
modelling structures such as are available in NetLogo, but more importantly will require
larger-scale distributed computing systems rather than a single desktop or laptop. Where model
run-time is long but acceptable, then cloud-based approaches using platforms such as
Microsoft Azure© or Amazon AWS© might be sufficient to allow for the multiple model
runs needed for parameter space exploration or what-if scenario generation. Where models
need to be accelerated even in single runs (models so large that run-times might otherwise be
months or even years) more traditional high performance computing architectures can be
exploited with frameworks such as RepastHPC, which provides the ability to scale to very
large numbers (billions) of agents in both gridded and networked configurations [135]. Some
of the associated technical difficulties in dealing with this kind of large model in languages like
Java are covered in [96].

4.2 Traditional links between scales may lose validity or be transformed
by the superimposition of newly emerging cross-scale links

We have been used to rather stable characteristic spatio-temporal relationships in biology/
ecology between space, time and organizational levels: e.g. cell dynamics to be studied over
seconds/min and at the spatial scale of microns (small size, lower organizational level, short
time steps), moving to higher scales with increasing dimensions, such as populations, studied
on an annual basis over landscapes of several squared kilometres in size, and countries at
scales of decades. This may no longer be true as there are also emerging cross-scale links that
also need to be taken into consideration, e.g. in the case of the global finance systems with
relevant dynamics within fractions of seconds. Price fluctuations can then trigger outbreaks of
violence and collapse of political systems far from their origin. On the other hand, resource
exhaustion and associated ecosystem degradation may play out over decades, but couple
together remote locations across the globe through the effects of trade networks and link to
fast dynamics in political and financial systems. Again, isolated case study locations will
struggle to deal with this kind of phenomenon.

4.3 Adequate representation of governance structure

Governance, i.e. actors and institutions involved in managing SESs, has been rarely and
overall not adequately represented in agent-based models to date: here traditional single-
agent economics focusing on homo economicus is not enough. The multi-scalar, multi-actor
nature of governance systems requires careful simulation, including the range of human
individual and collective behaviour that such systems display. To model the influence of
relevant actors on the selected dynamics across scales, we need to collect data to inform their
behaviours. As increasingly recognised by literature on cross-scale dynamics, research should
directly involve policy-makers and practitioners to identify questions and develop tools that
will prove useful to address environmental governance problems [136]. However, stakeholder
views of relevant scales may be limited by their previous experience: this may mean moving
them out of their comfort zone, and not relying on the stakeholders or other experts to be the

GeoInformatica

sole determinants of the model ontology. For this reason, we advocate for a significant use of
participatory methods in the design of experiments aimed at collecting behavioural data for
key stakeholders for example using scenario workshops [137, 138] or role-playing games
[139, 140]. These workshops can be designed in multiple ways, but usually rely on the
provision of scenarios regarding plausible future situations, to which participants need
to respond [141]. This method has proven successful in raising awareness in partic-
ipants towards specific subjects (e.g. unintended consequences of behaviours imple-
mented, see for instance [142]). Robust statistical methods for the identification of
representative stakeholders to be involved in the participatory process are crucial. On
the other hand, there is also a need to adopt a reflexive position to take into account
the complexity of the social contexts and to strategically deal with existing power asymmetries
among stakeholders [143].

Sketching the phases of a research project can help to operationalise the ideas discussed
above as part of such an ABM development cycle. While using the example of international
food trade, the first step could involve mapping relevant actors across different scales and
levels, e.g. (i) relevant ministries such as foreign affairs and trade for the decisions made in
regard to international agreements and agriculture to capture changing policies that affect
agricultural practises and crops grown; (ii) multi-national firms as they are especially relevant
as price makers in the food sector, due to their big role in agricultural technology development,
and their influence on policies through lobbying; (iii) farming communities and associations as
they represent the primary sector, receive and implement policies and the same time lobby
governments. This would be followed by scoping interviews with representatives from the key
actors to identify what dynamics they influence, and how they interact with other stakeholders.
Further interviews could be undertaken with actors that have been identified as relevant by the
first round of interviews and were not involved. Part of the interviews could involve questions
aimed at mapping both actors and relationships between them. The second stage of the project
could involve scenario-based workshops with key members of relevant stakeholder groups,
where they will be presented with a future scenario (e.g. future drought in Ukraine will result in
8% cereal production loss), and their responses to different checkpoints captured in the
scenario (e.g. drought results in a 100% increase in the international price. What is the reaction
of the actors?). Once this information has been collected and collated, the development of a
meta-model for the behaviour of these actors could start by generating a general framework of
responses for each actor based on their reactions to prompts or be informed by relevant
theories from cognitive and behavioural sciences. Follow-up interviews could be organised
with key stakeholders to fill the gaps or clarify specific reactions and therefore finalise the
behavioural meta-model for the different actors.

4.4 Infrastructure and technology as part of SESs

Put more emphasis on technical and infrastructure issues in SESs descriptions and frameworks.
There are almost no pristine ecosystems, and the built environment has a major impact on
ecosystems, but is multi-scalar in nature. These infrastructure systems are themselves complex
and often composed of multiple overlapping networks. As data from smart cities and
building infrastructure management systems begins to come online, the data on the
built environment will only become richer and more detailed. The effects of these human
developments on ecosystems is non-trivial, widespread and changing over time. We need to
include it on our SESs models.

GeoInformatica

4.5 Big data vs. big understanding

Machine learning has promise for analysis of interpretation of complex model output,
especially to see where and when scale separation is important, and for suggesting ways to
reduce complexity when confronted with modelling scaling-up or scaling-down. Big Data has
promise for calibration and validation, especially in the light of pattern-oriented modelling or
data assimilation but is not a substitute for theoretical underpinnings, particularly as Big Data
may be heavily biased (consider e.g. social media echo chambers), partial (satellite data
obscured by clouds), temporally- or spatially-limited (e.g. public transport data from a single
city) or highly aggregated (10-yearly census data records). We therefore also need Big
Understanding to actually make sense of the data, select the relevant parts, and to guide
further data gathering effort by creating data-constrained but process-based models. In this way
we make tools to help people who are overwhelmed by the amount of information and do not
have the means to discern between authoritative and inaccurate information.

The use of machine learning to understand complex model output will require significant
computational resources (i.e. cloud-based or multi-core/multi-node systems) and the develop-
ment of models that can run fast enough in an individual or parallel-sense. Even so, use of
black box machine learning, such as the highly successful deep learning tools now available,
may not only make insight difficult, but be misleading where the tools report high accuracy
despite being incorrect. More transparent ways to archive and interpret machine learning
outputs are needed [144].

4.6 Using participatory, transdisciplinary procedures to keep model output users
‘close-by’

Models play different roles in scientific investigations, the management of SESs, policy
appraisals (ex-ante analysis) and evaluation (ex-post analysis) [4]. Keeping the user of
modelling results close-by is essential to avoid the tendency of modellers of ABM to focus
too much on the question of how to represent SESs and too little on how to actually learn from
these models. Thus, we recommend iterative model development where early simplified model
versions are thoroughly analysed, with all relevant model outputs and testing methods
implemented. Participatory procedures [e.g. 145, 146] and transdisciplinary frameworks [e.g.
147] can play a prominent role in this. Co-design and co-production of research are becoming
more and more acknowledged as important components of ABM [57], although, the partic-
ipatory, transdisciplinary approach is not necessarily straightforward. Deciding who should be
involved at which part of a modelling cycle is complex and different actors and stakeholders
can have diverse interests. For example, interrogation of models and model results can be done
quantitatively (i.e. through multiple simulations, sensitivity analysis, or ‘what-if’ tests), but
may also be done in qualitative and participatory fashion, with stakeholders involved in the
actual design as opposed to just being shown the results, see for example Le Page et al. [148].
The choice should be driven by the purpose of the modelling process and the needs of
stakeholders. In both ex-ante and ex-post evaluation, using ABMs across scales can be a
powerful tool to use as a route for engaging and informing stakeholders, including the public,
about policies and their implications [149]. This may be by including stakeholders in the
process, decisions, and validation of model design; or it may be later in the process, in using
the results of a model to open up discussions with stakeholders, and/or even using the model
live to explore connections between assumptions, scenarios, and outcomes [150].

GeoInformatica

5 Concluding remarks

The issues we have discussed here emphasize the need for ABM of SESs to include the
feedbacks that are implied by the presence of both multiple time and spatial scales. The core
proposition of this paper is that in a world that is increasingly recognized as being connected
and multi-scale, solutions must be as well. This might lead to complex and intricate models,
but perhaps the complexity of the real world requires us to embrace this in our
modelling efforts. While large scale modelling has received much criticism in the past
[151], most of these issues could be addressed by increasing computing power [152],
and can be further overcome by ensuring transparency and reproducibility of model code and
clarity of model purpose.

Teleconnections in our globalized human-environment system now mean that in practice
anything less than global scale modelling is not likely to be able to address any of the pressing
policy problems of our time. These go beyond climate change to encompass pandemics,
financial instability, resource exhaustion, ecosystem collapse and species extinctions, persistent
global poverty, inequality and overconsumption, food security, civil violence, state failures and
warfare. The implication is that a global effort is needed to make progress in assessment of and
encourage development of ABM approaches that enables the simulation of SESs across scales
in all facets. Such an effort needs to involve multiple research groups across the globe, taking a
multiplicity of approaches into account, preferably sharing and jointly developing their model
code. It should not only focus on producing models with substantial improvements in their
capacity to simulate the socio-economic components of SESs, but more importantly should be
inclusive, transparent, well tested and, as far as possible, using open source model code and
data policies to make it available to all.

Acknowledgements This paper originated from discussions during the Lorentz Center workshop ‘Cross-Scale
Resilience in Socio-Ecological Simulations’ in Leiden 1–4 May 2017. The authors would like to thank in
particular Géraldine Abrami, Bruce Edmonds, Eline de Jong, Gary Polhill and Nanda Wijermans for organising
the workshop, and the Lorentz Center for hosting and providing financial support. Maja Schlüter acknowledges
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme (grant agreement No 682472 – MUSES). The input of Pete Smith contributes to the
DEVIL project [NE/M021327/1]. Kevin Thellmann acknowledges funding from the Water-People-Agriculture
Research Training Group funded by the Anton & Petra Ehrmann-Stiftung. Nick Gotts acknowledges help from
the Centre for Policy Modelling, Manchester Metropolitan University Business School, where he is a visiting
fellow. Melvin Lippe acknowledges funding form the German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture due to a
decision by the German Bundestag through the LaForeT Policies project.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps

Publisher’s Note
and institutional affiliations.

References

1. Berkes F, Folke C (1998) Linking social and ecological systems: management practices and social

mechanisms for building resilience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

2. Redman CL, Grove JM, Kuby LH (2004) Integrating Social Sciences into the Long-Term Ecological
Research (LTER) Network: Social Dimensions of Ecological Change and Ecological Dimensions of Social
Change. Ecosystems 7(2):161–171

3. Folke C, Hahn T, Olsson P, Norberg J (2005) Adaptive Governance of Social-Ecological Systems. Annu

Rev Environ Resour 30:441–473

GeoInformatica

4. Verburg PH, Dearing JA, Dyke JG, van der Leeuw S, Seitzinger S, Steffen W, Syvitski J (2016) Methods

and approaches to modelling in the Anthropocene. Glob Environ Chang 39:328–340

5. Anderies JM, Janssen MA, Ostrom E (2004) A Framework to Analyze the Robustness of Social-ecological

Systems from an Institutional Perspective. Ecol Soc 9(1):18

6. McGinnis MD, Ostrom E (2014) Social-ecological systems framework: initial changes and continuing

challenges. Ecol Soc 19(2):30

7. Leslie HM, Basurto X, Nenadovic M, Sievanen L, Cavanaugh KC, Cota-Nieto JJ, Erisman BE, Finkbeiner
E, Hinojosa-Arango G, Moreno-Báez M, Nagavarapu S, Reddy SM, Sánchez-Rodríguez A, Siegel K,
Ulibarria-Valenzuela JJ, Weaver AH, Aburto-Oropeza O (2015) Operationalizing the social-ecological
systems framework to assess sustainability. PNAS 112(19):5979–5984

8. Polhill JG, Filatova T, Schlüter M, Voinov A (2016) Modelling systemic change in coupled socio-

environmental systems. Environ Model Softw 75:318–332

9. Schlüter M, McAllister RRJ, Arlinghaus R, Bunnefeld N, Eisenack K, Hölker F, Milner-Gulland EJ,
Müller B, Nicholson E, Quaas M, Stöven M (2012) New horizons for managing the environment: a review
of coupled social-ecological systems modeling. Nat Resour Model 25(1):219–272

10. Virapongse A, Brooks S, Metcalf EC, Zedalis M, Gosz J, Kliskey A, Alessa L (2016) A socio-ecological

systems approach for environmental management. J Environ Manag 178:83–91

11. An L (2012) Modeling human decisions in coupled human and natural systems: Review of agent-based

models. Ecol Model 229:25–36

12. Filatova T, Verburg PH, Parker DC, Stannard CA (2013) Spatial agent-based models for socio-ecological

systems: Challenges and prospects. Environ Model Softw 45:1–7

13. Matthews RB, Gilbert NG, Roach A, Polhill JG, Gotts NM (2007) Agent-based land-use models: a review

of applications. Landsc Ecol 22(10):1147–1459

14. Parker DC, Manson SM, Janssen MA, Hoffmann MJ, Deadman P (2003) Multi-agent systems
for the simulation of land-use and land-cover change: A review. Ann Assoc Am Geogr 93(2):
314–337

15. Balbi S, Giupponi C (2009) Reviewing agent-based modelling of socio-ecosystems: a methodology for the
analysis of climate change adaptation and sustainability. Working Paper Department of Economics, Ca’
Foscari University of Venice, No. 15/WP/2009, ISSN: 1827/336X

16. Groeneveld J, Müller B, Buchmann CM, Dressler G, Guo C, Hase N, Hoffmann F, John F, Klasseert C,
Lauf T, Liebelt V, Nolzen H, Pannicke N, Schulze J, Weise H, Schwarz N (2017) Theoretical foundations
of human decision-making in agent-based land use models - A review. Environ Model Softw 87:39–48
17. Heckbert S, Baynes T, Reeson A (2010) Agent-based modelling in ecological economics. Ann N Y Acad

Sci 1185:39–53

18. Rounsevell MDA, Robinson DT, Murray-Rust D (2012a) From actors to agents in socio-ecological

systems models. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 367:259–269

19. Schulze J, Müller B, Groeneveld J, Grimm V (2017) Agent-Based Modelling of Social-Ecological
Systems: Achievements, Challenges, and a Way Forward. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation 20(2):8

20. Gog JL, Pellis L, Wood JLN, McLean AR, Arinaminpathy N, Lloyd-Smith JO (2015) Seven challenges in

modeling pathogen dynamics within-host and across scales. Epidemics 10:45–48

21. Delli Gatti D, Gallegati M, Greenwald B, Russo A, Stiglitz JE (2010) The financial accelerator in an

evolving credit network. J Econ Dyn Control 34:1627–1650

22. Stiglitz JE, Gallegati M (2011) Heterogeneous Interacting Agent Models for Understanding Monetary

Economies. East Econ J 37:6–12

23. Waldrop MM (2018) Free Agents. Science 360:144–147
24. Kiyono K, Struzik ZR, Yamamoto Y (2006) Criticality and Phase Transitions in Stock-Price Fluctuations.

Phys Rev Lett 96:068701

25. Arneth A, Brown C, Rounsevell MDA (2014) Global models of human decision-making for land-based

mitigation and adaptation assessment. Nat Clim Chang 4:550–558

26. Rounsevell MDA, Pedroli B, Erb K-H, Gramberger M, Busck AG, Haberl H, Kristensen S, Kuemmerle T,
Lavorel S, Lindner M, Lotze-Campen H, Metzger MJ, Murray-Rust D, Popp A, Perez-Souba M, Reenberg
A, Vadineanu A, Verburg PH, Wolfslehner B (2012b) Challenges for land system science. Land Use Policy
29(4):899–910

27. Haining R (2003) Spatial Data Analysis: Theory and Practice. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
28. Lloyd CD (2014) Exploring spatial scale in Geography. Wiley, Chichester
29. Marston SA, Jones JP III, Woodward K (2005) Human Geography without Scale. Trans Inst Br Geogr 30:

416–432

30. Montello DR (2001) Scale in Geography. In: Baltes B (ed) Smelser NJ. Elsevier, International

Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, pp 13501–13504

GeoInformatica

31. Gibson CC, Ostrom E, Ahn TK (2000) The concept of scale and the human dimensions of global change: a

survey. Ecol Econ 32(2):217–239

32. Cash DW, Adger NW, Berkes F, Garden P, Lebel L, Olsson P, Pritchard L, Young O (2006) Scale and

cross-scale dynamics: governance and information in a multilevel world. Ecol Soc 11(2):8

33. Lebel L, Garden P, Imamura M (2005) The politics of scale, position and place in the management of water

resources in the Mekong region. Ecol Soc 10(2):18

34. Young O (2006) Vertical interplay among scale-dependent environmental and resource regimes. Ecol Soc

11(1):27

35. Gotts NM, Polhill JG (2006) Simulating Socio-Techno-Ecosystems. Proceedings of the First World
Congress on Social Simulation (WCSS 2006), Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 21–25 August 2006, pp
119–126

36. Hofstede GJ (2018) Mental Activity and Culture: The Elusive Real World. In: Faucher C (ed) Advances in
Culturally-Aware Intelligent Systems and in Cross-Cultural Psychological Studies. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp 143–164

37. Foley JA, DeFries R, Asner GP, Barford C, Bonan G, Carpenter SR, Chapin FS, Coe MT, Daily GC, Gibbs
HK, Helkowski JH, Holloway T, Howard EA, Kucharik CJ, Monfreda C, Patz JA, Prentice IC,
Ramankutty N, Snyder PK (2005) Global consequences of land use. Science 309(5734):570–574
38. Schlüter M, Baeza A, Dressler G, Frank K, Groeneveld J, Jager W, Jansse MA, McAllister RRJ, Müller B,
Orach K, Schwarz N, Wijermans N (2017) A framework for mapping and comparing behavioural theories
in models of social-ecological systems. Ecol Econ 131:21–35

39. Hofstede GJ (2017) GRASP agents: social first, intelligent later. AI & Soc:1–9
40. Carpenter SR, Mooney HA, Agard J, Capistrano D, DeFries RS, Díaz S, Dietz T, Duraiappah AK, Oteng-
Yeboah A, Pereira HM, Perrings C, Reid WV, Sarukhan J, Scholes RJ, Whyte A (2009) Science for
managing ecosystem services: Beyond the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Proc Natl Acad Sci
106(5):1305–1312

41. Müller D, Munroe DK (2014) Current and Future Challenges in Land-Use Science. Journal of Land Use

Science 9(2):133–142

42. Colander D (2006) Post Walrasian Macroeconomics: Beyond the Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium

Model. Cambridge University Press, New York

43. Sonnenschein H (1972) Market Excess Demand Functions. Econometrica 40(3):549–563
44. Debreu G (1974) Excess Demand Functions. J Math Econ 1(1):15–23
45. Kirman AP (1992) Whom or What Does the Representative Individual Represent? J Econ Perspect 6(2):

46. Balke T, Gilbert N (2014) How Do Agents Make Decisions? A Survey. Journal of Artificial Societies and

47. Epstein JM, Axtell RL (1996) Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up. Press, The

117–136

MIT

Social Simulation 17(4):13

48. Tesfatsion L, Judd KL (2006) Handbook of Computational Economics. Vol. 2, Agent-Based

49. LeBaron B, Tesfatsion L (2008) Modeling Macroeconomies as Open-Ended Dynamic Systems of

Computational Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam

Interacting Agents. Am Econ Rev 98(2):246–250

50. Raberto M, Teglio A, Cincotti S (2012) Debt Deleveraging and Business Cycles. An Agent-Based
Perspective. Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal https://doi.org/10.5018
/economics-ejournal.ja.2012-27

51. Delli Gatti D, Di Guilmi C, Gaffeo E, Giulioni G, Gallegati M, Palestrini A (2005) A new approach to
business fluctuations: heterogeneous interacting agents, scaling laws and financial fragility. J Econ Behav
Organ 56(4):489–512

52. Farmer JD, Hepburn C, Mealy P, Teytelboym A (2015) A Third Wave in the Economics of Climate

Change. Environ Resour Econ 62(2):329–357

53. Lamperti F, Dosi G, Napoletano M, Roventini A, Sapio A (2017a) Faraway, So Close: Coupled Climate
and Economic Dynamics in an Agent-Based Integrated Assessment Model LEM Working Paper Series.
Available at SSRN: https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2944328 or https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2944328
54. Lustick IS, Alcorn B, Garces M, Ruvinsky A (2012) From theory to simulation: the dynamic political
hierarchy in country virtualisation models. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence
24(3):279–299

55. Natalini D, Bravo G, Jones AW (2017) Global food security and food riots–an agent-based modelling

approach. Food Security:1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-017-0693-z.

GeoInformatica

56. Ferrier S, Ninan KN, Leadly P, Alkemade R, Acosta LA, Akçakaya HR, Brotons L, Cheung
WWL, Christensen V, Harhash KA, Kabubo-Mariara J, Lundquist C, Obersteiner M., Pereira
HM, Peterson G, Pichs-Madruga R, Ravindranath N, Rondinini C, Wintle BA (2016) IPBES
(2016): The methodological assessment report on scenarios and models of biodiversity and
ecosystem services. Secretariat of
the Intergovernmental. Science-Policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, Bonn, Germany

57. Gilbert N, Ahrweiler P, Barbrook-Johnson P, Narasimhan KP, Wilkinson H (2018) Computational
Modelling of Public Policy: Reflections on Practice. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation 21(1):14

58. Janssen MA, Walker BH, Langridge J, Abel N (2000) An adaptive agent model for analysing co-evolution

of management and policies in a complex rangeland system. Ecol Model 131(2–3):249–268

59. Gross JE, McAllister RJJ, Abel N, Stafford Smith DM, Maru Y (2006) Australian rangelands as complex

adaptive systems: A conceptual model and preliminary results. Environ Model Softw 21(9):1264–1272

60. Cioffi-Revilla C, Rouleau M (2010) MASON RebeLand: An agent-based model of Politics, Environment,

and Insurgency. Int Stud Rev 12(1):31–52

61. Gerst MD, Wang P, Roventini A, Fagiolo G, Dosi G, Howarth RB, Borsuk ME (2013) Agent-based
modelling of climate policy: An introduction to the ENGAGE multi-level model framework. Environ
Model Softw 44:62–75

62. Greeven S, Kraan O, Chappin EJL, Kwakkel JH (2016) The Emergence of Climate Change Mitigation
Action by Society: An Agent-based Scenario Discovery Study. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation 19(3):9

63. Dubbelboer J, Nikolic I, Jenkins K, Hall J (2017) An Agent-based Model of Flood Risk and Insurance.

Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 20(1):6

64. Muis J (2010) Simulating Political Stability and Change in the Netherlands (1998–2010): an Agent-Based
Model of Party Competition with Media Effects Empirically Tested. Journal of Artificial Societies and
Social Simulation 13(2):4

65. Brondizio ES, Ostrom E, Young OR (2009) Connectivity and the Governance of Multilevel Social-

Ecological Systems. Annu Rev Environ Resour 34:253–278

66. Ostrom E (2009) A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social-ecological systems. Science

325(5939):419–422

67. Armitage DR, Plummer R, Berkes F, Arthur RI, Charles AT, Davidson-Hunt IJ, Diduck AP, Doubleday
NC, Johnson DS, Marschke M, McConney P, Pinkerton EW, Wollenberg EK (2009) Adaptive co-
management for social-ecological complexity. Front Ecol Environ 7(2):95–102

68. Grimm V, Ayllón D, Railsback SF (2017) Next-generation Individual-Based Models Integrate Biodiversity

and Ecosystems: Yes We Can and Yes We Must. Ecosystems 20(2):229–236

69. Luus KA, Robinson DT, Deadman PJ (2013) Representing ecological processes in agent-based models of

land use and cover change. J Land Use Sci 8(2):175–198

70. Huigen MGA (2004) First principles of the MameLuke multi-actor modelling framework for land use

change, illustrated with a Philippine case study. J Environ Manag 72(1–2):5–21

71. Bakker MM, Govers G, Kosmas C, Vanacker V, van Oost K, Rounsevell MDA (2005) Soil Erosion as a

Driver of Land-Use Change. Agric Ecosyst Environ 105(3):467–481

72. Eichner T, Pethig R (2005) Ecosystem and Economy: An Integrated Dynamic General Equilibrium

Approach. J Econ 85(3):213–249

73. Lindkvist E, Basurto X, Schlüter M (2017) Micro-level explanations for emergent patterns of self-
governance arrangements in small-scale fisheries—A modeling approach. PLoS One 12(4):e0175532.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175532

74. Martin R, Schlüter M (2015) Combining system dynamics and agent-based modeling to analyze social-
ecological interactions – an example from modeling restoration of a shallow lake. Frontiers in
Environmental Science 3:66

75. Manson SM (2005) Agent-based modeling and genetic programming for modeling land change in the

Southern Yucatán Peninsular Region of Mexico. Agric Ecosyst Environ 111(1–4):47–62

76. Gaube V, Kaiser C, Wildenberg M, Adensam H, Fleissner P, Kobler J, Lutz J, Schaumberger A,
Schaumberger J, Smetschka B, Wolf A, Richter A, Haberl H (2009) Combining agent-based and stock-
flow modelling approaches in a participative analysis of the integrated land system in Reichraming,
Austria. Landsc Ecol 24(9):1149–1165

77. Bagstad KJ, Johnson GW, Voigt B, Villa F (2013) Spatial dynamics of ecosystem service flows: A

comprehensive approach to quantifying actual services. Ecosyst Serv 4:117–125

GeoInformatica

78. Bithell M, Brasington J (2009) Coupling Agent-based models of subsistence farming with individual-
based forest models and dynamic models of water distribution. Environ Model Softw 24(2):173–190
79. Guillem EE, Murray-Rust D, Robinson DT, Barnes A, Rounsevell MDA (2015) Modelling farmer
decision-making to anticipate tradeoffs between provisioning ecosystem services and biodiversity. Agric
Syst 137:12–23

80. Bonan GB, Doney SC (2018) Climate, ecosystems, and planetary futures: The challenge to predict life in

Earth system models. Science 359(6375), eaam8328. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aam8328

81. Purves D, Scharlemann JPW, Harfoot M, Newbold T, Tittensor DP, Hutton J, Emmott S (2013)

Ecosystems: Time to model all life on earth. Nature 493:295–297

82. Evans MR, Bithell M, Cornell SJ, Dall SRX, Díaz S, Emmott S, Ernande B, Grimm V, Hodgson DJ, Lewis
SL, Mace GM, Morecroft M, Moustakas A, Murphy E, Newbold T, Norris KJ, Petchey O, Smith M,
Travis JMJ, Benton TG (2013) Predictive systems ecology. Proc R Soc B 280:20131452. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rspb.2013.1452

83. Harfoot MBJ, Newbold T, Tittensor DP, Emmott S, Hutton J, Lyutsarev V, Smith MJ, Scharlemann JPW,
Purves DW (2014) Emergent Global Patterns of Ecosystem Structure and Function from a Mechanistic
General Ecosystem Model. PLoS Biol 12(4):e1001841. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001841
84. Titeux N, Henle K, Mihoub J-B, Regos A, Geijzendorffer IR, Cramer W, Verburg PH, Brotons L (2016)

Biodiversity scenarios neglect future land-use changes. Glob Chang Biol 22:2505–2515

85. van Dam KH, Nikolic I, Lukszo Z (2013) Agent-based modelling of Socio-Technical Systems. Agent-

Based Social Systems 9, Springer

86. Barber CP, Cochrane MA, Souza CN Jr, Laurance WF (2014) Roads, deforestation and the mitigating

effect of protected areas in the Amazon. Biol Conserv 177:203–209

87. Millington JDA, Xiong H, Peterson S, Woods J (2017) Integrating Modelling approaches for

Understanding Telecoupling: Global Food Trade and Local Land Use. Land 6(3):56

88. Parker DC, Hessl A, Davis SC (2008) Complexity, land-use modeling, and the human dimension:

Fundamental challenges for mapping unknown outcome spaces. Geoforum 39(2):789–804

89. Pacilly FCA, Hofstede GJ, van Bueren ETL, Kessel GJT, Groot JCJ (2018) Simulating crop-disease
interactions in agricultural landscapes to analyse the effectiveness of host resistance in disease control: The
case of potato late blight. Ecol Model 378:1–12

90. FCA Pacilly (2018) Social-ecological modelling of potato late blight. Managing crop resistance in disease.

PhD Thesis, Wageningen University, 175p

91. Voinov A, Shugart HH (2013) ‘Integronsters’, integral and integrated modeling. Environ Model Softw 39:

149–158

92. Wolf S, Hinkel J, Hallier M, Bisaro A, Lincke D, Ionescu C, Klein RJT (2013) Clarifying vulnerability
definitions and assessments using formalisation. International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and
Management 5:54–70

93. Axelrod R (2006) Agent-based modeling as a bridge between disciplines. In: Tesfatsion L, Judd KL (eds)

Handbook of Computational Economics, Elsevier, Vol, vol 2, pp 1565–1584

94. Polhill JG, Gotts NM (2009) Ontologies for transparent integrated human-natural system modelling.

Landsc Ecol 24:1255–1267

95. Janssen S, Andersen E, Athanasiadis IN, van Ittersum M (2008) An European database for integrated
assessment and modeling of agricultural systems. In: Sànchez-Marrè M, Béjar J, Comas J, Rizzoli A,
Guariso G (eds) Proceedings of the 4th Biennial Meeting of the International Environmental Modeling and
Software Society (iEMSs). Barcelona, Spain, pp 719–726

96. Bosch J (2014) Continuous software engineering. Springer International Publishing
97. Herbsleb JD (2007) Global Software Engineering: The Future of Socio-technical co-ordination. Future of

Software Engineering, 188–198, IEEE Computer Society

98. Parker J, Epstein JM (2011) A distributed Platform for Global-Scale Agent-Based Models of Disease

Transmission. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 22(1):1–25

99. Parry HR, Bithell M (2012) Large scale agent-based modelling: A review and guidelines for model
scaling. In: Heppenstall AJ, Crooks AT, See LM, Batty M (eds) Agent-based models of Geographical
Systems. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 271–308

100. Smajgl A, Brown DG, Valbuena D, Huigen MGA (2011) Empirical characterisation of agent behaviours in

socio-ecological systems. Environ Model Softw 26(7):837–844

101. Müller-Hansen F, Schlüter M, Mäs M, Donges JF, Kolb JJ, Thonicke K, Heitzig J (2017) Towards
representing human behavior and decision making in Earth System models – an overview of techniques
and approaches. Earth System Dynamics 8:977–1007

GeoInformatica

102. Kitchin R (2013) Big data and human geography: Opportunities, challenges and risks. Dialogues in

Human Geography 3(3):262–267

103. Yang C, Huang Q, Li Z, Liu K, Hu F (2017) Big Data and cloud computing: innovation opportunities and

challenges. International Journal of Digital Earth 10(1):13–53

104. Ward JA, Evans AJ, Malleson NS (2016) Dynamic calibration of agent-based models using data

assimilation. R Soc Open Sci 3(4):150703

105. Lee J-S, Filatova T, Ligmann-Zielinska A, Hassani-Mahmooei B, Stonedahl F, Lorscheid I, Voinov A,
Polhill G, Sun Z, Parker DC (2015) The complexities of Agent-Based modeling output analysis. Journal of
Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 18(4):4

106. Lamperti F, Roventini A, Sani A (2018) Agent-based model calibration using machine learning surrogates.

J Econ Dyn Control 90:366–389

107. Kattwinkel M, Reichert P (2017) Bayesian parameter inference for individual-based models using a

Particle Markov Chain Monte Carlo Method. Environ Model Softw 87:110–119

108. Grimm V, Revilla E, Berger U, Jeltsch F, Mooij WM, Railsback SF, Thulke HH, Weiner J, Wiegand T,
DeAngelis DL (2005) Pattern-oriented modeling of agent-based complex systems: lessons from ecology.
Science 310:987–991

109. Barrett C, Eubank S, Marathe A, Marathe M, Swarup S (2015) Synthetic information environ-
ments for policy informatics: a distributed cognition perspective. In: Johnston EW (ed)
Governance in the Information Era: Theory and Practice of Policy Informatics. Routledge, New
York, pp 267–284

110. Schulz K, Seppelt R, Zehe E, Vogel HJ, Attinger S (2006) Importance of spatial structures in advancing

hydrological sciences. Water Resources Research 42:W03S03

111. Saari DG (2010) Aggregation and multilevel design for systems: Finding guidelines. J Mech Des 132(8):

081006

112. Evans TP, Kelley H (2004) Multi-scale analysis of a household level agent-based model of land cover

change. J Environ Manag 72(1–2):57–72

113. Galan JM, Izquierdo LR (2005) Appearances can be deceiving: Lessons learned re-implementing
Axelrod's 'Evolutionary approach to norms'. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation
8(3):2

114. Edwards M, Huet S, Goreaud F, Deffuant G (2003) Comparing an individual-based model of behaviour
diffusion with its mean field aggregate approximation. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation
6(4):9

115. Huet S, Edwards M, Deffuant G (2007) Taking into Account the Variations of Neighbourhood Sizes in the
Mean-Field Approximation of the Threshold Model on a Random Network. Journal of Artificial Societies
and Social Simulation 10(1):10

116. Pagel J, Fritzsch K, Biedermann R, Schröder B (2008) Annual plants under cyclic disturbance regime:

better understanding through model aggregation. Ecol Appl 18:2000–2015

117. Martin R, Thomas SA (2016) Analyzing regime shifts in agent-based models with equation-free analysis.
In: Sauvage S, Sánchez-Pérez JM, Rizzoli AE (eds) 8th International Congress on Environmental
Modelling and Software. Toulouse, France, pp 494–502

118. Zou Y, Fonoberov VA, Fonoberova M, Mezic I, Kevrekidis IG (2012) Model reduction for agent-based
social simulation: Coarse-graining a civil violence model. Physical Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 85:
066106

119. Banisch S (2016) Markov chain aggregation for agent-based models. Springer International Publishing
120. Hallier M, Hartmann C (2016) Constructing Markov state models of reduced complexity from agent-based

simulation data. Social Simulation Conference 2016, Rome, Italy

121. Niedbalski JS, Deng K Mehta PG, Meyn S (2008) Model reduction for reduced order estimation in traffic

models. Proceedings American Control Conference 2008, Seattle, USA

122. Costanza R (1989) Model goodness of fit: A multiple resolution procedure. Ecol Model 47(3–4):199–215
123. Pontius RG Jr, Boersma W, Castella J-C, Clarke K, de Nijs T, Dietzel C, Dua Z, Fotsing E, Goldstein N,
Kok K, Koomen E, Lippitt CD, McConnell W, Sood AM, Pijanowski B, Pithadia S, Sweeney S, Trung
TN, Veldkamp AT, Verburg PH (2008) Comparing the input, output, and validation maps for several
models of land change. Ann Reg Sci 42(1):11–37

124. Magliocca NR, van Vliet J, Brown C, Evans TP, Houet T, Messerli P, Messina JP, Nicholas KA,
Ornetsmüller C, Sagebiel J, Schweizer V, Verburg PH, Yu Q (2015) From meta-studies to modeling:
Using synthesis knowledge to build broadly applicable process-based land change models. Environ Model
Softw 72:10–20

GeoInformatica

ations. Prog Hum Geogr 39(1):3–25

Co-Management. Ecol Soc 10(2):9

climate change. Ecol Econ 26(1):43–65

125. Deodhar S, Bisset K, Chen J, Barrett C, Wilson M Marathe M (2015) EpiCaster: An Integrated Web
Application For Situation Assessment and Forecasting of Global Epidemics. Proceedings of the 6th ACM
Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics.

126. Adger WN, Arnell NW, Tompkins EL (2005a) Successful adaptation to climate change across scales. Glob

Environ Chang 15(2):77–86

127. Balbi S, Giupponi C, Perez P, Alberti M (2013) A spatial agent-based model for assessing strategies of adaptation
to climate and tourism demand changes in an alpine tourism destination. Environ Model Softw 45:29–51
128. Cohen A, McCarthy J (2014) Reviewing rescaling: Strengthening the case for environmental consider-

129. Adger WN, Brown K, Tompkins EL (2005b) The Political Economy of Cross-Scale Networks in Resource

130. Janssen M, de Vries B (1998) The battle of perspectives: a multi-agent model with adaptive responses to

131. Stern N (2016) Current climate models are grossly misleading. Nature 530:407–409
132. Wiedmann T, Lenzen M (2018) Environmental and social footprints of international trade. Nat Geosci 11:

314–321

133. Janssen MA, Alessa LN, Barton M, Bergin S, Lee A (2008) Towards a Community Framework for Agent-

Based Modelling. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 11(2):6

134. Rollins ND, Barton CM, Bergin S, Janssen MA, Lee A (2014) A Computational Model Library for

publishing model documentation and code. Environ Model Softw 61:59–64

135. Collier N, North M (2012) Repast HPC: A Platform for Large-Scale Agent-Based Modeling; in: Dubitzky

W., Kurowski K, Schott B (Eds.) Large-Scale Computing, 202p

136. Vervoort JM, Rutting L, Kok K, Hermans FLP, Veldkamp T, Bregt AK, van Lammeren R (2012)
Exploring dimensions, scales, and cross-scale dynamics from the perspectives of change agents in
social–ecological systems. Ecol Soc 17(4):24

137. Smajgl A (2010) Challenging beliefs through multi-level participatory modelling in Indonesia. Environ

Model Softw 25(11):1470–1476

138. Mazzega P, Therond O, Debril T, March H, Sibertin-Blanc C, Lardy R, Sant’Ana D (2014) Critical Multi-
level Governance Issues of Integrated Modelling: An Example of Low-Water Management in the Adour-
Garonne Basin (France). J Hydrol 519:2515–2526

139. Castella J-C (2009) Assessing the role of learning devices and geovisualisation tools for collective action in

natural resource management: Experiences from Vietnam. J Environ Manag 90(2):1313–1319

140. d'Aquino P, Bah A (2014) Multi-level participatory design of land use policies in African drylands: A
method to embed adaptability skills of drylands societies in a policy framework. J Environ Manag 132:
207–219

141. Delmotte S, Barbier J-M, Mouret J-C, Le Page C, Wery J, Chauvelon P, Sandoz A, Lopez-Ridaura S
(2016) Participatory integrated assessment of scenarios for organic farming at different scales in Camargue,
France. Agric Syst 143:147–158

142. Lippe M, Hilger T, Sudchalee S, Wechpibal N, Jintrawet A, Cadisch G (2017) Simulating stakeholder-
based land-use change scenarios and their implication on Above-Ground Carbon and environmental
management in Northern Thailand. Land 6(4):85

143. Barnaud C, Van Paassen A (2013) Equity, Power Games, and Legitimacy: Dilemmas of Participatory

144. Janssen MA (2017) The Practice of Archiving Model Code of Agent-Based Models. Journal of Artificial

Natural Resource Management. Ecol Soc 18(2):21

Societies and Social Simulation 20(1):1–2

145. Lippe M, Thai Minh T, Neef A, Hilger T, Hoffmann V, Lam NT, Cadisch G (2011) Building on qualitative
datasets and participatory process to simulate land use change in a mountain watershed of Northwest
Vietnam. Environ Model Softw 26(12):1454–1466

146. Le Page C, Perrotton A (2017) KILT: A Modelling Approach Based on Participatory Agent-Based
Simulation of Stylized Socio-Ecosystems to Stimulate Social Learning with Local Stakeholders. In:
Sukthankar G, Rodriguez-Aguilar JA (eds) Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: AAMAS
2017 Workshops. Visionary Papers. Springer, Cham, pp 31–44

147. Allen CR, Fontaine JJ, Pope KL, Garmestani AS (2011) Adaptive management for a turbulent future. J

Environ Manag 92(5):1339–1345

GeoInformatica

148. Le Page C, Bobo KS, Kamgaing OWT, Ngahane FB, Waltert M (2015) Interactive simulations with a
stylized scale model to codesign with villagers an agent-based model of bushmeat hunting in the periphery
of Korup National Park (Cameroon). Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 18(1):8
149. Voinov A, Bousquet F (2010) Modelling with stakeholders. Environ Model Softw 25(11):1268–1281
150. Johnson PG (2015) Agent-based models as “interested amateurs”. Land 4(2):281–299
151. Lee DB Jr (1973) Requiem for large-scale models. J Am Inst Plann 39(3):163–178
152. Lee DB (1994) Retrospective on large scale urban models. J Am Plan Assoc 60:35–40

Dr. Melvin Lippe is working as a senior scientist at the Thünen Institute of International Forestry and Forest
Economics in Hamburg, Germany. His research interest lies in the assessment of drivers and the multi-temporal
patterns of land cover/land use change (LULUC) in tropical environments. He uses participatory approaches,
GIS- and remote sensing techniques, as well as dynamic, spatially-explicit landscape models and spatial-role play
games to explain the social-ecological complexity of landscapes as tools for decision making and policy advice.

Dr. Mike Bithell is currently working as the Assistant Director of Research in Computing at the Department of
Geography, University of Cambridge. His research interests lie in numerical modelling of spatially distributed
systems, including fluid flow, atmospheric physics, climate and its interaction with ecosystems, changes in land
use and socio-economic processes.

GeoInformatica

Dr. Nick Gotts is trained in psychology and artificial intelligence. Until 1996, his research was mainly concerned
with qualitative spatial representation and reasoning in humans, other animals, and computers. Since then he has
concentrated on complex systems dynamics, particularly on agent-based social simulation, in the areas of land
use change, energy demand, and social and informational networks. Since July 2012 he has been an independent
researcher, particularly interested in ways of comparing agent-based models, and in the relationships between
analysis and simulation in the study of complex systems. He is a visiting fellow at Manchester Metropolitan
University.

Dr. Davide Natalini is Research Fellow at the Global Sustainability Institute, Anglia Ruskin University in
Cambridge, UK, where he co-leads the Global Resilience and Risk research theme. Davide is an interdisciplinary
environmental social scientist and studies complex social-ecological systems, systemic risk, and sustainable
development, with specific focus on environmental security and conflict. He implements both quantitative (e.g.
computer simulation) and qualitative (e.g. multi-stakeholder engagement) methods in his projects.

GeoInformatica

Dr. Peter Barbrook-Johnson is a UKRI Innovation Fellow and Research Fellow at the University of Surrey,
UK. His research interests are at the intersection of environmental policy, social science, and complexity science,
where he specialises in the use of agent-based modelling and participatory systems mapping of social and policy
systems.

Dr. Carlo Giupponi is a Professor at the Department of Economics of Ca′ Foscari University of Venice and
Dean of the Venice International University, Italy. His research activity focuses on sustainability science,
valuation methods, the integrated assessment and management of natural resources, with main focus on water
and agriculture, local to regional scales, and the interactions with global change drivers (climatic and socio-
economic ones).

GeoInformatica

Dr. Mareen Hallier is currently working a research associate at the Institute of Mathematics, Brandenburg
University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg, Germany. Her research focusses on the statistical analysis of
agent-based simulations of social-ecological systems. This includes for example the construction of models of
reduced complexity as well as the identification of system regimes and hierarchical pathways of change between
such regimes.

Dr. Gert Jan Hofstede is Professor of Artificial Sociality at Wageningen University, Netherlands. His long-
standing aim is teasing out the generic dynamics of human social behaviour. He co-authored the best-selling
‘Cultures and Organizations: software of the mind’. Gert Jan uses simulation gaming and social simulation using
agent-based modelling as preferred methods that integrate knowledge from many fields to yield operable
knowledge that can be applied in all kinds of practical contexts.

GeoInformatica

Dr. Christophe Le Page is working at the French agricultural research and international cooperation organiza-
tion (CIRAD UPR). His research interests involve participatory agent-based simulations and role-playing games
in the field of renewable resource management. He is involved in the development of the Cormas agent-based
simulation platform, and in designing and using simple simulation tools with local stakeholders, to share
representations and to foster dialogue.

Dr. Robin B. Matthews is a Professor and currently working at the James Hutton Institute, Aberdeen, Scotland,
UK. His overall research interests are in the processes of change and adaptation in coupled socio-ecological
systems in response to external drivers, and in using complex adaptive systems ideas and integrated modelling
approaches, including agent-based models, to understand these processes.

GeoInformatica

Dr. Maja Schlüter is an Associate Professor at the Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, Sweden.
Her research focusses on analysing and explaining the co-evolutionary dynamics of social-ecological system with
the aim to develop SES theory. She uses mathematical and agent-based modeling to test hypotheses about micro-
level causes of observed SES phenomena and to explore consequences of selected human-nature interactions
with the aim to identify patterns of interactions and outcomes across cases.

Dr. Peter Smith is a Professor at the Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences School of Biological
Sciences University of Aberdeen, Scotland, UK. His main research interests lie in the field of Global change
impacts on ecosystems, soils, agricultural and land based options to mitigate climate change, greenhouse gas
emissions, environmental and agricultural sustainability, global carbon cycle, ecosystem modelling, food security,
ecosystem services, and bioenergy (including BECCS).

GeoInformatica

Dr. Andrea Teglio is an Associate Professor at the Department of Economics of Ca′ Foscari University of
Venice, Italy. His main research interests are related to agent-based computational economics. On the one hand,
he is investigating the implications of modelling heterogeneous and interacting agents on the business cycle; on
the other, he is studying the impact of economic policy and financial regulation on the economic dynamics, both
in the case of single country settings and open economies or monetary unions.

Kevin Thellmann is currently pursuing his PhD at the Institute of Tropical Agriculture (Hans-Ruthenberg
Institute), University of Hohenheim, Germany on assessing ecosystem services in rubber dominated landscapes
in South-East Asia using biophysical modeling and transdisciplinary valuation approaches.

GeoInformatica

Affiliations

Melvin Lippe 1 & Mike Bithell 2 & Nick Gotts 3 & Davide Natalini 4 & Peter
Barbrook-Johnson 5 & Carlo Giupponi 6 & Mareen Hallier 7 & Gert Jan Hofstede 8 & Chris-
tophe Le Page 9 & Robin B. Matthews 10 & Maja Schlüter 11 & Peter Smith 12 & Andrea
Teglio 6 & Kevin Thellmann 13

1

3

5

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Thünen Institute of International Forestry and Forest Economics, Leuschnerstr. 91, 21031 Hamburg,
Germany

2 Department of Geography, University of Cambridge, Downing Place, Cambridge CB2 3EN, UK

Edinburgh, UK

4 Global Sustainability Institute, Anglia Ruskin University, East Road, Cambridge CB1 1PT, UK

Centre for Research in Social Simulation, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK

6 Department of Economics, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice and Venice International University, S. Giobbe

873, 30121 Venezia, Italy

Institute of Mathematics, Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg, Konrad-
Wachsmann- Allee 1, 03046 Cottbus, Germany

Information Technology Group, Department of Social Sciences, Wageningen University, Hollandseweg 1,
6706 Wageningen, KN, Netherlands

CIRAD, UPR GREEN, F-34398 Montpellier, France

James Hutton Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen AB15 8QH, UK

Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, Kräftriket 2B, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden

Institute of Biological & Environmental Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
23 St Machar Drive, Room G45 Aberdeen, Scotland AB24 3UU, UK

Institute of Agricultural Sciences in the Tropics (Hans-Ruthenberg-Institute), University of Hohenheim,
Garbenstr. 13, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany

