bs_bs_banner

Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3): 293–312

Research Article

A Lightweight Approach for the
Sensor Observation Service to Share
Environmental Data across Europe

Simon Jirka
52°North Initiative for Geospatial
Open Source
Software GmbH

Arne Bröring
52°North Initiative for Geospatial
Open Source
Software GmbH

Peter Kjeld
European Environment Agency

Jon Maidens
Atkins Danmark A/S

Andreas Wytzisk
52°North Initiative for Geospatial
Open Source
Software GmbH

Abstract
The importance of near real-time access to environmental data has increased
steadily over the last few years. In this article, the focus is on the European
Environment Agency (EEA), which receives environmental data from a large
number of providers. The heterogeneous data formats and data transfer mecha-
nisms make the data collection and integration a difﬁcult task for the EEA. An
approach is needed for facilitating the interoperable exchange of environmental
data on a large scale. A core element of this approach is the Sensor WebEnable-
ment (SWE) technology of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) which allows
the standardized,
interoperable, vendor and domain independent exchange of
sensor data. The main contribution of this article is a lightweight proﬁle for the
OGC Sensor Observation Service that ensures the necessary interoperability for
seamlessly integrating the environmental data provided by the EEA’s member
states and thus forms the foundation for the developed data exchange mecha-
nisms. This is complemented by information about the resulting Sensor Web archi-
tecture and the integration into the EEA’s existing IT infrastructure. In summary,

Address for correspondence: Simon Jirka, 52°North Initiative for Geospatial Open Source Software
GmbH, Martin-Luther-King-Weg 24, Münster, 48155, Germany. E-mail: jirka@52north.org

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01324.x

294

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

this article describes a practical scenario in which SWE technology enables the
exchange of near real-time environmental data on a large scale.

1 Introduction

Over the last few years, the importance of near real-time access to environmental data has
steadily increased. For organizations such as the European Environment Agency (EEA;
http://www.eea.europa.eu/) which receives environmental data from a large number of
providers, an efﬁcient exchange of data is challenging. In the case of the EEA, huge
amounts of environmental data are collected from various agencies of its member states.
The large numbers of data formats (e.g. binary, text based, or different XML variants) and
data access interfaces (e.g., FTP or proprietary web services) are causing huge integration
efforts (Kjeld et al. 2011). As shown in Figure 1, to access a new data source, the EEA needs
to understand the interface. Hence, for each new type of data source, the existing data
brokering system of the EEA needs to be manually adapted. This is the key challenge
underlying this research, to answer the question of how to build a system that enables
environmental data steams on a large scale across multi-organizational environments.
Thereby, a data stream represents the transfer of environmental observations through a
web-based infrastructure from the source, here member state agencies, to the aggregating
organization, here the EEA, as well as the forwarding to end users of environmental data.
In the past, different standardization efforts and legal frameworks have been initi-
ated to address this challenge for establishing interoperability within the context of
environmental data exchange. In Europe, the INSPIRE (European Commission 2007)
initiative and the leveraged Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standards are of most
importance. Hence, this research also builds on those building blocks. The key element
to facilitate the integration of multiple data providers is the Sensor Web Enablement
(SWE) framework of standards (Bröring et al. 2011) governed by the OGC. These are

Figure 1 Current situation – data sets from member states are provided through
heterogeneous mechanisms

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

295

used here, since they provide: (1) openness and interoperability; (2) vendor indepen-
dence; and (3) domain independence.

To answer the research question and establish SWE as a standard for a homogeneous
exchange of near real-time environmental data across Europe, several challenges need to
be addressed. A ﬁrst step to enable interoperable ﬂows of environmental data is the
deﬁnition of proﬁles that reﬂect a common agreement on how to apply the SWE
standards. As the SWE standards are deﬁned in a rather generic manner to support a very
broad range of use cases and scenarios, a pragmatic approach that reduces their com-
plexity is needed. On the one hand, such focused SWE proﬁles increase interoperability
by avoiding ambiguous interpretations. On the other hand, they reduce the necessary
implementation efforts. This resulted in a lightweight SOS proﬁle which constitutes the
main contribution of this article.

In addition, two further aspects will be introduced. First, it is shown how SWE
standards are integrated into legacy workﬂows, by looking at the use case of the EEA.
Therefore, the existing ArcGIS Server (Bader 2005) environment needs to be adapted.
Second, by providing re-usable software and documentation, the member state agencies
receive support in implementing the SWE technology. These two aspects complement the
lightweight SOS proﬁle by facilitating its practical application.

In summary, this article describes, in terms of the EEA use case scenario, how SWE
technology can be applied to enable the exchange of near real-time data on a large scale
and an approach is developed that answers the research question deﬁned in the ﬁrst
paragraph of this article. Challenges related to this approach are discussed and ways to
address them are presented.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the
relevant background of this work. Section 3 describes the underlying use cases and their
associated requirements. How to address the EEA’s requirements with a lightweight SOS
proﬁle that forms the basis for the EEA’s Sensor Web architecture is presented in Section
4. In Section 5, results are discussed. An outlook on remaining future work is given in
Section 6. Finally, Section 7 draws conclusions from the research.

2 Background

2.1 The European Environment Agency

The European Environment Agency (EEA) is an agency of the European Union (EU) with
currently 32 member states (European Environment Agency 2011). The EEA’s main task
is to provide policy makers, stakeholders and the general public with independent
information about the environment.

A core element of the EEA’s work is Eionet (http://www.eionet.europa.eu/), the
European environment information and observation network (European Environment
Agency 2005). Eionet serves as a partnership network for providing timely and quality-
assured environmental data to the member states and to cooperating countries. Thus, a
central task of the EEA is to collect data from its member states, perform quality-
assurance, and provide access to these data sets. For achieving this goal, the EEA is in
close cooperation with so called National Focal Points (NFPs) in the member states (i.e.
national environment agencies or environment ministries). Eye on Earth (http://
www.eyeonearth.org/) is a global public information service, where EEA is one of the

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

296

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

leading partners. This platform is primarily used as a dissemination platform and for
sharing data between various organizations on a global scale. This also means that data
collected within the Eionet community is intended to be shared via Eye on Earth.

This task leads to signiﬁcant streams of environmental (observation) data between
EEA and its member states. On the one hand, member states report their collected data
to the EEA. On the other hand, the EEA gives member states, policy makers, stakehold-
ers, and the general public access to collected and quality-assured data sets. This large
number of different data ﬂows, relying on often different individual protocols, is a key
driver for the EEA to aim at establishing a common, standardized, and interoperable
approach. By relying on a common standards-based protocol, the EEA expects to
signiﬁcantly reduce the currently high overheads for harmonizing incoming data formats
as well as for adjusting its systems to new data access mechanisms.

2.2 Sensor Web Enablement

The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) is an international standardization organiza-
tion. The OGC seeks to integrate spatiotemporal data and services into the World Wide
Web. To achieve this aim, the focus of the OGC is to establish interoperability and
therefore develop standards for service interfaces, data models and formats (Percivall
2008). Within the framework of OGC standards, one group of standards concerns the
integration of sensors and sensor data into spatial data infrastructures: the Sensor Web
Enablement (SWE) framework, which is especially designed to also support the transfer
and the communication of environmental observations (Botts et al. 2008).

The SWE architecture comprises information models, which represent data observed
by sensors as well as metadata describing sensors, and service models, which deﬁne the
interfaces for sensor related functionalities (i.e. access, tasking, and alerting). The SWE
framework is intentionally designed with a high degree of ﬂexibility. It is capable of
handling data measured by physical sensing devices, processed sensor data, as well as
data derived from virtual sensors, e.g. simulation models. Furthermore, it is scale and
domain independent. Also, real-time data access as well as access to archived historical
observation data can be provided via SWE (Bröring et al. 2011).

For enabling interoperable data ﬂows across Europe, three parts of the SWE frame-
work are considered: the standardized models for sensor data (Observations and Mea-
surement, O&M) and metadata (Sensor Model Language, SensorML), as well as the
Sensor Observation Service (SOS), which deﬁnes an interface for sensor data access.

2.2.1 Sensor Observation Service

The Sensor Observation Service (SOS) provides a standardized interface for accessing
sensor data in a common manner (Bröring et al. 2012). It provides operations for
retrieving both observation data (GetObservation) and sensor metadata (Describe-
Sensor). Besides these data access operations, the SOS also offers a transactional interface
(InsertSensor) and their observed data
which allows
(InsertObservation).

the insertion of

sensors

Within the EEA’s SWE architecture, the SOS interface plays a central role. It is
intended to be used by the EEA as well as the member states to provide access to their
data sets.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

297

2.2.2 Observations and Measurements

Observations and Measurements (O&M) deﬁnes a data model and encoding for obser-
vation data. While the conceptual model of O&M is deﬁned by ISO (ISO 2011), the
according XML encoding is openly available as an OGC standard (Cox 2011). O&M
provides a model for associating observed values with all relevant properties necessary
for their interpretation (location, time, observed parameter, and unit of measurement).
With regard to the SOS, O&M is used in two operations. First, O&M is the default
output of the GetObservation operation. Second, O&M is used for encoding measured
data that shall be inserted into a SOS through the InsertObservation operation.

O&M also has signiﬁcant relevance for the ofﬁcial European INSPIRE initiative
(INSPIRE Cross Thematic Working Group on Observations and Measurements 2011).
Several of the INSPIRE Annex Themes have been speciﬁed so that their scope, in
addition to the basic spatial information, includes measured, modelled, or simulated
data. As O&M is ideally suited to cover this type of data, its usage is recommended
by INSPIRE.

2.2.3 Sensor Model Language

While O&M is used for observed data, SensorML offers a model and an XML encoding
for sensor metadata (Botts and Robin 2007). Information such as the owner of a sensor,
the sensor type, identiﬁers, inputs/outputs, or geometric information about a sensor can
be described in SensorML documents. SensorML is relevant for two SOS operations.
First, it is the default output of the DescribeSensor operation. Second, it is used for
encoding the descriptions of sensors that shall be registered at a SOS through the
InsertSensor operation.

2.3 Related Sensor Web Projects

In the past years, a multitude of research projects and testbeds has been conducted to
provide sensor data in a homogeneous way by utilizing Sensor Web technology. These
projects analyzed the suitability of SWE standards and contributed to their development.
In the following a non-exhaustive selection of projects is presented.

As part of the Sixth Framework Programme, the projects OSIRIS (http://www.osiris-
fp6.eu/) (Jirka et al. 2009a) and SANY (http://sany-ip.eu/) (Klopfer and Simonis 2009)
were funded by the European Commission between 2006 and 2009. Both projects dealt
with use cases addressing environmental monitoring and risk management which incor-
porated in-situ sensors. SWE infrastructures were setup to gain interoperable access to
those sensors.

Within the Seventh Framework Programme of the EU, the projects GENESIS,
EO2HEAVEN, and ESS have built up SWE-based architectures to integrate sensors with
applications. In GENESIS, (http://www.genesis-fp7.eu/) SWE services have been used to
share air as well as water quality data to investigate the correlation between public health
factors. EO2HEAVEN (http://www.eo2heaven.org/) addresses
and environmental
human health and utilizes the SOS to monitor infections as well as human exposure to
environmental pollution. The ESS project (http://www.ess-project.eu/) makes use of SWE
services to enhance crisis management by providing real time information to decision
makers and ground forces, such as ﬁre-ﬁghters.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

298

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

As a joint project between Germany and Indonesia, GITEWS (http://www.
gitews.de/) developed a SWE based Tsunami early warning system (Raape et al. 2009).
Thereby, the SOS is used to provide access to the various sensors such as terrestrial
seismic, marine, or virtual sensors, i.e. simulations. In South Africa, the national power
supplier funded the project AFIS (Terhorst et al. 2008) which, through a SWE infrastruc-
ture, integrates in-situ weather sensors with remote sensing data for the detection of bush
ﬁres. Under the umbrella of the OGC, multiple testbeds have been conducted to evaluate
and enhance the SOS and its associated encodings. First, the Ocean Science Interoper-
ability Experiments (Oceans IE) 1 & 2 (Bermudez et al. 2006) have been conducted,
followed by the Groundwater Interoperability Experiment (http://www.opengeospatial.
org/projects/initiatives/gwie) as well as the Surface Water Interoperability Experiment
(http://www.opengeospatial.org/projects/initiatives/swie).

This work is similar to and builds upon the above listed projects and testbeds.
However, due to the need for a productive system at the EEA, the practical requirements
for this work as a foundation to answer the research question are deﬁned more clearly.
A key requirement is the proﬁle for the SOS to facilitate interoperability. The deﬁnition
of this proﬁle goes beyond the related work and is the main contribution of this research.

3 Use Cases

This section introduces the use cases of the EEA for the transfer of environmental
observation data across Europe. The following two sub-sections address two directions
of data ﬂow. First, the ﬂow of environmental data from member states to the EEA is
described (Section 3.1). Second, the access to the collected, processed, and quality-
assured observation data is described (Section 3.2). Then, Section 3.3 derives the key
requirements of the EEA from those use cases.

3.1 Reporting by Member States

An example where the data collected from the EEA member states is used is Eye on Earth
(http://www.eyeonearth.org/). Eye on Earth is a global public information service with
focus on data sharing between various organizations but also a place for the general
public to ﬁnd relevant and reliable environmental information and data. Air quality
(Ozone, PM10, and NO2) is among the many thematic topics found in Eye on Earth. This
data is transmitted on an hourly basis by the member states to the EEA using a
proprietary data format as described in Targa and Gabrielsen (2009). At the EEA the
data is received by a Microsoft BizTalk server which validates, processes, and ﬁnally
inserts the received data into a SQL Server SDE database. From here the data can be
accessed for viewing in Eye on Earth using ArcGIS Server map services. Another topic,
bathing water quality, relies on a similar mechanism.

With regard to Eye on Earth, the EEA would beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from a standard-
ized approach for the data exchange with its member states. Relying on standardized
SWE formats and interfaces the EEA would be able to discontinue the use of proprietary
software that is bound to the currently used data formats. Instead, the EEA and its
member states would be able to rely on any software supporting the SWE standards so
that the maintenance of a proprietary software infrastructure is no longer necessary.
Member states could get into a position where they can ﬂexibly choose software

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

299

Figure 2 Pushing environmental data by the EEA member states

components as long as the SWE standards are supported. As there are multiple data ﬂows
between the EEA and its member states, the ultimate goal is that a multitude of currently
used (proprietary) data formats can be narrowed down to one single standard format
supported by a broad range of software systems which can handle all occurring data
ﬂows of environmental monitoring data.

For enabling the ﬂow of data between member states of the EEA, two use cases have
to be considered: active reporting of environmental data by the member states to the EEA
( pushing the data) and harvesting of observation data by the EEA from its member states
( pulling the data).

In the ﬁrst case, the member states rely on a server provided by the EEA that offers a
standardized interface for pushing new near real-time measurement data into the systems
of the EEA. For example, a data provider in a member state would be responsible for
setting up a national measurement network for air quality. This data provider collects the
data measured by the sensor network and performs the initial processing steps (e.g.
ﬁltering out erroneous data). Subsequently, the data provider connects to the server located
at the EEA and submits the freshly collected data using the transactional SOS operations
InsertSensor and InsertObservation (see Figure 2). The advantages of this approach are
that new data can be pushed by the member states directly to the EEA as soon as it is
available and that it frees the member states from providing data access servers.

The second case is a pull-based approach. Thereby, the EEA regularly queries servers
of the member states for new data sets. The member states would be responsible for
setting up SOS servers, enabling access to their environmental observation data through
a standardized interface. By querying for new measurement data through the SOS
operation GetObservation at regular intervals, the EEA is able to retrieve the new data
sets (see Figure 3). The data transfer is initiated and controlled by the EEA. Thus, delays
may occur as new data is only transferred to the EEA systems when the regularly
scheduled query for new data is executed by the EEA. Other than in the previous
approach, new data is not automatically pushed to the EEA.

3.2 Provide Access to Environmental Data

The second group of use cases concerns the provision of data by the EEA to external
consumers, for example member states, policy makers, research projects or the general
public. The following example illustrates typical scenarios in which data consumers
beneﬁt from the provision of environmental data by the EEA through standardized
interfaces.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

300

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

Figure 3 Collection of environmental data by the EEA

An important aspect is the exchange of environmental data not only on a regional,
national, or continental level, but also globally. An example is the exchange of air quality
data between the U.S. Environment Protection Agency (US EPA) (http://www.epa.gov/)
and the EEA. The aim of this initiative is to provide more near real-time data for air
quality modelling but also the possibility for dissemination of the US EPA data into Eye
on Earth. Currently the data exchange is based on existing non-standard services, but it
shows the importance and necessity of supporting open standards in order to ease and
make data exchange robust and stable. By relying on an open and standards-based
approach, it would become possible to easily integrate other parties into a similar data
exchange. Based on this example it can be shown that the EEA would beneﬁt from a
standards-based approach as it allows the provision of environmental data to multiple
partners through a single system.

3.3 Requirements of EEA

Based on the previously described use cases, the following characteristics of the intended
SWE architecture can be derived from the EEA use cases, but can also be seen as the
general requirements for spatial data infrastructures today:

•

Interoperability: An approach is needed which ensures that different systems (at the
EEA, member states, and other data consumers) are able to communicate with each
other without the need for system adjustments.

• Vendor independency: The EEA cannot prescribe a speciﬁc software tool to its
member states. Thus, the use of an open standard is essential so that it can be
implemented within any system used by EEA partners.

• Domain independency: The approach for exchanging different types of data (e.g. air

and water quality data) shall be possible with the same protocol.

The following section introduces an approach to address these requirements by relying
on the standardized OGC SWE framework.

4 Approach

This section describes the approach that was chosen to fulﬁl the requirements of the EEA.
Section 4.1 outlines the overall architecture. Section 4.2 introduces the main contribution

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

301

of this work, the lightweight proﬁle for the SOS which aims at increasing interoperability,
in this case, between the EEA and its member states. This proﬁle is a core element for
realizing the overall architecture by specifying the concrete data formats and interfaces.
Section 4.3 presents an example of how the proﬁles described in Section 4.2 can be used
for implementing the developed architectural approach. More speciﬁcally, an extension
for ArcGIS Server is introduced which is a core element for achieving the integration of
SWE into the existing EEA infrastructure.

4.1 Architecture

The designed architecture for the EEA infrastructure is shown in Figure 4. It makes use
of the OGC SWE standards for enabling the relevant data ﬂows. These data ﬂows rely on
the O&M XML encoding and the SOS interface. Both push- and pull-based communi-
cation will be possible, although the ﬁrst iteration of the present work has focused on the
second option whereas the ﬁrst variant will be the subject of future work.

In the ﬁrst case, data providers actively transmit (i.e. push) new data through
implemented adapter components for their data sources to an SOS server at the EEA.
Therefore, the SOS at the EEA has to support the transactional extension of the SOS
interface, so that it is able to receive sensor registrations and observation insertions. This
way, the internal infrastructure of the EEA is hidden by the SOS and all data can be
delivered through the same interface.

In the second case, a harvesting component at the EEA regularly pulls sensor data
from SOS servers which are operated by agencies in the member states. The harvester
subsequently feeds the received data into the infrastructure of the EEA.

Figure 4 Overview of the architecture

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

302

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

The data handling within the EEA infrastructure needs to be embedded into the
existing software stack, which, in case of the EEA, relies on Python scripts and on
Microsoft BizTalk (Vasters 2001). For storing the collected environmental data, a MS
SQL Server is used. Special focus has been put on the development of a data model
supporting the storage and management of near real-time data (i.e. efﬁcient storage and
fast query for typical request parameters).

The SQL Server is also the data source used by the SOS extension of the ArcGIS
Server (Section 4.3). This extension makes it possible to offer the data in the underlying
database to internal and external data consumers through SOS servers. Thus, the EEA is
not only able to collect the data from the member states in a standardized way but also
makes it accessible in an interoperable manner.

The elements of this architecture are being implemented in an iterative manner. The
lightweight SOS proﬁle described in Section 4.2 is the basis for instantiating this archi-
tecture, as the proﬁle offers a detailed approach for how the different SWE interfaces,
data models and data formats shall be applied.

4.2 Lightweight SOS Proﬁle

The OGC SWE framework plays a central role in the system architecture. For achieving
interoperability between different parties, proﬁles of the relevant SWE standards are
necessary. The reason for this lies in the high ﬂexibility of the SWE framework. This
ﬂexibility makes it possible to apply SWE standards to a very large number of different
scenarios, domains and sensor types. At the same time, this ﬂexibility requires that
several parts of the standards are optional so that these elements are not supported by
every implementation. In addition, it is possible that there is more than one way to
encode certain sensor observations and metadata. Thus, proﬁles are important to restrict
the SWE standards to a minimum set of elements which have to be implemented by every
proﬁle compliant software package. In this work, a lightweight SOS proﬁle for stationary
in-situ sensors was developed. As the second generation of the SWE standards has been
published or is in the ﬁnal stages of the speciﬁcation process (Bröring et al. 2011), the 2.0
versions of the different standards are used. Detailed information about this proﬁle can
be found in a dedicated OGC document (Jirka et al. 2011).

From the SOS, four operations are included in the proﬁle. The GetCapabilities
operation allows retrieving a description of the content and allowed operation param-
eters of a SOS server. To load measurement data from an SOS server the GetObservation
operation can be used whereas metadata about the sensors can be accessed by sending
DescribeSensor requests. Finally, the GetFeatureOfInterest operation is intended for
serving the geometric descriptions of features associated with observations. A more
detailed description of which parameters are supported for the different operations of the
lightweight SOS proﬁle can be found in Table 1 (the GetCapabilities operation is not
shown in this table, as it does not include any restrictions). Because the realization of
active data pushing from member states to the EEA has not been included in the ﬁrst
phase of this work, the transactional SOS operations have been included in the archi-
tectural concept but not yet in the lightweight SOS proﬁle. To reduce the complexity, this
work has focused on the core operations of the SOS speciﬁcation.

Developing a proﬁle for the O&M standard is a core element of this work as it
deﬁnes the format of environmental data ﬂowing from the member states to the EEA and
from the EEA to data consumers. The most important restriction of the O&M proﬁle is

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

303

Table 1 Overview of the SOS operations and their parameters

Operation

Supported Parameters

Explanation

DescribeSensor

procedure

The identiﬁer of the sensor for

procedure

One or more identiﬁers of the

GetObservation

observedProperty

One or more identiﬁers of the

offering

temporalFilter

which a description is requested.
This parameter is mandatory.
The identiﬁer of the offering that

contains the data requested by the
user. This parameter is optional.
The time for which sensor data are

requested. In the lightweight SOS
proﬁle this is restricted to a time
period or a time instant. This
parameter is optional.

sensors from which observations
are requested. This parameter is
optional.

phenomena which are of interest
to the user. This parameter is
optional.

geographic features for which
observations are requested. This
parameter is optional.

The area for which observations are
requested. In the lightweight SOS
proﬁle the spatialFilter is restricted
to bounding boxes. This parameter
is optional.

geographic features which shall be
returned. This parameter is
optional.

features are requested. In the
lightweight SOS proﬁle the
spatialFilter is restricted to
bounding boxes. This parameter
is optional.

One or more identiﬁers of the
phenomena that shall be
measured at the geographic
features returned to the user.
This parameter is optional.

featureOfInterest

One or more identiﬁers of the

spatialFilter

featureOfInterest

One or more identiﬁers of the

spatialFilter

The area for which geometric

GetFeatureOfInterest

observedProperty

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

304

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

Table 2 Overview of the elements of the different observation types (all elements are
mandatory)

Element

Explanation

identiﬁer
phenomenonTime

An identiﬁer of the observation.
The time when the observation was performed. This can be

either a time instant or a time period.

The point in time when the observation became available
(e.g. after all processing steps were completed). If no
post-processing is performed, the resultTime is usually
identical to the phenomenonTime.

procedure
observedProperty
featureOfInterest

The identiﬁer of the sensor that has produced the observation.
The phenomenon for which the observation contains data.
The identiﬁer of the geometric feature to which the

resultTime

result

observation is associated. Within the lightweight SOS
proﬁle only sampling points are allowed as features of
interest.

The observed value. The speciﬁc data types differs between
the observation types included in the lightweight SOS
proﬁle:

Observation Type
Measurement

Type of the results
A scalar value including the unit

of measurement.

CountObservation

An integer value describing a

TruthObservation

A Boolean value (either true or

CategoryObservation

A term from a pre-deﬁned

TextObservation

Any kind of free text.

count.

false).

vocabulary.

the focus on a limited set of observation types. This avoids large overheads for software
developers to support exotic observation types while still covering all of the common
requirements occurring in practice. The observation type with the highest relevance
within the proﬁle is the Measurement which can be used for encoding scalar values.
However, other data types are also supported. For integer values the CountObservation
is available, for Boolean values the TruthObservation, for categorical values the Catego-
ryObservation, and for textual values the TextObservation can be used. A detailed
overview of the elements that need to be included in an O&M document according to the
lightweight SOS proﬁle is described in Table 2. Figure 5 shows an example how such an
O&M document is encoded.

With regard to SensorML a minimum set of mandatory metadata was deﬁned to
specify how sensor metadata provided by the member states to the EEA and by the EEA
to its consumers has to be encoded. On the one hand, the SensorML proﬁle comprises
general descriptive elements (e.g. textual descriptions, keywords, classiﬁers). On the

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

305

Figure 5 O&M excerpt

other hand, more technical information such as identiﬁers of the sensor, relationships to
geographic features and the outputs of a sensor are covered by the proﬁle. The detailed
description of these elements is provided in Table 3.

The SOS operations, their parameters as well as the encoding proﬁles are essential
for the deﬁned architecture. The next section introduces an example how the described
lightweight SOS proﬁle is implemented in practice for the ArcGIS Server environment at
EEA.

4.3 ArcGIS Server SOS Extension

The existing EEA infrastructure utilizes ArcGIS Server (Bader 2005) to provide environ-
mental data. Also, many EEA member state organizations make use of this technology.
To enable an easy integration of the SOS into legacy systems, the starting point for
implementing the developed SWE architecture based on the lightweight SOS proﬁle was
the design of an extension for ArcGIS Server which provides the functionality of the SOS
interface and implements the lightweight SOS proﬁle. In the future, further implemen-
tations of the lightweight SOS proﬁle will be available.

On top of a database, hosting the environmental data, an ArcGIS Server and its
typically used Map Service are set up with the default deployment routines. Then, the
new SOS Extension is added to the Map Service to provide the additional interface
functionality. Without this extension, the data is accessible via the GeoServices REST API
(Esri 2010), an interface which is currently going through the OGC standardization
process. By adding the SOS Extension, the data becomes available via the interface of the
OGC SOS standard (Section 2.2.1).

For this ArcGIS Server SOS Extension two key development steps have been under-
taken. At ﬁrst, a data model for near real-time observation data used by the database was
designed. This data model is aligned with the O&M 2.0 standard (Section 2.2.2) as well
as the proposed lightweight proﬁle (Section 4.2). The elements of this data model reﬂect
the key types of O&M, such as observation, feature of interest, and procedure. Ground-
ing the data model in O&M makes it generic enough to support various data sets from
differing domains.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

306

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

Table 3 Overview of the elements to be included in a SensorML document (all ele-
ments are mandatory)

Element

Explanation

description
identiﬁer
keywords

Textual description of the sensor.
A unique identiﬁer for the sensor.
Human readable keywords that describe the sensor.

These keywords are of special relevance for enabling
sensor discovery.

identiﬁcation

Further names of the sensor (this shall be a short name

classiﬁcation

Classiﬁers characterising the sensor. There shall be one

as well as a long name).

classiﬁer describing the sensor type.

contacts
featuresOfInterest

Contact information about the operator of the sensors.
A list of references to features of interest which

outputs

represent the geographic objects for which the sensor
is delivering observations. Within the lightweight SOS
proﬁle only sampling points are allowed as features of
interest.

The outputs of the sensor. This comprises on the one
hand a list of observed properties and on the other
hand the data types (if applicable including the unit of
measurement). For restrictions on the supported data
types please refer to Table 2 which describes the
allowed observation types in the lightweight SOS
proﬁle.

In a second step, the interface of the ArcGIS Server SOS Extension was developed.
Before a fully OGC SOS compliant interface has been implemented, a simpler resource-
oriented interface was designed, which follows the principles of the GeoServices REST
API (Esri 2010) that is natively supported by ArcGIS Server. An overview of the resource-
oriented SOS interface is presented in Figure 6. Observations, features, and procedures
are the key resources that can be directly accessed, since each entity has its own URL, or
query operations can be used to ﬁlter resources temporally, spatially or thematically.

On top of this interface for resources of the environmental data model, the SOS
operations proposed by the lightweight proﬁle are implemented. The GetObservation
operation is returning observation entities, the DescribeSensor operation returns meta-
data about procedures, and the GetFeatureOfInterest operation is used to give access to
the features resource.

The resulting ArcGIS Server SOS extension is not limited to the EEA case. Instead it
is made publically available so that it can be used by other data providers for enabling
their ArcGIS infrastructures to support the SWE standards. Thus, it can be considered a
ﬁrst practical implementation of the described SWE architecture and proﬁles for enabling
the cross-European exchange of environmental data. However, further implementations
in different software environments will follow in the future.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

307

Figure 6 Overview of resources accessible via the SOS extension interface

5 Application and Discussion

For verifying the lightweight SOS proﬁle (Section 4.2), it was integrated into the open
source implementation of the 52°North Sensor Observation Service (http://52north.org/
sos). The operations of the lightweight SOS proﬁle, GetCapabilities, GetObservation,
DescribeSensor and GetFeatureOfInterest, were implemented supporting the parameters
listed in the proﬁle speciﬁcation. By linking the SOS to the 52°North Thin SOS Client
(http://52north.org/communities/sensorweb/clients/Thin_SWE_Client) it was possible to
verify that the operations and parameters included in the lightweight proﬁle are sufﬁcient
to support typical functionality such as sensor data access and visualization.

In addition, the ArcGIS Server SOS Extension (Section 4.3) has been deployed and
tested for a data set provided by the EEA(http://www.eea.europa.eu/maps/ozone/
resources/about-the-data) which has been generated by a network of around 1,500 air
quality stations all across Europe, as shown in Figure 7. In this example setup, 30 days
of data comprising over one million observations were loaded into an SQL Server
database. Via the SOS Extension, observations as well as metadata about the sensor
network stations can be accessed. (The endpoint URL of this example deployment of
the ArcGIS Server SOS Extension is: http://ags.dev.52north.org:6080/arcgis/rest/
services/AirQualityEurope/MapServer/exts/SosSOE)

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

308

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

Figure 7 Network of air quality sensor stations across Europe

The ﬁrst test results have shown the applicability of the SWE framework and the
lightweight SOS proﬁle to near real-time data streams as they occur in practice at the
EEA. However, several aspects need further work. Investigations are necessary to deter-
mine if additional observation types for more compact encodings of the measured values
should be included in the lightweight SOS proﬁle. Currently, the volume of the trans-
mitted O&M documents is rather large due to the verbose XML encoding. Single O&M
observations are used for each measured value. The structure of those single O&M
observations is plain XML and thus easier to parse. O&M also allows the encoding of
data as comma separated values (CSV) by utilizing the SWE Common Data Model
standard (Robin 2010). Figure 8 shows the difference in size of these two alternative
O&M encoding styles. It is clear that the CSV way of encoding the data is much more
efﬁcient. However, with today’s high bandwidth networks, also the transmission of
around 700 KB for 1,000 data values in the XML style encoding does not necessarily
result in performance issues.

Although the lightweight SOS proﬁle offers a very simple approach for implement-
ing SWE, it still has some inherent complexity. Thus, the more and more popular
REST concepts (Richardson and Ruby 2007) have to be considered. As REST-based
interfaces offer a very simple way to communicate with web services, a REST
approach for the SOS 2.0 standard may need to be considered in the future to facilitate
the linking of applications to the EEA’s SOS servers. The SOS extension for the Geo-
Services REST API developed here (Section 4.3) is a candidate for such a REST-based
interface design.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

309

Figure 8 The size of different O&M encoding styles

Finally, it is important to gain acceptance of the developed infrastructure by further
stakeholders through practice. Although the EEA is at the core of the system, the
practical application within its member states is critical. This may also lead to further
requirements and experiences that will help to improve the current version of the
architecture as well as its implementations.

To contribute to the ﬁndings of this work, the lightweight SOS proﬁle was presented
and published as a Discussion Paper (Jirka et al. 2011) during the OGC Technical
Committee meeting in Brussels (Belgium) in November 2011. First feedback on the
proﬁle has been encouraging. Suggestions for further enhancements in the future con-
cerned primarily the inclusion of additional observation types so that data arrays for
sensor data can be encoded using comma separated values and to reduce the amount of
XML elements.

6 Outlook

In future, this work will focus on the transition of the developed approach into an
operational mode. After the deployment in the EEA’s infrastructure, it is important to
establish SWE based reporting and data exchange with the EEA’s member states. This
step goes beyond the deployment at the EEA. On the one hand, it is important to
make sure that member states interested in implementing SWE will have access to the
necessary SWE components. The support of the lightweight SOS proﬁle within com-
monly used software (e.g. ArcGIS Server, ArcGIS Desktop, 52°North SOS) is a very
important step towards this goal. On the other hand, to increase the acceptance and
implementation of SWE in the EEA’s member states, further support is necessary. This
includes especially the provision of best practice documentation, tutorials and training
workshops.

The practical implementation of the data ﬂows between the member states and the
EEA will also require further work. Push-based data transmission has been included in
the general architecture but not yet included in the SOS proﬁle. Before it is included,
advanced aspects such as synchronization of data sets will be the subject of future work.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

310

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

Regarding the lightweight SOS proﬁle for stationary in-situ sensors (Section 4.2), the
aim is to advance it to an ofﬁcially adopted OGC standard. In order to achieve this goal,
further open discussion with the OGC community is necessary to ﬁne-tune the existing
Discussion Paper (Jirka et al. 2011) and to reach consensus on necessary enhancements
(e.g. regarding the support of additional observation types).

The presented implementation of the ArcGIS Server SOS Extension (Section 4.3)
enables the EEA and the member state organizations to easily extend their existing
infrastructure to support the SOS interface. This extension supports not only an OGC
SOS conformant way of retrieving observations, and metadata about features and
sensors, it also provides a resource-oriented perspective on the O&M model. This
resource-oriented interface follows the principles of the GeoServices REST API (Esri
2010) which is currently making its way through the OGC standardization process. This
resource oriented, and REST-based interface of the SOS Extension is aligned with the
OGC SOS standard and can be considered as a new implementation of the conceptual
model of SOS 2.0. In future, this extension of the GeoServices REST API for providing
observation data will also be brought into the standardization process at the OGC.

Another challenge is the discovery of the available environmental data sets. The
current scope of the work is focused on the exchange of environmental data through
standardized data models and interfaces. Enabling discovery in such a Sensor Web
architecture will be element of future work (Jirka et al. 2009b).

7 Conclusions

This article addresses the research question of how to build a system that allows the
sharing of environmental data on a large scale across multi-organizational environments
by developing a standards-based approach. As this work is driven by the European
Environment Agency (EEA), one goal was to make sure that the requirements from
practice are well covered. The key achievement of the presented work is the lightweight
proﬁle for OGC’s SOS, which facilitates the implementation of SWE and enhances
interoperability. We have implemented this lightweight proﬁle in an SOS Extension for
ArcGIS Server, which is needed to support many existing spatial data infrastructures, as
seen in case of the EEA.

Although the presented work is strongly inﬂuenced by the EEA and its practical
requirements, the transfer of the results to other use case scenarios is straightforward.
The lightweight SOS proﬁle has been developed in a use case independent manner so that
stakeholders dealing with stationary, in situ sensors are able to re-use this key outcome
of this research.

With regards to future developments, the practical deployment at the EEA as well as
in member states will be important steps. Thus, the presented results will be a core
element for enabling the exchange of environmental data across Europe.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the European Environment Agency (EEA).

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

A Lightweight Approach for the Sensor Observation Service

311

References

Bader E 2005 ArcGIS Server Administrator and Developer Guide. Redlands, CA, Esri
Bermudez L, Bogden P, Bridger E, Creager G, Forrest D, and Graybeal J 2006 Toward an ocean
observing system of systems. In Proceedings of the Oceans 2006 Conference, Boston,
Massachusetts

Botts M and Robin A 2007 OGC Implementation Speciﬁcation: Sensor Model Language (Sen-

sorML) 1.0.0 (07-000). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium

Botts M, Percivall G, Reed C, and Davidson J 2008 OGC sensor web enablement: overview and
high level architecture. In Nittel S, Labrinidis A, and Stefanidis A (eds) Advances in GeoSensor
Networks. Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 4540: 175–90

Bröring A, Echterhoff J, Jirka S, Simonis I, Everding T, Stasch C, Liang S, and Lemmens R 2011

New generation sensor web enablement. Sensors 11: 2652–99

Bröring A, Stasch C, and Echterhoff J 2012 OGC Implementation Standard: OGC Sensor Obser-
vation Service, Version 2.0, Candidate Standard (12-006). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial
Consortium

Cox S 2011 OGC Implementation Speciﬁcation: Observations and Measurements (O&M) – XML

Implementation 2.0 (10-025r1). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium
Esri 2010 GeoServices REST Speciﬁcation, Version 1.0. Redlands, CA, Esri White Paper
European Commission 2007 Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 14 March 2007 Establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European
Community (INSPIRE). Brussels, Belgium, European Commission

European Environment Agency 2005 Eionet Connects. Copenhagen, European Environment

Agency

europa.eu/about-us

European Environment Agency 2011 EEA: Who We Are. WWW document, http://www.eea.

INSPIRE Cross Thematic Working Group on Observations and Measurements 2011 D2.9 Guide-
lines for the Use of Observations and Measurements and Sensor Web Enablement-related
Standards in INSPIRE Annex II and III Data Speciﬁcation Development. WWW document,
http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/Data_Speciﬁcations/D2.9_O&M_Guidelines_V1.0.
pdf

ISO 2011 ISO 19156:2011 – Geographic Information – Observations and Measurements –

International Standard. Geneva, International Organization for Standardization

Jirka S, Bröring A, and Stasch C 2009a Applying OGC sensor web enablement to risk monitoring
and disaster management. In Proceedings of the GSDI 11 World Conference, Workshop on
Sensor Web Enablement: Strengthening the SDI, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

Jirka S, Bröring A, and Stasch C 2009b Discovery mechanisms for the sensor web. Sensors 9:

2661–81

Jirka S, Stasch C, and Bröring A 2011 OGC Lightweight SOS Proﬁle for Stationary In-Situ Sensors.

Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium Discussion Paper No 11-169

Kjeld P, Bliki J, Jirka S, and Wytzisk A 2011 Sensor web technology for sharing environmental data
across Europe. In Proceedings of the INSPIRE Conference 2011, Edinburgh, Scotland
Klopfer M and Simonis I 2009 SANY: An Open Service Architecture for Sensor Networks. WWW

document, http://www.sany-ip.eu/publications/3317

Percivall G 2008 OGC Reference Model (OGC 08-062r4). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial

Consortium

Raape U, Tessmann S, Wytzisk A, Steinmetz T, Wnuk M, Hunold M, Strobl C, Stasch C,
Walkowski A C, Meyer O, and Jirka S 2009 Decision support for tsunami early warning in
Indonesia: The role of standards. In Geertman S, Reinhardt W, and Toppen F (eds) Cartog-
raphy and Geoinformatics for Early Warning and Emergency Management. Berlin, Springer
Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography Vol. 2: 233–47

Richardson L and Ruby S 2007 RESTful Web Services. Sebastopol, CA, O’Reilly Media
Robin A 2010 SWE Common Data Model, Encoding Standard, Version 2.0 (OGC 08-094r1).

Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium

Targa J and Gabrielsen P 2009 Setting Up an Additional Near Real-time Data Exchange with a
National or Regional Provider. WWW document, http://eea.eionet.europa.eu/Public/irc/

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

312

S Jirka, A Bröring, P Kjeld, J Maidens and A Wytzisk

eionet-circle/airclimate/library?l=/public/real-time_operational/real-time_maintenance/
p7141a_additional/_EN_2.5_&a=d

Terhorst A, Moodley D, Simonis I, Frost P, McFerren G, Roos S, and Bergh F 2008 Using the sensor
web to detect and monitor the spread of vegetation ﬁres in southern Africa. In Nittel S,
Labrinidis A, and Stefanidis A (eds) Advances in GeoSensor Networks. Berlin, Springer
Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 4540: 239–51

Vasters C F 2001 BizTalk Server 2000: A Beginner’s Guide. New York, McGraw-Hill Professional

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

