The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 2

pp. 176–185 May 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Typography in the Eyes of Bertin, Gender and Expertise
Variation

Rasha Deeb, Kristien Ooms and Philippe De Maeyer

Department of Geography, Gent University, Krijgslaan 281, S8, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
Email: rasha.deeb@UGENT.be

The main goal of this research is to set a group of typographic criteria to suit a wide array of map users. A group of Bertin’s
visual variables were applied individually and associatively for the same set of labels. Two kinds of maps (with point and
areal objects) were presented to expert and non-expert map users and analysed accordingly. Additionally, the effect of
gender variation was taken into account. The data were aggregated and studied for each graphical variable. For some
combinations of Bertin’s variables, statistically significant differences were detected in the preferences of the different map
users (e.g. male versus female and expert versus non-expert). Consequently, we identified which graphical variables
(individually or combined) were more preferred by specific user groups in relation to their application on text objects.

Keywords: Bertin’s variables, user preference, text variations

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES

Reading a map is a task that cannot be accomplished unless
textual elements are provided. These texts, and more
speciﬁcally the labels on the map image, can be considered
the fourth symbol type in addition to points, lines and areas.
This ﬁnding implies that certain rules should be applied in
the typographic design (Fairbairn, 1993).

Board and Taylor (1976) demonstrated the advantages of
using a conventional symbology and its inﬂuence on reading
names. Gerber (1981) identiﬁed reading labels as a midterm
level of the reading process, while Robinson and Petchenik
(1976) deﬁned the reading as an active process and a
transaction between the individual and the environment.
Therefore, it is important to know how much information is
transferred to each reader.

Variations in how labels are presented on the map (e.g. size
and colour value to indicate a hierarchy) facilitate the
interpretation of the contents (Imhof, 1975). Bartz (1970a)
also examined the inﬂuence of font size and its adequate
dimension. When used incorrectly, however, the variations in
label presentation may inﬂuence the interpretation of the
map’s contents in a negative way. Therefore, it is necessary to
know which type of variation can be used on map labels to
allow efﬁcient interpretation.

Bertin (1970) deﬁned six visual variables (size, value,
texture, colour, orientation and shape) that are applied to the
symbols on a map to visualize properties of objects or links
between objects, including associativity, selectivity, order
and quantity. In Table 1, the links between the six visual
variables and their properties are illustrated.

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000011

Text can be considered the fourth symbol type, therefore
these visual variables should also be applicable in this case
(Fairbairn, 1993). Text objects on a map do not have the
same design rules as point, line and area objects. It is distinct
in the way visual variables are applied. The ‘translation’ of the
application of these visual variables to text symbol type is
described below and illustrated in Table 2:
N size is applied to text by changing the font size,
consuming more space on the map for larger corpus and
less space for smaller corpus. In this article, points (dots)
are used to indicate texts sizes. Boldness was added to this
variable as the word consumes more space for the same
font size. Size provides selective, ordered and quantitative
perception. Therefore, variations in size can indicate
quantitative information like the population of a city,
but this can also be used to order information (discrete
classes indicating population levels) using levels of
hierarchy among the different label classes;
N value is defined by Bertin (1970) as the ratio between
black and white perceived on a given surface. Changing
the value of the typographical variable serves order and
selectivity, but it is still a critical concern when the
printing method is used (grey tone or coloured), in
addition to the background of the map. Based on the
variation in value, different label levels with hierarchal
purposes are served;
N texture (or pattern) is represented by a combination of
differing text characteristics. The texture of typographi-
cal symbols is linked with the overall
layout of the
individual word, such as the narrow or wide spacing of

Typography in the Eyes of Bertin, Gender and Expertise Variation

177

Table 1. Levels of organisation of the visual variables. After Bertin

(1970, ﬁg. 2, p. 69)

Visual variable

Associativity

Selectivity Order Quantity

Size
Value
Texture
Colour
Orientation
Shape

letters. In addition to that, texture is recognized by the
overall view of all textual elements on the map image,
reflecting the relationship of labelled features. Size and
value work together to provide infinitive array of
textures. Texture is an associative variable that allows
users to identify variations and group correspondences
within all depicted categories. Selectivity and order can
also be visualized using this variable. These properties
can thus be used to indicate a distinct theme (e.g.
continent versus ocean) or certain label hierarchy (e.g.
city versus village);
N colour (or hue) of texts is the attribute of the visual
sensation on a fixed saturation and value. Colours
provide both an associative and a selective perception.
Text colour can work functionally and is usually
employed to differentiate between themes, such as blue
for water bodies and red for danger;
N orientation can be applied to text either on each
individual character (italic), or by tilting the whole word.
Orientation plays an important role in the associative and
selective perception. Unlike in books, texts on maps can

Table 2. Bertin’s variables on text

follow many orientations to stress the shape of the
labelled object, such as rivers or countries;
N shape is represented using different fonts. ‘The world of
shape is infinite’, Bertin said, and this holds also true for
fonts.
text objects with an unlimited number of
Associativity is the property that is obtained by using
different shapes, which allows the map reader to
distinguish between different categories and group
similar objects. Consequently, shape can describe differ-
ent themes at the same level of importance. This is
commonly used when labelling, for example, land use
maps.

After Bertin deﬁned these visual variables and their proper-
ties, some authors took a closer look at them in the light of
new psychological theories or cartographic development.
Imhof (1975) added the variable position which he also
applied to texts as a label can be placed at a number of
(ﬁxed) locations relative to its associated objects. He
described the four preference positions of labels associated
with point objects as the upper right corner, lower right
corner, upper left corner and lower left corner. The
investigation of the optimal position for labels, however,
is not discussed in this paper. MacEachren (1995)
thoroughly discussed the visual variables based on their x,
y dimensions together with their numerical, ordinal and
nominal applications. In addition to the dimensions of the
symbology, modern cartography also allowed the develop-
ment of new variables, such as sound (MacEachren and
Taylor, 1994) and time (Kraak et al., 1997). Koch (2001)
referred to Bertin’s variables as an application of the Gestalt
laws, which describe rules of similarity and good design.
These laws have been extended after Bertin, but they are

178

The Cartographic Journal

still valid in the modern cartography. For 2K D and 3D
representations, Slocum et al. (2005) rephrased Bertin’s 2D
variables using spacing, size, perspective height, orien-
tation, shape, arrangement and ﬁnally hue, lightness and
saturation.

The legibility of maps has been a concern of cartogra-
phers since they started developing cartographic products.
Additionally, maps are widely used products by many
different groups of users. Consequently, text as a distinct
component requires special care in the long-term develop-
ment of maps. Locating names based on typographic
variations and measuring the completion times of tasks
were explored by Bartz (1970b), who conducted a series of
experiments in which participants had to locate names on a
map. This gave insights
in the efﬁciency of certain
typographic variables towards the map user. Foster and
Kirkland (1971) studied the association between text and
different colours. Phillips et al. (1977) compared the
response times of users related to different text character-
istics, such as size, boldness and shape, for difﬁcult and easy
names. Kraak and Ormeling (2010) deﬁned rules for texts
on maps to improve their readability. They also suggested
utilizing different textual variables to produce a more
readable map that also meets the needs of
the text
functions.

The studies mentioned above investigated the legibility
of labels using the amount of time a map user needs to
complete a task. However, none of these studies considered
the combination of all Bertin’s variables and their imple-
mentation on the textual information on maps as well as
their inﬂuence on the legibility of the map. These studies
also used paper maps to examine a range of individual text
variables and ﬁxation time measurement to indicate the best
text visualisation. Furthermore, no link was made from the
application of Bertin’s variables to texts. This paper aims to
extend these studies by measuring user preferences when
applying Bertin’s variables to texts (excluding colour and
value), taking into account experience and gender as each of
these groups may respond differently to maps.

When designing a map, different choices have to be
made: type of map, theme of the map, map audience, use of
the map, etc. Two of the most important types of maps are
topographic and thematic maps. The way the labels are
placed and visualized on these maps greatly depends on
their type, theme and audience. In the study described in
this paper, two basic map types are used: maps with point
data and maps with areal data which are all labelled. The
ﬁrst category (with point data) can refer to topographic
maps, isopleths maps and dot maps whereas the second
category (areal data) can refer to the majority of qualitative
and quantitative thematical maps such as choropleth maps,
soil maps, socio-cultural maps and socio-economical maps.
A blank background maps are used as a basic of extensive
studies where more complex map design will be tested and
colour and value will be tackled.

The experiment is a user study in which the participant must
choose one of two maps that have variations in how labels are
visualized (cf. Bertin’s variables). Since different types of users
are included in the study (experts, non-experts, females and
males), the outcome of the study reveals whether cartographic
training and practice inﬂuences label preference on maps. This

preference?

general space of the map?

method allows differentiating the variables used on maps
according to who the map intended for. The objective of the
experiment is to answer the following questions:
N what size does the audience prefer in its ratio to the
N what is the influence of bold fonts on the audience’s
N what kind of fonts does the user tend to accept more?
N which aspect of the orientation variable do the audience
N what is the influence of simple label textures and complex
N do all users have the same preferences when there are
variations in the level of experience in map use and in gender?
N how different levels of label hierarchy can be presented
using Bertin’s variables and what is the impact of these
designs on users’ preference?

label textures on users’ preference?

prefer the most?

THE METHODOLOGY

An experiment was constructed to examine the users’
preference towards
the application of Bertin’s visual
variables to texts for both point and areal data. The study
provides an overview of map users’ preferences of labelling
characteristics based on variation in experience and gender.

Participants
A group of 80 map users participated in the study. They
were divided according to the criteria experience and
gender. The non-expert group included 50 participants in
the beginning of their geographical education, with no
previous training in cartography. The other group of
participants consisted of 30 experts who work with maps
on a daily basis and have at least a master’s degree in
geography. Of the 80 participants, 35 were female and 45
male divided in balance across experts (15 females and 15
males) whereas the non-expert group consisted of 20
females and 30 males. The average age of the users was
23.3 years, with the experts’ average on 27.3 years and the
non-experts on 20.4 years. By taking into account experi-
ence and gender, it was possible to detect what inﬂuence
the users’ backgrounds had on their preferences regarding
labels on maps.

Task, stimuli and data
Forty-one maps were presented to the users during the
experiment in pairs or triples, forming 79 sets of questions.
Base maps were drawn at the scale of 1 : 100 0001. These
maps were designed with a blank background in order to
acquire neutral results of users’ preference. The study had
both a between- and within-user design. The ﬁrst part of
the experiment involved maps populated with point data
and their associated labels. The graphical variables size,
shape and texture were applied to the map labels to visualize
levels of importance in the labels and thus in the associated
objects. An example of such a pair of maps is depicted in
the experiment,
Figure 1. During the second part of
labels
variations in the size, shape and orientation of

Typography in the Eyes of Bertin, Gender and Expertise Variation

179

Figure 1. Example of the ranking task for point data (variable: texture)

associated with areal objects were investigated. Two maps
from these experiments are illustrated in Figure 2. Bertin’s
variables were applied (individually and combined) and
integrated in a coherent structure for both series. Colour
and value were excluded from these stimuli because the
function of these variables is mainly to indicate the nature of
the visualised object (Kraak and Ormeling, 2010) which is
not the domain of this research. In addition to that, text
colour and value cannot work functionally with a blank
background because of the consistent interaction between
the text foreground and the background’s colours.

To avoid biases in the answers due to resolution and size
differences, all participants completed their test on a ﬂat
screen with a 128061024 resolution. Each participant
followed the same order of maps in a sequence that lasted
20–30 minutes.

These trials were embedded in an online questionnaire in
which two or
three maps appeared on the screen
simultaneously. The participant then indicated a ranking,
which was subsequently stored in a database. The result was

an ordered list of the maps for each participant, indicating
his preferences on the readability of the maps for the
different visualized graphical variables.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Measurement of preference and typographic quality for all users
Map aesthetics is an important aspect of cartographic work.
To recall organized cartographic symbols factually and
sensibly, care should be taken in choosing the adequate
symbols for a wide range of audiences. Therefore, a variety
of typographic symbols were presented to the map audience
to test which presentation was preferred. The collected data
were accumulated and restructured to indicate the prefer-
able criteria between each set of maps.

A selection of criteria was used to obtain the most
preferred quality that measures aesthesis. Typographic

Figure 2. Example of the ranking task for areal data (variable: size)

180

Table 3. Font size overall preference

Font size

A
B
C
D

A

0
47
20
9

B

33
0
31
6

C

49
60
0
18

D

62
74
71
0

Total

144
181
122
33

criteria were analytically organized and grouped in order to
reﬂect four major mapping purposes:
N the equivalent use of criteria of names and labels
N the hierarchal use of criteria of names and labels
N the thematical use of criteria
N a combination of the above purposes, for example to

emphasize certain elements.

Thanks to the combination possibilities of visual variables,
numerous functionalities can be expressed using different
levels of complexity. One of the most important functions is
the hierarchical importance which can be embedded in three
levels of complexity. Complexity refers to the systematic
combination of the visual variables. Accordingly, the labels
(and maps) used in this study were divided into three levels of
complexity:
N first level of complexity: one of Bertin’s visual variable
was assigned to labels and text (e.g. showing hierarchy
using only different font sizes);
N second level of complexity: two variables were combined
or labels were presented in a hierarchical way using a
visual variable in addition to font size;
N third level of complexity: formed by using more than two
associated variables. Complex hierarchy is formed by
adding two visual variables to font size which can be
linked to it to form different hierarchal textures (case
styles, boldness, etc.).

Size
Regarding the ﬁrst level of complexity, size as a typogra-
phical variable varied from 8- to 14-font size. Due to the
fact that the map’s dimensions were transferred according
to the test structure, the sizes used were called A, B, C and
D2. These sizes were compared pair wise and summed to
reveal which font size was preferred. The results, listed in
Table 3, show the order of preference to be B–A–C–D.
Although font size measurement was changed due to map
scale changes, the users’ preference was calculated for the
overall view of map and the ratio of label size to the area
size. When only considering the labels’ font sizes, the
largest size (D) showed the least interest from the users and
consequently, it did not acquire a high rate of aesthetics

Table 4. Boldness effect on text preference

The Cartographic Journal

evaluation. Here, the label size D is considered too big
relative to the area that they cover. Size C is also rather large
but it has a noticeable higher preference rate than D. The
smallest size did not match the highest preference rate
compared to size B which is the most preferred size.
Consequently, this reﬂects the highest aesthetics design by
the symmetry and harmony between the label font size and
the district size. This result demonstrates the relation
between the labels to their depicted area.

The second level of complexity was also related to the size
of the labels; however, in this case, bold and uppercase
characters were used to indicate hierarchy. The variations in
the case styles were presented using ‘all letters in lowercase’,
‘only ﬁrst letter in uppercase’ and ‘all letters in upper case’.
These levels of hierarchy were both tested with a serif
(Times New Roman, TNR) and sans serif (Arial) font. The
results are illustrated in Table 4. These variations in case
styles and boldness show a higher preference for the bold
size in comparison to not bold for all forms of case style.
The general ratio is y60% bold preference to 40% not bold
preference and this result remains valid for a sans serif font
(Arial) and a serif font (TNR). The results also show that
the case style has a slight deference regarding both used
font (Arial and TNR).

On the third level of complexity, size was obtained by
varying case styles combined with other visual variables to
present multiple levels of hierarchy (two or three levels).
Complexity overlaps with hierarchy when different levels
of hierarchy need to be presented. For such a level of
complexity, three sequential font sizes correspond to three
levels of importance. Here the highest level was completely
uppercase, the middle level was designed with ﬁrst letter
uppercase and the lowest was fully written in lowercase
letters (5 three levels). This was later compared to a map
containing labels with only two levels of hierarchy (5 two
levels), as the highest level was fully designed in uppercase
and the other two were both labelled with ﬁrst letter
uppercase. These results are presented in Table 5. The
simple hierarchy (two levels) shows 20% more preferences
than the one with three levels for an Arial font and 40%
more preference for TNR. By comparing the results of the
levels of complexity and the difference between Arial and
TNR,
the users’ preference shows the importance of
simplicity when designing labels.

Shape
Shape preference was evaluated based on the frequency that
participants chose for each studied shape. Different fonts
were used to test shape preference. Since the number of
shapes (fonts) is theoretically inﬁnite, 15 different shapes
were deﬁned and divided into ﬁve groups (related to
formality, spacing, serif, serif and spacing, sans serif and

Font

Arial

Times New Roman

Size

All letters are lowercase

First letter is uppercase

All letters are uppercase

Bold
Not bold
Bold
Not bold

49
31
45
35

42
38
45
35

49
31
47
33

Typography in the Eyes of Bertin, Gender and Expertise Variation

181

Figure 3. Shape preference of the same texture

spacing) each with three levels. Each group thus tests one
characteristic of shape which ranged from a low over a middle
to a high level. Figure 3 illustrates the user preference of each
characteristic. This shows that users prefer fonts that have the
moderate degree of formality, spacing and serif and prefer the
lowest degree of serif and spacing and sans serif and spacing.
When presenting fonts characteristics in a ranked order, it
should be noted that the lowest level is preferred when two
criteria of font are presented and the middle characteristic
when an individual criterion is presented.

Three methods of labelling according to case style were
tested for the two most frequently used types (TNR and
Arial). Upper case, lower case and ﬁrst letter upper case
labelled map were tested pair wise. The arguable theory of
serif and sans serif use of typography was thus tested.
Table 6 represents the users’ shape preference showing the
highest preference for Arial with about 70–80% versus a 20–
30% preference for TNR.

Orientation
The orientation of typographic symbols was studied in two
phases. First, the orientation of the entire word was evaluated
by the participant. The orientation of the labels used during
the study corresponds to a typical output of most cartogra-
phical software: all horizontal, all tilted (under the angle of the
largest diagonal) or mixed (horizontal if applicable within the
boundaries, otherwise tilted). The participants tended to
followed by the tilted
prefer the horizontal orientation,
orientation and ﬁnally the mixed type orientation. This is
listed in Table 7. Under the circumstances of the experiment,

it was found that the users’ preference of horizontal matches
the orientation of text reading.

In the second phase, the orientation of each letter was
considered. The italic style was tested with the three levels of
complexity (Table 8). At the ﬁrst level of complexity, straight
and italic were tested for four font sizes of the labels (A, B, C
and D). The straight orientation was preferred over all the
tested sizes (A, B, C and D). The second level of complexity
involved italic versus bold italic in pair wise comparison. In this
case, only the smallest size acquired the highest preference for
bold italic, while the opposite is true for italic (with also a rather
high value for medium sizes). For the third level of complexity,
the result is exactly the opposite. Bold italic was tested versus
narrow bold italic in this case. The smallest font A has the

Table 6. The inﬂuence of shape on text preference

Case style

Times New Roman

Arial

All letters lower case
First letters upper case
All letters upper case

Orientation

Horizontal
Tilted
Mixed

20
27
15

59
10
11

Table 7. Orientation inﬂuence on text preference

Participants

60
53
65

%

74
12
14

Table 5. The third level of complexity preference (with two and three levels of hierarchy)

Hierarchy

Bold
Not bold

Arial

Two levels

48
44

Times New Roman

Three levels

Two levels

Three levels

32
36

56
56

24
24

182

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. The preference of shape and size of different textures

highest preference for bold italic whereas the preference of
narrow bold italic is for the larger font sizes B, C and D. It is
important to note that the users’ preference of second and third
levels of complexity is thus dependent on font size.

Texture
The design of texture has a wide array of choices as they are
based on a combination of visual variables. As a conse-
quence, the textures were divided according to font type:
serif (TNR) and sans serif (Arial). These two main groups
were further subdivided according to the applied variables:
textures of the same font and same size, multi-texture of the
same font and different sizes and ﬁnally multi-texture of
multi-font and different sizes. For each mentioned division,
the users identiﬁed which one they preferred, which is
shown in Figure 4. Using one-way ANOVA, the test
signiﬁcant deference was
declared that no statistical
detected for the three groups of texture and between the
two font types (F50.00 and P51.00). However, when only
one font was considered, the texture designed of Arial was
more preferred. In addition to that, the textures designed of
bold fonts were more preferred.

EXPERIENCE AND GENDER INFLUENCE

Both clusters of experience and gender were tested by
asking participants to show their preference of 79 sets of

Table 8. Complexity effect on orientation of text preference

two or three map combinations. These sets are devoted to
test size, shape, orientation and texture. For each set, users’
preference was analysed statistically using two-sided t-test.

Experts versus non-experts
Expert participants are well trained to use maps and work
with maps on a daily basis. It was expected that their attitude
towards map symbols, especially the typography, would
therefore differ from the non-expert users. The ranking test
was presented to both user groups (experts and non-experts).
As shown in Table 9, using two-sided t-test, only three
statistically signiﬁcant differences were found. They emerged
in the variables of orientation, shape and texture.

Figure 5 illustrates these signiﬁcant differences between
the experts’ and non-experts’ preference. The variation
between the two groups occurred in the sub-case of
orientation Arial narrow bold italic B size. The test showed
a fairly signiﬁcant difference (0.049). This draws attention
to the care that should be taken in labelling with B size as
the most preferable and readable size. The second
signiﬁcant difference was the same texture (all letters were
in uppercases), although with a different font. A high
signiﬁcant difference was recorded (0.005) as the experts
preferred Arial font type for this task, whereas the non-
experts preferred TNR. This difference between a serif and a
sans serif font must be taken into account when creating
maps for different user groups. Similarly, the same texture

First level of complexity

Second level of complexity

Third level of complexity

Font size

Straight

Italic

Italic

Bold italic

Bold italic

Narrow bold italic

A
B
C
D

65
42
47
74

15
38
33
6

17
47
47
70

63
33
33
10

64
38
17
9

16
42
63
71

Table 9. The detected level of preference variation between experts and non-experts

Criteria (experts/non-experts)

Pearson’s chi-square value

Asymp. Sig. (two-sided)

Arial–narrow–B size–bold versus Arial–narrow–B size–bold–italic
Arial–bold–all uppercase versus Times New Roman–bold–all uppercase
Arial–not bold–two levels versus Times New Roman–not bold–two levels

3.63
7.735
4.832

0.049
0.005
0.028

Typography in the Eyes of Bertin, Gender and Expertise Variation

183

used for this test was a combination of the three levels of
hierarchy and boldness for size. The result was a decreased
preference for TNR by female participants.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

It is not possible to deﬁne one typographic variable as the
‘best’ variable for all typographic functions and for all map
users. Although it has been found that some criteria have
much more acceptance than others, it is still unclear which
is the most efﬁcient and legible. To acquire these insights,
further experiments are required with time measurement as
a scale of efﬁciency.

The levels of complexity utilized declared few remarkable
differences for some criteria, such as narrow typography,
italic and bold. Additionally, contradictions were found
when using complex textures compared to font size. This
ﬁnding is due to the fact that boldness makes the symbol
larger and narrower. It has also been concluded that when
size is combined to other variables such as narrow and italic,
the larger size is highly preferred over the smaller.

For the three levels of complexity, different typographic
criteria are the most preferable and legible for the examined
group. Bertin’s preferred variable on typography can be
classiﬁed as follows:
N according to the map scale used and the distribution of
labels illustrated previously in Figures 1 and 2 (including
point data and area data), font size B is most preferred by
participants working with screen maps;
N a bold font allowed the typographic symbols to stand out
thus making it more eye-catching for the
more,
participant. A higher level of preference for bold fonts,
as illustrated in Figure 4, confirms this finding. In maps
of a higher complexity, however, bold fonts tended to be
a detrimental variable;
N Arial is the most preferred font type as an individual
variable. This finding could limit some cartographic
design. However, this result is not only true when the
font is varied individually, but also when font (shape) is
associated with other variables such as size and texture;
Arial type is generally preferred;
N it is remarkable that the preference of different shapes
followed almost the same trend in the analyses of both
experience and gender. Text simplicity or complexity
represented by font showed no specific significant
difference, meaning that the preference trend for each
group could be explained by the overall trend of shape
preference and vice versa;
N horizontal orientation is the most preferable typographi-
cal variable. However, it has the disadvantage of assign-
ing the orientation of
features.
Additionally, the text might exceed the available space
for a small feature size. According to the cartographical
rules and needs, map designers cannot always utilize
horizontal orientation;
N the orientation of the word letters (straight versus italic)
varies depending on the level of complexity design. For
the first level of complexity, users show noticeable
preference of the straight orientation, meanwhile it was
remarkably noted that for the second and third levels of

the geographical

Figure 5. Signiﬁcant differences between experts and non-experts

with two levels of hierarchy and different bold fonts showed
a high signiﬁcant difference (0.028), with a majority
preferring Arial.

Females versus males
Concerning the preferences of females and males, data were
compared pair wise between the two user groups. Four
signiﬁcant differences were recorded when using t-test
(Table 10). Starting from size B bold versus D bold, a
highly signiﬁcant deference was located (0.025) as females
rejected the larger size and preferred the B size. This case
was recorded only for the bold size, which in turn demands
much more attention and care for the association with other
variables. The second signiﬁcant difference was located
between Arial narrow C bold and Arial narrow C bold italic
(0.042). The third signiﬁcant difference (0.047) was
detected for the uppercase which enlarges the symbols
and makes the details more visible,
in addition to the
difference between Arial and TNR. The ﬁnal signiﬁcant
difference regards the same texture and different fonts of
Arial and TNR were highly signiﬁcant (0.005). The texture

184

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. Located signiﬁcant differences for females and males

complexity, the user preference depends on the labels
font size;
N for point data labelling, it is critical to establish rules as it
has been shown that differing groups have varying
tendencies, especially when it comes to the second and
third levels of complexity;
N the results indicated some statistical difference within the
experience and gender clusters. What is remarkable is
that these differences were not about variables of the first
level of complexity but about the second and third one;
N the visual variables of order perception (size, value and
texture) can be used individually or combined to
introduce hierarchy. This research presented hierarchy
by ordered variation in size (font size, boldness and case
style). Using two levels of hierarchy was remarkably
preferred over using three levels of hierarchy. This result
remains valid for Arial (sans serif) and TNR (serif) fonts.

Figure 6 illustrates the signiﬁcant statistical differences
the
between females and males. The preferences of

examined groups unsystematically vary between them and
according to the studied variable, which requires more
standardizing techniques and other studies to acquire more
detailed insights in the legibility and efﬁciency of typo-
graphic symbols. Additionally, the results are only valid on a
blank background where the distribution of features is the
most important function of the map and thus the primary
function of
is to provide the geospatial address.
Obtaining more empirical information on the relationship
between labels and the surrounding map elements is
essential and will be included in further studies, such as
different background colours.

text

However, care should be taken when studying colour and
the
value. They are very critical variables because of
interaction between the colour of labels and the colours
of map elements in ﬁrst place. Secondly, the medium on
which the map will be presented is critical as well.
Therefore, a thorough study is planned to obtain insights
in the relation between label visualisation and the map
thematic and their use of
background (topographic,

Table 10. The detected signiﬁcance levels for gender preference variations

Criteria (females/males)

Pearson’s chi-square value

Asymp. Sig. (two-sided)

Arial–D size–bold versus Arial–B size–bold
Arial–narrow–C size–bold versus Arial–narrow–C size–bold–italic
Arial–all uppercase versus Times New Roman–all uppercase
Arial–bold–three levels versus Times New Roman–bold–Three levels

5.045
4.127
3.940
8.061

0.025
0.042
0.047
0.005

Typography in the Eyes of Bertin, Gender and Expertise Variation

185

colours): which value is the best for a certain layout, the
inﬂuence of colour onto map legibility and others.

Determining the best legible typographic variable is a
combination of two tasks, starting with map aesthesis and
ending with map efﬁciency, including a series of rules and
priorities regarding map design. Further studies need to be
undertaken in order to explain the relation between text
functions and their design, which plays a critical role for
utilizing different variables individually or combined.

Furthermore, it would be interesting to extend this work
to the applications of label on other language symbols than
Latin in order to test the inﬂuence of visual variable on
different lettering systems such as Chinese or Arabic.
Moreover, the efﬁciency of visual variable on typography
will be tackled in future publication.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Rasha Deeb was born in
1984. She is a researcher at
CartoGIS research group,
Geography Department of
Ghent University.
She
holds a Master’s Degree in
Cartography, remote sen-
sing and GIS application
(Damascus University). She
taught cartography in Da-
mascus University between
2008 and 2010. She is
involved in studies of the
legibility and readability of
maps concerning typogra-
phy, visual variables and
semiology.

NOTES
1 The dimension of the test structure changed the scale to
1 : 270 000.

2 A corresponds to the original size 8, B to 10, C to 12,
and D to 14. The scaling factor applied to each map when
implementing it into the questionnaire is 0.37. The original
8 point size is transferred to 2.96 points, 10 points become
3.7 points, 12 points become 4.44 points and 14 points are
transferred to 5.18 points.

REFERENCES

Bratz, B. S. (1970a).

literature, assessment of
Cartographic Journal, 7, pp. 6–17.

‘An analysis of

the typographic legibility
its applicability to cartography’, The

Bratz, B. S. (1970b). ‘Experimental use of the search task in the
analysis of type legibility in cartography’, The Cartographic
Journal, 7, pp. 103–113.

Bertin, J. (1970). Semiology of Graphics: Diagram, Networks,

Maps, Translated by Berg, W. J., Esri Press, Redlands, CA.

Board, C. and Taylor, R. M. (1976). ‘Perception and maps: human
factors in map design and interpretation’, Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers, 2, pp. 19–36.

Fairbairn, D. J. (1993). ‘On the nature of cartographic text’, The

Cartographic Journal, 30, pp. 104–111.

Foster, J. J and Kirkland, W. (1971). ‘Experimental studies of map
of University

Society

the

typography’, Bulletin
of
Cartographers, 6, pp. 40–45.

Gerber, R. (1981). ‘Competence and performance in cartographic

language’, The Cartographic Journal, 18, pp. 104–111.

Imhof, E. (1975).

‘Positioning names on maps’, The American

Cartographer, 2, pp. 128–144.

Koch, W. G. (2001). ‘Jacques Bertin’s theory of graphics and its
cartography’,

development
Information Design Journal, 10, pp. 37–43.

on multimedia

influence

and

Kraak, M. J. and Ormeling, F. (2010). Cartography: Visualization of

Spatial Data, 3rd edition, Person Prentic Hall, Harlow.

Kraak, M. J., Edsall, R. and MacEachren, A. M. (1997). ‘Cartographic
animation and legends for temporal maps: exploration and or
in 18th ICA/ACI International Cartographic
interaction’,
Conference, pp. 253–261, Stockholm, Jun 23–27.

MacEachren, A. M. and Taylor, D. R. F. (1994). Visualization in

Modern Cartography, Pergamon, Oxford.

MacEachren, A. M. (1995). How Maps Work, Representation,

Visualization and Design, The Guilford Press, New York.

Phillips, R. J., Noyes, L. and Audley, R. J. (1977). ‘The legibility of

type on maps’, Ergonomics, 20, pp. 671–682.

Robinson, A. H. and Petchenik, B. B. (1976). The Nature of Maps,

University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Slocum, T. R., McMaster, R. B., Kessler, E. C. and Haward, H. H.
(2005). Thematic Cartography and Geographic Visualization,
2nd edition, Person Prentic Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

