This article was downloaded by: [Nova Southeastern University]
On: 01 January 2015, At: 00:17
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Map-centred exploratory
approach to multiple criteria
spatial decision making
Piotr Jankowski a , Natalia Andrienko b &
Gennady Andrienko b
a Department of Geography, University of Idaho,
Moscow, Idaho 83843
b GMD-German National Research Center for
Information Technology, Schloss Birlinghoven,
Sankt-Augustin, D-53754 Germany
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: Piotr Jankowski , Natalia Andrienko & Gennady Andrienko
(2001) Map-centred exploratory approach to multiple criteria spatial decision
making, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15:2,
101-127, DOI: 10.1080/13658810010005525

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810010005525

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be

independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 2, 101± 127

Research Article

Map-centred exploratory approach to multiple criteria spatial decision
making

PIOTR JANKOWSKI*, NATALIA ANDRIENKO** and
GENNADY ANDRIENKO**
*Department of Geography, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83843
** GMD— German National Research Center for Information Technology,
Schloss Birlinghoven, Sankt-Augustin, D-53754 Germany; e-mail:
piotrj@uidaho.edu

(Received 10 December 1999; accepted 4 May 2000)

Abstract. Spatial decision support is one of the central functions ascribed to
Geographical Information Systems (GIS). One of the foci of developing decision
support capabilities of GIS has been the integration of maps with multiple criteria
decision models. Progress in this area has been slow due to a limited role played
by maps as decision support tools. In this paper we present new prototype spatial
decision support tools emphasising the role of maps as a source of structure in
multiple criteria spatial decision problems. In these tools the role of map goes
beyond the mere display of geographic decision space and multicriterion evalu-
ation results. Maps becomes a ‘visual index’ through which the user orders
decision options, assigns priorities to decision criteria, and augments the criterion
outcome space by map-derived heuristic knowledge. As the additional means of
structuring multicriterion spatial decision problems we present an experimental
use of data mining, integrated with dynamic maps and multiple criteria decision
models, in order to reduce a problem’s dimensionality. We conclude the paper
for group
with future research directions emphasising map-based support
decision making.

1.

Introduction
Spatial decision making is an everyday activity, common to individuals and
groups. People take into account the realities of spatial organization when selecting
a locale to live, choosing land development strategy, allocating resources, or man-
aging infrastructure. Most of individual spatial decisions are made ad hoc, without
any formal analysis. These decisions are often based on heuristics and internalized
preferences supported by mental maps and ‘mental geocoding’ of information about
decision options. This analytically simple approach to spatial decision making can
be explained by a relatively small ‘decision equity’ at stake in daily pursuits, such as
the selection of a place to shop or an entertainment venue. The cost of making a
poor choice (decision) can be a smaller selection of goods, higher prices than elsewhere
or a boring evening spent at a nightclub. In contrast with these everyday decision
situations faced by individuals, the decision equity of organizations is often quite

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810010005525

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 102

P. Jankowski et al.

high. The organizations are hence more likely to use more sophisticated analytical
approaches to support spatial decision making.

One such approach relying on Multiple Criteria Decision Models (MCDM) has
been the active area of research and applications in spatial decision analysis
(Malczewski 1999a). The objective of using MCDM is to help (cid:142) nd solutions to
decision problems characterized by multiple choice alternatives, which can be evalu-
ated by means of performance characteristics called decision criteria. Because much
of modelling done with Geographic Information Systems (GIS) deals with evaluating
locational choice alternatives on the basis of suitability criteria considerable attention
in the last decade was devoted to integrating MCDM with GIS software. These
eŒorts resulted in a number of prototypes (Janssen and Rietveld 1990, Carver 1991,
Church et al. 1992, Faber et al. 1995, Jankowski and Ewart 1996, Lotov et al. 1997,
Wu 1998) and a few commercial software packages (Eastman et al. 1995, GeoChoice
Inc. 1999). The state of the art in this area has been based on the tight integration
strategy (Jankowski 1995). Depending on speci(cid:142) c implementation solutions, either
MCDM tools are implemented within a GIS package (for example, IDRISI, Eastman
1997 ) or GIS functions (such as spatial data query and mapping ) are implemented
in MCDM software (Fisher et al. 1996). The third option is to integrate both
modules (GIS and MCDM) at the operating system level. For example, Jankowski
et al. (1997) describe the use of the Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) protocol to
integrate a GIS-based map visualization module with MCDM and group voting
modules.

The mapping and visualization capabilities of current GIS-MCDM software
range from maps representing solutions obtained with simple non-compensator y
decision rules to graphical representations of criterion and decision spaces integrated
with more sophisticated compensatory decision techniques (Malczewski 1999a). Still,
the current software tools provide only a limited map-based decision support for
problem structuring. Although some innovative decision support maps were pro-
posed for multiple criteria-based location/allocation analysis (Armstrong et al. 1992,
Malczewski 1999b) , maps have been used predominantly as presentation media
either to display the results of spatial decision analysis or to inform about the
location of decision options. The use of maps as analytical tools in spatial decision
analysis has been little explored.

In order to test the use of maps as analytical decision tools Jankowski and
Nyerges (in press) conducted an experimental study of human-computer-huma n
interaction with 109 volunteer participants formed into 22 groups, each group
representing multiple (organizational) stakeholder perspectives. The experiment
involved the use of GIS integrated with multiple criteria decision models to support
group-based decision making concerned with the selection of habitat restoration
sites in the Duwamish Waterway of Seattle, Washington. Maps used by groups
included the variety of general thematic maps and images representing situational/
contextual characteristics of restoration sites and some specialized maps depicting
the solutions of multiple criteria decision models and the measure of group consensus
regarding the selection of restoration sites. These specialized maps are described in
Jankowski et al. (1997 ).

Findings of the study (Jankowski and Nyerges in press) showed that maps played
only a limited support role in various decision stages of the experiment. While the
use of multiple criteria decision models by groups remained steady throughout
diŒerent phases of the decision process, the use of maps was much lower during the

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

103

initial (deliberative-structuring ) phase, than during the later (analytical) phase. The
participants used maps predominantly to visualize the evaluation results and much
less to structure/design the decision problem.

In a diŒerent application of combined MCDM-GIS tools supporting the design
of water quality improvement strategies the use of maps and decision models pro-
ceeded in a cyclic way (Lotov et al. 1999). Presentation of MCDM results on GIS-
generated maps prompted water management experts to recurrently reformulate the
decision problem, more speci(cid:142) cally to impose additional constraints in order to
account for previously overlooked aspects of the decision situation. Although maps
seemed to play a more important role than in the Duwamish experiment, it is
questionable whether they might be regarded as problem structuring tools. For
experts, a map was mainly a convenient tool used to detect discrepancies between
the results obtained from a model and experts’ expectations based on some implicit
preferences.

The question arises then: what are the eŒective means of using maps in order to
support decision problem exploration and structuring? Casner (1991) clearly demon-
strated that diŒerent graphical presentations of the same data are required to support
diŒerent information-seekin g tasks. Accordingly, the task of multiple criteria spatial
decision analysis needs to be supported by task-speci(cid:142) c map displays. What kind of
maps are productive for spatial decision making and which direction should be taken
in developing more eŒective tools for multiple criteria spatial decision analysis are still
open research questions. In this paper we address them by demonstratin g new ideas
for integrating maps with MCDM using highly interactive, exploratory map displays
coupled with multiple criteria decision models and data mining algorithms.

To ground the presentation of theoretical ideas in a substantive domain we
present prototype software called DECADE (Dynamic, Exploratory Cartography
for Decision Support ) and demonstrate its application to a decision problem of
funding allocation for primary health care services. More speci(cid:142) cally, in §2 we outline
research ideas concerning the use of maps in spatial decision support. In §3 we
introduce new tools for map-based multiple criteria spatial decision analysis provided
by DECADE. In order to present the tools in a realistic context, we use a real-world
decision problem of ranking Idaho counties according to need for funding in primary
health care services. We conclude the paper with a summary of suggested decision
support maps and with future research prospects concerning the development of
collaborative spatial decision support systems.

2. Maps as decision support tools in multiple criteria spatial decision analysis

The results of the Duwamish experiment showed that maps not only played a
limited support role in the initial, exploratory stage of the decision process but also
that there was a noticeable diŒerence in the use of maps between facilitated (supported
by a human facilitator) and non-facilitated group decision sessions. The facilitated
sessions were characterized by a more frequent and intentional use of maps then
non-facilitated sessions, where the use of maps was sporadic and haphazard. The
role of facilitator was to guide the groups through the problem exploration and
resolution and to assist in the use of maps and MCDM models. The outcomes of
the facilitated sessions showed better quality and higher satisfaction with the decision
making process, which is consistent with (cid:142) ndings from other studies with group
decision support systems (Chun and Park 1998). Since the presence of group facilit-
ator was a source of structure simplifying and synchronizing the use of maps and

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 104

P. Jankowski et al.

decision models, we speculate that better integration of maps and MCDM tools
through data visualization can also become a new structure improving the under-
standing of decision situations, and consequently leading to better outcomes of the
decision making process. We propose that such integration be achieved through the
interactive and dynamic visualization of both, criterion and decision spaces.

2.1. Integrated visualization of criterion and decision spaces

It is recognized that multiple criteria spatial decision making requires simultan-
eous visualization of criterion and decision spaces (Malczewski 1999b). This type of
dualistic view opens up an opportunity to study basic relationships between the data
(criterion outcomes) and their spatial patterns (arrangements of decision options in
geographical space) providing the basis for understanding the structure of a decision
problem. Malczewski (1999b) suggests that the main objective of using maps in
multiple criteria spatial decision analysis should be the consideration of geographical
locations in the process of exploring tradeoŒs among the decision criteria and the
search for best (compromise) solutions to the decision problem. TradeoŒs among
two decision criteria can be depicted in a bi-criterion outcome space by means of a
scatterplot so that each point on the plot represents the performance of a decision
option on the respective two criteria. Locations of decision options along with the
underlying spatial relationships constitute a geographic decision space, which can
be depicted on a map. Malczewski (1999b) recognizes that the visualization tech-
niques he suggested have limitations. These limitations are mostly caused by the
static nature of the displays. We posit that the dynamic, highly interactive depiction
of both criterion and decision spaces can be more productive for understanding the
structure of a decision situation.

The idea of dynamic and interactive representation of criterion outcomes and
spatial decision options comes from exploratory data analysis (EDA). The concept
of EDA emerged in statistics. John Tukey (1977 ) introduced it as a counterbalanc e
to the traditional statistical techniques of checking a priori selected hypotheses. The
goal of EDA is to survey previously unknown data and to arrive at plausible
hypotheses concerning relationships, patterns, and trends hidden inside the data
volumes. Techniques of EDA are mostly based on data visualization, that is the
graphical presentation of data that can help reveal important traits and relationships.
The taxonomy of currently existing tools for interactive manipulation of graphical
displays can be found in (Buja et al. 1996 ).

Over the past decade the notion of EDA has spread from statistics to cartography .
Cartographers have recognized the demand for new software supporting the use of
interactive, dynamically alterable thematic maps and facilitating ‘visual thinking’
about spatially referenced data (MacEachren 1994, MacEachren and Kraak 1997).
Particular attention in the area of data visualization and EDA is paid to dynamic
linking between multiple data displays where changes in one display are immediately
propagated to other displays (Buja et al. 1991 ). The most common method of linking
is the identical marking of corresponding parts of multiple displays, for example,
with the same colour or some other form of highlighting. Usually highlighting is
applied to objects interactively selected by the user in one of the displays. This
technique is known as ‘brushing’. Linking of a map display with various kinds of
statistical graphs was suggested as a primary instrument of the exploratory analysis
of spatially referenced data (Monmonier 1989, MacDougall 1992). Later, other
kinds of interactive cartographic displays were suggested in addition to linking and

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

105

brushing. Thus, a user may interactively change visual properties of maps to make
them more expressive (Dykes 1997, Unwin and Hofmann 1998, Andrienko and
Andrienko 1999a).

One can expect that interactive, dynamically changeable, linked views can also
be productive in multiple criteria spatial decision making. Interactive maps may
provide the means of decision problem exploration and structuring and compensate
for some weaknesses of traditional, static maps. For example, it may be revealing to
locate on an interactive map any decision alternative selected in a scatterplot or to
evaluate an alternative selected in a map by viewing its multicriterion characteristics
on a scatterplot or a ‘value path’ plot.

2.2. Capturing implicit geographical preferences of a decision maker

Simultaneous representation of criterion and decision spaces and the support of
interactive map exploration opens a possibility of eliciting a decision maker’s prefer-
ences for decision criteria not only on the basis of attribute data but also geography.
Thus, the decision maker (DM ) can be given an opportunity to explicitly choose
options considered as good candidates for the solution by selecting them directly on
a map or in an accompanying scatterplot. In making the selection, the DM can
account for spatial information gained from the map. This kind of input makes it
possible, in particular, to derive DM’s target values, or aspiration levels for the
decision criteria. The aspiration levels thus obtained can be used for evaluating the
available options and selecting the best of them, for example, by means of the nearest
goal algorithm described in Lot(cid:142) et al. (1992).

It is quite clear which capabilities maps and complementary graphic displays
should posses in order to make the above outlined approach to decision making
possible: they should allow a direct selection of objects both through a map and
through supplemental graphics representing criterion outcome space. The multicrit-
erion decision procedures need to be integrated with the visualization. The DM
should have the opportunity to view on the map the results of her/his tradeoŒ
selection as well as to be able to change the selection and observe the impact of
such a change on the evaluation results. It is desirable that switching between the
analysis of criteria and options and the visualization of computation results be done
in an easy, seamless way.

Another possible use of interactive maps is the encoding of geographical informa-
tion in a form suitable for MCDM procedures. Through a direct interaction with a
map display the DM can classify the options on the basis of their spatial positions.
In this classi(cid:142) cation s/he can account for various aspects related to locations of
options: a relative position with respect to other options (north-south, centre-
periphery etc.), spatial relationships with other kinds of geographical objects
(closeness to sea, mountains, roads etc.), or a geographical distribution of values of
attributes referring to geographical objects (population density, unemployment, etc.).
The classes may represent a combination of all relevant aspects. Alternatively, several
classi(cid:142) cations may be de(cid:142) ned each re(cid:143) ecting one or a few of the spatial aspects
signi(cid:142) cant for a decision problem. Then it is important that the DM arranges the
classes thus obtained in the order of preference. A preference-based order makes
possible treating classes as values of a new decision criterion, capturing the DM’s
heuristics and map-induced knowledge about spatial aspects of the decision space.
Again, in the course of class ordering the DM expresses his/her implicit geographical
preferences. For example, selecting a house to live, a person would assign the highest

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 106

P. Jankowski et al.

preference to the group of houses located close to a lake but having good public
transport connections. The next category might be houses within the walking distance
to the city centre, and so on.

2.3. Reducing the cognitive complexity of multiple criteria spatial decision problem

Cognitive complexity of multiple criteria spatial decision problem can be consid-
ered in both, the criterion outcome space and the geographical decision space. The
number of decision (evaluation) criteria represents cognitive complexity in the cri-
terion outcome space. In most of the compensatory MCDM techniques the decision
maker is asked to explicitly express his preferences by assigning numeric weights to
decision criteria. The higher the number of criteria, the more cognitively di(cid:141) cult it
becomes to consistently assign weights that re(cid:143) ect the decision maker’s perception
of the relative importance of criteria. Assigning weights becomes even more confoun-
ded through the fact that weights account for changes in the range of values for
each evaluation criterion and additionally they account for varying degrees of impor-
tance attached by decision makers to these ranges (Kirkwood 1997). Hence, some
compensatory MCDM techniques use the implicit representation of preferences
through criterion tradeoŒs and aspiration levels (Lot(cid:142) et al 1992, Jankowski et al.
1999 ).

Another problem is the implicit assumption made in MCDM techniques that
evaluation criteria are unrelated, although in practice this is not always the case.
it would be desirable if the decision maker knew about existing
Consequently,
relationships among the criteria and accounted for them in assigning weights: for
example, did not assign high weights to correlated criteria.

The reduction of the cognitive complexity of criterion outcome space and the
revealing of relationships among the criteria can be achieved by means of standard
statistical procedures (e.g. multiple regression, discriminant analysis). These proced-
ures, however, require a user well-versed in statistics to interpret their results, hence
they are not very attractive for a participatory spatial decision support system
involving users with various levels of expertise in statistical techniques. Instead, we
propose the use of more exploratory techniques from the domain of Knowledge
Discovery in Databases (KDD).

KDD (Fayyad et al. 1996) is a research area of developing various computational
methods, known as data mining techniques, for probing data with the aim to detect
regularities, dependencies, or trends, and to draw generalized descriptions of data
features and relationships. The methods of data mining can be grouped according
to the purpose of their application into (Fayyad et al. 1996 ):

E Classi(cid:142) cation: mapping of a data item into one of several prede(cid:142) ned

categorical classes.

E Regression: mapping of a data item to a real-value prediction variable.
E Clustering: grouping of similar data items.
E Summarization: derivation of a compact description for a subset of data.
E Dependency modelling: detection of signi(cid:142) cant dependencies among variables.
E Link analysis: revealing of relationships between (cid:142) elds in the database, for

example, frequent associations of particular values.

E Sequence analysis: modelling of sequential patterns, in particular, in data with

time dependence.

Certainly, not all of the existing data mining methods can be recommende d for non-
expert users. An example of a data mining technique potentially useful, for a wider

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

107

audience of users, is the C4.5 Classi(cid:142) cation Tree derivation algorithm (Quinlan 1993 )
belonging to the classi(cid:142) cation group. The C4.5 algorithm is one of the best known,
e(cid:141) cient, and widely used techniques in KDD. Its results are easy to understand and
interpret. The goal of the algorithm is to discriminate among the classes of objects and
produce their collective descriptions on the basis of values of attributes associate d with
class members. In order to achieve this goal, the algorithm tries to select from the
available attribute s the most discriminating ones. In many cases a small subset of
attributes is su(cid:141) cient to ‘explain’ a given classi(cid:142) cation. These attributes may be regarded
as the most important for characterizin g the classes. The capability to select a smaller
subset of representativ e attribute s can be exploited for the purpose of complexity
reduction.

In contrast with the complexity of criterion outcome space, complexity in the
decision space is usually expressed by the number of feasible decision options. In
the case of spatial decision making, spatial relationships and spatial patterns formed
by locations of decision options produce additional complexity. Strict numerical
representation of some of these relationships may be hard to achieve, and/or the
resulting values may be di(cid:141) cult to interpret by decision makers. Yet the decision
makers may be capable of eliciting patterns and relationships from maps and integrat-
ing them with their heuristic knowledge about the decision situation. Hence, it is
desirable to provide the decision makers with explicit means to express heuristic
knowledge and to incorporate it into multiple criteria spatial analysis, for example,
as suggested in the previous subsection.

Cognitive complexity of the decision space can be reduced by applying the Pareto-
dominance principle (Cohon 1978). A feasible decision option is called non-
dominated, according to Pareto-dominance, if there is no other feasible option that
surpasses this option on any of the criteria without reducing performance on another
criterion. More formally, let X denote the set of all feasible decision options, and
C 5 {c1, c2, ..., cm} is the set of evaluation criteria under consideration. Any element
x ×X is characterized by a vector of criterion outcomes ( y1, y2, ..., ym), where yi is
a value of the criterion ci, i ×I 5 {1, 2, ..., m}. Then we say that decision option
x¾ ×X dominates x² ×X if y¾
i > y²
for all i ×I, and there is at least one j ×I that
i
y¾
j > y²
and > are used to denote the relationship of preference:
j . Here, the symbols >
stands for ‘no worse than’ and > for ‘better than’. It is clear that in the Pareto

sense option x¾

is better than x²

if x¾ dominates x² .

Application of the Pareto-dominance rule results in subdividing the set of decision
options into dominated and non-dominated , hence simplifying the structure of the
decision space. A decision support tool may display only non-dominated options
and hide dominated ones. However, if the evaluation criteria do not represent the
geographical aspects of the decision space, it is necessary to show the decision maker
both non-dominated and dominated options; there may be dominated options that
surpass any non-dominated one in respect to a geographical position. The decision
maker can regard such options as good candidates for a solution. Therefore we
suggest that all alternatives be shown to the decision maker, but the not-dominated
options be graphically distinguished from the dominated ones, for example, by using
larger symbols or a diŒerent hue value.

3. New tools for integrated map-MCDM spatial decision analysis

In this section we present the system DECADE which oŒers new prototype tools
for multiple criteria spatial decision analysis implementing the ideas expressed in the

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 >
108

P. Jankowski et al.

previous section. DECADE has been developed on the basis of dynamic mapping
software, Descartes (Andrienko and Andrienko 1999a). We also describe an
experiment with the use of data mining software Kepler (Wrobel et al. 1996 ).

In order to cast the proposed tools in the context of a realistic decision situation,
we (cid:142) rst describe a decision scenario. We then show how a decision maker could
analyse the decision situation using the facilities of DECADE. We describe three
possible models of a decision maker’s activity in the order of the increasing role
played by a map. In the (cid:142) nal part of the section we demonstrate the use of data
mining in order to reduce the complexity of criterion outcome space.

3.1. Decision scenario overview

Idaho is a predominantly rural state with numerous geographic and access
barriers. Sixteen of the state’s 44 counties are considered frontier ( less than six
persons per square mile). Using the de(cid:142) nition of urban to be a county with a
population centre greater than 20 000 persons, there are only 7 urban counties in
Idaho. Twenty counties have no population centre of 20 000 or more, but average
six or more persons per square mile. Sparsely populated areas, vast desert and
numerous mountain ranges complicate the delivery of primary health care services
throughout the state.

Idaho has historically claimed one of the lowest physician-to-populatio n ratios
in the nation. Currently, Idaho ranks 48th in the nation with 125 physicians in
patient care per 100 000. Recruiting health professionals to Idaho’s remote areas and
to regions in the state with substantial portions of low-income/undeserved persons
is a constant challenge. The Idaho Department of Health and Welfare (IDHW)
completed a survey of Idaho’s rural community facilities (excluding Boise, Nampa,
Caldwell, Idaho Falls, Lewiston and Coeur d’Alene) in October 1995, which indicated
that 28 of the 47 facilities interviewed were actively recruiting primary care physicians
or midlevel providers. The top two reasons for recruitment were increased demand
and to relieve the workload of other primary care providers. The analysis completed
by IDHW in 1994 indicated a maldistribution of primary care providers with an
adequate concentration of physicians and midlevel providers in the more populated
areas of the state and inadequate numbers in the more rural and frontier areas. The
state Health Professional Loan Repayment Program and the Health Professional
Clearinghouse are working to alleviate the challenges that many rural/underserved
Idaho communities face when recruiting health care providers.

The decision problem is how to distribute limited funds ($250 000) in order to
help the state counties attract health care professionals through repaying their
funds among the state counties should be
education loans. The distribution of
equitable, i.e. based on demonstrate d needs, and provide a high likelihood of success-
ful hiring and longer-term retention of health care professionals. The strategy for
arriving at a decision on how to allocate the funds is to develop a ranking of Idaho
counties based on thirteen evaluation criteria, measured or estimated criterion out-
comes, and relative importance weights attached to the criteria (Jankowski and
Ewart 1996).

3.2. Analysis of decision space using dynamically linked displays

Malczewski

suggested that an appropriate technique supporting
the analysis of decision space is the combination of maps with a ‘value path’
plot. However, the static, non-interactive display considered by Malczewski has its

(1999b)

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

109

limitations. If the number of options is large, numerous intersections of lines make
it very di(cid:141) cult to follow any particular value path. It is easy to see which option
optimizes any particular criterion taken separately, but it is rather di(cid:141) cult to estimate
its position in respect to the remaining criteria. Therefore Malczewski (1999b) warns
that this technique can be recommended only if the number of options is relatively
small. Another problem is that a spatial position of each ‘partial optimum’ is shown
on a separate map. There are natural limitations on the number and size of maps
to be put simultaneously on the computer screen. Therefore the number of criteria
that can be considered simultaneously is also limited.

The problems with the value path/map display can be eŒectively overcome by
adding interactivity and dynamics. Some highly interactive implementations of the
value path plot have been developed in the EDA area ( Inselberg 1998 ). In EDA it
is customary to use the term ‘parallel coordinates plot’ rather than ‘value path plot’.
DECADE oŒers the user a single map display dynamically linked with the parallel
coordinate plot. When the user points at some option represented in the map, the
respective object becomes highlighted in the map, and the corresponding value path
becomes highlighted in the parallel coordinate plot. And vice versa, the user may
point at some line segment in the plot, and the whole value path becomes highlighted
as well as the position of the corresponding option in the map. Such value path/map
integration makes it easy to evaluate any option with regard to all decision criteria.
Additionally, the user may ‘(cid:142) x’ highlighting by clicking on an object in the map or
on a line in the plot. The selected object remains highlighted when the mouse cursor
moves out of the display or points at other objects. This enables the comparison of
the value paths of two or more decision options. The (cid:142) xed highlighting diŒers in
colour from transient highlighting (white and yellow, respectively, see (cid:142) gure 1).

DECADE allows the user to combine visual analysis of input information, i.e.
criterion and decision spaces, with running MCDM procedures and visualizing their
results. In particular, one of the implemented MCDM procedures is based on the
Ideal Point technique (Hwang and Yoon 1981). The Ideal Point technique involves
three aspects: the Ideal (the best criterion scores), the Nadir (the worst criterion
scores), and the distances from each option to the Ideal and the Nadir. Consequently,
in the Ideal Point method each of the decision options is compared to the Ideal and
the Nadir. The criterion outcome distances measured to the Ideal and Nadir, calcu-
lated for each decision option, are then aggregated into relative closeness measures.
The closeness measure expresses how close each option is to the Ideal and conversely
how far it is from the Nadir. The options are then ordered/ranked beginning with
the one closest to the Ideal and furthest from the Nadir and ending with the one
furthest from the Ideal and closest to the Nadir. The maximum possible evaluation
score (the relative closeness measure) is 100, and the minimum possible is 0.

In DECADE the user can start the Ideal Point method from the window called
‘Decision options outcome map’ (see (cid:142) gure 1). This window is organized around a
map depicting the geographical extent of the decision situation—in our case the map
of Idaho by counties. Left to the map depicting the decision options the user (cid:142) nds
a criterion weight panel providing the listing of decision criteria (ten criteria were
selected and, hence, are listed in the panel). Above each criterion name there is a
slider allowing the user to select/adjust the criterion weight within the value range
(0, 1). The adjustment of one weight causes all other weights to automatically change
values proportionall y to their values before the adjustment. The north-east pointing
arrow, to the left of each weight slider, indicates a bene(cid:142) t criterion (that is, its values

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 110

P. Jankowski et al.

Figure 1. The performance of decision options presented on the map (Idaho counties) can
be viewed on the parallel coordinates graph.

Figure 3. The interface for elicitation of criterion aspiration levels.

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

111

are maximized), the south-east pointing arrow corresponds to a cost criterion with
values to be minimized. The user can easily change the directionality of criteria (from
maximize to minimize) with a mouse click. The panel to the left of criterion values
displays the outcomes for each Idaho county (in this case—decision option) on the
plot of parallel coordinates. The lines in the parallel coordinate plot can be considered
as trajectories of decision option outcomes.

When the user selects the checkbox ‘Compute (cid:142) nal scores’ (see the bottom of
(cid:142) gure 1), the system computes the evaluation of options by means of the Ideal Point
algorithm and presents the results on the map. The degree of darkness assigned to
objects (counties) in the map represents the scores: the higher the score, the darker
is the hue. At the same time additional two axes appear in the parallel coordinates
plot (see the bottom-left corner of (cid:142) gure 1). On these axes the (cid:142) nal scores are
represented: on the lower one the scores are mapped onto the scale from 0 to 100,
and the upper axis represents the minimum–maximum score interval.

All three panels—map, criterion weights, and parallel coordinates plot are dynam-
ically linked in the sense that any action (e.g. option selection, change of weight) in
one panel is immediately re(cid:143) ected on the other two panels. Such a level of interactivity
allows the simultaneous exploration of options in the geographical decision space
and the decision option outcome space.

On the screen copy presented in (cid:142) gure 1, the user selected several counties with
top (cid:142) nal evaluation scores. The mouse was clicked when the pointer was located on
the value paths that intersect the (cid:142) nal score axis at the rightmost positions. White-
segmented lines highlight the selected counties ( (cid:142) xed highlighting). Their distribution
can be easily studied along each criterion axis and provide a sense of the in(cid:143) uence
of that criterion on the (cid:142) nal evaluation outcome. The selected counties are also
visible on the map of Idaho. Their borders are highlighted with white line. In (cid:142) gure 1
the cursor points at one of the top ranked counties—Twin Falls. As the map is
sensitive to the cursor position, the boundary of this county is highlighted in yellow
(transient highlighting), and its criterion outcomes are displayed below the map. The
corresponding trajectory representing criterion outcomes is also displayed in yellow.
Any change of weights causes the (cid:142) nal evaluation score to be immediately
recomputed and the order of counties changed along the (cid:142) nal score axis. The map
is also dynamically updated in response to changes in criterion weights and (cid:142) nal
scores. This facilitates a sensitivity analysis where the user may select a group of
trajectories representing speci(cid:142) c counties and test if a slight change in criterion
weights causes a change in the (cid:142) nal score of selected counties.

Another type of map supporting spatial decision analysis and available in
DECADE is a map for classifying decision options based on the distribution of (cid:142) nal
evaluation scores (see (cid:142) gure 2). It allows the decision maker to interactively break
the range of evaluation scores into intervals and experiment with the number of
intervals and their respective ranges. Accordingly, the objects in the map are divided
into classes based on their evaluation scores. A supplementary display (the dot plot
in the upper section of the map window) shows the distribution of the scores.
DECADE makes it easy to form classes containing any desired number of options
achieving satisfactory (cid:142) nal evaluation scores. In the presented decision scenario the
user created a class of fundable counties containing the top eight scoring counties
(dark grey in (cid:142) gure 2) and a ‘near fundable’ class with two counties (medium grey
in (cid:142) gure 2). The remaining 34 counties were classi(cid:142) ed as non-fundable .

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 112

P. Jankowski et al.

Figure 2. Classi(cid:142) cation of counties according to the evaluation scores computed using the
Ideal Point method.

3.3. Elicitation of aspiration levels for decision criteria

The pairwise representation of criterion outcome and decision spaces opens up
a possibility of eliciting the decision maker’s preferences for criteria not only on
the basis of data but also geography. In the previous section we discussed how
preferences could be represented by criterion weights. We called this approach explicit
representation of preferences. Besides the explicit approach, DECADE also oŒers an
implicit approach to expressing preferences. In this approach the user, instead of
specifying numeric weights corresponding to relative importance of criteria, selects
aspiration levels. The concept of aspiration levels stems from Herbert Simon’s ideas
of bounded rationality and satis(cid:142) cing, and states that decision makers may be more
interested in (cid:142) nding decision options that come close to certain target values (aspira-
tion levels) rather than optimizing one objective at the expense of others (Simon
1960 ).

DECADE oŒers the capability of simultaneously visualizing criterion and
decision spaces by linking the map with a scatterplot (see (cid:142) gure 3). As before the
interface is organized around a map of the study area. The scatterplot shows the
distribution of values of two criteria. A pair of criteria is selected by the user from
two criteria lists—above and below the scatterplot, in the upper left of the map
interface. Any pair of criteria can be selected, and their outcomes for all options

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

113

(in our case Idaho counties) can be visualized in a bi-criterion outcome space.
Additionally, the distribution of outcomes may be subdivided into classes. The spatial
distribution of classes is depicted on the map by distinct hues representing each class.
In (cid:142) gure 3, the range of each of the selected criteria is divided into two intervals,
below and above user-speci(cid:142) ed break-point values. Thus, for the criterion ‘Number
of estimated unmet visits’ the user set the break point at zero to separate counties
with positive values from those with negative values. Four groups of counties resulting
from this classi(cid:142) cation are displayed on the map. Counties characterized by low
values of both criteria (in our example low-weight birth rate and number of estimated
unmet visits) are painted in yellow and those with high values of both criteria in
chartreuse (green mixed with yellow). The green colour represents counties with high
rates of low-weight births and negative values of unmet visits, and red corresponds
to counties with low values of low-weight births and positive values of unmet visits.
The scatterplot and the map are dynamically linked through the simultaneous
highlighting of objects in the map and the corresponding dots in the scatterplot.
These interactive features provide a convenient environment for the analysis of
decision problem data.

The map interface provides access to two MCDM techniques:

(1) Pareto-
dominance based division of the decision space into non-dominated and dominated
decision options, and (2) aspiration-levels based evaluation of decision options. The
former technique is implemented through a graphical representation of dominated
and non-dominated options in the scatterplot: all dominated options are hollow and
only non-dominated are displayed as (cid:142) lled, black dots. Selection of the control ‘hide
dominated objects’ below the scatterplot area results in the removal of dominated
objects from both the scatterplot and the map.

In the example shown in (cid:142) gure 3, there are (cid:142) ve non-dominated counties for the
pair of criteria ‘low-weight birth rate’ and ‘number of estimated unmet visits’. The
user examined all non-dominated counties and decided to select two counties—
Latah and Twin Falls as the geographical objects representing aspiration levels for
low-weight birth rate and number of estimated unmet visits. The criterion outcomes
of the selected options (i.e. counties) are accepted by the system as aspiration levels
for the two criteria. If more than one option is selected, an aspiration level is
computed as the median of the corresponding values. In the given example the levels
are low-weight birth rate 5 7.01%, number of estimated unmet visits 5 14 450.50. The
user can change aspiration levels for any decision criterion by selecting another point
from the scatterplot, or an object from the map, or simply typing in a desired value
into the appropriate (cid:142) eld of the top-right panel. It is expected, however, that the
decision maker will express her/his preferences mainly by a direct manipulation of
the display, i.e. through the selection of objects in the map or in the scatterplot. In
practice, there is no diŒerence between the two ways of selection since an object
becomes simultaneously highlighted both in the map and in the scatterplot as soon
as the mouse cursor approaches it. The scatterplot informs the DM about the trade-
oŒs between the criteria while the map depicts option locations, so the DM can base
her/his selections on both sources of information (criterion outcomes and geograph-
ical decision space). The presented interface is primarily designed for the elicitation
of user’s implicit, geography-base d preferences.

The aspiration levels expressed in this way become the basis for evaluating
decision options and (cid:142) nding the best variants in terms of their closeness to the
decision goal (given by the vector of aspiration levels). The search for best variants

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 114

P. Jankowski et al.

is based on the nearest solution algorithm (Lot(cid:142) et al. 1992 ). The nearest solution
to goal is represented by the decision option that minimizes the maximum weighted
distance between aspiration levels and each decision criterion. The algorithm always
identi(cid:142) es solutions that are e(cid:141) cient (non-dominate d). In DECADE the user can
start the algorithm by pressing the button ‘Calculate’ in the centre of the right panel
(see (cid:142) gure 3). The system calculates the scores on the basis of the available aspiration
levels and immediately displays the results. The map in (cid:142) gure 4 depicts ten best
counties in the sense of their closeness to the aspiration level-based goal.

DECADE oŒers the user an opportunity to compare the results of evaluating
decision options with both MCDM techniques: Ideal Point with criterion weights
and the nearest solution with aspiration levels. For the decision scenario results of
the comparison are presented on the map in (cid:142) gure 5.

Out of ten top-scoring counties seven were selected with both MCDM techniques.
From the methodological point of view, this level of agreement is to be expected
provided that the user’s preferences remain stable; both techniques are based on a
similar concept of distance between decision options and multicriterion goal but
use diŒerent mechanisms for expressing preferences (weights versus aspiration
levels). From the user’s perspective, an agreement between two evaluations made
independently helps to raise the con(cid:142) dence in the obtained results.

The availability of two MCDM techniques in DECADE provides a (cid:143) exibility to
accommodate diŒerent styles of preference speci(cid:142) cation. Additional (cid:143) exibility is
oŒered by the interface to the aspiration level-based method; the DM can either
enter aspiration levels explicitly or select the decision options to represent his/her
target through direct interaction with the map.

The combination of map and scatterplot was suggested by Malczewski (1999b)

Figure 4. Ten Idaho counties that are nearest to aspiration levels selected for three criteria:
low-weight birth rate, poverty rate, and population farther than 35 miles from the
nearest hospital.

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

115

Figure 5. Comparison of evaluation results (ten top scoring counties) between Ideal Point
and aspiration level-based nearest solution algorithms.

as an appropriate tool for the analysis of criteria and decision spaces. However,
Malczewski considered a static presentation with multiple scatterplots representing
all possible pairs of criteria and the same number of maps each showing the ‘best’
option for the corresponding pair of criteria. The shortcomings of this form of
presentation are a limited number of criteria that can be considered and a low
legibility of maps due to their small sizes. Interactivity and dynamic links between
map and scatterplot can substantiall y reduce these limitations. In DECADE the user
can select any pair of decision criteria. Consequently, one map/scatterplot pair is
usually su(cid:141) cient for the analysis of decision problem data. If, however, the user
needs to directly compare two or more maps or scatterplots, this may be achieved
by opening several windows.

3.4. T ransformation of geography-base d preferences into decision criteria

As already mentioned in $2.2, an interactive map can be used for direct classi(cid:142) ca-
tion of spatially distributed options on the basis of their geographical properties.
DECADE provides a tool, called the interactive classi(cid:142) cation map, which supports
this activity. Within our decision scenario, we demonstrate how the DM can use the
interactive classi(cid:142) cation map to express his/her preferences and heuristics related to
the geographical positions of options (i.e. counties). In the example considered there
is one criterion that explicitly re(cid:143) ects the geographical aspect of the problem, namely,
the number of people living farther than 35 miles from the nearest hospital. In other
applications, however, it may be quite di(cid:141) cult to (cid:142) nd a numeric measure that
adequately represents geographical characteristics of options. In such cases the ability
to extract spatial information from a map and encode it in a form suitable for further
processing becomes important. We shall now demonstrate how this can be
accomplished with the facilities available in DECADE.

Suppose that a DM is convinced that in order to allocate funds to counties it is

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 116

P. Jankowski et al.

necessary to consider the distribution of medical facilities (hospitals, ambulatories,
primary care sites etc.) together with the network of roads providing access to these
facilities. In the considered decision situation the respective criteria (distribution of
medical facilities and road network) can be shown on the map. It is also relevant to
take into account the population of counties. Unfortunately, exact data about the
distribution of the population are not available. The DM decides to use the available
information about the total population in each county. Additionally, using the
population (cid:142) gures and county areas s/he computes county population densities using
the spreadsheet calculation tool of DECADE.

On the DM’s request, the system generates three maps: two maps showing the
distribution of the total population and population density, respectively, and the
interactive classi(cid:142) cation map. Every map shows locations of medical facilities and
roads. All displays in DECADE are linked, which means the DM can select a county
on any one of the maps and simultaneously visualize the values of attributes associ-
ated with this county. The maps presenting population data are supplemented with
dot plot displays, as in the map shown in (cid:142) gure 2. On these displays the DM can
observe a relative position of the selected county in regard to the population number
and population density.

The interactive classi(cid:142) cation map (see (cid:142) gure 6) allows the DM to group geo-
graphic objects into classes through the direct manipulation of the map. Clicking on
an object in the map results in appending it to an active class (thus, in (cid:142) gure 6 ‘good’
is the active class). Using these facilities, the DM classi(cid:142) es counties into those with
good, average, and poor connections to medical facilities.

In the next step, the classi(cid:142) cation can be transformed into a new attribute to be
added to the existing table of decision attributes characterizing the counties. This
can be accomplished by pressing the button ‘Classes(cid:129)
table’ in the upper left part
of the window (see (cid:142) gure 6). In the example, the DM is interested in using the new
attribute as an additional evaluation criterion. This requires the attribute to be
numeric. Therefore the DM assigns numeric codes from 1 to 3 to categories (see
(cid:142) gure 7). The new attribute now represents the DM-judged quality of intra-county
connections to medical facilities: 1—means good connection, 2—average and 3—
poor. The new attribute can be treated as an evaluation criterion in MCDM tech-
niques. Thus, the DM can apply, for example, the Ideal Point method to evaluate
counties taking into account the new, map-derived criterion.

It is interesting to compare the evaluation scores obtained with the addition of
the new, ordinal-scale criterion with the scores computed using the ratio-scale cri-
terion ‘number of population farther than 35 miles from the nearest hospital’.
Although the map-derived criterion is less precise and more subjective than the ratio-
scale criterion (as the former is the result of DM’s interpretation of thematic maps),
the evaluation results demonstrate a rather high level of agreement.

For the comparison we used DECADE to create a map shown in (cid:142) gure 8. The
map is supplemented with a scatterplot used to classify attribute value ranges. We
broke each value range into two subintervals in such a way that the ten top-scoring
counties in each evaluation became separated from the rest. Looking at the scat-
terplot, the reader will notice that seven counties received topmost scores in both
evaluations. They are painted chartreuse in the map and can be found in the upper
right quadrant of the scatterplot. Three counties that were evaluated among the top
ten with the criterion ‘number of population farther than 35 miles from the nearest
hospital’ are painted red in the map and can be found in the lower right quadrant

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

117

Figure 6. Results of interactive classi(cid:142) cation of counties accounting for the distribution of
medical facilities.

of the scatterplot. There are also three counties classi(cid:142) ed in the top ten solely on
the basis of the evaluation with the map-derived criterion. They are painted green
in the map and are visible in the upper left of the scatterplot.

In our example we demonstrate d that interactive map display makes it possible
to capture map-based observations of spatial properties and relationships. By classify-
ing geographical objects, one may transform map-derived observations into cate-
gorical knowledge. On the basis of this knowledge an attribute with nominal or
ordinal scale properties can be derived.

3.5. Reducing the dimensionality of the multicriteria decision problem using data
mining

Up to this point we have focussed our discussion on how interactive maps
dynamically linked with other types of graphical displays can support spatial option
evaluation. We described three examples of option evaluation based on diŒerent
models of map use. These models were implemented with tools available in the

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 118

P. Jankowski et al.

Figure 7. The map-derived classi(cid:142) cation of decision options can be converted to a numeric
attribute.

spatial decision support system DECADE developed on the basis of the mapping
software Descartes (Andrienko and Andrienko 1999a).

One of the recent developments in Descartes was its integration with data mining
software called Kepler (Wrobel et al. 1996 ). Currently, the link between the systems
Descartes and Kepler, allows the user to proceed from a map to data mining
procedures applied to data depicted on the map. The results of data mining can be
displayed in Kepler, and this display becomes dynamically linked with maps and
other graphics in Descartes through simultaneous highlighting of corresponding
elements in both systems. The form of Kepler’s display depends on the data mining
algorithm used. For example, results of some procedures can be represented in the
form of a classi(cid:142) cation tree. The architecture of the link between Descartes and
Kepler is described in Andrienko and Andrienko (1999b).

We considered as an interesting idea the use of the link between the two systems
for investigating whether data mining algorithms might help reduce the cognitive
complexity of spatial decision problem. Speci(cid:142) cally, we were interested in the possibil-
ity of reducing the dimensionality of the criterion outcome space. If a subset of

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

119

Figure 8. Visual comparison of evaluation results obtained with the criterion ‘number of
population farther than 35 miles from the nearest hospital’ and with the new,
map-derived criterion ‘connection to medical facilities’.

Figure 13. Noticeable change in the criterion weights resulted in only minor changes in the
order of top scoring counties signifying the low sensitivity of evaluation criteria.

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 120

P. Jankowski et al.

‘strong’ evaluation criteria could be found such that they would result in the same
or near-same order of decision options as the full set of criteria, then the reduction
of cognitive complexity might be achieved. Clearly, the smaller the number of
evaluation criteria, the cognitively easier it becomes for the decision maker to express
his/her preferences in regard to the criteria and, consequently, to classify, order, or
choose the most satisfying decision option.

We carried out an experiment using one of the data mining methods, the C4.5
decision tree derivation algorithm (Quinlan 1993). We used the C4.5 algorithm
because of its capability to (cid:142) nd a minimum su(cid:141) cient subset of criteria needed to
explain a classi(cid:142) cation of decision options. The experiment yielded promising results.
It demonstrate d that data mining deserves further study as a potentially useful
methodology for reducing the cognitive complexity of multicriteria spatial decision
problems.

The C4.5 algorithm can be applied to any set of objects described by attributes
and grouped into a (cid:142) nite number of classes. The nature of the classes is irrelevant
for the algorithm. Whenever the user of Descartes has on the screen a map with any
classi(cid:142) cation of geographical objects, she/he can submit this classi(cid:142) cation to the
C4.5 algorithm with the purpose of
(cid:142) nding classi(cid:142) cation-speci(cid:142) c attributes
(Andrienko and Andrienko 1999c) . When the user activates this function, the assign-
ment of geographic objects to classes is retrieved from the map and submitted to
Kepler together with other available data about the objects (values of attributes) .

The C4.5 algorithm tries to discriminate between the given classes on the basis
of the values of available attributes and to produce a decision tree that divides the
whole set of objects into groups resembling the speci(cid:142) ed classes. Each tree node
represents a step in the division based on values of one attribute. For example, the
counties of Idaho may be divided into those with poverty rate below and above
13.76%. It is important to note that the C4.5 algorithm tries to (cid:142) nd the most
discriminative attributes, that is the most relevant in regard to the given classi(cid:142) cation.
Our particular interest was in applying the algorithm to data about decision
options classi(cid:142) ed into acceptable, near acceptable and un-acceptable. Such a
classi(cid:142) cation can be based,
for example, on the results of one of the MCDM
techniques available in DECADE. Speci(cid:142) cally, in our experiment we used the results
of the evaluation with the Ideal Point method described in $3.2. The evaluation was
done with equal weights assigned to ten criteria. According to the (cid:142) nal evaluation
scores, the counties of Idaho were classi(cid:142) ed into fundable (8 counties), near fundable
(2 counties), and unfundable (the remaining 34 counties). Our goal was to check
whether the same or similar classi(cid:142) cation could be obtained with a fewer number of
criteria. We expected that the number of criteria representing the nodes of the
decision tree would be less then the initial ten, and, hence, the method would reveal
the most signi(cid:142) cant criteria. If so, then the cognitive complexity of the decision
problem would be reduced by dropping oŒthe irrelevant criteria.

The results of submitting the classi(cid:142) cation of Idaho counties (three groups:
fundable, near-fundable , and non-fundable ) to the C4.5 algorithm are presented
in (cid:142) gure 9.

Each node in the tree speci(cid:142) es the test of some evaluation criterion, and each
branch descending from that node corresponds to one of the possible value intervals
for this criterion. The decision tree shows that there are only three relevant criteria
for the classi(cid:142) cation (presented earlier in (cid:142) gure 2):
(1) Low-weight birth rate,
(2) Population further than 35 miles from the nearest hospital, and (3) Poverty rate

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

121

Figure 9. Decision tree for classi(cid:142) cation of Idaho counties into three subgroups: fundable,
near fundable, and non-fundable.

(see (cid:142) gure 9). In other words, the classi(cid:142) cation of Idaho counties, based on the
results of evaluation with ten criteria, can be ‘explained’ by three criteria. The top
node criterion in (cid:142) gure 9—Low-weight birth rate, splits 44 Idaho counties along
two branches: 35 counties for which Low-weight birth rate was less than or equal
to 6.35% of all births and 9 counties that had Low-weight birth rate exceeding 6.35%.
The former branch leads into the node ‘Population farther than 35 miles from the
nearest hospital’ and the latter into the node ‘Poverty rate’. Test conditions at these
two nodes result then in four branches leading into leaf-nodes. For example, the
node ‘Poverty rate’ along with ‘Low-weight birth rate greater than 6.35%’ classi(cid:142) es
nine counties. These counties are then subdivided into a subgroup of six counties
belonging to the ‘fundable’ class and three counties, from which one belongs to the
‘near-fundable’ class and two to the ‘unfundable’ class ((cid:142) gure 9).

As already mentioned, graphical displays of data mining results in Kepler are
linked with all maps and supplementary graphics in Descartes. Thus, the distribution
of decision options at any node of the tree can be displayed on the decision options
outcome map (see (cid:142) gure 10). In the example, three counties of the third leaf node in
(cid:142) gure 9 (counting from left to right) are highlighted in (cid:142) gure 10. It is also possible
to select an object (county) or a set of objects in the map or other graphics in
Descartes and see its/their positions in the nodes of the decision tree.

Since the C4.5 algorithm found that only three criteria were important for the
given classi(cid:142) cation, one would expect to obtain a similar classi(cid:142) cation using instead
of ten only these three criteria—a signi(cid:142) cant reduction of the dimensionality problem.
In order to test this, we re-evaluated the need of Idaho counties for funding using
three criteria contained in the decision tree (see (cid:142) gure 11). Next, we compared the
result of re-evaluation with the initial evaluation obtained using ten evaluation
criteria (see (cid:142) gures 10 and 11). The comparison results are presented in (cid:142) gure 12.

In both maps in (cid:142) gure 12 the darkest shade of grey marks counties chosen as
fundable according to each of the evaluations. These are the counties with the top
eight scores. Additionally, the counties classi(cid:142) ed as fundable by means of ten evalu-
ation criteria are simultaneously highlighted in both maps with white boundaries
and small square symbols.

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 122

P. Jankowski et al.

Figure 10. Distribution of decision options at any node in the decision tree can be displayed
in the decision options outcome map.

Figure 11. Top ten scoring counties are highlighted simultaneously in the decision option
outcome panel and on the map. The evaluation was computed with three criteria.

Comparison of the maps in (cid:142) gure 12 shows a high degree of agreement between
the two evaluations: out of eight counties that received top scores in the (cid:142) rst
evaluation (with ten criteria) six counties (75%) were also among the top eight in
the second evaluation (with only three criteria). From the two counties classi(cid:142) ed as
near fundable in the (cid:142) rst evaluation one was among the top eight and the other
among the top ten in the second evaluation. We repeated both evaluations using
diŒerent sets of weights and obtained very similar results providing the basis for
reducing the number of evaluation criteria and hence, simplifying the problem
complexity.

In the next step of this exploratory multiple criteria decision analysis the user
could engage in selecting criterion weights and testing the sensitivity of weight

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

123

Figure 12. Comparison of two multiple criteria evaluations using (cid:142) rst ten criteria and
subsequently only three criteria.

changes on (cid:142) nal decision option outcomes. The bottom map in (cid:142) gure 13 shows the
results of evaluation after changing criterion weights (new weights depicted in the
top map in (cid:142) gure 13. Compare with weights in (cid:142) gure 11). The reader can compare
the map at the bottom of (cid:142) gure 13 with the map at the right of (cid:142) gure 12. The top
eight counties resulting from the evaluation with equal weights are highlighted with
white square symbols and white boundary lines. Comparing both (cid:142) gures the reader
can see that seven out of eight highlighted counties received topmost scores in the
second evaluation. The remaining county received a lower score and moved to the
near-fundable class. One of the two counties that was near fundable according to
the (cid:142) rst evaluation moved to the group of fundable (top 8) counties in the result of
the second evaluation. These changes in the evaluation results are not dramatic and
show a rather low sensitivity of the evaluation results.

It is important to note that the outcomes of using the C4.5 algorithm, as applied
in our experiments, can be driven by a large number of parameters. For example,
the form of decision tree derived from the same data set may vary from one run of
the algorithm to another. However, for our particular purposes the form of the tree
given by the number of branches and nodes was irrelevant. We were interested in
the attributes exposed at the upper tree levels. These attributes were expected to be
the most informative for the discrimination between the classes. Based on our
experimentation with the C4.5 algorithm we found that changes of its parameters
did not change its eŒectiveness in discrimination between the classes. Hence, one
may expect that the most informative attributes will almost always be found near
the top of the tree.

In principle, there may be several equally informative attributes with respect to
a subset of objects. The settings of the algorithm may in(cid:143) uence which of these
attributes will be selected at a given stage of the division of the subset and included

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 124

P. Jankowski et al.

in the corresponding tree node. Therefore it may be appropriate to determine the
subset of important (discriminant) attributes by running the algorithm several times
with diŒerent settings. Another option is to use for this purpose other data mining
techniques. Andrienko et al. (2000 ) describe the application of the so called ‘feature
weighting’ technique which explicitly assigns numeric weights to attributes according
to their importance. In the experiment described here we veri(cid:142) ed the results obtained
by the C4.5 algorithm using the feature weighting technique. Changes of the decision
tree due to modi(cid:142) cation of the parameters were insigni(cid:142) cant. The ‘feature weighting’
algorithm assigned the highest weights to the attributes exposed in the decision tree
thus con(cid:142) rming the selection of three discriminant criteria with the C4.5 algorithm.

4. Conclusion and directions for further research

We have shown how exploratory data techniques such as interactive maps and
data mining methods can support spatial decision making. The research reported
here was conducted utilizing the capabilities of Descartes —a mapping system
designed to support exploratory analysis of spatially referenced data with interactive,
dynamically changeable maps. We also employed the link of Descartes to a data
mining system Kepler. For the study we used a real decision-making problem of
allocating funds for primary health care services to Idaho counties. We described
four multicriteria decision cases, each employing diŒerent decision support tools.
The (cid:142) rst three cases demonstrate the application of interactive maps and the fourth
one the use of data mining algorithm integrated with interactive map displays. The
(cid:142) rst three cases diŒer in the pattern of using maps as aids in decision making. The
order in which they are presented corresponds to the growing role played by the map.
In the (cid:142) rst case the map helps the DM analyse data characterizing the decision
problem. The DM has an opportunity to estimate the performance of any option
with regard to all criteria by viewing its ‘value path’ in the parallel coordinates plot
as well as to compare performances of two or more options. The map is dynamically
linked with the plot and serves as a ‘visual index’; through which the user points at
decision options, that can also be viewed and analysed in the plot. The map also
allows an easy identi(cid:142) cation of options with particular ‘value paths’ selected from
the plot.

In the second example the map is used to capture the decision maker’s target
values for the criteria (aspiration levels). It is important that the DM does not have
to enter the aspiration levels explicitly. Instead s/he selects suitable compromise
variants directly in the map or in the supplementary scatterplot. In so doing, the
DM can express implicit geography-base d preferences and heuristics.

In the third case the interactive map serves as a tool to capture and encode
geography-induce d knowledge the user believes to be important for decision making.
The knowledge is expressed through an ordinal scale attribute re(cid:143) ecting the user’s
spatial preferences. This attribute can be used as a criterion in the evaluation of
options with the use of MCDM procedures. Such a map use exploits the human’s
capability of seeing: the human’s eye may capture from a map a lot of valuable
information that can hardly be obtained using any kind of automatic processing.
The map is a rich source and good organizer of information, and it also acts as a
catalyzer of preferences and heuristics important in selecting spatial options. The
emphasis on visual, map-based analysis does not contradict, however, the use of
geocomputationa l functions available in many GIS, e.g. generation of buŒer zones

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

125

to support visual observation. On the contrary, it complements spatial decision
analysis.

The fourth case demonstrate s the possibility of supporting spatial decision making
with data mining techniques. The experiment described in the paper demonstrate s
the potential of data mining techniques to help reduce cognitive complexity of a
decision-making problem. Interactive maps were also involved in the experiment;
they helped to interpret and analyse the results of data mining-based criterion
selection.

The results of our research demonstrate that exploratory data techniques can be
successfully applied to support multicriteria spatial decision making. The high level
of interaction between maps and attribute data graphs opens up new possibilities
for the integration of criterion outcome and geographical decision spaces, thus
allowing the decision maker to better understand the structure of the decision
problem at hand. Reduction of the decision problem cognitive complexity through
the elimination of ‘weak’ evaluation criteria also serves the purpose of structuring
the decision problem, which is the basic tenet of decision support.

In the future we plan to continue research on the use of various data mining
methods in spatial decision making. We also intend to undertake an investigation
of map-based support for group decision making, in particular, the distributed (in
space and time) decision making by a group of stakeholders, exports and decision
makers. The activities we consider as likely to bene(cid:142) t from map support are exchange
of opinions, arguments, and proposed solutions, comparison of solutions proposed
by diŒerent group members, and aggregation of individual solutions into a consensus-
based decision.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Drs Hans Voss and Klaus Rinner (GMD—German
National Research Centre on Information Technology) and Professor Alexander
Lotov (Moscow State University, Russia) for useful comments and fruitful discussion
about the content of the paper.

References
Andrienko, G., and Andrienko, N., 1999a, Interactive maps for visual data exploration.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13, 355–374.

Andrienko, G., and Andrienko, N., 1999b, Knowledge-Based Visualization to Support
Spatial Data Mining. In Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis, Proceedings of the 3rd
International Symposium, IDA-99, Amsterdam, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 1642, edited by D. J. Hand, J. N. Kok and M. R. Berthold (Berlin: Springer-
Verlag), pp. 149–160.

Andrienko, G., and Andrienko, N., 1999c, Data Mining with C4.5 and Cartographic
Visualization. In User Interfaces to Data Intensive Systems, edited by N. W. Paton
and T. Gri(cid:141) ths (Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society), pp. 162–165.
Andrienko, G., Jankowski, P., and Andrienko, N., 2000, Data mining approach to reducing
cognitive complexity of multiple criteria spatial decision problem. In Proceedings of
Spatial Data Handling SDH ’2000 (Beijing, China: The Study Group on Geographical
Information Science of the International Geographical Union), pp. 3015–3028.
Armstrong, M. P., Densham, P. J., Lolonis, P., and Rushton, G., 1992, Cartographic displays
to support locational decision making. Cartography and Geographic Information
Systems, 19, 154–164.

Buja, A., McDonald, J. A., Michalak, J., and Stuetzle, W., 1991, Interactive data visualiza-
tion using focusing and linking. In Proceedings IEEE V isualization’91 (Washington:
IEEE Computer Society Press), pp. 156–163.

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 126

P. Jankowski et al.

Buja, A., Cook, D., and Swayne, D. F., 1996, Interactive high-dimensional data visualization.

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 5, 78–99.

Carver, S., 1991, Integrating multicriteria evaluation with GIS. International Journal of

Geographical Information Systems, 5, 321–339.

Casner, S. M., 1991, A task-analytic approach to the automated design of graphic presenta-

tions. ACM T ransactions on Graphics, 10, (April 1991), pp. 111–151.

Chun, K. J., and Park, H. K., 1998. Examining the con(cid:143) icting results of GDSS research.

Information & Management, 33, 313–325.

Church, R. L., Loban, S. R., and Lombard, K., 1992, An interface for exploring spatial
alternatives for a corridor location problem. Computers & Geosciences, 8, 1095–1105.

Cohon, J. L., 1978, Multiobjective programming and planning (New York: Academic Press).
Dykes, J. A., 1997, Exploring spatial data representation with dynamic graphics. Computers

& Geosciences, 23, 345–370.

Eastman, J. R., 1997, IDRISI for Windows, version 2.0: tutorial exercises. Worcester, MA,

Graduate School of Geography, Clark University.

Eastman, J. R., Jin, W., Kyem, P. A. K., and Toledano, J., 1995. Raster procedures for multi-
criteria/multi objective decisions. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing,
61, 539–547.

Faber, B., Wallace, W., and Cuthbertson, J., 1995, Advances in collaborative GIS for land
resource negotiation. Proceedings, GIS’95, Ninth Annual Symposium on Geographic
Information Systems, Vancouver, B. C., March 1995 (Fort Collins, CO: GIS World,
Inc.), 1, 183–189.

Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., and Smyth, P., 1996, The KDD process for extracting

useful knowledge from volumes of data. Communications of the ACM, 39, 27–34.

Fisher, G., Markowski, M., and Antoine, J., 1996, Multiple criteria land use analysis.
Working Paper WP-96-006. Laxenburg, Austria, International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis.

GeoChoice Inc. 1999, Accessed 30 September, 1999, http://www.geochoice.com/software.html.
Hwang, C. L., and Yoon, K., 1981, Multiple Attribute Decision Making: Methods and

Applications (Berlin: Springer-Verlag).

Inselberg, A., 1998, Visual data mining with parallel coordinates. Computational Statistics,

13, 47–63.

Jankowski, P., 1995, Integrating geographic information systems and multiple criteria decision
making methods. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 9, 251–273.
Jankowski, P., and Ewart, G., 1996, Spatial decision support system for health practitioners:
selecting a location of rural health practice. Geographical Systems, 3, 279–299.
Jankowski, P., Nyerges, T. L., Smith, A., Moore, T. J., and Horvath, E., 1997, Spatial group
choice: a SDSS tool for collaborative spatial decision-making. International Journal of
Geographical Information Systems, 11, 577–602.

Jankowski, P., Lotov, A., and Gusev. D., 1999, Application of multiple criteria trade-oŒ
approach to spatial decision making. In Spatial Multicriteria Decision Making and
Analysis: A geographic information sciences approach, edited by Jean-Claude Thill
(Aldershot: Ashgate), pp. 127–148.

Jankowski, P., and Nyerges, T. L., in press, GIS-supported collaborative decision making:
results of an experiment. Annals of the Associations of American Geographers.
Janssen, R., and Rietveld, P., 1990, Multicriteria analysis and GIS: an application to agricul-
tural landuse in The Netherlands. In Geographical Systems and Regional Planning,
edited by H. J. Scholten and J. C. Stilwell (Dordrecht: Kluwer).

Kirkwood, C. W., 1997, Strategic Decision Making: Multiobjective Decision Analysis with

Spreadsheets (Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press).

Lotfi, V., Stewart, T. J., and Zionts, S., 1992, An aspiration-level interactive model for
multiple criteria decision making. Computers Operations Research, 19, 671–681.
Lotov, A. V., Bourmistrova, L. V., and Bushenkov, V. A.,1999, E(cid:141) cient strategies. An
application in water quality planning. In Decision Analysis and support for sustainable
development, edited by G. Kersten, Z. Mikolajuk and A. Yeh (Dordrecht: Kluwer),
pp.145–166.

Lotov, A. V., Bushenkov, V. A., Chernov, A. V., Gusev, D. V., and Kamenev, G. K., 1997,
Internet, GIS, and interactive decision maps. Journal of Geographical Information and
Decision Analysis, 1, 118–143

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 Map-based support for spatial decision making

127

MacDougall, E. B., 1992, Exploratory analysis, dynamic statistical visualization, and geo-
graphic information systems. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 19,
237–246.

MacEachren, A. M., 1994, Visualization in modern cartography: setting the agenda. In

V isualisation in Modern Cartography (New York: Elsevier Science Inc.), pp. 1–12.

MacEachren, A. M., and Kraak, M.-J., 1997, Exploratory cartographic visualization: advan-

cing the agenda. Computers & Geosciences, 23, 335–344.

Malczewski, J., 1999a, GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis (New York: John Wiley

Malczewski, J., 1999b, Visualization in multicriteria spatial decision support systems.

& Sons).

Geomatica, 53, 139–147

Monmonier, M., 1989, Geographic brushing: enhancing exploratory analysis of the scatterplot

matrix. Cartographycal Analysis, 21, 81–84.

Quinlan, J. R., 1993, C4.5: Programs for Machine L earning (San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann

Publishers).

Simon, H. A., 1960, T he New Science of Management Decision (New York: Harper & Row).
Tukey, J. W., 1977, Exploratory Data Analysis (Reading: Addison-Wesley)
Unwin, A., and Hofmann, H., 1998, New interactive graphic tools for exploratory analysis

of spatial data. In Innovations in GIS–5 (London: Taylor and Francis), pp.46–55.

Wrobel, S., Wettschereck, D., Sommer, E., and Emde, W., 1996, Extensibility in Data Mining
Systems. In Proceedings of KDD’96 2nd International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press), pp. 214–219.

Wu, F., 1998, SimLand: a prototype to simulate land conversion through the integrated GIS
and CA with AHP-derived transition rules. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 12, 63–82.

Downloaded by [Nova Southeastern University] at 00:17 01 January 2015 