Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468
DOI 10.1007/s10707-006-0342-8

The Radial Topology Algorithm—A New Approach
for Deriving 2.5D GIS Data Models

Ulrich Lenk · Christian Heipke

Received: 29 January 2004 / Revised: 3 May 2005 /
Accepted: 27 September 2005
© Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2006

Abstract In this paper a new method for the combination of 2D GIS vector data and
2.5D DTM represented by triangulated irregular networks (TIN) to derive integrated
triangular 2.5D object-based landscape models (also known as 2.5D-GIS-TIN) is
presented. The algorithm takes into account special geometric constellations and
fully exploits existing topologies of both input data sets, it “sews the 2D data into
the TIN like a sewing-machine” while traversing the latter along the 2D data. The
new algorithm is called radial topology algorithm. We discuss its advantages and
limitations, and describe ways to eliminate redundant nodes generated during the
integration process. With the help of four examples from practical work we show
that it is feasible to compute and work with such integrated data sets. We also discuss
the integrated data models in the light of various general requirements and conclude
that the integration based on triangulations has a number of distinct advantages.

Keywords multi-dimensional data modelling · triangulations · DEM/DTM ·
algorithms · performance · GIS

1 Introduction

1.1 Motivation

A focus of current research in geographic information science is the extension of
traditional 2D data structures to incorporate height information [17]. The integration

U. Lenk (B)
EADS Deutschland GmbH, Dept. MSIC21, 88039 Friedrichshafen, Germany
e-mail: ulrich.lenk@eads.com

C. Heipke
Institute for Photogrammetry and GeoInformation, University of Hannover,
Nienburger Str. 1, 30167 Hannover, Germany
e-mail: heipke@ipi.uni-hannover.de

448

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

of digital terrain models (DTM) and derived products into geographic information
systems (GIS) offers improved and extended analysis capabilities. As an example for
the beneﬁts of an integrated analysis, imagine the computation of a road slope along
its axis. Such an information is of interest to cyclists or haulage contractors. Also,
parcel based relief analysis, relevant in agriculture, poses problems to current GIS.
Perhaps more important are applications in which simulations based on terrain data
are carried out. In ﬂood management, for example, one may want to know which
roads are actually ﬂooded at a given water level. Similar issues arise in urban sound
simulation or when the trajectory of clouds of polluted gases needs to be computed.
Another emerging application lies in car navigation where the across track slopes
start to play a major role in safety systems. Also, data visualisation is sometimes
hampered by the separation of 2D GIS data and DTM.

Although many of these questions can be answered using today’s GIS software
packages by temporarily combining DTM data with 2D data residing in different
databases, the separation of planimetric and height information does not lend itself to
a comprehensive and comfortable analysis. Therefore, a considerable amount of time
and expertise is required to obtain the desired results. To ease and sometimes make
possible a combined analysis it is thus advantageous to work with one integrated
data set only, i.e., with a tesselation of the landscape into objects which “know” their
shape of (or on) the terrain surface.

The emphasize of the research reported in this paper lies on integrated 2.5D
GIS datastructures which leads to landscape objects integrated or enriched with
one height value for each position in the horizontal plane. The restriction to 2.5D
as compared to 3D data structures which allow for a multitude of height values
at each horizontal position has several reasons. First, 3D data structures were
already discussed by numerous authors, e.g., working on 3D city models or 3D
geological models [5],[6]. More importantly, DTM existing in national core geo-
spatial databases provide a valuable source for many applications, but are only 2.5D.
It is the intention of this article to discuss procedures which use available data sets
as input, allowing for upward compatibility of these data with new methods and thus
saving investments that have already been made.

Approaches of integrated 2.5D modelling may be subdivided into different cat-
egories. A well known classiﬁcation is given by Fritsch [16]. He distinguishes three
different approaches of integration:

1. Height attributing provides a z coordinate for each node;
2. Terrain information systems provide for an integration of DTM functionality and
possibly special data structures into a GIS without an integrated data model;
3. Total integration is an approach which leads to models fulﬁlling the requirements

of integrated modelling; which is the main focus of this paper.

Although it is commonly accepted that height attributing as described above does
not meet the requirements of integrated modeling, it may be discussed in a broader
sense. Whereas according to Fritsch [16] a z coordinate is only provided for each node
in the plane, a commonly used approach to link 2D objects with height information
is to set up a height step model of the relief, thus, to provide a z coordinate not to
nodes but to area objects created on the basis of contours. This leads to object-based
height attributing instead of node-based height attributing. Linking landscape objects
with height information is conducted by computing a map overlay. The result is an

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

449

object-based “wedding cake” approximation of the landscape (the name originates
from the discretization of the terrain relief by contour lines) and has initiated some
interest in GIS (see also below).

1.2 Some Background

In the following it is presumed that the reader is familiar with (constrained) Delau-
nay-triangulations (DT and CDT, respectively) as well as digital terrain modelling
based on triangular irregular networks (TIN). Introductory reading on these topics
may be found in standard GIS text books (e.g., [26]) or computational geometry (e.g.,
[2], [28]). A survey on triangulations is provided by Bern and Eppstein [3], they also
provide references for constrained triangulations.

One particularly important algorithm is the incremental insertion of points into an
existing TIN (e.g., [11],[19]). The major difference between the various approaches
for incremental insertion is the employed spatial access method to ﬁnd the location
of insertion into the TIN. Spatial access methods in TIN are treated by Devillers
et al. [12].

A sound theoretical background for the topics discussed in this paper is given
by the concept of simplicial complexes [5],[30]. In each dimension, there exists a
minimum object, called simplex. Figure 1 shows the 0-simplex, which is a node; the
1-simplex, which is an edge; and the 2-simplex, which is a triangle. Each n-simplex
consists of (n + 1) geometrically independent simplexes of dimension (n − 1). A facet
or face of a simplex is every simplex which is part of the ﬁrst (higher dimensional)
simplex. A 0-face of a 2-simplex is each of its 0-simplexes, i.e., corner point of the
triangle, and an edge of a triangle is a 1-face. A simplicial complex is a ﬁnite set of
simplexes satisfying the following two properties (cf. [36]): (1) A face of a simplex
in a simplicial complex is also in the simplicial complex. (2) The intersection of
two simplexes in a simplicial complex is either empty or also part of the simplicial
complex. An example for 2-simplicial complexes are TIN.

The conceptual data model of an integrated 2.5D-GIS-TIN model is illustrated by
Fig. 2 using the uniﬁed modelling language (UML, Booch et al., [4]). An area object is
decomposed into a set of triangles and is hence represented by a 2-simplicial complex
whereas a linear object is represented by a 1-simplicial complex, i.e., it consists of a
set of edges. Similarly, a point object is represented by a node.

Fig. 1 Examples for simplexes and simplicial complexes

450

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

Fig. 2 2.5D-GIS-TIN data model

1.3 Structure of the Paper

In Section 2 the state-of-the-art in integrating 2D GIS data sets with height infor-
mation is presented. Approaches relevant to our own investigations are described
and evaluated in some detail. The section also contains a short description of data
reduction algorithms which are important in our context due to the rather large data
volume resulting from the integration. Section 3 is devoted to a new approach to inte-
grate 2D GIS data and DTM called radial topology algorithm. After a description of
the algorithmic background the advantages and limitations are discussed, and some
enhancements are suggested. Section 4 describes various results from experiments
with the radial topology algorithm as well as an associated discussion. Section 5
provides some aspects on which the proposed data model may be assessed, Section 6
concludes the article and gives an outlook for future research and development.

2 Related Work

2.1 Early Investigations

The basic idea of integrating DTM and 2D GIS data has already been mentioned
by Peucker et al. [29] in their well known work on TIN. These authors felt that a
combination of a TIN and a “polygon system” would incorporate the advantages of
both concepts. Substantial development, however, only occurred at a later time.

Two integration approaches were discussed by Buziek [7]. The ﬁrst one is based on
the so-called hybrid DTM which is basically a gridded DTM enriched with structure
lines (break lines, ridge lines etc.) to depict the relief in a morphologically sound
manner. In the integrated model, DTM grid cells affected by 2D GIS geometry (here:
the structure lines) are triangulated locally to represent the line information (e.g.,
[8],[14]). Grid cells and triangles are subsequently linked in some way to landscape
objects and hence, height information may be analyzed object-based. Restricting this

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

451

approach to solely triangles leads to the integrated model based on TIN which is the
focus of this paper.

The other approach mentioned in Buziek [7] is the integration based on poly-
nomial surface objects. This approach is basically an extension of height attributing
to area objects, i.e., height step objects (see above). Polynomial surface objects are
obtained by linking higher order polynomials to these objects, and an integration
may again be conducted by a map overlay. The result is a better approximation of
the shape of the relief, however, also polynomial surface objects of higher order show
height discontinuities at the object borders comparable to the mentioned “wedding
cake” approximation.

The two approaches were investigated in detail by Lenk [24]. The result indicated
that the integration of 2D GIS data and TIN is superior to an integration based
on polynomial surface objects, mainly because integrated 2.5D-GIS-TIN models the
landscape surface without height discontinuities and require less computing effort.

2.2 Approaches to Integrate a DTM-TIN and 2D GIS Data

Pilouk [30] introduced the concept of modelling space by simplicial complexes
(called simplicial networks in his work). The suggested procedure to establish an
integrated 2.5D model ﬁrst combines the nodes of the 2D GIS data set with the TIN
nodes. Then, a constrained triangulation using the 2D line segments as constraints is
performed. After interpolating a height from the original TIN for each node of the
2D GIS data set, the result is recorded as a 2.5D data structure.

Rather than combining all nodes before triangulating the data, Klötzer [21] (see
also Pl ¨umer and Gr ¨oger [31]) introduce the nodes of the 2D GIS data set by
incremental DT. Afterwards, the Delaunay-criterion is re-established, then the
edges of 2D GIS data are added by splitting them with Steiner points at the
intersection with the TIN edges. Steiner points are supplementary points which are
inserted into existing triangulations.

As an important property of the integration process, Klötzer [21] stipulated
that the shape of the DTM should not be altered during the integration process
in order to preserve the terrain representation. However, the re-establishment of
the Delaunay-criterion may lead to minor alterations of the original DTM-TIN
shape. However, leaving out this step, the procedure fulﬁlls the requirement of shape
invariance. In the following discussion the latter procedure will be referred to as the
revised approach of Klötzer [21].

The method of Egenhofer et al. [15], originally developed in another context, can
be used for our task and is also incremental in nature, and is thus similar to the one
of Klötzer. To embed the 2D data into the TIN, ﬁrstly the two nodes incident to
an edge are inserted and afterwards Steiner points are computed at the intersection
between these edges and the TIN edges. A complete polygon is inserted into the TIN
by adding its edges sequentially.

Abdelguerﬁ et al. [1] conducted their work on the background that the vector-
product-format (VPF) existing at the time did not meet the requirements of the
modelling and simulation community of the US forces. They therefore introduced
the so-called extended-vector-format (EVPF). For each area object a local TIN
is computed and the heights to be determined are interpolated linearly in the
existing surface. “The process regions with a polygon with absolute x, y boundary

452

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

coordinates. After determining which triangles contain these points, the polygon is
overlaid by dividing it into one or more child polygons based on the elevation TIN
edges. Once the child polygons are deﬁned they are triangulated...” (Abdelguerﬁ et
al., [1], p. 668). To triangulate the child polygons a procedure described in O’Rourke
[28] is adapted.

2.3 Discussion of the Described Approaches

A closer look to the existing approaches reveals that generally they are capable
of preserving the shape of the existing DTM-TIN, the only exception being the
approach by Pilouk [30]. Inserting only the line segments of 2D geometry as
constraints into the DTM-TIN may change the surface shape, if structure lines are
also present, as one can see by the following example: Imagine a road crossing a
ridge line. In the integrated model the ridge line will not exist anymore as the line
representing the road takes priority. As a consequence, the algorithmic approach
of Pilouk [30] needs correct input data in the sense, that if structure lines are
present, intersection points between the 2D GIS data and these structure lines must
be available prior to the integration. The revised procedure of Klötzer [21], the
approach of Egenhofer et al. [15] as well as the method by Abdelguerﬁ et al. [1]
do not suffer from problems of changing surface shape, however, they ignore certain
special geometric constellations. These aspects will be treated in the following.

2.3.1 Special Geometric Constellations

When merging 2D GIS data and DTM-TIN, nodes from both data sets may lie at
geometrically identical positions in 2D. Nodes of the 2D GIS data may also fall onto
existing edges in the DTM-TIN and edges in both data sets may be completely or
partially collinear. The insertion of nodes onto existing edges is a standard operation
in computational geometry (e.g., de Berg et al., [2]) that is taken into account
explicitly by Egenhofer et al. [15], and also identical nodes are considered by these
authors. Klötzer [21] assumes that the input data sets are geometrically disjunct
which is the common case in computational geometry when triangulating point sets.
However, due to the independent capture of 2D GIS and DTM data it cannot be
generally assumed that the nodes in both data sets are spatially disjunct. Edge
collinearity is neglected in both approaches. With respect to these special geometric
cases the procedure of Abdelguerﬁ et al. [1] heavily relies on the implementation
of the map overlay. If the overlay algorithm does not consider these constellations
faulty results may be obtained.

2.3.2 Algorithmic Aspects

Analyzing the algorithmic background of the procedures shows that they all neglect
existing topological relations in both input data sets. For example, Klötzer [21] ﬁrst
inserts all nodes of the 2D data set into the TIN. He seemingly computes the location
of insertion for each node without considering the inherent line topology in the 2D
data set. Egenhofer et al. [15] ﬁrst insert the start node of an edge and then its end
node before computing intersection points with the TIN edges. The approach of
Abdelguerﬁ et al. [1] is not described in detail, but it is algorithmically completely

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

453

different as their approach relies on the map overlay process. To conduct a map
overlay in an efﬁcient manner, some sorting of input data has to be performed before
computing the actual overlay itself. A possible sorting order for line segments is along
one coordinate to compute the overlay afterwards with an output sensitive plane
sweep algorithm (e.g., [2]). Hence, sorting all existing edges will commonly not use
the existing topology of the input data sets.

Locating the triangle for insertion of the ﬁrst node of a 2D line provides also an
approximate location for the second node of that line. Hence, applying the strategy
of walking in a triangulation that utilizes the TIN topology to navigate in the latter
(e.g., [12]) should speed up the procedure substantially. The approach of starting a
topological walk in a triangulation with a predetermined triangle is also called the
jump-and-walk strategy (e.g., [23]). Hence, implementing an algorithm that traverses
all geometries of a 2D GIS data set and steps along the nodes of the geometries
while walking simultaneously in the TIN exploits the topologies of both input data
sets advantageously. Additionally, no special pre-sorting of geometric primitives has
to be conducted.

2.4 Data Reduction of Input Data

As mentioned before integrated data sets tend to have large data volumes. One way
to minimize data volumes is to reduce the amount of input data separately, i.e., to
simplify the 2D GIS data and the DTM data before integrating them.

One well known procedure for 2D line simpliﬁcation is the algorithm developed
by Ramer [33] and Douglas and Peucker [13], others are summarized e.g., by [35].
The Ramer- or Douglas–Peuker-algorithm is well-known, thus we do not describe it
here, although we will make use of it later (see Section 4).

Reduction of DTM data is particularly important, if a gridded DTM is available
as input, as gridded DTM often contain a large amount of redundancy. Adaptive
triangulations used for data reduction in DTM-TIN are treated by [1],[20],[32] and
others. We use the approach developed by Lenk and Kruse [25]. Comparable to
the scheme of the Ramer- or Douglas–Peucker-algorithm a point set in the plane
is initially approximated by its convex hull (CH) which may be illustrated by a
rubber band containing all input data. For a gridded DTM the CH is given by its
corners. The CH is triangulated, resulting in an initial approximation of the surface
described by the input point set. For the remaining points the vertical distance (rather
than the perpendicular distance which is better for highly undulated terrain, but
computationally more involved) to the initial surface is computed. Similar to the
[13] algorithm the point with the maximum distance is inserted, and the remaining
distances are re-computed. The algorithm is repeated, until the maximum distance is
below a pre-deﬁned threshold.

3 A New Approach to Compute the Integrated Model

From the above considerations a new method to integrate existing piecewise linear
2D geometries into a TIN has been developed (see also [24]). It takes into account
special geometric constellations, fully exploits existing topologies of input data and

454

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

works similar to the jump-and-walk strategy. The algorithm “sews the 2D data into
the TIN like a sewing-machine” while traversing the latter along the 2D data.

In Section 3.1 we describe the new method based on a single triangle, Section 3.2
explains how the method works with a number of successive nodes of a 2D geometry
and demonstrates that the result contains a certain amount of redundant nodes.
After presenting the data model with the minimum number of nodes (Section 3.3) an
enhancement of the new method which leads to non-redundant results is presented
in Section 3.4.

3.1 Description of the Algorithm

The basic principle of the algorithm is illustrated by Fig. 3: The area of a triangle
and its adjacent neighbors as well as its incident, oriented edges E0, E1 and E2
and nodes P0, P1 and P2 may be subdivided into 19 distinct geometric locations.
The basic primitive for this operation is the determinant computed by an oriented
edge of the triangle and the node to be tested [28]. The sign of the determinant
provides information whether the node lies to the left or right of the respective
edge and in addition, it delivers the area of the triangle given by the edge and the
node. Therefore, if the area is equal to zero, the tested node is collinear to the edge.
Combining all the three determinants computed from the node to be tested and the
three triangle edges provides information in which of the 19 locations the node lies.
If the node lies outside the center triangle, the combination of determinants delivers
the adjacent triangle which serves as input for the next determinant test. Using this
strategy, one can navigate in a TIN to a destination given by the coordinates of the
2D geometry.

Modifying this approach leads to a procedure that integrates 2D data into a TIN.

Figure 3 may be re-drawn in the way given in Fig. 4.

By knowing an incident triangle the horizon around a node may be divided into
distinct sectors represented by its incident edges and other geometric locations. The
basic primitive for this operation again is the signed determinant. The respective
determinants computed by the edges of the incident triangles and the end node of
the current line segment to be integrated into the TIN provides information where
the next node is located:

1.

In the triangle itself (case 1), so the node is simply added to the TIN and the
procedure continues with the next node of the 2D geometry;

2. On an incident edge of the last node (case 2a/b), hence the current line segment

is partially collinear with existing edges;

3. On adjacent nodes of the last node (case 3a/b), i.e., the next node of the current

segment is identical to an existing node in the TIN;

4. On the extension of the incident edges of the node (case 4a/b), i.e., the current
line segment needs to be split by the adjacent node as the incident edge is
partially collinear to the line segment;
In the sector of an adjacent triangle (case 5a/b), the search will continue with a
triangle whose index is determined by use of the TIN topology;

5.

6. On the edge opposite the node (case 6);
7. Beyond the edge opposite the node (case 7); consequently, the current line
segment is split by the opposite edge and an intersection point must be computed;

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

455

Fig. 3 Dividing the horizontal plane around a triangle into decision areas

Fig. 4 Radial-topological search around a node

456

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

8. To the back of the current node (case 8a/b/c), the search continues with an

adjacent triangle, similar to case 5;

9. On the current node, i.e., both nodes are geometrically identical (case 9).

On the basis of these events all geometries may be integrated into the mesh by
traversing the object holding the 2D geometries. As the basic operation in this
algorithm is the radial sweep combined with a topological walk along the 2D
geometry and in the TIN, the algorithm is termed radial topology algorithm.

In contrast to other approaches, the described procedure considers the partial
collinearity of edges of both input data sets explicitly as respective edges are split by
existing nodes. A further advantage is the fact that in its geometric part the inﬂuenced
area of a single insertion has at maximum the extent of four triangles (in case the
respective node lies on an edge), which leads to small I/O trafﬁc.

A prerequisite of the radial topology algorithm is that the complete 2D data must
be situated inside the convex hull of the DTM-TIN. Also, the algorithm only inserts
2D geometries (instead of landscape objects) into an existing DTM-TIN. To derive a
fully object-based landscape model, the different simplexes still need to be linked to
their respective objects and vice versa. Whereas point features may easily be linked
to nodes in the integrated model during insertion, and linear features can be linked
with moderate effort to 1-simplexes while traversing the DTM-TIN, the situation
becomes more involved when area or surface features have to be assembled from
the triangles in the integrated models.

Generally there are two possibilities to establish links between area objects and
triangles. The ﬁrst way is conducted on the basis of point-in-polygon-tests. For each
triangle its center is computed by averaging the coordinates of its corner points, and
the point-in-polygon-test is then carried out to determine the object in which the
triangle center lies [30]. The other possibility utilizes the topology of the resulting
integrated TIN. For each object, a so-called virus (cf. [34], 1997) is set up at an object
boundary. It then searches recursively for triangles until it reaches another boundary
to neighboring object.

3.2 Geometric Analysis

The explanations in Section 3.1 dealt solely with an individual triangle incident to the
current node being processed. It is now the aim to demonstrate how the algorithm
works with a number of successive nodes of a 2D geometry in a triangle of the DTM-
TIN. A possible situation is given in Fig. 5.

Nodes no. 2 and 4 are nodes of a 2D geometry entering the triangle from North-
East fall into the triangle. In the integrated model the 2D geometry is represented
by nodes no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, the numbering of the nodes indicates the sequence
of insertion (the sequence may be evaluated by use of Fig. 4). Nodes no. 1 and 6
are intersection points with existing edges of the original DTM-TIN and are hence
necessary for the tesselation of the horizontal plane into area objects. Nodes no. 3
and 5 do not contribute additional information to the tesselation of the plane, as they
lie on edges of the 2D geometry, and they do not add information to the description
of the surface shape of the original DTM-TIN as their heights were interpolated
linearly in the original DTM-TIN-triangle.

Thus, the radial topology algorithm leads to redundant data if intersection nodes
are computed between the geometry to be added to the DTM-TIN and edges that

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

457

Fig. 5 Geometric analysis of the results of the radial topology algorithm

have been added to the integrated TIN beforehand. Examples of integrated models
in Lenk[24] showed that the amount of redundant nodes may be more than half of
the total amount. As a consequence, it is highly recommended either to avoid or to
delete redundant data, in particular with respect to the set up of national core geo-
spatial databases and their already large data volume.

It should be noted that also the approaches of Klötzer [21] and Egenhofer et al.
[15] lead to redundant data. Whereas the data volume of Egenhofer et al. [15] is
the same as for the radial topology algorithm, the revised approach of Klötzer [21]
creates a data volume differing from the two others as ﬁrst all nodes of the 2D data
are inserted into the TIN. The resulting data volume is in general larger because
a maximum of intersection candidates is introduced into the TIN at each state of
algorithm execution. Only the procedure of Abdelguerﬁ et al. [1] does not produce
redundant data.

3.3 The Data Model with the Minimum Number of Nodes

From the section above it can be concluded that Steiner points added during the
integration are valid if and only if they are intersection points between edges of
the 2D GIS data and DTM-TIN edges. This relation has been considered in the
integrated data model which is presented in Fig. 6 using the UML.

458

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

Fig. 6 Integrated data model with minimum number of nodes

The DTM-TIN is represented by a CDT to incorporate structure lines into the
DTM-TIN. The latter and the 2D GIS data must be treated as independent input
data sets in the resulting integrated model, the 2.5D-GIS-TIN. Since the Delaunay-
criterion is not re-established during the integration, the resulting triangulation is
constrained even if the DTM-TIN does not contain morphological information,
hence the computation is termed the integrated constrained Delaunay-triangulation
(ICDT). A node of the 2D GIS data may fall onto a DTM-TIN edge or on a node
of the TIN. Hence, edges of the 2D data may be partially collinear with DTM-TIN
edges. A so-called “map” [31] is decomposed into one or more faces, i.e., polygons,
and each face consists of one or more triangles. The relation that only intersection
points are valid Steiner points is expressed by the and-relation between the incident
edges of the Steiner points NodeST E.

3.4 How to Compute the Integrated Model with Minimum Number of Nodes

In this section we describe ways to extend the radial topology algorithm in order to
avoid the creation of redundant data. In principal there are two ways to proceed: one
can compute the non-redundant result (1) during insertion of the 2D geometries into
the DTM-TIN, or (2) in a separate step based on the intermediate, redundant result.
In order to avoid redundant data during insertion, it is necessary to insert the ﬁrst
nodes of the geometry temporarily until the geometry leaves the starting DTM-TIN
triangle. At this stage it must be checked whether redundant data was generated
inside the triangle. If this is the case, re-triangulation has to be conducted while

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

459

suppressing the redundant data. This approach is mandatory if a simple triangle-
based data structure is used that stores only topological relations between triangles
and pointers from triangles to nodes, as we have done. It can be shown that the
approach is algorithmically rather involved, in particular for linear objects.

Therefore, we have instead developed a procedure for the second alternative as
indicated in Fig. 7. While being signiﬁcantly less complex in algorithmic terms, the
disadvantage of this approach is the additional computational effort, resulting from
the fact that we need to walk along the 2D data twice.

Redundant nodes are marked as such during the initial step of integration. To
delete them from the intermediate integrated model the procedure sweeps radially

Fig. 7 Deletion of redundant data from Fig. 5

460

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

around each node to collect incident and adjacent primitives, and then perform a
polygon triangulation. During the polygon triangulation this step is necessary to
consider the special case of three successive collinear nodes in the polygon. On
the basis of the mentioned signed determinants such situations can be found and
treated in an appropriate way. As a result a non-redundant integrated 2.5D-GIS-TIN
is available.

4 Experimental Results

In this section we show results of the integration. We also come back to the issue
of data reduction as indicated in Section 2.4. This has proven to be of particular
relevance, because we work with gridded DTM as input.

Figure 8 shows the input data sets as well as two integrated models for one of our
test areas, the Leine ﬂoodplain, south of Hannover, Germany. The Leine running
south along the base of a small mountain can be easily identiﬁed. The eastern part
of the area shows the ﬂoodplain with low relief energy. The upper left part of Fig. 8
shows the 2D GIS data, in the upper right the resulting integrated model is depicted.
The underlying DTM has of course been triangulated, but the gridded nature of the
input is still clearly visible. It also becomes clear that from a topographic point of
view this result contains a high amount of redundant data (note, that this redundancy
is due to the grid data model and has no connection to the algorithmic redundancy
discussed in the previous section).

Applying data reduction techniques as described in Section 2.4, namely the
Ramer- / Douglas-Peuker algorithm for the 2D GIS data, and adaptive triangulation
for the DTM-TIN (see again [25]), has yielded the two lower representations of
Fig. 8. In the lower left the DTM-TIN, adaptively triangulated with a threshold of 1
m, can be seen, in the lower right, the integrated model resulting from the simpliﬁed
2D data set (threshold 1 m) and the adaptively triangulated DTM-TIN is depicted. It
is clearly visible that the data volume of the lower right model is signiﬁcantly smaller
than the one depicted in the upper right, as was to be expected. A feature of TIN-
based integrated models can also be observed: especially in ﬂat areas the approach
can lead to long skinny triangles. This is due to the different point densities along
the 2D geometries and the spatial distribution of DTM-TIN nodes in the horizontal
plane.

A deeper insight into numerical results with respect to data volume is given in
Tables 1 and 2 which contain not only information for the Leine area but also for
the other test areas Damme, situated in a hilly moraine landscape, and Ebergötzen
representing a mountainous region in the Harz mountains, both in Germany. Table 1
contains information about the input data. All three test areas are of equal size. As
the number of nodes in a grid is independent of the morphology, i.e., it depends only
on its size, it is only provided for the ﬁrst area.

It should be noted that the height accuracy of DTM data used as input was stated
with 1 m by the data provider, the respective value for horizontal accuracy of 2D
data is 3 m. Therefore, applying a threshold of 1 m for simpliﬁcation of both data sets
should not deteriorate the general accuracy of the integrated model. The second step
of simpliﬁcation (3 m) was computed to show the result according to the speciﬁed
accuracy of the 2D input data set.

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

461

Fig. 8 Examples of integrated models for test area Leine

In Table 2 the size of the resulting integrated models is shown. Taking into account
the different morphology and density of the 2D GIS data, comparable results are
obtained for all three test areas. It is clearly visible that applying data reduction
algorithms to input data sets leads to a signiﬁcantly smaller amount of nodes in the
integrated models and that adaptive triangulation contribute the major part in data
simpliﬁcation. Besides, the effect of data reduction of course depends on the terrain
morphology. Areas with a higher relief energy lead to a denser node distribution in
the adaptive TIN and thus in the respective integrated models.

462

Test
area

Table 1 Amount of nodes in (simpliﬁed) input data sets for different test area

Type of
data

Threshold
[m]

Nodes [%]
of full data set

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

Leine/Damme/Ebergötzen
Leine
Leine
Leine
Leine
Leine
Damme
Damme
Damme
Damme
Damme
Ebergötzen
Ebergötzen
Ebergötzen
Ebergötzen
Ebergötzen

full 12.5-m-grid
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN
full 2D data set
simpliﬁed 2D data set
simpliﬁed 2D data set
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN
full 2D data set
simpliﬁed 2D data set
simpliﬁed 2D data set
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN
full 2D data set
simpliﬁed 2D data set
simpliﬁed 2D data set

0
1
3
0
1
3
1
3
0
1
3
1
3
0
1
3

Nodes
abs.

25,921
1,103
265
1,608
947
620
2,301
587
2,323
1,230
841
4,109
1,337
2,962
1,587
1,020

100

4.3
1.0

100
58.9
38.6
8.9
2.7

100
52.9
36.2
15.9
5.2

100
53.6
34.4

5 General Discussion of Integrated Models Based on TIN

The aim of this section is to discuss the compatibility of the TIN-based integration of
DTM and 2D GIS data with existing concepts in GIS research and practice. Rather
than developing a general catalogue of features to assess the data model, a small
and not necessarily complete list of properties is used. For the decision in a speciﬁc
project, these elaborations can be useful in an initial assessment phase, they should
however be extended in light of any particular requirements.

Compatibility with existing data sets is provided as it was one of the major pre-
requisites for developing the 2.5D geo-spatial data model. The model uses input data

Table 2 Amount of nodes in integrated data models (with simpliﬁed input data sets)

Type of
input data

Threshold
[m]

Nodes [%]
of full data set

Test
area

Leine
Leine
Leine
Damme
Damme
Damme
Ebergötzen
Ebergötzen
Ebergötzen

12.5-m-grid as TIN, full 2D data
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN and 2D data
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN and 2D data
12.5-m-grid as TIN, full 2D data
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN and 2D data
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN and 2D data
12.5-m-grid as TIN, full 2D data
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN and 2D data
simpliﬁed DTM-TIN and 2D data

0
1
3
0
1
3
0
1
3

Nodes
abs.

34,166
3,143
1,314
36,656
5,513
2,285
37,661
8,555
3,918

100

9.2
3.8

100

15.0
6.2

100

22.7
10.4

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

463

as provided by national mapping agencies, and it may be easily applied to other data
sources such as irregularly sampled DTM data.

Compatibility with existing geo-spatial data models and GIS software is provided
under certain restrictions. Simplicial complexes, and thus TIN, may be stored in geo-
databases if the latter are capable of processing complex objects which consist of
several geometric parts. Otherwise, they must be stored as separate TIN where each
TIN triangle is linked with the full attribute data set of the respective parent object.
Compatibility with existing approaches in geo-spatial data modelling: 2-simplicial
complexes are compatible with higher dimensional data models as the theoretic
background may be extended to 3D and 4D, see [30], and [5]. 2-simplicial complexes
can also be used to model general surface features in space where a multitude of
height values is allowed for each position in the horizontal plane (see [27]), however
topology is still purely two-dimensional. Such approaches are sometimes termed as
2.75D (e.g., [9],[18]). Hence, the proposed procedure of integration on the basis of
triangulations is also compatible with existing approaches in higher dimensional GIS
research, and also provides for migrating existing national core geo-spatial databases
to 3D.

Quality of terrain modelling using TINs is inﬂuenced mainly by three factors: ﬁrstly
by quality of the original input data, secondly by effects caused by the interpolation
scheme being used to interpolate the surface between original data points, and possi-
bly thirdly by a data simpliﬁcation scheme if it is applied. This is also the case for 2D
data whereas not a surface but a smooth line is being interpolated between original
points. In case data simpliﬁcation is required, the use of similar threshold values for
both input data sets allows to construct models with homogeneous accuracy for all
three dimensions. As a consequence, quality is easily controlled in TIN-based 2.5D
landscape modelling.

The computational effort to compute TIN-based integrated models is governed by
the way the DT is computed and the spatial access data structure being used for the
incremental insertion of nodes. As the DT of irregular point sets and triangulation
of polygons is a well-researched ﬁeld in computational geometry, many working
algorithms are available. Algorithms for DT may be implemented as O(n log n)
processes with moderate effort, and the insertion of additional nodes has only O(n2)
in the worst case (e.g., [19]).

Analysis and spatial query space: As the TIN is a well-researched data model,
many algorithms exist to analyze this data structure (volumes, isolines, surface
contents etc.). 2.5D-GIS-TIN may be easily accessed spatially as they describe objects
with discrete nodes. Objects are represented by boundary representation or by
sequences of nodes.

Data volume: The integration based on triangulation leads sometimes to a large
data volume, as was discussed in the previous section. We have also shown that the
data volume may be reduced algorithmically and controlled efﬁciently by appropri-
ately simplifying the input data.

Visualization of TIN is a standard procedure and consequently, no technical
problems are anticipated in this area. However, care should be taken in larger
scales, where semantic problems may appear, if the 2D GIS data and the DTM are
not consistent with each other and with the conception of a human observer. For
instance, the height information taken from the DTM for a 2D polygon denoted as

464

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

a lake is not necessarily ﬂat, and this semantic inconsistency may lead to artifacts in
the visualization.

As a result of the discussion in this section, we can state that the integration based
on triangulations ﬁts into existing approaches of capturing geo-spatial information,
higher dimensional data modelling and management as well as analysis and visual-
ization. By using integrated data potential users will beneﬁt from an improved access
to the third dimension based on individual landscape objects.

6 Conclusions and Outlook

In this article we have described a new algorithm, termed the radial topology
algorithm, for the generation of an integrated 2.5-GIS-TIN data set starting from
separate DTM and 2D GIS data. Besides the application of integrating 2D data
into a TIN, the algorithm is capable of inserting any 2D geometry into existing
triangulations, and to interpolate height information efﬁciently for successive nodes
in a 2D topological network such as a road network used in car navigation. Except
for the differences in height interpolation, it can also be used to integrate structure
lines into TIN.

We have discussed the advantages and limitations of the radial topology algo-
rithm, also with respect to approaches in the literature, and have described ways
to eliminate the redundant nodes generated during the integration process. With
the help of four examples from practical work we have shown that it is feasible to
compute and work with such integrated data sets.

We have also discussed the integrated data models in the light of various more
general requirements. As a consequence of this discussion, we conclude that the
integration based on triangulations ﬁts into existing approaches of capturing geo-
spatial information, higher dimensional data modelling and management as well as
analysis and visualization. By using integrated data potential users will beneﬁt from
an improved access to the third dimension based on individual landscape objects.

The next steps of our work comprise mainly two points: we hope that many
different DTM and GIS users will beneﬁt from our work. We want to make sure
that these advantages can be brought to light more clearly with the help of prototype
applications. Thus, we will seek collaboration with users in order to test and reﬁne
the described algorithm and data model.

The second issue is more research oriented. As was mentioned in the previous
section, besides the geometric issues of integration there are also semantic questions,
which need to be addressed. The example of the lake was already given above.
Consider as another one a road running across a mountainous area. The 2.5D road
should have a correct slope along and across its axis everywhere. Most probably this
will not be the case, when the height of the corresponding nodes is taken from the
integrated data model, since it must be assumed that the DTM and the 2D GIS are of
different geometric accuracy and resolution, have been captured at different times,
from different data sources, and for different purposes, to give just a few reasons for
the resulting inconsistency.

The underlying problem is that although no explicit height information is stored
in the 2D GIS data, the nature of the object class implicitly introduces height in-
formation: a lake is ﬂat, as is a soccer ﬁeld, a road can only have limited slopes and

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

465

slope changes, rivers monotonously run downhill, overpasses need to actually pass
above underpasses etc. Thus, the task is to formalize these implicitly given height
cues and to introduce them into the integration process. Initial work on this topic has
been reported by Koch and Heipke [22].

Yet another issue worth mentioning is the extension of the model to higher
dimensions (3D and 4D) using other or additional data sources as well as application
oriented models (e.g., a speciﬁc surface model for car navigation similar to the
approach of Chen et al. [10]). Thus, the topic of integrating planimetric and height
information including their temporal behavior to ﬁnally arrive at true 3D or 4D
representations of our world remains a complex and very interesting challenge.

Acknowledgements This research was funded by a grant of the German Federal Environmental
Foundation, Osnabrück, Germany. Topographic data were provided by the State Mapping Agency
of Lower Saxony (Landesvermessung und Geobasisinformation Niedersachsen), Germany. The
support by these organizations, as well as the helpful suggestions of the anonymous reviewers are
gratefully acknowledged.

References

1. M. Abdelguerﬁ, E. Cooper, C. Wynne, and K. Shaw. “An Extended Vector Product Format
(EVPF) suitable for the representation of three-dimensional elevation in terrain databases,”
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, Vol. 11:649–676, 1997.

2. M. de Berg, M. van Kreveld, M. Overmars, and O. Schwarzkopf. Computational Geometry—

Algorithms and Applications. Springer: Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1997.

3. M. Bern and D. Eppstein. “Mesh generation and optimal triangulation,” in D.Z. Du and
F.K. Hwang (Eds.), Computing in Euclidean Geometry (2nd Edition), Lecture Notes Series on
Computing, Vol. 4, pp. 47–123, World Scientiﬁc: Singapore, 1995.

4. G. Booch, J. Rumbaugh, and I. Jacobsen. Uniﬁed Modelling Language User Guide. Addison-

Wesley: Reading, Massachusetts, 1998.

5. M. Breunig. “On the way to component-based 3D/4D geoinformation systems,” in Lecture Notes

in Earth Sciences 94, Springer: Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2000.

6. M. Breunig. “Integration of spatial information for geo-information systems,” in Lecture Notes

in Earth Sciences 61, Springer: Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1996.

7. G. Buziek. “Considerations on integration of DTM in GIS,” in Proc. of Eurocarto XI, pp. 165–

176, Kiruna, Sweden, 1993.

8. G. Buziek, D. Grünreich, and I. Kruse. “Stand und Entwicklung der digitalen Landschaftsmod-
ellierung mit dem Topographischen Auswertesystem der Universität Hannover (TASH),”
Vermessung, Photogrammetrie, Kulturtechnik, Vol. 90:84–88, 1992.

9. B. de Cambray. “Three-dimensional (3D) objects in geographical databases,” in Proc. 4th Euro-
pean Conference and Exhibition on Geographical Information Systems (EGIS’93), Genova, Italy,
29.03.-01.04, pp. 217–226, 1993.

10. J. Chen, M. Sun, and Q. Zhou. “Expression and visualization of cloverleaf junction in a 3-

dimensional city model,” GeoInformatica, Vol. 4:375–386, 2000.

11. P.A. Devijver and M. Dekesel. “Insert and delete algorithms for maintaining dynamic Delaunay

triangulations,” Pattern Recognition Letters, Vol. 1:73–77, 1982.

12. O. Devillers, S. Pion, and M. Teilland. “Walking in a triangulation,” in Institut National de
Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA), Sophia Antipolis, Rapport de recherche
no 4120, 2001.

13. D.H. Douglas and T.K. Peucker. “Algorithms for the reduction of the number of points required

to represent a line or its caricature,” Canadian Cartographer, Vol. 10:112–122, 1973.

14. H. Ebner and D. Fritsch. “High ﬁdelity digital terrain models elements of land information

systems,” FIG Congress, XVIII, Toronto, Canada, Invited Paper No. 504.1, 15, 1986.

15. M.J. Egenhofer, A.U. Frank, and J.P. Jackson. “A topological data model for spatial databases,”

in Proc. First Symposium SSD’89, Santa Barbara, California, USA, pp. 271–286, 1989.

466

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

16. D. Fritsch. “Three-dimensional geographic information systems—status and prospects,” in Inter-
national Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Vol. XXXI, Part B3, Vienna, Austria,
pp. 215–221, 1996.

17. M.F. Goodchild. “What next? reﬂections from the middle of

the growth curve,” in
T.W. Foresman (Ed.), The History of Geographic Information Systems: Perspectives from the
Pioneers, pp. 369–381, Prentice-Hall: Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 1997.

18. G. Gröger. Modellierung Raumbezogener Objekte und Datenintegrität in GIS. Herbert

Wichmann Verlag: Heidelberg, 2000.

19. L. Guibas and J. Stolﬁ. “Primitives for the manipulation of general subdivisions and the compu-

tation of Voronoi diagrams,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 4:74–123, 1985.

20. M. Heller. “Triangulation algorithms for adaptive terrain modelling,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. on

Spatial Data Handling, Zürich, Vol. 1, pp. 163–174, 1990.

21. F. Klötzer. “Integration von triangulierten digitalen Geländemodellen und Landkarten,”
Diploma thesis, Institute of Computer Science III, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität,
Bonn, Germany, 1997.

22. A. Koch and C. Heipke. “Semantically correct 2.5 D GIS data—the integration of a DTM and
topographic vector data,” in P. Fisher P. (Ed.), Developments in Spatial Data Handling, 11th
Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, pp. 509–526, Springer: Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2004.
23. M. van Kreveld. “Digital elevation models and TIN algorithms,” in M. van Kreveld, J. Nievergelt,
Th. Roos and P. Widmayer (Eds.), Algorithmic Foundations of Geographic Information Systems.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1340, pp. 37–78, Springer: Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1997.
24. U. Lenk. “2.5D-GIS und Geobasisdaten—Integration von Höheninformation und Digita-
len Situationsmodellen,” Wissenschaftliche Arbeiten der Fachrichtung Vermessungswesen der
Universität Hannover Nr. 244 and Deutsche Geodätische Kommission bei der Bayerischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Reihe C, Nr. 546. Doctoral
thesis, University of Hannover,
Germany, 2001.

25. U. Lenk and I. Kruse. “Multibeam data processing: data reduction, adaptive triangular meshing
and comments resulting from Brouns et al. (THJ No. 101, 2001),” Hydrographic Journal, Vol.
102:9–14, 2001.

26. P.A. Longley, M.I. Goodchild, D.J. Maguire, and D.W. Rhind (Eds.). Geographical information

systems, Vol. 1., Principles and Technical Issues. Wiley: New York, 1999.

27. A. de la Losa. “Towards a 3D GIS,” in Proc. GISPlanet’98 (CD-ROM), Lisboa, Portugal, 1998.
28. J. O’Rourke. Computational Geometry in C. 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press:

Massachusetts, 1998.

29. T.K. Peucker, R.J. Fowler, J.J. Little, and D.M. Mark. “Digital representation of three-
dimensional surfaces by Triangulated Irregular Networks (TIN) (Revised),” Simon Fraser Uni-
versity, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada and Ofﬁce of Naval Research, Geography Programs,
Arlington, Virginia, USA, Technical Report No. 10, 1976.

30. M. Pilouk. “Integrated modelling for 3D GIS,” Ph.D. Thesis, ITC Publication Series No. 40,

Enschede, The Netherlands, 1996.

31. L. Plumer and G. Gröger. “Achieving integrity in geographic information systems—maps and

nested maps,” GeoInformatica, Vol. 1:345–367, 1997.

32. M.F. Polis, S.J. Gifford, and D.M. McKeown Jr. “Automating the construction of large-scale

virtual worlds,” IEEE Computer, Vol. 28:57–65, 1995.

33. U. Ramer. “An iterative procedure for the polygonal approximation of plane curves,” Computer

Graphics and Image Processing, Vol. 1:244–256, 1972.

34. J.R. Shewchuk. “Delaunay reﬁnement mesh generation.” Ph.D. Thesis, School of Computer

Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 1997.

35. R. Weibel. “Generalization of spatial data: principles and selected algorithms,” in M. van
Kreveld, J. Nievergelt, Th Roos and P. Widmayer (Eds.), Algorithmic Foundations of Geographic
Information Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1340, pp. 99–152, Springer: Berlin
Heideberg New York, 1997.

36. M.F. Worboys. GIS—A Computing Perspective. Taylor and Francis: London, 1995.

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

467

Christian Heipke was born in Lüneburg, Germany in 1961. Since 1980 he studied Geodetic Sciences
and Surveying at the universities of Hannover, Sydney, and Munich. He graduated from the Tech-
nical University Munich in 1986 and subsequently joined the Industrieanlagen-Betriebsgesellschaft
(IABG), Ottobrunn as a Research Scientist. In 1990 he became Research Fellow at the Chair for
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Technical University Munich. In the same year he received a
Ph.D. degree (Dr.-Ing.) and in 1994 the venia legendi (Dr.-Ing. habil.), both from TU Munich.

He led the research group ‘Digital Photogrammetry’ at the same institution from 1991 –
1994. Throughout 1995 he was a visiting professor for photogrammetry at Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH. He returned to TU Munich at the beginning of 1996, were he headed the research
group ‘Image matching and object extraction.’ He was awarded another guest professorship at the
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland in spring 1998.

In October 1998 he was appointed Head of the Institute of Photogrammetry and GeoInformation,
University of Hannover, where he currently leads a group of about 25 researchers, most of them
funded through grants from national and international science organisations and from industry.
His professional interests comprise all aspects of digital photogrammetry & remote sensing, image
understanding and their connection to GIS.

Christian Heipke is the recipient of the Otto von Gruber Award 1992, the most prestigious award
for young scientists offered by the International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
(ISPRS). He has more than 60 refereed publications in scientiﬁc journals to his name. He is a member
of the German Geodetic Commission (DGK), the Braunschweig Scientiﬁc Society (BWG), the
German Society for Geodesy, Geoinformation and Land Management (DVW), the German Society
for Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Geoinformation (DGPF), the German Society for Pattern
Recognition (DAGM), the American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ASPRS),
and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He has acted as guest editor and
reviewer of major international journals in photogrammetry and remote sensing, and has organized
and co-organized a number of international scientiﬁc meetings in the ﬁelds of photogrammetry,
remote sensing, GIS and computer vision. He is active as scientiﬁc reviewer for a number of scientiﬁc
foundations, e. g. in Germany, Switzerland, Finland, France and Belgium. Currently he serves as
chair of the ISPRS working group IV/3 “Automated geo-spatial data acquisition and mapping” and
as vice-president of EuroSDR (European Spatial Data Research, formerly known as OEEPE), in
which he is responsible for research.

468

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 447–468

Dr.-Ing. Ulrich Lenk PgDipHS is currently a system engineer at EADS Deutschland GmbH,
Friedrichshafen, Germany, and involved in the development of ground segments (tasking and data
processing) for air borne and space borne sensors. He started in 2002 as a software development
engineer at EADS and moved quickly into the position of a system engineer with a strong
emphasis of mission planning, image chain and applications. Prior to this position at EADS he
was with the Institute of Cartography and Geoinformatics (ikg), University of Hannover, Germany,
where he completed his Doctor-Engineer in Geoinformatics. The topic of his thesis was related to
multidimensional landscape modeling by combining height information and 2D GIS data. He also
obtained a Diplom-Engineer in Geodesy and Surveying from University of Karlsruhe, Germany,
and a Postgraduate Diploma in Hydrographic Surveying (FIG/IHO Level A) from University of
Plymouth, UK. He has been involved in GIS projects, SAR system projects, hydrographic surveys
and data processing as well as terrain modeling at ikg and at the Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar
and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany. His main interests are software development for
GIS, synthethic aperture radar (SAR), multidimensional GIS data models, terrain modeling, TINs
and hydrographic data processing.

