The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

The Place Names of the Middle East Before and
After Ptolemaic Cartography: An Emblematic
Selection from Ancient Maps

Silvia Siniscalchi & Cosimo Palagiano

To cite this article: Silvia Siniscalchi & Cosimo Palagiano (2018) The Place Names of the Middle
East Before and After Ptolemaic Cartography: An Emblematic Selection from Ancient Maps, The
Cartographic Journal, 55:3, 205-216, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1413788

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1413788

© 2018 The Authors. Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.

Published online: 18 Oct 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 218

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL
2018, VOL. 55, NO. 3, pp. 205–216
https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1413788

REFEREED PAPER

The Place Names of the Middle East Before and After Ptolemaic Cartography:
An Emblematic Selection from Ancient Maps

Silvia Siniscalchi

and Cosimo Palagiano

Silvia Siniscalchi, Dipartimento di Studi Umanistici, Università degli Studi di Salerno Fisciano (Sa), Italy;
Cosimo Palagiano, Department of Documentary, Linguistic-philological and Geographical Sciences, “Sapienza” University of Rome, Roma,
Italy

ABSTRACT
The cultural gap between Europe and Asia (at ﬁrst political and then religious) saw an increase
with the spread of Islam, which, to the European imagination, was synonymous with ‘foreign’.
This separation grew after the discovery of America (1492) with the loss of the central
commercial position of the Mediterranean reducing the level of contact between the
countries of its basin. Traces of these changes can be recognized on historic Western maps
in the transformation of their toponyms (place names). Through a comparative cartographic
analysis, this paper examines some of the key changes and phases that occurred during the era.

KEYWORDS
Place names; cartography;
Mediterranean culture;
Mesopotamia; Middle East;
Islam

Description of the status quo in the examined geopolitical area (Syria and Iraq)

Despite the severe destruction that terrorism and war have recently caused to buildings and to the archaeological
heritage of Syria and Iraq, remote and recent maps can safeguard the magniﬁcent images of these two countries.
They are territories where the ﬁrst real process of ‘territorialization’ began, that is to say, the transformation of
nature into territory1: a meeting point of the dialectical relationship between two diﬀerent and extraordinary
cultures, Iraq and Syria, which have always occupied a special and prominent place in history tout court. Here,
the major revolutions took place, which gave birth to human civilization, as observed by Childe (1950): the
Neolithic (with the development of agriculture and livestock in the eighth and in the seventh millennium BC)
and the urban revolution (with the birth of the city and the state in the fourth and in the third millennium
BC). Furthermore, over the centuries, Eastern and Western cultures met following the penetration of Greek-
Roman empires and trade. Christianity was born and initially spread in these lands,2 thanks to a long period of
prosperity and to the well-being of Christian minorities, beyond the view of the ‘clash of civilizations’,
according to which the ideological and cultural divisions between the West and the Middle East would give way
to the birth and spread of Islam in the seventh century. A clash originally conceived by Huntington (1997),
which grasped the relationship of economic, social and cultural tension between Western and Islamic societies,
as heterogeneous subjects in the global world. But only a minority of the Muslim world is involved in the
conﬂict of today; it is also clear that, although the armed ﬁghting between the Christian and Islamic worlds
constitutes a recurring leitmotif of history, trade and cultural exchanges between these two realities have never
been called into question over the centuries, even during the period of the Crusades.

However, there are undoubted fault lines which have contributed to deteriorate and harden the relations between
Western countries and those of the so-called ‘Middle East’: this name is in fact in and of itself an example of this
condition. It is a name coined to denote a new geography, invented after the end of the Ottoman Empire. It is a
misleading name, since it is identiﬁed with the Arab and Muslim countries, whereas, from a geographical point
of view, it includes Arab countries with Christian minorities and of other religions (as Turkey, Syria, Egypt,
Lebanon, Israel), non-Arab Islamic countries (as Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan), to which are added also Islamic
countries that are not in the Middle East (including Pakistan, Bangladesh, Malaysia and Indonesia).

It is a diversity that indicates the geographical and cultural complexity of these territories, ruled for over four
centuries by an empire that had identiﬁed nationalism as the most serious threat to its estate. At the end of the
nineteenth century, it had tried to recover its cultural identity by pursuing a policy of homogenization in the
name of Islam, that recovered even after the outbreak of the revolution of the ‘Young Turks’ led by Mustafa

CONTACT Silvia Siniscalchi
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.

ssiniscalchi@unisa.it © 2018 The Authors. Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.

206

S. SINISCALCHI AND C. PALAGIANO

Kemal to curb the centrifugal tendencies. Also for this reason, probably, Islam is seen as the most connotative
character of the Middle East, even if, without a doubt, its importance is real. Until the Middle Ages, indeed,
Islamic civilization is rich, very advanced, able to use the jihad (‘eﬀort on the way to God’) as an instrument for
the development of the political and military outcome. From the Renaissance onwards, with the ‘Reconquista’
of Spain, the circumnavigation of Africa, the discovery of America, the transfer of economic trades to the
Atlantic, the process of secularization, the centralization of power and the birth of the Modern States, a major
split occurs between the Western and Eastern world, passing the ﬁrst to a progressive material enrichment,
whereas the second to a slow decay; through the Enlightenment and the ideals arising from the French
Revolution, also stems an increasingly marked cultural and ideological separation, culminating in the overthrow
of power relations between the two civilizations. The latter is symbolically carried out with the conquest of
Egypt by Napoleon Bonaparte (1798–1801), who gives a blow to the Ottoman Empire and inaugurates the
experience – shocking for the Arab world – of colonialism, which reaches its climax with the First World War
and the ﬁnal dissolution of the Empire (1922).

Syria and Iraq in the Western imagination: a vision of the Middle East between the place names
of Ptolemaic maps and modern cartography

The maps testify the process of the progressive separation between the West and the Middle East, as the analysis
of some cartographic representations of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries by diﬀerent authors will attempt to
show (Table 1). The maps, in fact, are not simply technical tools but the expression (and production) of ideological
values, social and cultural rights, as well as of visions of the world (Farinelli, 1992; 2009). The place names in this
regard, certainly play a privileged role for the understanding of the performative process of ‘territorialization’3 and
for the study of geo-cultural identity (Aversano, 2007), examined on diﬀerent levels and in their constitutive links
with the concept of landscape, as stated by UNESCO in 2003 (which has included place names in the Intangible
Cultural Heritage). The changes of place names, therefore, are not only part of the historical ﬂuctuation of a
language, but are also ‘markers’ of geographical features, territories and identity spaces (Jordan and Woodman,
2016).

Aversano’s research on place names (2007), in particular, is the basis of a comparative method, aimed to
measure the territorial transformation of an area over time based on its toponomastic variations, linked to both
‘macro’ and ‘micro’ geo-historic events, according to a glocal heuristic process, linking local events to other
more general ones, as well as on the interaction of all available sources. Starting from this method, this
contribution will try to carry out a toponymic investigation on the geographical areas of Syria and Iraq, not so
much from the point of view of their real territorial transformations – aim that would require a much wider
and more thorough analysis – but in relation to the transformation of their representation into the collective
perception of an occidental population.

In the case of the representation of Syria and Iraq in Western mapping, indeed, the question is even more
complex. The transition from the Ptolemaic representation to the modern one of the Middle East, in fact, from
a geographical-historical point of view, shows the cartographic progress related to the new scientiﬁc discoveries
– of which the Dutch cartographers, such as Ortelius, show the ﬁrst results, which in Italy reach an acme with
Giovanni Antonio Magini (D’Ascenzo, 2015) – remembering also the importance of the Jesuit penetration in
Asia, which brought the acquisition of new techniques from China. At the same time, however, it also decrees
the end of a Weltanschauung which, through Ptolemaic cartography and the enormous prestige it enjoyed, had
kept alive the classical idea of a Greek-Roman sea, the Mediterranean, as a common connotative sign of the
countries that overlook it. Therefore this is a transformation linked to the end of a collective imagination fed by
a humanistic culture and by the rediscovery of the classics during the Renaissance.

Table 1. Comparison between eight relevant place names in the ﬁve examinated maps. The persistence of Damascus and Palmira, today a UNESCO World
Heritage Site, highlights the historic role of these two cities as a cultural meeting point between East and West in the centuries.

Bernardo Silvano 1511

Abraham Ortelius 1594

Pierre Mortier 1695

Emanuel Bowen 1744

Current place names or areas of pertinence

Country names
Babylonia
Mesopotamia
Place names
Chalybon
Nicephorium
Bibla
Damascus
Hierapolis

Palmyra

Diarbech

Aleppo
Racha
Bagdet
Damascus

Mosul

Diarbek

Alep
Raqqa
Baghdad
Damas

Musol

Diarbekr

Aleppo

Baghdad
Damascus

Mosul
Palmyra

Iraq
Iraq, Syria

Aleppo
Al-Raqqah
Baghdad
Damascus
Manbij
Mossul
Palmyra

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

207

It is a vision which vanished in the prevalence of revolutionary events, with the discovery of America (1492), the
Protestant schism and the progressive formation of the modern European state, which decreed the deﬁnitive
decline of the idea of restoring the ‘unity of the world’ through the empire (Di Martino, 2010), of which
Frederick II had been one of the most ambitious examples.

The abandonment of Ptolemy, in fact, takes place progressively between the end of the 400s and early 500s,
when, according to Rossi (2015), in Western cartography, a sort of new visual canon takes shape, with the
invention of printing and the standardization of cartographic symbols. The main references of this event are
the Liber Chronicarum (or Nuremberg Chronicle) and the Theatrum Orbis Terrarum by Ortelius. The graphical
homogenization increases through the dynasties of Flemish printers and publishers, including Blaeu, owners in
the mid-1600s of European standards of cartographic language, and the dissemination of the Novo Atlas
Sinensis of the Jesuit Martino Martini (which brings to Europe the most advanced knowledge of Chinese
cartography - see Castlelnovi, 2015; Ricci, 2015).

The symbolic description of a single great world of Ptolemaic cartography is substituted by a descriptive
representation closer to reality, more adequate to the needs of knowledge and territorial control of the modern
state (a requirement, however, already considered by nautical maps: Dell’Oro, 2015). Precisely for this reason
even the Middle East ceases to be represented according to the canons of the Greek-Roman geography, with
which the Ptolemaic cartographers had ‘tamed’ the area into reassuring parameters, continuing to call it with
ancient place names, as a sign of ‘appropriation’ and ‘control’ of space that, after the end of the crusades,
ideally continued in cartography,
in the face of an increasingly aggressive Islam against Christianity (as
evidenced by the fall of Constantinople into Ottoman hands in 1453).

It was a European operation, obviously, of which the Islamic countries were not minimally aware, developing, as
from the end of the eighth century, their own more pragmatic cartographic tradition: despite being steeped in
Greek, as well as Christian and Jewish cosmology,
it mainly focussed on the representation of the Arab
territories and, with the eastward expansion, it was inﬂuenced by the approach to the scientiﬁc and artistic
traditions of Persia, India and even of China.4 Therefore, while the Latin Western world would not know
Ptolemy for another 400 years (dedicated to the production of religious globes and ‘T in O’ maps), the Arabs had
absorbed his science in their cartography, along with many other works of astronomy and optics; however they
leave it until the late ninth century, because of the need to process more eﬃcient mapping tools (Brotton, 2012).
In eﬀect, Ptolemy had reappeared in the West even before, thanks to the work of Al-Idrisi (1099–1165), active at
the Norman court in Palermo, who, with his Kitab nuzhat al-mushtaq ﬁ’khtiraq al-’afaq (The pleasure of him who
longs to cross the horizons or The Book of Roger, in honour of Roger II), makes a great geographical description of
the world then known, referring to Greek traditions, Christian and Islamic science, geography and journeys.
Although it is not possible to speak of a real syncretism between the Arab and Christian world (considering the
limited rights of Muslims, the support of the Normans for crusades to the Holy Land and the theological
disputes), however, it is without a doubt that the cultural and religious pluralism of the Normans in Sicily,
thanks to a series of pre-existing cultural, persistent factors, will be an extraordinary example of ‘melting pot’
ante litteram.5 Nevertheless, the work of Al-Idrisi, according to Cantile (2013) and Brancaccio (1991), remains
conﬁned within the circuit of Court and, therefore, unknown to most.

The rediscovery of Ptolemy in Western culture, in fact, happens only during the mid-fourteenth century,
thanks to the studies of the humanists and their scientiﬁc analysis of Latin and Greek texts, including, of
course, the Geographia (brought to Florence by the Byzantine scholar Manuel Chrysoloras, in 1397), which
would subsequently be subject to numerous translations and revisions, with the addition of new ‘Tabulae’,
after the discovery of America.

Among the various editions of the very prestigious Geographia is the one set down by Bernardo Silvano in 1511
(Figures 1 and 2), geographer and humanist born in Eboli (Salerno, Italy) in 1465, through which a new chapter for
the Ptolemaic exegesis opens: in fact he seems ‘to have been the ﬁrst to amend Ptolemy’s text and maps, subjecting
both to severe assessment through comparison with contemporary geographical knowledge. Silvano […] attempted
to reconcile Ptolemy’s Geography with the more recent knowledge incorporated in contemporary nautical charts,
and “he did know that Ptolemy[‘s information] could be reconciled to all the reports from mariners”’.6 In
particular, Silvano outlines the world’s regions in a way closer to reality, similar to the modern picture of the
world, and he adds a heart-shaped map of the world (Figure 1), designed with a modiﬁed projection with
respect to the one of Ptolemy (Conti, 2009).

Syria and Iraq, according to the canonical division of the 27 Ptolemaic tables, are shown in Table Fourth of Asia
(‘The site of Mesopotamia’: Figure 2) and their centres are denoted by Greek-Roman place names. We will
examine, as an illustrative case, some of the most important of these: ﬁrst there appears, ‘spread’ on the map,
the name Babylonia (in the southeastern area) and then Mesopotamia (in north-west area) that, according to
Book V of Geographia (referring to the edition of 1599, p. 125), is so called, with a Greek name, ‘per essere nel

208

S. SINISCALCHI AND C. PALAGIANO

Figure 1. B. Silvano, Planisphere from Geographia of Ptolemy (1511). Source: Claudii Ptholomaei Alexandrini Liber Geographiae cum Tabulis et universali ﬁgura
[…] Bernardo Silvano from Eboli, Venice 1511 (reprint edited by M. Pastore).

Figure 2. B. Silvano, Quarta Asiae Tabula, from Geographia of Ptolemy (1511). Source: Claudii Ptholomaei Alexandrini Liber Geographiae cum Tabulis et
universali ﬁgura […] Bernardo Silvano from Eboli, Venice 1511 (reprint edited by M. Pastore). We have highlighted the areas of Babylonia and
Mesopotamia (whose names are ‘spread’ on the map) and the place names of the examined centres (Bibla [Baghdad], Hierapolis [Manbij], Chalybon
[Aleppo], Nicephorium [Al-Raqqah], Palmyra, Damascus).

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

209

mezzo tra il Tigre, & l’Eufrate ﬁumi. In Hebreo si chiama Aram-Neharot, cioè Soria dei ﬁumi, hoggi si chiama
Regno de Diarbech’7 and it is bordered on the north by Armenia Major, on the west by the Euphrates river, on
the east by the Assyrian part of the Tigris River, on the south by part of the Euphrates which runs through the
Arabian desert (Geographia, 1561). After a description of the area called Babylonia – bounded on the north by
the Mesopotamia and Euphrates Rivers, on the West and South West by the desert of Arabia on the east and
south by Tigris River, up to its mouth (the Persian Gulf) – comes a list of represented cities, with their ancient
and modern names, found on Silvano’s map.

Referring to main cities and proceeding from east, we will consider seven better known of them: Bibla (about
35° latitude and 79° longitude), corresponding to Bagadet/Bagdet – or also Babylon according to Ross (1933) –
currently Baghdad, capital of Iraq. Continuing west, we meet Nicephorium (about 35° latitude and 74° longitude),
on the Euphrates river (just west of its conﬂuence with the River Balikh), city of Greek origin, then Roman and
ﬁnally, Arab, corresponding to Al-Raqqah (until recently ‘capital’ of the Is). On North West we read the name
Hierapolis Berea (about 37° latitude and 72° longitude), formerly the seat of the cult of Atargatis (renamed
Great Goddess Syria by the Greeks and the Romans) and, later, of one of the ﬁrst Christian communities, as
well as the birthplace of the stoic Epictetus (Miller, 1916), which is also known as Hierapolis Bambice (from
the Latin name added to the Greek),8 today corresponding to Manbij (Dussaud, 1927), in the governorate of
Aleppo, also directly involved in the Syrian civil war.

The place name of Mosul is present in the review of Geographia by Magini but not found on the Silvano’s map: it
is a historic city built opposite the ruins of ancient Nineveh (conquered by the Arabs in AD 637), fallen under the
control of IS (Islamic State) as of June 2014, and subject to a systematic destruction of its cultural heritage. Further
west we read the name Chalybon (about 36° latitude and 72° longitude), which later became Berorea and then
Aleppo (Arabic Haleb), a very ancient city (the oldest site dates back to the ﬁrst millennium BC), Roman from
64 BC and part of the Byzantine Empire until the Arab conquest (AD 637). Aleppo, considered World Heritage
by UNESCO, was devastated by the Syrian civil war. We note again, to the south of Chalybon, Palmyra (about
35° latitude and 72° longitude), the ancient oasis city, founded in the second millennium BC in the Syro-
Arabian desert, so called in the Greek-Roman period and known as Tadmor in Hebrew and Arabic, conquered
by the Arabs in AD 634 also victim of IS destruction.

South west of Palmyra we read the name Damascus (about 33° latitude and 71° longitude), capital of Syria today,
of prehistoric origin (the Sumerians called it Anshukurraki ‘horse town’: source Treccani online), part of the
Roman province of Syria, prosperous and strong in the imperial age and site of an important bishopric in the
Byzantine period, before being conquered by the Arabs in AD 635.

The Ptolemaic representations are however still produced throughout the sixteenth century, in coexistence
with modern cartography, arriving in some cases to the successive century. The new cartography of the
modern age is destined to prevail, but it would be a mistake to consider it, in principle, better than the
previous. As pointed out before, in fact, Silvano had technically improved the maps of Ptolemy. Comparing
his Tabula of Asia with the Turcici Imperii Descriptio of 1594, from the Theatrum Orbis Terrarum of
latitude and, especially, of
Abraham Ortelius (Figure 3), we discover in fact that the measurements of
longitude, are incorrect and much less precise in respect to the Ptolemaic map. We can see this simply by
evaluating the distances (immeasurably shortened) between Bagdet [Baghdad], Racha [Raqqa] and Mosul, as
well as between Damascus and Aleppo.

The disappearance of the historical names of Mesopotamia (called in Ortelio Diarbech, according to Ptolemy’s
edition of 1599) and Babylonia, as well as the place names of Bibla, Chalybon, Nicephorium, Palmyra and
Hierapolis, is a clear sign of the progressive detachment of modern cartography from the vision of the classical
world, although the use of Latin for many place names shows, at the same time, the lack of immediacy for this
transformation. The administrative division of imperial space, in its extent on three continents, is quite detailed;
Asia is no longer seen as an integrated whole. A detail that demonstrates the need to deﬁne in the maps the
world order from a political point of view and no longer from an ideological-cultural world view. It is
interesting to observe at the same time, among the sub-regions of the Ottoman Empire, the presence of those
of Armenians and Kurds, protagonists in the twentieth century, and still today, of painful events, arising from
the will of the Turkish state, after the end of the Empire, to eliminate from its extension each diﬀerent ethnic
group and every possible independent national aspiration.

Similarly the Carte De La Turquie De L’Arabie et De La Perse by Pierre Mortier of 1695 (Figure 4) shows, with a
more precise plan of the former as regards the latitudinal and longitudinal distances, the awesome vastness of the
Ottoman Empire, in its European, Asian and African parts, without giving details of the internal borders, still little
known in the West. In this case the place names, translated into French, expressed the split from the classical vision
of the Middle East; with this in mind, we observe the transformation of the name Bagdet in the current Bagdad
(without ‘h’) and the presence of many regional names (with Diarbek instead of Mesopotamia). To be noted

210

S. SINISCALCHI AND C. PALAGIANO

Figure 3. A. Ortelio, Turcici Imperii Descriptio (1594) taken from Theatrum Orbis Terrarum. Source: Marciana National Library, Venice. In the enlargement we
can see the names of Mosul, Racha [Al-Raqqah], Bagdet [Baghdad], Aleppo and Damascus. Instead of Mesopotamia appears the name of Diarbech.

also Kurdistan and Armenia, of which the Ottoman Empire had recognized their national identity, together with all
other populations which were part of its immense territory and contrary to what would have occurred after its
dissolution.

The New & Accurate Map of Turkey in Asia, Arabia & c. by Emanuel Bowen of 1744 (Figure 5), even if not part
of the modern geodetic cartography, displays in all its complexity the organization of the Ottoman Empire, shown
here in its Asian part (including the islands), divided into states and governorates. The regional names of Anatolia,
Armenia (Turkey), Kurdestan, Syria, Diarbekr, Iraq, Arabia Deserta, Yemen or Arabia Felix, plus others (including
Chaulan, Hadramut, Seger) stand out. Western geographers were well aware of the complicated internal structure
of the Turkish Empire and of their lack of knowledge about it. Even in the early nineteenth century, in fact, writes
Margaroli (1829): ‘The Ottoman Empire currently arouses the curiosity of politicians, not to say of all the nations.
But yet we are still unfamiliar with the customs of this country, its laws, its national character, its productive state,
its territorial division and other news, which is necessary for the exact analysis of a people. The very history of this
nation has been little studied’.

We note in this map the simpliﬁcation of place names (in a quantitative sense), the presence of place names
already highlighted in the previous maps and the retrieval of the name of ‘Tadmor or Palmyra’ which, together
with the use of some latin words, emphasizes, in the end, the persistent will of the western culture to be present
in the Ottoman civilization.

Historic context of the analyzed maps: some brief comments

Concerning the historic context of the analyzed maps, Syria and Iraq, from around the middle of the fourteenth
century follow the fate of the Ottoman Empire. So, Silvano’s maps, based on a Greek-Roman vision of the
Mediterranean countries, belong to a historical context during which the economic-cultural disintegration

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

211

Figure 4. P. Mortier, Carte De La Turquie De L’Arabie et De La Perse, Dressee sur les Memoires les plus recens rectiﬁez par les Observations de Mrs. de
l’Academie Royule, des Sciences, Amsterdam, 1695. Source: Barry Lawrence Ruderman Antique Maps Inc. In the enlargement we can see the names of
Baghdad, Raqqa [Al-Raqqah], Musol [Mosul], Alep [Aleppo] and Damas [Damascus]. Instead of Mesopotamia appears the name of Diarbek.

between the Middle East and the West had not yet taken place. At the beginning of the ﬁfteenth century, indeed, the
Ottoman Empire is in a phase of great expansion – begun by Bitinia in the fourteenth century, it continued for the
next three centuries, arriving in Europe – to impose itself as an interlocutor for the peoples of the West.

At the time of Ortelio’s map, the situation was already undergoing change; the death of Suleiman the
Magniﬁcent (1566), in fact, is the ﬁrst act of the disintegration of Ottoman central power: under its successors a
slow decadence of the empire begins, however accompanied by aggression and wars against the rival states
the ﬂeets of barbarian pirates,
(especially Venice and the Hapsburg Empire). So, with the support of
commercial trade is threatened throughout the Mediterranean, dominated by Chair ed-Dina, the Barbarossa,
Pirate and Ottoman Admiral. The naval victory of Lepanto (1571) limits Turkish dominance to the Eastern
Mediterranean, but occasional alliances between Ottomans and foes of the Habsburgs (France, Prussia and
England), though politically unsuccessful, facilitate commercial trades.

After the Turkish conquest of Constantinople (1453), the Middle East had already begun to lose its pivotal
position in the commercial routes of the sixteenth century. For direct access to the oriental spice trade, the
Portuguese and Spanish sought to reach India by circumnavigating Africa; in 1488, Bartholomew Diaz passed
the Cape of Good Hope, in 1492, Christopher Columbus discovered America, and one year later, Vasco da
Gama arrived in Calcutta. So, the way to the Indies through the Ocean subordinates the strategic position of
the Middle East for the exchanges with the Far East, while the discovery of America shifts the commercial axis
to the West, leaving to foreigners the trade with Europe (Demandt, 2004: 109). When the Western nations
again came into contact with the Middle East after these events, they had outgrown the Ptolemaic image of the
world and were open to the current Arab names in the area; so in the west maps of Middle East the place

212

S. SINISCALCHI AND C. PALAGIANO

Figure 5. E. Bowen: A New & Accurate Map of Turkey in Asia, Arabia & c. London, 1744. Source: Barry Lawrence Ruderman Antique Maps Inc. In addition to
Baghdad, Mosul, Damascus and Aleppo, the map also reports the name of the ancient city of Palmyra. Instead of Mesopotamia appears the name of Diarbekr.

names change, except for those that were familiar because of the biblical tradition (as Damascus) or from the
crusader state lore (as Aleppo).

The decline of the international prestige of the Ottoman Empire began after the unsuccessful Siege of Vienna
(1683), the conclusion of an internal crisis that had begun in the preceding century. After an economic separation
there follows a cultural one, since only a few Turks read Latin (Turkish is written with using the Arabic alphabet).
The conditions for the development of an illuminated middle class are inexistant and Ottoman Islam condemns
itself to isolation: the two worlds which, in many respects, are connected, become estranged.9

The abandonment of the Ptolemaic representation of the Middle East and the consequent disappearance of the
Greek-Roman toponyms of Mesopotamia can be interpreted, therefore, as a clue to this ideological-cultural
separation. The latter contributed to the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, progressively overtaken by
Western technology and science, weakened by corruption, debts, insecure roads, alliances between provincial
governors and foreign powers.

Place names as socio-political indicators and evidence of divergence between East and West

The comparison of the ﬁve historical maps examined reveals, therefore, the progressive loss in the Western view of
the world, shortly after the discovery of America, with an ‘ecumenical’ vision of the Mediterranean sea. An
indication of such a change is found in the transition from Ptolemaic to modern cartography, with the change
of the toponyms belonging to the mesopotamic area. But the comparison also reveals that some of these persist
in the centuries; in particular, the place names of Damascus and Palmyra remain almost unchanged (Table 1).
They are, in fact, as already stated, two very ancient cities, depositaries of many traces of the pre-Islamic world,

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

213

Figure 6. The Parthian Empire. Source: E. Yarshater-The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 3, Part 1, Cambridge University Press (1983). We can see the
Euphrates and Tigris rivers, with the place names of Babylonia and of the ancient cities of Falluja, and Hatra (whose ruins were destroyed by IS [Islamic State]).

Figure 7. The Byzantine-Sassanian borderlands. Source: E. Yarshater-The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 3, Part 1, Cambridge University Press (1983). We
can see the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, with the place names of Mesopotamia, Syria and of the ancient cities of Hatra and Palmyra (whose ruins were
destroyed by IS [Islamic State]).

because they are linked to the various semitic civilizations of Mesopotamia and to the subsequent cultures
introduced by the Mediterranean civilizations (Phoenicians, Greeks and Romans). This is evidenced by the
persistence of their names in ancient and modern cartography. In the Geographia of Ptolemy, after delimiting
the borders of Mesopotamia (as already described), are listed the mountains, the rivers, and ﬁnally the cities
and villages, which are near the Euphrates river; from Porsica to Sipphara. Cities and villages near the Tigris
river follow from Dorbeta to Manchana. Then the cities of Seleucia Teuscapha and Apamia are listed. Other
cities in the Media region near the Tigris river are listed from Bithias to Daremma and the cities and villages in
Babylonia are named from Apamia to Barsita. Among the important cities listed are Babylon,10 Nineveh
(biblical Ninua, Mosul), Aleppo (the ancient capital of the northern Syrian kingdom of Yamhad),11 called
Chalybon in Silvano (Figure 2) as formerly remarked. Concerning Syria (called Soria by Ptolemy) we ﬁnd

214

S. SINISCALCHI AND C. PALAGIANO

Palmyra (renamed Hadrianopoli by Emperor Adriano and called Tadmor by the Israelites, because it was founded
by Solomon) and Damasco (called Damascho by Tolomeo, 1561: 122).

With the exception of those cities whose names remain unchanged, it is very diﬃcult to pinpoint their locations,
as we can see reading Plyni (Naturalis History, translated by Rackhan, 1969),12 although the geographical work by
Ptolemy (Γεογραϕικὴ Ὑϕήγησις) had a considerable fortune until 1730, even after the printing of modern atlases
such as those of Ortelius and Mercator.

ﻛﺘﺎﺏﺻﻮﺭﺓﺍﻻُﺭﺽ

The main Arabic author of the translations and emendations of the geographical work by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-c.
170) was Abū G aʿfar Muh ammad ibn Mūsā Al-H
uwârizmî, a Persian mathematician, astronomer and geographer

(Baghdad? c. 780-c. 850, during the Abbasid Caliphate). His geographical work is entitled:
(Book
of the shape of the Earth). Hans von Mžik (Mžik, 1926: IX–X), who published this book (the Kitāb) according to the
manuscript Cod 4247 of the Bibliothèque de l’Université et Régionale in Strasbourg, distinguishes two groups of
names: those of Greek origin coming mostly from Ptolemy’s Geography and a small part from the Romance of
Alexander. Because the Arabs, according to Mžik, had no direct knowledge of the Greek texts, a second group
comes from the Islamic tradition. In general the two groups can be identiﬁed clearly. The Arab writers named
many cities of Mesopotamia. In the tenth century of our era the author known as al-Bashshārī or al-Muqaddasī
(‘the man from Jerusalem’) wrote a treatise (Ahsan al-Taqāsim ﬁ Ma’rifat al-Aqālīm [The Best Divisions for
Knowledge of the Regions]) which describes, among others the regions of Iraq, of Aqūr (Al-Jazīra) [Upper
Mesopotamia] and of al-Shām (Syria).13 Among the major cities of the Region of al-’Irāq al-Kūfa, al-Basra,
Wāsit, Baghdād, Hulwān and Sāmarrā are named, with a summary account of their conditions: the climate,
doctors of the law, seven systems of reading the Qur’ān, measures of capacity, coinage, some customs of the
people, sectarian quarrels, holy places, dispositions of people, government, land-taxes, distances on main roads.
In the above-mentioned treaty of Al-Idrisi, seven of his nine manuscripts contain maps. In the sixth Section of
the third Climate he describes the inhabited places of Iraq (including Baghdad) and the mosque of Damasque,
the ‘ﬁnest of the whole world’.14 Abū al-H asan ‘Alī ibn abī bakr al-Harawī (dead in Aleppo in 1215), in his
Kitab al-ishara ila màrifat al-ziyara (Book of indications to make known the places of visitations) describes the
city of Aleppo and its surroundings, including Heliopolis (Ba’labakk), Damascus and surroundings, Nīnawā,
Nineveh, Mosul and its environs, Samarra, Baghdad and its surroundings. In Upper Mesopotamia, ‘Euphrates
curves around this region, and the Tigris […] rises from here […] the roads through it are diﬃcult, and the
Romans have devastated its frontiers’. Some of the most cited cities are indeed al-Raqqa and al-Mawsil (Mosul).
The region of Al-Shām (Syria) is divided into six regions. The ﬁrst going from Aqūr (Mesopotamia) is
Qinnasrīn, Hins [Homs, Emesa], Dimasq (Damascus), al-Urdnn (Jordan), Filastīn (Palestine), then al-Sharāt.
The capital of Qinnasrīn is Halab (Aleppo).

Conclusions

As Demandt (2004) observes, the relationship between Christian Europe and the Islamic world is tormented by the
desire for integrality, which distinguishes both religions. Enlightenment and modernization have mitigated it:
Christianity has become increasingly secularized; Islam, in many ways, has become a correlate of globalization
and of the American way of life, above all in the higher social classes, inﬂuenced by a Euro-American civilization.
Nevertheless, extreme positions have not ceased to exist, especially in the poorest sections of the population,
joining the political-economic, social and cultural instances. It is revealed by the dramatic events related to the
spread of terrorism, because of which countries such as Syria and Iraq have paid a very high price. In fact today
Syria can no longer be considered a single state entity, due to the civil war that has divided it since 2011 and
because of the occupation by armed groups (including IS) of large regions, especially in the north and east of the
country. As for, Iraq, the country has collapsed into a military and political crisis degenerating into civil war
(2006–2007) and into the loss of its territorial integrity, which means it now exists only on the map (Battaglia, 2016).
Precisely for these reasons, examining the relationship between the transformation of some important names of
these two countries with their historical events and, above all, with their representation in the collective
imagination of Western culture, we have tried to explain the change of our perception of their proximity/
distance from us, above all after the end of the Ptolemaic view of world. If it is true that the rise of Islam
represents a starting point for understanding the reasons for this distance,
it is equally true that such a
separation was enhanced by historical and economic events, reﬂected by cartography.

Our experiment is founded on a comparative analysis, which in this context we have had to limit, but which, to be
exhaustive, would need an examination of all the ancient place names of Mesopotamia. Through a diacronic
comparison between their changes, we could discover the transformation throught the centuries of the territorial
identity of these geographical areas, from an external and internal point of view. It can be an aim for a successive

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

215

and larger research work, to better comprehend the complex processes, remote and present, of the union and
separation between East and West.

Notes

1. See Raﬀestin (1984) and Turco (2007 and 2010).
2. Three of the ﬁve historic patriarchates of the Christian Church arose in fact in Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch.
3. The naming process, universal in its historical and geographical signiﬁcance, according to Turco (2007, online), is the

ﬁrst act of ‘territorialization’.

4. See Brotton (2012).
5. Palermo is called al-Madinah by Muslims, Panhormos by the Greeks and Balarm by Christians. In this sense, with Roger
II the Norman and Frederick II of Swabia the relationship between royal power and cultural production took place in a
substantial continuity (Li Vigni, 2011).

6. Valerio (2007). It is a remarkable circumstance, since, as noted elsewhere still by Valerio (2013), no scholar before the

twentieth century, had ever spoken of Ptolemy’s errors.
‘because it is between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. In Hebrew it is called Aram-Neharot, that is Soria of the rivers,
today it is called Kingdom of Diarbech’.

8. To this regard, Pliny the Elder, describing the internal parts of Syria, writes that among these was Bambyce ‘quae alio

7.

nomine Hierapolis vocatur’ (Naturalis Historia, Liber V, 81).

9. The West received many beneﬁts from the cultural exchange with the East, as often shows the history of words, customs,
food and sciences. Not by chance the task of linking languages and cultures is of the interpreter (Dolmetscher); this
word, in fact, of Turkish origin, refers to the exchange between the West and the East, source of prosperity for both,
since: God is the East, God is the West, the regions of North and of South rest in the peace of his hands (Demandt,
2004, pp. 110–111).

10. According to Genesis 11:9 the name was derived from the Hebrew verb balal, ‘to confuse’.
11. This was one of the great political and military powers of the western Asian world until its conﬂicts with the Hittites in

the second half of the seventeenth century and early sixteenth century, when it declined.

12. F. Schachermeyr in R.E. Pauly Wissowa, under the entry Mesopotamien, 1114–1116, tries to explain some place names,
as Chalkitis (perhaps Charitis or Baliehitis, Inigene), which is named only by Ptolemy (V. 17.4), Akabene, names, only by
Ptolemy (perhaps Adiabene), Chazene, Kalachene, Arrapachtis, Chalonitis, Akobaritis (named only by Ptolemy), and so
on.

13. See al-Muqaddasi (1994).
14. See the pages of the translation bey Jaubert (1836).

Notes on the contributors

Silvia Siniscalchi is a Researcher in Geography at the Department of Humanistic Studies,
University of Salerno, where she is also Director of the Laboratory of Historical Cartography
and Toponymy (founded by Prof. Vincenzo Aversano) and enabled as an Associate
Professor. Silvia is a Member of the Central Committee of the CISGE (Italian Centre for the
Study of History and Geography) and the main Italian geographical associations (Società
Geograﬁca Italiana, Società degli Studi Geograﬁci di Firenze, Associazione dei Geograﬁ
Italiani, Associazione degli Insegnanti Italiani di Geograﬁa). She has worked for several years
on research projects at
levels, contributing to the
international, national and local
organization of conferences and exhibitions of cartography. Her main research interests are
historical cartography and toponymy and her teaching incorporates geography, cartography, historical
geography, cultural geography and the geography of nutrition.

ORCID

Silvia Siniscalchi
Cosimo Palagiano

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2085-4321

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8716-5323

References
Al-Muqaddasi (1994) The Best Divisions for Knowledge of the Regions: A Translation of Ahsan al-Taqāsim ﬁ Ma’rifat al-Aqālīm

Centre for Muslim Contribution to civilization UK: Garnet.

Aversano, V. (Ed.) (2007) Toponimi e Antroponimi: beni-documento e spie di identità per la lettura, la didattica e il governo del

territorio Soveria Mannelli, Calabria: Rubbettino.

Battaglia, A. (2016) “L’invenzione del Medio Oriente” In Treccani, Il libro dell’anno 2016 Roma: Istituto della Enciclopedia

Italiana, pp.376–379

Brancaccio, G. (1991) Geograﬁa, cartograﬁa e storia del Mezzogiorno Napoli: Guida Editori.
Brotton, J.R. (2012) A History of the World in Twelve Maps London: Allen Lane.

216

S. SINISCALCHI AND C. PALAGIANO

Cantile, A. (2013) Lineamenti di storia della cartograﬁa italiana Volume 1: dalle origini al Cinquecento Rome: Geoweb.
Castelnovi, M. (2015) “Ultra Atlantem: l’interesse storicogeograﬁco delle ‘altre’ opere di Martino Martini” In Dai Prà, E. (Ed.)

La storia della cartograﬁa e Martino Martini Milan: FrancoAngeli, pp.91–140.
Childe, V.G. (1950) “The Urban Revolution” Town Planning Review 21 pp.3–17.
Conti, S. (2009) “Bernardo Silvano y sy obra cartogràﬁca” Revista de estudios colombinos 65 (6) pp.63–74.
D’Ascenzo, A. (2015) “I geograﬁ italiani e la costruzione dell’immagine dell’Asia orientale fra tardo Quattrocento e

Cinquecento” In Dai Prà, E. (Ed.) La storia della cartograﬁa e Martino Martini Milan: FrancoAngeli, pp.47–67.

Dell’Oro, P. (2015) Carte, cartograﬁ e marinai: storia della cartograﬁa nautica Verona: Edizioni il Frangente.
Demandt, A. (2004) Piccola storia del mondo Rome: Donzelli.
Di Martino, A. (2010) Il territorio: dallo stato-nazione alla globalizzazione: Sﬁde e prospettive dello stato costituzionale aperto

Milan: Giuﬀrè Editore.

Dussaud, R. (1927) Topographie Històrique de la Syrie antique et médiévale Paris: Geuthner.
Farinelli, F. (1992) I segni del mondo. Immagine cartograﬁca e discorso geograﬁco in età moderna Milano: Feltrinelli.
Farinelli, F. (2009) La crisi della ragione cartograﬁca Turin: Einaudi.
Huntington, S.P. (1997) Lo scontro delle civilizzazioni e il nuovo ordine mondiale Milan: Garzanti.
Jaubert, P.A. (1836) Géographie d’Édrisi Traduit de l’arabe en Français d’après deux manuscrits de la Bibliothèque du Roi et
accompagnée de notes par P. Amédée Jaubert, Imprimé par autorisation du Roi à l’Imprimerie Royale. Tome premier, Paris.
Jordan, P. and Woodman, P. (Eds.) (2016) Place-Name Changes, in Proceedings of the Symposion in Rome, 17–18 November

2014. Verlag Dr. Kovač, Hamburg.

Li Vigni, B. (2011) Federico II: Il principe sultano Rome: Armando Editore.
Margaroli, G.B. (1829) La Turchia ovvero l’impero ottomano osservato nella sua situazione geograﬁca-statistica politica e

religiosa, non che sulla sua storia Milano: Schiepatti.

Miller, K. (Ed.) (1916) Itineraria romana: Romische Reisewege an der Hand der Tabula Peutingeriana dargestellt Stuttgart:

Mžik, H. (Ed.) (1926) Kitāb al-Wuzarā’ wa-l-kuttāb [based on the unicate MS Vienna Cod. mixt. 916 dated 546/1151] Leipzig:

Strecker und Schröder.

Otto Harrassowitz.

Pliny (1969) Natural History in ten volumes Volume II (Books III–VII) (trans. Rackham, H.) London and Cambridge,

Massachusetts: Harvard University Press and William Heinemann.

Raﬀestin, C. (1984) “Territorializzazione, deterritorializzazione, riterritorializzazione e informazione” In Turco, A. (Ed.)

Regione e regionalizzazione Milan: FrancoAngeli, pp.69–82.

Ricci, A. (2015) “Geograﬁa, politica e commerci globali: Martino Martini e la cartograﬁa olandese del Secolo d’Oro” In Dai Prà,

E. (Ed.) La storia della cartograﬁa e Martino Martini Milan: FrancoAngeli, pp.177–193.

Ross, Edward D. (Ed.) (1933) Sir Anthony Sherley and His Persian Adventure London and New York: G. Routledge & Sons.
Rossi, M. (2015) “Un atlante cinese per un pubblico europeo. I segni convenzionali nell’Atlas Sinensis del 1655 di Martino

Martini” In Dai Prà, E. (Ed.) La storia della cartograﬁa e Martino Martini Milan: FrancoAngeli, pp.206–219.

Tolomeo, A.C. (1561) La Geograﬁa Venice: Appresso Vincenzo Valgrisi.
Tolomeo, A.C. (1599) La Geograﬁa Venice: Appresso Gli eredi di Melchior Sessa.
Treccani (2018) “Al Raqqa”; “Aleppo”; “Damasco”; “Hierapolis”; “Jihad”; “Mossul”; “Palmyra”; Available at: http://www.

treccani.it/ (Accessed: 8th February 2016).

Turco, A. (2007) “Territorio e Territorialità” Treccani, Enciclopedia Italiana – VII Appendice Available at: http://www.treccani.

it/enciclopedia/territorio-e-territorialita_(Enciclopedia-Italiana) (Accessed: 2nd February 2016).

Turco, A. (2010) Conﬁgurazioni della territorialità Milan: FrancoAngeli.
Valerio, V. (2007) “Cartography in the Kingdom of Naples during the Early Modern Period” In Woodward, D. (Ed.) The History
of Cartography Volume 3: Cartography in the European Renaissance Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.940–974.
Valerio, V. (2013) “Spunti e osservazioni dal libro di lucio russo e l’America dimenticata. I rapporti tra le civiltà e un errore di

Tolomeo” Geostorie 21 (1, 2) pp.77–97.

