Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433
DOI 10.1007/s10707-013-0187-x

Context-based mobile GeoBI: enhancing business analysis
with contextual metrics/statistics and context-based reasoning

Belko Abdoul Aziz Diallo & Thierry Badard &
Frédéric Hubert & Sylvie Daniel

Received: 21 October 2012 / Revised: 1 July 2013 /
Accepted: 23 July 2013 / Published online: 13 September 2013
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract Business professionals are increasingly mobile and should be supported by suitable
mobile Decision Support Systems (DSS). In our previous work, we have established that such
suitable mobile DSS should be (i) GeoBI(Geospatial Business Intelligence)-enabled and (ii)
context-based, and have addressed issues regarding context characterization and context model-
ing. The present paper deals with mobile GeoBI context-based reasoning. Through realistic
scenarios, it highlights (i) the requirement for context-based reasoning to enhance mobile GeoBI
experience, (ii) the need for contextual metrics/statistics to help mobile business professionals
discover their local context, (iii) the need for crossing business performance metrics with
contextual metrics to help mobile business professionals in discovering the context hidden behind
business performance figures, and proposes convenient solutions to tackle these needs.

Keywords Business Intelligence (BI) . Mobile Geospatial Business Intelligence (GeoBI) .
Context-awareness . Context reasoning . Contextual metrics/statistics . Business performance
metrics/indicators . Service Oriented Architecture (SOA)

1 Introduction

Thanks to mobile computing conjugated to the requirements for organizations to reach high
performance results in the today’s mobile and high-competitive business world, professionals
are increasingly mobile [1], accessing their organizations’ data from anywhere at any time by
using mobile devices (e.g. smart phones, tablets) as alternative platforms once on the go. This
B. A. A. Diallo : T. Badard (*) : F. Hubert : S. Daniel
Centre de Recherche en Géomatique, Université Laval, 1055, avenue du Séminaire,
Québec, QC G1V 0A6, Canada
e-mail: Thierry.Badard@scg.ulaval.ca

B. A. A. Diallo
e-mail: belko-abdoul-aziz.diallo.1@ulaval.ca

F. Hubert
e-mail: Frederic.Hubert@scg.ulaval.ca

S. Daniel
e-mail: Sylvie.Daniel@scg.ulaval.ca

406

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

requires these mobile business people to be supported with suitable mobile decision support
systems (DSS), especially mobile BI ones since BI technologies are increasingly adopted by
organizations [2].

Such mobile DSS should provide mobile professionals with operational, tactical and
strategic BI data (e.g. OLAP mini-cubes, dashboards, scorecards, reports, etc.) targeted to
their local context.

In our previous work [3–5] we have established that such suitable mobile DSS should be
(i) GeoBI-enabled, to integrate geospatial dimensions of business and mobility, and (ii)
context-based, to capture the user’s mobile context, and react accordingly by delivering
relevant GeoBI services to the user.

On the way towards enabling context-based mobile GeoBI applications, several issues

have been addressed in these works, especially:

(i) Context characterization issue, i.e. identifying and describing relevant mobile GeoBI
contextual information. For that purpose, paper [3] realized an empirical analysis of
mobility and mobile environments, and identified major context dimensions/axes
characterizing a mobile GeoBI context. Article [4] especially deepened that issue and
provided:

– An organization of mobile GeoBI context into hierarchical context levels (personal,
ambient and surrounding contexts) fitting with human perception of space,
– A consistent characterization of major GeoBI context dimensions (personal, busi-
ness, spatial, technological, social, environmental, and time contexts) according to
their relevance for mobility and BI activities.

(ii) And context modeling issue, i.e. organizing, structuring and building an appropriate
mobile GeoBI context model from relevant contextual information characterizing it, by
highlighting the semantics it carries, and logic it implies.

Based on context characterization, paper [4] has proposed a UML-based multilevel
mobile GeoBI context model supporting context-sharing and structuring. This model
)
(Fig. 1) is a top-level and extensible model. The geospatial (
pictograms underline the fact that a mobile GeoBI context is location-based and time-
dependent. For the purpose of GeoBI context-based reasoning, the model was extended
and detailed in paper [5] to provide an OWL-based ontology model (Fig. 5) since OWL
is more suitable for knowledge sharing and context reasoning than UML [6].

) and temporal (

,

In this paper, we highlight, through realistic scenarios:

(i)
(ii)

the requirement for context-based reasoning to enhance mobile GeoBI experience
the need for contextual metrics/statistics to help mobile business professionals discover
their local context capabilities and opportunities, and

(iii) the need for crossing business performance metrics with contextual metrics to help
mobile professionals in discovering the context hidden behind business performance
figures.

With respect to our previous articles, the present paper:

(i)

enriches the previous OWL-based GeoBI context model with contextual metrics in
order to provide a richer model which offers richer business analysis support (e.g.
context-based reasoning, discovery of local context opportunities/capabilities, and
context hidden behind business figures, etc.),

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

407

Fig. 1 Hierarchical multilevel Mobile GeoBI context model for context-sharing and structuring

(ii) and provides an interoperable service-oriented architecture to help implement and deliver

context-based mobile GeoBI services targeted to the mobile professional work context.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2, through realistic scenarios regarding a mobile
selling context (section 2.1), demonstrates the requirement for context-based reasoning to
enhance mobile GeoBI (section 2.2), the needs for contextual metrics to explore the potential
of a location (section 2.3), and to discover context behind performance metrics (section 2.4).
Section 3 defines contextual metrics and extends the OWL-based mobile GeoBI context model
(Fig. 5) with these metrics. Finally, section 4 provides a GeoBI service-oriented architecture for
delivering contextual metrics and crossing them with business key performance indicators
(KPI) and metrics. Challenges regarding service composition and mechanism of pushing or
pulling data to mobile users are also discussed.

2 Realistic scenarios of context-based reasoning and contextual business analysis

To highlight the need for context-based reasoning and contextual metrics to reinforce mobile
GeoBI decision making, this section provides:

408

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

– A general context of a mobile business salesman in chief, mister IdoBI Reason willing
to take advantage of context-based mobile GeoBI services to straighten his business
activities in some local areas.

– Realistic case-studies where M. IdoBI Reason will be performing GeoBI context-based
reasoning and contextual business analysis, thanks to contextual metrics/statistics.

2.1 General context of scenarios: BioWYNX mobile selling activities

Let us consider that M. IdoBI Reason, has been moved from Washington DC to Quebec City as
mobile sales analyst and strategist to reorganize and expand the local branch of BioWYNX.

BioWYNX is a multinational firm specialized in selling biological foods. Its business

model is built upon quick, direct and mobile selling.

To minimize delivery fees, BioWYNX disposes of at least one storehouse per district from
which salesmen can supply customers and where customers can also go and purchase directly.
Its customers are mostly individuals, but also organizations (the person representing the
organization is then considered). Customers may be classified according to their age group
(e.g. 18–25 years old), social group (e.g. students vs. workers vs. managers, etc.) or
organizations there are affiliated to (e.g. Laval University vs. Canadian Tire vs. Unemployed
Association vs. Non-affiliated, etc.).

BioWYNX has its own salesmen but also deals with other mobile salesmen working for
partnering companies. These shared salesmen are rewarded (the companies as well)
according to sales they realized for BioWYNX. A salesman can supervise other salesmen
(e.g. a team) or a given company, and can sell everywhere in the country.

To efficiently monitor its business performance, BioWYNX has deployed a BI platform and
its mobile version to allow remote access to BI data (SOLAP cubes, maps, tables, reports,
dashboards) from anywhere at any time from mobile smart phones and tablets. Figure 2
represents the snowflake schema of the data warehouse from which OLAP cubes and mini-
cubes (Fig. 3) are pre-calculated and generated to ease and fasten mobile analysis. The
dimensions are: Products, Seller, Time, Location and Customer which has two hierarchies.
The measures are: number of sold products (NbProdUnits), sales amount of a given product
(SalesAmount), average of offered discounts (Discount), and the unit price (avgUnitPrice).

2.2 Requirement for context-reasoning to enhance mobile GeoBI

Now, let us say that after taking office, IdoBI Reason wants to visit salesmen on the ground
according to their performance (e.g. sales amount per year, number of sold products, number
of customers, etc.). Therefore, when entering a sales zone (e.g. a district), IdoBI might want
to get supported by a context-aware mobile GeoBI application with requests like:

– According to my current location (or given area of interest, AOI), who are top 3 best

performing salesmen? (e.g. Bill, Steve, and Larry)

– Who are the supervisors of Steve that have their offices located in that area?

These are simplified context-based reasoning requests which can help M. IdoBI Reason
analyze if there is a correlation between sales performance and the close presence of
supervisors. A more complex GeoBI request could be:

–

In that location (AOI), who are the supervisors of Steve that cumulated more than
$100.000 sales of chocolate family products last month, and that have their offices near
to BioRoom hotel, or near to my current position?

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

409

Family

Company

Category

Team

Product

Facts

Salesman

-SalesmanFK
-StoreFK
-DayFK
-ProductFK
-CustomerFK
-NbProdUnits
-SalesAmount
-Discount
-AvgUnitPrice
-WS_ProdIndex

Day

Week

Storehouse

District

Month

Customer

City

Quarter

Year

AgeGroup

SocialGroup

Organization

Province

Country

i

n
o
s
n
e
m
D

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
r
e
m
o
t
s
u
C

Fig. 2 Snowflake-schema model for warehousing sales data

That request implies context-based reasoning and requires contextual information regard-
ing the business context (e.g. professional relationship between salesmen), the time context
(e.g. last month), and the spatial context (e.g. IdoBI current position, AOI name or geometry,
etc.) characterizing the local GeoBI context; and additionally, an access to a BI data cube

Fig. 3 Example of OLAP hypercube and mini-cubes which can be generated from the previous data warehouse
model (Fig. 2) thanks to server-side OLAP tools

410

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

regarding sales facts. Existing mobile BI solutions (e.g. Hand-OLAP [7], Mobile-OLAP [8],
Spatial OLAP Mobile [9], MoBI [10], and Go! Mobile [11]) do not provide such context-
awareness and context-reasoning.

To enable such GeoBI context-based reasoning, an OWL-based mobile GeoBI context

model (Fig. 5) was proposed in our paper [5].

In addition to reasoning on contextual information to provide context-based mobile
GeoBI support, next section reveals and shows the need for contextual metrics/statistics to
provide decision-driven (GeoBI/BI-oriented) contextual information that can help discover
the capabilities and opportunities of local contexts.

2.3 Need for contextual metrics/statistics

Let us say that to define a new pricing strategy to boost sales and conquer new segments of
the market, IdoBI would like to know for each location (e.g. district) he is visiting, some
statistics about:

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

the average revenue per capita, food expenditure per household,
the ratio Man/Woman of the population,
the rate of unemployment, of illiteracy,
the average debt rate of the population,
the average salaries of workers and managers,
the most consumed foods,
the most enjoyed foods,
the top 5 best-selling food products regardless the company,
the average consumer price index,
competitors X, Y, Z last year turnovers,
Etc.

These kinds of metrics that we name indifferently contextual metrics or contextual statistics
can be retrieved from polls and surveys published by research institutes [12], survey companies,
national or regional statistics agencies such as FedStats [13], StatCan [14], EuroStat [15], etc.
Unfortunately, they are poorly exploited and mostly available as raw documents, e.g.:
hardcopy reports, static web pages, downloadable files, etc. Even statistics web sites offering
“browsable” and “searchable” ways to access specific statistics(e.g. [13, 14]), require at least
three click-actions before reaching the expected page containing the expected statistics at a
district level. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, there are not yet web services
proposing a direct request of a given statistic by simply submitting, e.g., the statistic name/code,
the targeted location and period, etc.

Therefore, M. Reason, in order to have on hand such contextual metrics for a cross analysis

with his company business performance metrics once on the field, should have to, e.g.:

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

bring with him tons of statistics paper reports,
perform long and time-consuming exploration and searches on statistics websites,
identify and prepare in advance, for each location (e.g. district) he plans to visit, a list
of possible contextual statistics he might be interested in, etc.

All of these user-effort based solutions have the inconvenience of being inappropriate for a
competitive decision making in mobile and even sedentary work. Indeed, in any of these cases,
M. IdoBI Reason will have to find and cross by himself the appropriate contextual metrics
regarding his current location, with his business metrics (e.g. best-selling food products in

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

411

Beauport district regardless of the company vs. best-selling products of BioWYNX in that
district).

Given the high need for such statistics in decision making [16], BI/GeoBI systems should
be enriched with these ones. Indeed, BI/GeoBI systems mainly focus on organizational data
and business performance metrics, but ignore contextual information and metrics character-
izing conditions in which performance is reached. To palliate this limit, several options can
be envisaged:

a)

Integrating contextual metrics into the same OLAP cubes as business performance
metrics. This requires context dimensions, levels and contextual data to be aligned with
organizational data dimensions,
levels, and members and may lead to contextual
information loss/exclusion since only those matching with organizational data dimen-
sions will be selected. Moreover, contextual metrics/measures have to be aligned with
performance metrics/measures to keep the same level of granularities and make them
“summarizable” through levels. This is a huge task since contextual metrics/statistics are
not always quantitative and “summable” values, but are often qualitative and cannot be
aggregated (Ex.: if chocolateX1 is the best-selling product in New York, MilkZ3 in
Washington, etc., what is the best-selling product for whole USA? Rather than aggre-
gating the cities best-selling products, a statistic regarding whole USA is required.)
b) Putting contextual metrics into separate OLAP cubes as contextual metrics data cubes.
This solution avoids aligning contextual metrics with organizational data cube unlike
option (a). In addition, the contextual metrics cube could be built upon the context
dimensions characterizing the mobile GeoBI context (ex. Fig. 1). However, this could
lead to several empty cells in the cube since not all contextual facts concern all context
dimensions as do business facts in organizational data cubes. For example, a contextual
fact regarding unemployment in Quebec City in 2011 involves business, social, spatial,
and time contexts, but not technological and environmental contexts. Creating several
small cubes that crosses only involved dimensions is also possible, but in anyway, the
issue of aggregability of contextual metrics remains. Moreover, storing contextual
metrics in multidimensional data cubes prevents from capturing new unexpected con-
textual information, and prevents from reasoning on contextual metrics (e.g. a statistic
may be considered as opposite or denying another statistic provided by another survey
or surveyed 1 week/month/quarter/year earlier).
Integrating contextual metrics/statistics into an inferable GeoBI context model (e.g.
OWL-based GeoBI context ontology in Fig. 5). This appears to us as the best way since
(a) contextual metrics are first of all contextual information offering richer BI-oriented
description of primary contextual information (e.g. location name), and (b) OWL
ontologies are more suitable for context reasoning [6] and dynamic insertions/updates
and alignment of data [17]. However, issues naturally inherent to context acquisition
and quality are to be handled as previously addressed in paper [5].

c)

In summary, options (a) and (b) provide a direct integration of contextual metrics into
OLAP data structures, but limit reasoning capabilities and may highly cause information loss
and alignment problems. Contrariwise, option (c) provides a natural and richer way to enrich
contextual information and context-based reasoning minus inherent issues regarding con-
textual metrics management and updates which are common problems with these three
options. But option (c) still remains the more suitable.

Sections 3 and 4 provide more details on the way we enrich the mobile GeoBI context

ontology with contextual metrics and how they can be delivered to mobile professionals.

412

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

2.4 Need for crossing business performance metrics with GeoBI contextual metrics

Let us now consider that M. IdoBI Reason would like to deeply analyze the business
performance figures his predecessor left. Since the values of some business metrics appear
to be inexplicable, IdoBI would like to analyze the GeoBI context in which those figures
were recorded: e.g. how were business, social, environmental contexts?

For instance, knowing that last year (e.g. 2011), sales were bad (e.g. drop of 10 %
compared to 2010) by exploring an OLAP mini-cube is undoubtedly useful. But it can be
more helpful by additionally learning that these bad figures occurred in:

(i)
a gloomy business context (e.g. raise of unemployment: 10 %),
(ii) a conflicting social context (e.g. a general strike every other day),
(iii) a rainy and warm environmental context (e.g. average rainfall-rate: 150 mm, average

(iv) a spatial context with a drop of road traffic (−10 %) and an increase of public

temperature: 35 °C),

transportation (+15 %),

(v) a technological context with a raise of call failure rate1 (e.g. +3 %), a raise of mobile
access failure rate2 (e.g. +4 %) and drop call rate3 (e.g. +3 %) regarding telecommu-
nications, etc.

Since he was not living in Quebec in 2010, IdoBI ignores how the economic context was.
He could call his predecessor, but since the latter was “unfairly” fired, IdoBI is hesitating. He
could also discuss with some Quebecers (colleagues, experts, etc.), check on websites, etc.,
to have some insights. But all of this is time consuming. What M. Reason would really
prefer is to go beyond the metrics values, and have an interactive access to the context
behind these values.

Figure 4a shows an example of what existing BI solutions can provide as BI support: a
drillable (e.g. trough ↓ arrow) BI graphic (e.g. gauge) that displays a performance metric
value (e.g. 2011 sales vs. 2010 sales) within a dashboard/report. Figure 4b provides a visual
illustration of what M. IdoBI Reason would like to get as advanced GeoBI support: a
drillable (↓) BI graphic from which he can access the GeoBI context hiding behind the
displayed business performance figure (e.g. clicking on “CM” command button). The related
contextual metrics characterizing the GeoBI context in which that performance was recorded
can then be displayed next to performance metrics to help decision makers cross analyze
their organizational and contextual GeoBI data. These contextual metrics/statistics could
also be made drillable (↓) to offer an intuitive way of exploring contextual information.

We consider that such needs for linking/crossing business metrics/indicators with GeoBI
contextual metrics/statistics in order to have some advanced data analysis are legitimate
since performance metrics/indicators are usually limited to measuring the state/projection of
the organization activities, while GeoBI contextual metrics/statistics provide additional
measurement about the state of activities/events surrounding the organization. Section 4
provides more details about how that crossing could be achieved.

1 “The call failure rate (CFR) is the percentage of calls to an ISP or any network provider that fail to get
through” [51]
2 An access failure rate is the number of failures divided by the total number of attempts [52].
3 “A drop call is defined as a traffic channel that is released by either the base station or the mobile without the
consent of the mobile user. The dropped call rate is defined as the total number of dropped calls divided by the
total number of successful call completions during a specified period [52].”

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

413

a Today’s drillable
dashboard

b

Towards accessing drillable
contextual metrics from drillable dashboard

Fig. 4 a Today’s drillable dashboard. b Towards accessing drillable contextual metrics from drillable dashboard

3 Enriching contextual information with GeoBI contextual metrics

Contextual information is in general neutral information (e.g. location name) whereas numbers
in general and statistics in particular are insightful for business intelligence actors. For instance,
saying that Chinese language is spoken in Canada is a general descriptive contextual informa-
tion, while stating that Chinese is the 3rd most spoken language in Canada [18], is a GeoBI/BI-
oriented contextual metric that can support decision making (e.g. advertising in Chinese).

3.1 Defining contextual metrics

We define a contextual metric as a location-based and time-dependent statistical calculation
(e.g. birthrate) or measurement (e.g. turnover) providing contextualized description about
persons (e.g. birthrate within Canadian people in 2010), objects/products (e.g. turnover of
Apple iPads in Quebec City in 2011) or events/activities (average number of social events
each weekend in Beauport) localized in the surrounding context of an organization/person, be that
metric predictive or retroactive. Example: average revenue per capita in Quebec City in 2030.

414

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

In fact, contextual metrics are statistical measures summarizing contextual information
over the time (e.g. average number of accidents in 2010 in Quebec City). Therefore, they
enrich detailed contextual information (e.g. an accident occurred at BioStreet at 9:00; today’s
temperature at 12:00), with summarized and analysis-oriented statistical data regarding
contextual information they are related to over a time (e.g. number of accidents per day at
BioStreet; Average temperature of this month).

Contextual metrics/statistics can strongly contribute to enriching the mobile GeoBI context

model with analytical data that:

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

are closer to business performance metrics,
provide an analytical overview of contextual reality,
lead to well-informed contextual business analysis.

As discussed in scenario 2 in section 2.3, contextual metrics should be integrated into an

OWL-based GeoBI model) to provide richer context-based reasoning.

3.2 Extending and enriching mobile GeoBI context with contextual metrics

To address context modeling issues, our paper [5] has provided an OWL-based ontology
model of mobile GeoBI context (Fig. 5) which supports context-based reasoning. It extends
the UML-based GeoBI context model we proposed in [4] since OWL is more suitable for
knowledge sharing and context reasoning than UML [6]. The proposed ontology was
designed using the OWL-compatible graphical formalism provided by CmapTools COE
ontology tool [19] which provides formalized lexical and graphical conventions to express
), and literals
graphically OWL and RDF/RDF-S content. Classes (
(e.g. xsd:string) are nodes with rectangular shapes. Properties are links between:
classes, individuals, classes and individuals, individuals and literals, etc.
That OWL-based GeoBI context ontology organizes contextual

), individuals (

information into
) and time-dependent (temporal pictogram

geospatial-enabled (spatial pictograms

,
) multilevel context elements including:

,

Local context (e.g. Gas business in Quebec City) and Remote Context (e.g. War in Libya),

–
– Context Levels around the user (Personal, ambient, and surrounding contexts),
– Context dimensions characterizing the user’s personal context (Goal, Task, Identity,
Cognition) and context dimensions surrounding the mobile worker (business, social,
spatial, technological, and environmental contexts),
Extensible key elements characterizing each context dimension (Organization, Re-
source, Market, etc. for business context). Each key element can be extended into more
detailed contextual information and so on, as detailed in paper [5].

–

To provide mobile professionals with additional GeoBI/BI-oriented contextual information
and richer GeoBI context-based reasoning, we propose to extend and enrich that model with
contextual metrics. To achieve that, we proceed as follows:

(i) Organizing contextual metrics like contextual information into dimensions, key ele-

ments, etc. to match the GeoBI context model structure.

Indeed, since contextual metrics provide statistical measures regarding contextual infor-
mation, they should be also organized into context dimensions, especially since they are
primarily and above all, contextual information too. In addition, that provides a context-
driven organization of these statistics that can ease their management and retrieval

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

415

Fig. 5 Semi-detailed mobile GeoBI context model

according to the nature of contextual analysis conducted by professionals: e.g. social
analysis of business data, etc.
Therefore, the following dimensions of contextual metrics can be made up: Personal contex-
tual metrics, Business contextual metrics, Social contextual metrics, Spatial contextual
metrics, Technological metrics, and Environmental metrics. Table 1 provides some examples
for each dimension.

(ii) Tying contextual metrics conveniently to contextual information they measure. For
example, business contextual metrics (e.g. top 5 best-selling food products) are related
to contextual information (e.g. food products) involved in business context.

The interest of such typology of contextual metrics is its capability of hierarchically
grouping metrics related to the same topic, and its extensibility, i.e. other dimensions/categories
of contextual metrics can be added to the model and tied to the right concept. An overview of
the enriched and extended mobile GeoBI context model is proposed in Fig. 6. Dimensions and
concepts of contextual metrics are highlighted in yellow reddish and are tied to contextual
information through a relation “is related to”. The model is extensible thanks to its hierarchical

416

Metrics
category

Table 1 Examples of GeoBI contextual metrics

Description

Examples of contextual metrics

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

Personal

Statistics regarding people in

1. Quebecers perception of American people/tourist

contextual
metrics

general or a given person in
particular

Business

Statistics regarding organizations

and business activities.

contextual
metrics

Social

contextual
metrics

Statistics regarding the society
organization and behavior.

1. Birth/Death rate

2. average revenue per capita

2. Popularity of Obama in Quebec City

3. Depression rate among Quebecers

4. Task frequency, number of keystrokes per second

when walking, etc.
1. Rate of unemployment

2. Average salaries of managers

3. Average consumer price index

4. Top 5 companies in food distribution in Quebec City

5. top 5 best-selling food products regardless the company

3. Man/Woman repartition of the population
4. rate of illiteracy per social group

5. average food expenditure per household

6. Social network reputation/popularity(e.g. number of

followers on Twitter)

2. Location accessibility : average time to reach a key
service (hospital, school, etc.) from a given location

3. Population density

4. Average water level/volume of a given water body

5. Oil/Gas/Gold/Natural resource reserves capacity in a

given location

1. Number of internet/mobile phone users
2. call failure ratea
3. mobile access failure rateb
4. drop call ratec
5. Number of a webpage visitors per day from a given

location

2. average temperature

3. level of water pollution

4. Average number of endangered species

5. Average amount of pollution penalties/bonds
6. Quantity of waste per day

Spatial

Statistics regarding geospatial

1. Average road traffic/length/freight

contextual
metrics

objects.

Technological
metrics

issues

Statistics regarding technological

Environmental
metrics

conditions and issues

Statistics regarding environmental

1. average rainfall/snowfall rate

a “Percentage of calls to an ISP or any network provider that fail to get through” [51]
b An access failure rate is the number of failures divided by the total number of attempts [52]
c “A drop call is defined as a traffic channel that is released by either the base station or the mobile without the
consent of the mobile. The dropped call rate is defined as the total number of dropped calls divided by the total
number of successful call completions during a specified period [52]”

structure where a top concept is described by key elements characterizing it, and so on.
Therefore, additional dimensions and key elements can be added or existing ones can be

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

417

removed to meet the needs of the targeted BI domain/project (e.g. sales, transportation, real
estate, etc.).

Additional examples of contextual metrics (business ones) are provided as instances

(individuals) in Fig. 6.

Contextual metrics could also be classified into simple contextual metrics which are attached
to basic contextual information (e.g. rate of illiteracy) and complex contextual metrics which need
a combination of several dimensions (e.g. rate of illiteracy among employees in a mining area).
Formally, a contextual metric is defined as a subclass of contextual information having its own
data and object properties: hasMetricName, hasMetricValue, hasMetricUnit, hasMetricCover
ageLocation (location covered), hasMetricType (Qualitative/Quantitative). See right column of
Fig. 7(1/2). A contextual information is defined as an OWL class characterized (at least) by the
following data and object properties: hasLabel, hasBegin, hasEnd, hasLocation, hasSource. See
left column of Fig. 7(1/2). Since a contextual metric is primary a contextual information, these
latter properties are also used to describe instances of contextual metrics. Especially, the
hasLocation property is used to specify the location, the metric is referred to. This can be different
from the location, the metric covers. The left column of Fig. 7(2/2) gives an example of consumer
food price index that covers the province of Quebec, but that is linked to Beauport district since
Statistics Canada doesn’t provide such statistic at district level, and not even at city level.

Besides the hasBegin and hasEnd properties that we introduced to handle the temporality of
contextual information, we use GeoSPARQL [20] ontology definitions (referred to with geo Prefix)
to handle geospatial information. The geo:hasGeometry property is specifically used to refer to the
geometric part of a geospatial feature (e.g. District). That geometric part has to instantiated as a
member of geo:Geometry class. Its geometric shape (e.g. Point, Polygon, etc.) can then be specified
using (among others) the geo:asWKT property. See right column of Fig. 7(2/2)

Tying contextual metrics to contextual information does not only enrich the mobile GeoBI
context model with analytical data, but also enables the possibility to provide mobile professionals

Fig. 6 Enriched mobile GeoBI context model with contextual metrics (overview of a semi-detailed model)

418

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

Fig. 7 Excerpt of the formal OWL ontology of the mobile GeoBI context model enriched with contextual metrics

with richer context-aware GeoBI services delivering contextual metrics/statistics. Next section
proposes an architecture for that purpose.

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

419

4 Architecture for delivering and binding GeoBI contextual metrics with business
performance metrics

Nowadays, to analyze business performance, decision makers usually have to scrutinize
business performance metrics and indicators by:

(i)

(ii)

comparing a given metric value (e.g. number of client orders per day) to other metrics
values (e.g. number of new clients per day, amount of advertisement per day). Such
metrics are generally displayed in the same dashboard to easily detect a possible issue
(e.g. Advertisement campaign is not efficient), or to be aware if a given goal is reached
(e.g. minimum of 5 new clients per day)
comparing current value of a given metric to its past values to detect possible trends or
patterns (e.g. sales are decreasing in Quebec City since last year), etc.

These analysis techniques mainly focus on analyzing the organization activities. However,
business performance metrics and indicators are usually limited to measuring the state/projection
of the organization activities, whereas GeoBI contextual metrics/statistics provide additional
measurement about the state of activities/events surrounding the organization. We propose then
an additional way of analysis which consists of crossing/binding business performance
metrics/indicators with contextual metrics/statistics to provide professionals with most complete
analysis of data regarding the organization activities as well as activities/events surrounding it.
By binding/linking business performance metrics/indicators with contextual metrics, we
mean requesting relevant contextual metrics possibly related to parameters/contextual infor-
mation involved in a business performance metric/indicator. Figure 4 in section 2.4 provides
a visual highlight of such binding.

Moreover, business people may also want to pull or get pushed with contextual metrics

targeted to their mobile context as shown in scenario 2 (section 2.3).

For the purpose of implementing such context-aware delivery service of contextual metrics
and the capability of binding them with business performance metrics, Fig. 10 provides a context-
aware GeoBI service oriented architecture (SOA). SOA eases abstraction, reusability and inter-
operability of functionalities, and is more suitable for mobile computing than client/server
architecture [21–23]. However, two major issues need to be additionally managed to fully
leverage the advantage of deploying SOA web services to support mobile computing. These
issues concern service composition strategies and mechanisms of delivering data to mobile users.

4.1 Web services composition strategies

Services are interoperable (platform and network independent) and loosely-coupled software
units/routines that client applications or other services can discover and invoke to achieve
over a network, a given task. They can be deployed over internet as web services by using
languages and protocols depending on the selected architectural approach. Two approaches
exist [24]: “REST-oriented and SOAP-oriented” [25].

SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) approach is a message-oriented paradigm [26]
where client applications and web services communicate via asynchronous SOAP messages
which encapsulate remote operations and data into XML format. A Web Services Descrip-
tion Language (WSDL) is used to describe web services’ communication interfaces (e.g. url,
port), methods/operations, data types, etc.; while a UDDI (Universal Description, Discovery
and Integration) registry is used to expose and help discover services. SOAP, WSDL and
UDDI are W3C well known standards.

420

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

REST (Representational State Transfer) approach is a resource-oriented paradigm [27]
where client applications access web services through URIs by calling HTTP methods (e.g.
GET, POST) to interact with operations and resources provided by these services. Unlike
SOAP services, there is not yet a standardized language for describing RESTful services.
Various specific languages are sometimes used e.g.: Web Application Description Language
(WADL), Web Resource Description Language (WRDL), etc. [26]. The Open Geospatial
Consortium (OGC) provides RESTful web mapping services (e.g. Web Map Service–WMS,
Web Feature Service–WFS, etc.) and Location-based services (e.g. OpenLS) that we will
leverage to implement geospatial functionalities involved in the proposed GeoBI-SOA.

In addition to being RESTful or SOAP-based, a service can be atomic or composite/complex
[28]. Atomic services perform simple tasks/functionalities such as retrieving from the database,
contextual metrics associated to a given location name (contextual metrics delivery service in
the GeoBI-SOA). To achieve complex functionalities, atomic services can be combined and
conveniently arranged to build composite services rather than reinventing the wheel. This is
known as service composition and consists of conveniently orchestrating existing (atomic)
services in a way that help achieve more complex tasks.

For instance, compared to the previous example, retrieving a list of contextual metrics
regarding the location IdoBI is visiting now (location-aware), is more complex. It can be
achieved by orchestrating a composite service which combines the previous atomic service
(example above) with a reverse geocode service (e.g. OGC OpenLS) which first determines
the location name from IdoBI’s current GPS position.

–

“From the developer’s perspective, service composition offers reuse possibilities. From
the user’s perspective, it offers seamless access to a variety of complex services” [29].

BPEL (Business Process Execution Language) acts as the de-facto standard for composing/
orchestrating services [26, 30]. It defines a composite service as a process invoking
(synchronously/asynchronously) services through their WSDL description,
into a given
(sequential/parallel) sequence. This raises a problem regarding the use of BPEL to orchestrate
RESTful services which do not use WSDL. Main solutions to overcome that problem are [31]:

(i) WSDL bindings for HTTP: mapping WSDL operations to URIs, HTTP methods, and
operations exposed by RESTful services. WSDL 1.1 provides a basic support (only
GET and POST methods), while WSDL 2.0 provides a wider support to all HTTP
methods but is not yet supported by BPEL 2.0 [26, 31]. OGC provides WSDL 1.1
binding for its RESTful services (e.g. WFS at [32]).

(ii) REST adapters: hiding the heterogeneity by using an adapter service that translates and
forwards BPEL calls to RESTful services and vice-versa through WSDL schemas [31].
(iii) BPEL extensions for REST: extending BPEL to enable a direct support of RESTful
services [26]. proposed a solution called BPEL for REST which enables direct calls of
HTTP methods within BPEL codes.

Another problem, raised by [33], is the missing support of raw binary data in XML schema,
whereas OGC RESTful services such as WMS and WCS return map images. Among possible but
not satisfactory solutions are using: SOAP Messages with Attachments, SOAP Message Transmis-
sion Optimization Mechanism (MTOM) or a proxy service to encode and decode binary data [33].
For the future implementation of the proposed GeoBI-SOA, we have chosen BPEL with
HTTP bindings since this option is widely tested and adopted by open source orchestration
engines like Apache ODE (http://ode.apache.org/).

Figure 8 shows a stripped BPEL code (like in [29], ports, variable types, and other parameters
are ignored for clarity) defining the composite service aforementioned (i.e. retrieving a list of

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

421

contextual metrics based on IdoBI’s location). It first declares variables, defines services
(OpenLS-LocationBasedService, ContMetricsDelivery-Service), and then invokes sequentially
operations exposed by the services (ReverseGeocode, GetLocationMetricsList) after assigning
values to input variables from the process input, or from previously invoked services outputs.
The last service output variable is copied to the process output and sent back to the requesting mobile
GeoBI client as entering response. The OGC-OpenLS-LocationBasedService invoked in the BPEL
code will be bound with WSDL 1.1 as excerpted in Fig. 9.

4.2 Mechanisms of delivering data to mobile users

According to [34] and [35], three main classes of delivery strategies can be combined: (i) push
or pull approaches supplied through (ii) periodic (e.g. scheduled) or a-periodic (e.g. event-
driven) requests by using (iii) one-to-one (unicast) or one-to-many (multicast) delivery system.
Pull requests are issued by the mobile client application to ask for data from the server,
while push requests are auto-generated server-side to disseminate data to the users based on
their preferences and subscriptions to peculiar contents and services.

Pull mechanisms include a-periodic request-response performed by the user, and periodic
request-response a client application may perform to periodically get up-to-date data from
the server. HTTP pull is an example of periodic pull technique using AJAX technologies to
refresh the client each TTR (Time To Refresh) [36].

Push techniques include long polling technique, publish-subscribe mechanism, and broad-
cast disks technique [34–36]. Publish/subscribe approach is considered by several publications
[37, 38] as the most suitable for mobile environments since it overcomes disconnections issues.
However, issues regarding personal mobility [39], risks of non-delivery [40], etc. remain.

Publish-subscribe and users’ request-response are default push and pull techniques we adopt
for the future implementation of the proposed architecture (Fig. 10). The push mode will be
implemented by using one of most popular push technologies available for smartphones:

(i) Apple Push Notification Service (APNS) [41],
(ii) Android Cloud to Device Messaging Framework (C2DM) [42],
(iii) Microsoft Push Notification Service (MPNS) [43].

4.3 Description of the architecture

The GeoBI-SOA is composed of:

(i)

the context-aware service (CawS), responsible for acquiring the user’s context and
handling push/pull requests. it contains the context acquisition service (CAS) respon-
sible for acquiring contextual information and updating them into the database, and
the requests handling service (RHS) dedicated to handle “pull” and “push” requests as
well as generating periodical requests for periodic acquisition of the user’s context by
calling the CAS.

(ii) Context ontology databases: since contextual information and contextual metrics might
evolve differently we have chosen to separate them into two models stored into two
different ontology databases referring each other. Indeed, contextual information are
granular and volatile while contextual metrics are more summarized and persistent over
the time. Ontologies can be enriched with SWRL [44] semantic rules if needed.
(iii) The GeoBI Services Manager (GeoBI-SM), responsible for selecting the requested
context-based GeoBI service among available ones, i.e.: the Contextual Metrics

422

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

Fig. 8 BPEL code (stripped) for requesting context-based metrics

Delivery Service (CMDS) which delivers contextual metrics, and the Metrics Binding
Services (MBS) responsible for binding contextual metrics with business metrics.

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

423

Fig. 9 Excerpt of WSDL 1.1 binding for OpenLS reverse Geocoding

(iv) Rules-based and context-based reasoning engines,

responsible for loading and
inferring on contextual information and metrics (and rules) to find contextual metrics

Fig. 10 Service oriented architecture for delivering and binding GeoBI contextual metrics with business
performance metrics

424

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

(v)

matching the submitted request. The Jena Framework [45] will be used as reasoning
engine in our prototype.
The Mobile Output Presentation Service (MOPS), responsible for delivering GeoBI data to
mobile clients. It contains the Output Rendering Service (ORS) which renders data, and the
Output Delivery Service (ODS) which sends data to mobile applications in push/pull mode.
(vi) External GeoBI services exposed by GeoBI infrastructures implanting the snowflake
data warehouse schema presented in Fig. 2. These can be called to request GeoBI data
and metadata (e.g. business performance metrics)

(vii) External Mapping and location-based services for processing and representing geospatial

features

The proposed architecture operates as follows in “push” and “pull” modes.

4.4 The GeoBI SOA in push mode

Let us consider that M. IdoBI is visiting Beauport district and wants to get pushed with contextual
metrics regarding that AOI. Push requests are initiated, handled and delivered as follows:
Step ❶A: When a network connection is available, the context-aware mobile GeoBI
application running on the mobile device contacts the context-based GeoBI
server over internet and initiates the CawS with up-to-date sensed contextual
information and with the user’s preferences for push data if any.

❶B:

❶C:

❷:

If the mobile application is configured to accept pushed GeoBI data, and depen-
dently on the user’s preferences/indications about what kind of GeoBI data/service
he needs to get pushed with and how (periodically or event-based), the RHS (in the
CawS) may wait for a timeout or the expected event (e.g. entering a new location)
before generating the push request based on preconfigured indications (e.g. when a
salesman enters a new district, send him the list of top 5 best-selling products in
that location). In case there are pending push requests (e.g. the user was not
reachable), these are first performed.
if necessary, CAS communicates with the mobile GeoBI application, gathers
additional contextual information and sends it back to RHS.
CAS updates the contextual information database with recently gathered contex-
tual information.

❸: With the generated push request, and the recently gathered contextual informa-
tion, RHS calls GeoBI-SM that starts the appropriate service, here, CMDS.
CMDS launches the BPEL process (in Fig. 8) that first calls the OpenLS
location-based service (β in Fig. 10) to get the user’s location place name (i.e.
Beauport) from his position coordinates. It then builds an ontological request (as
in Fig. 11) to select matching contextual metrics from the contextual metrics
database based-on contextual information (e.g. location-name).
CMDS submits the request to reasoning engines.

❹:

Operations from ❺ to ❽ are then performed to push to the user the expected GeoBI
data. These operations are described hereafter since they are almost the same in pull mode.

4.5 The GeoBI SOA in pull mode

Let us now suppose that M. IdoBI Reason is consulting through a gauge or Spatial OLAP client
interface, a metric related to sales per month of chocolate products targeted to his current

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

425

context (e.g. Beauport district). He wants now to obtain contextual metrics possibly related to
that metric for further contextual analysis. The proposed architecture operates as follows:

Step ❶A: The user requests contextual metrics (e.g. Fig. 4b: click on a command button).

❶B:

❶C:

❷:

❸:

RHS handles the request and calls CAS to capture the up-to-date mobile GeoBI
context, including the user’s task context from which the request was performed.
CAS communicates with the mobile GeoBI application and gathers contextual
information including contextual dimensional parameters regarding the business
performance metric/measure, M. Reason was consulting (e.g. location: Beauport,
Time: Dec. 2011, ProductCateg: Chocolate, metric/measure: Amount of sales,
value:4000$).
CAS updates the contextual information database with recently gathered con-
textual information.
RHS calls GeoBI-SM with the request and the GeoBI context including the
request context. GeoBI-SM launches MBS which may need to call (β) OpenLS
location-based services to get expected geospatial features (e.g. location name)
or (λ) GeoBI services to get additional metadata regarding the business
metric/measure M. Reason was consulting.

MBS builds an ontological request (e.g. GeoSPARQL-based [20]) indicating the
appropriate contextual metrics to be bind with the contextual dimensional
parameters/metadata previously gathered.
❹: MBS submits the request to reasoning engines.
❺A, ❺B, and ❺C: Reasoning engines load contextual information and metrics and
infer to find contextual metrics matching the submitted request.
When necessary, the reasoning process can be enriched with
SWRL [44] semantic rules such as (i) alignment rules to align
business performance metrics concepts from OLAP cubes with
contextual
information and metrics entities if necessary (e.g.
location == >Spatial context), or (ii) binding rules to specify
how some contextual metrics should be associated (e.g. if sales
metrics are concerned, select also social contextual metrics even
if “social” parameters are not involved in the business perfor-
mance metric to bind).

Figure 11 describes the steps of interactively binding business
metrics/indicators with contextual metrics/statistics. The supplied ex-
ample of GeoSPARQL request uses spatial analysis functions (e.g.
geof:sf-contains) to ensure that contextual metrics to be selected are
within the geometry of Beauport district. The request listing assumes
that the geometry of Beauport (gWKT_Beauport) was already re-
quested based on the gathered contextual parameter “Location”.

❻: The reasoning result (e.g. contextual metrics regarding chocolate products in

Beauport District) are sent back to MBS (CMDS for above push mode).

❼: MBS (or CMDS) communicates the results to ORS in MOPS for rendering purpose.
❽: After conveniently rendering the contextual metrics, ODS in MOPS sends the
output to the mobile application for display. In push mode, a notification message
is sent with indications to access pushed data when the user decides it. This is to
avoid sending critical data while “delivery is not guaranteed” [41]

Such service oriented architecture can be implemented and used in parallel with
traditional mobile BI platform for organizations that do not yet plan deploying

426

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

Fig. 11 Detailed steps of interactive metrics binding

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

427

integrated context-based mobile GeoBI services but would like to benefit of the
analytic and semantic richness provided by contextual metrics.

5 Persisting the metrics/statistics augmented mobile GeoBI context ontology

A prototype of the proposed solution is under development. To give the reader a taste of the
implementation in progress, we briefly expose here (due to space limitations), how the GeoBI
context ontology (excerpted in Fig. 7) has been persisted into the databases presented in the
architecture.

Unlike common organized data, there is no particular data model to build to get RDF/OWL
data stored into a database. These are stored in the form of triple stores into a predefined data
model for optimized storage and retrieval of RDF triples (subject, property, object). Many java-
based frameworks like Apache Jena [45], Sesame implement persistent ontological data that
way into relational databases like MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQL server, Oracle, etc.

Figure 12 exposes how we used Jena Java-based framework to connect to a PostgreSQL
database (mcGeoBI_Ont_DB_Metrics), read our ontology model from an OWL file excerpted

Fig. 12 Java class excerpt of persisting our mGeoBI contextual metrics into a postgreSQL database

428

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

in Fig. 7, and write it into mcGeoBI_Ont_DB_Metrics. Figure 13 shows the Jena’s triple store
data model that contains our contextual metrics ontology.

Further works regarding context-based reasoning and web services development and

deployment are being carried out.

6 Related works and discussion

To the best of our knowledge, compared to existing works, this is the time the notion of
contextual metrics/statistics is introduced, integrated in a context model, and crossed with
BI/GeoBI metrics/measures.

Indeed, from context modelling side, several context models have been proposed to
support context-based reasoning [46–48], etc. Few of them directly concern decision support
(e.g. [48]), but all of them are limited to retrieving general purpose contextual information
(e.g. location, persons/objects) describing the context.

From BI/GeoBI side, some solutions (e.g. [49, 50]) have been issued to annotate OLAP data
structures with metadata and comments that can help improve somehow the data meaning and
context. Here, too, annotations are expected to be comments describing BI data rather than
statistics/metrics that can be bound with business metrics. Even though annotations were used
to integrate contextual statistics, there would still be limitations including: (i) context-based
reasoning capabilities (OLAP data structures are not suitable for it); (ii) alignment issues
between BI metrics and contextual metrics (see options (a) and (b) in section 2.3), and (iii)
the fact that BI data cubes does not cover the entire GeoBI context but only a (summarized) part
of the company business context.

7 Conclusion and future work

Through realistic scenarios, the paper has highlighted the need for additional features to
improve decision making, amongst:

Fig. 13 Overview of our contextual metrics ontology stored in Jena’s triple store data model

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

429

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

The requirement for context-reasoning to enhance mobile GeoBI activities;
The need for GeoBI contextual metrics/statistics to help mobile business profes-
sionals discover their local context capabilities and opportunities;
The need for crossing business performance metrics with GeoBI contextual
metrics to help mobile business professionals discover the context hidden behind
business metrics and KPIs.

To fulfill these requirements, we have proposed in this paper:

A definition of contextual metrics/statistics;

(i)
(ii) A characterization and organization of contextual metrics into contextual metrics

dimensions;

(iii) An enrichment of previous OWL-based mobile GeoBI context model with con-
textual metrics to provide mobile professionals with a richer business analysis
support;

(iv) A context-based GeoBI service-oriented architecture for delivering contextual
metrics and crossing them with business metrics. Some challenges regarding
service composition approaches and mechanisms of pushing/pulling data to
mobile users were discussed. However, other challenges regarding statistics
management, personal mobility [39], risks of non-delivery of pushed data [40],
etc., still remain.

A prototype is under development and a foretaste of the implementation in progress has
been given through the persistency of GeoBI contextual metrics into a postgreSQL database.
Future work will deal with completing the prototype development while further work will be
dedicated to providing an integrated context-based and semantic-augmented mobile GeoBI
solution (augmenting OLAP cubes with semantic relations).

References

1. Richman A, Noble K, Johnson A (2002) When the workplace is many places: the extent and nature of off-

site work today. WFD Consulting, Watertown

2. Gartner.com. “Gartner forecasts global business intelligence market to grow 9.7 % in 2011,” Gartner, 18
02 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1553215. [Accessed 26 05 2012]
3. Diallo BAA, Badard T, Hubert F, Daniel S (2011) “Towards context awareness mobile Geospatial BI

(GeoBI) applications.” In: International Cartography Conference (ICC). Paris

4. Diallo BAA, Badard T, Hubert F, Daniel S (2012) Mobile and context-aware GeoBI applications: a
multilevel model for structuring and sharing of contextual information. J Geogr Inf Syst (JGIS) 4:425–443
5. Diallo BAA, Badard T, Hubert F, Daniel S (2012) “An OWL-based mobile GeoBI context ontology
enabling location-based and context-based reasoning and supporting contextual business analysis.” J
Locat Based Serv, vol. under review

6. Gu T, Wang X, Pung H, Zhang D (2004) “An ontology-based context model in intelligent environments.” In:
Communication networks and distributed systems modeling and simulation conference. San Diego, CA, USA
7. Cuzzocrea A, Furfaro F, Saccam D (2003) “Hand-olap: a system for delivering olap services on handheld

devices.” In: ISADS 2003. Pisa, Italy

8. Maniatis A (2004) “The case for mobile OLAP.” In: First International Workshop on Pervasive Informa-

tion Management (in conjunction with EDBT’04). Heraklion, Greece

9. Dubé É, Badard T, Bédard Y (2007) “Service web de constitution en temps réel de mini-cubes SOLAP pour
clients mobiles.” In: Atelier SIG ubiquitaire–SIG mobiles, CQFD-Géo/Sageo. Clermont-Ferrand, France
10. BusinessObject.com. “Getting information where and when you need it,” 2008. [Online]. Available: http://
www.businessobjects.com/pdf/product/catalog/information_delivery/mobile/mobile_product_sheet.pdf
11. IBM.com. “Cognos 8 Go! mobile extend business intelligence value by accessing information on
mobile devices.,” 2009. [Online]. Available: http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/cognos/products/
cognos-8-go/mobile/

430

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

12. I. f. S. Research. “Institute for Survey Research–Temple University,” Temple University, 01 01 2012.

[Online]. Available: http://www.temple.edu/isr/. [Accessed 19 05 2012]

13. fedstats. “fedstats,” fedstats, 12 03 2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.fedstats.gov/. [Accessed 15 05 2012]
14. statcan. “statcan,” statcan, 30 04 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.statcan.gc.ca. [Accessed 15 05 2012]
15. EuroStat. “EuroStat, your key to European statistics,” EuroStat, 16 06 2012. [Online]. Available: http://

epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/. [Accessed 16 06 2012]

16. Black K (2011) Business statistics, contemporary decision making. West Publishing, Los Angeles
17. Hebeler J, Fisher M, Blace R, Perez-Lopez A (2009) Semantic web programming. Wiley Publishing, Inc
18. Wikipedia. “Chinese Canadian,” 01 10 2012. [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_

Canadian#Language. [Accessed 01 10 2012]

19. Hayes P, Eskridge TC, Mehrotra M, Bobrovniko D, Reichherzer T, Saavedra R (2005) “COE: tools for
collaborative ontology development and reuse.” In: Knowledge Capture Conference (K-CAP) 2005
20. Perry M, Herring J (2012) “GeoSPARQL—a geographic query language for RDF data.” Open Geospatial

Consortium

21. Microsoft (2009) “Architectural patterns and styles.” In: Microsoft® application architecture guide, 2nd

edition (Patterns & Practices). Microsoft Press

22. Badard T, Bédard Y, Hubert F, Bernier E, Dubé É (2008) Web services oriented architectures for mobile

SOLAP applications. Int J Web Eng Technol (IJWET) 4(4):434–464

23. Lhotka R (2005) “Is SOA just N-tier in other clothing?,” Magenic Technologies, http://www.lhotka.net/

decks/vslive05/Is%20SOA%20Just%20N-Tier.pdf

24. AlShahwan F, Moessner K. “Providing SOAP web services and RESTful web services from mobile
hosts.” In: In Internet and Web Applications and Services (ICIW), 2010 Fifth International Conference on
(pp. 174–179). IEEE., Guildford, UK, 2010, May 9–15

25. Zur Muehlen M, Nickerson JV, Swenson KD (2005) Developing web services choreography

standards—the case of REST vs. SOAP. Decis Support Syst 40(1):9–29

26. Pautasso C (2009) RESTful web service composition with BPEL for REST. Data Knowl Eng 68(9):851–866
27. Richardson L, Ruby S (2007) RESTful web services, O'Reilly Media, Incorporated
28. Grzech A, Swiatek P (2009) Modeling and optimization of complex services in service-based systems.

Cybern Syst 40:706–723

8(6):51–59

29. Milanovic M, Malek M (2004) Current solutions for web service composition. IEEE Internet Comput

30. Akram A, Meredith D, Allan R (2006) “Evaluation of BPEL to scientific workflows.” In: In Cluster
Computing and the Grid, 2006. CCGRID 06. Sixth IEEE International Symposium on (vol. 1, pp. 269–
274). IEEE

31. He K (2009) “Integration and orchestration of heterogeneous services.” In: In pervasive computing

(JCPC), December 2009 Joint Conferences on (pp. 467–470). IEEE

32. [Online]. Available: http://schemas.opengis.net/wfs/2.0/wsdl/wfs-soap-bindings.wsdl
33. Kiehle C, Greve K, Heier C (2007) Requirements for next generation spatial data infrastructures–

standardized web based geoprocessing and web service orchestration. Trans GIS 11(6):819–834

34. Mühl G, Ulbrich A, Herrmann K, Weis T (2004) Disseminating information to mobile clients using

publish-subscribe. IEEE Internet Comput 8(3):46–53

35. Franklin M, Zdonik S (1997) “A framework for scalable dissemination-based information in proceedings

of the ACM OOPSLA Systems Conf.” Atlanta

36. Bozdag E, Duersen A (2008) “An adaptive push/pull algorithm for AJAX applications.” In: AEWSE
37. Cugola G, Nitto ED (2001) “Using a publish/subscribe middleware to support mobile computing.”

Heidelberg, Germany

38. Jacobsen HA (2001) “Middleware services for selective and location-based information dissemination in mobile
wireless networks.” In: Advanced topic workshop on middleware for mobile computing. Heidelberg, Germany
39. Podnar I, Hauswirth M, Jazayeri M (2002) “Mobile push: delivering content to mobile users.” In: ICDCSW“02
40. Apple. “Apple push notification service,” 25 01 2013. [Online]. Available: http://developer.apple.com/
library/ios/#documentation/NetworkingInternet/Conceptual/RemoteNotificationsPG/ApplePushService/
ApplePushService.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40008194-CH100-SW1. [Accessed 25 01 2013]

41. Apple I. “Apple push notification service,” 2011. [Online]. Available: http://developer.apple.com/library/

ios/documentation/NetworkingInternet/Conceptual/RemoteNotificationsPG/ApplePushService/
ApplePushService.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40008194-CH100-SW9. [Accessed 2011]

42. Google I. “GCM architectural overview,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://developer.android.com/google/

gcm/gcm.html

43. Microsoft. “Push notications for windows phone,” 2011. [Online]. Available: http://msdn.microsoft.com/

en-us/library/ff402537(v=VS.92).aspx. [Accessed 2011]

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

431

44. Horrocks I, Patel-Schneider PF, Boley H, Tabet S, Grosof B, Dean M. “SWRL: a semantic web rule
language,” 21 05 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/. [Accessed 03 07 2012]
45. Carroll JJ, Dickinson I, Dollin C, Reynolds D, Seaborne A, Wilkinson K (2004) “Jena: implementing the

semantic web recommendations.” In: 13th World Wide Web Conference, WWW2004

46. Wang XH, Zhang DQ, Gu T, Pung HK (2004) “Ontology based context modeling and reasoning using
OWL.” In: 2nd IEEE Conf. Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom 2004) Workshop on
Context Modeling and Reasoning

47. Ejigu D, Scuturici M, Brunie L (2007) “An ontology-based approach to context modeling and reasoning in
pervasive computing.” In: CoMoRea Workshop of the IEEE International Conference (PerCom’07). New York,
USA

48. Kumar P, Gopalan S, Sridhar V (2005) “Context enabled multi-CBR based recommendation engine for

ecommerce.” In: IEEE International Conference on e-Business Engineering, Beijing, China

49. Stefanov V, List B (2006) “Business metadata for the DataWarehouse–weaving enterprise goals and multi-
dimensional models.” In: 10th IEEE Int.Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops
50. Cabanac G, Chevalier M, Ravat F, Teste O (2007) “An annotation management system for multidimensional
databases.” In: In data warehousing and knowledge discovery. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 89–98
51. Rouse M. “call failure rate (CFR),” SearchNetworking, 01 08 2006. [Online]. Available: http://

searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/call-failure-rate. [Accessed 18 06 2012]

52. Station OI. “Access failure rate and drop call rate,” Radio Frequency Optimisation IBase Station, 08 03
2011. [Online]. Available: http://rf-optimization.blogspot.ca/2010/03/access-failure-rate-and-drop-call-
rate.html. [Accessed 18 06 2012]

Belko Abdoul Aziz Diallo is a Ph.D student at the department of geomatics sciences of Laval University in
Quebec City (Canada). He received his degrees of Programming engineer (Bsc.) and Design engineer (Msc.)
in computer science at The High School of Computer Science of Polytechnic University of Bobo, in Burkina
Faso, his native country. He worked for electrical and telecommunications companies in Burkina before
receiving in 2007, an international Ph.D scholarship from CIDA (Canadian Agency for International Devel-
opment). He is currently a semantic augmented and Context-based mobile GeoBI/BI researcher and practi-
tioner (as Ph.D student) in GeoSOA research Group at Laval University. His research area includes (mobile)
Geospatial Business Intelligence (GeoBI), mobile context characterization and modeling for decision support,
context-awareness and context-based reasoning for mobile geo-decision (GeoBI) applications. His research
issues embrace more widely mobile spatial decision support systems (DSS), Location-Based Services (LBS),
geospatial web services, web-mapping, and semantic web programming. He is member of CRG (Centre for
Research in Geomatics), member of the GEOIDE (GEOmatics for Informed DEcisions) network of centers for
excellence, and is the winner of a first prize at Laval University’s contest of entrepreneurship ideas
“Entrepreneuriat laval 2009” with a project named “Real 3D e-Booking”. He has recently acted as an external
reviewer for Journal of Location-Based Services (JLBS) and has collaborated with some research groups
involved in NeoGeography, GIS wikification, Voronoï-Icosahedron tessellation, and Geoide project for
improved Global web map Visualization.

432

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

Dr. Thierry Badard is professor in geoinformatics at the Department of geomatics sciences of Laval University
in Quebec City (Canada). He heads the GeoSOA research group and is a full time researcher and a former member
of the steering committee of the Centre for Research in Geomatics (CRG). He is also a regular researcher of the
GEOIDE Network of Centres of Excellence in geomatics. He has more than 15 years of experience and he has
been involved and has led national and international R&D projects of importance. His research interest deals with
geospatial (Web) Services Oriented Architectures (SOA), location-based and context-aware web services,
geospatial Business Intelligence and geo-analytical tools and the design of intelligent mobile applications for
better decision support. He acts as a reviewer for several international journals and scientific conferences and has
already an important record of scientific contributions. Dr. Thierry Badard is also involved in the geospatial free
and open source community. He is administrator and project coordinator of the GeOxygene, GeoKettle,
GeoMondrian and SOLAPLayers open source projects. He is an OSGeo charter member and acts as a member
of the OSGeo conference committee. He was in charge of the free software commission in the OSGeo
Francophone local chapter and he is co-founder and a co-chair of the OSGeo Quebec local chapter. He is also a
founding co-chair of the ICA (International Cartographic Association) commission on open source geospatial
technologies. For further details, please visit: http://geosoa.scg.ulaval.ca.

Frédéric Hubert obtained his Ph.D. in Computer Science at the Caen University (France), realized at the
COGIT laboratory from the Institut Géographique National (IGN-France). Since January 2007, he is a
professor for the Geomatic Sciences department at Laval University. He has 12 years of experience in the
Geoinformatics field. He is also member of the Centre de Recherche en Géomatique (CRG). His research
interests are mainly concentrated on user needs specification in Geomatics, geospatial business intelligence,
geospatial multimodal interactions, usability of geospatial systems, mobile spatial context, mobile augmented
reality, and geospatial web services. He has also been reviewer for various international scientific conferences.

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:405–433

433

Sylvie Daniel graduated from Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Rennes (France) in electrical engineering in
1994. She received the PhD degree in signal processing and telecommunications in 1998 from University of Rennes I
(France). She has been working with imagery and geospatial data for over 17 years, including in the industry where she
led and managed international research and developments projects. Since 2004, she has been at Laval University
(Quebec, Canada) where she is now an associate professor. She has participated in several national and international
research initiatives and was the project leader of six multi-disciplinary projects. She has held competitive research funding
from several agencies including the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Canadian
Foundation for Innovation. She has been on the Scientific or Organizing committees of various international conferences.
She is associate editor of the International Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Information Systems. Sylvie Daniel
is a Member of IEEE, principal researcher of the Centre for Research in Geomatics (C.R.G.) and investigator of the
GEOIDE Network of Centres of Excellence. Her interests include data acquisition (images and LiDAR data), image
processing and artificial intelligence, data fusion and augmented reality. Her research projects focus on 3d modeling of
infrastructure and urban environment, and on new edutainment tools based on geomatics technologies.

