The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 1
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 5–15

June 2003

5

V I E W P O I N T

The Top Ten Maps of the Twentieth Century:
A Personal View

David Forrest

Department of Geography & Geomatics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
Email: dforrest@geog.gla.ac.uk

The ®rst BCS President of the twenty-®rst century re¯ects on the cartography of the twentieth century and identi®es
those `maps’ that he believes have had signi®cant in¯uence on the development of the discipline during that century.

Many lists have been compiled of the ‘top ten’, or the ‘top
hundred’ movies or popular songs to mark the turn of
the millennium. I was asked to undertake the challenge
of selecting my own ‘top ten’ maps of the last century.
My immediate response was limited to a few of those
described below that came immediately to mind, these
being chosen easily without very much thought. One or
two are very obvious and no doubt maps that many
cartographers would include in their own list. One or two
are perhaps less expected, but these few have remained on
the list. However, as the idea germinated and a start was
made on writing this article, my list of candidates grew.
Going beyond the initial few required much more thought,
and decisions about what to include and, especially, what
to exclude became much more dif(cid:142)cult.

What are the criteria and what should their relative
weighting be? Should selection be based on a map’s
importance in terms of what it shows or should it be carto-
graphic innovation that comes to the fore and emphasize
how things are shown? The approach will obviously differ if
you speak to an historian, a geographer, a graphic designer,
a map collector or a cartographer. My own perspective
comes as someone who has had a strong interest in maps
from an early age and who has spent twenty-(cid:142)ve years
researching and teaching cartography. A few re(cid:143)ect what
they show, but the emphasis is mostly on cartographic
design or innovation. As a result, what is presented is not
based on a thorough scienti(cid:142)c analysis or extensive search
through map libraries. Rather, it is very much based on my
own experience of maps, with some in(cid:143)uence from people
with whom I have discussed this ‘challenge’.

Everyone will have their own list of what maps have
in(cid:143)uenced them, or that they feel have in(cid:143)uenced carto-
graphy during the last century. To come up with a more
objectively de(cid:142)ned list would require extensive research and
consultation, an exercise which would no doubt be revealing
and rewarding. Those presented here very much represent
the exposure to maps and interests of one individual, but
hopefully most of the choices, or the genre they represent,

DOI: 10.1179/000870403235002024

will generally be viewed as having some signi(cid:142)cance in the
development of cartography. Many lists of ‘top tens’ were
very much dominated by the output of the later years of
the century, perhaps not surprisingly as recent events are
more clear in people’s minds. However, an effort has been
made to consider the full extent of the century despite the
author’s personal experience being dominated by its later
years.

Choosing (cid:142)ve or six maps remained quite easy, but in
(cid:142)nalizing the list there is also the fear of missing some-
thing that should be totally obvious. No attempt has been
made to prioritize the list, the order used being roughly
chronological.

1. ANTARCTICA: THE LAST UNCHARTED
CONTINENT?

At the beginning of the twentieth century, although there
were still large parts of several continents remaining to be
mapped in any detail, most land areas had been explored
and at least general small-scale maps existed. At that time,
Antarctica remained largely unexplored. As the new century
dawned there was a (cid:143)urry of activity as many countries
sent expeditions to explore this uncharted,
inhospitable
continent. Although most expeditions were ostensibly for
‘scienti(cid:142)c investigation’,
that many
involved in these expeditions were pure adventurers with
the sole aim to win the ‘race to the Pole’, but many of the
expeditions and those involved in them did put scienti(cid:142)c
investigation to the fore (Cameron, 1980).

there is no doubt

1901 had been designated ‘Antarctic Year’ by the
International Geographical Congress and to mark the
occasion major expeditions were mounted by Germany,
Sweden and Britain. All three expeditions were primarily
focused on scienti(cid:142)c endeavour and were great successes
in this regard, although Markham, the leader of the British
expedition, was at heart an explorer and the party included
the famous polar explorers Scott and Shackleton. The
Discovery’s three years in the Antarctic did result in a

6

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1b. Inset map from the map in Figure 1a. Shown approximately
half size

At a scale of 1:2 500 000 the map accompanying
the report of the British expedition published in The
Geographical Journal of 1904 (Figure 1a) represented a
signi(cid:142)cant advance in the mapping of the area, although the
smaller scale inset map included in the report (Figure 1b)
shows how much of the continent remained to be mapped.
The map design itself deserves little comment. In carto-
graphic style it is very simple, its representation of relief
in explored areas being the sole element of cartographic
interest.

2. THE INTERNATIONAL MAP OF THE WORLD AT
1:1 000 000

If Antarctica was the last continent remaining to be
explored at the dawn of the new century, much of the rest
of the world still lacked adequate maps. The idea of the
International Map of the World at a scale of 1:1 million
was conceived towards the end of the nineteenth century,
but the development and production of such global topo-
graphic coverage was very much a product of the twentieth
century. Initial proposals in the 1890s for an international
series of maps covering the whole globe led to a few
prototypes being developed and further discussion early in
the new century. Conferences on the concept were held in
London in 1909 and Paris in 1913. Four commissions
formalized the speci(cid:142)cation and design of the map and a
Central Bureau was establish to co-ordinate the work. It
had been agreed from the outset that one to one million
was the most appropriate scale for a small-scale general
topographic map. It was a scale that was already used by
many countries and was seen at the time to be a practical
scale to (cid:142)ll the ‘white’ areas of the World map. It was

Figure 1a. Extract from ‘Map Showing the Work of THE NATIONAL
ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION. 1902–3–4.’ Source: The Geographical
Journal, 1904. Original scale 1:2500 000, shown approximately true
to scale

great advance in scienti(cid:142)c knowledge about the frozen
continent and together with the results from the German
and Swedish expeditions forms the basis for much of our
knowledge and understanding of Antarctica.

Top Ten Maps of the Twentieth Century

7

deemed a useful scale for general geographical studies, for
preliminary examination of larger scale projects, and at the
time, was probably the largest scale at which global coverage
was feasible. For its time, it is quite conventional
in its
design (Figure 2).

Following disruption by the First World War,

the
proposals were reactivated; although full international agree-
ment had not been (cid:142)nalized, several countries had published
sheets more or less conforming to the speci(cid:142)cation. In
theory, each country was to publish the sheets of its own
territory; eight European countries were to undertake the
publication of sheets for Africa; and in South America, cover-
age was largely sponsored by the American Geographical
Society. A survey of coverage following the Second World
War stated that just over 400 sheets had been published of
which 260 conformed closely to the speci(cid:142)cations. Thus,
after about forty years less than half the land area was
mapped by the series.

Control passed to the United Nations Cartographic
Of(cid:142)ce in 1953. The usefulness of the map was re-evaluated
and lack of progress investigated (United Nations, 1954).
While the map was widely accepted as being useful and
formed the basis of small scale mapping of several countries,
reasons for slow progress with coverage included:

.
only 41 countries had formally adhered to the project;
. many countries did not have cartographic agencies

capable of meeting the speci(cid:142)cations;

. many countries, although interested in principle, had

higher priority mapping tasks;

.

the World Aeronautical Chart (WAC) at 1:1M was
seen as a more important priority.

In 1962 the objectives of the IMW were re-de(cid:142)ned.
The production of a general-purpose map would satisfy
the requirements of pre-investment surveys, economic and
development planning. It was also to provide a base map
for the preparation of thematic maps on a variety of sub-
jects. Several of the speci(cid:142)cations were altered to match
those of the World Aeronautical Chart, recognizing that
most countries were heavily committed to WAC production
and that previously no materials were common between
these two series at the same scale.

With this rejuvenation, hopes of progress were high
when, at the International Geographical Congress in 1964,
the whole project was questioned by Arthur Robinson,
the leading American academic cartographer of the time.
In his opinion the map series was a waste of time (1965)
and he was not alone in his criticism (Thrower, 1996).
Robinson challenged the use of the 1:1 million scale as too
large for a general reference map and too small for serious
(cid:142)eldwork. He doubted how it could be used successful
for its stated purpose and argued that it provided little
beyond ‘reconnaissance coverage and cartographic wallpaper’
(1965, p. 2).

This really seems to have signalled the death knell of
the International Map of the World after half a century of
effort. Many countries continue to produce similar maps,
but there is no co-ordinated programme. The fact that the
WAC and Operational Navigational Charts (ONC) both

Figure 2. Extract of International Map of the World 1:1 000 000, Sheet N.J-18. Shown approximately true scale

8

The Cartographic Journal

achieved world coverage at this scale and the 1:2.5 million
scale Carta Mira, covering the World in 244 sheets, was
published shortly after Robinson’s criticism removed any
impetus to complete the IMW.

While the IMW was a valiant attempt to undertake a
multinational project, its failure is as much a re(cid:143)ection of the
turbulent nature of the century as it is an indication of how
cartographic priorities changed. The moral is that unless
there is both a clearly identi(cid:142)ed need and an authoritative
lead body, as is the case with both world aeronautical
charts and international hydrographic charts, international
co-operation and standardization are dif(cid:142)cult,
if not
impossible, to achieve.

3. BECK’S UNDERGROUND ‘MAP’

It is unlikely to be a surprise to anyone to see Harry Beck’s
underground diagram of 1933 on a list of twentieth-
century cartographic innovations (Figure 3). There is of
course debate as to whether or not it is a map as it distorts
space in an irregular fashion, but general acceptance by
cartographers of many ‘map like objects’ being considered
maps changed as the century came to an end and most
cartographers now accept such renditions of space as belong-
ing to the class of object we call maps. A recent survey of
three hundred (cid:142)rst-year university Geography students
showed that 90 per cent of them thought is was a map,

and undoubtedly the percentage of the general public
would be much higher.

The (cid:142)rst card folder edition of 1933 was entitled ‘A
Map of London’s Underground Railways’. In 1934 the
title was reduced simply to ‘Railway Map’. A later example
of the pocket version in my possession — a rather spiky
1962 version by Hutchinson — calls itself a ‘Diagram of
Lines’. In the early 1990s it was described as a ‘Journey
Planner’, the term ‘Tube Map’ being used from 1995 to the
present. Although through the years it has had different
of(cid:142)cial descriptions and perhaps cartographers avoided
using the term ‘map’ when discussing it, there is no doubt
that to most it is simply the ‘Underground Map’.

That the basic design has survived 70 years and has
become a model for underground systems and other trans-
port networks globally, speaks for itself. Dispensing with
geographical accuracy, Beck aimed to produce a diagram
that was more useful to the travelling public than the then
current unsuccessful maps of the increasingly complex and
growing Underground. That Beck’s (cid:142)rst approaches to the
London Underground management with the map were
unsuccessful is well documented (e.g. Garland, 1994). His
belief, indeed passion, for the map led, a few years later, to a
trial printing that the travelling public greeted enthusiastically
and have done ever since.

So in(cid:143)uential

image of
London of many visitors is that of the underground map,
not of the real distances and relationships between places.

is the ‘map’ that the mental

Figure 3. London Transport ‘RAILWAY MAP’. Card folder version No. 2, 1934. Shown approximately 80% of full size

Top Ten Maps of the Twentieth Century

4. THE SWEDISH ECONOMIC MAP

Often I (cid:142)nd it hard to tie down my interests in carto-
graphy. I am interested in all types of maps and many
different aspects of theoretical and practical cartography. I
would have to say though, that one of my main interests is
topographic mapping. Although dismissed by some ‘carto-
graphic’ researchers as being ‘mere inventories’, implying
minimal design input,
is impossible to take such
comments seriously. The variety of content and design of
topographic maps, at similar scales and for essentially
similar purposes is quite fascinating.

it

The public image of the topographic map is the medium
scale, generally highly coloured example at, or around
1:50 000 scale, or perhaps those in the 1:250 000 scale
range. However, the choice here is quite different to this
widely known and used type. Few countries have national
coverage at scales larger than 1:50 000 or 1:25 000. Few
of those that do have such series produce them as full
colour maps. The Ordnance Survey’s 1:10 000 scale is
typical of those series that do exist, with all planimetric
detail in black and brown used for contours; many other
such series are purely monochrome with perhaps screened
contours.

The Swedish Economic map is not well known, but is
unusual and remarkable in many different ways. Begun in
1937, the series gradually extended to cover 80 per cent
of the country by 1978, the majority at 1:10 000, with

9

some less populated areas mapped at 1:20 000 (Lindberg,
1987). The concept of the Economic Map is interesting.
It was designed to ful(cid:142)l three major functions: (cid:142)rst, to
serve as a military map with full details of relief and
topography; second, to show basic land use; and third,
it is a cadastral map showing all rural property boundaries
and internal civil boundaries. It was deemed uneconomic
to produce separate maps for these different purposes
(Figure 4a).

The basis of the map has always been aerial photo-
graphy. It was the (cid:142)rst attempt at a national photomap
and it is astonishing that the Swedes should have con-
templated this as early as 1937, but the approach is very
suitable for the terrain being covered and the requirement
for land use information. The whole concept is very much
in tune with modern ideas about the exploitation and
management of resources such as forests, soils, etc. The
normal edition was produced in four colours — black,
brown, green and yellow — from 1:30 000 scale photo-
graphs. The compilation was drawn in black on a red
photomosaic base and separated out by photography. The
brown contours were plotted photogrammetrically at
5-metre intervals. The yellow ‘improved land’ plate was
made by masking and the green photo base was pre-
pared using a very (cid:142)ne half tone screen. Gradually the
photomosaics were replaced by orthophotos and current
production is based on digital orthophotos. In 1995 it was
decided to stop printing the four colour map at 1:10 000

Figure 4a. Extract of the Economic Map, Sweden. Scale 1:10 000. Copyright Lantma¨teriverket, Ga¨vle. Shown approximately true scale

10

The Cartographic Journal

developed, which consists of two printings in purple-grey
tones for the main shading with a yellow-buff colour used
for slopes facing the light source (Harley, 1973, p. 120).
Low ground is shown by a pale green tint, applied to areas
under 500 feet on the Lake District sheet and under 100
feet on the Loch Lomond sheet (McGrath, 1967, p. 138).
How this overall effect was achieved is described in the
Scottish Geographical Magazine of 1960 by Brigadier
Harris. The rest of the speci(cid:142)cation appears to be more or
less identical to the standard Ordnance Survey One Inch
maps of the time, apart from the addition of red point
symbols and text for some tourist features.

Some bias must be admitted in selecting this particular
example as the writer spent much of his youth and has
returned in recent years to live in the area covered by the
Loch Lomond sheet. This map made an early impression
and must take some responsibility for a life immersed in
maps. The map has always appealed to me and it is always
a surprise that when it is included in a display of maps for
an essay on relief depiction that students seem to overlook
the subtlety of the colours used and the overall effective-
ness of the design — it is rare that anyone ever comments
on the use of two colours for relief shading — perhaps an
indication of how well it works that even those who have
been set the task of studying the maps overlook this point.
It should be noted that some of the other Ordnance
Survey tourist maps of the period are much less effective,
especially some of those with layer colours which have
either inappropriate colour ranges or colour schemes that
dominate the overall image to the detriment of legibility.

6. THE FAR SIDE OF THE MOON

While the history of mapping has primarily been con-
cerned with delimiting our own planet, there have always
been those whose thoughts turned towards the celestial
bodies. Our own natural satellite, the Moon, has naturally
been a focus for much of the effort in extra-terrestrial
cartography.

The moon rotates around its own polar axis at the same
rate as it rotates around the Earth. The result of this is
that just half of the Moon is visible from Earth. Thus,
while there have been maps of the near side of the Moon
for many centuries, all be it rather lacking in detail due to
the distance of the observer, it was only with space travel
in the latter half of the twentieth century that we were
able to gaze at the mysterious far side of the Moon.

The (cid:142)rst photographs of the far side, taken by the
Russian Luna III, showed, unexpectedly, some differences
in topography to the visible side, mainly in the lack of
large ‘maria’ and (cid:142)lled craters. The topography is generally
like the highland regions of the near side. The somewhat
blurred images from Luna III were published in a photo-
graphic atlas in 1961. In the 1960s several other useful
lunar photographic missions took place, including Ranger
and Surveyor by the United States and Zond III by the
Soviet Union. The US Orbiter programme was designed
speci(cid:142)cally to provide photographs for mapping. The (cid:142)ve
Orbiter missions successfully covered a large part of the
Moon’s surface at scales varying from 1:34 000 to 1:64 000
(Lewis, 1969).

Figure 4b. Extract of the ‘Economic Map’, Sweden. Scale
1:20 000. Copyright Lantma¨teriverket, Ga¨vle. Shown approxi-
mately true scale

scale. Instead a series of 1:20 000 six colour maps are
printed, the additional colours being blue and a brownish-
violet (Figure 4b). In my opinion, much of Great Britain,
particularly northern Scotland, would bene(cid:142)t greatly from
being mapped using these methods rather than the standard
Ordnance Survey 1:10 000 scale line maps.

5. LOCH LOMOND TOURIST MAP

Having included both small and large-scale topographic
mapping, it is perhaps inevitable that medium scale topo-
graphic mapping should be considered. Without doubt
one of the mapping successes of the twentieth century
was the extensive spread of detailed and accurate general
purpose mapping at, or around, 1:50 000 to 1:100 000
over much of the globe. Although not a new concept in
the twentieth century, at the start of the century most
of these maps were monochrome and showed relief by
hachures or very limited contours (most would be classed
as form lines these days, not contours with accurate
heights). Developments in surveying and photogrammetry
allowing extensive coverage and accurate contouring, and
progress with cartographic reproduction and printing
technology has led to the modern colourful medium-scale
topographic map which is the image of cartography for
many people.

Although when discussing medium scale topographic
map design many turn to the Swiss examples as the model
to aspire to, there are alternatives worth considering. This
includes some, but not all, of the Tourist editions of
the One Inch map (1:63 360) produced by the Ordnance
Survey in the 1950s and 60s. Without doubt the Swiss
style looks superb in showing some of the more spectacular
alpine sites in Switzerland, but fails rather miserably in
areas of lower relief where it becomes quite uninspiring
in appearance due to the lack of colour compared to many
other designs.

In contrast, the design adopted by Ordnance Survey for
the Loch Lomond and Lake District sheets works effectively
in both high and relatively low relief areas (Figure 5).
looking shading system has been
Here a very natural

Top Ten Maps of the Twentieth Century

11

Figure 5. Extract of ‘Loch Lomond and The Trossachs Tourist Map’, by Ordnance Survey, 1979. Crown copyright. Shown approximately
true scale

Complex processing of the original images transmitted
back to Earth resulted in a series of photomosaics at
1:5000 scale of possible landing sites and 1:100 000 scale
mosaics with 50 metre contours added. Since this time a
wide range of maps at different scales have been produced,
such as Lunar Aeronautical Charts at 1:1 million by the
US Defence Mapping Agency.

The example shown (Figure 6) is an extract from the
National Geographic’s map supplement to the February
1969 magazine. It shows the north polar area of the far
side of the Moon on the Lambert Azimuthal Equal Area
projection. The extensive coverage of craters is typical of
the surface of the far side.

7. THE PETERS PHENOMENON

At a press conference in 1973, the German historian Arno
Peters launched a ‘new’ world map projection (Snyder,
1989) (Figure 7). He claimed that it was the (cid:142)rst signi-
(cid:142)cant projection to show the countries in proportion to
their true areas and gave a much fairer view of the world.
He accused cartographers of being biased towards other
projections, particularly the Mercator, and in support of
imperialistic and racist philosophies.

Peters’ claim that this was a new projection and many of
the other claims he makes for it have been discredited in the
cartographic literature (e.g. Snyder, 1989; Maling, 1974).
Opposition to Peters’ claims for the projection has been
quite categorically expressed by the German Cartographic
Society who went so far as to say that: ‘the Peters map
conveys a distorted view of the world. It is by no means a
modern map and completely fails to convey the manifold
global, economic and political relationships of our times!’
(1985, p. 110).

Given this background, why should it be included in a
list of signi(cid:142)cant maps of the last century? Regardless of
the accuracy or not of Peters’ claims, there is no doubt
that the map has had more public attention, or perhaps
notoriety in cartographic circles, than almost any other
map. Despite all the efforts of the great and good of
cartography, the map will not go away! The controversy
resurfaces every few years when another journalist stumbles
across it on a slow news day and publishes a piece pro-
moting its use. For example the student newspaper at
Memorial University and other Canadian universities carried
a full page article supporting it in 1984, and the writer was
contacted earlier this year by a journalist from the Daily
Mail who was writing a piece about it.

In 1989 the American Congress on Surveying and
Mapping held a seminar about it, where representatives

12

The Cartographic Journal

In Britain, computers were (cid:142)rst used to map the 1971
census (Dorling, 1993) and People in Britain: a Census
Atlas (CRU, 1980) was typical of many such products
around the globe at that time. Although the computer was
making it easier for a wide range of maps to be produced
quickly and cheaply, as Dorling (1993) points out the
fundamental nature of population maps had changed little
in 130 years.

With so many experiments into different ways of mapping
numerical data, such as bi-variate mapping (e.g. Meyer
et al., 1975), contiguous and non-contiguous cartograms
(e.g. Kidron & Segal, 1981; Olson, 1976) it is dif(cid:142)cult to
pick out one particular map. For no better reason than the
fact that I was very impressed by a talk given to a British
Cartographic Society Symposium in the early 1990s, I have
selected a multivariate, non-contiguous cartogram pro-
duced by Dan Dorling (1993) as an example of a map
pushing the boundaries of this sector of the discipline.

One of the key issues in mapping population and other
enumerated information is the uneven distribution of the
phenomena being mapped. To solely re(cid:143)ect the distri-
bution of a phenomenon, calculating a density or a ratio
may be suf(cid:142)cient to counter the problems of variable sized
enumeration areas, but in relating further variables to
people and not land, one way of attempting to ‘normalize’
the data is to map it on a base of an equal population carto-
gram. Thus,
in this type of mapping, the enumeration
units are mapped at a size proportional to their population,
not in proportion to their land area.

In Figure 8 each ward is represented by a hexagon with
area proportional to its population and located as close to
its geographical neighbours as possible (Dorling, 1993).
The map attempts to show the results of British local
elections in 1987, 1988 and 1990. Each ward is coloured
according to 36 categories of result, with hue indicating
the dominant party. As Dorling points out, to adequately
explain what is shown in this one diagram would take
several pages of text, a clear vindication of the application
of this type of mapping.

9. DIGITAL CHART OF THE WORLD

Although not the (cid:142)rst worldwide dataset, the Digital Chart
of the World has probably had the biggest impact of all
those produced to date. Digital World outlines have been
quite widely available since the early 1970s, but due to
cost of creation, distribution and memory cost associated
with storing large datasets,
in the early days of digital
mapping, most were quite limited in detail. For example,
World Databank 1 from the US Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) was digitized from 1:12 million scale maps and
consisted of one hundred thousand co-ordinates. The (cid:142)rst
detailed World database that I am aware of, was digitized
from 1:1 000 000 scale Operational Navigational Charts
(ONC) and produced by Petroconsultants. Mundocart
was designed to be a high quality cartographic dataset, but
its use was signi(cid:142)cantly limited by its high cost. When it
was published on CD-ROM in 1989 it sold for £5000.
Although technically Mundocart CD was a great step
forward,
it was out of the reach of most researchers
needing a base for their thematic studies.

Figure 6. Extract of ‘The Earth’s Moon’. Supplement to the National
Geographic Magazine, February, 1969. Copyright, The National
Geographical Society. Shown approximately correct size

from (cid:142)fteen international and US aid organizations were
addressed by leading (cid:142)gures in US cartography and mapping.
What other map has achieved such status? It continues to
be widely circulated and used (Vujakovic, 2002, Calder,
2002). So while cartographers may object to Peters’ views
of their abilities and morals, it must be acknowledged that
his projection continues to have great in(cid:143)uence beyond
cartographic circles.

8. STATISTICAL MAPPING

There is little doubt that the century saw a great develop-
ment in many types of mapping, not least the increasingly
widespread use of maps to represent census and other
statistical data. In some respects one of the most signi(cid:142)-
cant contributions was a piece of software, not a map
per se. The Symap program (e.g. Robertson, 1967) seemed
ubiquitous in universities and many organisations interested
in statistical data in the late sixties and the seventies.
Cartographers on the whole were rather scathing of its crude
lineprinter output, but geographers and others interested
in analysing data and looking for patterns, or cause and
effect, were more interested in the (cid:143)exibility it offered
than the graphic quality of the results.

Top Ten Maps of the Twentieth Century

13

Figure 7. The Peters World Map. Produced using ArcView with ESRI sample data

With perhaps quite similar aims to the International Map
of the World, the World Digital Database for Environmental
Science (WDDES) aimed to provide an affordable set of
base topographic information to allow the mapping of
environmental data. Despite much international discussion
and promotion of this project at cartographic, GIS and
other conferences in the mid to late 1980’s and an agree-
ment with Pergamon Press to produce it on CD-ROM,
the project never seems to have reached fruition.

A much more successful project was the Digital Chart
of the World (DCW) undertaken on behalf of the US
Defence Mapping Agency (DMA — now NIMA) and
several co-sponsors, including the UK Directorate of Military
Survey (now Defence Geographic Information Agency).
Again,
like Mundocart and WDDES, the source is the
1:1M ONC series. The work of digitizing and providing
specialist display software to accompany the dataset was
undertaken by ESRI.

In its initial generic form released in 1992 the Digital
Chart of the World is supplied on four CD-ROMS con-
taining almost two gigabytes of topologically structured,
feature-coded data. Each CD covers a major region of the
World. The data is structured into seventeen thematic
layers with each layer including a number of feature classes
(Figure 9). Thus, the data is in a form that easily allows
exploitation within a GIS environment. This dataset is
particularly signi(cid:142)cant due to the price for the four CD set
of £200.

Not only is this initial price very modest, being a
product of a US government funded agency, the dataset is
in the public domain. This has resulted in many software
producers reformatting the data to suit their own systems
and distributing it ‘free’
to their customers. This has
made the original dataset and later versions of it both very
widely distributed and easy to use, achieving in the digital
era very much what the International Map of the World
set out to do almost a century earlier.

10. THE VIRTUAL WORLDS OF ALAN COLLINSON

In the later part of the century the computer came to
dominate the production of maps. Although without doubt
some of these were innovative, the vast majority relied on
long-standing, conventional design ideas. In the early days
of computer mapping there was a lot of criticism of many
of the resulting maps, but as time has progressed increased
memory capacity and affordable higher resolution output
devices have removed much of this criticism. Today the
poor maps coming out of desktop mapping programmes
and GIS are generally not the fault of the hardware or
software!

Several of the maps featured in my list are included
because someone showed a willingness to innovate and to
challenge conventional assumptions. Thus my (cid:142)nal choice
is not so much a speci(cid:142)c map, but an idea promoted by

14

The Cartographic Journal

Alan Collinson. While he can demonstrably produce well-
designed maps conforming to conventional expectations,
Alan has for many years questioned cartography and carto-
graphic conventions and has been bold enough to put this
in print (e.g. Collinson, 1997).

Why do maps have to rely on abstract symbols? Why
can’t trees look like trees? How often is water an unvarying
pale blue colour in reality? Why shouldn’t water on maps
look like water? And for that matter, why can’t maps have
clouds (Figure 10)?

Some may argue that this type of image is not a true
map, but many of the ideas are applicable to more conven-
tional maps. It is also true that pictorial maps have existed
for centuries and there were several well-known exponents
of the genre during the twentieth century, such as Beran.
However, exploiting the power of the computer does
allow much greater (cid:143)exibility and offers this for minimal
additional cost.

Through the British Cartographic Society Design Group,
Alan has challenged many of us to rethink our approach
to cartography. I chose this as my (cid:142)nal map because I
believe that some cartographers have for centuries shown
their willingness to innovate and to adopt techniques and
practices of other disciplines. If we are to continue as an
identi(cid:142)able, important profession, we must continue to do
so.

CONCLUSION

Finalizing my list of top ten maps was not easy. It leaves
many types of maps un-represented. For example, I have
not included any atlases which were many and varied and
which developed signi(cid:142)cantly throughout the century. The
production of a National Atlas was a major undertaking
by many countries during the twentieth century. There
were several signi(cid:142)cant general-purpose atlases, such as the
Times Mid-Century edition in (cid:142)ve volumes and some
interesting products by Dorling Kindersley in the 1990s.
Thematic atlases also saw some signi(cid:142)cant products such as
the State of the World Atlas and The Times Atlas of World
History.

The development of car ownership has led to the road
map or road atlas probably being the most common type
of map used by the general public and their free distri-
bution in some parts of the world certainly encouraged this.
Other transport developments also had a major in(cid:143)uence
on map design and production. The aeronautical chart was
a totally new product in the early twentieth century and
the way the range has developed to include charts for both
visual and instrumental navigation is signi(cid:142)cant. They have
also been responsible for the development of some alter-
native relief representation methods and there can be no
doubt about the importance of the World Aeronautical
Chart (WAC) and Operational Navigational Chart (ONC)
series in world cartography. While hydrographic charts have
been produced for several centuries, international agree-
ments on their distribution and design were signi(cid:142)cant
events later in the century, although the move to digital
versions in ECDIS has so far proved to be less successful.

Closer to home,

the completion of the large scale
digital map of Great Britain by the Ordnance Survey in mid

Figure 8. Great Britain Election Results, designed and produced by
D. Dorling. Reproduced from The Cartographic Journal Vol. 30, No. 2

Figure 9. A simple map of part of central Scotland generated in
ArcView using Digital Chart of the World data. Scale approximately
1:1000 000

Top Ten Maps of the Twentieth Century

15

Figure 10. An image of Llandudno produced by Alan Collinson. Copyright Alan Collinson

nineties is historically signi(cid:142)cant. The Ordnance Survey
have also been leaders in large scale mapping in several
other ways,
including the Superplan print on demand
service and the Landplan series with its largely automated
generalization.

The list of possibilities could go on, but my choices have
now been made. I’m sure the editor would be delighted to
hear from others who think there are particularly signi(cid:142)cant
maps that I have overlooked.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I must thank all those that have helped me in developing
my list and in particular Alastair Pearson who suggested
that I write this in the (cid:142)rst place and provided insightful
feedback on earlier drafts. I owe a longstanding debt of
gratitude to John Keates who (cid:142)rst introduced many of the
different types of map to me, and encouraged their study
from a cartographic perspective. Henry Castner also played
a signi(cid:142)cant role in broadening my cartographic horizons.

German Cartographic

Society.
Projection’, The Cartographic Journal, 22, 108–10.

(1985).

‘The

so-called Peters

Harley, J. B. (1973). Ordnance Survey Maps: A de(cid:142) nitive guide.

HMSO, Southampton.

Harris, L. J. (1960). ‘Hillshading for relief depiction in topographic

maps’, Scottish Geographical Magazine, 76, 14–20.

Kidron, M. and Segal, R. (1981). The State of the World Atlas.

Lewis, H. A. G. (1969). The Times Atlas of the Moon. Times

Heineman, London.

Newspapers, London.

Lindberg, P.-O. (1987). The Economic Map. Unpublished paper.

Lantmateriverket, Gavle, Sweden.

Maling, D. H. (1974).

‘Peters’ Wunderwerk’, Kartographische

Nachrichtung, 4, 153–56.

Markham, C. R. (1904). ‘Address to the Royal Geographical Society,

1904’, The Geographical Journal, 24, 9–16.

Meyer, M. A., Broome, F. B. and Schweitzer, R. H. (1975). ‘Color
statistical mapping by the U.S. Bureau of the Census’, The
American Cartographer, 2, 100–17.

McGrath, G. (1967). ‘United Kingdom Ordnance Survey tourist
maps at one-inch scale: a review/some Canadian implications’,
The Cartographer, 4, 136–56.

National Geographic Society (1969). ‘The Earth’s Moon’, Supplement

Olson, J. M. (1976). ‘Noncontiguous area cartograms’, Professional

to National Geographic, 135.

Geographer, 28, 371–80.

Raper, J. and Vozenilek, V. (1993). ‘The Digital Chart of the World:

Controversial but invaluable’, GIS Europe, March, 57–60.

Robertson, J. C. (1967). ‘The SYMAP programme for computer

Robinson, A. H. (1965). ‘The future of the International Map’, The

Snyder, J. (1989). ‘Map projection controversy’, ACSM Bulletin,

Thrower, N. J. W. (1996). Maps & Civilization: Cartography in

United Nations (1954). ‘First progress report on the International
Map of the World on the millionth scale’, World Cartography, 4.
Vujakovic, P. (2002). ‘From North-South to West Wing: Why the
‘Peters Phenomenon’ will simply not go away’. The Cartographic
Journal, 39, 177–79.

REFERENCES

Saturday 13 July, p. 2.

Macdonald, London.

HMSO, London.

34, 117–24.

Calder, S. (2002). ‘Is the World in good shape?’ Independent,

mapping’, The Cartographic Journal, 4, 108–13.

Cameron,

I.

(1980). To the Farthest Ends of

the Earth.

Cartographic Journal, 1, 1–4.

Census Research Unit (1980). People in Britain — a Census Atlas.

February, 37–39.

Collinson, A. (1997). ‘Virtual Worlds’, The Cartographic Journal,

culture and society, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Dorling, D.

(1993).

‘Map design for census mapping’, The

Cartographic Journal, 30, 167–83.

Dorling, D.

(1995). A New Social Atlas of Britain. Wiley,

Chichester.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

