bs_bs_banner

Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3): 313–329

Research Article

An Ontology-Driven Framework and Web
Portal for Spatial Decision Support1

Naicong Li
The Redlands Institute
University of Redlands

Michael Goodchild
Department of Geography
University of California

Robert Raskin
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Pasadena, California

Krzysztof Janowicz
Department of Geography
University of California

Abstract
Numerous systems and tools have been developed for spatial decision support (SDS),
but they generally suffer from a lack of re-usability, inconsistent terminology, and
weak conceptualization. We introduce a collaborative effort by the SDS Consortium
to build a SDS knowledge portal. We present the formal representation of knowledge
about SDS, the various ontologies captured and made accessible by the portal, and
the processes used to create them. We describe the portal in action, and the ways
in which users can search, browse, and make use of its content. Finally, we discuss
the lessons learned from this effort, and future development directions. Our work
demonstrates how ontologies and semantic technologies can support the documen-
tation and retrieval of dynamic knowledge in GIScience by offering ﬂexible schemata
instead of ﬁxed data structures.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Spatial decision support (SDS) provides computational or informational assistance for
making better-informed decisions about problems with a geographic or spatial compo-
nent. This support assists with the development, evaluation, and selection of proper
policies, plans, scenarios, projects, interventions, or solution strategies (SDS Consortium
2008). SDS plays an ever-increasing role in planning and decision-making when solving
complex, large-scale problems in GIScience. Numerous spatial decision support systems
(SDSS) and tools have been developed to date. With few exceptions, these systems and
tools have been built independently for each application, are not easily reusable, are not

Address for correspondence: Naicong Li, Redlands Institute, University of Redlands, 1200 East
Colton Avenue, PO Box 3080, Redlands, CA 92373, USA. E-mail: naicong_li@spatial.redlands.edu

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01325.x

314 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

readily adaptable to changing business environments, and their performance is not
independently veriﬁable. The lack of modularity represents a major blockage for their
re-usability and interoperability (Goodchild and Glennon 2008).

Developing reusable and interoperable SDS systems and tools depends on a high
level of understanding of the domain of spatial decision support, including the identiﬁ-
cation of the fundamental concepts of SDS. Such an understanding is difﬁcult to achieve
for several reasons. The knowledge in the ﬁeld of SDS is vast, spanning many areas
including: spatial decision processes and their steps (Malczewski 1999), methods and
techniques used during a spatial decision process (Malczewski 1999, 2006); participation
and collaboration dimensions of the decision process (Armstrong 1993, Jankowski and
Nyerges 2001, Sieber 2006, Jankowski et al. 2006); systems functionality (Densham
1991, Malczewski 1999); and the data, data models, and process models needed to solve
a decision problem in an application domain. In addition to the challenge of integrating
information from many aspects of SDS, multiple overlapping ﬁelds of study have been
developed by various research communities. Examples include SDSS, planning support
systems (PSS) (Batty 2008), group decision making (Jankowski and Nyerges 2001),
public participation geographic information systems (Sieber 2006), intelligent spatial
decision support systems (Leung 1997), and spatial expert support systems (Zhu and
Healey 1992). Methods and tools developed in these ﬁelds of study often overlap or
partially overlap but may use the same terms to refer to different concepts or use different
terms to refer to the same concept. Therefore, experts may assume that their models are
based on the same assumptions and will interoperate when they are not commensurable;
and combining them may lead to misleading results (Harvey et al. 1999). This semantic
mismatch inhibits the mutual understanding and sharing of information and experiences
about SDS development. Additionally, a common conceptual framework for synthesizing
and presenting this vast body of knowledge is missing. These deﬁciencies make it difﬁcult
and error-prone to select appropriate methods and tools and other SDS resources,
understand their implications, and combine them into a solution strategy.

In this article, we present the results of a large-scale project that aims to capture the
body of knowledge in SDS using a semantic-enabled and ontology-driven Web portal.
The presented work serves as a source of information and a common vocabulary for SDS
researchers and practitioners. It provides learning material for students and newcomers
interested in this multidisciplinary ﬁeld. It creates a standard way to specify and register
SDS resources and thus helps to avoid semantic mismatches among them. In doing so, the
presented system also contributes to the vision of a semantics-enabled e-Science (De
Roure and Hendler 2004). The SDS ontologies are the result of collaborative work of the
SDS Consortium (SDS Consortium 2011), whose 33 members include scholars and
practitioners in SDS and related ﬁelds from various universities, NGOs, and government
agencies, with application domains spanning natural and human systems. Our work
highlights how semantic technologies and ontologies can be used to model knowledge in
a complex and heterogeneous domain, improve documentation and retrieval, and ease
the development of ﬂexible Web applications. The presented portal is automatically
generated from the SDS ontologies; consequently, all aspects of SDS-related information
ranging from process workﬂows, methods and tools to case studies can be managed using
a common framework. New data at the schema and instance levels can be integrated
on-the-ﬂy without hard-coded changes to the portal. The ability to move the business
logic from the application code to the data is one of the strengths of the semantic
approach and a prerequisite to handle dynamic information. The lessons learned in

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

315

creating such a portal and ontologies go beyond SDS but can be adapted to improve the
understanding of and access to geographic information analysis, in general.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the content
analysis of the body of knowledge in SDS, and introduces the SDS ontology that we have
developed to capture this knowledge. In Section 3, we present the SDS Knowledge Portal,
a semantic-enabled Web application that provides the user with easy access to SDS-
related knowledge and resources. Section 4 illustrates the usage of the portal through two
use cases. Section 5 discusses lessons learned. Finally, Section 6 concludes our work and
points to future research directions.

2 Formal Representation of the Body of Knowledge in SDS

Developing a ﬁne-grained, highly formalized ontology for a vast body of knowledge
and resources is challenging, especially with limited resources. However, we can create a
sound conceptual framework for organizing this knowledge, ﬁll it initially with essential
content, and let the content develop further over time. This conceptual framework
should ease information retrieval and navigation and be extendable in the future. In this
work, we present a set of domain-speciﬁc ontologies, which serve as the conceptual
framework to organize SDS-related knowledge and resources. These ontologies have
been agreed upon by the SDS Consortium members and have been developed to satisfy
ﬁve major objectives: (1) document knowledge in a formal and consistent way that limits
the interpretation of the used terms towards their intended meaning; (2) establish a
standard against which SDS resources can be classiﬁed and registered; (3) ease retrieval
and browsing through this vast body of knowledge; (4) uncover inconsistencies and
incompatibilities; and (5) reduce the barriers of entry to the successful application of
SDS.

2.1 The Content of the SDS Ontologies

The SDS ontologies currently include deﬁnitions for over 900 concepts, 500 instances,
200 attributes and relations, all provided with a common model for labels, synonyms
and acronyms, detailed descriptions, and provenance information. (The terms “class”
and “concept” as well as “relation” and “role” are used synonymously in the Semantic
Web community.) The ontologies are coded in OWL (Web Ontology Language). For the
purpose of conceptual clarity as well as following the best practice in ontology develop-
ment, the concepts are partitioned logically into over 40 ontologies. These ontologies are
then grouped into several major components for the ease of concept browsing and search
(see Section 3): decision problem types, planning/decision process phases and steps,
methods and techniques, technology, domain data and knowledge, people and partici-
pation, and resources for decision processes. A rich set of relations connects the concepts
in and across these components, which could be used to guide the decision-maker to best
practices in assembling a decision solution strategy.

The decision problem type ontology includes subcategories such as impact assess-
ment, suitability assessment, location allocation, site search or selection, network design,
and scheduling. Besides taxonomic relations, several attributes and relations describe
decision problem types, such as spatial scale, temporal extent, and various decision

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

316 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

contexts deﬁned in the decision context ontology, including institutional, legal, social,
cultural, geographic contexts and application domains.

The planning and decision process ontology describes structured or semi-structured
decision process workﬂows with their phases and steps. Classical decision theories
(Simon 1960) divide the decision process into a few major phases, such as intelligence,
design, and choice. There are many variations on this sequence (Steinitz 1990, Malcze-
wski 1999), for example, phases in some of the approaches are considered sub-steps in
other variations. Example decision process phases include problem identiﬁcation, stake-
holder engagement, process mapping, condition assessment of the current state of the
system, design of alternative solutions, evaluation of the alternative designs including
impact analysis, and selection of a design alternative based on a set of pre-deﬁned
criteria. Associated with these phases and steps are commonly used methods and tech-
niques, decision participant types and roles, and expected outcomes. Depending on the
nature of the decision problem type and its application domain, the decision process may
adopt a workﬂow that is most suitable for its purpose.

A separate ontology contains a large set of SDS methods and techniques organized
into types and subtypes based on their purpose, such as spatial modeling, simulation,
optimization, multi-criteria decision analysis, and consensus building. They are deﬁned
with a set of parameters such as inputs and outputs, and linked with speciﬁc decision
process steps where they are commonly used.

The SDS technology ontology deﬁnes those concepts necessary to classify SDS
software in terms of their system functionality, such as data management, tools/models
management, scenario management, process ﬂow control, collaboration support, report
generation, and visualization.

The domain data and knowledge ontology includes deﬁnitions of relevant data
attributes, data source attributes, data topics, knowledge domains to describe and
classify data sources, data models, and process models.

The people and participation ontology deﬁnes concepts related to participatory
and collaborative planning and decision-making as well as the various participant roles
during various steps of a decision process.

The resources ontology deﬁnes SDS resource types such as references to resource
instances including workﬂow templates, methods and techniques, tools, models, case
studies, data sources, literature, and related Web sites. These resources are deﬁned and
classiﬁed with extensive use of the concepts and attributes deﬁned in other branches of
the conceptual framework described above.

As of Spring 2012, the knowledge base spans more than nine decision process
workﬂows with their phases and steps, about 100 methods, 80 SDS tools and models,
various data sources and case studies, and more than 700 publications related to SDS
research.

2.2 The SDS Ontology Development Process

The process of developing SDS ontologies is iterative and ongoing. Our ﬁrst task was
to identify the relevant concepts to be included in the ontology. For each concept, we
identiﬁed the set of attributes and relations with other concepts needed to make the
structure of the body of knowledge explicit and to facilitate navigation and retrieval. For
example, implements (and its inverse relation implemented by) is needed to present the
relations between SDS methods and software tools which realize these methods.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

317

Two specialist workshops were held in 2008, engaging well-known scholars, expe-
rienced practitioners, technology developers, and ontology experts. The outcomes of
these workshops included: (1) Major ontologies were identiﬁed, to partition SDS con-
cepts into branches of knowledge that act as the top nodes of the Web portal; (2) the
modular design of the SDS ontologies was ﬁnalized, and the inter-dependencies of
ontologies were identiﬁed; (3) the collaborative discussion and debates during the work-
shops helped deepen a common understanding of the structure of the body of knowledge,
including determining the set of attributes and relations needed for some important
facets, such as decision-making phases; and (4) the diverse backgrounds of the partici-
pants brought together multiple perspectives on SDS that were methodologically varied
and domain speciﬁc. These contributions are essential for the development of ontologies
whose aim is to include and synthesize all aspects of SDS. At the end of each workshop,
participants formed focus groups, each reﬁning a component of the SDS ontologies.

The ontology development process was mostly top-down, in that its design was
driven by an overall understanding of the structure of SDS research. Some of the key
concepts considered essential
ingredients for such understanding (e.g. the decision
process, methods, and their inter-relations) drove the development of other supporting
concepts. However, a bottom-up, data-driven approach was adopted in a few cases. For
instance, we imported a set of SDS tools from an existing database and came across some
describing attributes that we had not considered before, but subsequently included.

While the consortium’s development model

resembles METHONTOLOGY
(Fernandez et al. 1997) and related approaches, our maintenance phase differs. The
workshops set the ground for major changes and releases. In contrast, small changes
requested by members are all handled, formalized, and implemented by a single main
editor to ensure consistency in the used engineering paradigms and ontological commit-
ments. In the future, we may introduce a collaborative Web-platform to assist members
in contributing OWL code directly; however, the size of the consortium may require a
rigid framework for such contributions.

2.3 Design Considerations of the SDS Ontologies

The design of the SDS ontologies is purpose-driven. Besides capturing the structure
of knowledge in SDS, ontology development helps facilitate access to information. For
instance, the ontologies support users by providing deﬁnitions of essential concepts related
to SDS as well as access to SDS resources. This purpose has dictated several design choices.
One of the design considerations is scope. SDS is a research and application area
that cuts across academic disciplines and human knowledge domains. While a basic
understanding of these domains is necessary to classify the functions of the SDS tools and
models, developing ontologies for these domains is beyond the scope of our project. We
have focused on deﬁning the essential concepts in SDS, including those for decision
problem types, decision context, decision process, methods, technology, participation and
collaboration, and decision support resources. These concepts reside in a set of SDS core
ontologies but we also refer to external concepts, for example, to link to data attributes
that specify the inputs and outputs of tools and models. These external concepts reside in
a set of supporting ontologies. We have initially included only those supporting concepts
that are directly referred to by core concepts and their deﬁnitions, and in contrast to the
SDS core, their deﬁnitions merely consist of natural-language descriptions.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

318 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

Another design consideration is the degree of formalization: that is, which attributes
and relations are minimal but sufﬁcient for the automation of information access and
the required reasoning support. For instance, when we deﬁne the steps in a decision
process, signiﬁcant information about those steps is provided through natural-language
deﬁnitions. Formalized properties include sub-steps, methods and techniques commonly
used for these steps, tools that support them, participant types, among others. Which
information should be described in natural language and which should be formalized
depends on the relations to be established between concepts. This choice, in turn, is
determined by the navigation needs of the SDS portal; see Section 3.

Inverse properties are heavily used in the SDS ontologies. As mentioned above, SDS
methods have an implemented-by relation with tools and models, and tools and models
have an implements relation with methods. Inverse relations signiﬁcantly improve navi-
gation and ease the development of the portal (most inverse relations are automatically
inferred).

In some cases we had to make a choice between modeling an entity as a class or
instance. For example, speciﬁc methods are currently represented as classes instead of
instances. This approach ensures that our ontologies are extendable and can grow with
the research ﬁeld. Reﬁnements to existing SDS methods can be modeled as subclasses.
For example, for sensitivity analysis method is an area of active research, and variations
have been developed in recent years (Ligmann-Zielinska and Jankowski 2008). These
submethods are represented as subclasses of sensitivity analysis. This ﬂexibility on the
schema level is an important feature as new knowledge can be integrated easily. Sub-
suming reasoning-based query expansion ensures that users can navigate the portal from
generic to more speciﬁc SDS methods; see Section 3.

Another common design decision was to choose between taxonomic and non-
taxonomic relations. To keep the navigation interface clear and to comply with the
literature, we identiﬁed a minimal set of subclasses and superclasses, and expressed as
many other facts as possible using non-taxonomic relations or attributes. For example,
the SDS tools are instances of various subclasses of the software class. They also have
many properties describing their relation to other branches of the SDS ontologies, such
as methods and decision process steps. Although tools are formally coded as having one
taxonomic relation to the class software type, users may want to browse tools differently.
For example, one may want to have the tools organized based on what decision process
activity types they support. This structure requires a tool taxonomy based on these
decision process activity types. Therefore, before each ontology version release, we
automatically derive an additional subsumption relationship for the tools keyed off a
decision process activity type, derived from each tool’s relation to decision process steps.
Consequently, on the Web portal, the tools can be browsed either through a decision
process activity type tools taxonomy or a software type taxonomy.

As with the consideration for any systems design, we have been mindful to maintain
modularity in the ontology design, and partitioned the related concepts into a set of
SDS ontologies. The dependencies among these ontologies were carefully considered, so
that supporting ontologies containing concepts that are more generic (upper level) are
imported into ontologies that are more SDS-domain speciﬁc, but not the other way
around. Besides being conceptually cleaner, this practice allows easy import of well-
established third-party ontologies and makes our ontologies reusable for external parties.
For instance, the data-attributes ontology imports a data-topic ontology based on the
ISO 19115 data-topic categories. Several of the supporting ontologies developed by the

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

319

SDS Consortium ultimately should be replaced by domain- or application-level ontolo-
gies developed by other expert groups. For example, we plan to replace part of the
data-attributes ontology by importing the relevant Semantic Web for Earth and Envi-
ronmental Terminology (SWEET) ontologies (Raskin and Pan 2005). SWEET provides
support for scientiﬁc and numerical concepts, such as scientiﬁc units, scientiﬁc relations,
provenance, and data representation. We believe that ontologies should carry as few
ontological commitments as possible and interlink with other Semantic Web ontologies
by matching and alignment (Shvaiko and Euzenat 2008) whenever knowledge has to be
added that exceeds our own expertise.

3 SDS Ontologies in Action: The SDS Knowledge Portal

SDS ontologies could potentially beneﬁt a diverse set of user communities, including
SDS practitioners, researchers and students, SDS resource providers, decision makers in
various application domains, and members of the general public who are interested in
this subject. To make the content of the SDS ontologies easily accessible initially by the
research and practice community, a portal was launched in 2009 and extended in 2011.
The content of the SDS Knowledge Portal is entirely driven by the SDS ontologies as
proposed by the SEAL (SEmantic portal) approach (Maedche et al. 2003). The portal
serves a dual purpose: accessing the body of knowledge in SDS, and accessing the
resources which are registered and characterized by the ontologies, e.g. tools, models,
data sources, and case studies. Figure 1 displays a typical page from the portal with
callout boxes indicating the main components and functionalities for ontology and
resource browsing as well as the semantic search (see more detailed descriptions in
Sections 3.2 and 3.3 below).

Faceted search as an exploratory, multi-ﬁlter paradigm has been proposed for
browsing semantic-enabled portals (Suominen et al. 2007). While this approach is
feasible, we instead combined several query paradigms, some of which resemble facets.
The SDS portal was developed with a heterogeneous user base in mind. Browsing by
category or directly navigating the ontology graph may be preferred by domain experts
and learners of SDS, while users in search of appropriate methods and tools for their
work may prefer direct access via semantic search to arrive at a speciﬁc documentation.
In the following, we present the system architecture of the SDS Knowledge Portal
(http://www.spatial.redlands.edu/sds/), the main functionality, and how the portal is
generated from the ontologies introduced above.

3.1 System Architecture of the SDS Knowledge Portal

The SDS Knowledge Portal consists of the following main components: (1) the SDS
ontologies, stored in an Allegrograph RDF Store; (2) the SDS Ontology Server; and (3)
the Web portal front end. At the start-up of the SDS Knowledge Portal, the Web
application queries the SDS Ontology Server to retrieve a minimal set of information
(labels and subsumption relations) about all the concepts, and populates the portal with
this information. When the user accesses the portal and clicks on any concept of interest,
the application sends a request to the Ontology Server to retrieve, parse, and display
all information for this concept. Every time the portal submits a request to the SDS
ontologies, the Ontology Server translates the request into a SPARQL query, and sends

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

320 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

Figure 1 The main functional components of the SDS Knowledge Portal

the query to the Allegrograph RDF Store to retrieve the relevant triples. Next, the
Ontology Server parses the triples into a JSON serialization, and returns them to the
front end. The Web portal then interprets the JSON string, renders the content, dynami-
cally creates a page for the concept content, and displays the page in the user’s browser.
Figure 2 presents the system architecture and workﬂow of the SDS Knowledge Portal.

3.2 Browsing the SDS Knowledge Portal

The SDS Knowledge Portal provides the user with several ways to browse the SDS
ontologies. First, users can navigate the ontological hierarchy. Hierarchies are among the
most common paradigms for Web navigation and form an intuitive starting point,
especially for inexperienced users. The major components that were presented in Section
2.1 are reﬂected in the top categories of the hierarchy. Figure 3 shows these components,
with the “problem type” taxonomy expanded.

The ontology content can also be browsed by following non-taxonomic relations
among concepts. As mentioned before, the concepts in the SDS ontologies are heavily
interlinked via OWL object properties, facilitating the user’s exploration of the portal.
Browsing through such relations can be accomplished through hyperlinks on the Portal

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

321

Figure 2 System architecture and workﬂow of the SDS Knowledge Portal

Figure 3 Browsing the ontology through the ontology hierarchy and relations among
the concepts and instances

(automatically generated base on the property deﬁned in the ontology), highlighted in
blue in Figure 3.

Browsing can also be done graphically. Each concept page on the portal contains a
subgraph of the entire ontology graph showing the current concept and its relations. For
reasons of performance and readability, the portal only displays nodes and links that

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

322 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

Figure 4 Graphical ontology browsing via relationships

constitute the deﬁnition of the concept. Figure 4 shows the graph for Ecosystem Man-
agement Decision Support (EMDS), a spatial decision support system. It deﬁnes EMDS
by a software type, its relations to decision problem types, decision process steps,
methods and case studies, and various system capability related speciﬁcations. The user
can click on any node to navigate to that related concept.

The user can also browse the ontology content alphabetically via a glossary that is

automatically generated and populated from the ontologies; see Figure 5.

As mentioned above, accessing information about SDS resources is one of the major
services provided by the portal. Various categories of resources can be accessed via a
Resources menu, and the instances of a resource category can be browsed alphabetically
(Figure 6; they can also be searched, as explained below in Section 3.3).

3.3 Searching the SDS Knowledge Portal

Besides browsing, the SDS resources can be searched by specifying a set of constraining
criteria. The search criteria leverage the attributes and relations that are deﬁned for a
particular resource type in the SDS ontologies. For example, tools and models can be
searched based on decision problem types targeted, relevant domain knowledge model-
ing areas, methods and techniques implemented, as well as system-related criteria such as
platform or functional component. As the user selects values for the criteria, the search

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

323

Figure 5 Browsing the Glossary

Figure 6 Browsing the instances of data sources

is performed by dynamically ﬁltering ontology instances. Figure 7 shows the criteria
against which tools and models can be searched, with the “required functional compo-
nents” criterion value list expanded. It also shows the criteria that the user has speciﬁed
so far, and the tools remaining on the list that satisfy the speciﬁed search criteria.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

324 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

Figure 7 The multi-criteria tools and models search

The SDS resources can also be queried via a main search ﬁeld on the portal with
semantic-enabled search, instead of regular keyword search, by performing query expan-
sion (Bhogal et al. 2007). Query expansion is partly achieved by leveraging the synonym,
abbreviation, and acronym information encoded for the concepts in the ontology. The
search navigates the ontology graph by following the attributes and relations formally
deﬁned for particular resource types. A search for “AHP” (Figure 8) returns: the SDS
method AHP (Saaty 1988), tools that implement AHP, case studies in which AHP was
adopted, and publications that include AHP-related discussions. The search involves the
following steps: (1) ﬁnd the concept for the speciﬁed keyword (“AHP”) in the ontology
– in this case we ﬁnd the concept Analytical Hierarchy Process (with “AHP” as the
additional label); (2) determine the type of AHP (it is a SDS method); (3) invoke a search
route predeﬁned speciﬁcally for the concepts of the SDS methods type, which includes a
limited set of predicates which the ontology server checks, such as the implements
predicate for tools or the methodUsed predicate for case studies; (4) query the RDF graph
for related classes and instances based on this set of predicates; and (5) cluster the search
results list based on SDS resource types.

The semantic search leverages the subclass and sibling-class relations, as well as
other transitive relations deﬁned in the ontology, which is a more common means of

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

325

Figure 8 Semantic search

expanding a search query. For example, the user may search for a tool that implements
sensitivity analysis. In the SDS ontologies, sensitivity analysis is a method class with
subclasses aspatial sensitivity analysis, spatial sensitivity analysis, and global sensitivity
analysis. The ﬁrst two subclasses have additional subclasses. When the user searches for
tools that implement sensitivity analysis, the portal returns all the submethods of sensi-
tivity analysis and the tools that implement any of the methods.

4 Usage Scenarios for the Portal and Ontologies

Due to its ﬂexible user interface and broad range of resources, there are many different
ways and reasons to use the SDS portal and ontologies, and they were set up with
documentation, improved retrieval, and learning in mind. To demonstrate how our
system supports these tasks, this section brieﬂy discusses a retrieval and a learning use
case.

Domain experts, researchers interested in applying SDS methods, and students interested
in learning about SDS are likely to use the browsing and navigation interfaces of the

4.1 Learning Use Case

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

326 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

portal. To give a concrete example, a student may want to learn about planning and
decision workﬂows as an intuitive starting point for applying SDS as part of her research
(readers are invited to follow the directions starting at http://www.spatial.redlands.edu/
sds/). The Explore the Ontology frame contains a collapsible list of topics starting from
introductory topics over descriptions of methods up to useful resources. The frame gets
automatically enlarged on-mouse-over and the student navigates to the Planning and
Spatial Decision Process Workﬂows section via Planning and Spatial Decision Process.
The resulting page describes major workﬂow models and, among others, lists Steinitz’s
Framework. By following this hyperlink, the student accesses a new page that lists each
of the six process phases, contains a detailed illustration, a reference to the paper by
Steinitz (1990), and links to more detailed descriptions of each phase. To assist the
student in understanding whether this speciﬁc workﬂow model is relevant for his or her
work, the page also lists application domains and decision problem types. As the
researcher is interested in land use planning, Steinitz’s framework seems appropriate. By
following the domain link he or she can immediately learn about relevant software, e.g.
IDRISI Land Change Modeler, or read about related case studies, such as the Summit
County Lower Blue Subbasin Master Plan. The description of this study provides
detailed descriptions and links to relevant literature and lists lessons learned.

4.2 Search Use Case

In addition to browsing and navigating, some users may prefer a direct search. This is
especially the case for those experts and researchers who are familiar with SDS and want
to review appropriate methods and tools for their work. To give a concrete example, a
researcher may be interested in those tools that were created with wildlife management
and land use planning in mind and support suitability assessments. First, the researcher
types in “wildlife” in the topmost right search box. This results in a categorized overview
of all tools, data sources, case studies, and literature related to this query. As the
researcher does not want to check all provided tools by hand, he or she selects the Tools
and Models view from the Resources menu. The resulting page can be used to get an
overview of all tools within a feature matrix or to ﬁlter them by speciﬁc properties
deﬁned in the SDS ontologies. For instance, by selecting Land Use Planning and Suit-
ability Assessment as domain and problem type, respectively, the researcher receives a
ﬁltered list of tools. To further restrict the search, he or she ﬁlters tools by their costs and
selects free tools to ﬁnally review the Refuge GAP software in more detail.

5 Lessons Learned

While developing the SDS ontologies we faced an interesting trade-off between repre-
senting knowledge and facilitating browsing and searching (see Section 2.3). We had to
keep the information retrieval purpose in mind when designing the ontologies, while
staying true to the underlying knowledge structure as much as possible. The main lessons
we have learned from engineering these ontologies and the Knowledge Portal are as
follows. First, the scope of coverage should be restricted to the immediate areas of
expertise provided by the consortium, while links to external ontologies enrich the local
speciﬁcations and reuse previous work on the Semantic Web. Second, when designing
ontologies for a dynamic and growing research ﬁeld by a heterogeneous consortium,

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

327

following the rule of minimizing ontological commitments is crucial to ensure enough
ﬂexibility for future extensions. Third, labels and comments are not only key for
documentation but are important to ease search and browsing through the knowledge
portal. Fourth, and as suggested in the literature, the untangling, i.e. the introduction, of
multiple-taxonomic relations, should be done bottom-up by Semantic Web reasoners and
not manually during ontology engineering. Fifth, inverse and transitive relations are key
to improving navigation and inference, and keeping the size of the ontologies manage-
able. These relations should be inferred instead of deﬁned. Finally, our work supports the
claim (Baader et al. 2010) that when balancing knowledge representation and semantic
search, higher expressivity is not necessarily the major concern.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Spatial decision support is a dynamic and heterogeneous domain that beneﬁts from a
detailed description of its existing process workﬂows, methods and tools. Instead of
simply choosing a set of parameters to classify SDS resources, we developed ontologies
to capture the various aspects of spatial decision support ranging from decision prob-
lems, processes, methods and technology, over tools, models and data sources, to relevant
case studies and literature. We collected a representative set of SDS resources and
registered them against the parameters deﬁned in SDS ontologies.

SDS knowledge is represented by a set of ontologies that were developed in common
agreement among a large-scale consortium of researchers and practitioners from various
sub-domains of the ﬁeld. Driven by the needs to document the body of knowledge in
SDS, ease learning, and navigate through the portal, these ontologies provide a ﬂexible
conceptual framework for classiﬁcation and characterization and are interlinked with
other ontologies on the Semantic Web. By providing formal deﬁnitions, the ontologies
become common vocabularies for the broader SDS community to facilitate re-usability
and interoperability of SDS resources by reducing the risk of semantic mismatches.
The ontologies may also serve as the basis for intelligent SDS applications that provide
guidance for tasks such as conﬁguring a SDS system by suggesting appropriate methods,
tools, and models based on the parameters of a speciﬁc decision problem. Our frame-
work also contributes to the establishment of a standard for describing SDS services that
can be used in Web registries to facilitate service interoperability and chaining as
proposed by the Open Geospatial Consortium.

The SDS ontology development work will continue for the foreseeable future.
Currently there is interest within the user community in deepening the knowledge in the
ontology for targeted knowledge domains, and we have started to do this for the domain
of urban planning. Given our purpose of serving SDS, we are only including concepts
that are pertinent to planning and decision making in this domain. Besides deeper
development of a particular ontology branch, many existing concepts have very skeletal
deﬁnitions that can beneﬁt from further development. Another important area of future
work is related to handling dialect differences across user communities, such as scientists
vs. land managers vs. designers. Although we will have a standard label for a concept, we
can accommodate alternate word usage by presenting the preferred term for this concept
in a view tailored for a particular user community, analogous to using different language
labels in the ontology. An important future direction is to leverage more of the logical
structure in the ontology for reasoning (e.g. the relations between decision problem types

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

328 N Li, R Raskin, M Goodchild and K Janowicz

and decision process workﬂows, methods, and various resources), and to develop more
intelligent applications that provide automatic guidance to the user in selecting suitable
SDS resources depending on the characteristics of their actual decision problems. As
proposed by the SEAL approach (Maedche et al. 2003), integrating semantic similarity
to improved navigation and retrieval (Janowicz et al. 2011) is a next step for the portal.
With the Allegrograph triple store and SPARQL support in place, we are also considering
serving the instance data as Linked Data for science and education. Finally, a systematic
user review on both the SDS ontologies and the Knowledge Portal would be useful to
obtain more insight for improving the content as well as usability of the Portal.

Note

1 The authors dedicate this article to the memory of co-author Rob Raskin, who passed away
prior to its publication. Rob’s research at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory encompassed the
ﬁelds of atmospheric science and GIScience. He was also interested in semantic interoperability
and the development of common ontologies to foster sharing heterogeneous scientiﬁc data
across knowledge communities. He founded the well-known Semantic Web for Earth and
Environmental Terminology (SWEET), a modular and extensible set of upper-level ontologies
for Earth system science. Rob was a founding member of the Spatial Decision Support (SDS)
Consortium and a major contributor to the development to the SDS ontology. His presence will
be deeply missed by colleagues in many ﬁelds to which he has made signiﬁcant contributions.

Naicong Li’s work was supported in part by funds provided by the U.S. Army Research
Laboratory and the U.S. Army Research Ofﬁce under grant number W911NF-07-1-
0392.

Acknowledgements

References

Armstrong M P 1993 Perspectives on the development of group decision support systems for

locational problem solving. Geographical Systems 1: 69–81

Baader F, Lutz C, and Turhan A Y 2010 Small is again beautiful in description logics. Künstliche

Intelligenz 24(1): 25–33

Batty M 2008 Planning Support Systems: Progress, predictions, and speculations on the shape of
things to come. In Brail R (ed) Planning Support Systems for Cities and Regions. Cambridge,
MA, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy: 3–30

Bhogal J, Macfarlane A, and Smith P A 2007 Review of ontology-based query expansion. Infor-

mation Processing and Management 43: 866–86

Densham P J 1991 Spatial decision support systems. In Maguire D J, Goodchild M F, and Rhind
D W (eds) Geographical Information Systems: Principles and Applications. New York, John
Wiley and Sons: 403–12

De Roure D and Hendler J A 2004 E-Science: The grid and the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent

Systems 19(1): 65–71

Fernandez M, Gomez-Perez A, and Juristo N 1997 METHONTOLOGY: From ontological
art towards ontological engineering. In Proceedings of the Fall 1997 AAAI Symposium,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: 33–40

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

Ontology-Driven Portal for Spatial Decision Support

329

Goodchild M F and Glennon J A 2008 Representation and computation of geographic dynamics.
In Hornsby K S and Yuan M (eds) Understanding Dynamics of Geographic Domains. Boca
Raton, FL, CRC Press: 13–30

Harvey F, Kuhn W, Pundt H, Bishr Y, and Riedemann C 1999 Semantic interoperability: A central

issue for sharing geographic information. Annals of Regional Science 33: 213–32

Jankowski P and Nyerges T 2001 Geographic Information Systems for Group Decision Making.

New York, Taylor and Francis

Jankowski P, Nyerges T, Robischon S, Ransey K, and Tuthill D 2006 Design considerations and
evaluation of a collaborative, spatio-temporal decision support system. Transactions in GIS
10: 335–54

Janowicz K, Raubal M, and Kuhn W 2011 The semantics of similarity in geographic information

retrieval. Journal of Spatial Information Science 2: 29–57

Leung Y 1997 Intelligent Spatial Decision Support Systems. Berlin, Springer-Verlag
Ligmann-Zielinska A and Jankowski P A 2008 Framework for sensitivity analysis in spatial
multiple criteria evaluation. In Cova T J, Miller H J, Beard K, Frank A U, and Goodchild
M F (eds) Geographic Information Science: Fifth International Conference (GIScience 2008),
Park City, Utah. Berlin, Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 5266: 217–33
Maedche A, Staab S, Stojanovic N, Studer R, and Sure Y 2003 SEmantic portAL: The SEAL
approach. In Fensel D, Hendler J A, Lieberman H, and Wahlster W (eds) Spinning the
Semantic Web. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press: 317–59

Malczewski J 1999 GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis. New York, John Wiley and Sons
Malczewski J 2006 GIS-based multicriteria decision analysis: A review of the literature. Interna-

tional Journal of Geographical Information Science 20: 703–26

Raskin R G and Pan M J 2005 Knowledge representation in the Semantic Web for Earth and

Environmental Terminology (SWEET). Computers and Geosciences 31: 1119–25

Saaty T L 1988 The Analytical Hierarchy Process: Decision Making for Leaders in a Complex

World. Pittsburgh, PA, University of Pittsburgh Press

SDS Consortium 2008 SDS Knowledge Portal. WWW document, http://www.spatial.redlands.edu/

SDS Consortium 2011 Spatial Decision Support Consortium, WWW document, http://www.

sds/ontology/?n=SDSSAbout:SDS

spatial.redlands.edu/sds/consortium/

Shvaiko P and Euzenat J 2008 Ten challenges for ontology matching on the move to meaningful
Internet systems. In Meersman R and Tari Z (eds) On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems (OTM 2008). Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 5332:
1164–82

Sieber R 2006 Public participation geographic information systems: A literature review and frame-

work. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 96: 491–507

Simon H A 1960 The New Science of Management Decision. New York, Harper and Row
Steinitz C A 1990 Framework for theory applicable to the education of landscape architects (and

other environmental design professionals). Landscape Journal 9: 136–43

Suominen O, Viljanen K, and Hyvönen E 2007 User-centric faceted search for semantic portals. In
Franconi E, Kifer M, and May W (eds) The Semantic Web: Research and Applications. Berlin,
Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 4519: 356–70

Zhu X and Healey R 1992 Towards intelligent spatial decision support: integrating geographical
information systems and expert systems. In Proceedings of the GIS/LIS’92 Symposium, San
Jose, California: 877–86

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(3)

