int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 8, 715± 738

Research Article

Actor-networks and implementation: examples from conservation GIS
in Ecuador

EUGENE W. MARTIN
University of Washington, Department of Geography, Box 353550 Seattle WA
98195-3550, USA
ewmartin@u.washington.edu students.washington.edu/ewmartin
CommEn Space: The Community and Environment Spatial Analysis Center
1305 4th Ave. Seattle WA 98101, USA
eugene@commenspace.org; www.commenspace.org

Abstract. Recommendationsfor implementation and evaluation of Geographical
Information Systems (GIS) can bene(cid:142) t from a broader theoretical foundation to
support investigation, understanding and improvement. This paper discusses
Actor-Network Theory (ANT) as a framework to delineate and evaluate the
social and technical interactions involved in GIS implementation. The proposed
process traces actor-network interactions through texts, technical objects, people,
money and control. Actor alignment, actor-network stability and obligatory points
of passage are evaluated to compare actor-networks. Case study research on
conservation GIS implementation in Ecuador illustrates these methods. The
strength of these actor-networks is examined through analysis of actors’ inter-
actions and the presence and function of an obligatory point of passage. Stronger
actor-networks exhibit alignment among actors, co-location of an obligatory
point of passage with the center of calculation and credit sharing.

1.

Introduction
Recommendations for implementation and evaluation of geographical informa-
tion systems (GIS) can bene(cid:142) t from a broader theoretical foundation to support
investigation, understanding and improvement. Traditional prescriptions for GIS
implementation frequently consist of sequential steps to guide establishment of GIS
(Huxhold 1991, Antenucci 1991 ).
primarily in local municipal organizations
Evaluations of success in GIS implementation have been based on accomplishment
of organizational objectives (Guptill et al. 1988 ), data availability and data accuracy
(Budic 1994 ). Other measures of success are subject to perspectives and judgments
based on personal eŒects of GIS implementation and may change with the passage
of time (Campbell and Masser 1995, 110 ). Examination of GIS diŒusion, social
networks and ‘technical communities’ (Assimakopoulos 1997 ) emphasizes the roles
played by people, often leaving the larger in(cid:143) uences and details of funding, politics
and technology interactions by the wayside. These research eŒorts have contributed
greatly to identifying the factors that play signi(cid:142) cant roles in aŒecting GIS
implementation.

Research on GIS implementation contexts have expanded understanding of the
prescriptive approach to implementation and explored the role of the organization

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

716

E. W. Martin

(1991 )

and its politics. Campbell
identi(cid:142) es three preconditions for the eŒective
utilization of computers for urban planning: a clearly de(cid:142) ned information manage-
ment strategy, commitment of organization personnel and organizational and envir-
onmental stability. Campbell and Masser (1995 ) introduce three implementation
perspectives that shape organization’s eŒorts to establish GIS: technological deter-
minism, managerial rationalism and social interactionism. With respect to politics,
Pinto and Azad (1994 ) demonstrate the potential of Public Organization Theory to
advance positive management of GIS implementation. Like the implementation step
approach, these eŒorts remain focused on the public institution and municipal agency
contexts. This emphasis on the organization as the implementation context hinders
treatment of the multifaceted relationships that exist between internal and extended
elements of the organization in social, technical and political arenas.

The di(cid:141) culty in guiding and evaluating GIS implementation stems from the
social-technical interaction nature of GIS. The importance of interaction between
social and technical elements has been recognized in implementing information
technology (Orlikowski and Robey 1991, Orlikowski 1992 ) and GIS (Innes and
Simpson 1993, Campbell 1996 ). Orlikowski (1992 ) introduced a ‘structural model of
technology’ as a conceptual and theoretical model to allow a deeper understanding
of technology and organization interactions. Similarly, Pinto and Onsrud (1997 )
consider evaluating successful system implementation using approaches
from
Information Systems and Management Information Systems and point out their
utility with respect to GIS. Again, these approaches are limited in their ability to
treat interactions that extend beyond organizational boundaries to include speci(cid:142) c
contextual elements such as coalitions of organizations, interactions with hardware,
software and data providers, and end users’ information needs and capabilities.

This paper discusses Actor-Network Theory (ANT) as an alternative framework
to identify and examine the extended collection of actors and interactions associated
with a GIS implementation process. By removing the limitations imposed by categor-
ies and compartmentalization of human activities, ANT extends the analysis scope
to include a greater range of entities and in(cid:143) uences aŒecting GIS implementation.
By considering the actors participating in the implementation and operation of GIS
as components of an actor network, ANT is shown to support a broader understand-
ing of the context for GIS implementation as well as contributing institutional,
political and technical linkages.

Theory development to support analysis and understanding of GIS must be
applicable in all contexts of
implementation and application. Research on GIS
implementation has frequently focused on established public and government agen-
cies situated in western industrialized countries where the majority of GIS deploy-
ments have been concentrated. Outside of this realm the diŒusion and adoption of
GIS in new implementation contexts is increasing. The challenges encountered while
employing GIS in non-western contexts are well known (Dunkerly 1986, Taylor
1991, Fox 1991, Hastings and Clark 1991, Yeh 1991, Poole 1995, Warren 1995, Dunn
et al. 1997 ) and the use of GIS by grassroots conservation organizations is being
investigated (Sieber 1997 ). In light of these developments, current research and
construction of theoretical frameworks must be capable of addressing the diversity
of actors and interactions that are encountered in expanding implementation
contexts.

The applied portion of this paper focuses on GIS supporting conservation
resource management activities based in Quito, Ecuador. This

and natural

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

717

implementation context is representative of eŒorts to resolve growth and resource
management issues in countries where GIS is new technology. Conservation initiat-
ives in Ecuador are introduced followed by the case study methods. The case study
results and analysis include descriptions of the four participant GIS implementations,
their actors and interactions, associated actor-network diagrams and a comparative
analysis. The (cid:142) nal section presents conclusions and suggestions for new research
directions.

2. How to trace actor networks

is a framework for

Actor-Network Theory (ANT)

investigating society-
technology interactions. This research framework was developed by studies in
Science, Technology and Society (STS) for tracing heterogeneous networks of actors
and their interactions involved in the production of science and technology (Latour
1987, Callon et al. 1996 ). In expanding the scope of analysis to include any in(cid:143) uential
element associated with the production of technology the creators of ANT emphasize
description at the expense of explanation. They advocate approaching technology
research without the limiting arti(cid:142) cial divisions other disciplines erect between
human, non-human, science, nature and society. To apply ANT is to assert that
knowledge is local and socially constructed and society is created by science and
vice versa.

One of the most important works on ANT is Science in Action by Bruno Latour
(1987 ). In this book, Latour addresses the interaction of technical and social content
in scienti(cid:142) c activity and lays out a coherent research methodology for following
scientists at work. Investigators utilizing ANT have engaged in empirical studies of
science and society aimed at uncovering the processes that produce scienti(cid:142) c repres-
entations (Callon 1985, 1991, Law 1985, 1991, Latour 1987, 1992, Akrich 1992, Bijker
and Law 1992 ).

Since all interactions between humans are mediated through objects of one type
or another (Law 1992, p. 383 ), ANT accepts humans, non-humans and their interme-
diaries as actors. By removing the analytical divide between humans and objects, we
are better able to examine the nature of interactions that are the building blocks of
networks both within and beyond organizations (Latour 1991, 1992, Law 1992 ).
The perspective shifts the analytic focus from the organization to the characteristics
and behaviour of actor interactions between elements of society and techno-science.
The justi(cid:142) cation in this radical view is that if we want to know the origins of power
and structure, then we must consider a broader range of components that collaborate
and cooperate in their creation, proliferation and persistence.

As a recently developed research framework being applied to the diverse and
often controversial topics of science and society, ANT is in a state of (cid:143) ux (Law 1997,
Latour 1999 ). Another STS approach related to ANT that considers interactions
between science and society is social worlds and arenas theory (Strauss 1978, Becker
1982, Clarke 1990, 1991 ). While both of these theoretical approaches are ‘construc-
tionist, relativist and focused on relations among actors’ (Clarke and Montini 1993,
p. 45), ANT encourages examination of speci(cid:142) c actors’ interactions. Social worlds
and arenas theory adopts a broader perspective concerned with negotiated social
order and the distribution of power (Clarke 1990, 1998 ). The components of ANT
put forth and employed in this paper are strongly in(cid:143) uenced by social worlds and
arena theory, especially with regard to issues of control and power. Despite this
extension of the theory, this research endeavor remains an ANT analysis because

718

E. W. Martin

the fundamental unit of analysis is the actor-network, and not the larger overarching
social structure.

2.1. ANT components and supporting concepts

Literature on the development and application of ANT oŒers a suite of useful
and practical elements to delineate and characterize actor networks. While some of
these concepts are longstanding in the practice of ANT, their derivation, interpreta-
tion and development are not entirely without contention. The interpretation of
ANT concepts presented herein re(cid:143) ects an eŒort to bring their utility to bear for
investigation of GIS actor-networks. Anticipating that most of these concepts are
new to readers unfamiliar with ANT, I brie(cid:143) y introduce them here.

Interactions between actors are the primary building blocks of actor-networks
and their many manifestations are called ‘translations’ (Callon 1985, Latour 1987,
1997 ). Between human actors, the translation of interests is roughly analogous to
commitment and the negotiation of shared interests. Between humans and objects,
translation occurs, for example, during design when the object is imbued with its
purpose, program or script in how it interacts or aŒects other actors (Akrich 1992 ).
Further translation takes place between the object and the actors it encounters as
the initial program or script is altered through interaction. Actors that are strongly
aligned through translation each share a vested interest in the activities of the other
and form durable interactions. Poorly aligned actors require frequent negotiation of
their interactions or may cease to interact. Challenges to the alignment between
actors in a network are termed ‘trials by strength’ (Latour 1987, pp. 74–79).

Interactions between actors related to the production or support of technology
are segments that together form an actor network. Convergence is a special case of
translation that aligns the elements in a network (Callon 1991 ). In some cases, actor-
networks can become so transparent or accepted that they are no longer recognized.
In this case, alignment and durability lead to punctualization, a point where the
network supporting an actor disappears from view. This takes place when the
network components that are responsible for the production of objects or perform-
ance of functions are summed up in symbols or artefacts that encapsulate the network
(Callon 1991 ). In the case of technology, punctualization takes the form of a ‘black
box’ (Latour 1987 ).

ANT employs a number of conceptual elements that connect actors and transcend
prede(cid:142) ned categorizations. Star and Griesemer (1989, p. 393 ) introduce boundary
objects as ‘objects which are plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the constraints
of several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain common identity
across all sites’. Harvey and Chrisman (1998 ) demonstrate the utility of the boundary
object concept to understand the interwoven relationships between people and
organizations in the localized construction of GIS. They explore wetlands and
technical standards as boundary objects that connect multiple agencies despite
persistent disagreements over de(cid:142) nition, measurement and implementation. Although
they may be contentious, boundary objects play an important role in stabilizing
institutional relationships.

Latour introduces the ‘center of calculation’ as a location where the accumulation,
synthesis and analysis of observations to yield greater understanding (Latour 1987,
pp. 215–57). He illustrates this concept with La Pe´rouse’s voyage of cartographic
exploration and the collection of ‘immutable mobiles’ (Latour 1990 ). La Pe´rouse is
shown to be successful only when his inscriptions of the landscape are returned to

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

719

France where they can be presented and combined with other observations. Today’s
cartographic centres of calculation are often supported by GIS technology where
data layers are inscriptions that are ‘...mobile, (cid:143) at, reproducible, still and of varying
scales, they can be reshu‚ ed and recombined’ (Latour 1990, p. 45).

Inscription devices are technical artifacts that record, and thus translate, nature,
particularly in a visual representation (Latour 1987 ). Scientists use a multitude of
instruments that make nature ‘accessible’ through the inscription of measurements
as graphs, illustrations or maps. Inscription devices often punctualize the inscription
device’s actor-network and natural phenomenon being inscribed in the resulting
graphic representation. In relation to a GIS actor-network, inscription devices are
potent boundary objects that extend the collection of actors participating in an actor
network. Information derived from satellite imagery is common in land use data
sets, yet the process, techniques and actor-network that accountable for the data are
commonly punctualized as a citation or reference to data sources.

Another important theoretical element in describing an actor-network is the
‘obligatory point of passage’, a node which acts as an intermediary between networks
or network components. A strong obligatory point of passage exercises control over
resources and is able to claim responsibility for the success of the network (Law and
Callon 1992, p. 46). As a connective and controlling feature, the presence and function
of an obligatory point of passage varies from network to network yet plays an
important role in alignment and durability (table 1).

Co-location of the obligatory point of passage with a the centre of calculation,
where control over resources coincides with the management and analysis of multiple
data sources, may result in an especially strong actor network depending on the
nature of constituent actors’ interactions. In assessing the contribution of the obligat-
ory point of passage to the nature of an actor network, the strength and nature of
interactions among individual actors must be taken into account.

2.2. W hat circulates?

The methodological approach to investigate actor-networks is to observe and
record the interactions, connections and eŒects of actors involved in the production
of techno-science (Latour 1987 ). The di(cid:141) culty in accomplishing this task is the
overwhelming multitude of possible interactions and circulating entities that

Table 1. Potential advantages and disadvantages in the function of an obligatory point of
passage in an actor-network.

Strong

Weak

Advantage

Disadvantage

Controls the network
Perpetuates network existence
Maintains interaction with
participating actors

Network success inextricably
linked to Success of the
obligatory point of passage

Distributed responsibility greater
circulation
Flexibility of interaction

Competing channels between
actors circumvent resource
control and responsibility for
success
Competing obligatory points of
passage can fracture a
functioning network

720

E. W. Martin

constitute an actor-network. Michel Callon (1991 ) has identi(cid:142) ed four main types of
action intermediaries that circulate, align and de(cid:142) ne scienti(cid:142) c networks:

E Texts
E Technical artefacts
E Human beings
E Money

In relating interest and arranging support for a particular perspective on a
phenomenon, the scienti(cid:142) c text de(cid:142) nes ‘the skills, objects and relations of heterogen-
eous entities’ (Callon 1991, p. 136). Latour (1987 ) recognizes scienti(cid:142) c publications
as means to enrol, support, and extend networks. These scienti(cid:142) c texts represent
network associations through the citations and references that support the research.
Scienti(cid:142) c publications also document credit for success in research and investigation,
an important factor in acquiring or maintaining control over resources (Latour and
Woolgar 1979 ). Non-scienti(cid:142) c texts such as contracts, internal reports, memos and
progress reports also serve as intermediaries that can document actor interactions
and establish credit. Information products such as graphs, maps and data base
records can be considered texts for their ability to represent relationships between
heterogeneous entities.

Technical objects align networks through programs of action (Akrich 1992,
Latour 1992 ). A program of action dictates the resources required for the object to
function, the skills an operator must possess to control and direct the object and
the intended task the object was designed to accomplish. Examining the program of
action of a technical object can serve as a means to identify ine(cid:141) cient, inappropriate
or counter productive linkages that weaken a network. Human actors’ programs
of action derive from multiple sources such as social position, job description, respon-
sibility, credit among peers, acquired skills and knowledge, desire, belief and
even biological need. Position and function of human actors in an actor-network
is predicated upon an appropriate set of acquired or innate abilities and the
responsibility to interact with speci(cid:142) c actors in the network.

Money as an action intermediary bridges the gap between actors with a vested
interest in an actor-network and capacity to do work (Callon 1991 ). Money in the
context of direct funding, sales or venture capital becomes translated into orders,
actions and recommendations. The circulation of money transformed into action is
representative of alignment between those actors providing the (cid:142) nancial resources
and the output or work accomplished by the actor-network. Money in and of
itself is a powerful boundary object that may be traced through textual action
intermediaries such as receipts, bills of sale and contracts.

In ‘Aramis, or, The Love of Technology’, Latour (1996 ) describes a failed trans-
portation initiative in France, demonstrating the multiple levels of interactions and
in(cid:143) uences upon a network. Latour found that taken individually, money, politics or
technological reasoning was insu(cid:141) cient to explain the failure of the network.
Learning from this example, control should be a consideration in tracing an actor-
network. The need to address and assess control or power relationships between
actors has been recognized within social worlds and arenas theory (Clarke 1991,
Fujimura 1992, Garrety 1997 ). The power relationships examined through social
worlds and arenas theory revolve around the human social activities that lead
to the construction of
legitimacy, negotiation of social order, representation of
others, and imposition of perspectives. In some situations control may be an action

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

721

intermediary, in others it might be better considered as an interaction modi(cid:142) er. The
multiple levels and degrees of control present in an actor-network make exhaustive
tracing of control impossible, but remaining sensitive to the presence and eŒects of
control upon portions of a network is a valuable contribution. The purpose of
including control as an intermediary in delineation of an actor-network is to expose
power relationships that might otherwise be ascribed to technology.

2.3. Applying ANT to GIS

The (cid:142) rst step in applying ANT is to generate an initial functional sketch of the
various actors, human, non-human, social, cultural, and technical, that interact in
an actor-network. With respect to GIS, examination of interactions surrounding the
hardware and software boundary objects will identify many important actors. The
relationships between people, institutions and resources that support and perpetuate
these technical artefacts constitutes the core portion of a GIS actor-network and is
accountable for its operation. Data resources in a GIS are inscriptions that link the
technology core actor-network to displaced landscapes and landscape processes
through representation. Finally, the circulation of maps, data layers and reports
generated at the GIS centre of calculation links information consumers to the GIS
actor-network.

Thus far, the delineation of a GIS actor-network is principally a descriptive
exercise and is generally consistent with traditional applications of ANT (see Law
1997 ). The principal accomplishment at this point is in recognizing the linkages
between social and technical actors that comprise an operating GIS. Considered
within the larger contexts of the actor-network, culture and society, speci(cid:142) c actor
interactions can be identi(cid:142) ed as more important than others in stabilizing an actor-
network. Taken as a whole, examination of the actor-network’s interactions can
identify and characterize the presence and function of an obligatory point of passage.
With structural analysis of an actor-network, it is possible to identify problematic
translations between actors and consider their impact upon a GIS actor-network.

3. Case study setting: Ecuador

Before relating the research methods employed to apply ANT in studying GIS,
a contextual foundation to the case study setting is required. This section introduces
the importance of Ecuador’s biological resources, the emergence of conservation
organizations and their motivations to acquire and implement GIS.

3.1. Biological resources

Ecuador is a small country (283 560 km2) with a population of about 12 million
that straddles the equator on South America’s west coast between Peru and
Colombia. Possessing portions of the upper Amazon basin, the Andes Mountains,
Paci(cid:142) c coastal lowlands and the Galapagos Archipelago, Ecuador is one of the most
biologically diverse countries on Earth (Myers 1988, USAID/Ecuador 1989 ). EŒorts
to protect this biodiversity have resulted in the establishment of twenty state owned
national parks and protected areas with plans to establish more. Combined, these
areas cover more than four million hectares, roughly 16% of the nation’s territory,
and have signi(cid:142) cant national and international importance (Ponce and Huber 1982,
Figueroa 1995, Varea et al. 1997 ) ((cid:142) gure 1).

Activities to preserve, conserve and manage Ecuador’s protected areas have
local and international Non

been undertaken by the Government of Ecuador,

722

E. W. Martin

Figure 1. Ecuador’s main geographic regions and system of national protected areas (Original
map Instituto Geogra(cid:142) co Militar, 1996).

Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Management of Ecuador’s protected areas
was the responsibility of the Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganaderia (MAG) until
August 1992 and is now the responsibility of the Instituto Ecuatoriano Forestal y
de Areas Naturales y Vida Silvestre (INEFAN)
(INEFAN/World Bank 1993 ).
Financial and technical support has been oŒered to INEFAN from a variety of
international sources, principally USAID, CARE, The Nature Conservancy, and
to increase this agency’s eŒectiveness in
Wildlife Conservation International,
administering the protected areas (INEFAN/World Bank 1993, pp. 7–8).

3.2. Environmental NGO’s

In addition to the expansion of governmental and international conservation
initiatives in Ecuador (USAID/Ecuador 1989, USAID/Ecuador 1994, pp. 97–104)
there has been explosive growth in number of conservation oriented NGOs.
Fundacio´ n Natura, Ecuador’s (cid:142) rst environmental NGO, was founded in 1978 and
at least 24 more NGOs were established between 1984 and 1993 (Meyer 1993,
pp. 200–202). The arrival of these groups in the local conservation arena in Ecuador
indicates that there were voids not addressed by existing conservation eŒorts. The
proliferation of these organizations can also be attributed to the availability of

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

723

funding from a variety of international sources interested in the conservation of
tropical biological resources (Meyer 1993 ). International and donor agencies saw
the appearance of Ecuadorian environmental NGOs as a means to circumvent
institutional barriers in local government and a chance to broaden their impact in
communities. These organizations participate in a broad spectrum of activities includ-
ing environmental education,
legal reform, buŒer zone management, alternative
income generation, promotion of agroforestry, biological monitoring and investi-
gation, ecotourism and sustainable ecosystem management. While many of these
activities are focused on areas other than the national parks and protected areas,
some of these organizations work directly in the protected areas. A great number of
projects conducted by NGOs are done under contract for or in co-operation with
INEFAN (USAID/Ecuador 1994, p. 98). Examples of these are the creation and
implementation of management plans, delimitation of park boundaries, socio-
economic studies of communities within park boundaries and training programs for
park personnel.

3.3. Enter GIS

In Latin America, initiation of GIS implementation and use began in the early
1970s (Smith 1992 ). Early GIS technology transfer in this region during the past
decade was facilitated by the Organization for American States (OAS), International
Development Bank (IDB), United Nations Developmet Program (UNDP), and the
United States Agency for International Development, and was mainly associated
with natural disaster planning (Smith 1992 ). In 1996 there were twenty organizations
with GIS capability in Ecuador (CEPEIGE-PUCE 1996 ).

The growth and development of conservation GIS initiatives in Ecuador is the
result of increased demand for information gathering and analysis services to support
conservation planning and decision-making processes. Activities such as prioritizing
areas for conservation eŒorts, design of management plans for national parks,
improving administration of protected areas and establishing baselines for mon-
itoring projects are locally recognized as able to bene(cid:142) t from analysis of geographic
information (Fundacio´ n Natura 1991a, 1991b, 1995 ). GIS is viewed as an eŒective
solution to managing and visualizing information resources for the bene(cid:142) t of conser-
vation initiatives and the desire to acquire GIS technology and products among
conservation NGOs is widespread (Troya 1997 ). International funding organizations
are also interested in the potential of GIS to promote eŒective planning and mon-
itoring of Ecuador’s protected areas and biological resources. A number of organiza-
tions are providing resources or participating in the use of GIS to meet conservation
objectives through the support of local governmental or NGO projects, including
The Nature Conservancy (TNC), US Agency for International Development
(USAID), The World Bank, Conservation International
(CI), World Wildlife
Federation (WWF), and CARE.

4. Case study methods

The concepts and methods related earlier in this paper were applied to investigate
four conservation GIS initiatives in Quito, Ecuador. Quito, Ecuador’s capital, was
selected as the location for this case study because it is the centre of activity for
much of the nation’s conservation movement. Fieldwork, conducted during July and
August of 1997, included preliminary research, selection of participant organizations,
informant interviews and collection of supporting texts.

724

E. W. Martin

4.1. Organizations, informants and interviews

Preliminary research consisted of asking prominent members of Ecuador’s conser-
vation community to identify conservation organizations utilizing GIS to support
their activities. In addition to a list of conservation GIS initiatives, the preliminary
research stage also identi(cid:142) ed funding sources, clients, and other end users of GIS
information products. From this information, four conservation GIS initiatives, three
private non-pro(cid:142) t and one government contract were selected and invited to particip-
ate based on their importance in the conservation community and their level of
involvement with GIS. Each of the four organizations agreed to participate (table 2 ).
Each organization identi(cid:142) ed individuals that were the best informed about their
ongoing GIS activities for initial interviews: technicians and the project managers.
These persons provided information relating to the institutional context, history,
training, funding sources, clients and future directions of the individual projects.
Additionally, these informants identi(cid:142) ed others who might be able to oŒer alternative
perspectives on their GIS activities from an administrative, client or funding perspect-
ive. Organization administrators addressed the utility of GIS in the institution’s
greater goals, changes in the institution’s organizational structure as a result of GIS
implementation, changes in operational practices,
internal uses of the results or
products from their GIS and future directions in the growth of their GIS. Clients
and end users were interviewed to learn how they were making use of GIS information
products and if they were eŒective. Funding source representatives provided informa-
tion on their conservation agenda in Ecuador, their reasons for supporting the
development of GIS initiatives, their role as owners or creators of information and
data and how they were bene(cid:142) ting from their support of GIS. Three local private
GIS contractors providing data preparation services were also interviewed con-
cerning their activities and involvement with the participant conservation GIS initiat-
ives. Twenty-(cid:142) ve informants participated in thirty interviews. Some informants had
multiple relationships with one or more of the participant GIS initiatives (table 3).

Table 2. Conservation GIS initiatives that participated in the case study.

Name

EcoCiencia
Fundacio´ n Natura
Corporacio´n Centro de Datos para la Conservacion (1998)
CECIA/FEDEMA (1998)

Status

Private non-pro(cid:142) t
Private non-pro(cid:142) t
Private non-pro(cid:142) t
Private non-pro(cid:142) t
Government
Contract

Table 3. Categories of informant relationships to the participant conservation GIS initiatives.

Informant relationship:

GIS manager/technicians
Organization administrators
Clients/end users
Funding source representatives
Contributing private contractors

8
4
10
5
3

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

725

4.2. Supporting documentation

Every eŒort was made to acquire texts documenting these projects’ histories,
institutional arrangements,
funding, acquisition of technology resources and the
established roles of people. Of particular interest were intero(cid:141) ce memos, and contract
terms of reference that detailed the negotiations and contract governing a GIS
project. Project proposals, interim reports and summaries, particularly for the larger
funding sources and their local partners, were useful in illustrating various institu-
tional perspectives on GIS as well as the rationale and means for supporting GIS
technology transfer. Examples of map output from the projects were photographed
or photocopied when available.

4.3. Network diagrams

The interviews and supporting texts were examined to identify the actors particip-
ating in the implementation or operation of a speci(cid:142) c GIS and to characterize their
action intermediaries. These actors and their interactions were sketched in an associ-
ation diagram presenting a two dimensional visual overview of the actor-networks
supporting the individual GIS initiatives. While there are no established methods
for visual representation of actor-networks, the diagrams in this paper are loosely
based on the actor-network diagrams of Law and Callon (1992 ). Following
Orlikowski’s positioning of technology at the centre of organizational structure
(Orlikowski and Robey 1991, Orlikowski 1992 ), GIS technology is treated as a
closed black box at the centre of each actor-network (see (cid:142) gure 2). The actors
accountable for the GIS actor-network are located inside a grey square in the middle
of the diagram. Additional supporting actors that provide input resources are
arranged on the left and the recipients of information products or bene(cid:142) ts produced
by the GIS are on the right. Four categories of double-ended arrows signify the four
action intermediaries that connect the actors to the GIS technology and to each
other. These relationships are strictly topological: the length and direction of the
vectors representing action intermediaries have no meaning. In some cases, multiple
arrows are used to represent multifaceted interactions. Interactions that are character-
ized by the same action intermediary should not be considered equal within or across
diagrams; each interaction is de(cid:142) ned by the reciprocating exchange that takes place
between the involved actors.

Figure 2. EcoCiencia’s GIS implementation actor-network.

726

E. W. Martin

5. Case study results and analysis

The actor-networks of the four participant conservation GIS initiatives are pre-
sented in the following sections. Although the (cid:142) eld research investigated several
projects accomplished by these GIS initiatives, only the implementation actor-
networks are described and analysed here. A section is devoted to each organization
and presents a brief historical sketch, descriptions of each initiative’s actors and
interactions and an assessment of the actor network.

5.1. EcoCiencia

resource management

environmental education and natural

EcoCiencia is a non-pro(cid:142) t organization that supports ecological/biological
investigation,
in
Ecuador. Begun in 1990, they have grown into a multidisciplinary institution with
a holistic approach to conservation initiatives incorporating studies in anthropology,
sociology, economics and communication in their eŒorts. EcoCiencia has been a
longtime cooperating partner with Sustainable Use of Biological Resources (SUBIR).
SUBIR was a project funded in part by USAID and managed by a consortium of
CARE International with The Nature Conservancy (TNC) and The Wildlife
Conservation Society (WCS). Primary objectives of SUBIR were to provide a model
for eŒective natural resource management and institutional strengthening of local
conservation organizations. SUBIR Phase II (SUBIR II) began in 1994 and is
managed solely by CARE which provides technical support to local NGOs who in
turn provide implementation (USAID/Ecuador 1994, EcoCiencia 1997 ).

The actor-network that initiated the GIS laboratory at EcoCiencia is stabilized
by the strong interdependent relationships among a few actors. Initiated in 1992
during doctoral dissertation research by Rodrigo Sierra, the network is composed
of actors with a vested interest in each other’s success ((cid:142) gure 2). Sierra, a student at
Ohio State University under Larry Brown and Douglas Southgate, was investigating
land use and deforestation in north-western Ecuador (Sierra 19940. EcoCiencia
hosted Sierra’s research and received funding from USAID administered through
SUBIR to provided technology and data resources for this research. Ecociencia staŒ,
led by Fernando Rodriguez, also used the GIS and image technology to conduct
several small scale biological assessments utilizing remotely sensed data (Rodr´guez
et al. 1994a, 1994b, 1995 ). These additional projects were funded by SUBIR with
resources from USAID and the MacArthur Foundation.

The common accomplishment of this actor-network is the establishment and
operation of a GIS lab at EcoCiencia, but each actor engages in this network for
diŒerent reasons. USAID ful(cid:142) lls its contract with SUBIR, SUBIR satis(cid:142) es its mandate
to lead and strengthen local environmental organizations, Rodrigo Sierra completes
his dissertation and EcoCencia staŒbecome trained in GIS and produce their own
research. Alignment through funding is strong due to the compatible agendas of the
funding institutions (USAID, SUBIR and the MacArthur Foundation) and the
recipients (EcoCiencia and Sierra) who produce the work.

Another source of strength in this actor-network is the sharing of credit and
circulation of information products. The activities of this actor-network are punc-
tualized in several text documents: Sierra’s dissertation (1994 ), a book version of
Sierra’s research (1996 ), three reports from GIS supported ecological analyses
(Rodr´guez et al. 1994a, 1994b, 1995 ) and numerous maps. Publication of literature
for consumption by the scienti(cid:142) c/academic community is the frequent end product
of research and doing so legitimizes this GIS actor-network. Alignment with the

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

727

scienti(cid:142) c/academic community is strong due to association with and support from
Ohio State University.

Rodrigo Sierra functions as a weak obligatory point of passage that is co-located
with the centre of calculation (EcoCiencia’s GIS laboratory). His research activities
mobilize interactions with the other actors, a role analogous to the GIS champion,
but they do not interact exclusively with him. Interactions between USAID, SUBIR
and EcoCiencia predate the GIS actor-network and persist after conclusion of Sierra’s
research. These pre-established institutional relationships prove to be the most
durable interactions of the actor-network as they continue to sustain operation of
the laboratory after Sierra’s departure.

5.2. Corporacion Centro de Datos para la Conservacion Ecuador

The Corporacion Centro de Datos para la Conservacion—Ecuador (CDC
Ecuador) was created in 1993 as a private non-pro(cid:142) t NGO by The Nature
Conservancy (TNC), TNC local partner Fundacio´ n Natura, and Fundacio´n Jatun
Sacha. CDC Ecuador is a member of the South American Conservation Data Centers
sponsored by TNC (The Nature Conservancy 1998 ). The mission of CDC Ecuador
is to support the management and conservation of protected areas and rare ecological
communities at risk of disturbance through the collection, generation, processing
and diŒusion of information (CDC Ecuador 1998 ). Initial activities consisted of
Rapid Ecological Assesments (REA), a systematic method for gathering baseline
biodiversity information for selected ecologically sensitive areas. As CDC Ecuador
grew, a state of the art GIS was implemented with funding from TNC to support
spatial presentation and analysis of biological data. Marcelo Guevarra, a technician
with experience in remote sensing and GIS in European agencies and CLIRSEN,
the military space agency of Ecuador, was hired by CDC Ecuador to lead the new
GIS laboratory.

The fact that CDC Ecuador was fully funded and operational prior to engaging
in contracts with other organizations changes the dynamic of the supporting actor-
network. Without the signi(cid:142) cant barriers of cost associated with training and acquisi-
tion of equipment, the CDC is motivated more by an institutional mandate to
circulate information than a need to acquire resources and develop technical capabil-
ities and resources. This shifts the importance of the interactions in the actor-network
from the translation and alignment of funding sources to those interactions that
aŒect the production, delivery and use of information products developed by CDC
Ecuador.

((cid:142) gure 3). Fundacio´ n Natura,

The (cid:142) rst use of CDC Ecuador’s GIS was to support the preparation of the new
management plan for Podocarpus National Park in southern Ecuador (Guevarra
1997, personal communication)
the organization
responsible for developing the management plan for INEFAN, contracted with CDC
Ecuador to conduct a REA of the park and prepare the required cartographic
resources for the management plan. Speci(cid:142) cations for the spatial information prod-
ucts supporting the management plan were established in the contract terms of
reference between Fundacio´n Natura and INEFAN. These terms of reference required
eight thematic maps drawn to a scale of 1:100 000: base map, vegetation, hydrology,
geology and soils, ecosystems, land use, critical areas and management zones.

The resource inputs for this initiative came from a number of diverse actors.
Funding for the REA was provided by USAID while the cost of the cartography
was shared between the CDC and Fundacio´ n Natura. Aeromapa, a private (cid:142) rm in

728

E. W. Martin

Figure 3. The CDC implementation GIS actor-network.

Quito, diŒerentially corrected the (cid:142) eld positional data. Satellite imagery acquired
from CLIRSEN supported the creation of vegetation maps while data for geology,
soils and infrastructure were digitized from paper maps.

The primary end users of the information products produced by this actor-
network are Fundacio´ n Natura and INEFAN. Additional informal end users include
the CDC who retains the database, TNC who operate the Conservation Data Center
Network and Arco Iris, a conservation organization active in and around the national
park. Beyond the information products produced, the staŒmembers of the CDC
gained experience from the process and demonstrated their ability to manage a
complex project and produce professional results.

The strongest alignment in this GIS actor-network is between the CDC and its
funding source, TNC. They both share a vested interest in success of the project as
this will further the missions of both organizations and justify further funding. The
weakest alignment is between the CDC and INEFAN as they disagreed over the
speci(cid:142) cations in the maps to be delivered. The CDC produced vegetation maps that
went beyond the minimum information content detailed in the contract terms of
reference raising objections from INEFAN. A letter responding to the objection
explained the reason for the departure and the improved utility of the map supplied
(Ortiz 1996 ). In addition to the eight maps speci(cid:142) ed by the terms of reference, the
CDC produced an additional map of land occupancy, an intermediate layer produced
during analysis for the (cid:142) nal land use map. INEFAN’s resistance to progress and
cartographic innovation by the CDC is an expression of con(cid:143) ict between institutional
agendas: national park management versus analysis and dissemination of information
about natural resources.

Fundacio´ n Natura serves as an obligatory point of passage for this actor network
in their control over resources in the network and responsibility for production of
the management plan. The strength of this position is weakened since the (cid:142) nal
products are subject to review and approval by INEFAN. CDC Ecuador constitutes
the centre of calculation in its dual role of gathering and processing the information

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

729

resources about the park. Although important, this role is ancillary as it is encapsul-
ated within the larger eŒort to create the management plan. This relationship is
evident in the division of credit for products of the actor-network. The CDC is
credited for the mapping eŒort and their logo appeared on the maps. In the o(cid:141) cial
(cid:142) nal document authored by Fundacio´ n Natura and approved by INEFAN, the
eŒorts of the CDC are summed up in a single line of credit to the ‘Technical Team’
(INEFAN/Fundacio´n Natura 1997 ).

CDC Ecuador and their GIS laboratory continues to be funded by TNC and
has engaged in several other projects, including support for two other national park
management plans. In these subsequent activities the alignment with the funding
source remains stable and durable, but the obligatory point of passage and control
over the actor network is substituted, as other organizations were responsible for
authoring these management plans. The weak and renegotiated alignment between
the centre of calculation and the end users of the information products suggests that
this GIS actor-network could bene(cid:142) t from changes in interaction between these
actors. CDC Ecuador and INEFAN would both bene(cid:142) t from dialog where carto-
graphic standards are discussed and the potentials for information products to
support management decisions are explored. Terms of reference for the delivery of
information products re(cid:143) ecting the understanding between CDC Ecuador and
INEFAN would help to stabilize this weak interaction link in the network.

5.3. Fundacio´n Natura

Fundacio´ n Natura, Ecuador’s oldest environmental NGO, is known for its focus
on the social and political aspects of natural resource management. Their activities
lobbying
include promoting sustainable development, environmental education,
political and legal initiatives, eŒective management of Ecuador’s protected areas,
conservation of biodiversity, promoting management of urban environmental
resources and engaging in research to support these activities (Fundacio´n Natura
1998 ). The organization’s national o(cid:141) ce is located in Quito and they have three
local chapters in Quito, Guayaquil and Azogues.

Fundacio´ n Natura’s GIS was established in 1994 to meet the needs of their
Amazonia Project, which started in 1992. Roberto Cruz, a consultant to Fundacio´ n
Natura in charge of this project, proposed a GIS be established to incorporate
existing cartographic resources with other regional data to design comprehensive
management zones for Ecuador’s Amazon region ((cid:142) gure 4). Nixon Narvae´z, a geo-
graphy student at the Ponti(cid:142) cia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador (PUCE) studying
land use zoning in the Amazon, contributed to the design and implementation of
the GIS. The Amazonia project was originally funded by the IUCN (REDLAT 1996 )
and supported purchase of a computer for the GIS. The rest of the system was
assembled using resources from within Fundacio´ n Natura.

The Amazonia Project and development of the Amazonia database was cut short
when the IUCN suspended funding for the project in 1996. In an attempt to (cid:142) nish
the project, a contract for additional funding was negotiated with the government
organization Instituto de Ecodesarollo de la Amazonia (ECORAE). This funding
support was also cut short, ending the project. Existing results of the project and
the database were delivered to ECORAE, local municipal governments in the
Amazon region and indigenous communities with GIS capabilities.

The actor network that initiates Fundacio´ n Natura’s GIS exhibits co-location of
the centre of calculation with the obligatory point of passage, but the potential

730

E. W. Martin

Figure 4. Fundacio´ n Natura’s GIS implementation actor-network.

strength of this arrangement is undermined by alignment di(cid:141) culties with funding
sources and the information product end users. Fundacio´ n Natura’s ability to con-
tinue the project during an interruption of funding and (cid:142) nally complete the project
using internal resources illustrates the strength of
this co-location. Although
Fundacio´ n Natura has distributed digital data from the Amazonia project, alignment
with these end users appears to be weak. By providing funds, ECORAE had a vested
interest in the results, but not enough to see the project to completion. Likewise,
local municipal governments and indigenous communities were recipients of the
information products, but did not actively contribute to the productive activities
of the actor-network. In spite of these weak alignments, Fundacio´ n Natura has a
vested interest in circulating the project results to demonstrate success and accept
responsibility for completion of the project.

At the close of the Amazonia Project, Fundacio´ n Natura redirected the focus of
the GIS lab to internal information needs using internal resources. This change
helped to stabilize the GIS actor-network by removing unstable interactions with
actors from beyond the organization, but placed limitations on access to resources
for continued operation.

5.4. FEDIMA/CECIA

In 1995, INEFAN, with support from the Global Environmental Facility (GEF)
put out a request for proposals through the United Nations Development Program
(UNDP) to identify and evaluate protected forests and private, community and state
owned lands in southern Ecuador as potential protected areas. The contract required
a multidisciplinary approach incorporating biological, economic, social and legal
data with satellite imagery in a GIS. Two organizations, Fundacio´ n Ecuatoriana de
Investigacio´ n y Manejo Ambiental (FEDIMA) and La Fundacio´ n Ornitologica del
Ecuador (CECIA) teamed together and won the contract based partly on their
strength in using bird species as indicators of ecosystem health. CECIA is a local
partner of BirdLife International, an international ornithological conservation action
organization based in England (CECIA 1998 ). FEDIMA biologists participated in
the (cid:142) rst biological assessment of the Cordillera del Condor in 1993 and 1994
(Conservation International 1998 ). The contract was awarded in January of 1996,
but work did not begin until eight months later.

Christopher Canaday and Clemencia Vela, the authors of the FEDIMA/CECIA

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

731

proposal, assembled an actor-network with the required skills and resources to
complete the project ((cid:142) gure 5). Biological
inventories conducted by FEDIMA/
CECIA specialists, existing data from avifauna surveys (Conservation International
1998 ), and recent work by the Missouri Botanical garden were included in an
analysis of biodiversity. The locations of species occurrences were combined with
Holdridge life zone maps to identify concentrations of endemic species. Members of
the FEDIMA/CECIA technical team conducted social, economic and legal (cid:142) eld
surveys to assess the potential impacts of human activity on the success of potential
protected areas. Satellite images of southern Ecuador were acquired from CLIRSEN
and analysed to locate the remaining large tracts of undisturbed vegetation in the
region. Topographic maps from Ecuador’s Instituto Geogra(cid:142) co Militar (IGM ) were
used as base maps for the project providing a common spatial reference for GPS
(cid:142) eld observations. The biological and socio-economic data were compiled in a digital
database by INFOESPACIO, a private GIS consulting (cid:142) rm in Quito.

This GIS actor-network had numerous technical interactions that required re-
negotiation to maintain alignment. An initial set back to the project was di(cid:141) culty
acquiring promised satellite imagery from CLIRSEN. An antiquated data tape drive
and lack of writable CD’s caused an eight-month delay in delivery of the satellite
images. Without another alternative cost-eŒective source for the imagery, there was
no choice for the management team but to wait for the images to be delivered.

Unlike the three other GIS actor-networks investigated, this initiative did not
have a single centre of calculation. At the time of the contract, neither the funding
or contract organizations supported a functional GIS lab. Access to GIS technology
was made possible through a contract with INFOESPACIO and with equipment
owned by INEFAN, but had never been used. INEFAN’s hardware had been
purchased by GEF at the recommendation of a consultant, but no one at INEFAN
was quali(cid:142) ed to set up the system. Upon learning that this equipment was available,
the technical coordinator for FEDIMA/CECIA, Chris Canaday, was granted access
to conduct the satellite image analysis for the contract providing he set up the
workstation. While alignment with CLIRSEN as a data provider and access to GIS
technology were eventually stabilized, they required repeated negotiation. These
interactions undermine the strength of the FEDIMA/CECIA leadership as the oblig-
atory point of passage because they cannot eŒectively control these resources and
success of the project hinges on their availability.

Figure 5. The FEDIMA/CECIA/INEFAN/GEF GIS actor-network.

732

E. W. Martin

Poor alignment was also observed in interactions with the information end user,
INEFAN, through con(cid:143) icts in the contract terms of reference on potential protected
area criteria and cartographic speci(cid:142) cations. The criteria were established in the
contract terms of reference authored by the UNDP using content from INEFAN
(INEFAN/GEF 1996 ). Use of GIS to support the analysis was required, but the
speci(cid:142) c nature of the analysis procedure using GIS was not fully detailed. Thirteen
criteria in four categories were identi(cid:142) ed to support comparison of the potential
protected areas (table 4) exactly how to measure these criteria was not addressed.
While criteria such as uniqueness, naturalness, and social acceptance are important
to consider in planning a protected area, applying these criteria is situation speci(cid:142) c
and de(cid:142) es standardization.

Six maps were speci(cid:142) ed for the (cid:142) nal results: base map (drainage, topography,
population centres and roads), ecology (ecosystems and related wildlife), land use,
negative environmental impacts, proposed protected area boundaries, and tourism/
recreation value. All maps were required to be 1:100 000 scale with an acceptable
margin of error no more than 50 m. During preparation of the (cid:142) nal cartographic
products, the contract team determined these scale and accuracy requirements were
excessive for the project information content. The strict cartographic speci(cid:142) cations
were seen as an attempt by INEFAN to pursue a data development strategy at the
expense of the contracting organizations.

At the conclusion of the project, the disagreements over measurement criteria
and information speci(cid:142) cations threatened acceptance of the results by INEFAN.
Despite the criteria to standardize analysis and delivery of information resources,
the contracting organizations felt that the FEDIMA/CECIA team placed too much
emphasis on biological factors and the information resources and analysis of social,
economic and legal aspects were not su(cid:141) cient. This disagreement illustrates competi-
tion between FEDIMA/CECIA and INEFAN/UNDP/GEF as the obligatory points
of passage in this actor-network. FEDIMA/CECIA controls the execution of the
project yet it must operate under standards set in the terms of reference and (cid:142) nal
products are subject to approval by INEFAN/UNDP/GEF. Credit for the accom-
plishments of the actor-network cannot be shared because the results are in dispute
and neither party wants to recognize the contributions of the other.

Table 4.

INEFAN/GEF evaluation criteria for potential protected areas (INEFAN/GEF

1996).

Criteria category

Ecological

Educational/scienti(cid:142) c

Social/economic

Pragmatic

Criteria

Uniqueness
Diversity
Disturbance
Size
Access
Monitoring
Investigation
Demonstration
Recreation
Tourism
Scenic value
Urgency
Opportunity

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

733

The unstable technical interactions and competing centres of calculation in this
actor-network place the productivity of this actor-network in jeopardy. Like the
CDC Ecuador actor-network, standards and technical speci(cid:142) cations become conten-
tious and require repeated negotiation between the information provider and end
user. These di(cid:141) culties might be avoided if the information product speci(cid:142) cations
were established with participation of the information provider. Alternatively, the
underlying goals behind information product speci(cid:142) cations could be made public
and transparent so a contractor could make suggestions on the best means to
accomplish them. Uninformed parties who write unreasonable terms of reference
into a contract should expect di(cid:141) culty during execution and potential contractors
should know enough to avoid such contracts. Informed strategic planning on the
part of INEFAN to develop coherent geographic information policies to support
their needs in management of Ecuador’s protected areas would help to improve their
alignment with the GIS actor-networks in which they interact.

6. Conclusions and new directions

This investigation has demonstrated that application of ANT to study GIS
implementation produces useful insights into the eŒects and impacts of social inter-
actions surrounding GIS technology. ANT opens analysis of GIS to include diverse
social and technical actors that aŒect the nature of GIS implementation. Tracing
actor-networks permits examination of these actors’ interactions that contribute to
the durability and function of a GIS actor-network. Examination and comparison
of these networks show that they are all diŒerent despite similar topical domains.
This illustrates the important role that context plays in con(cid:142) guring GIS. Explanation
of why similar GIS implementations produce diŒerent outcomes is predicated on
detecting diŒerences in the constituent actors and their interactions.

Although this investigation only examined four GIS actor-networks that focus
on conservation issues in Ecuador, there are some patterns that are worth mentioning.
Unlike other actor-networks that converge to produce a technical artefact (see Bijker
and Law 1992 ), GIS actor-networks converge to produce information artefacts that
circulate. All of these actor-networks managed to produce information artefacts, but
there are marked diŒerences in their alignment with the various the end users.
Rodrigo Sierra and EcoCiencia produced information artefacts for the scienti(cid:142) c
community with which they are well aligned while Fundac´o´ n Natura made their
own eŒorts complete their project and deliver the results to users who might (cid:142) nd it
of value. Both CDC Ecuador and FEDIMA/CECIA struggled with expectations set
forth in contract language in delivery of their information artefacts. While all of
these implementations can be considered successful in circulating their work, they
exhibit degrees of success.

Alignment with resource actors and eŒective substitution of actors is another
pattern that may contribute to a GIS actor-network’s ability to create and circulate
information artefacts. The ability to substitute actors in a network is an eŒective
means to survive trials by strength (Latour 1987 ). Rodrigo Sierra leaves EcoCiencia
after completing his research, but the GIS lab continues to function as the institu-
tional relationships remain intact and other staŒtakes over his responsibilities. CDC
Ecuador maintains alignment with its funding source and continues to contribute
to the preparation of other national park management plans. Fundac´o´ n Natura
experienced three substitutions of funding sources yet still manages to produce data
products. In these examples, a weak obligatory point of passage and the ability

734

E. W. Martin

to substitute actors and resources is an important GIS actor-network quality. The
weak obligatory points of passage competing for strength in FEDIMA/CECIA
actor-network had few options for substitution of resources (satellite image access,
technology access) and disputed acceptance of the (cid:142) nal information products.

Successful circulation of information artefacts that credit the responsible actors
could be considered a measure of success and may lead to continuation or expansion
of the actor-network. EŒective geographical information products are potent allies
contributing to the creation of facts (Latour 1987, 1990 ). An actor-network that can
claim responsibility for the creation of an information artefact is proof that the actor-
network is operational. Sharing credit across the actors in the network is an import-
ant contribution to stabilizing actor-interactions where credit is valuable. Circulation
of an information artefact extends the GIS actor-network and further legitimizes its
existence. This circulation also acts like advertisement of the GIS actor-network’s
abilities and may lead to future stabilized interactions with funding sources and
clients that bring more resources to the actor-network. In the EcoCiencia GIS actor-
network, credit is important because the information artefacts are aimed at the
scienti(cid:142) c community. CDC Ecuador is willing to accept less credit for their work
with Fundac´o´ n Natura and INEFAN because their funding source is more secure
and part their mission is the diŒusion of information. Fundac´o´ n Natura works hard
to circulate their information artefacts after repeated funding di(cid:141) culties to because
it is a part of their mission statement and to demonstrate that their GIS is operational.
While stability in actor interactions is certainly an important contribution to the
stability of the entire actor-network, overall network structure plays a complimentary
role. These two aspects of actor networks need to be considered simultaneously to
understand why one actor network withstands its trials of strength and another does
not. Strong alignment with multiple and redundant interactions between constituent
actors can result in an actor network that lacks an obligatory point of passage, yet
is better able to withstands trials by strength. Presence of an obligatory point of
passage can contribute to network strength if it can mediate between actor-networks,
maintain interactions between actors and successfully promote circulation. This is
the case with EcoCiencia where Rodrigo Sierra, a weak obligatory point of passage,
can be eŒectively replaced with a new laboratory director. Sierra initiated interaction
among actors and a new lab manager will inherit these interactions. A strong
obligatory point of passage may be the Achilles heel of a network during a trial by
strength if the actor interactions cannot be maintained or substituted.

With respect to overall GIS actor-network structure, co-location of the obligatory
point of passage was observed as a possible indicator of network stability. While the
actual impact of co-location or separation on GIS actor-network stability depends
on context and actor interactions, examining this relationship is revealing about the
behaviour of a GIS actor-network. The GIS actor-networks for CDC Ecuador and
FEDIMA/CECIA exhibited separation and they both experienced di(cid:141) culties in
alignment with the intended end user. If the obligatory point of passage is a manage-
ment node that is not well versed in the capabilities and resource requirements of
GIS, then repeated negotiation with the centre of calculation will be required to
complete the objectives of the network. Conversely, co-location means the mobiliza-
tion of resources is informed by system requirements and credit for production of
information is more explicitly linked to the GIS.

Finally, this research suggests several new directions towards investigation of
interactions with ANT. GIS actor-networks positioned in a

GIS social-technical

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

735

variety of social contexts should be traced to verify repeatability and re(cid:142) ne the use
of ANT for this topic area. I expect other researchers would encounter a wider
variety of actor interactions that in(cid:143) uence the stability and durability of GIS actor-
networks than those observed in this investigation. Generalizing patterns of actor
interaction as predictive of GIS actor-network instability would require a large body
of research to establish correlation. It is worth noting that the use of ANT for
predictive or diagnostic purposes is quite unfaithful to ANT’s founding precepts
(Law 1997 ). For the moment, the best use of ANT for investigating GIS may be to
continue exposing the social interactions behind GIS operations so practitioners,
managers, theorists and researchers will be more sensitive to building stable GIS
actor-networks.

Adopting a longitudinal approach, ANT could support investigation of actor
interactions in response to shifts in GIS use, incorporation of new technologies,
developments in public policy or (cid:143) uctuation in availability of resources to sustain
GIS operations. Some of the most important challenges facing existing GIS installa-
tions are changes in technology and data resources. How these changes are intro-
duced to a GIS actor-network and how they aŒect network stability remains to be
investigated.

Acknowledgments

This research would not have been possible without the co-operation of the many
people involved with conservation GIS in Ecuador, especially Roberto Troya,
Marcelo Guevarra, Jennifer Swenson, Nixon Narvae´z, Clemencia Vela, and
Christopher Canaday. Supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant
98-10075, Nicholas Chrisman Principal Investigator. Stone Environmental Inc. of
Montpelier, Vermont provided funds for (cid:142) eldwork in Quito. Thanks to Nick
Chrisman, Francis Harvey and the three anonymous reviewers for their comments
on the draft versions of this paper.

References
Akrich, M., 1992, The de-scription of technical objects. Shaping T echnology/Building Society:
Studies in Sociotechnological Change, edited by W. E. Bijker and J. Law (Cambridge:
The MIT Press), pp. 205–224.

Antenucci, J. C., 1991, Geographic Information Systems: A Guide to the T echnology (New

York: Van Nostrand Reinhold).

Assimakopoulos, D., 1997, GIS diŒusion in Greece: the development of a Greek GIS commun-
ity. In Geographic Information Research: Bridging the Atlantic edited by M. Craglia
and H. Couclelis (London: Taylor and Francis), pp. 111–128.
Becker, H. S., 1982, Art Worlds (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Bijker, W. E., and Law, J., 1992, Shaping T echnology/Building Society: Studies

in

Sociotechnological Change (Cambridge: The MIT Press).

Budic, Z. D., 1994, EŒectiveness of geographic information systems in local planning. APA

Journal, Spring, 244–259.

Callon, M., 1985, Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the scallops
and the (cid:142) sherman of St. Brieuc Bay. In Power, Action and Belief, edited by J. Law
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul ).

Callon, M., 1991, Techno-economic networks and irreversibility. In A Sociology of Monsters:
Essays on Power, T echnology and Domination edited by J. Law, Sociological Review
Monograph (London: Routledge), 38, 132–161.

Callon, M., Law, J., and Rip, A., editors, 1996, Mapping the Dynamics of Science and

T echnology : Sociology of Science in the Real World (London: Macmillan).

Campbell, H., 1991, Conditions for the eŒective implementation of computers in urban

736

E. W. Martin

panning in developing countries. Computing, Environment and Urban Systems, 15,
55–67.

Campbell, H., 1996, Theoretical perspectives on diŒusion of GIS technologies. In GIS DiVusion,
edited by I. Masser, H. Campbell and M. Craglia (London: Taylor and Francis),
pp. 23–45

Campbell, H., and Masser, I., 1995, GIS and Organizations: How EVective are GIS in Practice?

(London: Taylor and Francis).

CDC Ecuador, 1998, Corporacion Centro de Datos para la Concervacion de Ecuador, URL

http: //www.abi.org/nhp/lacarb/ec/index.htm.

CECIA, 1998, La Fundacion Ornitologica del Ecuador—CECIA, URL

http: //www.geocities.com/ RainForest/Jungle/7633/index.html.

Clarke, A. E., 1990, A social worlds research adventure: the case of reproductive science. In
T heories of Science in Society, edited by S. E. Cozzens and T. F. Gieryn (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press), pp. 15–42.

Clarke, A. E., 1991, Social worlds theory as organization theory. In Social Organization and
Social Processes: Essays in Honor of Anselm Strauss edited by D. Maines (Hawthorne,
NY: Aldine de Gruyter), pp. 119–58.

Clarke, A., and Montini, T., 1993, The many faces of RU486: tales of situated knowledge

and technological contestations. Science, T echnology and Human Values, 18, 42–78.

Clarke, A. E., 1998, Disciplining reproduction: Modernity, American L ife Sciences and the

Problems of Sex (Berkeley: University of California Press).

Conservation International, 1998 The Cordillera del Co´ ndor Region of Ecuador and Peru:
//www.conservation.org/WEB/ CILIB/

A Biological Assessment, URL http:
PUBLICAT/ RAP/RAP7/SUMRESLT.HTM

Cristofani, A., 1996, The earth in balance: maintaining Brazil’s Biodiversity (inset on

Podocarpus National Park). GPS World, June, 20–26.

Dunkerly, H. B., 1986, Land information systems for developing countries. Survey Review,

Dunn, C. E., Atkens, J. et al., 1997, GIS for development: a contradiction in terms? Area, 29,

28, 305–314.

151–159.

EcoCiencia, 1997, EcoCiencia: Investigaction y educacion para la conservacion de la biodiver-

sidad y el manejo sostenible de los recursos naturales, EcoCiencia, 2.

Figueroa, S., 1995, Ecuador: the system of protected areas. In National Parks W ithout People?
T he South American Experience, edited by S. Amend and T. Amend (Gland,
Switzerland: IUCN), pp. 217–234.

Fox, J. M., 1991, Spatial information for resource management in Asia: a review of institutional

issues. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5, 59–72.

Fujimura, J. H., 1992, Crafting science: standardized packages, boundary objects, and transla-
tion. In Science as Practice and Culture, edited by A. Pickering (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press), pp. 168–211.

FundacioÁ n Natura, 1991a, Ecuador 2000: Previsiones de una consulta a expertos sobre el

futuro del desarollo y el medio ambiente. Quito: Fundacio´n Natura.

FundacioÁ n Natura, 1991b, Lineamientos para un programa de investigaciones sobre areas

naturales protegidas en el Ecuador. Quito: Fundacio´n Natura.

FundacioÁ n Natura, 1995, Memorias: Simposio Nacional De Areas Protegidas Del Ecuador.

Simposio Nacional De Areas Protegidas Del Ecuador. Quito: Fundacio´n Natura.

FundacioÁ n Natura, 1998, Objectivos y Politicas, URL http: //wwwpub4.ecua.net.ec/fnatura/

html/objetivos.html.

Garrety, K., 1997, Social worlds, actor networks and controversy: the case of cholesterol,

dietary fat and heart disease. Social Studies of Science, 27, 727–774.

Guptill, S. C., Cotter, D. et al., 1988, A process for evaluating geographic information systems.

In GIS/L IS ’88. Proceedings of 3rd International Conference, 1, 145–151.

Harvey, F., 1997, Improving multi-purpose GIS design: participative design. In Spatial
Information T heory: A T heoretical Basis for GIS, edited by S. C. Hirtle and
A. U. Frank (Berlin: Springer), pp. 313–328.

Harvey, F., and Chrisman, N. R., 1998, Boundary objects and the social construction of GIS

technology. Environment and Planning A, 30, 1683–1694.

Hastings, D. A., and CLark, D. M., 1991, GIS in Africa: problems, challenges and opportunit-

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

737

ies for co-operation. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5,
29–39.

Huxhold, W. E., 1991, An Introduction to Urban Geographic Information Systems (New York:

INEFAN/FundacioÁ n Natura, 1997, Plan de Manejo—Parque Nacional Podocarpus Tomo

Oxford University Press).

I & II. Quito: Fundacio´n Natura.

INEFAN/GEF, 1996, Terminos de referencia para el diseno del sistema regional de areas
naturales protegidas y sus estrategias de manejo. Distrito Regional Forestal No. 5:
Zamora Chinchipe, El Oro y Morona Santiago. Quito: INEFAN/GEF.

INEFAN/World Bank, 1993, Proyecto GEF Ecuador: Plan Maestro para la Proteccion de
la Biodiversidad Mediante el Fortalecimiento del Sistema National de Areas
Protegidas. Quito: INEFAN.

Innes, J. E., and Simpson, D. M., 1993, Implementing GIS for planning: Lessons from the

history of technological innovation. APA Journal, Spring, 230–236.

Latour, B., 1987, Science In Action (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Latour, B., 1990, Drawing things together edited by M. Lynch and S. Woolgar. Representation

in Scienti(cid:142) c Practice (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press), pp. 19–68.

Latour, B., 1991, Technology is society made durable. A Sociology of Monsters: Essays
on Power, T echnology and Domination, edited by J. Law (London: Routledge),
pp. 103–131.

Latour, B., 1992, Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artefacts.
In Shaping T echnology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnological Change, edited
by W. E. Bijker and J. Law (Cambridge: The MIT Press), pp. 205–224.

Latour, B., 1996, Aramis or T he L ove of T echnology (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Latour, B., 1997, On actor-network theory: A few clari(cid:142) cations.
URL http: //www.keele.ac.uk/ depts/stt/stt/ant/latour.htm

Latour, B., 1999, On recalling ANT. Actor Network and After, edited by J. Law and

J. Hassard (Oxford: Blackwell and the Sociological Review), pp. 15–25.

Latour, B., and Woolgar, S., 1979, L aboratory L ife: T he Social Construction of Scienti(cid:142) c

Law, J., editor, 1985, Power, Action and Belief. Sociological Review Monograph No 32

Facts ( Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage).

(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul ).

Law, J., editor, 1991c, A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, T echnology and Domination,

Sociological Review Monograph (London: Routledge).

Law, J., 1992, Notes on the theory of the actor-network: ordering, strategy and heterogeneity.

Systems Practice, 5, 379–393.

Law, J., and Callon, M., 1992, The life and death of an aircraft: A network analysis of
technical change. In Shaping T echnology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical
Change, edited by W. E. Bijker and J. Law (Cambridge: MIT Press). pp. 21–52.

Law, J., 1997, Traduction/Trahison—Notes on ANT.

URL http: //www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/ stslaw2.html

MacFarland, C., Oviedo, G. et al., 1991, Ecuador: Biodiversity Conservation T hrough
Strengthening of the Protected Areas System, unpublished proposal submitted to the
Global Environmental Facility.

Meyer, C. A., 1993, Environmental NGO’s in Ecuador: an economic analysis of institutional

change. Journal of Developing Areas, 27, 191–210.

Myers, N., 1988, Threatened biotas:

‘Hotspots’ in tropical forests. T he Environmentalist,

8, 1–20.

Nature Conservancy, 1998, South American Conservation Data Centres.
URL http: //www.heritage.tnc.org/nhp/lacarb/samap.html

Orlikowski, W. J., and Robey, D., 1991, Information technology and the structuring of

organizations. Information Systems Research, 2, 143–169.

Orlikowski, W. J., 1992, The duality of technology: rethinking the concept of technology in

organizations. Organization Science, 3, 398–427.

Ortiz, J., 1996, Memorandum: Informe sobre cartographia PP-M34, Quito, Ecuador,

Pinto, J. K., and Azad, B., 1994, The role of organizational politics in GIS implementation.

Fundacio´n Natura.

URISA Journal, 6, 35–61.

738

Examples from conservation GIS in Ecuador

Pinto, J. K., and Onsrud, H. J., 1997, In search of the dependent variable: toward synthesis
in GIS implementaiton research. In Geographic Information Research: Bridging the
Atlantic, edited by M. Craglia and H. Couclelis (London: Taylor and Francis),
pp. 129–145.

Ponce, A., and Huber, R. M., 1982, Ecuador’s active conservation program. Parks, 6, 7–10.
Poole, P., 1995, Indigenous Peoples, Mapping and Biodiversity Conservation: An Analysis of
Current Activities and Opportunities for Applying Geomatics Technologies, The
Biodiversity Support Program—WWF, TNC, WRI.

REDLAT (Red Latinoamericana de Estrategias Hacia la Sustentabilidad), 1996,

Estrategia para el Desarollo Sostenible de la Amazonia Ecuatorial.
URL http: //www.infoweb.co.cr/redlat/esp/Estrategias/Ecuador.html.

RodriÁ guez, F., Mariscal, A. et al., 1994a, Characterizacio´n ecolo´gica por Sensores Remotos
de las a´reas de Cuellaje, Cordillera de Toisa´n, Pin˜ a´n y Maran˜o´ n, en la zona de
in(cid:143) uencia de la Reserva Ecolo´gica Cotacachi Cayapas, Ecuador. Quito: EcoCiencia.
RodriÁ guez, F., Mariscal, A. et al., 1994b, Characterizacio´ n ecolo´gica por Sensores Remotos
de las a´reas de Lita y alrededores en la zona de in(cid:143) uencia de la Reserva Ecolo´ gica
Cotacachi Cayapas, Ecuador. Quito: EcoCiencia.

RodriÁ guez, F., Larrea, M. et al., 1995, Characterizacio´n Ecolo´gica y Socio-econo´mica de la

isla Santay, Guyas, Ecuador. Quito: EcoCiencia.

Sieber, R. E., 1997, Computers in the Grassroots: Environmentalists, Geographic Information
Systems and Public Policy. Doctoral Dissertation: Graduate Program in Urban
Planning and Policy Development, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey.

Sierra, R., 1994, Land Use Strategies of Household Based Enterprises, The Timber Industry,
and Deforestation in Northwest Ecuador: The Articulation of Market Forces, National
Policies, and Local Conditions. Doctoral Dissertation: Ohio State University.
Sierra, R., 1996, La Deforestacion en el Noroccidente del Ecuador, 1983–1993. Quito:

EcoCiencia.

Smith, B., 1992, The use of geographic information systems in development planning in Latin
America. In Benchmark 1990 Conference of L atin Americanist Geographers edited by
T. L. Martinson (Muncie, Ind.: CLAG Publications), 17/18, 337–342.

Star, S. L., and Griesemer, J. R., 1989, Institutional Ecology, Translations, and boundary
objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology.
Social Studies of Science, 19, 387–420.

Strauss, A. L., 1978, A social worlds perspective. Studies in Symbolic Interaction, 1, 119–28.
Taylor, D. R. F., 1991, GIS and developing nations. Geographical Information Systemes:
Principles and Applications, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. Goodchild and D. W. Rhind
(New York, John Wiley and Sons), 2, 71–84.

USAID/Ecuador, 1989, Natural Resource Management and Conservation of Biodiversity

and Tropical Forests in Ecuador: A strategy for USAID. Quito: USAID.

USAID/cuador, 1994, Sustainable Uses for Biological Resources: Subir Phase II Strategic

Plan. Quito: USAID.

Varea, A., Barrera, C. et al., 1997, Ecologismo Ecuatorial. Quito: Abya-Yala.
Warren, S., 1995, Teaching GIS as a socially constructed technology. Cartography and

Geographic Information Systems, 22, 70–77.

Yeh, A. G. O., 1991, The development and application of geographic information systems for
urban and regional planning in the developing countries. International Journal of
Geographical Information Systems, 5, 5–27.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of
Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted
to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may
print, download, or email articles for individual use.

