The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 273–276 December 2003

273

S U R V E Y

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

A Taxonomy for Tactile Symbols: Creating a Useable
Database for Tactile Map Designers

Jonathan Rowell* and Simon Ungar**

*Tactile Inkjet Mapping Project, Department of Geography, Anglia Polytechnic University, East Road,
Cambridge CB1 1PT, UK (address for correspondence).
Email: j.rowell@apu.ac.uk
**Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK.
Email: s.ungar@surrey.ac.uk

This paper describes a methodology for generating a database of tactile symbols. It outlines the conception, develop-
ment and re®nement of the database into a framework suitable for access and searching by remote users. An example
of how the database might work in regard to tactile line symbols is provided. A critical analysis of the database
highlights the inherent challenges of constructing a framework for and subsequently managing data of this type in
an electronic environment. We provide an overview of the potential bene®ts of using such a tool, and discuss how an
evolving project of this kind might encourage a degree of standard practice in tactile map design.

INTRODUCTION

This paper presents a case for generating a tactile
symbol database and outlines how it might work. Despite
the potential value and widespread perceived desirability of
such a tool, no attempt has been made to create such a
database — (cid:142)rstly because gathering information of this
kind is dif(cid:142)cult, and secondly making sense of the data and
presenting it in a useable format is a considerable task. The
fact that most tactile map designers work independently
(Rowell and Ungar, 2003a) adds to the dif(cid:142)culty of collect-
ing data, but also makes the potential bene(cid:142)ts of such
an undertaking greater. We believe that there are clear
advantages of creating this tool that justify the effort
involved. This is because the database:

. will act as a vital reference tool, allowing us to pool
incorporate research (cid:142)ndings,
current best practice,
and highlight any areas of notable consistency and
inconsistency in usage. Indirect sources exist, such as
the Nottingham Map Kit (James & Armstrong, 1975)
and Tactile Graphics: A Users Manual (Edman, 1982),
but these give no indication of current practice. It will
thus enable us to gauge what is happening and who is
using what.
has the potential to encourage greater levels of con-
sistency in design by enabling users to see which
tactile symbols have been used previously, what they
have represented and how effective they have been.

.

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225012998

Creating an archive of tactile symbols is not a new concept
(Tasker, 2000), although developing a database designed
explicitly to encourage better standards of tactile map
design is novel. Indeed there are disadvantages to simply
producing a long list of symbols. A large archive without
clear structure would make (cid:142)nding the right tactile symbol
for a user’s purpose dif(cid:142)cult. It would also be hard to make
critical or comparative assessments of symbols. In order to
make data accessible and meaningful to a range of users,
it must be catalogued in systematic ways. It is thus vital
that the database be designed carefully. We propose a
solution to make the database a practical application
creating a taxonomy of tactile symbols. This will consist of
a descriptive framework that will allow users to interrogate
the database on several
levels and provide a facility for
tactile symbols to be related on the basis of common
properties. At the broadest level, symbols will be categorized
according to:

.

.

Structure — de(cid:142)ned by their physical attributes and
dimensions (speci(cid:142)ed in a precise way such that they
can be reproduced accurately).
Function — taking account of how they have been
used and what they represent.

The methodology comprises three distinct but overlapping
processes in the development of the database. An initial
task consisting of gathering information about tactile symbols
(data collection) is followed by devising a means of storing

274

The Cartographic Journal

and cataloguing it (data collation). Finally data presentation
addresses ways of presenting tactile symbol information in
a way that makes it easy to understand and use.

DATA COLLECTION

Data for the archive is derived from two main sources, an
international survey of tactile map producers and designers
and site visits to UK organizations that hold substantial
amounts of tactile material. This is augmented by analysis
of appropriate available literature, particularly early work on
sets of discriminable symbols (Gill & James, 1973; Nolan
& Morris, 1971; Wiedel & Groves, 1969) and attempts to
synthesize research to create sets of tactile symbols (Rener,
1993; Edman 1982).

DATA COLLATION

Individual tactile symbols will be assigned identi(cid:142)cation
numbers, allowing each tactile symbol to be traced back to
its original source. Annotated illustrations and digital photo-
graphs of each symbol are being made and a facility to
locate and link directly to these images from the database
will be built into a (cid:142)nal package.

DATA PRESENTATION

The structural and functional characteristics of each tactile
symbol will be recorded in a spreadsheet, providing the
detail from which more meaningful
information can be
constructed, and the necessary dimensions that will enable
users of the database to replicate tactile symbols. We
anticipate developing an electronic catalogue comprising a
simple-to-use browser permitting searches of the database
on the basis of various tactile symbol attributes. Symbols
will be sorted into generic groups using a classi(cid:142)cation
structure built into the system on the basis of tactile symbol
taxonomy. This organizing framework will be developed
according to:

Tactile symbol structure: the physical structure of individual
tactile symbols will be analysed and symbols will be classi-
(cid:142)ed according to key characteristics and dimensions. The
process offers an opportunity to associate different symbol
elements by putting them into linked categories on the basis
of common features. The global shape of point symbols
might enable them to be categorized as circles, squares
and triangles, for example. Areal symbols can be categorized
according to the type of (cid:142)ll, for instance whether the (cid:142)ll is
read as a continuous texture, or as a discontinuous, repeating
pattern.

Tactile symbol function: it will also be possible to group
tactile symbols on the basis of function, i.e. the way(s) in
which they have been deployed to represent landmarks
on tactile maps. Symbols, including tactile ones, have not
always been ascribed meanings that are obvious. Other
than the few symbols that have iconic status, the nature of
symbolic representation is largely arbitrary. The taxonomy
will make sense of this randomness by presenting symbol
groups on the basis of shared meanings.

Within sets of symbols grouped together by common
properties, further levels of re(cid:142)nement are necessary to
help make sense of the groups. It is envisaged that this will
be achieved by:

Hierarchical presentation: a facility to have results to an
enquiry presented hierarchically will be developed as part
of the taxonomy. Initially it will be possible to rank output
according to levels of incidence, the number of times a
tactile symbol appears in our database and/or how often
the symbol has been used. Later users will be able to
request that groups of symbols appearing in response to
their enquiries be rated according to known discriminable
properties based on research, or user feedback

Making links between structure and function: linking
factors of structure and function might also help constitute
meaningful groupings. A simple case study highlights how
this might work. A tactile map designer having already
used a particular line symbol to represent a road on a map,
but still required to depict another known linear feature
such as a footpath for example, would want to rule out
from amongst all the possible footpath symbols ones that
could be easily confused with the original symbol for the
road. It is intended that the database will allow for such
re(cid:142)nements. The designer will be able to search by
function for a set number of
line symbols used to
represent footpaths, excluding on the basis of structure
those that appear too similar to the tactile symbol already
used for the road. Not only is the process easy but it
should also help us understand better how symbols have
previously been combined to form legible tactile maps.

A glossary of terms: in order to provide common and
consistent de(cid:142)nitions of symbol descriptions, a glossary of
terms used in their description will be created to ensure that
there is no confusion over terminology used to describe
tactile symbol attributes.

TAXONOMY EXAMPLE

An overview of a classi(cid:142)cation for tactile lines shows how
the taxonomy will work by establishing a series of classes
into which all lines can be grouped.

Structure
A line is (cid:142)rst differentiated from other tactile symbol
types: point and area. It comprises a mark, band or curve
on a surface connecting two points of speci(cid:142)ed common
property. It is potentially limitless along its extent or
length (i.e.
its structure is not de(cid:142)ned by its length).
Categorization proceeds by describing variations from the
simplest conceivable line, such that three types of line can
be identi(cid:142)ed: simple single, complex simple and double/
multiple.

Simple Single Lines
Simple single lines are characterized by width, height and end
pro(cid:142)le that remains constant along the length (see Figure 1).
The category can be further sub divided into:

A Taxonomy for Tactile Symbols

275

HOW WILL THE DATABASE WORK?

Basing a database on tactile symbol taxonomy provides a
facility for making complex information manageable and
accessible. Users will also bene(cid:142)t by the introduction of an
easy-to-use search mechanism.

A user interface will form the front end of the database.
This menu driven user-friendly browsing window consist-
ing of drop down menu bars and scroll boxes will enable
users to search and browse for tactile symbols on the basis
of either their structure,
function or aspects of both.
Furthermore users will also be able to control the results of
their searches by indicating the number of possible symbol
options they require to choose from, and determine the
criteria upon which the list of resulting symbols is ranked.
At this stage we envisage the results will be presented in a
table as a series of illustrated examples of tactile symbols.
Once a choice has been made, double clicking a tactile
symbol box will provide a fuller description and all the
details users need to know in order to reproduce that
tactile symbol accurately.

Potential bene(cid:142)ts arising from the tactile symbol database
include:
. The accurate replication of tactile symbols in general
use by producers and designers across different tactile
production methods.

. Greater insight into the relationships between symbols

and their use.

. The introduction of an element of ‘standardization
through the backdoor’. Even without a move to
implement standard practices in tactile map production,
the availability of a database cataloguing a wide range
of symbols
linked to their common uses, might
encourage a greater level of consistency among pro-
ducers. Standardization is viewed by producers as an
unwelcome regulation of their work (Rowell & Ungar,
2003b), but viewed by tactile map users as highly
desirable (Rowell & Ungar, 2003c).

. The ability to produce easy-to-use catalogues of tactile
symbols for people without access to the Internet.
. The opportunity to improve our understanding of
tactile map syntactics. Matching tactile map symbol
categories to categories of the geographic features they
represent through the taxonomy, will help establish and
formalize symbol–referent relationships, about what
works and what does not (MacEachren, 1995).

CONCLUSION

A case for establishing a tactile symbol database has been
made and an outline of our proposed methodology has been
presented. The potential bene(cid:142)ts, especially to independent
tactile map designers, have been described. For the tool to
become a valuable resource it must be easy to use, both in
searching for tactile symbols, and understanding and apply-
ing outputs. In order to facilitate this process we have
recommended using a tactile symbol taxonomy to make
organize the information. This classi(cid:142)cation system will

Figure 1. Diagram of simple single lines above illustrates their differences

DISCUSSION

. Continuous lines — vary by virtue of end pro(cid:142)le/shape

.

.

and end values/dimensions.
First Order Discontinuous lines — possess the same
attributes as above except they are broken and there-
fore also de(cid:142)ned by side values, a measure of land and
gap features, which in this case are dashes and dots
of equal length and regularly repeating, possessing a
periodicity of one.
Second Order Discontinuous lines — includes lines with
variations in the lengths of the dots and dashes, and
can also be irregularly repeating.

Complex Single Lines
These are characterized by modulations in width, height/
elevation and/or end pro(cid:142)le along their length. As each
will possess any or all the attributes of simple lines, they will
also be continuous, (cid:142)rst or second order discontinuous as
above.

Double/Multiple Lines
Double or multiple lines are generally characterized as
individual simple, continuous, (cid:142)rst or second order dis-
continuous lines combined and thus also measured as a
function of the separation between them. They can also be
complex lines in combination, but this is rare.

Function
In addition to sets of lines classi(cid:142)ed by structure, it is also
possible to group lines according to function. As seen in
the previous example a user could choose to view all lines
that had previously been used for a footpath, or from
a selected subset of lines used to depict footpaths only as
broken lines on a particular type of tactile map. All these
options would be feasible.

276

The Cartographic Journal

categorize symbols on the basis of their structure and
function, and present them in meaningful groups. Used to
its full advantage the database has the potential to intro-
duce a degree of consistency currently lacking in tactile
map design. This will improve access to tactile information
in the long term.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research reported here was funded initially by the
Enterprise and Innovation Of(cid:142)ce of Anglia Polytechnic
University, and subsequently by the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council. EPSRC Grant GR/R94480/01.
The authors would like to thank Don McCallum for his
input.

REFERENCES

Blind, New York.

Edman, P. (1992). Tactile Graphics, American Foundation for the

Gill, J. M., and James, G. A. (1973). ‘A study of the discriminability
of tactual point symbols’, American Foundation for the Blind
Research Bulletin, 26, 19–34.

James, G. A., and Armstrong, J. D. (1976). Handbook for mobility
maps, Blind Mobility Research Unit, Nottingham University,
Nottingham.

MacEachren, A. M. (1995). How Maps Work: Representation,

Visualization and Design, The Guildford Press, New York.

Nolan, C. Y., and Morris, J. E. (1971). Improvement of tactual
symbols for blind children Final Report, American Printing
House for the Blind, Project No 5-0421, Grant No OEG-32-27-
0000-1012, Louisville, KY.

Rener, R. (1993).

‘Tactile cartography: another view of

tactile

Rowell, J., and Ungar, S.

cartographic symbols’, The Cartographic Journal, 30, 195–98.
touch: an
(2003a).
international survey of tactile maps. Part 1: production’, British
Journal of Visual Impairment, 21, 98–104.

‘The world of

Rowell, J., and Ungar, S. (2003b).

touch: an
‘The world of
tactile maps. Part 2: design’, British

international survey of
Journal of Visual Impairment, 21, 105–10.

Rowell, J., and Ungar, S. (2003c). Feeling your way: a tactile map
user survey, Proceedings of the 21st International Cartographic
Conference, Durban, South Africa, 10–16 August 2003.

Tasker, N. (2000). DOTS before your eyes: a tactile diagram design
resource, Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Tactile Diagrams, Maps and Pictures, Hat(cid:142)eld, UK, 9–10 October
2000.

Wiedal, J. W., and Groves, P.A. (1969). Tactual mapping. Design,
reading and interpretation. Final Report,

reproduction,
University of Maryland, SRS Grant No. RD-2557-S.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

