G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

                                        A LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR 
                    EMBRACING BOUNDARY LOCATION 
                    USING ONLY COORDINATES1

Izaak de Rijcke LLM, OLS2

A  public  that  increasingly  expects  the  delivery  of  boundary  line,  property  corner  establishment  and
retracement, in a virtual environment with no “hard features” referenced to the ground, may seem like the
exact opposite of what is seen as “certain,” such as a cadastral monument. Yet, increasing capacity to model
boundary  location  using  digital  mapping  is  challenging  our  traditional  views  of  how  evidence,  based  on
co - ordinates, is to be treated. This paper explores these developments with a view to understanding the further
changes that are needed in the legal framework for determining boundary location based on co - ord inates.3

Un public qui s’attend de plus en plus à la détermination d’une limite, à l’établissement d’une borne et
au  réarpentage  d’une  limite  de  propriété  dans  un  environnement  virtuel  sans  « éléments  physiques »
référencés au sol peut sembler exactement à l’opposé de ce qui est perçu comme « certain », par exemple une
borne cadastrale. Toutefois, l’augmentation de la capacité de modéliser l’emplacement des limites en utilisant
la cartographie numérique remet en question notre vision traditionnelle de la façon dont la preuve, fondée sur
les  coordonnées,  doit  être  traitée.  Le  présent  article  examine  ces  avancées  dans  le  but  de  comprendre  les
changements additionnels qui sont requis dans le cadre juridique pour déterminer l’emplacement des limites
en fonction des coordonnées.3

Overview

The definition of cadastral boundary, based not
on a reference to a “hard feature,”4 but on a mathe-
matical model, means that the model is an attempt to
replicate the hard feature. At common law, this had
been  accomplished  by  the  adherence,  in  respect  of
legal boundaries, to one simple goal, and was cap-
tured  by  the  simple  adage:  place  most  reliance  on
things  which  are  least  likely  to  be  mistaken.5 The
principles of boundary retracement are then replete

with variations of this adage in order to achieve the
implementation of that goal.6 This may well be fine
if  the  hard  feature  is  capable  of  being  found  or
replaced  as  a  most  probable  position  of  a  line  or  a
corner sought to be reliably re-established. However,
what if the model is itself the end result? What if the
model is the only means of re-establishing a line or
corner which was never related to a hard feature in
the first place? This is no longer an academic or legal

1 This paper served as a basis for the presentation made at the National Surveyors Conference at Edmonton, Alberta,
in May, 2016. It has also been expanded into a full chapter found in de Rijcke, I., Principles of Boundary Law in
Canada, 2016, Four Point Learning, Guelph, at chapter 10: Boundaries and Co-ordinates.
Izaak de Rijcke is a lawyer practising law in Guelph, Ontario and is adjunct professor at the School of Graduate
Studies at Lassonde School of Engineering, York University.

2

3 Note that Ontario will be the subject of discussion in this paper, regarding current practice and regulations; other

jurisdictions in the world (primarily Ireland and New Zealand) are considered and recent literature will be
reviewed for further discussion regarding trends, the law, and how this topic can be better understood. 
Il est à noter que l’Ontario fera l’objet d’une discussion dans cet article au sujet de la pratique et des règlements
actuels; d’autres pays dans le monde (principalement l’Irlande et la Nouvelle-Zélande) sont pris en considération
et la littérature récente sera examinée en vue de discussions ultérieures au sujet des tendances, de la loi et de la
façon dont ce thème peut être mieux compris. 
“Hard feature” in this context means a physical, tangible “thing” of topographic feature, which can be seen and
touched.

4

5 Diehl v Zanger, 39 Mich 601 (1878).
6 The hierarchy of evidence is but a reflection of this principle.

Izaak de Rijcke
izaak@izaak.ca

                                                                                              dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2016-308

GEOMATICA  Vol. 70, No. 3, 2016, pp. 207 to 222

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

puzzle:  it  is  a  fact  of  how  probable  position  is
increasingly advanced as needing to become legally
recognized, effectively established, and based only
on  a  mathematical  model  which  is  based  on  geo-
desy,  statistics  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  technology
(with advances in software applications).

In  Generally  Accepted  Land  Surveying

Principles,7 the following statement appears:

Boundaries  defined  by  theoretical  measure-
ments  such  as  geographic  coordinates  are  an
expression of intent and in most cases require
subsequent  action  by  a  land  surveyor  such  as
the placement of, or reference to, a monument
or connection to a physical feature. This action
is  also  required  to  apply  legal  authority  to  a
boundary in Canada's common law provinces.

Examples can be found today in the practice of
issuing oil and gas leases in the offshore (beacons
are not set on the seafloor for this purpose), allow-
ing for prospecting and mining claims (prospectors
do not set steel monuments in muskeg), and more
recently, in the recurring theme of deferred monu-
mentation  whenever  a  new  subdivision  is  created
(the  posts  all  get  bulldozed  out  anyway  when  the
streets and homes are built).

It  is  the  latter  example  which  also  poses  the
most  daunting  challenge  for  land  registration  sys-
tems; daunting because prevailing “best practice”
suggests that parcel creation and boundary defini-
tion without a hard feature are simply bad ideas.8
In fact, it may be even worse than parcel creation,
followed  by  settlement  and  titling,  with  no
demarcation or survey at all. The surveyors who
are  sent  in  to  see  and  measure  where  the  fence
posts  have  fallen  are  at  the  apex  of  producing  a
learned  opinion  regarding  the  location  of  an
existing boundary which, to date, may have never
been surveyed.9

Yet,  we  deal  with  a  public  that  increasingly
expects  the  delivery  of  boundary  line  and  corner
establishment,  and  retracement,  in  a  virtual  envi-
ronment with no hard features. It is an environment
which admittedly is entirely digital, it is 3D, and it
is the result of powerful technology which is avail-
able  to  laypersons  as  GPS,  Google®  and  Bing®
mapping  products  and  software  driven  by
unprece dented computing power.

Ontario’s Coordinate
System

How will the courts respond to a digital parcel
line  or  corner,  with  no  hard  features  and  defined
only  by  modelling  using  coordinates?  For  that
mat ter,  how  do  we  approach  the  challenge  of
explaining  to  a  court  what  a  coordinate  is?  The
sim ple  idea  of  what  Cartesian  and  polar  coordi-
nates  are  may  be  understood  well  enough  by  a
layperson  who  had  a  full  complement  of  high
school mathe matics. In fact we already embody, in
the law of Ontario (and many other jurisdictions),
the “idea” of coordinates which are part of a sys-
tem  which  is  established  by  regulation.  Ontario’s
Coordinate  System  continued  from  1990  as
Regulation  1028  under  the  Surveys  Act,  was
revoked  on  June  7,  2010,10 and  continued  under
the  Surveyors  Act as  Ontario  Regulation  216/10.
Today’s regulatory  requirement  establishes  the
fol lowing system:11

Integration

14. (1) When undertaking a survey for a plan
to  be  registered  or  deposited  in  the  reg istry
system  or  land  titles  system,  a  licensed
mem ber  shall  inte grate  the  sur vey  with  a

7 Generally Accepted Land Surveying Principles, Canadian Council of Land Surveyors, undated, at:
http://www.ansls.ca/files/Generally%20accepted%20land%20surveying%20principles.final.pdf7

8 Cadastre 2014 is the result of a working group of FIG-Commission 7 looking at trends and developments in the

field of cadastre. The working group was active from 1994–1998 and presented the results in 1998. It projected the
trends and developed visions of what cadastral systems might be in 20 years’ time. Cadastre 2014 has received
worldwide attention and is available at: http://77.243.131.160/cadastre2014/translation/c2014-english.pdf
Cadastre 2014 does not suggest that eliminating monuments is a bad idea; however this is not best evaluated in a
simplistic binary yes/no manner. The consensus of many presentations at FIG conferences questions the value of
monuments from an economic cost/benefit perspective. The “fit-for-purpose” concept suggests that monuments are
no longer a “one size fits all.” The “fit-for-purpose” concept is discussed near the end of this paper.
9 Meaning, never having been retraced and no prior survey work has ever occurred which can be retraced.
10 O. Reg. 217/10. The “Performance Standards for the Practice of Professional Land Surveying” contains new and

revised elements of former O. Reg. 42/96 (entitled “Performance Standards for the Practice of Cadastral
Surveying”) and former O. Reg. 1028, (entitled “Ontario Coordinate System”).
11 The Ontario Coordinate system is a combination of both MTM and UTM zones.

208

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

coor dinate system in accor dance with sections
31  to  35  and  determine  the  coor dinates  of
every  angle  or  corner  on  a  line  or  boundary
and  all  topographic  information  required
under sec tion 24. O. Reg. 216/10, s. 14 (1).

(2)  The  coordinates  required  under  subsec-
tion  (1)  shall  be  accurate,  at  the  95  per  cent
con fidence level, to,

a) 0.05 m in urban areas;
b) 0.2 m in rural areas; or
c) 1  m  in  remote  areas.  O.  Reg.  216/10,

s. 14 (2).

…

Reference datum and map projection

31. If  a  survey  is  integrated  with  a  coordinate
system,

a) The  system  shall  be  referenced  to  the
North American Datum 1983 (Original)
or  the  North  American  Datum  1983
(Canadian  Spatial  Reference  System)
realization; and

b) Coordinates  shall  be  expressed  as  grid
coordinates  in  a  Universal  Transverse
Mercator map projection or a Modified
Transverse  Mercator  map  projection
that  complies  with  sections  32  to  35.
O. Reg. 216/10, s. 31.

…

Coordinates to be Recorded Only;
Coordinates not to Dictate or
Assist in Defining

Section  14  only  requires  the  surveyor  to
“inte grate  the  survey  with  a  coordinate  system  in
accordance  with  sections  31  to  35  and  determine
the coordinates of every angle or corner on a line
or  boundary.”  However,  nothing  operates  in
reverse:  the  direction  at  present  is  to  display  the
values  which  result  from  integration,  rather  than
using  the  coordinate  values  derived  from  integra-
tion12 and  shown  on  a  plan  from,  say,  2010,  to
re-establish the position of the point on the ground
today.  However,  note  the  further  requirement  for
what information does need to be shown on a plan
in  regards  to  the  stated  result  from  having  the
sur vey integrated:

Contents

…

18. (1) A plan shall show,

12 “Integration” is not defined as a word in the Regulation.
13 O. Reg. 216/10, s. 18 (1)(i).

i.

If  a  survey  has  been  integrated  with  a
coordinate  system  in  accordance  with
sec tion 14,
i.

a table containing the coordinates of
at  least  two  monumented  points
relat ed to the survey,

ii. a  note  stating  that  the  coordinates
can not,  in  themselves,  be  used  to
re - establish the corners or bound-
aries shown on the plan,

iii. a  note  stating  that  the  coordinates
com ply with subsection 14 (2),
iv. a note stating the source from which
the  coordinates  were  derived  and
specifying the map projection, zone,
datum and if applicable, adjustment
epoch, and
sufficient data to enable the loca tion
of the parcel of land surveyed to be
ascertained in relation to the monu-
mented  points  that  are  used  to
inte grate  the  survey  and  that  are
shown  in the  table  described  in
sub clause (i)…13
[emphasis added]

v.

In  fact,  this  provision  clarifies  the  role  of
coor dinates  when  seeking  to  retrace  a  lost  corner.
By  including  a  note  on  the  plan  that  states  that,
“…  the coordinates cannot, in themselves, be used to
re-establish  the  corners  or  boundaries  shown  on
the plan,” the caution against using coordinates in
retracement  is  a  qualified  “in  themselves.”
Presumably, if other evidence was available which
the  surveyor  was  also  to  take  into  account,  then
that  evidence  might  corroborate  the  lost  corner’s
coordinate  determined  position  …  or  the  coordi-
nate  value  might  corroborate  the  other  evidence.
But is it that simple? Is this a lost opportunity? The
wording in Ontario’s regulation may speak to the
isolated instance of a corner on a survey plan—but
why  inte grate  the  survey  and  show  coordinate
information at all if the resulting values are not to
be used as a single (“in themselves”) determinant
of correct legal position? Does it mean that coor-
di nates  can not  be  used,  even  if  they  are  the  only
evidence available?

To find the answers, we must revisit our basic
ideas of what a boundary is—these ideas may need
to accommodate new methods for defining and lay-
ing out boundaries in the first place. We also need
to  consider  the  mathematical  model  because  the
variables  in  any  model  must  be  understood.  The

209

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

variables  are  what  set  the  parameters  of  “place.”
Lastly,  we  must  seek  to  understand  the  certainty
associated  with  that  definition  of  “place”  since
that  notion  of  “certainty”  will  almost  always
become  paramount  as  a  concern  for  geomatics
professionals.

In  considering  how  the  law  will  respond  to
efforts  to  define  a  digital  boundary  cadastre,  we
might do well to be reminded that legislation and
common-law  principles  have  generally  distin-
guished between a “first running” and a “retrace-
ment.”14 The  distinction  is  necessary  since  it
ori ents  the  entire  process  of  what  follows.
Assuming  that  a  first  running  has  left  hard  fea-
tures,  all  subsequent  retracement  work  is  an
attempt to restore the spatial position of that fea-
ture.  In  a  digital  cadastre  context,  there  are  no
hard features to be found or restored; the location
of the boundary line or corner is to be set using the
parameters of the mathematical model again, each
time it is sought out. In this sense, all retracement
of a boundary within a digital cadastre becomes a
“first running”—subject only to the potential legal
effect of first occupancy.15

True and Unalterable

Note  as  well  the  need  to  reconcile  the  present
statutory  significance  of  what  makes  a  property

legally  “true  and  unalterable.”  The
cor ner 
cod i fi ca tion of common law principles of boundary
retracement in the Surveys Act may need to be revis-
ited if in fact the “original posts or blazed trees in the
first survey thereof” are replaced with a location cri-
terion (coor dinates) which override the evidence on
the ground. The section deserves repeating:

True  and  unalterable  line,  boundary  and
corner

54. Every 
line,  boundary  and  corner
estab lished by survey and shown on a plan of
subdivision  is  a  true  and  unalterable  line,
boundary  or  corner,  as  the  case  may  be,  with
respect to such plan and shall be deemed to be
defined by the original posts or blazed trees in
the  first  survey  thereof,  whether  or  not  the
actual  measurements  between  the  original
posts are the same as shown on the plan of sub-
division  or  expressed  in  any  grant  or  other
instrument.16

How a legal framework that defines the cor rect
legal position by a mathematical model will accom-
modate this section is problematic. It is sug gested
that the implementation and broad adop tion of such
a framework cannot occur unless:

1. the section is repealed;
2. the  framework  operates  only  as  a  formalized

evidentiary “resource”17 for surveyors; or,

14 A helpful explanation of this distinction can be found in Dale, P.F., Cadastral Surveys within the Commonwealth,

London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1976, Chapter 1, page 13:

The  problems  faced  by  the  Provinces  in  Canada  are  in  part  attributable  to  defects  in  the  system
which result from individual surveys of individual parcels by individual surveyors. There is a lack
of survey control and whereas many of the boundaries of properties have been carefully traversed,
many have not and in many instances the absolute location of the parcels is indeterminate. As in
Australia, the problems are more concerned with retracement, that is, with the re-establishment of
boundaries which were described perhaps a century or more ago. Once a survey is carried out and
is used as the basis for the transfer of land, it cannot be changed, destroyed or forgotten without due
process of law. Every legal survey establishes in effect a monument to the credit or discredit of the
surveyor who carried out that survey. The ambiguities and uncertainties of the land parcel defini-
tions as written down in early deeds and documents of transfer have left a legacy of problems which
are baffling and expensive to rectify.

15 First occupancy is generally evidenced by physical occupation and is a potential hard reference if a structure has been
built based on a presumably correct placement of the structure within the digital boundaries of the parcel. That single
act may, in itself, serve as a form of “first running” and be recognized by the law not as an encroachment over a digital
boundary, but the actualization and result of a first running based on first principles of boundary law.

16 Surveys Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.30, s. 54.
17 An interesting example of this option has existed in the State of Minnesota since 1946 in c. 165, s. 8. Today,

Section 505.25 of 2015 Minnesota Statutes is largely the same and states,

WHEN USE OF COORDINATES SUPPLEMENTAL
Whenever coordinates based on the Minnesota Coordinate System are used to describe any tract of land
which in the same document is also described by reference to any subdivision, line, or corner of the
United States public land surveys-, the description by coordinates shall be construed as supplemental to
the basic description of such subdivision, line, or corner contained in the official plats and field notes
filed of record, and in the event of any conflict the description by reference to the subdivision, line, or
corner of the United States public land surveys shall prevail over the description by coordinates.

210

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

3. the framework accommodates the existence of
better  evidence  as  and  when  encountered  in
“hard” form on the ground.18
The  selection  of  an  option  from  the  list
enu merated above lies at the core of how a frame-
work is designed for the possible “reverse” opera-
tion  of  coordinate  data  listed  on  a  plan  of  survey
and that it alone defines the legally correct position.

Geo-Referencing
Unpatented Mining Claims

In addition to the Ontario Coordinate System,
there  has  recently  emerged  a  parallel  but  separate
geo-referencing  system  for  the  identification  of
mining  claims  which  are  nonetheless  “ground
staked.”  Amendments  to  regulations  came  into
effect  in  November  2012  and  specifically  require
the submission of data acquired through the use of
GPS  as  part  of  the  claim  filing  process.  The
rel e vant section of the Regulation states,

Geo-referencing

2.1  (1)  An  application  to  record  a  mining
claim that is ground staked in unsurveyed ter-
ritory  on  or  after  November  1,  2012,  must
include Global Positioning System geo-refer-
encing data for all corner posts, witness posts
and  line  posts  used  to  indicate  a  change  in
direction of a claim boundary and the Global
Positioning  System  geo-referencing  data
must  comply  with  standards  satisfactory  to
the Minister.19

In  order  to  understand  what  are  “standards
sat isfactory  to  the  Minister,”  the  Ministry  of
Northern Development and Mines website20 refers
to  Geo-Referencing  Standards  for  Unpatented
Mining Claims (MNDM Guideline)21 that must be

followed  for  the  collection  and  submission  of  the
required  GPS  data.22 The  very  obvious  question
becomes: does the GPS data define the legal loca-
tion of a claim boundary or do the posts which are
placed  in  the  ground  prevail? The  process  by
which  to  resolve  any  disagreement  remains  unan-
nounced.23 The  need  for  a  process  by  which  to
resolve any conflict between the physical or “hard”
position  of  the  post  and  its  coordinated  position
values requires a summary form of adjudication in
a quick and cost-effective manner.24

Further  guidance  is  available  in  a  Claim
Staking FAQ25 section on the same website and in
answer  to  the  question,  “What  if  my  coordinates
overlap  with  another  unpatented  mining  claim?”
the following answer is provided:

“MNDM is  developing  protocol/processes  to
address  any  issues  with  overlapping  coordi-
nates. The submission of GPS locational data,
either as a submission of assessment work or as
a requirement for any new claims staked on or
after  November  1,  2012,  is  intended  as  a  step
towards  clarifying  claim  locations  in  advance
of the planned move to fully electronic, on-line
map staking, therefore it is important to record
the  coordinates  as  accurately  as  possible.  The
MNDM  guideline  covering  the  standards  for
georeferencing  mining  claims  will  outline  the
data collection requirements.”26

While  this  might  answer  the  question  posed
ear lier as, “does the GPS data define the legal loca-
tion of a claim boundary or do the posts which are
placed  in  the  ground  prevail?”  the  more  troubling
aspect of this answer is that it really is a “we do not
know  …  protocol/processes  are  being  developed”
response. This  might  be  perfectly  understandable  if
the  actual  protocol/processes  that  are  being  devel-
oped  include  the  application  and  integration  of
boundary dispute resolution principles that clarify the
question.27 In  many  respects,  the  prob lem  is  no

18 See the discussion below at “Geo-Referencing Unpatented Mining Claims.”
19 O. Reg. 310/12, s. 1, which amended O. Reg. 43/11, “Claim Staking and Recording.”
20 http://www.mndm.gov.on.ca/en/mines-and-minerals/mining-act/mining-act-modernization/claim-staking
21 Guideline: Standards for the collection of GPS data for unpatented mining claims is a MNDM publication (last

updated in January 2015), and which can be accessed here: http://www.mndm.gov.on.ca/sites/default/files/georefer-
encing_standards.pdf

22 Unlike the Ontario coordinate system, there is no MTM component; it is only UTM based.
23 Circumstances may have changed after the submission of this paper.
24 Further discussion of what this entails is beyond the scope of this paper.
25 Frequently Asked Questions.
26 See: http://www.mndm.gov.on.ca/en/mines-and-minerals/mining-act/mining-act-modernization/claim-staking#sim-

ple-table-of-contents-13

27 Boundary adjudication as a process may need to become an important part of a cadastral boundary system in

which coordinates are accorded a pre-eminent evidentiary value.

211

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

dif ferent from what is posed with the col lection and
depiction  of  coordinate  values  on  a  plan  of  survey
under section 18, O. Reg. 216/10… what will the val-
ues be used for? If it is to assist in re-establishment
and  retracement,  then  the  mathematical  values  can
serve a valuable evidentiary function. But we are left
to see what the actu al protocol/processes will be that
are necessary to adjudicate and resolve discrepancies
between “hard features” and the coor dinated posi tion
of the same feature.

The Geodetic Model as a
Mathematical Framework

In considering the mathematical model, we are
confronted  with  a  series  of  variables  that  serve  to
capture  and  model  the  real  world.  Geodesy  has
advanced  to  include  not  only  3D  parameters  of
posi tion, but also dynamic elements of time and cer-
tain vector properties. The model is based on using
historical measurements of fixed ground sta tions28 in
order to capture relative spatial position. Using least-
squares and statistical probability to refine position
and reject outliers, the model is specifically designed
to  allow  for  a  framework  for  defining  spatial  loca-
tion.  Importantly,  the  model  is  not  reality  itself  or
even  linked  to  a  direct  measurement  to  a  “hard”
ground  feature;  each  such  meas urement  has  been
changed, to a greater or lesser degree from what it
actually is, as a result of the adjustment process. The
conversion  from  reality  to  the  model—and  back
again—is  possible  only  if  we  therefore  include  all
variables in the model and we apply the correct for-
mula,  which  permit  an  exact  translation  from  hard
feature to virtual, and from virtual back to hard fea-
ture. This  is  a  chal lenge—if  not  impossible;  it  is  a
theoretical  pos sibility  but  never  attainable  since  as
additional  variables  are  adjusted  for,  and  added  to,
the model and more accurate measurements prompt
periodic updates and revisions.29

But this fact need not be the end of the matter.
The statistical properties of the model that defines the
framework, as well as the statistical properties of the
data  and  measurements  that  are  used  to  lay  out  the

needed  position  in  reality,  not  only  help  us  in
meas ur ing  uncertainty  itself;  these  properties  also
invite us to rethink the nature of a legal boundary that
is defined by, and in, a digital cadastre. The notion of
a boundary being defined by a line and a corner gives
way to a prescribed swath and an error ellipse. The
legally correct position of a boundary may well be a
digital line and corner as the correct “place,” but it is
no less correct if the line moves and remains within
the swath. The dig i tal corner is no less legally correct
if still posi tioned within the statistical ellipse of, say,
95% confidence.30

Explained  in  this  manner  to  a  court  will  be  an
intellectually honest approach to reconciling the dig-
ital definition of a boundary line and corner with the
legal understanding of where that point is locat ed in
reality. It would be futile to suggest that a coor di nate
value brings with it a level of absolute “certainty” for
purposes  of  enclosing  the  spatial  extent  of  a  legal
right.31 The  futility  lies  in  the  denial  of  the  “uncer-
tainty” which is known to exist and which can itself
be measured. Geomatics professionals know this. As
geomatics professionals we understand the futility of
digital  cadastral  systems  which  are  dedicated  to
attempting  to  fix  “place,”  but  with out  the  attendant
uncertainty parameters which force a need for meta-
data  that  captures  the  uncertainty  in  defining  the
spa tial extent of the swath. Until we admit to the exis-
tence  of  uncertainty  attached  to  the  swath  and  start
explaining what it means, users will be met with sur-
prise and disappointment. Surprise, because its exis-
tence has not been disclosed; disappointment because
we all along had the ability to cap ture this uncertainty
and have chosen to not make it an important part of
conversations. We will lose credibility in our courts if
we do not start speaking this language. But what are
the legal implications in Canada in going forward?

The Status of Coordinates
in Canada

A review of Canadian literature on this topic is
best  started  with  the  1999  study  and  Report32
sub mitted to the Canadian Council on Geomatics.

28 Are these the hard features which connect our digital model to real ground?
29 The term “epoch” in stipulating a geodetic datum is most telling. The 3D model is augmented by time (t) to make

the dynamic model truly 4D.
30 See O. Reg. 216/10, section 14(2).
31 The legal “right” could range from outright ownership, to a lesser privilege such as a licence to conduct

explo ration or prospecting.

32 Ballantyne, Dr. B., K. Khan and T. Conyers. Coordinates in context: technical, social and legal implications of
using coordinates-only to define boundaries, Final Report to the Canadian Council on Geomatics. August 1999.

212

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Relative to the comments above, the authors made
the following prescient note:

However, the more important role may lie in respect
of those matters which are considered more impor-
tant than boundaries. The authors sagely point out,

There is also some confusion over the symbiotic
relationship between coordinates-only to define
boundaries, deferred monumentation of bound-
aries,  and  integrated  surveys.  Although  this
study  is  not  directly  concerned  with  the  lat ter
two, integrated surveys do represent an interme-
diate conceptual step between the use of monu-
ments and the use of coordinates-only, insofar as
monumented boundaries are integrated to close
tolerances within a spatial reference system. The
coordinates which are derived for the locations
of the monuments can then be used as evidence
in re-establishing the monuments.33

Indeed,  as  this  paragraph  notes,  “…coordi-
nates which are derived for the locations of the mon-
uments can then be used as evidence in re-establish-
ing  the  monuments.”  The  legal  difference  between
using coordinates as “evidence,” rather than serving
to “deem” the location of a lost corner by using only
coordinates, is crucial. The writers of the Report in
1999 were also alive to the broader social and institu-
tional issues which would inform the proper use of
coordinates. Of course the lack of full reconciliation
between legal acceptance of coordinates for all pur-
poses in determining the legal position of a boundary
does not mean that coordinates have no use. There is
a  context  and  fitness  for  purpose  which  will  allow
coordinates  to  play  an  important  role  in  a  digital
cadastre  and  in  the  retracement  of  parcel  corners.

Simply  because  something  can  be  done,  does
not necessarily mean that it should be done. In
any debate about the use of coordinates-only, it
is  foolish  to  ignore  the  views  of  those  for
whom  the  cadastre  exists:  the  occupiers  and
managers of land.34

At this point we may need to reflect on what is
exactly being “defined” or “retraced” by mathemat-
ical coordinates. Ontario operates under a “general
boundaries” regime in which land registration, town-
ship survey systems and descriptions of land did not
depend on the physical location of a property corner
or line to be determined on the ground; it was suffi-
cient in many instances to merely allow the system of
survey  to  establish  a  survey  fabric,  along  with  the
“geographics”  which  would  allow  for  the  relative
position  of  a  parcel  to  be  located,  but  precise  posi-
tioning  was  left  for  later.  However,  once  the  “posi-
tioning”  activity  had  taken  place,  all  else  that  fol-
lowed would be a retracement of the first running.35
Does coordinate definition of a legal corner depend
on the corner having been first located—or can coor-
dinate definition actually assist in establishing where
that corner should be? This is a practical conundrum
which  operates  in  most  common  law  jurisdictions
which have a “general boundaries”36 regime.

The  authors  of  the  Report also  wrestled  with
the  hierarchy  of  evidence:37 natural  boundaries  at

33 Ibid., at page 7. 
34 Ibid., at page 18. 
35 Generally speaking, the first survey of a parcel operates to set out its boundaries and configuration. Accordingly,
work that follows by other surveyors is generally seen or considered by others as a retracement of that first work.
When the expression “resurvey” is used, it is either a result of misunderstanding this principle or there is a specific
intention and instruction to actually “resurvey” for purposes of consciously changing the location of boundaries
and the configuration of a parcel from what is known to already exist.

36 The interplay between the general boundaries rule and its implication for how we think about surveying a boundary was

alluded to in Maynard, J., “Digital Boundaries in England and Wales,” in: Surveying World, 9(4) May/June 2001: 

An  important  feature  of  land  registration  in  England  and  Wales  is  the  general  boundaries  rule.
According to this rule, the extent of a parcel of land is defined by reference to the physical features that
surround it without defining the precise position of the legal boundary of the land. Thus the physical
boundary might be a brick wall, but whether the legal boundary follows the centre, or one or other face
of the wall, or in fact lies at a small distance from the wall is not recorded.

37 In  other  words,  a  surveyor  seeks  out  the  intention  of  the  party  to  a  document  containing  a  metes  and  bounds
descrip tion in order to determine the location of a boundary on the ground. See also, Oosterhoff and Rayner, Anger
and Honsberger Real Property (2nd ed.), Chapter 19, at para. 1904.2:

The  general  rules  in  the  definition  of  boundaries  where  there  is  an  ambiguity,  or  an  inconsistent  or
uncertain description, are as follows: The intention of the parties (which is the controlling consideration)
must be ascertained. The whole description must then be looked at fairly in order to see what are the
leading  words  or  descriptions  and  what  is  the  subordinate  matter  (and  for  this  purpose  evidence  of
extrinsic facts may be considered). Finally, resort is to be had to natural landmarks, artificial monu-
ments, adjacent boundaries, and courses and distances, in that order, but subject to what would appear
to be most consistent with the apparent intent of the grantor.

Cited in O’Hanley v. Wheatley & Gulf Surveys, 2005 PESCTD 20 (CanLII), at para. 35.

213

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

the peak and measurements are at the bottom of the
pyramid.  This  was  rejected  entirely  as  being  an
issue  for  consideration  when  seeking  to  place  the
value  of  coordinates  in  a  cascading  hierarchy  of
evidence. The Report continued,

which  the  outcome  is  represented  by  coordinate
val ues is likely fraught with difficulty—unless there
is an ability to reconcile coordinate values with the
idea  that  they  must  be  the  result  of  a  purposeful,
quasi-judicial process—and not just the result of an
observation. That process is adjudication.

The “South Australia
Effect”

Observations  may  be  prone  to  what  could  be

termed the “South Australia effect.”40

The boundary dispute between the two states
arose from the initial running of a legal boundary
described  as  “the  141st meridian  east”  (Figure  1).

However, if there is no uncertainty about what
is transferred, then the hierarchy is not to be
referred to …. So, if there is no ambiguity in
the legal description of a parcel, then the hier-
archy  of  evidence  is  irrelevant.  If  there  is
ambiguity,  and  monuments  were  placed  to
reflect  the  intentions  of  the  grantor,  then  the
object is to re-establish the boundary accord-
ing to the position of the original monuments.
If, however, no monuments were placed, as if
coordinates-only  are  used,  then  the  coordi-
nates  can  become  the  best  evidence  of  the
location of the boundary.38

It  seems  difficult  to  reconcile  this  conclusion
as the “final word” on the hierarchy and how sur-
veyors understand it to operate. Perhaps this is why
the Report concluded on this issue with a rejection
of  the  hierarchy  as  a  possibly  outdated  principle
and one that should no longer be an impediment to
the  potential  value  of  modern  coordinates  as
trump ing “intention.” The authors continued,

However, measurement science has advanced
somewhat  since  that  time,  meaning  that  the
hierarchy  itself  is  suspect.  Moreover,  in  the
absence  of  the  old  hierarchy,  and  in  the  face
of using coordinates-only, perhaps the courts
will develop new principles to allow extrinsic
evidence to assist in resolving ambiguities in
descriptions.39

The  significance  of  the  hierarchy  is  not  its
abil ity to be applied as a “rule;” rather it lies in its
practical manifestation of the very process of eval-
uating and filtering evidence: rejecting what is not
reliable and placing greatest weight on what can be
seen,  touched  and  remembered  by  a  witness.
Turning this legal principle into a methodology by

Figure 1: The border between Victoria, South
Australia, and New South Wales, as marked on an
1883 map showing Victoria’s western border as
more than two miles further to the west than that of
New South Wales.41

38 Supra, note 16 at page 24.
39 Ibid., at page 25. 
40 In South Australia v. Victoria, [1914] UKPC 3, [1914] AC 283, the claim made by South Australia to correct the
error in the running of the State boundary, which resulted in the “loss” of a swath of land having a width of two
miles, was rejected. Lord Moulton, writing for The House of Lords noted,

“The  fact  that  no  astronomical  determination  can  be  accurate  is  not  a  reflection  on  the  position  of
astronomy among the sciences. Throughout the whole world of observations the inevitable presence of
inaccuracies is recognized, and the dominant idea is to determine the probable error of each set of
observations, that is to say, the margin of inaccuracy which must be allowed to it and within which it
cannot be trusted. As the means and instruments of observation improve, this probable error grows
smaller but it can never disappear. A striking example of improved methods is given in the instant
case.”

41 From: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Vic_SA_NSW_border_1883.jpg Wikimedia Commons is a freely licensed

media file repository.

214

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

The  ability  to  accurately  run  such  a  boundary  on
the ground was primarily a function of the survey-
or’s ability to keep accurate time.42 In other words,
the  technology  and  equipment  available  for  use  by
the land surveyor when it was first run in 1847, would
limit  the  accuracy of  the  boundary’s  placement  in
direct  proportion  to  the  inherent  limitations  of  the
methods  and  instrumentation  available.  As  both
improved, this was not a reason to “more accurately”
run the line again. The full implication of this princi-
ple  is  difficult  to  appreciate  if  one  considers  only
measurement technology and the power of software
in processing large amounts of observation data: the
law looks to the most probable location of where a
boundary  was  first  placed—not  where  improved
expertise  in  measure ment  will  refine  or  correct  the
first placement.

Boundary Survey Reforms
in Ireland

A  2008  study43 in  Ireland  that  analysed  the
practice and method of boundary surveying in that
jurisdiction proposed extensive reforms in order to
take  advantage  of  survey  integration  and  using
coordinates to better provide accuracy and certainty
for  boundaries.  Early  in  this  lengthy  document,  a
reference appears to a FAQ which is posted—and
answered—on 
the  Property
the  website  of 
Registration Authority (PRA).44

“I  have  a  dispute  with  my  neighbour  over
where the boundary lies. Can you tell me who

is  right?  No.  The  Land  Registry  map  is  an
index  map  and  identifies  property,  not
boundaries. Therefore, we are not in a posi-
tion 
(Property  Registration
Authority  website,  accessed  on  9/7/2008)
[emphasis in original].

to  advise.” 

This quote is taken directly from the Frequently
Asked Questions page of the PRA website. For
most property owners this answer is unbeliev-
able. If the PRA cannot supply reliable informa-
tion  on  property  boundaries  to  resolve  bound-
ary  disputes,  who  can,  or  more  importantly,
should the PRA be in a position to do so?

Information  held  in  the  PRA  folios  is  widely
considered  as  reliable,  so  a  State  guarantee  is
provided  for  the  title,  and  the  system  is  per-
ceived as secure. In contrast, information in the
PRA mapping is widely considered as unreliable,
so a State guarantee is not provided for the loca-
tion or extent of boundaries, thus the system is
perceived as less secure.” [emphasis added]

The Green Paper is an impressive study—over
100  pages—and  reports  on  the  investigation  of
coordinates as a potential means to improve survey
practice  and  to  enhance  boundary  certainty.
Because  of  its  common  law  basis  and,  like
Ontario,  its  general  boundaries  regime,  the  treat-
ment of coordinates in that jurisdiction is of more
than just academic interest. In setting the stage for
a deeper analysis of how this might be achieved,
references are made to the importance of a digital
cadastre  to  the  nation’s  economy  and  the  impor-
tant need to start on a process by which uncertainty
in  map  information  can  be  rectified.45 Some  of

42 The equipment needed was a chronometer that could be synchronized to Greenwich time, by astronomic

obser va tion of the moons of Jupiter.

43 The Irish Institution of Surveyors, Green Paper Proposing Reform of Boundary Surveys, Dublin, 2008.
44 The PRA is Ireland’s government land registration system, operated for the public benefit and supported by a land
titles statutory regime. It is a general boundaries jurisdiction in which the Green Paper defines a general boundary as:

A line determining the limits of ownership of a parcel of land represented by a topographical map
of phys i cal features. General boundaries have three characteristics:

• The ownership of the physical feature is left undetermined;
• The location of the title boundary within the physical feature is left undetermined; and,
• Position of the boundary is regarded as approximate. 

(at page vi)

45 In some respects, the study does not actually endorse a coordinates-only framework of boundary definition and

control. Instead, the timeline is a more realistic call for “moving in that direction,” even if it will take 100 years to
get there! The Green Paper also notes,

The accuracy potential of modern surveying practice is not being exploited by the PRA to attain the
potential of a truly digital property map.
These best practice guidelines for boundary surveys are proposed to address this mapping deficiency.
They have been prepared with a view to improving the accuracy of maps submitted to the PRA. As a
result solicitors and others can expect to get a uniform high accuracy product.
A more secure PRA mapping system where uncertainty in the map information is minimised or elim-
inated is required to rectify the current unreliable situation and to register landowners’ most valuable
assets  with  cer tainty.  The  minimisation  of  uncertainty  in  PRA  maps  is  also  urgently  required  for
Ireland’s e-Conveyancing needs, the Irish Spatial Data Infrastructure …                            (at page x)

215

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

what  was  written  in  2008  in  the  Green  Paper,
reads  like  what  we  may  be  hoping  to  achieve  in
many  Canadian  jurisdictions.  Figure  2 below
highlights  that  the  legal  similarities  with  many
Canadian  land  registration  models  are  similarly
focussed on providing a certainty of title, in which
title enjoys a guarantee, but boundaries do not.46
The  same  distinction  could  be  said  to  apply  to
Ontario’s  Block  maps,47 which  have  never  been
intended as boundary sur veys, but play an impor-
tant supporting role in allowing for a guarantee of
title for the parcel which may appear as a unit on
a Block map.

Registry in the mistaken belief that these maps
accurately record property boundaries and are
fit  for  this  purpose.  This  report  will  provide
compelling  evidence  opposing  this  view,  and
proposes a change of atti tudes and practices to
rectify this situation.49

Five  years  later,  further  research50 in  Ireland

concluded that,

With the high number of boundary surveys as
part  of  disputes  in  the  past  five  years  and  the
gradual increase in boundary surveys as part of
disputes in the intervening years of the digital
mapping  project,  ways  in  which  to  minimize
disputes  need  to  be  made.  There  have  been
suggestions and calls for a cadastre like system
to  be  implemented  where  all  property  parcels
would  be  conclusive  and  guaranteed  by  state
however  with  current  economic  climate,  this
approach seems unlikely.51

Boundaries and Coordinates
in New Zealand after
Earthquakes

In September 2010, a major earthquake struck
the South Island of New Zealand. This was not the
only earthquake event in New Zealand; such events
are  common  and  are  frequently  severe,  causing
shifts in the surface of the earth and resulting in sig-
nificant property damage. As a case study of a com-
mon law jurisdiction, which has a sophisticated land
registration  system52 that relies  extensively  on  the
work  of  land  surveyors,  New  Zealand  is  another

Figure 2: Secure and less secure portions of the Irish registration system as
currently operated.48

More than just an analysis of current practice,
the Green Paper appeared to be based on interna-
tional best practices and also faced public attitudes
and stakeholder needs head-on:

PRA  maps  and  Ordnance  Survey  Ireland  …
maps are used daily by property professions to
subdivide  and  register  land  in  the  Land

46 Supra, note 27 at page 2. 
47 Block maps are sometimes referred to as “Electronic Property Index Maps,” (ServiceOntario Bulletin 2014–03), or

“Property Maps” (O.Reg. 43/96). 

48  This figure appears in: The Irish Institution of Surveyors, Green Paper Proposing Reform of Boundary Surveys,
Dublin, 2008, at page 2, and is originally termed as: “Figure 1: Secure and less secure portions of the Irish registra-
tion system as currently operated.”

49 Ibid.
50 O'Brien, D., Prendergast, W., Why are property boundary disputes increasing in Ireland? International

Postgraduate Research Conference, University of Salford, Manchester, April 8–10, 2013.

51 Ibid., at p. 10.
52 For example, the Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) website states,

We make sure New Zealand has accurate information about where people and places are, people
have confidence in their property rights and Crown property is well managed for future generations.
…
Our responsibilities include managing land titles, geodetic and cadastral survey systems, topograph ic
information,  hydrographic  information,  managing  Crown  property  and  supporting  gov ern ment
deci sion making around foreign ownership.

From: http://www.linz.govt.nz/about-linz

216

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

example of the role that coordinates can play in the
determination of legal property corners and bound-
aries.  Also  notable  is  the  site  and  theme  of  the
FIG2016  Working  Week  Event53 in  Christchurch,
New Zealand: Recovery from Disaster.54 Following
the  earthquake  event,  new  rules  for  the  survey  of
boundaries of parcels which had been the subject of
significant  movement  went  into  effect.  The  Rules
were  updated  by  the  Surveyor  General  through
LINZ and came into effect on January 1, 2013.55

interest  focussed  on 

In  the  aftermath  of  that  disaster,  there  was
spe cific 
the  role  of
coor di nates as either a means for re-establishing,
or  as  a  support  to,  the  legal  framework,  which
would  guide  the  boundary  re-establishment
process.  For  purposes  of  this  paper,  steps  that
were  taken  to  enhance  certainty  in  cadastral
boundary  re-estab lishment  by  surveyors  in  that
post-earthquake environment would be especially
germane. Stark examples of the physical changes

53 http://www.fig.net/fig2016/Welcome.htm
54 http://www.fig.net/fig2016/theme.htm
55 The Rules govern many aspects of cadastral surveying but the revised text of Rule 18 specifically addresses the

treatment of boundary re-establishment when the boundaries have experienced significant movement:

18.1 Re-establishing boundaries affected by deep-seated movement

(a) Where deep-seated movement has distorted an existing boundary in excess of the applica-
ble accuracies in rules 3.3.1, 3.4, and 3.5, that boundary must reflect that distortion which
may require the creation of new boundary angles.
(b) Where a new boundary angle has been created under (a):

(i) the boundary must be part of a new parcel,
(ii) information about occupation and physical features in terms of rule 9.5 must be
provided in the form of a diagram,
(iii) the Diagram of Survey and Diagram of Parcels must prominently depict the fol-
lowing annotation clearly related to the relevant boundary:
‘Boundary includes new angles due to deep-seated movement.’

(c) Boundaries on land subject to uniform block shift must be re-established in terms of that
block shift.

18.2 Acceptance of boundaries affected by ground movement

(a) An existing boundary which meets the criteria for class C under rule 3.2.3 and which may
have  been  displaced  by  ground  movement  greater  than  the  accuracies  for  class  C  in  rules
3.3.1(a)(vi) or 3.4, must be either:

(i) accepted and become class D, or
(ii) be defined by survey.

(b) Where a boundary is accepted under (a)(i), the Diagram of Survey and Diagram of Parcels
must prominently depict the following annotation clearly related to the relevant boundary:
‘Boundary not surveyed since ground movement.’

18.3 Unproven marks

(a) An old survey mark that the survey has not determined as being either disturbed or undis-
turbed may be included in a CSD where:

(i) the mark has been affected by ground movement, and
(ii) the mark is not being used to re-establish a boundary.

(b) The Diagram of Survey must include a notation indicating each mark that is unproven.

18.4 Survey report for boundaries affected by ground movement
In addition to the reporting requirements under rule 8.2, a survey report must include the informa-
tion  considered,  reasons  for,  and  details  of  decisions  made  regarding  each  existing  boundary  or
boundary point affected by ground movement that is defined by survey.

From: Rules for Cadastral Survey 2010—LINZS65003 (amended 1 November 2012) at: 
http://www.linz.govt.nz/system/files_force/media/regulatory-documents/65003-LINZR65003%20Rules%
20for%20Cadastral%20Survey%202010_%20Amended%202012.pdf

217

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

to the as-built environment and the utility infra struc-
ture are cap tured in this image (Figure 3):56

The writers pointed out:
New Zealand has no prescriptive law or reg u la-
tion for the re-establishment of boundaries fol-
lowing earthquakes or landslip. There is also a
lack  of  common  law  to  assist  survey ors  with
precedents  for  re-establishing  boundaries  fol-
lowing  an  earthquake.  Moreover,  the  move-
ment experienced following the Darfield earth-
quake  causes  difficulty  with  the  hierarchy  of
evidence  when  a  boundary  monument  may
appear  undisturbed  from  its  originally  placed
position but has moved considerably.57

In  looking  for  best  practices  in  other  parts  of
the  world,  the  Surveyor  General  in  New  Zealand
commissioned a study  which scanned for possible
precedents in other jurisdictions. As the authors of
that study noted, the conclusion reached was that,
…  there  is  a  dearth  of  rigorous  principles  to
deal with such movement which could assist in
preparing similar response for New Zealand.60

Nonetheless,  a  summary  of  steps  which  were
identified  as  necessary  to  manage  and  rebuild  the
spatial cadastre were noted:

1. Before the spatial cadastre could be “re-aligned,”
it  would  be  necessary  to  update  the  geodetic
sur vey control system in the affected area.61
2. Before the spatial cadastre could be “updated,”
without  re-surveying  every  affected  point,  a
model of the earthquake movements needed to
be developed and applied.62 

3. The  timing  of  the  update  and  release  of  new
coordinate values in order to avoid a mixing of
pre  and  post-earthquake  values  needs  to  be
carefully managed.

Most  importantly,  the  authors  recognized  the
need for correcting coordinate values to reflect the
displacement on the ground, but also that additional
points and angles in and along a boundary may be
needed  to  ensure  that  the  displaced  boundary  fea-
tures are captured in the spatial cadastre dataset.63
A more recent paper64 has commented further
on this issue, after the adoption of amendments to
the  Rules  for  Cadastral  Survey  2010 in  New
Zealand. In particular, this paper attempted to rec-
oncile  certain  aspects  of  the  legal  framework  for
using coordinates to define legal boundary location

Figure 3: A stormwater manhole raised by liquefaction (attributed to
Wikipedia).58

56 This, and other images, appear in Smith, M., M. Thompson, N. Donnelly and D. Grant, Re-establishment of

Cadastral Boundaries Following the 2010 Earthquake in Canterbury, New Zealand, FIG Working Week 2011,
“Bridging the Gap between Cultures,” Marrakech, Morocco, Paper 4852.

57 Ibid., at page 9. 
58 Ibid., at page 4.
59 Ballantyne, B., 2004, Managing the New Zealand cadastre after deformation events: Applying grit to a slippery

slope, LINZ research report. 

60 Ibid., at page 9.
61 Ibid., at page 10.
62 Ibid., at page 11.
63 Ibid., at page 13. The authors note:

Where a parcel boundary has been displaced or distorted by deep-seated movement, such as a fault
rupture,  that  exceeds  the  applicable  accuracy  tolerances  of  the  RCS2010,  the  re-established
bound ary  must  reflect  that  displacement  or  distortion  which  may  require  the  creation  of  new
bound ary angle points.

64 Grant, D., C. Crook, and N. Donnelly, “Managing the dynamics of the New Zealand spatial cadastre,” in S.

Winter and C. Rizos (ed.) Proceedings of Research@Locate’14, Germany, 7–9 April 2014, pp. 60–71. Available at:
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1142/paper8.pdf

218

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

boundaries  at  the  surface  is  relevant  to  the  legal
framework  that  might  respond.  From  a  conceptual
point  of  view,  the  literature  produced  by  LINZ  has
included  several  guidelines  to  the  Rules  which,  in
turn, appear to still be in a state of flux. The diagram
in Figure 4 below is a helpful graphic which allows
us  to  better  appreciate  the  types  of  boundary

with the physical evidence of that same boundary
on the ground.65 After describing the characteristics
of the dynamic geodetic datum which was adopted
in New Zealand in 2000, the authors identified the
dynamic spatial cadastre as the least well managed
aspects of  this  infrastructure.  The  comments
deserve repeating since the same challenge applies
in  any  common  law  jurisdiction  which  desires  to
move  towards  the  determination  of  the  spatial
extent of property rights (boundaries) with a math-
ematical model which is dynamic—and in constant
need of maintenance:

One  of  the  difficulties  of  managing  a  dynamic
cadastre  is  the  increasing  number  of  customers
who  use  the  spatial  cadastre  in  their  business
processes,  products  and  services.  On  the  one
hand is the GIS community who may use it as
contextual  spatial  data  or  may  expressly  align
other  datasets  to  it.  For  these  customers,  the
dynamics  of  the  cadastre  are  a  nuisance—
sta b ility is often more valued by them than spa-
tial  accuracy.  However  on  the  other  hand  are
cadastral surveyors using the cadastre in the way
it was primarily intended to be used—to locate
property boundaries. For these users, accuracy is
more important and changes to the cadastre are
expected—especially as it is surveyors who ini-
tiate  those  changes  through  the  lodgement  of
new cadastral survey transactions.66

Much  of  the  technical  analysis  regarding  the
cause  of  movement  attempts  to  contrast  surficial
movement with deep seated distortion. However, it is
not clear why the reason for the displacement of legal

Figure 4: Examples of distorted boundaries.67

65 Ibid., at page 60. The authors noted,

Boundaries  in  the  physical  cadastre  may  move  over  time.  So  may  the  representation  of  these
boundaries in the spatial cadastre as new survey information is accepted which indicates that the
boundary coordinates are incorrect and as the spatial cadastre is reviewed and readjusted as a
consequence.  The  mechanisms  that  cause,  manage  and  record  these  movements  are  naturally
related  to  each  other  (a  new  boundary  survey  may  result  in  a  new  accepted  position  for  the
boundary and therefore changed coordinates) but may also operate quite independently and at
different times.

66 Ibid., at page 61.
67 Interim guide to the amended Rules for Cadastral Survey 2010, LINZG65704, December 2012, at page 36, Figure

14. But note that the same guide also observes,

Where a boundary has shear or lateral distortion (normally at a fault rupture):

•
•

•

a boundary that was formerly a straight line may now include one or more angles,
a boundary that moved with the earth will hold the same relationship to relevant phys-
ical evidence as it did prior to the earthquake. An example is a boundary that coincided
with a fence line will continue to coincide with that fence line. Boundary points will
still be defined in terms of close survey marks,
a water boundary or an irregular boundary moves with the ground movement in the
same manner as points on a right line boundary.

Ibid., at page 35. The guide is available at: http://www.linz.govt.nz/system/files_force/media/regulatory-docu-
ments/Interim%20guide%20to%20the%20amended%20Rules%20for%20Cadastral%20Survey%202010_%20LINZ
G65704%20%28rtf%29.doc

219

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

adjust ment that may be needed in the mathematical,
coordinate  defined  model,  but  this  begs  the  larger
question:  if  general  boundaries  pre vail  in  New
Zealand as they do in Ontario and Ireland, who cares?
Example D is referred to as a case in which “new
angles  will  have  been  introduced  to  a  former ly
straight  boundary  line.”68 Two  problems  emerge
from  this  analysis.  One  relates  to  the  fact  that  the
coordination of boundary points implies limited cap-
ture of a spatial polygon. If a boundary is anything
but a straight line between two corners, the capture of
corners is of limited use as a mathematical model of
the  parcel’s  actual  boundaries. The  second  problem
relates to what is alluded to in the concluding para-
graph in footnote 65 below. If, as the authors write,
…  the  cadastre  must  bridge  the  interface
between the measured dynamics of the earth’s
surface  and  the  relatively  inflexible,  slow
mov ing and slow changing application of land
law  which  nevertheless  serves  the  vital  func-
tion of protecting property rights in land ...,

how can certainty ever be reached with the use of
mathematical coordinates to determine the loca tion
of a legal parcel boundary?

Coordinates that are “Fit
for Purpose”69

Some  answers  might  lie  in  an  emerging
approach  to  land  administration  which  posits  that

68 Ibid., at page 67. However, the authors also conclude:

not all goals can be achieved with a single purpose
cadastre—let  alone  a  single  purpose  numerical
cadastre which  has,  as  its  primary  objective,  the
fix ing of a legal boundary through the use of mathe-
matical coordinates. “Fit for Purpose” embraces the
idea that the purpose of a cadastre is what defines the
attributes of the data in the cadastre. For example, if
the purpose of requiring the electronic submission of
a paper-based plan of survey is to create a repository
of plan records, the desired level of “precision” of the
information  stored  in  the  database  depends  on
whether the goal is to have an image file, an accurately
scaled image or data file, or, as in Ireland, a form of
ordinance  survey  map  which  captures  and  displays
the general boundary information that is needed for
the legal framework to operate. If, instead, the goal is
to develop a spatially accurate, mathematical coordi-
nate dataset which is expected to define where a legal
boundary is on the ground, the concept described in
the former example would be useless.

In  some  respects  the  search  for  means  by
which  we  can  embrace  boundary  location  using
only coordinates is doomed unless a more sophisti-
cated  approach  to  integrated  land  management  is
considered. In fact our own experience in Canada
may have suffered as a result of not participating in
some  of  these  topical  discussions  in  international
circles. It is especially in the emergence of “general
boundaries”  as  the  over-arching  preference  for  a
legal  framework  in  international  research  and
lit er ature  that  we  might  be  most  taken  aback.

It is apparent that cadastral boundaries physically move as a result of earth deformation and that the
spatial cadastre needs to be able to respond to and model those movements. However this problem
covers a complex spectrum of specialist knowledge: geophysics; geodesy; management of the spatial
cadastre;  and  land  law.  The  dynamics  of  the  earth  are  reasonably  well  known,  measured  through
geo detic  techniques  and  modelled  in  solid-earth  geophysics.  New  Zealand’s  geodetic  datum  has  a
deformation model associated with it to recognize the motion of “fixed” survey marks attached to the
surface of the earth.
At  the  other  end  of  the  knowledge  spectrum,  land  law  is  based  on  centuries  of  common  law  and
precedents formed in a small number of historic court cases. Those precedent setting cases have not,
to date, recognized the existence of geodynamics on the surface of the earth. The tectonic motions
are slow but continuous, occur across the whole country and mostly cannot be detected by the general
public. Motions resulting from earthquakes are localized, frighteningly fast, but of short duration.
The cadastre must bridge the interface between the measured dynamics of the earth’s surface and
the relatively inflexible, slow moving and slow changing application of land law which nevertheless
serves the vital function of protecting property rights in land. [emphasis added]

69 The concept of “fit-for-purpose” is described in Enemark, S., K.C. Bell, C. Lemmen and R. McLaren, Fit-For-

Purpose Land Administration, Joint FIG / World Bank Publication, No. 60 (2nd ed.) as,

… land administration that should be designed to meet the needs of people and their relationship to
land, to support security of tenure for all and to sustainably manage land use and natural resources.
This perspective calls for a flexible and pragmatic approach rather than requirements imposed through
rigid regulations, demands for spatial accuracy and systems that may be unsustainable for less devel-
oped countries dependent on donor funding. Of course, such flexibility allows for land administration
sys tems to be incrementally improved over time, should it be found necessary.

The full publication is available at: http://www.fig.net/resources/publications/figpub/pub60/Figpub60.pdf

220

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Fit-For-Purpose Land Administration summarizes
the penultimate “best practice” as follows,

The fit-for-purpose approach includes four key
principles:

1. General  boundaries  rather  than  fixed
boundaries. Using general boundaries to delin-
eate land areas will be sufficient for most land
administration purposes especially in rural and
semi-urban  areas.  In  the  present  context,  the
term  “general  boundary”  means  one  whose
position  has  not  been  precisely  determined,
although usually, the delineation will relate to
physical features in the field.

2. Aerial imageries rather than field surveys.
The  use  of  high  resolution  satellite/aerial
imagery is sufficient for most land administra-
tion  purposes.  This  approach  is  three  to  five
times cheaper than field surveys.

3. Accuracy  relates  to  the  purpose  rather
than technical standards. Accuracy of the land
information should be understood as a relative
issue related to the use of this information.

4. Opportunities for updating, upgrading and
improvement.  Building  the  spatial  framework
should be seen in a perspective of opportunities
for on-going updating, sporadic upgrading, and
incremental  improvement  whenever  relevant
or necessary for fulfilling land policy aims and
objectives.70

We  might  be  surprised  to  learn  that  legal
cer tainty in parcel boundary location does not rank
as  an  important  consideration—even  in  Western
societies. A recent presentation at the FIG Working
Week 2015 included a slide deck71 which noted:

At  what  level  do  boundaries  need  to  be
determined to contribute to those land man-
agement functions?

• Depends 

on 

circumstances, 

like

topog ra phy, density of use, etc.

• Many  (physical)  boundaries  cannot  be
determined very accurate, they have a low
‘ide alization precision’ (cf. Baarda, see Bennett
et al. 2012. Geomatica 66(3): 365–374.)

⚬ e.g.,  middle  or  edge  of  ditch,  at  the
tree, middle of the hedge (0.5–1 m);
corner of house (5–15 cm), ...

• Such boundaries are “visible,” esp. from 

aerial images. 

Perhaps it really does depend on many circum-
stances.  Unfortunately,  we  still  have  no  reported
cases  in  common  law  jurisdictions  in  which  the
treatment  of  coordinates  as  a  determinative  factor
in  the  retracement  or  re-establishment  of  a  legal
boundary is claimed as the sine qua non element in
spatial certainty and boundary location.72 

But  is  this  correct?  How  does  land  admin-
is tra tion define land law in Canada—let alone the
spatial  extent  of  property  rights?  How  does  this
speak  to  land  title  registration  and  the  ability  to
enhance certainty of boundary location? In fairness
to the authors of the United Nations funded study,
the  target  audience  was  not  necessarily  Western
society. Nonetheless, we are reminded that the con-
ceptual  analysis  of  why  mathematical  coordinates
are important begins with a search for the answer to
this question: important for what purpose?

Coordinates and the Public
Interest

The lack of jurisprudence need not be a basis for
suggesting  that  there  is  no  role  for  mathematical
coordinates  in  the  definition  of  a  parcel  boundary.
Such a view would ignore the very effective and effi-
cient role that coordinates play as a form of bound-
ary guarantee in many civil law jurisdictions.73 The
guarantee is not that what an owner sees or believes
to be the boundary as assured by the state; rather the

70 Ibid., in Executive Summary at: http://www.fig.net/resources/publications/figpub/pub60/figpub60.asp
71 Zevenbergen, J., R. Bennett, The Visible Boundary: More Than Just a Line Between Coordinates, 19 May 2015,

Sofia, Bulgaria.

72 This is unlikely to occur until such time as there are regulations or legislated authority for implementing such a system.
73 For example, consider the practice in Louisiana in a somewhat dated paper: Heck, Carl E., 1968, “Fixing Limits, and
Surveying Land,” La. L. Rev. 28 at page 632. Available at: http://digitalcommons.law.lsu.edu/lalrev/vol28/iss4/9

The  Louisiana  Civil  Code  provides  that  land  may  be  separated  judicially  or  extra-judicially  by
mutual consent if the parties are of full age; but if one of the parties is a minor, or interdict, it must
be  done  judicially. The  Code  also  provides  that  in  either  case  the  separation  must  be  made  by  a
sworn surveyor of this state, who is bound to make a procès-verbal of his work in the presence of
two witnesses. It is the theory and policy of the law that the survey by a sworn surveyor is an official
act and the procès-verbal is written evidence of the proper location of land in accordance with the
title papers of the parties, and thus is sufficient to transfer the ownership of property or serve as the
basis for ten-year acquisitive prescription.

221

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

state dispenses a service in declaring where a parcel
corner is located, based on the application of coor-
dinates  to  the  hard  ground  surface.  It  does  not
engage  in  retracement  and  the  hierarchy  of  evi-
dence has no role to play.

Even the word “cadastre” is becoming a dated
term. Since the 1990s, many jurisdictions prefer the
expressions, “land administration” or “land gover-
nance.” The terminology continues to evolve74 and
much work still needs to be done. Paramount will
be  the  establishment  of  concepts  and  terminology
which can be adopted by participants in the discus-
sion.  For  example,  “geo-referencing”  is  not  the
same  thing  as  the  listing  of  coordinate  values
obtained  from  an  integrated  survey.75 Creating  a
repository of scanned survey plans is not the same
thing  as  creating  a  digital  cadastre. A  glossary  of
terms  to  pull  the  nomenclature  into  common
parl ance would help.

A  further  consideration  (which  this  paper
merely hints at), is the integration between a math-
ematical  coordinate  database  for  legal  parcel
cor ners  and  boundaries  and  a  principle76 based

algorithm  for  resolving  the  many  disconnects
which  will  appear  between  “place”  as  defined  by
the coordinate value, and the “hard” feature on the
ground. Equally important is the continuing moni-
toring of other initiatives in Canada and elsewhere.

Author

Izaak  de  Rijcke practices  law  and  is  a  land
sur veyor  with  a  focus  on  land  title  and  boundary
issues for private owners, municipalities, conserva-
tion authorities and governments. He has taught the
survey law courses for years and presently teaches
a  number  of  courses  at York  University.  He  is  an
Adjunct  Professor  at  Osgoode  Hall  Law  School
where he taught Property in 2014 and continues as
Adjunct  Professor  in  the  School  of  Graduate
Studies at the Lassonde School of Engineering. He
is also editor of Geomatica. Izaak delivers CPD for
lawyers through the Law Society of Upper Canada
and  Canadian  Bar Association,  and  for  surveyors
through Four Point Learning. q

74 Enemark, S., A well-tailored cadastral system is in fact acting as a backbone in society, April 2015, at:

http://mycoordinates.org/cadastre-in-a-changing-world-issues-and-directions/

75 Geo-referencing (as understood and used in this paper) is just that: a link or tie with existing coordinate control in

order to allow for a calculation of values of all features on the plan as a subset of data (it is “referenced”).
However, it stops short of uploading the subset into the larger network. Integration does the latter, but when the
term “integration” is used in Ontario legislation, it appears to be closer to geo-referencing. Integration includes a
re-adjustment ripple for all proximate points and features as the fresh data is ingested. Most important about true
“integration” is that the coordinate spatial data is valid for applications in both directions (as a contribution to the
larger fabric and as a source of evidence in retracement). At present it operates primarily as a contribution to a
the oretic coordinated fabric of parcel boundaries which does exist on the ground (and perhaps in surveyors’ minds)
but is rarely used as evidence in the process of boundary re-establishment.

76 Principles, as based on case law, are contrasted with rules, which may be more amenable to reduction into an

algo rithm. See: O’Brien, D., and W.D. Prendergast, 2014, “Established case law for land surveyors on property
boundaries,” Survey Review 46(334) 58, 63 and 64:

For property boundary disputes to be minimised, one way in which this may occur is for a surveyor
to be more familiar with case law on property boundary disputes by creating a ‘Guidebook’ of case
law. By embracing, utilising and implementing case law in surveyor’s day-to-day routine, it can sig-
nificantly assist them and clients when a boundary issue is brought before them. It is the surveyors
responsibility to accurately establish property boundaries in a professional manner with the facility
to defend their work in court if needs be. Not only do surveyors have a responsibility to themselves
and their profession, they have a responsibility to their clients and landowners. Landowners expect
them to be fully informed and know what to do when called upon and resolve the situation to the
best of their ability.
[citations omitted].

222

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/20/18For personal use only. 