International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 21, No. 7, August 2007, 799–810

Research Article

Modeling visibility through vegetation

MARCOS LLOBERA*
Department of Anthropology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-3100, USA

(Received 9 December 2005; in final form 28 November 2006 )

The calculation of visibility patterns associated with past monuments and sites is
an important element
in modern landscape archaeology. These types of
investigations have been limited by the inability of current viewshed routines
to incorporate vegetation information. The following paper presents a new
viewshed algorithm aimed at calculating the probability of locations being visible
in the presence of vegetation. To this day, little work has been done to address
this limitation, a notable exception is Dean’s Permeability Index Model (1997). A
review of Dean’s model
is provided here in the light of the new proposed
algorithm. The new algorithm is based on mathematical principles found in
Beer–Lambert’s Attenuation Law, a physics law governing the attenuation of
light through a medium. In addition to common viewshed parameters, the
routine requires a 3D model of a tree/plant and a layer indicating the spatial
distribution and density of vegetation on the landscape. The possibility of
varying both, the spatial and density distribution of tree/plants, and the three-
dimensional model representing vegetation makes the model well suited to
investigate the impact that vegetation may have on visibility patterns.

Keywords: Viewshed; Vegetation; Paleo-reconstruction; Landscape archaeology

1.

Introduction

In spite of the abundance of viewshed algorithms published in recent years, the
majority has focused almost exclusively on streamlining the line-of-sight (los)
algorithm in order to make it faster. For the most part, the nature of the output has
remained unchanged: classifying a location as being obstructed or not by
topography. Moreover, these studies calculate visibility under identical environ-
mental conditions often disregarding essential information, such as direction of light
source, atmospheric refraction, vegetation, etc. This is rather unfortunate given the
fertile ground that the resolution of these topics provides for new developments
within GISc (Llobera 2006). Over the years, a few of these limitations have been
addressed to various degrees of success, like the effect of illumination (Fisher 1995)
or atmospheric refraction (see ArcGIS v9.1 documentation).

While few authors have made reference to some of these environmental factors
(see Bishop 2002, Bishop et al. 2003) these have seldom been the focus of formal
models. The inability to incorporate vegetation remains one of the most important,
if not the main, Achilles’ heel surrounding GISc approaches to visibility analysis.
Amongst the reasons for this shortcoming is undoubtedly the fact that a satisfactory
solution cannot be attained using traditional GIS data structures. To be able to

*Corresponding author. Email: mllobera@u.washington.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2007 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810601169865

800

M. Llobera

address this limitation it is necessary to resource to the use of three-dimensional
information that has yet to be fully developed in commercial GIS.

The following paper discusses a theoretical model, a new algorithm, aimed at
calculating the probability of visibility in a landscape populated with vegetation.
The study arose in an attempt to address one of the main criticisms surrounding the
use of viewsheds studies within landscape archaeology (Tschan 2000, Wheatley and
Gillings 2000). Within this field, patterns of visibility generated by cultural features
in the landscape (e.g. earthwork and megalithic monuments) are often associated
with social and symbolic aspects within past societies. These patterns of visibility are
often argued as being instrumental in the definition of territories or associated with
questions regarding power and control (e.g. Barrett 1994). The ability to assess how
visibility patterns associated with prehistoric monuments may have been affected by
existing vegetation would shed important light into these investigations. It is
unlikely, however, that archaeologists will ever be able to reconstruct these patterns
with any degree of precision. The best of palynological and other palaeo-
environmental evidence can only provide us with information about the type of
vegetation that was present at any point in time. It can also indicate whether people
were actively manipulating their environment (e.g. there is evidence of clearances
around prehistoric round barrows in England). But it cannot tell us exactly where
trees or shrubs were located in the past. Nevertheless, knowing the type of
vegetation, and its environmental requirements, it is possible to speculate with a
good degree of certainty where certain type of vegetation may have been distributed
in a landscape. These locations can then be populated with different vegetation
densities ranging from few sparse trees to dense growth to allow us to determine in
which areas visibility may have been affected, to what degree, and to investigate the
effect of clearances in the past.

The following sections describe a new viewshed routine that enables the

incorporation of this information when calculating visibility.

2. Preliminary work

To this author’s knowledge, Dean’s Visual Permeability Method (1997) is the only
published work that has provided a tentative solution to this problem. In this work,
Dean used two triangulated irregular surfaces (TINs) to represent tree coverage.
Both TINs were used to delimit the height of the subcanopy (tree trunks) and the
tree canopy above the terrain. Given a viewpoint, Dean calculated the probability of
other locations being visible to be proportional to the length of the los that crosses
both the subcanopy and canopy regions. Crossing through each of these regions
reduces the probability by a certain amount (the permeability coefficient). Dean
refers to this coefficient as the distance that a los traverses before it is obstructed
entirely by tree coverage. In his article Dean acknowledged the difficulties of
determining empirically this coefficient:

Determining the visual permeability of a forest is not a trivial matter. It seems plausible
that visual permeability is a function of many factors, including density, age, species
composition, understory characteristics, and so on. This study made no attempt to
rigorously examine the issue of determining visual permeabilities. Instead, a number of
possible visual permeability values were picked somewhat arbitrarily and evaluated by
using them in a visual permeability-based viewshed delineation analysis (Dean 1997,
p. 973)[my emphasis].

Modeling visibility through vegetation

801

Through a set of field experiments, Dean derived information that he later used to
choose the appropriate permeability coefficient (Dean 1997, pp. 974–975). The
choice of this coefficient was based on the proportion of targets that were correctly
classified in both the field and his model. It is important to note that the use of
empirical information ought to be considered as a way of fitting the viewshed model
to a particular vegetation distribution rather than as an independent way of
verifying the results of the algorithm.

While appealing for various reasons (its simplicity and relative computational

efficiency) Dean’s study has several important limitations:

N It does not provide a way to consider the effect of varying densities of
vegetation. The presence of a TIN reflects the presence or absence of
vegetation, and does not allow discrimination of patches with high or low
vegetation density. Dean’s permeability coefficient refers to the entire canopy
and subcanopy, hence it is implicit that density is constant in these regions.

N The mechanisms to incorporate ‘structural’ differences because of

tree
typology are limited. The amount by which visibility is reduced is independent
of the angle of incidence of the los on vegetation or nature of the canopy that it
crosses (see figure 4). The model could not easily differentiate between looking
across tree tops or the middle of trees.
N It is very difficult, except by analogy to another environment, to use this model
to predict visibility without conducting a priori field experiments in order to
‘adjust’ the value of the permeability coefficient a posteriori.
N More importantly, it assumes that the probability of seeing through a patch of
vegetation decreases linearly (rather than exponentially) with distance. As I
hope to show below, this is not correct from a probabilistic point of view.
Furthermore, it stands in opposition to well-established principles in physics
that describe the likelihood of a large-scale particle (similar in this case to los)
traversing any medium.

3. Model description

The conceptual and mathematical basis for the model presented here is provided by
Lambert’s Law of Absorption (also known as Beer–Lambert’s Attenuation Law).
Reference to this law can be found in most elementary physics and meteorological
optics textbooks (Friedlander 2000, Halliday et al. 2004). Lambert’s law provides a
generic description on how large particles interact when crossing a certain medium.
While some of the assumptions governing this law are not strictly met by the model,
they still provide the guiding principles on which the following solution is built. A
geometric explanation of this law is used in the next section instead of the traditional
calculus one found in most physics textbooks in order to provide the reader with an
intuitive understanding.

3.1 Beer–Lambert’s Attenuation Law

We consider an imaginary thin sheet containing n number of particles per unit
volume. Each of the particles in the sheet have a cross-section c (see figure 1). The
thickness of this sheet, Dx, is thin enough in order to guarantee ‘no shadowing’ (i.e.
no two particles within the slice can be found one behind the other). We now
consider a stream of photons, i.e. a beam, traversing several of these slices.

802

M. Llobera

Figure 1. Stream of photons traversing a thin slice.

The probability that the slice will intercept an incoming uncharged particle is
P(int)5n?Dx?c. For slices of the same thickness we expect that the ‘blocked area’, i.e.
the area blocked by the particles in the slice, is on average the same. It follows that
this probability also corresponds to the fraction f of uncharged incoming particles
that are removed from the beam as they encounter each slice. In figure 1, f would
correspond to the ratio of yellow area b (sum of circles) divided by the blue area A
(free space).

Let f5b/A, it is clear that 0(f(1. The chance that an incoming particle will

survive traveling though a slice is 1–f.

If we put two slices in a row, the incoming particle stands 1–f chance of going
through the first slice and 1–f of surviving the second one. Hence the total chance of
getting though is (1–f)?(1–f). For m number of slices the probability will be (1–f)m.
If N0 particles are launched we expect N5N0?(1–f)m to traverse the mth slice. The
expected fraction of particles that will survive is S5N/N0. That is, S is the likelihood
that any incoming photon will survive. Let’s make S to be a function of the depth
x.We can also relate the number of slices m to x since x5m?Dx. We now have,

S xð Þ~ 1{f
ð

Þ

x
Dx

This expression can be further developed in order to get rid of Dx. If b5(1–f) then
. Given that b

0,b,1. By imposing x.Dx then x/Dx.1 we now have, S xð Þ~ b 1
is a fractional number we can substitute b51/a,

(cid:1) (cid:2)x
Dx

S xð Þ~

#x

"

Dx

(cid:3) (cid:4) 1
1
a

h
(cid:5)
~ a{1

ix

(cid:6) 1

Dx

h
~ a

1
Dx

i{x

Given that a.0 and that 1/Dx.0 and finite it follows that the entire expression
between square brackets is always greater than 1. This expression clearly shows that
S(x) decays exponentially. With some more elaboration and further substitutions we

Modeling visibility through vegetation

803

would obtain the exponential law of attenuation,

S xð Þ~e{a:x aw0, xw0
ð

Þ

3.2 Visibility through vegetation

Beer–Lambert’s Attenuation Law is adapted here to calculate the probability of
seeing through vegetation. The following description refers to the ‘visibility’ between
two locations only, i.e. a single los, but it can easily be generalized to an entire
viewshed.

For the sake of simplicity the following example assumes that there is only one
type of plant/tree, and that the observer and target location (i.e. where we are
looking at) are both on the same leveled surface. Our ultimate goal is to derive the
probability that a los will unite a viewpoint with a target location in the presence of
vegetation.

To this end, the traditional representation of los as a line is extended in order to
consider a rectangular solid, a beam (hereafter los-beam). This assumption is not
unrealistic as we are seldom interested in the visibility of a single point. The los,
which would run through the center of the los-beam, is kept for reference. The ends
of the beam are planes centered at the observer’s and target location. The normal
vector of both planes is defined by the direction of the los. The width (w) and height
(h) of the los-beam are arbitrary. The los-beam can be thought of as being the result
of launching a series los parallel to the original los, similar to the incoming particles
in the previous description. The probability that the target location is visible
corresponds to the chance that any los within the los-beam will pass unobstructed.
This probability is a function of the amount of, or lack of, vegetation encountered
along the los-beam. In the example described here we assume that vegetation
intercepts the entire cross-section of the los-beam, i.e. that the entirety of the los-
beam is blocked by the vegetation. It is important to keep in mind that this does not
need to be the case. In fact the vertical arrangement of vegetation along a los-beam
will seldom be constant. In some instances the los-beam will intercept vegetation
fully or partially depending on altitude changes along the los.

To estimate the likelihood of a target being visible we compute the proportion of
the los-beam blocked by the intervening vegetation. We approximate the calculation
of this value by dividing the length of the volume of the los-beam into smaller slices
with length Dx analogous to the slices described in the original attenuation
description. According to Lambert’s law Dx must be thin enough in order to
guarantee ‘no shadowing’, i.e. no two molecules (bits of vegetation in our case)
within the thin slice can lie behind each other. For our purposes we define Dx to be
the diameter of the circumference that delimits the canopy of an average plant/tree
type when projected onto a horizontal plane, see figure 2. We then consider the net
blocking effect that the tree has on the los-beam, i.e. we flatten the tree in the
direction of los.

Strictly speaking, Lambert’s Law assumes that the particles making up the
material, or medium, are randomly distributed and that their number is more or less
constant (enough for the mean density per volume of slice to be considered a good
estimate). While this is not strictly true in the case of vegetation (i.e. bits of
vegetation are not randomly moving everywhere) we can relax this restriction which
was put in place to simplify calculations and to define upper bounds of probability
estimates.

804

M. Llobera

Figure 2. Diameter of a 3D model tree will be used to determine Dx.

To find out how much blockage a los-beam will suffer at a distance x from the
observer we need to consider various factors: the amount of vegetation that the los-
beam will encounter, which is related to the density of vegetation along the beam,
and how much the los-beam will be blocked given the angle of incidence of the beam
on the vegetation.

Let a represent the cross-section area of the los-beam (a5w?h). Let r(x) be the
density of vegetation (i.e. number of plants/trees per unit of volume) at a distance x
from the observer. For obvious reasons, the number of trees in the volume, a?Dx, of
one of our slices is equivalent to the number of trees found at the base of the slice,
i.e. in the area w?Dx (see figure 3). Let b(x, z) be the area within a that is ‘blocked’ by
a single average plant/tree located at a distance x from the observer and at a relative
height z above/below the los. In this example b is always constant as the relation
ground–tree–observer remains the same along the entire los length. However, the
relative height of the tree in relation to the observer is likely to vary in normal
circumstances because of terrain variation along the los direction.

The ratio of area blocked by the vegetation to the total cross-sectional area of the

los-beam at x can then be estimated as being,

w xð Þ~

a:Dx:r xð Þ:b x, z
a

ð

Þ

The denominator is the cross-section area of the los-beam and the denominator is
the area blocked by the vegetation at location x from the observer that is contained
within the volume a?Dx.

Given our choice of Dx, it follows that 0(w(1. Using the same logic as the one
used in the previous section we derive the chance of a lo-beams surviving a ‘slice of
vegetation’ as being 1–w. The probability that it will pass through a second ‘slice of
vegetation’ is (1–w)?(1–w). For n slices, the proportion of los that will pass will be (1–
w)n. If we were to launch an arbitrary number of los, say N0, N5N0?(1–w)n of them
would pass.

We can interpret the fraction p xð Þ~ N
N0

Þn to be the probability that one of
the original N0 los will pass. Let this probability be p(x). Thus we arrive at a similar
expression to the one we obtained in the previous section which we could transform

~ 1{w
ð

Modeling visibility through vegetation

805

Figure 3. The volume in a los-beam is a divided into slices with Dx deep.

into an exponential equation.

p xð Þ~e{k xð Þ:x k§0, xw0
ð

Þ

x: Represents the distance from the observer along the los
k(x): Function based on the density of vegetation along the los.

From the above it is clear that the probability of a target location being visible
when looking across a volume of vegetation does not decrease linearly but
exponentially. This is perhaps the single most important shortcoming of Dean’s
earlier work. This result is appealing because it coincides with what we experience in
reality. As an observer looks toward a target location, vegetation closest to him/her
will reduce the viewable area by a certain amount. The probability that the target
location remains visible will decrease quite rapidly in the presence of additional
vegetation given that all that is needed is that vegetation further behind blocks the
remaining viewable area and so on. Note that this result does not imply that in order
to calculate visibility through vegetation all we need to do is to incorporate a
distance decay function to an ordinary viewshed. This approximation would be
marginally correct only if we were on a plane field and the density of vegetation was
constant. In order to calculate the probability we are interested in, it is necessary to
compute blockage along the los. The proper calculation of this blockage is not
straightforward as shown in the following sketch (figure 4).

806

M. Llobera

Figure 4. Sketch showing a non-trivial blockage pattern along a los-beam.

4. Modeling results

A case study using a synthetic DEM (figure 5) is used to illustrate the application of
the model. Several areas in the DEM were selected so that they could be ‘populated’
with trees (figure 6). In this example the selection is totally arbitrary but ideally it
would be the result of a more elaborate (palaeo-)environmental reconstruction.

The ensemble of these areas defines a template onto which different levels of tree
coverage are mapped. To test the new algorithm, we considered two different
scenarios each of which corresponds to different levels of tree density: low, high
(figure 6). These levels are constructed by filling the areas outlined by the template
with a distribution of random values within pre-determined numerical ranges. The
low-density scenario is constructed by generating values between 0 and 0.30, while
the high-density scenario is made out of random values between 0.7 and 1.0. Rather
than vegetation density (r), these values refer to tree coverage (c), so that a value of
1.0 corresponds to the unit area being totally covered by trees (however many there
are) while a value of 0.25 would correspond to one quarter of the unit area being
covered by trees.

For this particular example, a three-dimensional tree with a volumetric size of
8.1568.1566.00 (m) was generated. The tree can be thought as being made up by
tiny voxels of an arbitrary size (5.0 cm3 in this instance). It is envisaged that an
extended version of this model would include a module dedicated to design and
generate trees of different sorts. The possibility of being able to specify the
characteristics of the tree provides great flexibility when exploring different possible
scenarios as different types of trees and seasonal changes (in the case of a deciduous
type) can be easily accommodated.

As a by-product of calculating the probability of visibility it is possible to obtain a
raster representing the index of visual depth as shown in figure 7. This index, which
is related to Dean’s original visual permeability concept, represents the depth of
view for each location within the viewshed as computed from the observer. It is
calculated in planimetric terms, i.e. as the horizontal distance from the observer. For
any visible location the value of this index coincides with the horizontal distance
between the location and the observer. This value will be different for locations that

Modeling visibility through vegetation

807

Figure 5. Test DEM and observer location.

are not visible, either because they are hidden by topography or because their
probability of visibility (when computed along the los) dropped below a certain
threshold value (in this case this value was set to 0.001).

Finally, figure 8 displays the results obtained after running the new algorithm.
The new routine was executed using the vegetation coverage layers described above.
The effect that the different vegetation coverages have on visibility is clearly evident
when their viewsheds are compared with a typical viewshed (far left in figure 8).
Differences in the probability of visibility between each vegetation coverage level
can also be noticed. Except for very simple scenarios, it is hard to predict how these
differences will affect the visibility probability. This value is the result of complex
interrelationships between the observer, target location, the topographic nature of
the area being covered by vegetation, the density at those locations, and how much
obstruction the cross-section of the los-beam actually encounters. The procedure
allows us to detect which areas are totally unaffected by the current vegetation

Figure 6. The spatial distribution of vegetation for two different levels of density coverage.

808

M. Llobera

Index of visual depth calculated for high density coverage (r52000 m). The inset
Figure 7.
highlights target points where los-beams were fully obstructed. The visual depth at these
locations corresponds to the distance from the observer to the point where the los-beam was
totally obstructed.

Figure 8. Probability of visibility given different vegetation coverages (r52000 m).

Modeling visibility through vegetation

809

layout in spite of the presence of vegetation. For those affected areas, it provides a
measure of the mitigating effect that different vegetation coverages have on
visibility. For some locations, the increase in vegetation coverage has a minimal
effect as opposed to others.

5. Conclusions and future work

This new algorithm extends current GIS viewshed capabilities by allowing the user
to incorporate into the visibility calculation information about the nature of the
vegetation (via a 3D model), its spatial distribution and density. As part of a more
comprehensive palaeo-environmental reconstruction model, this procedure can be
used to explore the effect that different spatial distribution of trees (or other
vegetation) and tree densities may have on the visual quality of a landscape.

The underlying rationale for using the approach was based on cost effectiveness
and uncertainty surrounding environmental information. It is simply very difficult,
or not worth the effort, to determine where exactly each tree or plant might be
located in a landscape. Even if we did have this information we are likely to be more
interested in how changes to the layout and density of trees would affect visibility.
This is certainly true in the case of landscape archaeology where, except for a few
point locations, we can only reconstruct in broad terms the trees and plants that
existed at a certain period in time.

There are several ways in which this study and the model presented here can be
improved. In spite of the fact that the model presented is based on sound physical
principles (derived from Lambert’s attenuation law) the model remains theoretical
in so far that it has not been tested empirically. Testing this model would require
access to a study area with certain characteristics and availability of specific
information:

N An area dominated by a single type of tree.
N An area for which an estimated tree/vegetation coverage layer could be
N A good quality DEM.
It is hoped that this information will be available in the near future and that

calculated with some degree of accuracy.

testing will take place soon after.

The algorithm itself can be extended and improved in other ways; for instance, it
could be altered to consider the effect of different types of vegetations and their
associated densities simultaneously. It could also be expanded to incorporate
random versions of the three-dimensional model representing each tree type (by
introducing random changes in foliage and size). Other improvements may be
achieved by substituting the los-beam by a solid angle, and simulating the visual
fusion of distant objects. At the moment the cross-section area of the los-beam
remains constant throughout the length of the los. The introduction of solid angle
(i.e. rectangular-based pyramid with its apex theoretically located at the observer’s
eye) would have the effect of reducing the cross-sectional area closer to the observer.
This in turn would put more weight on vegetation nearest to the observer. Visual
fusion, the effect of merging distant objects into a pattern, may also be simulated by
dynamically altering the resolution used to map trees onto the los-beam. Trees
further away would be mapped into larger ‘chunks’ of the los-beam.

While the principles of the model are better understood in stochastic terms, the
implementation of the model is not 100% stochastic. Indeed a purely stochastic

810

Modeling visibility through vegetation

model would not be satisfactory. Human vision has developed to spot order within
nature. An algorithm that was 100% stochastic would not, for this reason, be
appropriate. The model is constructed using a mixture of random and non-random
elements. This combination allows us to address within the same modeling
framework both the structural and variable character associated with vegetation
in a landscape. Landscape variability may be introduced using different spatial
distributions of vegetation patches and different density levels. The structural
component is incorporated through the use of three-dimensional representations of
the vegetation that capture, to various degrees of complexity, the specifics of
different vegetation types.

The algorithm presented here had a very concrete goal: to calculate a ‘probability’
viewshed given a certain spatial distribution and density of trees. While the results
presented here are thought to be valuable in their own right, the impact and wider
implications of this algorithm can only be fully understood when we consider the
routine as being part of a wider modeling effort, and further empirical tests have
been undertaken.

Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge Professor Tim Sluckin (School of Mathematics,
University of Southampton, UK) for clarification of some of the key concepts in the
Physics literature; Dr Lee Hazelwood (National Air Traffic, UK) for pointing out
the resemblance of some of my early work with Lambert’s Attenuation Law; and Dr
Steven Goodreau (Anthropology, University of Washington, USA) for checking
through my work and providing much valued suggestions in the face of some
obstacles and two anonymous referees for several insightful comments.

References
BARRETT, J.C., 1994, Fragements from Antiquity: An archaeology of social life in Britain, 2900–

1200 BC (Oxford: Blackwells).

BISHOP, I.D., 2002, Determination of thresholds of visual impact: the case of wind turbines.

Environment and Planning B, 29, pp. 707–718.

BISHOP, I.D., WHERRETT, J.R. and MILLER, D., 2000, Using depth variables as predictors of

visual quality. Environment and Planning B, 27, pp. 865–875.

DEAN, D.J., 1997, Improving the accuracy of forest viewsheds using triangulated networks
and the visual permeability method. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 27, pp.
969–977.

FISHER, P., 1995, An exploration of probable viewsheds in landscape planning. Environment

FRIEDLANDER, K.S., 2000, Smoke, Dust and Aerosol: Fundamentals of Aerosol Dynamics (New

HALLIDAY, D., RESNICK, R. and WALKER, J., 2004, Fundamentals in Physics (New York:

LLOBERA, M., 2006, Seeing is believing: GISc and the visual. In Classics IJGIS, P. Fisher (Ed.)

and Planning B, 22, pp. 527–546.

York: Oxford University Press).

Wiley & Sons).

(London: CRC Press).

WHEATLEY, D.W. and GILLINGS, M., 2000, Vision, perception and GIS: developing enriched
approaches to the study of archaeological visibility. In Beyond the Map, G. Lock (Ed.)
(Amsterdam: IOS Press), pp. 1–28.

TSCHAN, A., 2000, Perception and viewsheds: are they mutually inclusive? In Beyond the

Map, G. Lock (Ed.) (Amsterdam: IOS Press), pp. 29–48.

