The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society

pp. 1–14

2016

2016

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

Claudia Robbi Sluter1,2, Corne´ P. J. M. van Elzakker3 and Ivana Iva´ nova´ 4

1 Po´ s-graduac¸a˜o em Cieˆncias Geode´sicas, Departamento de Geoma´tica, Universidade Federal do Parana´, Centro
Polite´cnico, Jardim das Ame´ricas, Caixa Postal 19001, CEP 81531-980, Curitiba, Brazil. 2CAPES – Coordenac¸a˜o de
Aperfeic¸oamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior, Setor Banca´rio Norte, Quadra 2, Bloco L, Lote 06, CEP 70040-020 -
Brası´lia, DF, Brazil. 3Department of Geo-Information Processing (GIP), Faculty of Geo-Information Science and
Earth Observation (ITC), University of Twente, PO Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands. 4Departamento
de Cartografia, Faculdade de Cieˆncia e Tecnologia (FCT), Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Rua Roberto
Simonsen 305, CEP 19060-900, Presidente Prudente, Brazil
Email: robbi@ufpr.br

Geo-information solutions can achieve a higher level of quality if they are developed in accordance with a user-centred
design that requires definition of the user requirements in the first step of solution construction. We treat a geo-
information solution as a system designed to support human-based activities in a specific context through which solutions
to contextual problems can be achieved via geographic knowledge. Geographic knowledge is a result of geo-data
exploration, analysis, interpretation and dissemination with a given geo-information system. Taking the characteristics of
geo-information systems into account, existing methods and techniques of requirements engineering may be applied for the
design and implementation of geo-information solutions. Based on these considerations, here we present a generic
framework that can aid geo-information experts, geo-informaticians and cartographers in the design and construction of
more efficient, effective and satisfactory solutions.

Keywords: user requirements, geoinformation solution, requirements elicitation, requirements engineering

INTRODUCTION

This paper presents a discussion on adjusting and applying
known methods and techniques of requirements elicitation to
the design of geo-information solutions. Higher quality
solutions are achieved via user-centred design, which requires
that the user requirements are deﬁned in the ﬁrst stage of the
work and that every decision in the design process is based on
those requirements. The user requirements determine the
type of solution, e.g. a simple map, a set of maps, an interactive
map, a geographical
information system (GIS), a geo-
visualization system or a virtual reality solution.

Currently, although user-centred design is increasingly
promoted in the geo-information domain (Wealands et al.,
2005; Lloyd, 2009; Yovcheva et al., 2010; Tsou, 2011), a
sound methodology for requirements elicitation and analysis
is still half developed at best. Few scientiﬁc papers exist that
describe research results in which the goal
is related to
requirements deﬁnition for geo-information applications. In
one example, Nelson et al. (2007) described an approach to
requirements description based on informal problem analysis
applied to a geographic application. The need for research on
requirements elicitation and analysis for the geo-information

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000092

domain was noted by Lloyd (2009), who concluded that this
area is still under-investigated.

a

as

result of

requirements

A framework for eliciting requirements is the ﬁrst task in
establishing a methodology for developing geo-information
solutions
engineering.
Requirements engineering evolved from the software
engineering discipline due to the need to improve software
quality and to minimize the occurrence of programming
errors. Problems related to high costs, missed schedules,
unsatisﬁed users and unexpected difﬁculties in system
maintenance were the result of an ineffective approach to
requirements deﬁnition (Ross and Schoman Jr, 1977). The
relevance of deﬁning the requirements
for computer
systems stimulated its evolution over the last four decades
(Kotonya and Sommerville, 1998).

The elicitation of user needs requires not only knowledge
of the users and their problems that call for solutions but
also an understanding of their skills and expertise as well as
the decisions that they have to make. If geographical
knowledge is a requirement for carrying out selected tasks
related to user responsibilities, the users need a type of geo-
information solution for decision-making or knowledge

2

The Cartographic Journal

insights. Therefore, the designer of a geo-information
solution must understand the relationship between the
users’ responsibilities and the users’ tasks.

One of the challenges in deﬁning the requirements for
geo-information solutions involves gaining an understand-
ing of the speciﬁc character of geo-information and its
inﬂuence on the design of solutions that match the users’
goals and needs. Therefore, expert knowledge (e.g.
cartography and geo-information science) is necessary for
building a usable geo-information solution. The cartogra-
phers and geo-informaticians must be able to analyse the
user requests and decide what is possible to build and at
what cost.

The user requests should be deﬁned in accordance with
the methods and techniques of requirements engineering
for computer
systems. The similarities between user
requirements for geo-information solutions and require-
ments engineering theory lead us to our main objective, i.e.
to investigate whether the known methods and techniques
of requirements elicitation can be applied in the geo-
information domain, taking into consideration that a geo-
information solution is a system-based product that is the
the
result of an engineering process. Consequently,
possibility of relating requirements engineering and geo-
information solutions requires that the latter are deﬁned as
a system. In our research, a geo-information software
system can range from a simple static map to a complex
geo-visual analytics system, and we assume that a basic set of
components always exists as a portion of every geo-
information system. The set of components, their char-
acteristics and their relationships can differ due to different
use contexts and user needs.

This paper is organized as follows. First, we deﬁne a geo-
information solution as a system and subsequently describe
our understanding of the techniques and methods of
requirements engineering in a geo-information context.
Finally, we describe how requirements elicitation techni-
ques and methods should be applied in the geo-domain to
make decisions on a geo-information solution design based
on user requirements.

THE GEO-INFORMATION SOLUTION AS A SYSTEM

According to NASA (2007, p.3), ‘systems engineering is a
methodical, disciplined approach for the design, realisation,
technical management, operations, and retirement of a
system. A ‘‘system’’ is a construct or collection of different
elements that together produce results not obtainable by the
elements alone’. The value of the system is determined by the
interactions of the system’s different elements (NASA,
2007). From the engineering point of view, a geo-informa-
tion solution can be designed and built as a system intended
to represent and disseminate geo-information.

An assumption in our proposition is that a set of basic
components exists for any type of geo-information system,
and the speciﬁcs of the different solutions are established as
a result of the geo-information system design. The design
the solution must be based on the requirements
of
speciﬁcations, which include the user requirements and
needs. The system components are organized into three

Figure 1. Characteristics of geospatial data. Source: Adapted from
Kraak and Ormeling (2010)

groups: geo-information, geo-visualization and geo-data-
base. The geo-information components
are location,
attribute and time. Every geo-information system is based
on representation of geographic location (Virrantaus et al.,
2009), and the geo-information characteristics are estab-
lished (Figure 1) together with the attributes and time
(Kraak and Ormeling, 2010). The geo-visualization com-
ponents allow us to view the results of geo-processing and
to develop visual analysis. These components are display
medium, spatial resolution, symbology and interactive cap-
abilities. The geo-database components are related to the
tasks of storing, modelling, managing and accessing spatial
data. The set of components of this proposed framework is
a generic one because it forms a framework for any geo-
information software system. Each of these components is
composed of a set of sub-components that deﬁnes a geo-
information software system at a more detailed level of
functionality, and their characteristics are established in
accordance with the user requirements (Figure 2).

The display medium is one of the basic components of
the system because the computer screen presents the geo-
information. The display medium determines the size,
colour resolution and image resolution of the graphical
solutions. The video size presents a constraint for the
decision on the screen map scale, which will set the
conditions for a multiple-scale solution. For example, it is
possible to represent the same geographic region on a 200
screen at a larger map scale than on a 150 screen, thus
allowing the user to view more detailed information on a
larger
to
cartographers or geo-informaticians, if the level of detail
of the screen maps demanded by the user matches a 150
screen solution, the screen size must be a component of the
system requirements. More complex situations occur in case
of
smartphones), which require a
deﬁnition of the minimum level of generalization for the
maps on the screen.

screen. Although this

scenario is obvious

screens (e.g.

small

The minimum level of generalization deﬁnes the spatial
resolution that must be modelled and stored in the geo-
database. In addition to the display medium, the minimum
level of generalization is also deﬁned in accordance with the
necessary geo-data processing and analysis requirements of

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

3

Figure 2. Basic set of components of geo-information systems and their relationships

the users. For instance, if it is only possible to store and
consequently depict urban areas and main roads at a certain
level of generalization, the user cannot acquire knowledge
of the spatial distribution of buildings and other auxiliary
roads. If this second level of geographic knowledge is
required, the system should be designed accordingly. In this
work, the user requirements for spatial analysis impose the
level of generalization of geo-information that can be stored
and displayed, and this requirement is one important
condition for the decisions on the hardware and the
software in the geo-information system design (Figure 3).
The display medium also constrains the characteristics of
the symbology (level of detail, colour and size of
the
cartographic symbols). The legend is another important
geo-visualization element (Dykes and Wood, 2010), and

because the legend design must be based on certain speciﬁc
elements, i.e. layout and position, here it is understood as
one different component of symbology. The size of the
display can make the legend design rather difﬁcult with
respect to legend position and layout (Figure 3).

The interactive capabilities are deﬁned in accordance with
the level of user
interaction demanded by the user
requirements. Therefore, this item depends on display
medium and determines certain characteristics of
the
symbology and the related legend (Figure 3). At this stage
in our research, we assume that the display medium is always
a computer screen and that the type of
interaction is
accomplished in a non-immersive environment using a
mouse or touch screen. These maps can be dynamic and are
designed and implemented as single-user environments

Figure 3. Component relationships that are application dependent

4

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Sub-components of symbology for a 2D map solution

(Haklay and Chao Li, 2010) or web-mapping applications
(Kraak and Brown, 2001; Skarlatidou, 2010). From the
point of view of design of a geo-information software system
based on user requirements, the differences between these
choices rely on the interactive tools for handling geo-data. In
a single-user environment solution, the interactive capabil-
ities depend on the software implementation that runs in a
stand-alone solution. For web-mapping applications, the
software implementation is based on web services for spatial
data (Tsou and Curran, 2008). Today, the Open Geospatial
Consortium standards (OGC, 2013) are widely used for
Web Map Services, and the Geography Markup Language
makes web mapping applications possible for either desktop
browsers or mobile platforms (Ko¨bben, 2007).

Any geo-information software system requires representation
of the geo-data in a geo-database (Burrough and McDonnell,
1998; Kraak and Ormeling, 2010). A geo-information solution
can be simply designed as a system based on only a PC and
stand-alone database software or as a database that runs on a

server. These two types of database implementation require
different database designs, and, consequently, different
solutions for storage, maintenance and implementation of
the geo-data structures. Modelling, storage, processing, and
semantics are four possible aspects of geographic information
(Virrantaus et al., 2009), and the cartographer or geo-
informatician must be prepared to use all of this knowledge
to propose a suitable solution for the users of a geo-
information software system.

In addition to identifying and deﬁning the system
components, the designer of a geo-information system
must take into consideration their relationships, which are
established in accordance with the purpose of representing
and disseminating geo-information. The quality of the
solution is measured in accordance with the user require-
ments (Chrisman, 1984). Therefore, the system’s effective-
ness, efﬁciency and user satisfaction should be the objective
of the geo-information solution instead of the technological
sophistication of the system’s components.

Figure 5. Sub-components of symbology for a 3D map solution

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

5

Figure 6. An illustration of geo-information system components. The basic set of components is represented inside the ellipse

Selected examples of

the relationships between the
system’s components are illustrated in Figure 3. The basic
set of components of geo-information systems shows that
geo-information location, attribute and time deﬁne the
spatial data content that is to be modelled, structured and
managed in the geo-database. Location accuracy and spatial
resolution are directly dependent on each other. If we can
deﬁne the data accuracy from the user requirements, then
we can also establish the minimum level of generalization
for
the spatial data content. The minimum level of
generalization deﬁnes the largest possible scale for the
maps built from those geo-data. The options for accessing
the data in the geo-database (data accessibility) determine
the possibilities of
the map and software interactions
(interactive capabilities), whereas the user needs deﬁne
the interactive tools that must be implemented in the
system interface. Attributes and time, together with spatial
resolution, inﬂuence the decisions in creating the graphical
elements of a map symbology. For a solution based on 2D
maps (static screen maps), the symbology component has a
different set of sub-components (Figure 4) than a solution
(Figure 5). In a 3D graphic
that
representation, the shading pattern of a scene is dependent
on the illumination model, which is deﬁned in accordance
with the characteristics of the surface and the position and
characteristics of the light source (Foley et al., 1990).

requires 3D maps

In conclusion, the system requirements speciﬁcations
deﬁne the design of the solution and, therefore, of the

characteristics of any solution component and the compo-
nent relationships.

UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES

Due to the large number of possibilities for geo-informa-
tion solutions, we propose a theoretical framework for the
design of any type of geo-information solution in the
deﬁned problem domain. In requirements engineering,
the problem domain is deﬁned in accordance with
stakeholders’ needs and demands. A stakeholder is any person
or any entity that has an interest in the system (Kotonya and
Sommerville, 1998; Cockburn, 2001; Hull et al., 2005), and
the users are those stakeholders that will directly interact with
the system (IEEE, 1998; Sutcliffe, 2002). According to the
deﬁnition of a system adopted in this research (NASA, 2007,
p.3) and adapted to the geo-information context,
the
components of a geo-information software system could be
people, hardware, software, facilities, policies, documents and
the necessary geo-data. Figure 6 illustrates that if people,
hardware, software and certain equipment are deﬁned as
system components, then they are an element of the system
domain, and their relationship to the system basic components
must be deﬁned.

A geo-information software system may be required if
users must make decisions based on geographic knowledge.

6

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. System development process and traceability. Source: Adapted from Hull et al. (2005)

Figure 8. Adaptation of the ‘four worlds’ model to a geo-information system. Source: Adapted from Sutcliffe (2002)

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

7

Figure 9. Activity model of the requirements engineering process adapted to a geo-information solution. Source: Adapted from Kotonya and
Sommerville (1998)

Therefore, a geo-information software system can be
understood as a special type of bespoke system (Kotonya
and Sommerville, 1998), and consequently,
it can be
designed and built in accordance with user requirements
deﬁned by requirements engineering methods and techni-
ques. The use context can consist of any set of individual
citizens or organization activities
require a geo-
information solution. For example, the organization could
be public or private, governmental or non-governmental, a
small or large enterprise, etc., and the organizational
purpose
research
development.

scientiﬁc

business

could

that

be

or

The development of software solutions via an engineer-
ing approach has stimulated the proposal and improvement
of models for design and implementation of computer
systems. Since the proposal of the ‘waterfall model’ (Royce,
1970), software engineering models have been deﬁned
based on the assumption that the complexities of the system
domain and user needs (problem domain) are treated at
different levels of abstraction. The software implemented in
the computer (machine) is accomplished at the lowest level
of abstraction, and the requirements deﬁnitions at the
highest level because they are closer to our (human) view of
the world (Ross and Schoman Jr, 1977). The different
levels of abstraction are represented by different models, i.e.
requirements, analysis, design and implementation, and
these models require methods that make possible the
mapping of one model to another (Nosek and Schwartz,
1988). In this process, the outputs from one model act as
the inputs for the next level of abstraction model. For
instance, the outputs from requirements speciﬁcation are
the inputs
In requirements
the analysis model.
engineering, the transformation of high-level to low-level
requirements is known as traceability. Every model at a
different level of abstraction (Figure 7) should be deﬁned in
accordance with a set of requirements. Because the entire
process of system development is dependent on require-
ments, it is important to understand that requirements exist
at each level of abstraction,
i.e. statements of needs,
stakeholder requirements, system requirements and system
component requirements. For large systems, subsystem
component requirements also exist (Hull et al., 2005).

for

To achieve the best levels of efﬁciency, effectiveness and
user
satisfaction, a geo-information system based on
requirements engineering must be developed in a set of
stages. Because the requirements for the geo-information
system are fulﬁlled only if they are considered in every stage
of the product design and implementation, every decision
in the process must be based on the established user
requirements. The relationship between the system require-
ments and every stage of the development of a geo-
information system can be understood and organized as the
four worlds model (Sutcliffe, 2002). In this research, we
assume that the adaptation of the four worlds model to a
geo-information system (Figure 8) is suitable for any type of
geo-information solution. The usage world is deﬁned in
accordance with the users and their need for geo-informa-
tion. The usage world is transformed into the geo-information
solution design world, which is transformed into the geo-
information solution production world, and the result is the
geo-information solution world. Each one of those worlds is
deﬁned by proper theory and methods. The ‘worlds’ are
connected to each other by information ﬂow, which carries
the results of every stage of building geo-information
solutions from one ‘world’ to another. In this manner, the
results achieved in the user requirements elicitation stage
form the basis
the geo-information design tasks.
Similarly, the production tasks are deﬁned and accomplished
in accordance with the geo-information design results. Once
again, the performance of the geo-information solution
depends on the user requirements deﬁnitions.

for

In the four worlds view model, the usage world represents
the application domain, which is also referred to as the use
context (Sutcliffe, 2002). The application domain deﬁnes
the purpose of the geo-information system and sets the
system boundaries. Therefore, the deﬁnition of the geo-
information system domain should be the ﬁrst task in
developing a solution. The geo-information use context is
established in accordance with the goals and requirements
of the stakeholders. The intended goals and the expected
results and requirements are the system characteristics and
capabilities that make it possible to achieve those results
(Fairly, 1985). The usability of the ﬁnal solution is veriﬁed
only for the deﬁned use context speciﬁed by the system

8

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 10. Adaptation of the generic requirements elicitation process to a geo-information software system. Source: Adapted from Kotonya
and Sommerville (1998)

domain. The description of
the geo-information use
domain is the result of a requirements elicitation process
as deﬁned by Kotonya and Sommerville (1998).

The ﬁnal product of requirements engineering is system
speciﬁcation, which forms the basis of the design and
implementation processes. The speciﬁcations of a system can
be accomplished in four different activities: elicitation, analysis,
documentation and validation (Figure 9). At the end of the
validation stage, the requirements are considered correct,
detailed, unambiguous and sufﬁciently complete to match the
needs and requirements of the stakeholders, including the
system’s users (Kotonya and Sommerville, 1998).

As noted by Nosek and Schwartz (1988, p.1372), at the
requirements validation stage, it is important that the users
check ‘whether the problem statement has been transformed
accurately into the requirements document’. In the require-
ments validation step, any errors or mistakes made during the
requirements engineering process must be detected and
corrected. The process of preparing and validating the agreed
requirements document is iterative because it is based on
negotiation between stakeholders and requirements engi-
neers. The agreed-upon requirements document (Figure 9)
means that the negotiation between stakeholders (including
the users) and requirements engineers reaches a solution that
satisﬁes the stakeholders and that this solution can be
implemented. The design of the solution must result in
system behaviour that meets the speciﬁed requirements
(Kotonya and Sommerville, 1998; Bray, 2002).

FRAMEWORK FOR REQUIREMENTS ELICITATION
APPLIED TO GEO-INFORMATION SOLUTIONS

Stages in the requirements elicitation process
Elicitation is the ﬁrst activity in describing the requirements for
a geo-information software system because the requirements

must be discovered at the beginning of the solution design
(Figure 9). During requirements elicitation, the task of the
requirements engineers is to gather information useful
in
understanding the characteristics of the problem domain as
and
well
Sommerville, 1998; Bray, 2002).

the stakeholders’

requirements

(Kotonya

as

and collect

The requirements elicitation process is accomplished using
four different tasks: establish objectives, understand back-
requirements
ground, organize knowledge
(Figure 10). The elicitation process begins with establishing
the objectives and deﬁning the problem to be solved by the
geo-information solution. Cartographers or geo-informaticians
must understand the relationship between user activities and
the problems these activities aim to solve. For a geo-
information software system, the process of proposing a
solution for the problem must be accomplished based on
geographic knowledge and the consequent geo-information
analysis. The expected results of geo-information analysis are
achieved if the necessary conditions and constraints for the geo-
information software system are deﬁned. As an example,
suppose that users must carry out exploratory analysis and that
they wish to use an interactive solution in a single-user
environment only. In such a case, certain possible conditions
for the system design are that the necessary data must be stored
in the user’s workstation, the maps must be depicted on the
computer screen and the interactive tools must enable the
achievement of the deﬁned goals. These conditions require the
speciﬁcation of the characteristics of the computer (e.g.
memory, capacity), the geo-database software and the compu-
ter screen size and resolution. More speciﬁcally, the computer
memory and geo-database software must reﬂect the character-
istics and amount of necessary data, including geo-data. The
computer screen size and resolution and the characteristics of
the video card must be suitable for graphic map solutions and
interaction tools to stimulate insights in the exploratory analysis
stage, which is a constraint for the map scales.

After performing the ﬁrst task in requirements elicitation,
the cartographer or geo-informatician must study and

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

9

understand the knowledge background (at a suitable level)
with which the users will develop certain tasks that demand
geographic knowledge. The usual techniques applied in this
stage of the work are document analysis and interviews.
Examples of user activities include tasks as speciﬁc as the
development of a Municipal Master Plan (MMP), monitor-
ing and improvement of a public health system, and
management of sylviculture for the paper and cellulose
industry. User requirements can also be related to personal
decision-making, e.g. renting a house or using Google
Maps for planning car routes for a family holiday. At this
stage of the requirements elicitation process, the goal is to
understand the system background based on knowledge of
the use context characteristics, the application domain and
the existing geo-information solutions. In software engi-
neering, for the case in which the new system is an upgrade
of a previous system, it is necessary to have knowledge of
the existing system. For production of a geo-information
software system, it is necessary to understand the previous
solutions for geographic analysis that are adopted by those
who use the geo-information. The understanding of an
application domain and how to deﬁne it is well known in
the geo-information ﬁeld. Every thematic map is built with
data collected from an application domain. The use context
that must be understood is the one in which the user
activities are performed.

to stakeholder

The third stage of requirements elicitation involves
organization of the knowledge acquired from the two
previous tasks. The knowledge that must be organized
refers
identiﬁcation and characteristics,
priority ranking of the goals of the user activities and
essential and important knowledge of
the application
domain. From the use context characteristics, information
is available that allows identiﬁcation of the stakeholders, and
from the stakeholder responsibilities in the application
domain it is possible to describe their characteristics. The
knowledge, professional background and experience of the
geo-information users have a strong inﬂuence on their
spatial cognition and consequently on their view of the
spatial feature characteristics and relationships. For the same
geographic region and spatial phenomenon, users with
different backgrounds (i.e. urban planners, transportation
engineers, physicians or tourists) will seek different answers
because they understand the spatial phenomenon relation-
ships in different ways. Consequently, the geo-information
solutions must contain various characteristics to be useful to
different users.

The result of the third stage is the knowledge that forms
the basis for deﬁning the requirements and the decisions on
the geo-information software system design and implemen-
tation. Knowing the use context characteristics and the
application domain makes it possible for the cartographer or
geo-informatician to understand and deﬁne the system
requirements, which are a collection of requirements from
the stakeholders, the application domain and the use context.

Proposed guideline for eliciting requirements for a geo-information
software system
To guide the requirements elicitation process, we present
the following set of questions, proposed in accordance with
the process illustrated in Figure 10. These questions are

organized according to the main steps of the requirements
elicitation process:
N User activity:

3 What is the overall activity that the users must
execute in the business or research organization of
the users or during personal decision-making (e.g. a
car route for a tourist trip)?

3 What is the knowledge background of the user
activity (e.g. urban planning for the development of a
master plan, forest and agriculture engineering and
economics for environmental protection or transpor-
tation, traffic engineering and urban planning for
public transportation in urban areas)?

3 What are the mission, goals and objectives of the user

activity (e.g. job, scientific research, tourism)?

N Problem to be solved:

3 What problem is to be solved?
3 What required geographic knowledge is related to

the problem?

N Geo-information solution constraints:

3 What are the geo-data conditions that are required to

solve the problem?

3 What are the constraints for the geo-data and the
geo-information system that are required by those
conditions?

N Objectives of the geo-information system:

3 Based on the activity goals, the problem to be solved
and the solution conditions and constraints, what are
the objectives of the geo-information system?

N Application domain:

3 What

is the administrative and/or professional

organization for the user activity?

3 How is this organization related to the activity’s

goals and objectives?

3 Based on the objectives of the geo-information
the

software system, what
application domain of the geo-information system?

is the definition of

N If a geo-information solution is already in use:

3 What aspects of the problem can this system still

solve and how?

reasons?

3 Which activities cannot be solved and what are the

3 Is it efficient (cost/benefits rate) to use a component

of the old geo-information solution?

N Stakeholder and user identification:

3 Who are the stakeholders in the application domain?
3 What characteristics of the stakeholders must be taken
into account in the geo-information system design?
3 What are the relationships among the stakeholders,
the application domain and the geo-information
system?

10

The Cartographic Journal

3 Among the stakeholders, who are the geo-informa-

3 What are the users’ responsibilities and tasks in their

tion system users?

activity context?

N Goal prioritization and domain knowledge filtering:

3 How do the users tasks fit into the activity’s goals and

3 What geographic knowledge do the users need to

objectives?

build up?

3 How is the geographic knowledge applied by the

users to accomplish their tasks?

3 How do the users make decisions based on geo-

graphic knowledge?

3 Based on the activity’s mission and goals,

the
application domain, the problem to be solved and
the stakeholders’ demands, what are the criteria used
to define the priorities for the geo-information
system goals, and consequently, the ranking of these
goals?

3 According to the geo-information system goals, what
knowledge of the application domain will act as the
basis for the design of the geo-information software
system?
N Collect requirements:

3 What are the stakeholders’ (including the users)
requirements for the geo-information software system?
3 What are the application domain and the organiza-
tion requirements for the geo-information software
system?

system intended to do?

The result of the requirements elicitation task is a ‘ﬁrst
requirements’ document. This document is used as the
input for the requirements analysis task. According to the
Revision of IEEE Std 830 – 1998: Recommended Practice
for Software Requirements Speciﬁcation (IEEE, 2009), the
requirements document should address selected basic issues
in this
research that are adapted to geo-information
software systems according to the following:
N Functionality – What is the geo-information software
N External

interfaces – How does the geo-information
system interact with people, with the system’s hardware,
with other hardware and with other software?
N Performance – What is the speed, availability, response
time, recovery time, etc. of the various geo-information
software system functions?
N Attributes – What are the requirements of the system’s
portability, correctness, maintainability, security, etc.?
N Design constraints imposed on an implementation – Are
there any required standards in implementation lan-
guage, policies for geo-database integrity, resource
limits, operating environment(s) etc.?

Selected techniques for eliciting requirements for a geo-information
software system
Most of the techniques described in the literature on
requirements engineering are used by cartographers or

geo-informaticians if their aim is to investigate the usability
of
interactive maps or geo-visualization systems. Those
techniques, e.g. document analysis, interviews and ques-
tionnaires, can also be used to carry out the requirements
elicitation process for a geo-information software system
and answer the questions listed in our proposed guideline
above as follows:
N Document analysis (Suchan and Brewer, 2000) at the
beginning of the requirements elicitation process for
learning related to:

2 The activity’s expertise;
2 The activity’s mission, goals and objectives;

N Document analysis and literature review for acquiring

knowledge of:

2 The activity context (business or research organiza-

tion or personal decision-making) expertise;

2 The relationship between the administrative and/or

professional organization;

2 The activity goals and objectives;

N Interviews (Suchan and Brewer, 2000; van Elzakker,

2004) for:

2 Refining the definition of

the activity context
(business or research organization or personal
decision-making) mission, goals and objectives;

2 Improving the knowledge of the activity context (business
or research organization or personal decision-making)
expertise;

N Brainstorming (Parnes and Meadow, 1959; Collaros and
Anderson, 1969; Bouchard Jr, 1972) for understanding
the initial concepts of the problem to be solved by the
geo-information software system;
N Unstructured interviews (van Elzakker, 2004) for defin-
ing the problem and the geographic knowledge related
to the problem;
N Questionnaires (Suchan and Brewer, 2000) and interviews
(Suchan and Brewer, 2000; van Elzakker, 2004) for:

2 Refining the problem;
2 Defining the geo-information solution conditions
and constraints required by the characteristics of the
problem and geo-information analysis that will be
used in the solution of the problem;

N Interviews and task observation (Suchan and Brewer,
2000) for understanding the previous geo-information
solutions;

N Document analysis,

interviews and questionnaires
(Suchan and Brewer, 2000) for understanding the
application domain and the organization structure;
N Interviews, task observation and questionnaires (Suchan
and Brewer, 2000) for identifying stakeholders and
system users and understanding their characteristics;
N Questionnaires (Suchan and Brewer, 2000) for defining
the priority ranking for the activity context (business or
research organization or personal decision-making) and

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

11

goals and essential and important knowledge of the
application domain;
N Questionnaires and interviews (Suchan and Brewer,
2000) for defining the user tasks related to the problem
domain and how the geographic knowledge is used;
N Task scenarios and focus groups (Suchan and Brewer,

2000; van Elzakker, 2004) for:

2 Understanding how the users make decisions based

on geographic knowledge;

2 Defining the components and their relationships in

the proposed geo-information system;

2 Defining the requirements for the system function-
ality, external interfaces, performance and attributes.

The ﬁnal product of the requirement deﬁnition process is
the agreed requirements document (Figure 9) (Kotonya
and Sommerville, 1998). The deﬁned requirements can be
divided into two groups: stakeholder requirements and
system requirements. The ﬁrst category is represented by a
use model, and the latter category is represented by a
conceptual (e.g. object-oriented analysis) model of a system
(Coad and Yourdon, 1990; Booch, 1994). One successful
proposed model for use-model representation is the use-
case model (Bittner and Spence, 2003). A use-case model
represents the interactions between the users and the system
in a diagrammatic manner and from an external point of
view (Jacobson, 1992; 1994). The representation of the
system’s functionality as a result of the interaction between
users and system, e.g. with the use-case model (Bittner and
Spence, 2003; Jacobson, 1992; 1994),
is possible after
identifying all of the user requirements.

An example of requirements elicitation for a geo-information solution
for urban planning
As an example of a possible implementation of
the
requirements elicitation process, we illustrate our proposal
by describing certain aspects of the development of an
MMP in the State of Parana´ in Brazil. The knowledge ﬁeld
of
this geo-information solution application is urban
planning, and the cartographers and geo-informaticians
must learn about urban planning at a necessary level to be
able to understand the theory of the MMP, as deﬁned in the
federal and state laws that rule these plans and the urban
planning methodology
State
(Paranacidade, 2010). According to the Brazilian Federal
Constitution (BRASIL, 1988), every municipality that
contains more than 20,000 inhabitants is obliged to have
an MMP, which is the basic instrument for establishing
policies for urban settlement and development. Since 2001,
every MMP in Brazil must be proposed in accordance with
the ‘Statute of the Cities’ – Federal Law 10257/2001
(BRASIL, 2001).

adopted

Parana´

in

In the State of Parana´, it is common that the municipality
executive government must contract a consulting ﬁrm that
specializes in urban planning to develop an MMP. The
proposed MMP is analysed and approved by the munici-
pality’s technicians and sent to the municipality council of
representatives for approval as a set of laws. Consequently,
in the State of Parana´,
there are three groups of
professionals that could be involved in establishing and

implementing an MMP: state and municipality government
technicians and consultants. In this example, the users of
the geo-information system are the state government
technicians who work for
an institution known as
Paranacidade ,http://www.paranacidade.org.br/..

Paranacidade is responsible for promoting and delivering
the activities and services related to regional, urban and
institutional development of the State of Parana´ munici-
palities as well as management of public ﬁnancial resources.
The responsibilities of Paranacidade relative to the MMP
are (Paranacidade, 2010):
N To aid the municipality administration in organizing a
team of technicians responsible for monitoring and
evaluating every step of the development of the MMP;
N To plan and organize actions that enable knowledge
exchange between municipality technicians and consultants;
N To solve the doubts of the consultants or municipality
technicians relative to the development of the MMP
goals, methodology or activities schedule;
N To guarantee that the MMP is in accordance with the
federal, state and municipal laws, especially with Federal
Law nu 10.257 (BRASIL, 2001);
N To establish guidelines for implementation of a perma-
nent and sustainable municipal planning process that will
be used by the municipality technicians.

Paranacidade is organized as a directorate, and every
directorate has ofﬁces. The geo-information solution stake-
holders might include every director of Paranacidade, from
the executive director to the director of operations, the chief
ofﬁcers of projects and the technicians that work for the
ofﬁces. In addition to these professionals, we include
stakeholders from the municipality’s city hall secretaries
and the Paranacidade regional ofﬁces and from certain State
of Parana´ government secretaries. The system users are the
professionals from the project ofﬁces who are responsible for
setting the guidelines and methodology for development and
revision of the MMP. The technicians of this ofﬁce are
experts in urban planning, civil engineering, geography,
business,
information technology and geo-information
engineering.

The objective of an urban and regional plan is to promote
actions for sustainable planning, employment and income
generation; improvement of the quality of life; and social
inclusion (Parana´, 2003). To achieve this objective, an MMP
is developed in ﬁve stages (Paranacidade, 2010), of which
three stages are directly dependent on geographic knowledge:

1. Analysis of the regional, municipal and urban reality;
2. Guidelines and propositions for the MMP;
3. Drafting of the set of laws that establishes the MMP

itself.

The analysis of the reality is accomplished in three steps:

1. Data and geo-data surveying,
2. Geo-information structuring,
3. Geo-information analysis, aiming at analysis of the
current state of the municipality relative to all the
aspects of the MMP.

The third step requires an understanding of the character-
istics of physical geography, economics, history and land

12

The Cartographic Journal

use evolution as well as the socio-economic conditions and
environment of the municipality. An example of spatial
analysis accomplished in the third step is deﬁnition of the
geographic location and limits of
the environmental
protection areas. To deﬁne the environmental protection
areas, it is necessary to understand the current situation of
the region relative to geomorphology, pedology, geology,
vegetation, hydrography, topography and urban and rural
areas.

urban land distribution;

region for future urban development;

The results of the third step are the inputs for a proposed
MMP that is also based on spatial analyses because it must
establish guidelines
socio-economic and
for political,
environmental actions and the urban infrastructure and
utilities planning required to achieve results related to:
N Management of real estate development to promote
N Planning of urban land use and establishment of the
N Definition of social equity in urban services and
N Planning of the urban street system and rural road
systems by taking into consideration urban and rural land
use, public transportation and other methods of trans-
portation;

N Environmental protection and sanitation;
N Protection of the natural, historical, artistic, cultural and
N Definition of the regulatory and policy backgrounds for

infrastructure distribution;

archaeological patrimony;

building permits and parcel divisions.

It is necessary to develop a geo-information solution and to
collect, organize and represent geo-data for spatial analysis
of the municipality’s current state for the design of the
MMP. In the State of Parana´, certain urban planners still
use printed maps, although others adopted GIS several
years ago. However, the GIS solutions are only used to
generate thematic maps, either printed or screen maps. For
these users,
the geo-information solution might best
combine GIS and interactive map characteristics. Such a
geo-information solution would be designed to allow users
to acquire the spatial knowledge necessary for the MMP of
a municipal region.

analysis: urban, municipal

Examples of the necessary conditions and constraints of
the geo-information system are related to the size of the
geographic region. The MMP must be based on three levels
and state
of geographic
(Paranacidade, 2010). Each of
these levels requires a
different
range of geo-information scales, and conse-
quently, different solutions for the geo-information com-
ponents of the system (e.g. spatial data content, geo-data
content modelling, display medium, software and map
interaction, symbology).

The design of the geo-information system must take into
consideration that the users must make decisions based on
geographic knowledge to accomplish their tasks. The geo-
information solution should provide such functions as using
different maps from different datasets stored in the geo-
database, accessing tables and graphics related to the map,
performing geographic analysis, deﬁning the map layout
and comparing the maps to the tables and graphics, as in a
geo-visual analytics system.

In the real-life situation of designing a geo-information
solution, the cartographer or geo-informatician should
describe the characteristics of the dataset that would be
accessed by the users from the geo-database, the geo-
information scale range to be implemented, the geo-
information visualization parameters for any type of map,
the data classiﬁcation methods demanded by the geo-
graphic knowledge requested, etc. However, every one of
these decisions must be based on the user requirements,
and the implementation of the geo-information system
must meet the user requirements and needs. Additionally, it
is highly important to take into consideration that in the
geo-domain, the user requirements and needs are always
dependent on how efﬁciently and effectively the users can
acquire the geographic knowledge necessary to make
decisions, which are related to the development of an
MMP in this example.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we described the application of existing
techniques and methods of requirements elicitation for the
design of a geo-information software system. Our approach
is based on the following assumptions:
N It is possible to achieve higher levels of efficiency, effective-
ness and user satisfaction if the design and implementation of
a geo-information solution is based on user requirements.
N Design of a geo-information solution in accordance with
user requirements characterizes it as user-centred design.
N A geo-information solution is a system, and therefore its
N It is possible to ascertain a basic set of geo-information system
components with characteristics and relationships established
in accordance with the user requirements and the use context.

design is based on an engineering approach.

One of the important starting points of our proposal is that the
design of the entire system, including the user interface, is a
result of the user requirements. Therefore, the geo-information
system must ﬁt the users’ needs and expectations and not the
other way around, which would force the users to adjust and
adapt themselves to the system. The consequence of our
approach (which is in turn a demand for the system design) is
that the level of user satisfaction should be high. This level of
user satisfaction is only possible if the users can learn how to use
the system independently, to acquire the geographic knowledge
necessary to perform their
the user
requirements are completely and correctly deﬁned and the
system design is developed in accordance with those require-
ments, the users are able to execute the tasks deﬁned during the
requirements elicitation in their application domain.

intended tasks. If

Our purpose in describing an example related to the
development of an MMP was to illustrate how to approach
the elicitation of requirements in a practical situation. A
complete set of the information that would form a component
of the requirements document is the objective of our future
research in which we will apply the proposed framework to a
well-deﬁned case study. The case study is the design of a geo-
information system for the development and implementation of
MMPs for the State of Parana´, Brazil. This case study is
developed in different stages in accordance with the activity

Requirements elicitation for geo-information solutions

13

model of the requirements engineering process adapted to a
geo-information solution. One of the objectives of the case
study is to complete the requirements elicitation with sufﬁcient
information to deﬁne the functionality, external
interfaces,
performance, attributes and design constraints imposed in an
implementation of the geo-information system. Certain results
have already been achieved and are described in Sluter et al.
(2013). The range and complexity of deﬁning user require-
ments for this case study will provide us with the information
and knowledge that will make it possible to verify whether the
proposed guideline can evolve into a methodology. After
eliciting all of the requirements for the geo-information system,
we can describe them using system requirement models
(Jackson, 2006; Arlow and Neustadt, 2005; Gunter et al.,
2000). Analysis and application of the requirement models for
the description of geo-information system requirements is a
component of our planned future research.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Claudia Robbi Sluter is an
in
Associated Professor
Cartography
and Geo-
graphic Information System
at the Federal University of
Parana´ (UFPR), Brazil. She
studied Cartographic Engi-
neering at the Federal Uni-
versity of Parana´ (UFPR)
and obtained a PhD degree
on Applied Computing
from the National Institute
for Space Research (INPE),
Brazil. She works on topics
in use and users issues in geo-information processing and
dissemination, geovisualization and geovisual cognition.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research work is developed in cooperation with the
Servic¸o Social Autoˆnomo Paranacidade (Paranacidade Social
Service) of Brazil.

REFERENCES

Arlow, J. and Neustadt, I. (2005). UML2 and the Unified Process,
Practical Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, 2nd Edition,
Addison-Wesley Professional, Boston, MA.

Bittner, K. and Spence, I. (2003). Use Case Modeling, Addison-

Wesley Inc., Boston, MA.

Booch, G. (1994). Object-oriented Analysis and Design with

Application, Benjamin Cummings, Redwood City, CA.

Bouchard Jr, T. J. (1972). ‘A comparison of two group brainstorming
procedures’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 56, pp. 418–421.
BRASIL (1988). Constituic¸a˜o da Repu´ blica Federativa do Brasil -
Texto consolidado ate´ a Emenda Constitucional nu 70 de 29 de
marc¸o de 2012, Senado Federal, Secretaria Especial de Publicac¸o˜es
e Editorac¸o˜es, Brası´lia, Brasil.

BRASIL (2001). Dia´rio Oficial da Unia˜o nu 133, Repu´ blica Federativa

do Brasil, Imprensa Nacional, Brası´lia, Brasil.

Bray, I. K. (2002). An Introduction to Requirements Engineering,

Pearson Education Ltd., Edinburgh Gate.

Burrough, P. A. and McDonnell, R. A. (1998). Principles of
Geographical Information Systems, Oxford University Press,
New York.

Chrisman, N. R. (1984). ‘The role of quality information in the long-
term functioning of
system’,
Cartographica: The International Journal of Geographic
Information and Geovisualisation, 21, pp. 79–87.

information

geographic

a

Coad, P. and Yourdon, E. (1990). Object-oriented Analysis, 2nd

edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Cockburn, A. (2001). Writing Effective Use Cases, Addison-Wesley,

Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Collaros, P. A. and Anderson, L. R. (1969). ‘Effect of perceived
expertness upon creativity of members of brainstorming groups’,
Journal of Applied Psychology, 53, pp. 159–163.

Dykes, J. and Wood, J. (2010).

‘Rethinking map legends with
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and

visualization’,
Computer Graphics, 16, pp. 890–899.

Fairly, R. E. (1985). Software Engineering Concepts, McGrall-Hill,

Inc., New York.

Foley, J. D., van Dam, A., Feiner, S. K. and Hughes, J. F. (1990).
Computer Graphics Principles and Practice, 2nd edition,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., Boston, MA.

Gunter, C. A., Gunter, L., Jackson, M. and Zave, P. (2000). ‘A
requirements and specifications’, IEEE

reference model
Software, 17, pp. 37–43.

for

Haklay, M. and Chao Li, L. (2010).

‘Single user environments:
desktop to mobile’, in Interacting with geospatial technologies,
ed. by Haklay, M., pp. 223–243, John Wiley & Sons Ltd,
Chichester.

Hull, E., Jackson, K. and Dick, J. (2005). Requirements Engineering,

2nd edition, Springer ,springeronline.com..

IEEE - The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (1998).
IEEE Std 1233–1998 Guide for developing system requirements
specifications, NY, USA.

IEEE - The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (2009).
(Revision of IEEE Std 830–1993) IEEE Recommended practice
for software requirements specifications, NY, USA.

Jacobson, I. (1992). Object-oriented Software Engineering: A Use
Case Driven Approach, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
Reading, MA.

Jacobson, I. (1994). ‘Basic use-case modeling’, in The road to the
unified software development process, ed. by Jacobson, I.
(2000), pp. 167–181, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Jackson D. (2006). Software Abstractions: Logic, Language, and

Analysis, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ko¨bben, B. (2007). ‘RIMapperWMS: a Web Map Service providing
SVG maps with a built-in client’,
in
Geoinformation and Cartography, The European Information
Society: Leading the Way with Geo-Information, ed. By Fabrikant,
S. and Wachowicz, M., Part 6, pp. 217–230, New York.

in Lectures Notes

Kotonya, G. and Sommerville, I. (1998). Requirements Engineering
- Processes and Techniques, John Wiley and Sons Ltd, New York.
(2001). Web Cartography -

and Brown, A.

Kraak, M.

J.

Developments and Prospects, Taylor and Francis, London.

Kraak, M. J. and Ormeling, F. (2010). Cartography - Visualization

of Spatial Data, 3rd edition, Prentice Hall, Essex.

Lloyd, D. (2009). Evaluating Human-centered Approaches for
Geovisualization, PhD Thesis, City University of London,
London, UK.

NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration (2007) NASA
Systems Engineering Handbook, NASA/SP-2007-6105, Rev1, USA.
Nelson, M. A. V., Alencar, P. S. C. and Cowan, D. D. (2007).
‘Informal description and analysis of geographic requirements: an
approach based on problems’, Software & System Modeling, 6,
223–245.

Nosek, J. T. and Schwartz, R. B. (1988).

‘User validation of
information system requirements: some empirical results’, IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 14, pp. 1372–1375.
OGC – Open Geospatial Consortium (2013). OGCH Standards and
supporting documents. http://www.opengeospatial.org/stan
dards (accessed on 18 June 2013).

14

The Cartographic Journal

Parana´ (2003). Polı´tica de desenvolvimento urbano e regional para o
Estado do Parana´. Secretaria de Estado de Desenvolvimento
Urbano (SEDU), Governo do Estado do Parana´, Curitiba, Brasil.
Paranacidade (2010). Processo licitato´ rio de Convite nu008/2010 -
Plano Diretor Municipal - Municı´pio de Lunardelli - Termo de
refereˆncia padra˜o elaborado pelo Paranacidade que atende a lei
15229/2006. Servic¸o Social Autoˆnomo Paranacidade, Curitiba,
Brasil.

Parnes, S. J. and Meadow, A. (1959). ‘Effects of ‘Brainstorming’
instructions on creative problem solving by trained and untrained
subjects’, Journal of Educational Psychology, 50, pp. 171–176.
Ross, D. T. and Schoman Jr., K. E. (1977). ‘Structured analysis for
Software

IEEE Transactions

definition’,

on

software
Engineering, SE-3, pp. 6–15.

Royce, W. W. (1970). ‘Managing the development of large software
systems’, Proceedings IEEE WESCON, 1–9, Los Angeles, CA,
Aug.

Skarlatidou, A. (2010). ‘Web-mapping applications and HCI con-
siderations for their design’,
in Interacting with geospatial
technologies, ed. by Haklay, M., pp. 245–264, John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, Chichester.

Sluter, C. R., Brandalize, M. C. B., Iva´nova´, I. and van Elzakker, C.
(2013). Defining standard symbols for street network maps for urban
planning based on user requirements. Proceedings of 26th
International Cartographic Conference, Dresden, Germany, Aug.
Suchan, T. A. and Brewer, C. A. (2000). ‘Qualitative methods for
research on mapmaking and map use’, Professional Geographer,
52, pp. 145–154.

Sutcliffe, A. (2002). User-centred Requirements Engineering,

Springer-Verlag, London.

Tsou, M. and Curran, J. M. (2008). ‘User-centered design approaches
for web mapping applications: a case study with USGS hydrological
data in the United States’, in International Perspectives on Maps
and the Internet, ed. by Peterson, M., Lectures Notes in
Geoinformation and Cartography, Vol. 20, pp. 301–320.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Tsou, M. (2011). ‘Revisiting web cartography in the United States: the
rise of User-Centered Design’, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 38, 3, 250–257.

Yovcheva, Z., van Elzakker, C. P. J. M. and Ko¨bben, B. (2010).
‘Collaborative mapping and spatio-temporal data dissemination
through a web-based virtual globe application’, Proceedings of
3rd International Conference on Cartography and GIS,
Nessebar, Bulgaria, Jun.

Van Elzakker, C. P. J. M. (2004). The use of maps in the exploration
of geographic data, Utrechtse Geografische Studies 326,
University of Utrecht, Utrecht.

Virrantaus, K., Fairbairn, D. and Kraak, M. J. (2009). ‘ICA research
agenda on cartography and GI science’, The Cartographic
Journal, 46, pp. 63–75.

Wealands, K., Cartwright, W., Miller, S. and Benda. P. (2005). ‘User
assessment for developing optimal cartographic representation
models within an Australian mobile location-based services travel
application’, Proceedings of 22th International Cartographic
Conference, La Coruna, Spain, Sep.

