The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 283–287 December 2003

283

S U R V E Y

First Steps Towards a Model of Tactile Graphicacy

Frances Aldrich, Linda Sheppard and Yvonne Hindle

Reginald Phillips Research Programme, Experimental Psychology, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QG, UK.
Email: frances@biols.susx.ac.uk, yvonne@biols.susx.ac.uk

This paper describes our initial steps towards developing a model of how blind people comprehend tactile graphics. In
the ®rst half of the paper we set out the aims of the model, and then consider other key issues such as the nature and
scope of the model, the information it must incorporate and the outcomes it should provide. In the second half of the
paper we present our ideas for the model itself, outlining the four facets that make it up Ð perceptual processing,
cognitive skills, knowledge and cognitive development. Throughout the paper we raise questions for open debate and
invite feedback on our ideas.

INTRODUCTION

information is being presented in non-
Increasingly,
verbal formats such as diagrams, charts, graphs, maps and
so on, collectively referred to as ‘graphics’. The ability to
understand and to create such displays is referred to as
‘graphicacy’. We have argued elsewhere that graphicacy
is an important extension of literacy, and a competence
increasingly expected of educated adults in our society
(Aldrich & Sheppard, 2000). People with visual impair-
ments need access to the same information as their sighted
peers, and this poses a challenge when the information is
presented graphically. How best to meet this challenge is
the fundamental question that motivates this research.

Previous investigations focused on the design of tactile
graphics materials (Sheppard & Aldrich, 2000 & 2001;
Aldrich & Sheppard, 2001). Now, attention turns to the
skills required of the users. Obviously, no matter how well
designed tactile graphics may be, they are worthless if
users do not possess the skills and knowledge necessary to
comprehend them. This current phase of research is there-
fore addressing two questions: ‘What skills underlie tactile
graphicacy?’ and ‘How can blind people best develop these
skills?’

To help answer these questions a model of

tactile
graphicacy is being developed — that is, a conceptual
framework that will incorporate the currently available data
and understanding regarding tactile graphicacy. Issues regard-
ing the production of tactile graphics will be left aside for
the time being, as we focus solely on comprehension. This
will allow us to look in more depth at what we consider,
on pragmatic grounds at least, to be the more important
aspect of tactile graphicacy.

The model will provide a more coherent account of the
factors involved in tactile graphicacy than has previously
been available, and will serve to highlight gaps in exist-
ing knowledge. The model might also provide a common

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225013014

language for discussing tactile graphicacy, engender a more
systematic approach to its teaching, lead to more informed
design of tactile graphics, and set an agenda for future
research into tactile graphics comprehension.

While geography at least occasionally alludes to it (Balchin,
1972), it is worth noting that there is no equivalent model
of visual graphicacy as far as we have been able to establish
by searching the literature on education and cognitive
psychology. No detailed curriculum has been speci(cid:142)ed for
the teaching of visual graphicacy within schools either. The
National Curriculum refers to the use of graphics only in
general terms as a communication tool, and does not
specify a list of graphic formats with which children should
be familiar. It is our belief that graphicacy should be
addressed more explicitly in the school curriculum and we
put the case for this earlier (Aldrich & Sheppard, 2000).
It is therefore not possible to approach tactile graphicacy
by modifying an existing model or curriculum for visual
graphicacy even if one should wish to do so, and it is
arguable how appropriate this would be in any case. Our
approach to tactile graphicacy must of necessity break new
ground.

In this paper we set out initial steps towards a model
of tactile graphicacy, focusing on tactile graphics com-
prehension. Much emphasis at this stage is on mapping
out the territory, thinking carefully about the aims of the
model, what it should incorporate, and what
level of
analysis to adopt. A whole section of the paper is devoted
to these issues before presenting ideas for the model itself.

TERMINOLOGY

To avoid ambiguity we will start by de(cid:142)ning a number of
terms as we use them in this paper. Our de(cid:142)nitions are
followed by comments that expand on the interpretation
we have adopted.

284

The Cartographic Journal

Graphics — ‘Two-dimensional displays of primarily
non-textual information which hold a shared meaning
for people. Examples include sketches, photographs,
diagrams, maps, plans, charts and graphs.’

Although all graphics are grouped together in this de(cid:142)nition,
certain kinds are less likely to be encountered as tactile
graphics than others. Photographs, for instance, are dif(cid:142)cult
to translate into tactile form meaningfully.

Tactile graphics — ‘Graphics intended to be read
principally by touch rather than vision.’

The word ‘intended’ rather than ‘designed’ is used advisedly.
All too often tactile graphics are not designed at all — they
are simply visual graphics in a raised-line version. We have
documented some of
the problems this gives rise to
in earlier papers (Aldrich & Sheppard, 2001; Sheppard &
Aldrich, 2001).

Graphicacy — ‘The demonstrated ability to com-
prehend and to produce graphics.’

The word ‘ability’ is used to refer to measurable perform-
ance, not to a mental capacity or potential that may not
have shown yet in behaviour.

Tactile graphicacy — ‘The demonstrated ability to
comprehend and to produce tactile graphics.’

The ability to produce graphics as well as comprehend
them is an important element of graphicacy because it
allows people to be more effective communicators. Ideally,
blind children should have the same opportunities for pro-
ducing graphics as their sighted counterparts. In reality,
however, the methods available to blind learners for pro-
ducing their own graphics are both limited and limiting.
(German (cid:142)lm, for example, allows little variation in line
height and little scope for correction of errors.) Furthermore,
blind learners may have to overcome greater inherent
dif(cid:142)culties in producing graphics than sighted learners, for
example problems with memory load and spatial under-
standing. For these reasons, focus here is on comprehension,
where it is possible to anticipate (cid:142)ndings will have the
most impact.

PERSPECTIVES ON GRAPHICACY

Having de(cid:142)ned the terms used in this paper, it is necessary
to explain in more detail what both visual and tactile
graphicacy entails.

We propose that graphicacy is the result of acquiring

and applying:

.
.

a set of graphics ‘reading’ and ‘writing’ skills, and
a knowledge of graphic conventions,

in addition to possessing relevant knowledge of the domain
represented in the graphic (e.g. geography, biology,
electronics, economics, etc.).

Furthermore, acquisition of these skills and knowledge
depends on different prerequisite levels of cognitive develop-
ment. For example, children can learn to identify shapes
such as triangle, square and rectangle at quite an early
age. However, recognizing the match between a target

shape and the same shape rotated by 180 degrees requires
a greater degree of cognitive development. The view that
there are a series of developmental ‘thresholds’ that deter-
mine the learner’s readiness to acquire tactile graphicacy
skills clearly holds implications for teaching.

It is worth pointing out that there is no reason to
believe that the developmental pre-requisites for tactile
graphicacy will be the same as for visual graphicacy. In fact
there are good reasons to believe that tactile graphicacy may
require a greater degree of cognitive maturity than visual
graphicacy (e.g. Heller, 1991). For instance, processing
the information obtained through a sequence of touches
places a greater load on memory than processing information
obtained visually. It therefore seems reasonable to expect
that tactile graphicacy in blind children will develop later
than visual graphicacy in sighted children.

BACKGROUND TO THE MODEL

Aims
In beginning to develop a model of tactile graphicacy
there are four aims:

.

.

.

.

to provide a coherent and comprehensive framework for
discussion of tactile graphicacy across relevant disciplines
such as teaching and cognitive psychology. This requires
(cid:142)nding an appropriate level of analysis that is meaning-
ful to people from a variety of professional back-
grounds. A highly detailed cognitive analysis would
be inappropriate for example, as would an analysis
expressed purely in terms of educational outcomes.
to foster a more systematic approach to teaching tactile
graphicacy. This includes developing a better under-
standing of the skills and knowledge that underlie
tactile graphicacy, and the way these are best acquired,
the model will offer guidance for teaching practice and
help end the ad hoc approach which is common at
present.
to facilitate more informed design of tactile graphics.
Designers with a better understanding of the process
of comprehending tactile graphics are more likely to
avoid some of the pitfalls in production.
to set an agenda for future research and so promote
greater interest in tactile graphicacy from the research
community.

The extent to which these aims can be met depends to a
large extent on the interest and involvement of others who
are prepared to comment, make suggestions, adopt ideas,
provide feedback, and raise the pro(cid:142)le of tactile graphics
generally.

Scope
It is both desirable and feasible for blind children to
acquire the essential elements of tactile graphicacy while
at school. The task of modeling the level of competence
in interpreting a range of commonly encountered graphic
formats that academically average blind children might
realistically achieve by the time they leave secondary school
is part of this project.

First Steps Towards a Model of Tactile Graphicacy

285

Nature
Three points regarding the nature of the model being
developed need to be made.

Firstly, a de(cid:142)nition of the word ‘model’, and the way in
which it is used, must be made. As indicated earlier, the
model of tactile graphicacy proposed is intended to provide
a conceptual framework within which disparate (cid:142)ndings
and approaches to tactile graphics can be viewed more
coherently. It is a ‘pen and paper’ model, rather than a
computer-based model that can be ‘run’ to test predictions.
In this initial stage of development we present ideas in text
although envisage presenting the model diagrammatically
later, probably adopting the ‘boxes and arrows’ format
familiar to cognitive psychologists.

Secondly, a choice has been made to look at tactile
graphicacy in terms of its component skills and knowledge.
An alternative approach would be to look at tactile graphicacy
in terms of the range of formats with which a user should
demonstrate competence (e.g. bar chart, line graph, etc.).
We refer to these as the ‘component approach’ and the
‘curriculum approach’ respectively. Both approaches have
their pro’s and con’s but we have chosen to focus on the
component approach, at least initially, because it appears to
offer more leverage in explaining what is going on, rather
than just re-describing in greater detail
the challenge
which tactile graphics present.

Thirdly, and (cid:142)nally, in any discussion of tactile graphics,
graphicacy and component skills, a level of analysis that is
meaningful both to teachers and to cognitive psychologists
must be found. This is essential
if successful dialogue
between these groups is to be promoted.

WHAT THE MODEL SHOULD INCORPORATE

Information incorporated in the explanatory framework
comes from three sources. These are:

a detailed task analysis of tactile graphics use;
existing literature on tactile graphics; and
existing literature on cognitive development.

WHAT THE MODEL SHOULD PROVIDE

Ultimately it is intended that the model should:

describe the skills & knowledge that underlie tactile
graphics comprehension;
illuminate the hierarchical relationships between the
skills — relationships that may determine their order
of acquisition;
place the acquisition of these skills in context in terms
of children’s cognitive development; and
provide guidance for how to teach graphics com-
prehension with a more systematic approach than is
generally used at present.

.
.
.

.

.

.

.

THE FOUR FACETS OF THE MODEL

There are four facets to the model proposed: perceptual
processing, cognitive skills, knowledge and cognitive
development.

1. Perceptual Processing
This facet covers the initial processing of touch sensations
from the graphic. These perceptual processes are swift and
automatic, with the learner having no conscious access or
control over the activities involved. The perceptual pro-
cessing is driven by the graphic itself and might therefore be
described as ‘bottom up’. Perceptual processes provide the
most basic building blocks for the chain of events that will
lead to comprehension of the graphic under examination.

There is little scope for improving perceptual processing
because the learner cannot consciously access or control the
processes involved. However, it may be possible to improve
the quality of input to perceptual processing by improving
haptic techniques (e.g. avoiding pressing too hard) and to
improve quantity of input by improving search strategies.

2. Cognitive Skills
This facet includes a broad spectrum of cognitive skills that
may come into play in the quest to extract meaning from a
tactile graphic. Examples of these cognitive skills include
line tracking; discriminating between lines, symbols and
textures; identifying shapes such as triangle, circle, square;
detecting patterns; identifying spatial relationships such as
‘next to’, ‘between’, ‘above’; recognizing similarities with
previous graphics; attributing meaning to observed patterns;
making comparisons; and bringing prior knowledge of the
subject matter to bear. Skilled users may in addition be
able to re(cid:143)ect consciously on the skills at their disposal and
choose which to apply in the particular context (an ability
referred to as ‘metacognitive’ skill), for example choosing
a suitable search strategy.

Initial input to cognitive processing of a tactile graphic is
provided by the basic building blocks from perceptual pro-
cessing. The results of the early stages of cognitive processing
then provide the input for further cognitive processing. For
example,
initial cognitive processes detect patterns and
con(cid:142)gurations in the basic building blocks provided by per-
ceptual processing (perhaps recognizing basic geometrical
shapes). The patterns and con(cid:142)gurations that are detected
are then themselves processed further to (cid:142)nd higher order
relationships (for example patterns in the way that basic
shapes are placed in relation to one another). The results
of this processing then provide the input for the next level
of cognitive processing and so on. Further perceptual infor-
mation may be coming in while the cognitive processing is
underway, and the results of the cognitive processing may
themselves prompt the learner to seek additional perceptual
information through touch. This mix of cognitive and per-
ceptual processing continues until, hopefully, the data are
interpreted, comparisons made and the intended meaning
is extracted from the graphic.

The cognitive skills involved in comprehending a tactile
graphic vary enormously in their complexity and there is
much debate about whether it would be useful to sub-
divide cognitive skills within the model (e.g. into ‘low’,
‘mid’ and ‘high’ level cognitive skills). For the time being
a decision against doing so has been taken, as it is hard to
identify objective grounds for making such a classi(cid:142)cation
and important not to get sidetracked into a debate about
how particular skills should be classi(cid:142)ed.

286

The Cartographic Journal

Although there is no intention of introducing levels of
cognitive skill into the model at present, it is possible to
identify and propose some inherent order in the acquisition
of the skills that might provide a way of sub-dividing
cognitive skills later. That is not to suggest that all funda-
mental cognitive skills must be in place before any higher
cognitive skill can be acquired, but that certain skills only
become attainable when related fundamental skills are in
place. For example, before a particular metacognitive skill
can be acquired, the necessary ‘family’ of related lower
level cognitive skills must be in place. This has obvious
implications for teaching and we hope to say more about
this in later investigations.

In the section above, perceptual processing is described
as being driven by the graphic itself, so called ‘bottom up’.
Cognitive processing of graphics on the other hand could
be de(cid:142)ned as ‘top down’, because it seeks to impose mean-
ing on the incoming data. Also, in contrast to the swift,
automatic nature of perceptual processing, cognitive pro-
cessing has a tendency to be slower, voluntary, effortful and
under conscious control, particularly the later-acquired skills.
Cognitive skills are also more open to intervention and
teaching than perceptual skills, which is why cognitive
skills are given more attention in the model.

3. Knowledge
Additionally two kinds of knowledge are also required in
order to make sense of graphics — domain knowledge and
knowledge of graphic formats and conventions.

Domain Knowledge
The graphics user must have some understanding of the
subject matter represented, sometimes referred to as ‘domain
knowledge’. For example this may be economics, electronics,
biology, geology or mathematics. This knowledge need
not be comprehensive — in fact, by de(cid:142)nition, for most
learners it will not be. However, it needs to be suf(cid:142)cient
to allow the user to make sense of the information that is
presented in the graphic.

Knowledge of Graphic Formats and Conventions
Competent graphics users also possesses knowledge of a
range of graphic formats — these may include for example
maps, bar charts, line graphs, pie charts, biological structure
diagrams (e.g. skeleton), and biological process diagrams
(e.g. food chain). Each format has a set of associated
conventions concerning orientation, axes, labeling, the use
of arrows and so on. These conventions may be taught
explicitly or some may be assimilated through context of
use.

The National Curriculum does not specify which graphic
formats children should learn to use at school. In the
absence of an of(cid:142)cial curriculum we will draw up a list of
basic graphic formats with the aim that children should be
familiar with these on leaving school.

which are beyond the present level of cognitive maturity of
the learner. To try to teach skills which rely on these
before they have been acquired will result in frustration and
loss of con(cid:142)dence in the learner. It is therefore important
to incorporate the cognitive maturity of the learner into
any model of tactile graphicacy.

Currently relevant developmental

literature is being
reviewed. In general, results have demonstrated a develop-
mental lag in blind children compared to sighted children
(e.g. Davidson, Dunn & Wiles-Kettenmann, 1981; Hatwell,
1985, Stephens & Grube, 1982). Much of the early research
concerning the cognitive development of blind children was
carried out within a Piagetian framework. This approach
has been heavily criticized for a number of reasons, how-
ever, and there are a variety of other approaches that must
be considered. Among these are the view that children’s
development should be analysed in terms of the strategies
and concepts they are able to employ (Blades & Spencer,
1994); that young children require greater familiarity,
repetition, saliency of cues and redundancy of information
in order to carry out the same tasks as older children
(Millar, 1994); and that context of learning and level of
support available are an important determinant of what
children can achieve (Vygotsky, 1978).

The review has also highlighted some fundamental
criticisms of the approach underlying the existing literature
(e.g. see Warren, 1994; Warren & Hatton, in press). For
example, tasks used to assess development are typically
designed for sighted children and may not be appropriate
for blind children. Also, comparisons between the ‘average’
blind and sighted child overlook the wide variation within
the blind population, and a more productive approach
might be to look at the causes of this variation.

Consideration of how the developmental (cid:142)ndings might
be incorporated into the model of tactile graphicacy is
currently been given.

THE WAY FORWARD

This paper has raised a number of speci(cid:142)c questions that
need to be discussed by everyone with an interest in the
understanding tactile graphicacy. These include:

. What graphic formats should be included on the list of

essentials for school leavers?

. What is the most appropriate level of analysis and
description of tactile graphicacy, given the aim of (cid:142)nding
a common language?
Is the ‘component skills’ approach to graphicacy better
than a ‘curriculum’ approach?
Should the ‘cognitive skills’ category be broken down
further, and if so, how?

.

.

We invite your comments on these and related issues.

4. Cognitive Development
When teaching the use of tactile graphics, the level of
cognitive development of the child must also be taken into
account. There may be certain concepts and mental processes

We would like to thank the following: Simon Ungar
of Surrey University for useful discussions about tactile
graphicacy, and for commenting on a draft of this paper;
Adrian Farnsworth, Resource Of(cid:142)cer for the Sight Impaired

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

First Steps Towards a Model of Tactile Graphicacy

287

at Derby City Council Education Department, for his interest
and enthusiasm for our undertaking; and the University of
Sussex’s Research Development Fund for (cid:142)nancing the
Reginald Phillips Research Programme for a further three
years.

Frances Aldrich and Yvonne Hindle would also like
to take this opportunity to offer public thanks to Linda
Sheppard for the signi(cid:142)cant contribution she made during
her time with the Reginald Phillips Research Programme.

REFERENCES

Aldrich, F. K.,

and Sheppard, L.

(2000).

‘Graphicacy:

the

fourth ‘‘r’’?’, Primary Science Review, 64, 8–11.

Aldrich, F. K., and Sheppard, L. (2001). ‘Tactile graphics in school
education: perspectives from pupils’, British Journal of Visual
Impairment, 19, 69–73.

Balchin, W. G. V. (1972). ‘Graphicacy’, Geography, 57, 185–95.
Blades, M.,

and Spencer, C.

(1994).

‘The development of
representations’, Advances in

children’s ability to use spatial
Child Development and Behavior, 25, 157–99.

Davidson, P. W., Dunn, G., and Wiles-Kettenmann, M. (1981).
‘Haptic Conservation of Amount in Blind and Sighted Chidren:
Exploratory Movement Effects’, Journal of Pediatric Psychology,
6, 191–200.

Hatwell, Y. (1985). Piagetian reasoning and the blind, American
Foundation for the Blind, New York. (First published in 1966 as
‘Privation sensorielle et intelligence’ by Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris.)

Heller, M. A. (1991). ‘Haptic Perception in Blind People’, in The
Psychology of Touch, ed. by Heller, M. A., and Schiff, W.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey.

Millar, S. (1994). Understanding and Representing Space: theory
and evidence from studies with blind and sighted children,
Clarendon Press Oxford.

Sheppard, L., and Aldrich, F. K. (2000).

beginner’s guide to graphics
Primary Science Review, 65, 29–30.

‘Tactile graphics: A
for visually impaired children’,

Sheppard, L., and Aldrich, F. K. (2001). ‘Tactile graphics in school
education: perspectives from teachers’, British Journal of Visual
Impairment, 19, 93–97.

Stephens, B., and Grube, C. (1982). ‘Development of Piagetian
Reasoning in Congenitally Blind Children’, Journal of Visual
Impairment and Blindness, 76, 133–43.

Warren, D. H. (1994). Blindness and Children: An individual
differences approach, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Warren, D. H., and Hatton D. D. (in press). ‘Cognitive development
in Handbook of Neuro-
in visually
psychology, ed. by Rapin I., and Segalowitz, S., 2nd edn, Elsevier
Science Publishers, Amsterdam.

impaired children’,

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher
psychological processes, ed. by Cole, M., John-Steiner, V.,
Scribner, S., and Souberman, E., Harvard University Press
Cambridge, MA.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

