The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 3

pp. 179–182 UKCC National Report to ICA 2011-Special Issue August 2011

O B S E R V A T I O N S

The Ordnance Survey OpenData Initiative

Bob Lilley

Ordnance Survey, Adanac Drive, Southampton, SO16 0AS, UK
Email: bob.lilley@ordnancesurvey.co.uk

On 1 April 2010, Ordnance Survey launched OS OpenData and it transformed the way people could access mapping and
geographic information (GI) of Great Britain. The online mapping portal allows users to view, download or develop the
data with the simple click of a button. In the year since its launch, the data have helped underpin a range of applications,
helped promote government transparency and encouraged greater take-up of geographic information.

Keywords: Ordnance Survey, open data, transparency, geographic information, Open Government Licence

OS OpenData allows users to freely download mapping and
geographic information, such as administrative boundaries
and postcode data, which would previously have been
subject to royalty payments and restrictions on reuse. The
decision to make this data available for free was made by the
previous government in November 2009 at the request of
open data champions Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of
the Web, and Professor Nigel Shadbolt of the University of
Southampton. The commitment to OS OpenData has since
been maintained by the current coalition government. Both
Sir Tim and Professor Shadbolt saw geographic data as key
to unlocking greater government transparency and new
economic and social value.

With the intention to launch OS OpenData on 1 April 2010,
Ordnance Survey had less than 5 months to make the project a
success. Over the previous few years, there had been much
discussion around how to open up access to data and being
unable to ﬁnd a way to make it work within the Trading Fund
business model. Funding the business through revenue for
mapping and GI made it hard to see how giving data away for
free could work in practice without degrading the exceptional
accuracy and currency of Ordnance Survey’s data.

Over

those 5 months negotiations continued over
which datasets would be included and how it would be
funded, while work at the Southampton head ofﬁce
concentrated on how OS OpenData would actually be
delivered. To ensure that OS OpenData would be a
success, the delivery of the data to the public needed to
be simple and seamless. The project team worked hard to
bring the idea to fruition.

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13044121958821

There were three elements for the team to concentrate on
– the three buttons that you can see when you enter the OS
OpenData website – the view, develop or supply options. Of
those three buttons on our website, the ﬁrst two reused
elements of OS OpenSpace.

The view option works by embedding the OS OpenSpace
application into the page and the OS OpenData datasets
were made available through OS OpenSpace. The page is
hosted on a cloud environment, by one of several suppliers
involved in OS OpenData.

The second option, develop, is a simple link through to
the OS OpenSpace application programming interface.
Launched in 2007, OS OpenSpace is free to access and lets
developers create amazing web applications and online
projects with Ordnance Survey maps.

The third option involved the creation of a whole new
application and data supply solution. The team needed to build
a new Java-based application linking to a hosted environment.
This meant capturing some basic information from users,
including name and email address so that an email could be sent
out with a web link to a download centre, where the order data
are waiting to be retrieved. The download centre is located on
an ultrafast network to ensure fast and easy access to the data. A
huge amount of work was put into the supply of media orders
and ensuring that all the customer information was captured
and the orders were packaged up and dispatched efﬁciently.
The DVDs used are ultra-thin, environmentally friendly
EcoDiscs. For example, OS Street View of Great Britain can
be stored on six discs and ﬁts into a slim wallet for dispatch,
minimizing the amount of packaging needed.

180

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. Example page of Windsor & Maidenhead Council DataTap website, 2011 (www.arcusglobal.com/transparency/DataTAP/view_map.php?
query547&reverseColors5no)

The culmination of the project was the launch on 1 April
2010. John Denham MP, former Communities Secretary,
was on hand to place the ﬁrst order. The launch event took
place at Ordnance Survey’s head ofﬁce and a video was
released at the same time featuring Sir Tim Berners-Lee and
Professor Nigel Shadbolt. On the video, Professor Shadbolt
said, ‘OS OpenData makes critical geographic information
freely available to all of us. Our goal has been to facilitate
innovation and reuse, to allow everyone the opportunity to
enrich this valuable public data.’

The negotiations had come to a ﬁnal agreement that OS
OpenData would be funded by government and made up of
a range of raster and vector mapping datasets. These include
the detailed 1 : 10 000 scale OS Street View, Boundary-
Line, which provides
the electoral and administrative
geography of the country, and Meridian 2 and Strategi,
both of which vector datasets offer customisable views of
Britain’s topography. Appendix lists those datasets currently
included in OS OpenData.

Ordnance

and Chief
Survey’s Director General
Executive, Vanessa Lawrence CB said of the launch, ‘Over
the past few months we have been working extremely hard
to put in place all the steps which were necessary in order to
deliver the [former] Prime Minister’s objective. I believe
that OS OpenData delivers on that vision, providing a wide
range of Ordnance Survey mapping for reuse and without
restriction. I am really looking forward to see the public’s
response to OS OpenData and watching the creation of
new applications and services, all being underpinned by
Ordnance Survey data.’

The launch had been widely anticipated and saw a range
of media coverage and the high demand from the moment
of launch was documented via Twitter. There have been
orders from across the globe, including the Middle East,

making good use of the edge servers hosting data at
locations around the world. Users are from sectors as
diverse as ﬁnance, charities, hobbyists and engineering.

The uses of OS OpenData have been wide and varied
and are of great interest to the business. CIFAS, the UK’s
Fraud Prevention Service, a not-for-proﬁt organisation,
uses OS OpenData to help them recruit local authorities
into membership. CIFAS downloaded OS Street View,
Boundary-Line and Code-Point Open for the London
Boroughs and used fraud data to plot the locations of fraud.
Investigators can then clearly see the density of fraud taking
place in their localities.

Spatial Geographic Services and Applications Limited
(SGSA Ltd) used OS Street View as a base before adding
road routing information, which could be vitally important
to our emergency services. By incorporating trafﬁc calming
data, one-way streets, gates and fords and more, it would
help countless people in planning the best routes to travel.
Among the uses has also been the Windsor and
Maidenhead Council DataTap website, which won the
MediaGuardian Innovation Award for best use of data
in March 2011. The site, built by Arcus Global, uses
Ordnance Survey data to instantly visualise a range of
council
including population, councillor’s
allowances and crime statistics (Figure 1). These visualisa-
tions help make the data more accessible than mere tables
or
spreadsheets, and help support accountability and
transparency. Another recent user of OS OpenData has
been FIND, the mapping technology company. They have
launched a new free mapping website allowing the public to
create and customize their own maps.

information,

Peter ter Haar, Ordnance Survey’s Director of Products,
comments: ‘Since the launch of OS OpenData we’ve seen a
great amount of interest and many people have downloaded

The Ordnance Survey OpenData Initiative

181

Figure 2. Nottinghamshire County Council display winter gritting routes on their website

information, postcode data

or ordered data. We’ve also seen some innovative and
the data, particularly our electoral
interesting uses of
boundary
and the OS
OpenSpace API. Now, as the service has become established
in the market, it is going to be very interesting to see what
further applications are built and the impact they will have.’
Other uses have included mapping the locations of
pharmacies and train stations across Great Britain using
1 : 250 000 scale Colour Raster and Code-Point Open.
Many councils use the datasets to show residents the nearest
recycling facilities or the latest planning applications, and
Nottinghamshire County Council displays winter gritting
routes (Figure 2). There are also GPP Housing’s property
for housing associations and the
management
Facebook game ‘National Treasures’.

tools

To mark the anniversary of the Southampton Blitz,
Ordnance Survey created a map plotting the location of the
712 bombs that fell, based on records from the time. The
map used OS VectorMap District and was supplemented
with images of documents from the time from The National
Archives and Southampton City Council.

More unusually, Lovell Johns created a user-friendly map for
the Elephant Family charity. Their annual Elephant Parade
highlights the crisis faced by the endangered Asian elephant and
the map showed elephant locations across the city of London

on OS Street View. This guide helped visitors locate the 250
large and colourful elephant statues around the capital.

Since the launch, Ordnance Survey has continued to
maintain and improve the data available. In addition to the
standard yearly or twice yearly updates, in May 2010, OS
VectorMap District was added to the portfolio, which was
itself subsequently updated following user feedback in
March 2011. Ordnance Survey was also the ﬁrst Trading
Fund to incorporate the Open Government Licence in
January, helping to provide greater consistency with other
sources of government data.

Despite the ongoing popularity of OS OpenData,
Ordnance Survey is always looking at new audiences to
introduce to the service and their marketing team ran a
number of OS OpenData seminar roadshows for the
ﬁnancial services sector. Greg Davis explained, ‘We encour-
aged both data users and senior managers to come and see
how easy it is to download and use our free datasets, and how
it could be used by banks, loss adjusters and insurers.’

Twitter was used to promote the seminars and attract
new delegates and Ordnance Survey has found it a useful
way to interact with customers. The Ordnance Survey blog
has also been a great way to talk to people about OS
OpenData and it has stimulated some interesting debates
around the topic. The blog also hosts a Geo Clinic which

182

The Cartographic Journal

answers people’s questions and guides them through step-
by-step processes with OS OpenData.

In terms of future developments, Peter ter Haar adds: ‘I
think what we have learnt over the past year is that as well as
making the data available, you really also need to help
people make the most of it. That is why over the next year
we will be releasing tools to make it easier for users to build
applications using OS OpenData.’

Further support comes as part of the current Geo-
Vation Challenge, Ordnance Survey’s innovation awards
programme that supports geography based ventures. There
is £10,000 available in seed funding for the best ideas
underpinned by OS OpenData that could help improve
transport in Britain. The recipients of that investment were
decided at the GeoVation Showcase on 4 May at Ordnance
Survey’s Southampton head ofﬁce. The event was free to
attend, and open to the general public.

On the 1-year anniversary, Professor Shadbolt said: ‘We
argued for the release of key Ordnance Survey data because
location data puts everything in context. We also believed it
would inspire developers who wanted to build applications
with the data. This is now happening and it is precisely this
sort of innovation that will create value from OS OpenData,
as well as the other data that Government is making freely
available.’

Ordnance Survey will continue to build upon the success
of OS OpenData, working to promote and add to the service

over the coming months and years. Despite the challenges
involved in making the idea into a reality in a short period of
time, it is clearly a hugely appreciated application and that is
beginning to be adopted across a range of sectors. Find out
more at http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/opendata

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

responsible

Bob Lilley is the Senior
Manager
for
cartography at Ordnance
Survey (GB). In his most
previous role he was res-
ponsible for all the carto-
graphic work necessary to
deliver Ordnance Survey’s
derived paper and data pro-
ducts as well as the develop-
ment and successful imple-
mentation of the strategy to
and re-position
revitalise
the
cartography within
organisation. He is currently leading a team dedicated to
deﬁning how we develop a consistent ‘look and feel’, or style,
to future products and services that is immediately identiﬁable
as the Ordnance Survey brand.

APPENDIX: OS OPENDATA PRODUCTS

Product

Raster/vector

Nominal scale

Comment

MiniscaleH
1 : 250 000 scale Colour Raster
StrategiH
MeridianTM 2
Land-Form Panorama
1 : 50 000 scale Gazetteer
OS VectorMapH District (vector)
OS VectorMapH District (raster)
OS Street ViewH
Boundary-LinTM
OS LocatorTM
Code-Point OpenH

Both
Raster
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector
Raster
Raster
Vector
Vector
Vector

1 : 1 000 000
1 : 250 000
1 : 250 000
1 : 50 000
1 : 50 000
1 : 50 000
1 : 25 000
1 : 25 000
1 : 10 000
1 : 10 000
1 : 10 000
n/a

Contours at 10 m VI or 50 m grid DTM
Names from 1 : 50 000 scale mapping

Generalised street level mapping
Political and administrative boundaries
Road name gazetteer
Postcode units and administrative codes

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

