Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164
DOI 10.1007/s10707-013-0194-y

Effective mix-zone anonymization techniques for mobile
travelers

Balaji Palanisamy · Ling Liu

Received: 30 May 2013 / Revised: 4 October 2013 /
Accepted: 10 October 2013 / Published online: 16 November 2013
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract Mix-zones are recognized as an alternative and complementary approach to spa-
tial cloaking based location privacy protection. Unlike spatial cloaking techniques that
perturb the location resolution through location k-anonymization, mix-zones break the con-
tinuity of location exposure by ensuring that users’ movements cannot be traced while they
are inside a mix-zone. In this paper we provide an overview of some known attacks that
make mix-zones on road networks vulnerable and discuss a set of counter measures to make
road network mix-zones attack-resilient. Concretely, we categorize the vulnerabilities of
road network mix-zones into two classes: one due to the road network characteristics and
user mobility, and the other due to the temporal, spatial and semantic correlations of loca-
tion queries. We propose efficient road network mix-zone construction techniques that are
resilient to attacks based on road network characteristics. Furthermore, we enhance the road
network mix-zone framework with the concept of delay-tolerant mix-zones that introduce a
combination of spatial and temporal shifts in the location exposure of the users to achieve
higher anonymity. We study the factors that impact on the effectiveness of each of these
attacks and evaluate the efficiency of the counter measures through extensive experiments
on traces produced by GTMobiSim at different scales of geographic maps.

Keywords Location privacy · Mix-zone · Location-based services

1 Introduction

Advances in sensing and positioning technology, fueled by wide deployment of wireless
local area networks (WLAN), have made many devices location-aware. Location-based

B. Palanisamy ((cid:2))
School of Information Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA, USA
e-mail: bpalan@pitt.edu

L. Liu
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta GA, USA
e-mail: lingliu@cc.gatech.edu

136

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

services (applications that require geographic location information as input) are becoming
increasingly common. The collection and transfer of location information about a particu-
lar subject can have important privacy implications. Concrete examples of location-based
services (LBSs) include searching nearest points of interest (“Where is the nearest gas sta-
tion to my current location?”), spatial alerts (“Remind me when I drive close to the grocery
store”), location-based social networking (“Is my colleague Tom currently at his office?”).
Such services require the Location-based Service Provider to track the location information
of their mobile users in order to deliver location based services. Continuous location based
services represent queries that are continuously evaluated along the trajectory of a mobile
user either periodically or aperiodically. Examples of continuous queries (CQs) are “inform
me the nearest gas stations coming up along the highway I-85 south every 3 min in the next
30 min” or “show me the restaurants on highway I85 north within 5 miles every two minutes
during the next hour”. Although LBSs offer users many interesting and life enhancing expe-
riences, they also open doors for new security risks that can endanger the location privacy
of mobile clients [3, 27].

Location privacy is a particular type of information privacy. According to [11], loca-
tion privacy is defined as the ability to prevent other unauthorized parties from learning
one’s current or past location. In LBSs, there are conceivably two types of location pri-
vacy – personal subscriber level privacy and corporate enterprise-level privacy. Personal
subscriber-level privacy must supply rights and options to individuals to control when, why,
and how their location is used by an application. With personal subscriber-level privacy,
each individual has liberties to “opt in” and “opt out” of services that take advantage of their
mobile location. Corporate enterprise-level privacy is fundamentally different in that corpo-
rate IT managers typically control when, why, and how mobile location capabilities provide
application benefits to the organization as a whole.

Location privacy threats refer to the risks that an adversary can obtain unauthorized
access to raw location data, derived or computed location information by locating a transmit-
ting device, hijacking the location transmission channel, and identifying the subject (person)
using a mobile device. In the United States, privacy risks related to location information
have been identified in the Location Privacy Protection Act of 2001 [4]. On one hand,
public disclosure of location information enables many useful services such as improved
emergency assistance. Mobile users can obtain a wide variety of location-based informa-
tion services, and businesses can extend their competitive edges to mobile commerce and
ubiquitous service provisions. On the other hand, without safeguards, extensive deployment
of location based services may risk location privacy of mobile users and to expose LBSs
to significant vulnerabilities for abuse. For example, location information can be used to
spam users with unwanted advertisements or draw unwanted inferences from victims’ vis-
its to clinics, doctors’ offices, entertainment districts, religious activities or political events.
In extreme cases, unauthorized disclosure of private location information can lead to physi-
cal harm, for example in stalking or domestic abuse scenarios. Even though some Location
based Service providers (such as Google maps) have a well-stated privacy policy statement,
such privacy statement is primarily for not exposing the collected information to public and
commercial uses. Thus, there are still inherent risks in continuous collection of location
information by the LBS provider as there are channels of attacks beyond the control of the
LBS provider and the protection of the privacy policy statement, including insider attacks.
For instance, there was a recent incident in Google where a Google engineer spied on four
underage teens for months before the company was notified of the abuses [5].

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

137

In the past, a fair amount of research efforts have been dedicated to protecting location
privacy of mobile travelers. The first category is represented by location cloaking tech-
niques [9, 20, 24, 31, 40]. Spatial location cloaking typically adds uncertainty to the location
information exposed to the location query services by increasing the spatial resolution of a
mobile user’s locations while meeting location k-anonymity and/or location l-diversity [9].
More specifically, the spatially cloaked region is constructed to ensure that at least k users
(location k anonymity) are located in the same region, which contains l different static sen-
sitive objects (locations). However, the use of spatially cloaked resolution instead of exact
position of users does not prevent continuous exposure of location information and thus may
lead to breaches of location privacy due to statistics-based inference attacks [28]. Moreover,
spatial cloaking is effective for snapshot queries but vulnerable to CQ-attacks.

In contrast, mix-zone based techniques anonymize user identity by restricting when
and where the exposure of users’ positions are allowed [11]. Mix-zones are regions in
space where no applications can trace user movements. Mix-zones enable users to change
pseudonyms such that the linking between the old and new pseudonyms is not revealed. The
idea behind using pseudonyms instead of the real identities is to disassociate the exposure
of location information from the actual identity of the person. However, when a pseudonym
is used by a user for a continued duration of time, the adversary can link a pseudonym to
the user’s actual identity through the inference of user’s personal locations such as home
address, office location and other known favorite locations. For instance, if a pseudonym α
is located often at the home location and office location of user Tom, then the adversary can
infer with high confidence that the pseudonym α belongs to Tom. To prevent such inference
of real identities from pseudonyms, pseudonyms need to be changed from time to time.
However, simply changing the pseudonyms in a user’s path of travel can leave the traces of
the user trajectory and therefore the linking between the old and new pseudonyms can be
easily inferred using a simple connect-the-dots approach.

Mix-zones securely enable users to change pseudonyms in an anonymous fashion such
that the linking between the new and old pseudonyms can not be inferred. The anonymity in
mix-zones is guaranteed by enforcing that a set of users enter, change pseudonyms and exit
a mix-zone in a way such that the mapping between their old and new pseudonyms is not
revealed [11]. In this paper, we assume that the mix-zones are managed by a trusted third
party that is independent of location-based service providers and mobile users. One such
third party player will be the mobile networking service provider as mobile users use their
cellphones to request LBSs through location privacy protected channels via the networking
service provider. We note that the mobile networking service provider has access to the
locations of the users.1 Therefore, in this paper we assume that the anonymizer is hosted by
the networking service provider which acts as the trusted third party.

The idea of building mix-zones at road intersections was first proposed in [18] and [13].
An optimal placement of mix-zones on a road map was formulated in [19]. These ear-
lier techniques for road network mix-zones follow a straightforward refinement of basic
mix-zones [11] by using rectangular or circular shaped zones. Both the definition and the
construction methodologies of these mix-zones fail to take into account the effect of timing
and transition attacks.

Several factors impact on the effectiveness of mix-zone approaches, such as user popu-
lation, mix-zone geometry, location sensing rate and spatial resolution, spatial and temporal

1The mobile networking service provider has access to the user location information through techniques such
as cell tower triangulation.

138

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

constraints on user movement patterns as well as semantic continuity of the information
requested by the LBSs. Mix-zones constructed on the road networks are vulnerable to tim-
ing and transition attacks due to the inherent nature of the road network and the mobility
patterns of the users. Concretely, the timing information of users’ entry and exit into the
mix-zone provides information to launch a timing attack and the non-uniformity in the tran-
sitions taken at the road intersection provides valuable information for a transition attack.
Both of these attacks aid the attacker in guessing the mapping between the old and new
pseudonyms.

Mix-zones are also prone to CQ-attacks when the mobile clients obtain continuous query
services. The CQ-attack refers to the risk that an adversary can perform inference attacks by
correlating the semantic continuity in the time series of query evaluations of the same CQ
and the inherent trajectory of locations. We note that neither spatial cloaking nor mix-zone
techniques are inherently resilient to CQ attacks. In this paper, we introduce the various
attacks that road networks are vulnerable to and illustrate the possible counter measures
to deal with them. We first describe and analyze the timing and transition attacks on road
network mix-zones and then study the continuous query correlation attacks (CQ-attacks)
that perform query correlation based inference to break the anonymity of road network-
aware mix-zones. We describe three types of the continuous query correlation attacks (CQ
attacks for short): (i) the basic CQ attacks in which only query correlation based inference is
performed, (ii) the CQ-timing attacks in which inference attack is performed based on both
query correlation and timing correlation, and (iii) CQ-transition attacks in which inference
attack is performed based on both query correlation and transition correlation.

We then discuss in detail the various road network mix-zone construction techniques
that are resilient to these attacks. Finally, we present an enhancement of the road network
mix-zone framework namely the concept of delay-tolerant mix-zones that introduce a com-
bination of spatial and temporal shifts in the location exposure of the users to achieve higher
anonymity than conventional mix-zones. We show that the delay-tolerant mix-zone model
offers greater level of anonymity under sophisticated attack models such as the continu-
ous query correlation attacks described above. We study the effectiveness of the mix-zones
attacks and the proposed techniques through extensive experiments conducted using traces
produced by GTMobiSim [33] on different scales of geographic maps.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We first introduce the concept and defi-
nition of mix-zones in Section 2 and provide an overview of various attacks to mix-zones
in Section 3. In Section 4, we introduce attack resilient mix-zone design and construction
techniques and analyze the privacy strength against the set of attack models described in
Section 3. We highlight the effectiveness of our attack-resilient mix-zones through experi-
mental evaluation in Section 5. The related work is discussed in Section 6 and we conclude
in Section 7.

In this section we introduce the concept and notations for basic mix-zones and road network
mix-zones.

2 Mix-zones

2.1 Mix-zone concepts

A mix-zone of k participants refers to a k-anonymization region in which users can change
their pseudonyms such that the mapping between their old and new pseudonyms is not

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

139

revealed. In a mix-zone, a set of k users enter in some order and change pseudonyms but
none leave before all users enter the mix-zone. Inside the mix-zone, the users do not report
their locations and they exit the mix-zone in an order different from their order of arrival,
thus, providing unlinkability between their entering and exiting events.
The properties of a mix-zone can be formally stated as follows:

Definition 1 A mix-zone Z is said to provide k-anonymity to a set of users A iff
1. The set A has k or more members, i.e., |A| ≥ k.
2. All users in A must enter the mix-zone Z before any user i ∈ A exits. Thus, there exists

a point in time where all k users of A are inside the zone.

3. Each user i ∈ A, entering the mix-zone Z through an entry point ei ∈ E and leaving at

an exit point oi ∈ O, spends a completely random duration of time inside.

4. The probability of transition between any point of entry to any point of exit follows a
uniform distribution. i.e., a user entering through an entry point, e ∈ E, is equally likely
to exit in any of the exit points, o ∈ O.

Figure 1 shows a mix-zone with three users entering with pseudonyms a, b and c and exiting
with new pseudonyms, p, q and r. Given any user exiting with a new pseudonym, the adver-
sary has equal probability of associating it with each of the old pseudonyms a, b and c and
thus this example mix-zone provides an anonymity of k = 3. The uncertainty of an adver-
sary to associate a new pseudonym of an outgoing user i(cid:4) to its old pseudonym is captured
by entropy, H (i(cid:4)) which is the amount of information required to break the anonymity.

H (i

(cid:4)

) = −

pi(cid:4)→j × log2(pi(cid:4)→j )

(cid:2)

j ∈A

where pi(cid:4)→j denotes the probability of mapping the new pseudonym, i(cid:4)
to an old
pseudonym, j. When users change pseudonyms inside mix-zones along their trajectories, an
adversary observing them loses the ability to track their movements.

2.2 Road network mix-zones

Unlike the theoretical mix-zones, mix-zones constructed at road intersections (Fig. 2) may
violate some conditions. For instance, in a road network mix-zone, users do not stay ran-
dom time inside while entering and exiting the mix-zone [18, 34]. Such violations provide
additional information to the adversary in inferring the mapping between the old and new
pseudonyms. Mix-zones constructed at road intersections have a limited number of ingress

Fig. 1 Mix-zone model

140

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

Fig. 2 Road network mix-zone

and egress points corresponding to the incoming and outgoing road segments of the inter-
section. Furthermore, users in a road network mix-zone are also constrained by the limited
trajectory paths and speed of travel that are limited by the underlying road segments and
the travel speed designated by their road class category [2]. Thus, users are not able to
stay random time inside a road network mix-zone and no longer follow uniform transition
probability when entering and exiting the mix-zone.

For example, in Fig. 2, users a and b enter the road intersection from segment 2 and turn
on to segment 4. Users c and d enter from segment 1 and leave on segment 2. When user a
and b exit the mix-zone on segment 4 with their new pseudonyms, say α and β, the attacker
tries to map their new pseudonyms α and β to some of the old pseudonyms a, b, c, and d
of the same users. The new pseudonym α is more likely to be mapped to two of the old
pseudonyms, a or b, than the other pseudonyms because users a and b entered the mix-zone
well ahead of users c and d and it is thus less probable for c and d to leave the mix-zone
before users a and b given the speed and trajectory of travel. Here, the limited randomness
on the time spent inside a road network mix-zone introduces more challenges to construct
efficient mix-zones. Similarly, in Fig. 2, in order for the attacker to map α and β to c and d,
the old pseudonyms, users c and d should have taken a left turn from segment 1 to segment
4 and users a and b should have taken a U-turn on segment 2. Based on common knowledge
of inference, the attacker knows that the transition probability of a U-turn is small and the
mapping of α and β to c and d is much less probable.

Thus, unlike theoretical mix-zones, the mapping probabilities in a road network mix-
zone may violate the uniform probability distribution assumption. Thus, measuring just the
entropy of mix-zone may not be sufficient for an accurate estimate of the achieved user pri-
vacy. Two systems can be shown to have the same entropy, but may provide different levels
of anonymity when considered from an individual user’s perspective [39]. In order to ensure
that the distribution of the mapping probabilities approximates the uniform distribution, we
argue to evaluate the quality of road network mix-zones, in addition to entropy. In other
words, it is important to measure the deviation of the mapping probabilities in a pairwise
fashion using pairwise entropy: for any two users i and j entering the mix-zone and exiting
with new pseudonyms i(cid:4) and j (cid:4), the pairwise entropy for the mapping of an exiting user
with pseudonym i(cid:4) to an entering user with pseudonym j is defined as the entropy obtained

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

141

by considering i and j to be the only members of the anonymity set. In that case, we have
only two mapping probabilities: pi(cid:4)→i, corresponding to the probability of mapping the new
pseudonym i(cid:4) to i and pi(cid:4)→j , corresponding to the probability of mapping i(cid:4) to j. If the prob-
abilities pi(cid:4)→i and pi(cid:4)→j are equal, then i(cid:4) is equally likely to be i or j. The attacker has
the lowest certainty of linking the outgoing user i(cid:4) to i or j (50 %). However, if one of the
probabilities is much larger than the other, then the exiting user with the new pseudonym i(cid:4)
can be associated with the old pseudonym whose mapping probability is higher. Formally,
let i and j denote the pseudonyms that the two users carry when entering a road network
mix-zone, and i(cid:4) and j (cid:4) be the pseudonyms that the same two users carry when exiting the
mix-zone. Then the pairwise entropy Hpair (i, j ) between users i and j is defined as follows:

Hpair (i, j ) = −

(cid:3)
pi(cid:4)→ilogpi(cid:4)→i + pi(cid:4)→j logpi(cid:4)→j

(cid:4)

Note that Hpair (i, j ) and Hpair (j, i) are not the same. Hpair (i, j ) measures the pairwise
entropy between users i and j for the event of user i exiting as i(cid:4) whereas Hpair (j, i)
measures the pairwise entropy between the users i and j during the exit of user j as j (cid:4).

In comparison, by Definition 1, a theoretical mix-zone ensures a uniform distribution for
all possible mappings between old and new pseudonyms and the highest pairwise entropy
of 1.0 for all pairs of users in the anonymity set. We argue that an effective road network
mix-zone should provide a pairwise entropy close to 1.0 for all possible pairs of users in the
anonymity set.

Next, we define the road network mix-zone as proposed by the MobiMix road network

model [34] as follows:

Definition 2 A road network mix-zone offers k-anonymity to a set A of users if and only if:

1. There are k or more users in the anonymity set A.
2. Given any two users i, j ∈ A and assuming i exiting at time t, the pairwise entropy after

timing attack should satisfy the condition: Hpair (i, j ) ≥ α.

3. For any two users i, j ∈ A, the pairwise entropy after transition attack should meet the

condition: Hpair (i, j ) ≥ β.

3 Threat models and attacks

This section is dedicated to illustrate the vulnerabilities of basic mix-zones, such as road
network based timing and transition attacks and continuous query correlation attacks (CQ-
attacks) and present a formal analysis of the mix-zone anonymization problem.

3.1 Attacks based on road network characteristics

We describe three attack models based on the characteristics of road networks: (1) Tim-
ing Attack, (2) Transition Attack and (3) Combined timing and transition attack. The effect
of attacks based on real world constraints had been studied ever since Beresford et.al. [11]
proposed the mix-zone model. Freudiger et. al. [18] studied the effectiveness of the mix-
zones on road networks and identified that the timing information and transition probability
at the road intersection provide valuable information to the attacker for mapping the new
pseudonym to the old pseudonym. Similarly, Buttyan et. al. [13] showed that the privacy
obtained in the road network mix-zones is impacted by attacks related to the timing of

142

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

the entry and exit events in a road network. The MobiMix road network mix-zone frame-
work [34] developed a formal model of these attacks in road network mix-zones which are
described below.

3.1.1 Timing attack

In timing attack, the attacker observes the time of entry, tin(i) and time of exit tout (i) for
each user entering and exiting the mix-zone. When the attacker sees an user i(cid:4) exiting, he
tries to map i(cid:4) to one of the users of the anonymity set, Ai. The attacker assigns a probabil-
ity, pi(cid:4)→j that corresponds to the probability of mapping i(cid:4) to j, where j ∈ A. The mapping
probabilities are computed through inference based on the likelihoods of the rest of the users
to exit at the exit time of i(cid:4), denoted by tout (i(cid:4)). Once the mapping probabilities are com-
puted, the attacker can utilize the skewness in the distribution of the mapping probabilities to
eliminate some low probability mappings from consideration and narrow down his inference
to only the high probable mappings. Consider an example anonymity set, A = {a, b, c}, let
user a exit with a new pseudonym a(cid:4) at tout (a(cid:4)) and let the likelihoods of a, b and c exiting at
time tout (a(cid:4)) be 0.1, 0.09 and 0.05 respectively. In this case, we show that it is easy to com-
0.1
= 0.416,
pute the mapping probabilities based on these likelihoods: pa(cid:4)→a =
0.1+0.09+0.05
pa(cid:4)→b =
= 0.208. Thus, with the tim-
= 0.375 and pa(cid:4)→c =
ing information, the attacker is able to find that a(cid:4) → a is the most probable mapping and
a(cid:4) → c is least probable.

0.05
0.1+0.09+0.05

0.09
0.1+0.09+0.05

3.1.2 Transition attack

In transition attack, the attacker estimates the transition probability for each possible turn in
the intersection based on previous observations. On seeing an exiting user, i(cid:4), the attacker
assigns the mapping probability pi(cid:4)→j for each j ∈ A based on the conditional tran-
sitional probabilities T ((ingress(j ), egress(i(cid:4))). Transition attack can equally affect the
effectiveness of road network mix-zones as timing attack if not handled with care.

3.1.3 Combined timing and transition attack

In the combined timing and transition attack model, the attacker is aware of both the entry
and exit timing of the users and as well the transition probabilities at the road intersection
for a given road network mix-zone. One can estimate the mapping probabilities pi(cid:4)→j for
each j ∈ A based on both the likelihoods of every user j exiting at time tout (i(cid:4)) and the con-
ditional transition probabilities T (ingress(j ), egress(i(cid:4))). This combined attack is often
more powerful than the timing and transition attacks in isolation as it utilizes the information
leaked by both timing and transition attacks.

3.2 Continuous query correlation attacks

We next discuss the class of attacks that are based on continuous query correlation. As
discussed earlier, road network mix-zones are prone to CQ attacks when mobile users obtain
continuous query services. When a user is executing a continuous query, even though her
pseudonym is changed whenever she enters a road network mix-zone, an adversary may
simply utilize the consecutive snapshots of the query to reveal the correlation between the
old and new pseudonyms. To the best of our knowledge, all road network mix-zones are
prone to CQ-attacks.

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

143

3.2.1 Basic CQ-attack

We first illustrate the basic CQ-attack which uses only query correlation between the
consecutive snapshots of the continuous query to infer the mapping between the old
and new pseudonyms. Consider the example in Fig. 3a where three users enter with
pseudonyms a, b and c and exit with new pseudonyms p, q and r. The attacker finds
that before entering the mix-zone, users a and b run continuous queries on obtain-
ing nearest drug store and shortest path driving directions to the airport respectively.
Upon their exits, the attacker again finds more instances of their corresponding con-
tinuous queries with different pseudonyms, q and r. Here, although users a and c
change their pseudonyms to q and r, the continuous exposure of their CQ information breaks
their anonymity. Similar attack can happen in a road network mix-zone as shown in Fig. 3b
where three users with pseudonyms, a, b and c enter and leave the mix-zone. As users a
and b are running continuous queries, the attacker finds an instance of a(cid:4)s continuous query
before entering the mix-zone and when user a exits with a new pseudonym, say α and
receives another instance of the same query, the attacker infers that the new pseudonym α
must correspond to the old pseudonym a. To the best of our knowledge, no existing road
network mix-zone technique is free from CQ-attacks. For instance, we find in Fig. 3c that
even the non-rectangular mix-zone [34] that is most effective against road network timing

a

b

c

Fig. 3 Mix-zone anonymization and its risks under CQ-attack

144

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

attack is also prone to the CQ-attack. Next we briefly discuss the CQ-attacks on Spatial
cloaking based solutions and describe how Spatial and temporal cloaking based techniques
over Mix-zone networks lead to CQ-timing and CQ-transition attacks.

3.2.2 Spatial cloaking

In the spatial cloaking technique, the granularity of location exposure is reduced by expos-
ing a larger spatial region containing the locations of k mobile users instead of the user’s
actual location [9, 20, 21]. In other words, the exposed location is indistinguishable from
the locations of k or more users. However, for continuous queries, the spatial cloaking tech-
nique is vulnerable to query correlation based on the information across different snapshot
instances of the continuous query. For example in Fig. 4a, we find users a and b asking con-
tinuous queries for nearest drug store and shortest path to airport at some time instance t.
The conventional spatial cloaking algorithm finds a cloaking box encompassing the loca-
tions of a and b with the locations of three other users, c, d and e so that the users obtain
location k-anonymity corresponding to a k value of 5. As the spatial cloaking algorithm
lacks knowledge of the continuous query correlation attack, at a later point in time, say time
t + δt, when users a and b have moved far from each other, it may cloak users a and b using
different cloaking boxes that only ensures location k anonymity (Fig. 4b). Therefore, we
find user a’s location is cloaked with the locations of l, m, n and o and similarly, the location

a

b

c

Fig. 4 Continuous query: spatial cloaking based techniques

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

145

of user b is cloaked using the locations of users r, s, u and w. Using query correlation, the
attacker will be able to compare consecutive cloaking boxes and infer that user a is issuing
the continuous query to nearest drug store as a is the only common user between the two
cloaking boxes. Similarly the adversary can infer that b is the user executing the continuous
query on the shortest path driving directions to the airport. Next we discuss a similar cloak-
ing based approach for anonymizing continuous queries in a mix-zone framework and show
how it leads to CQ-timing and CQ-transition attacks.

3.2.3 Mix-zone based CQ anonymization

In the CQ-cloaking approach in a mix-zone framework, the continuous queries are either
temporally or spatially perturbed while the snapshot queries continue to be unperturbed.
The locations used by the CQ is perturbed such that a continuous query originating from
a mix-zone is indistinguishable from at least k users traversing the mix-zone. While this
technique does not make changes to the mix-zone model, we show that it makes the CQ
anonymization susceptible to CQ-timing attack and CQ-transition attack.

Consider the example shown in Fig. 4c where we have a CQ labeled as star. The square
nodes represent road network mix-zones. We observe the star CQ trace starting from the
mix-zone at road junction n6. Each star represents one snapshot execution of the corre-
sponding CQ. Intuitively, if we delay the execution of the individual CQ snapshots of CQ
users starting at mix-zone n6 such that at least kc users leave the mix-zone within the tempo-
ral delay, it will make it harder for an adversary to associate the CQ-induced trajectory with
the corresponding CQ user. For instance, in Fig. 4c, if the continuous query on the shortest
path to the airport (marked by stars) originating from the mix-zone n6 is perturbed spatially
or temporally in such a way that there are k or more users coming out of the mix-zone at
road junction n6 within the continuous query’s spatial cloaking region (or temporal cloak-
ing window), then from the attacker’s perspective, the query could have originated from any
of the k users who entered the mix-zone within the time window. Both CQ-spatial cloaking
(CQ-s) and CQ-temporal cloaking (CQ-t) are similar in principle, however in CQ-spatial
cloaking, instead of delaying the snapshots, the CQ exposes a larger spatial region such that
there are k or more users within the spatial region.

CQ-timing attack CQ-cloaking techniques are vulnerable to CQ-timing attack when users
in the anonymity set violate the steady motion assumption, i.e., if all users do not travel
at the imposed speed of the road segment. In the example shown in Fig. 4c, we find that
users with pseudonyms a, b, c, d, e, f, g and h enter the mix-zone during the continuous
query’s temporal cloaking window, dtmax. When the steady motion assumption fails, user
a travels slowly and stays on segment n5n6 while other users move ahead of the segment,
n5n6. If user a is the issuer of the continuous query, then the continuous query would stay
on segment, n5n6 even though it is executed with a temporal delay while other users of the
anonymity set move ahead. By observing this, the attacker can eliminate the low probability
members and identify the issuer of the continuous query with high confidence.

CQ-transition attack CQ-cloaking techniques are prone to another vulnerability namely
CQ-transition attack. When the transitions taken by a subset of the users in the anonymity
set differ from that of the user executing the query, then those members can be eliminated
from consideration. For example, in Fig. 4c, at road intersection n5, users c and h take a left
turn on to the road segment, n2n5 whereas users f and g move straight on segment, n4n5

146

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

and users b, e and d turn right on to segment, n5n9. When the continuous query uses CQ-
temporal cloaking or CQ-spatial cloaking and follows the querying user after a temporal
delay or using a spatial cloaking region, from the transition taken by the continuous query,
from segment, n6n5 to n9n5, the adversary will be able to eliminate the users, c, h, f and g
from consideration as their transitions differ from that of the continuous query.

4 Attack-resilient mix-zone techniques

In this section, we discuss the techniques for mix-zone construction, which are resilient to
the above mentioned attacks. We first discuss how to construct road network mix-zones with
resilience to road network based timing attack.

4.1 Constructing mix-zones resilient to timing attack

A majority of existing mix-zone proposals adopt a straightforward approach to construct
mix-zones around the road junction using a rectangular or circular region centered at
the road junction as shown in Fig. 5. We argue that such a straightforward approach
has detrimental effects on the level of anonymity and privacy obtained. We first analyze
the weaknesses of the straightforward naive rectangular mix-zone approach and then dis-
cuss three MobiMix mix-zone construction techniques that consider the geometry of the
zones and their impact on the resilience to timing attack in the mix-zone construction
process. Concretely, we discuss: (i) Time Window Bounded(TWB) Rectangular, (ii) Time
Window Bounded(TWB) Shifted Rectangular and (iii) Time Window Bounded(TWB) Non-
rectangular mix-zones. All perform better than the naive Rectangular mix-zones under
timing attack.

4.1.1 Naive rectangular mix-zones

A straightforward approach to construct mix-zones around the road junction is to define a
rectangular region centered at the road junction as shown in Fig. 2. The size of the rectangle
is defined based on some system supplied default value. For each exiting user i(cid:4), the set of
users that were inside the mix-zone at any given time during user i(cid:4)’s presence in the mix-
zone forms its anonymity set, Ai. Thus, any two users that were present together at any
given time, become members of each other’s anonymity sets.

Fig. 5 Rectangular mix-zone

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

147

Timing attack is highly effective in such Naive Rectangular Mix-zones. This is because
in Naive Rectangular mix-zones, even when the anonymity set size is typically large, a
majority of members of the anonymity set become low probable under the timing attack.
For instance, in Fig. 5, consider two users i and j entering from the segments a into the
mix-zone. Let user i exit with a new pseudonym i(cid:4) on segment c and assume the four road
segments in the mix-zone, a, b, c and d, have the same speed distribution. If the arrival times
of i and j differ by a large value, then even though users i and j might have been present
together in the mix-zone for some amount of time, the attacker may infer that the user who
entered first is more likely to exit first and that it is unlikely for j to exit before i exits the
mix-zone. Therefore, the pairwise entropy of the naive rectangular mix-zones is low under
timing attack, making such naive rectangle mix-zones more vulnerable under timing attacks.

4.1.2 TWB rectangular mix-zones

To overcome the problem inherent in the naive rectangle mix-zones, a time-window
bounded approach is proposed [13, 18, 19]. In the time window bounded approach, the rect-
angle is constructed in the same way as in the naive rectangular mix-zone, however, the
anonymity set for each user i is assumed to comprise of only users who had entered the mix-
zone within a time window in the interval, tin(i) − τ1 to tin(i) + τ2. Here, tin(i) is the arrival
time of user i and τ1 and τ2 are chosen to be small values so that the time window ensures
that the anonymity set of i comprises of only those users who are entering the mix-zone with
a closely similar arrival time as the arrival time of i, defined by the time window. Hence,
when i exits the mix-zone as i(cid:4), the attacker would have hard time to differentiate i(cid:4) from all
members of i’s anonymity set, Ai, as they are all likely to exit at the same time when i exits.
A challenge to the time window based rectangular mix-zones is how to determine the
right size of the time window. Although, the notion of mix-zone time window has been
adopted in several existing mix-zone proposals [13, 18, 19], they all use a system-supplied
default value for the time window length for all the junctions. We argue that it should be
decided based on a number of factors including the characteristics of the road junctions,
the mix-zone size, the speed distribution of users on the road segments and the level of
anonymity users expect, so as to guarantee a lower-bound pairwise entropy. Concretely, for
road intersections that have segments with the same speed distributions, we can precisely
guarantee a lower-bound on the pairwise entropy for the members of the anonymity set by
constructing the anonymity set with the right length of time window based on our MobiMix
road network model [34].

However, when the segments of the road intersection have different mean speeds (e.g.,
when they belong to different road classes), the attacker may be able to eliminate some
mappings based on the timing information. For example, in Fig. 5, let us assume a mix-zone
of size 0.5 miles × 0.5 miles with segments a and c of residential road category having
a mean speed of 20 mph and segments b and d of highway roads with a mean speed of
60 mph. Consider two users i and j entering the mix-zone at the same time. Let user i enter
through the highway segment b and exit through the highway segment d, and let user j
enter though the residential segment a and exit through the residential segment c. If both
i and j travel around the mean speed of their respective road segments, then i and j would
exit approximately in 30 sec and 90 sec respectively. When user i exits the mix-zone with
a new pseudonym i(cid:4) in 30 sec, the attacker can infer that i(cid:4) is more likely to be i than j.
Thus, even though the anonymity set consists of users entering with closely similar arrival
times, the difference in the speed distribution on the roads causes the default window size

148

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

to be ineffective, making the window based rectangular mix-zones vulnerable to the timing
attacks.

4.1.3 TWB shifted rectangular mix-zones

To address the above mentioned vulnerabilities against timing attacks, a time window
bounded shifted rectangular approach is proposed [34]. In the Time window bounded shifted
rectangular approach, the rectangle is not centered at the center of the junction, instead it is
shifted in such a way that for all users in the anonymity set, from any point of their entry
into the mix-zone, it takes the same amount of time for them to reach the center of the road
junction when traveling at the mean speed of the road segments. Similarly, from the center
of the junction, it takes the same amount of time for the members of the anonymity set to
reach any exit point when travelling at the mean speed of the road segments. In a shifted
rectangular mix-zone, a set of users entering within the short time window, tin(i) − τ1 to
tin(i)+τ2, are likely to exit the mix-zone at the same time. Hence, when user i exits as i(cid:4), the
attacker could not infer which member in the anonymity set, Ai, will be the best match for
i(cid:4) since i(cid:4) is likely to be any of the members of Ai. If t represents the average time to reach
the center of the road junction from an entry point which is the same as the average time
to reach an exit point from the junction center, then the mix-zone lengths on the segments
will be given by the product of their mean speed, say v and the average time, t as shown
in Fig. 6. Compared to naive rectangular and time window bounded rectangular mix-zones,
shifted rectangular mix-zones provide good pairwise entropy for many cases, however, they
remain to be vulnerable and leak information when the speed of the users deviates from the
mean speed.

For example, in Fig. 6, consider a mix-zone of size 0.5 miles × 0.5 miles in a road
intersection with a slow residential road segment, a having mean speed 20 mph and three
other highway segments, b, c, and d having mean speed 60 mph. Let all road segments
have a standard deviation of 10 mph from their mean speed. The computation would yield
va.t = 0.375 miles and vb.t = vc.t = vd .t = 0.125 miles. Let users i and j enter the mix-
zone at the same time. Let user i enter through the highway segment, b and exit through the
highway segment, d and let j enter through the residential road segment, a and exit through
the highway segment, c. Let us assume user j travels with a speed of 10 mph on segment
a and travels at 60 mph on segment, c. In this case, the attacker would see j (cid:4) exiting in
2 min, 32.5 sec. With this timing information, the attacker can find that j (cid:4) is more likely
to be mapped to j than i because if j (cid:4) is i, then i should have travelled really slow on the
highway segments b and c, with an average speed of 5.9 mph in order to exit after 2 min,

Fig. 6 Shifted rectangular
mix-zone

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

149

Fig. 7 Non-rectangular
mix-zone

32.5 sec. However, if j (cid:4) is j, then j needs to have travelled only at 10 mph on the residential
road segment, a which is more likely to happen. Thus, the attacker can guess that j (cid:4) is j
with high confidence. In general, the shifted rectangular approach performs badly when the
user’s speed deviates from the mean speed of the road segments.

4.1.4 TWB non-rectangular mix-zones

A more effective way to construct mix-zones would be to have the mix-zone region start
from the center of the junction only on the outgoing road segments as shown in Fig. 7.
We refer to this technique as non-rectangular approach. The non-rectangular approach is
free from timing attacks caused by the heterogeneity in the speed distribution on the road
segments. As in the rectangular approaches, the anonymity set for each user, i comprises of
users who had entered the mix-zone within a time window in the interval, |tin(i) − τ1| to
|tin(i) + τ2|. The length of the mix-zone along each outgoing segment is chosen based on
the mean speed of the road segment, the size of the chosen time window and the minimum
pairwise entropy required.

Proof of timing attack-resilience The TWB non-rectangular mix-zone is most resilient to
timing attacks as it does not encounter any disparity in the speed distributions. Here, as
long as a pair of users enter within each other’s time window, the mapping probabilities will
be similar to each other. For instance, if user i and j enter the mix-zone and exit with new
pseudonyms i(cid:4) and j (cid:4), the mapping probabilities pi(cid:4)→i and pi(cid:4)→j corresponding to the exit
of i as i(cid:4) will be similar to each other. Precisely, the length of the mix-zone determines how
closely similar are the two mapping probabilities. By suitably choosing a mix-zone region
length, one can control the similarity of the two mapping probabilities, pi(cid:4)→i and pi(cid:4)→j . In
other words, we can obtain a high lower bound on the pairwise entropy, Hpair (i, j ). There-
fore Hpair (i, j ) will be always greater than the required minimum value α (refer Definition
2). Thus for any set of k users entering the mix-zone, the mix-zone ensures a high pairwise
entropy between each of them, forming an effective anonymity set.

4.2 Resilience to mix-zone transition attack

We next discuss attack-resilient mix-zone construction to deal with transition attacks. As
discussed earlier, in a road network, it is possible to launch transition attack to guess the
linking between the pseudonyms. For each exiting user, i(cid:4) the attacker observes the exiting
segment of i(cid:4) and tries to map i(cid:4) to one of the users, j in the anonymity set based on the

150

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

conditional transitional probability of exiting in the outgoing segment, oseg(i) given that
j entered from the incoming segment, iseg(j ). In order to protect against transition attack
in cases where the transition probability is skewed, the transition attack resilient technique
in [35] proposes that the mix-zone time window should be chosen in such a way that for
each outgoing segment, l, there are enough number of users (k or more) entering the mix-
zone from the road segments that have similar transitioning probability to the outgoing
segment, l, and hence have a higher pairwise entropy, say greater than or equal to β. There-
fore, the attacker will have at least k users in the anonymity set that he cannot ignore from
consideration.

Proof of transition attack-resilience Given that for each outgoing segment, l, the mix-zone
ensures that there are k or more users entering with a similar transitioning probability to
segment l, the mapping probabilities pi(cid:4)→i and pi(cid:4)→j corresponding to the exit of i as i(cid:4)
will be similar to each other. Thus, it results in a high pairwise entropy, Hpair (i, j ) between
each of those k users. Therefore referring to Definition 2, the pairwise entropy Hpair (i, j )
will be always greater than the required minimum value β and thus the mix-zone protects
against transition attack.

4.3 Resilience to CQ-attacks

CQ-attack by far is the most challenging attack in a road network mix-zone. To the best of
our knowledge, no road network mix-zone is completely free from CQ-attacks. However,
the goal for designing CQ-attack resilient solutions is to increase the anonymity strengths
of the mix-zones by considering the fact that the attacker has the continuous query cor-
relation information at the intermediate mix-zones to infer and associate the CQ induced
trajectory with its user. Note that the initial anonymity forms the major component of the
anonymity under the CQ-attack model as the attacker breaks the anonymity obtained in the
intermediate mix-zones and therefore it is important that the mix-zones provide high initial
anonymity for the continuous queries so that even when the attacker breaks the anonymity
in the subsequent mix-zones, the initial anonymity remains sufficient to meet the required
privacy level.

Proof of CQ-attack resilience When a user executes a continuous query, it induces a tra-
jectory corresponding to the movement of the user even though the user’s pseudonym
is changed whenever she crosses a road network mix-zone. In the proposed mix-zone
anonymization model, any mobile user who wishes to obtain CQ service first moves to
the nearest mix-zone and starts to run the CQ service from the mix-zone. Since the CQ
originates from a mix-zone, the CQ is anonymized with a set of k users in the mix-zone.
Here, the attacker becomes confused to associate the continuous query with the actual user
as each of the user in the mix-zone has equal likelihood of starting the continuous query.
Hence the continuous query obtains an initial anonymity of k. However, it should be noted
that at the subsequent mix-zones, the query correlation reveals the mapping between the old
and new pseudonyms of the continuous query and hence the intermediate mix-zones do not
effectively contribute to the anonynmity.

Thus for a continuous query, its initial anonymity forms the major component and inter-
mediate mix-zones add anonymity only when users in the intermediate mix-zones ask the
same query. For instance, if m out of the k users traversing an intermediate mix-zone run
continuous queries and if there are R number of unique continuous queries run by the m
users and if Ar is the set of users running the continuous query, Qr , 1 ≤ r ≤ R, then the

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

151

entropy of each continuous query user, i executing the query, Qr and exiting the mix-zone
with a new pseudonym, i(cid:4) is given by
H (i) = −

pi(cid:4)→j × log2

(cid:3)
pi(cid:4)→j

(cid:2)

(cid:4)

j ∈Ar

where pi(cid:4)→j denotes the probability of mapping the user exiting with the new pseudonym,
i(cid:4) to an old pseudonym, j that runs the same continuous query. Therefore, for a user starting
to execute a CQ from mix-zone m1, if fi users out of the mi continuous query users in the
ith mix-zone execute the same CQ, then the entropy X of the user executing the continuous
query is given by

X = log|k1 − m1| +

log|fi|

(cid:2)

2≤i≤n

where log|k1 −m1| represents the initial anonymity of the user while starting the continuous
query in mix-zone, m1.

The delay-tolerant mix-zones we discuss next combine mix-zone based identity privacy
protection with location mixing to achieve high initial anonymity for the continuous queries
that is otherwise not possible with conventional mix-zones. In the delay-tolerant mix-zone
model, users expose spatially or temporally perturbed locations outside the mix-zone area.
However, on the exit of each delay tolerant mix-zone, the mix-zone changes their perturbed
locations by introducing a random temporal shift (temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones) or a
random spatial shift (spatial resolution-tolerant mix-zones) to their already perturbed loca-
tions. While conventional mix-zones only change pseudonyms inside them, the additional
ability of delay-tolerant mix-zones to change and mix user locations brings greater opportu-
nities for creating anonymity. Therefore, the anonymity strength of delay-tolerant mix-zones
comes from a unique combination of both identity mixing and location mixing. Such high
anonymity provides the initial anonymity required to anonymize the continuous queries so
that the queries obtain the required anonymity even under the CQ-attack model. Given that
the delay-tolerant mix-zone provides a high initial anonymity, k which is the required level
of anonymity for the continuous query, the query meets the anonymity levels even though
the intermediate mix-zones may not provide any effective anonymity under the CQ-attack
model. Thus the proposed CQ-anonymization scheme is CQ-attack resilient.

4.4 Delay-tolerant mix-zones

We first illustrate the concept of delay-tolerant mix-zones with an example temporal
delay-tolerant mix-zone. Table 1 shows the entry and exit time of users in a conventional
rectangular road network mix-zone. We find that user a enters the mix-zone as t = 100 and
exits at time t = 104. Similarly the other users enter and exit as shown in Table 1. Here
the adversary may know that the average time taken by the users to cross the mix-zone is
4 sec. Therefore when user a exits at a(cid:4) at time t = 104, the attacker can eliminate users
e and f from consideration as they have not even entered the mix-zone by the time user
a exits2. Similarly, the adversary can eliminate users o and n from consideration based on
timing inference that users o and n have exited the mix-zone by the time a and b enter the
mix-zone. Therefore when a exits as a(cid:4), the attacker has uncertainty only among the users

2For the sake of example simplicity, we assume that the users take the average time of 4 s to cross the mix-
zone, in a real road intersection, it could actually take slightly longer or shorter time to cross based on the
speed of travel.

152

User

o

n

m

a

b

c

d

e

f

Table 1 Conventional road network mix-zone

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

tin

94

96

98

100

101

103

103

106

108

tinside

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

tout

98

100

102

104

105

107

107

110

112

{a, b, c, d, m}. Also, among the users {a, b, c, d, m}, the attacker can eliminate more users
through sophisticated reasoning based on timing inference described later.

However, in the delay-tolerant mix-zone model, each user uses a temporal delay, dt
within some maximum tolerance, dtmax. Inside the mix-zone, the temporally perturbed
location of each user is assigned a random temporal shift. In the delay-tolerant mix-zone
example shown in Table 2, we find that user a initially uses a temporal delay, dtold of 4 sec
and inside the mix-zone it is shifted randomly to 16 sec. Here dtmax is assumed as 20 sec.
Therefore when user a exits as a(cid:4), it becomes possible that many users can potentially exit
in the exit time of user a. The example in Table 2 shows one possible assignment of new
temporal delays, dtnew for other users in order for them to exit at the same time as a(cid:4). Thus,
during the exit of user a as a(cid:4), the attacker is confused to associate the exiting user a(cid:4) with the
members of the anonymity set, {a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, m, n}. In principle, users’ new
temporal delays, dtnew are randomly shifted inside the mix-zone ensuring the possibility of
each of the users to exit at the exit time of each other and thus the delay-tolerant mix-zone
model provides significantly higher anonymity compared to conventional mix-zones. Such
high anonymity provides the initial anonymity required for the continuous queries under the
CQ-attack model.

4.4.1 Temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones

In a temporal delay tolerant mix-zone, every mobile user delays the location exposure with
a randomly chosen delay, dt within the maximum temporal tolerance, dtmax. The temporal
time window, dtmax is chosen based on the arrival rate of the users in the road junction so as
to ensure an expected number of users arriving into the mix-zone within the temporal toler-
ance, dtmax. Note that the random delay used by a mobile client does not change during its
travel between mix-zones. Only when the mobile client enters a new mix-zone, its temporal
delay is randomly shifted to a new value within the temporal window, dtmax.

As it is intuitive, for an exiting user, i(cid:4), the number of users in the effective anonymity set
(i.e., those members that have high pairwise entropy with each other and with i(cid:4)) is directly
proportional to the temporal tolerance, dtmax, ie., the greater the temporal tolerance value,
dtmax, the more the number of users that could possibly resemble i during the exit of i(cid:4) with
a high pairwise entropy. Thus by varying the temporal tolerance, dtmax the temporal delay
tolerant-mix-zones can offer any desired level of anonymity to the users.

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

153

Table 2 An example temporal delay-tolerant mixing

Observed tin

tinside

dtold

dtnew

Observed tout

User

w

m

v

u

s

r

q

p

o

n

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

k

l

81

84

84

87

89

90

92

94

96

98

100

101

103

103

106

108

109

111

113

115

117

118

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

7

7

10

12

13

15

18

19

20

4

4

7

7

10

12

13

15

18

19

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

18

16

15

13

13

10

8

7

5

3

1

0

0

105

108

108

111

113

114

116

118

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

120

121

4.4.2 Spatial resolution-tolerant mix-zones

The second class of mix-zones based on the concept of delay-tolerance is the spatial
resolution-tolerant mix-zone. Unlike the temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones, in the spatial
resolution-tolerant mix-zone approach, users’ locations are instantaneously sent out using a
spatial region instead of the exact point location. Here, the spatial region masks the exact
time of traversal of the user inside the mix-zone ensuring the possibility that the user could
be located at any point within the spatial region. This ensures that the adversary can not infer
the exact time of traversal of the user. The spatial region is constructed by first identifying
the temporal window size, dtmax based on the arrival rate of the users in the mix-zone and
by translating the user’s current location into a spatial region based on the temporal win-
dow size, dtmax. A spatial region corresponding to a temporal window size dtmax includes
all road segments that can be reached within dtmax units of time (i.e., the corresponding
dl units of length) from the center of the region when travelled at the mean speed of the
road segments. The delay-proportional spatial cloaking algorithm described in Algorithm 1
computes the spatial region in such a way that the distance from the center of the spatial
region and the location of the mobile user exactly corresponds to the spatial distance, dl
proportional to the temporal delay, dt of the user in the temporal delay-tolerant approach.
Inside the delay-tolerant mix-zone, the spatial regions of the users are randomly changed by
introducing a spatial shift (Fig. 8).

154

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

a

b

Fig. 8 Illustration of spatial resolution-tolerant mix-zones

We note that the spatial resolution-tolerant mix-zone approach does not incur temporal
delays, however they lead to higher query processing cost that is directly proportional to the
size of the spatial regions. In the next subsection, we discuss spatio-temporal delay-tolerant
mix-zones that yield suitable tradeoffs between the incurred delay and the cost of query
processing.

4.4.3 Spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones

In the spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zone approach, user locations are perturbed using
both a temporal delay as well as a spatial region instead of the exact point location and
the mix-zone introduces both random temporal and spatial shifts to the spatio-temporally
perturbed user locations. Therefore, to an adversary observing an user, the user could have
been located at any point in the spatial region at any instance of time during the temporal
time window. Thus, the spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones effectively combine tem-
poral delay-tolerant and spatial delay tolerant mix-zones to obtain the highest anonymity for

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

155

continuous queries while making acceptable tradeoff between anonymous query processing
cost and temporal delay incurred in anonymous query processing.

Overall, the road network mix-zones enhanced with the concept of delay-tolerant mixing
provides the level of anonymity required to meet the strong privacy requirements under the
CQ-attack model.

5 Experimental evaluation

In this section, we present the experiments on the effectiveness of the various attack resilient
mix-zone techniques on road networks and discuss the level of privacy provided by them.
We first describe the experimental setup and the road-network mobile object simulator used
in the experiments.

5.1 Experimental setup

We use the GT Mobile simulator [33] to generate a trace of cars moving on a real-world road
network, obtained from maps available at the National Mapping Division of the USGS [2].
The simulator extracts the road network based on three types of roads – expressway, arterial
and collector roads. Our experimentation uses maps from three geographic regions namely
that of Chamblee and Northwest Atlanta regions of Georgia and San Jose West region of
California to generate traces for a two hour duration. We generate a set of 10,000 cars on
the road network that are randomly placed on the road network according to a uniform
distribution. Cars generate random trips with source and destination chosen randomly and
shortest path routing is used to route the cars for the random trips. The speed of the cars are
distributed based on the road class categories as shown in Table 3.

5.2 Resilience to mix-zone timing attack

We first measure the resilience of the various techniques to timing attacks based on road
network characteristics. Figure 9 shows the average and worst-case pairwise entropy of the
mix-zones for various values of k, the size of the anonymity set. In Fig. 9a, we observe that
the effect of timing attack is different across various approaches: we find that the TWB
non-rectangular mix-zones perform the best under timing attack with the average pairwise
entropy close to 1.0. Here, the length of the non-rectangular mix-zone is computed so as
to ensure a lower bound pairwise entropy of α = 0.9 for the chosen time window size, τ
which is computed based on the user arrival rate in the road junction to ensure the expected
value of k with a high probability of p = 0.9. In order to compare the effectiveness of the
other mix-zone approaches with the TWB non-rectangular approach, the TWB rectangular
and TWB shifted rectangular mix-zones are also constructed with the same length and time
window as used by the non-rectangular mix-zone. Similarly, the size of the naive rectangular

Table 3 Motion parameters

Road type

Expressway

Arterial

Collector

Mean speed (mph)

Std. dev.(mph)

Speed distribution

60

20

Gaussian

50

15

25

10

Gaussian

Gaussian

156

 
y
p
o
r
t
n
E
 
e
s
w

i

r
i
a
P

 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1
 0.8
 0.6
 0.4
 0.2
 0

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

Naive Rect
TWB Rect
TWB Shifted Rect
TWB Non-rect

Naive Rect
TWB Rect
TWB Shifted Rect
TWB Non-rect

 
y
p
o
r
t
n
E
 
e
s
w

i

r
i
a
P

 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1
 0.8
 0.6
 0.4
 0.2
 0

 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11
k

a Average Pairwise entropy

 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11
k
b Worst-case Pairwise entropy

Fig. 9 Resilience to timing attack

mix-zone is fixed in such a way that the mean time to cross the mix-zone equals the time
window of the TWB non-rectangular mix-zone.

In Fig. 9a, we also find that the naive rectangular and time window bounded rectangu-
lar mix-zones have low pairwise entropies after timing attack but the pairwise entropy of
the TWB shifted rectangular approach is relatively higher, close to 0.8 as its geometry is
more resilient to timing attack. However, a high pairwise entropy of 0.9 or higher may be
often required to ensure strong anonymity. In such cases, the time window bounded non-
rectangular approach becomes the most efficient choice. The worst case pairwise entropy
in Fig. 9b represents the lowest possible pairwise entropy obtained by the users after timing
attack. Here also, only the TWB non-rectangular approach offers a high value for the worst
case pairwise entropy.

5.2.1 Success rate and relative anonymity of road-network attack-resilient mix-zones

In order to measure the effectiveness of the mix-zone techniques against road network-
specific attacks, we study the success rate of them in providing the expected value of k.
Here, the expected probability of getting k or more users, p is taken to be 0.9 and the value
of k is varied from 2 to 11. Figure 10a shows the comparison of the success rate among

Naive Rectangle
TWB Rectangle
TWB shifted Rectangle
TWB Non-Rectangle

)

%

(
 
e
t
a
r
 
s
s
e
c
c
u
S

 140

 120

 100

 80

 60

 40

 20

 0

k
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

 3.5

 3

 2.5

 2

 1.5

 1

 0.5

 0

 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11
k
a Success Rate

 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11

k
b Relative Anonymity

Fig. 10 Success rate and relative-k

NW Atlanta
San Jose
Chamblee

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

157

the mix-zone approaches. A mix-zone is considered successful for an user if the user has at
least k other users in its anonymity set with pairwise entropies greater than 0.9 under both
timing and transition attacks. As evident from the Figure, the TWB non-rectangular mix-
zones have the highest success rate, the other mix-zones have low success rate due to their
lack of resilience to timing attack. In order to compare the level of anonymity offered by the
mix-zones with the anonymity expected from them, we measure relative anonymity which
is defined as the ratio of the value of obtained k to the value of expected k. Figure 10b shows
the variation of relative-k of TWB non-rectangular mix-zones with respect to the expected
value of k for different geographic maps. The expected success rate is set to 90 %. The
graphs show that the value of relative k lies within the range of 2 to 3, meaning that the
mix-zone on an average offers two to three times the anonymity requested by the users.

5.3 Resilience to CQ-attacks

This set of experiments compares the CQ-attack resilient mix-zones namely delay-tolerant
mix-zones with the conventional mix-zones and CQ-cloaking techniques in terms of their
anonymity under CQ-attack measured by entropy. Here, the delay-tolerant mix-zones are
constructed over a conventional road network mix-zone whose size is chosen to offer an
anonymity of 4. In Fig. 11a, we compare the average entropy of the temporal delay-tolerant,

t−M
s−M
st−M
CQ−t
CQ−s
Conventional roadnet

y
p
o
r
t
n
E

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

y
p
o
r
t
n
E

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

20

40

60

80

100

120

Anonymity (k)
a Entropy after CQ-attack

Time (sec)
b Entropy Timeline - CQs

Delay−tolerant
CQ−cloaking
Conventional roadnet

Delay−tolerant
CQ−cloaking
Conventional roadnet

25

20

y
p
o
r
t
n
E

15

10

5

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time (sec)
c Entropy Timeline - SQs

Fig. 11 Comparison with conventional mix-zones

158

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

spatial resolution-tolerant and spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zone approaches (t-M,
s-M, and st-M) with the conventional mix-zone approach and the temporal and spatial CQ-
cloaking approaches (CQ-t and CQ-s) for various values of required anonymity, k. Here, the
temporal window and spatial region size are chosen based on the arrival rate of the users in
the mix-zones to ensure the required number of users, k with a high probability, p = 0.9.
For the spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones, the spatial region size is fixed as 800 m
and the temporal window is varied according to the required value of k. We find that the
average entropy of the conventional mix-zone approach is significantly lower than that of
the delay-tolerant mix-zones as they can not adapt to higher levels of anonymity but the
delay-tolerant mix-zones always provide the required anonymity level for all values of k
as shown by the high entropy. Here, we also note that the CQ-cloaking approaches (CQ-
t and CQ-s) have low level of entropy due to the effect of CQ-timing and CQ-transition
attacks. In Fig. 11b and c, we plot the timeline of the entropy obtained by continuous queries
(CQ) and snapshot queries (SQ) respectively. Here, we use the spatio-temporal mix-zone
as the candidate delay-tolerant mix-zone and temporal CQ-cloaking as the candidate CQ-
cloaking technique. We find that with conventional mix-zones, the continuous queries obtain
low initial anonymity and it stays constant throughout the timeline. With the CQ-cloaking
approach, the queries obtain higher anonymity in the beginning but their anonymity is grad-
ually reduced due to the impact of CQ-timing and CQ-transition attacks. However, the
delay-tolerant mix-zones offer very high anonymity to meet the privacy requirements of the
continuous queries under the CQ-attack model. For snapshot queries, we find that the tech-
niques have a different trend as shown in Fig. 11c. The conventional mix-zone model shows
an increasing entropy timeline where users gain more anonymity at the intermediate mix-
zones as CQ-attack has no impact on snapshot queries. We also find that the delay-tolerant
mix-zone offers greater anonymity to snapshot queries with a much steeper entropy timeline
but the CQ-cloaking technique offers only similar anonymity as the conventional mix-zone.

5.3.1 Performance of continuous and snapshot queries

Next, we study the performance impact of the delay-tolerant mix-zone approaches for con-
tinuous and snapshot queries individually. We measure the average temporal delay incurred
and the average query execution time of the techniques in Fig. 12a and b. Here, all queries

CQ
SQ

CQ
SQ

l

)
c
e
s
(
 
y
a
e
d
 
l
a
r
o
p
m
e
T

 
.
g
v
A

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

)
c
e
s
m

(
 
e
m

i

i
t
 
g
n
s
s
e
c
o
r
P
 
y
r
e
u
Q

5

4

3

2

1

0

CQ−t

CQ−s

t−M

s−M

st−M

CQ−t

CQ−s

t−M

s−M

st−M

Anonymization Technique

a

Average temporal delay

Anonymization Technique

b Query Cost

Fig. 12 Performance of continuous and snapshot queries

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

159

are anonymized corresponding to a k = 50. The spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zone
uses its default spatial region size of 800 m. The query execution time represents the
average time to process a snapshot of a k-NN query for a k-nearest neighbor value of
(kq = 7) over 14000 uniformly distributed objects on the road network using the road
network based anonymous query processor described in [40]. We find that with the CQ-
temporal cloaking (CQ-t), only the continuous queries incur delay before getting processed
and in CQ-spatial cloaking (CQ-s), neither of the queries incur any delay. With the spa-
tial cloaking approach, we obtain the results of the query for all possible locations within
the cloaking region, however the continuous queries in the CQ-spatial cloaking approach
result in higher query execution time. In temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones (t-M), both
continuous and snapshot queries incur temporal delays but have low query execution time.
Conversely, the spatial resolution-tolerant mix-zones (s-M) do not incur any delays for the
queries but have increased query execution time for both snapshot and continuous queries.
The spatio-temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones technique (st-M) finds a tradeoff between
these approaches and has more than 55 % lower average temporal delay compared to the
temporal cloaking case as well as a 40 % lower query execution time compared to the spatial
resolution-tolerant mix-zones.

5.3.2 Success rate of CQ-attack resilient mix-zones

Our final set of experiments evaluates the performance of the delay-tolerant mix-zones in
terms of their success rate in providing the desired level of anonymity given the influence
of CQ-attacks. The success rate represents the fraction of the cases where the proposed
framework is able to provide an anonymity equal or greater than the requested value, k. In
Fig. 13a, the query anonymity level is varied along the X-axis and the Y-axis represents the
obtained success rate. Based on the arrival rate of the users in the mix-zone, the expected
success rate is chosen as 0.9 so that the delay-tolerant mix-zones provide an anonymity
of k or higher in more than 90 % of the cases. We find that all the delay-tolerant mix-
zone techniques obtain a success rate close to the expected success rate of 0.9, however the
success rate of the CQ-cloaking approach is much lower (less than 0.3) and the conventional
mix-zone approach has a even lower success rate of less than 0.06. Similarly, we study
relative-k which is defined as the ratio of the anonymity obtained by the queries to the

e
t
a
r
 
s
s
e
c
c
u
S

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

t−M
s−M
st−M
CQ−t
CQ−s
Conventional roadnet

y
t
i

m
y
n
o
n
A
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

1.5

0.5

2

1

0

Query Anonymity

a

Success Rate

Fig. 13 Success rate and relative k

t−M
s−M
st−M
CQ−t
CQ−s
Conventional roadnet

Query Anonymity

b

Relative k

20

40

60

80

100

120

20

40

60

80

100

120

160

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

query anonymity requested. In Fig. 13b, we find that the relative anonymity level of delay-
tolerant mix-zones ranges from 1.5 to 2.0 showing that the queries on an average obtain
an anonymity which is 1.5 to 2.0 times the requested value. The successful cases of CQ-
cloaking and conventional mix-zone approaches have a lower relative anonymity as the
mix-zones have lower success rate and provides lower value of k in general.

In order to evaluate the success rate under different fractions of continuous queries in
the system, we study the approaches by varying the fraction of users executing continuous
queries. Here, each query is anonymized with an anonymity of 50. Figure 14a shows that the
obtained success rate is close to the expected success rate for the delay-tolerant mix-zones
across different fractions of CQs in the system. However, the CQ-cloaking and conventional
mix-zone techniques have much lower success rate. Similarly, the success rate of the tech-
niques is compared across different scales of geographic maps described in Section 5.1.
We compare the success rate of spatio- temporal delay-tolerant mix-zones in Fig. 14b that
shows that the technique performs well across different geographic maps.

6 Related work

Location privacy has been studied over the past decade along two orthogonal dimensions:
spatial cloaking through location k-anonymity represented by [8, 9, 15, 20, 31, 40] and
mix-zone based privacy protection and its variations represented by [11, 13, 18, 19, 30,
34]. Some of them had identified the additional vulnerability of location disclosure due to
mobile users traveling on spatially constrained road networks [34, 40]. The XStar approach
[40] performs location cloaking by adding road network-specific privacy metrics such as
segment diversity and QoS requirements, striking a balance between the attack resilience of
the performed protection and the processing cost of the anonymous query.

The concept of mix-zones was first presented in the context of location privacy in [11].
The idea of building mix-zones at road intersections is proposed in [18] and [13]. In [19],
a formulation for optimal placement of mix-zones in a road map is discussed. Almost all
existing mix-zone techniques follow a straightforward approach of using a rectangular or
circular shaped zone and their construction methodologies do not take into account the
effect of timing and transition attacks in the construction process.

e
t
a
r
 
s
s
e
c
c
u
S

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0.1

t−M
s−M
st−M
CQ−t
CQ−s
Conventional roadnet

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

t

e
a
r
 
s
s
e
c
c
u
S

0
0.1

NW Atlanta
San Jose
Chamblee

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

CQ fraction

a Varying CQ fraction

Fraction of CQs

b

Varying Maps

Fig. 14 Success rate

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

161

Inspired by the mix-zone concept, the Cachecloak algorithm [30] employs an alternate
technique for path-mixing by using cache prefetching to hide the exact location of mobile
user by requesting the location based data along an entire predicted path. Although these
techniques are effective when all users obtain the same service, they are vulnerable to
continuous query correlation attacks when the mobile users obtain uniquely different CQ
services. Recently, content caching [7] has been proposed as an alternate solution to location
privacy. However, caching large amounts of information on tiny mobile devices may not
be effective. In addition, they may limit the usability of the services by restricting mobile
clients to ask only services that are cached before-hand.

In recent years, there had been research efforts that dealt with location privacy risks
of continuous queries. [14] proposes spatial cloaking using the memorization property for
continuous queries. This is further used in [36] for clustering queries with similar mobility
patterns. However, as discussed earlier, this type of techniques may lead to large cloaking
boxes resulting in higher query processing cost as users may not always move together.
An alternative thread of research is represented by the Private information retrieval tech-
niques as an alternate to location cloaking for anonymous query processing [22, 23]. PIR
techniques guarantee privacy of mobile users regardless of which types of queries (continu-
ous or snapshot) they ask. However PIR based solutions are known to be expensive in both
computation and storage overheads, even with the recent new techniques such as hardware-
assisted PIR techniques [42], developed to improve the scalability and efficiency of the PIR
approach. Another general issue with PIR based solutions is its limitation in terms of what
kinds of queries can be protected under PIR [41].

To the best of our knowledge, the road network and CQ-attack resilient mix-zone frame-
work discussed in this paper is the first road-network aware attack-resilient mix-zone that
guarantees an expected value of anonymity by leveraging the characteristics of both the
underlying road network and motion behaviors of users traveling on spatially constrained
road networks. Additionally, by performing a combination of both location mixing and iden-
tity mixing in the mix-zones, the delay-tolerant mix-zone approach offer greater level of
anonymity that is sufficient to meet the anonymity levels of continuous queries under the
CQ-attack model while maintaining acceptable quality of continuous query services.

7 Conclusions

This paper investigates the use of mix-zones as an effective alternative approach to location
privacy protection, complementary to spatial cloaking [4, 10–12, 18]. We discussed the vul-
nerabilities and challenges of constructing attack-resilient mix-zones on road networks. For
example, on a road network, the timing information of users entry and exit into the mix-zone
may lead to timing attacks and the non-uniformity in the mobility patterns taken at the road
junctions may lead to transition attacks. When the location based services are continuous in
nature, mix-zones will face the challenge of CQ-attacks, which perform query correlation
based inference on continuous queries to break the anonymity of the road network mix-
zones. We described our road network and CQ-attack resilient mix-zone framework and
discussed the solution techniques to counter the effects of road network timing and transi-
tion attacks as well as the continuous query correlation attacks. Our extensive experiments
on the effectiveness of our approach using traces generated by GTMobiSim [17] shows
significant attack-resilience under a wide range of mix-zone attack models.

162

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

Acknowledgments This work is partially sponsored by grants from NSF CISE NetSE program, SaTC
program, and a grant from Intel ISTC on Cloud Computing and also by an IBM PhD fellowship for the first
author.

References

Draft

1. Cuellar JR, Morris JB, Mulligan DK, Peterson J, Polk J (2003) Geopriv requirements. IETF Internet

privacy in VANETs. In: ESAS

Geoinformatica

location-based services. In: MDM

2. U.S. Geological Survey. http://www.usgs.gov.
3. USAToday. Authorities: gps systems used to stalk woman. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/

4. Location Privacy Protection Act of 2001. http://www.techlawjournal.com/cong107/privacy/location/

5. Chen A GCreep: google engineer stalked teens, spied on chats. Gawker, September 2010 http://gawker.

6. Aggarwal C (2005) On k-anonymity and the curse of dimensionality. In: VLDB
7. Amini S, Lindqvist J, Hong J, Lin J, Toch E, Sadeh N (2011) Cache’: caching location-enhanced content

2002-12-30-gps-stalkerx.htm

s1164is.asp

com/5637234/

to improve user privacy. In: Mobisys

location privacy. In: IEEE TDSC

with PrivacyGrid. In: WWW

8. Ardagna C, Cremonini M, Vimercati S, Samarati P (2011) An obfuscation-based approach for protecting

9. Bamba B, Liu L, Pesti P, Wang T (2008) Supporting anonymous location queries in mobile environments

10. Bayardo R, Agrawal R (2005) Data privacy through optimal k-anonymization. In: ICDE
11. Beresford A, Stajano F (2003) Location privacy in pervasive computing. Pervasive Computing, IEEE
12. Bettini C, Mascetti S, Wang X, Freni D, Jajodia S (2009) Anonymity and historical-anonymity in
location-based services. In: Privacy in location-based applications: introduction, research issues and
applications, lecture notes of computer science 5599. Springer

13. Buttyan L, Holczer T, Vajda I (2007) On the effectiveness of changing pseudonyms to provide location

14. Chow C, Mokbel M (2007) Enabling private continuous queries for revealed user locations. In: SSTD
15. Chow C, Mokbel M, Bao J, Liu X (2011) Query-aware location anonymization for road networks. In:

16. Dewri R, Ray I, Ray I, Whitley D (2010) Query m-invariance: preventing query disclosures in continuous

17. Daz C, Seys S, Claessens J, Preneel B (2002) Towards measuring anonymity. PETS
18. Freudiger J, Raya M, F´elegyhazi M, Papadimitratos P, Hubaux J-P (2007) Mix-zones for location privacy

in vehicular networks. In: WiN-ITS

19. Freudiger J, Shokri R, Hubaux J-P (2009) On the optimal placement of mix zones. In: PETS
20. Gedik B, Liu L (2005) Location privacy in mobile systems: a personalized anonymization model. In:

ICDCS

mobile systems. In: WWW

21. Ghinita G, Kalnis P, Skiadopoulos S (2007) PRIVE: anonymous location-based queries in distributed

22. Ghinita G, Kalnis P, Kantarcioglu M, Bertino E (2011) Approximate and exact hybrid algorithms for

private nearest-neighbor queries with database protection. In: GeoInformatica

23. Ghinita G, Kalnis P, Khoshgozaran A, Shahabi C, Tan K (2008) Private queries in location based

services: anonymizers are not necessary. In: SIGMOD

24. Gruteser M, Grunwald D (2003) Anonymous usage of location-based services through spatial and

temporal cloaking. In: MobiSys

25. Hengartner U, Steenkiste P (2003) Protecting access to people location information. In: security in

26. Hong J, Landay J (2004) An architecture for privacy-sensitive ubiquitous computing. In: Mobisys. pp

27. Karger P, Frankel Y (1995) Security and privacy threats to its. In: World Congress on Intelligent

28. Krumm J (2007) Inference attacks on location tracks. In: PERVASIVE
29. Machanavajjhala A, Gehrke J, Kifer D, Venkitasubramaniam M (2006) l-Diversity: privacy beyond k-

pervasive computing

177–189

Transport Systems

Anonymity. In: ICDE

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

163

30. Meyerowitz J, Choudhury R (2009) Hiding stars with fireworks: location privacy through camouflage.

31. Mokbel M, Chow C, Aref W (2006) The new casper: query processing for location services without

In: MOBICOM

compromising privacy. In: VLDB

32. Mouratidis K, Yiu M (2010) Anonymous query processing in road networks. In: TKDE
33. Pesti P, Bamba B, Doo M, Liu L, Palanisamy B, Weber M (2009) GTMobiSIM: a mobile trace genera-
tor for road networks. College of computing, georgia institute of technology. http://code.google.com/p/
gt-mobisim/

34. Palanisamy B, Liu L (2011) MobiMix: protecting location privacy with mix-zones over road networks.

35. Palanisamy B, Liu L Attack-resilient mix-zones over road networks: architecture and algorithms.

36. Pan X, Meng X, Xu J (2009) Distortion based anonymity for continuous queries in location based mobile

37. Serjantov A, Danezis G (2002) Towards an information theoretic metric for anonymity. PETS
38. Shmatikov V, Wang M (2006) Timing analysis in low-latency mix networks: attacks and defenses. In:

39. Toth G, Hornak Z, Vajda F (2004) Measuring anonymity revisited. In: Norsec
40. Wang T, Liu L (2009) Privacy-aware mobile services over road networks. In: VLDB
41. Wang T, Liu L (2010) Execution assurance for massive computing tasks. In: IEICE transactions on

information and systems, Vol. E93-D, No. 6, Special session on Info-Plosion

42. Williams P, Sion R (2008) Usable PIR. In: NDSS

In: ICDE

Georgia Tech Technical Report

services. In: GIS

ESORICS

Balaji Palanisamy is an Assistant Professor in the School of Information Sciences in University of Pitts-
burgh. He received his B.Tech from Pondicherry Engineering College and M.S from Georgia Tech both in
Computer Science. He obtained his PhD degree in Computer Science from the college of Computing at
Georgia Tech in August 2013. His primary research interests lie in scalable and privacy-conscious resource
management for large-scale Distributed and Mobile Systems. He is a member of IEEE.

164

Geoinformatica (2014) 18:135–164

Ling Liu is a full professor in the School of Computer Science at Georgia Institute of Technology. There she
directs the research programs in Distributed Data Intensive Systems Lab (DiSL), examining various aspects
of data intensive systems with the focus on performance, availability, security, privacy, and energy efficiency.
She has published more than 300 International journal and conference articles in the areas of databases,
distributed systems, and Internet Computing. She is a senior member of the IEEE.

