The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 51 No. 4

pp. 372–386 November 2014

S U R V E Y

How to Assess Visual Communication of Uncertainty? A
Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation
User Studies

Christoph Kinkeldey1, Alan M. MacEachren2 and Jochen Schiewe1

1HafenCity University Hamburg, Lab for Geoinformatics and Geovisualization, U¨ berseeallee 16, Hamburg 20457,
Germany. 2GeoVISTA Center and Department of Geography, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Email: christoph.kinkeldey@hcu-hamburg.de

For decades, uncertainty visualisation has attracted attention in disciplines such as cartography and geographic
visualisation, scientific visualisation and information visualisation. Most of this research deals with the development of
new approaches to depict uncertainty visually; only a small part is concerned with empirical evaluation of such techniques.
This systematic review aims to summarize past user studies and describe their characteristics and findings, focusing on the
field of geographic visualisation and cartography and thus on displays containing geospatial uncertainty. From a
discussion of the main findings, we derive lessons learned and recommendations for future evaluation in the field of
uncertainty visualisation. We highlight the importance of user tasks for successful solutions and recommend moving
towards task-centered typologies to support systematic evaluation in the field of uncertainty visualisation.

Keywords: uncertainty, geovisualisation, information visualization, scientific visualization, evaluation, user studies

INTRODUCTION

All geospatial data contain uncertainty and ignoring this
fact can have severe consequences for spatial analysis and
decision making (Zhang and Goodchild, 2002). Past
research has suggested that communicating information
about data uncertainty has the potential to increase trust in
the results when analyses are conducted (Fisher et al., 2012)
and to support decision making that uses the data (Aerts
et al., 2003; Deitrick and Edsall, 2006; Leitner and Bu-
ttenﬁeld, 2000). Visualisation of uncertainty has attracted
substantial attention over more than two decades. Much
of the work has focused on developing typologies of un-
certainty that represent various aspects of data and how it
might be signiﬁed (Buttenﬁeld and Weibel, 1988; Pang
et al., 1997; Sanyal et al., 2009; Thomson et al., 2005) and
on developing methods to depict uncertainty visually (e.g.
Cedilnik and Rheingans, 2000; Ehlschlaeger et al., 1997;
Sanyal et al., 2010; Wittenbrink et al., 1996). A compre-
hensive review of uncertainty typologies is provided by
MacEachren et al. (2005) and a review of uncertainty
visualisation across science by Brodlie et al. (2012). From
the broad literature, ﬁve common dichotomous categories
for uncertainty visualisation can be identiﬁed:
N explicit/implicit
This category distinguishes between directly expressing
signify levels of
uncertainty, e.g. using glyphs

that

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000099

uncertainty (explicit) or signifying it indirectly, e.g. through
multiple visualisations showing different possible outcomes
(implicit) (Deitrick, 2012). Explicit depiction of uncer-
tainty graphically is most common. Implicit uncertainty
depiction is given less attention in the uncertainty
visualisation literature.
N intrinsic/extrinsic

This commonly used distinction was introduced by both
Howard and MacEachren (1996) and Gershon (1998) in
cartographic and information visualisation contexts, respec-
tively. Intrinsic techniques alter the existing symbology to
represent uncertainty, basically through manipulation of
visual variables, e.g. colour value. In contrast to this,
extrinsic approaches add new objects to the display to depict
uncertainty, e.g. glyphs or grids.
N visually integral/separable

The third dichotomy focuses on the visual cognitive
response of the viewer: A visually integral signiﬁcation of
uncertainty cannot be perceptually separated from the data
signiﬁcation while a visually separable signiﬁcation can be
read independently (MacEachren et al., 1998). These
show some overlap with intrinsic/extrinsic
categories
because intrinsic methods tend to be visually integral and
extrinsic ones visually separable, but there are exceptions.

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

373

after a critical review of existing studies and their ﬁndings,
we derive lessons learned and recommendations for future
work. Our focus lies on user studies from the early 1990s
until the present that involve uncertainty visualisation in the
domains of cartography and geovisualisation, scientiﬁc
visualisation and information visualisation. We concentrate
on visualisation of geospatial uncertainty, thus, this review is
more comprehensive for studies that include some geo-
graphic component than those that are primarily aspatial.
Apart from that, we focus on empirical studies involving
users, typically using metrics such as map reading accuracy
and speed or user conﬁdence. Studies that do not appear
in our list include, e.g. conceptual evaluations that use
heuristics derived from general guidelines and rules for data
visualisation coined by Bertin, Tufte, Ware and Chambers
(Riveiro, 2007a; Riveiro, 2007b; Wittenbrink et al., 1996;
Zuk and Carpendale, 2006). Such studies, while not our
focus here, do provide basic statements on the usability of
different methods and therefore can help to choose suitable
visualisation techniques. Another type of study we did not
consider are case studies (without users involved) that
demonstrate the basic usability and utility of a method
(e.g. Allendes Osorio and Brodlie, 2008; Dooley and Lavin,
2007), sometimes in connection with assessing display
performance (Rhodes et al., 2003).

Owing to the volume of literature, differences in goals
and diversity of methods, this paper reviews and analyses
studies focused on communicating uncertainty (together or
separately from communicating data) and not on those that
investigate uncertainty visualisation impacts on reasoning
and decision making (which we will address in a follow up
paper). Some studies contribute to both aspects and will
thus appear in both papers.

This paper is organized as follows: In the section on
‘Analysis of the literature’, we describe the methodology of
the review and outline the main characteristics of the
studies. This includes the distribution of studies over the
years,
the types of uncertainty and the visualisation
techniques that have been assessed, the kind of application
domains the studies deal with, the groups of participants
that were involved and the tasks that were conducted. In
the section on ‘Discussion of ﬁndings’, we summarize and
discuss the main ﬁndings of the studies, organized using the
UVis3 we introduced above. From the discussion, we derive
lessons
In the
learned and identify open questions.
conclusion, we summarize the main ﬁndings, discuss the
limitations of the review and suggest future directions for
evaluation of uncertainty visualisation.

ANALYSIS OF THE LITERATURE

In this section, we analyse the main characteristics of the
user studies we included in the review; we have identiﬁed 44
studies described in 34 publications. Every sub-study that
involved a different group of subjects was treated as a
separate study, e.g. the Boukhelifa et al.’s (2012) paper
contained six studies. We analysed each study by summar-
izing its main characteristics such as the study methodol-
ogy, the visualisation techniques used, the data and scenario
that were involved and the reported ﬁndings. Based on this

Figure 1. UVis3 (‘Uncertainty Visualisation cube’) for categorisa-
tion of uncertainty signiﬁcation in visualisations

N coincident/adjacent

This categorisation refers to view organisation, i.e. if data
and uncertainty are represented in an integrated view
(coincident) or in separate views (adjacent) (MacEachren,
1992).
N static/dynamic

The distinction here is between a classical static map
versus a dynamic map using animation and/or
interactive controls. One example of the latter is
dynamic alternation in which a map depicting the
data is alternated with one depicting data uncertainty,
often with user control (‘toggling’).

Based on these categories, we propose a structure to
describe uncertainty visualisation approaches in a systematic
way using the following three main dichotomies:
N coincident/adjacent;
N intrinsic/extrinsic; and
N static/dynamic.
We represent
these three dichotomies as axes of an
Uncertainty Visualisation cube (UVis3, Figure 1). We left
out ‘explicit/implicit’ and ‘integral/separable’ from the list,
since most approaches are explicit. And, as already
discussed, ‘visually integral/separable’ on the one hand
corresponds to ‘intrinsic/extrinsic’ in most cases and on the
other hand is a distinction focused on human visual
processing rather
the cube
distinguishes eight main combinations that help us to
discuss uncertainty visualisation approaches in a systematic
way in the remainder of the paper.

than signiﬁcation. Thus,

As the range of methods for signifying uncertainty has
grown, so has the need to assess their usability and
applicability for various use contexts. This need has
stimulated a range of
focused on evaluating
studies
uncertainty visualisation methods, but the studies have
been idiosyncratic, thus difﬁcult to compare and develop
generalisations from. To address this gap, we present a
review of user studies directed to evaluation of uncertainty
visualisation methods and tools. The ﬁrst step is to give an
overview of past research and summarize the state of the art
in uncertainty visualisation assessment. In the second step,

374

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 2. Number of studies over time separated by their type. The peak in 2012 is due to the six studies from the Boukhelifa et al.’s
(2012) paper

description, we were able to make comparisons and thus
identiﬁed commonalities and differences.

We have included study reports published between 1992
and 2014. Over the years, there has been an increase in the
number of studies that evaluate (rather than just categorize
or suggest methods for) uncertainty visualisation, but the
numbers are generally small with considerable ﬂuctuation
(Figure 2). As shown in Figure 3, the majority of studies
apply quantitative methods (38 out of 44), i.e. controlled
lab experiments (22) and web-based experiments (16).

Web-based experiments have emerged since 2002 and their
number has become comparable to traditional laboratory
experiments (16 web-based versus 15 lab studies from 2002
to 2014). Just a small fraction of studies (6 of 44) are based
solely on qualitative methods, i.e. interviews (4) and focus
groups (2).

In the remainder of this section, we analyse ﬁve speciﬁc
aspects of the studies: uncertainty categories, visualisation
techniques, application domains, participants and tasks,
organized in subsections.

Figure 3. Number of studies per type

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

375

(Aerts

attribute

Uncertainty categories
When uncertainty of geospatial data is depicted, it can be
quantiﬁed and represented for each of the three core
information components:
(what), positional
(where) and temporal (when) uncertainty (MacEachren
et al., 2005). Studies dealing with uncertainty information
mainly cover the ﬁrst component, attribute (also called
thematic) uncertainty. Typically, they relate to uncertain
model outputs
et al., 2003; Alberti, 2013),
classiﬁcation uncertainty (Blenkinsop et al., 2000; Drecki,
2002; Kinkeldey et al., 2014) or reliability (e.g. variance) of
statistical data (MacEachren et al., 1998). Just one study (at
least from those focusing on communication of uncer-
tainty) deals with positional uncertainty visualisation
exclusively (Grigoryan and Rheingans, 2004). There are
no studies in the set assembled here that solely deal with
temporal aspects of uncertainty. Less than a fourth of the
studies (10/44) involve multiple types of uncertainty.
These studies fall into two categories: either different types
of uncertainty are evaluated separately, such as the symbol
sets for attribute, positional, and temporal and uncertainty
in MacEachren et al. (2012). Or a combination of types is
involved in the evaluation, as in Kardos et al. (2003; 2007;
2008) or Zhang et al. (2008) with a focus on attribute and
positional aspects of uncertainty at the same time.

Visualisation techniques
One of the basic criteria for the selection of studies for this
review was that the studies reported upon involve a visual
representation of uncertainty. To systematize the appro-
aches used in the studies, we use the three dichotomies
from the UVis3 (refer to the introduction).

Intrinsic/extrinsic

Most of the studies involve intrinsic approaches, i.e. when
visual variables of existing map content are manipulated to
represent uncertainty. Examples include colour hue and
colour value (a term under which we subsume value,
lightness and brightness) (e.g. Aerts et al., 2003; Edwards
and Nelson, 2001; Leitner
and Buttenﬁeld, 2000;
MacEachren et al., 1998; Nadav-Greenberg et al., 2008;
Retchless, 2012; Schweizer and Goodchild, 1992; Slocum
et al., 2003), transparency (e.g. Drecki, 2002; Newman and
Lee, 2004; Slocum et al., 2003; Viard et al., 2011), or
colour saturation that is used in a number of studies (e.g.
Drecki, 2002; Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka, 2011; Kunz et al.,
2011; Leitner and Buttenﬁeld, 2000; Retchless, 2012;
Sanyal et al., 2009).

While in the minority, we also identiﬁed multiple studies
i.e. when additional
that focus on extrinsic techniques,
graphical objects are used to represent uncertainty, typically
approaches using glyphs or error bars (Alberti, 2013; Drecki,

2002; Sanyal et al., 2009; Slocum et al., 2003), grid-based
techniques (Kardos et al., 2007; 2008; Kinkeldey et al.,
2014) or contouring (Senaratne et al., 2012).

Coincident/adjacent

Starting with the earliest research on uncertainty visualisa-
tion, coincident approaches (with data and uncertainty
integrated in the existing display) have been contrasted with
adjacent approaches with data and uncertainty in separate
views (MacEachren, 1992). While most studies assess
coincident approaches, there are a number of studies that
involve a direct comparison between adjacent and coin-
cident views (Aerts et al., 2003; Edwards and Nelson, 2001;
Evans, 1997; Gerharz and Pebesma, 2009; Kardos, 2003;
Kardos, 2007; Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka, 2011; Kunz et al.,
2011; MacEachren et al., 1998; Retchless, 2012; Senaratne
et al., 2012; Viard et al., 2011).

Static/dynamic

The majority of studies deal with traditional static visualisa-
tion. As the display typically can become complex when
uncertainty is added to data depictions, there have also been
numerous attempts to utilize dynamic views. Some of these
use non-interactive animation (Aerts et al., 2003; Blenkinsop
et al., 2000; Evans, 1997; Kardos et al., 2003; Kardos et al.,
2007; Zhang et al., 2008) and some incorporate interactive
interfaces (Alberti, 2013; Blenkinsop et al., 2000; Evans,
1997; Gerharz and Pebesma, 2009; Slocum et al., 2003;
Senaratne et al., 2012).

studies

Application domains
The majority of
(29 out of 44 studies) use
applications from a deﬁned domain, e.g. from environmental
science or health research (Table 1). An advantage of this
strategy is that it increases logical validity for the focus
domain. However, by not systematically attempting to pick
tasks that are general and representative of applications that
cross domains, it is difﬁcult to know the extent to which
generalisation from the results is valid and it is difﬁcult to
relate results among studies. For example, when a study
assesses the intuitiveness of an approach the results are often
domain-speciﬁc: A symbol set used in aviation may be highly
intuitive for a pilot, but this result cannot be easily transferred
to other domains – for an expert with a different background,
the symbol set may not be intuitive at all.

376

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Number of participants

Participants
The reported number of participants per study differs
substantially (Figure 4); one important factor is whether
evidence is quantitative or qualitative. Owing to require-
ments of statistical analysis, the number is much higher in
studies using quantitative approaches. Lab studies, the most
common evaluation type, range from 9 (Zhang et al., 2008)
to 123 (Viard et al., 2011) participants – the median is 31.
Compared to studies carried out in a laboratory, web-based
studies have the advantage that high numbers of subjects
can easily be recruited; the participant numbers in web-
based studies reviewed reﬂect this as they range from 32
(Kinkeldey et al., 2014) to 274 (Retchless, 2012) with a
median of 82. As noted above, studies involving qualitative
methods (i.e.
focus groups, and interviews) use fewer
participants – all have less than 15 subjects.

Another crucial aspect regarding participants is their
that
expertise. Expertise is described in many ways
are usually not directly comparable across studies, e.g.

experience in using geographic information (Gerharz and
Pebesma, 2009; Kardos et al., 2008), experience with the
concept of uncertainty and its visualisation (Kardos et al.,
2008; Kinkeldey et al., 2014), experience in maps and
mapping (Evans, 1997, MacEachren et al., 2012), training
or knowledge in the application domain (Aerts et al., 2003;
Kolbeinsson, 2013; Kunz et al., 2011; Senaratne et al.,
2012) or computer literacy more generally (Newman and
Lee, 2004). Self-assessment was often used to determine
the subjects’ expertise, especially when participants were
recruited via the web (Aerts et al., 2003; Kinkeldey et al.,
2014; Senaratne et al., 2012). A number of studies deﬁne
groups with different levels of expertise (e.g. novices versus
experts) to assess its impact on the results (Evans, 1997;
Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka, 2011; Nadav-Greenberg et al., 2008;
Schweizer and Goodchild, 1992; Slocum et al., 2003). All
in all, the type and level of expertise of participants often
remain unclear and groups are usually heterogeneous in
expertise.

Table 1. Domains used in the reviewed studies. Some publications cover more than one domain and thus appear more than once

Domain

Studies

Aviation
Land-use planning, spatial planning,
urban planning
Remote sensing, land cover/land use

Health research, medical imaging,
disease reporting
Environmental modeling, water
management, climate change, soil
mapping, geology
Natural hazard management
Meteorology, weather forecast
Demography, census
No specific domain

Kolbeinsson (2013)
Aerts et al. (2003), Leitner and Buttenfield (2000), Senaratne et al. (2012),
Vullings et al. (2013), Zhang et al. (2008)
Blenkinsop et al. (2000), Drecki (2002), Evans (1997), Kinkeldey et al. (2014),
Senaratne et al. (2012), Wray (2007)
Edwards and Nelson (2001), Grigoryan and Rheingans (2004), MacEachren et al.
(1998), Wray (2007)
Alberti (2013), Gerharz and Pebesma (2009), Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka (2011), Retchless (2012),
Senaratne et al. (2012), Slocum et al. (2003), Viard et al. (2011)

Kunz et al. (2011)
Nadav-Greenberg et al. (2008), Wittenbrink et al. (1996)
Kardos et al. (2007), Kardos et al. (2008), Schweizer and Goodchild (1992)
Bisantz et al. (1999), Bisantz et al. (2009), Boukhelifa et al. (2012), Finger and Bisantz (2002),
Kardos et al. (2003), MacEachren et al. (2012), Newman and Lee (2004), Sanyal et al. (2009)

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

377

Tasks
Assessing effectiveness of map communication, whether of
the data in the map or uncertainty of those data, typically
involves having participants complete some task and
measuring accuracy and speed with which they do so.
From the papers
reviewed, we identiﬁed two major
categories we discuss below: objective assessment that includes
tasks with measurable correctness of results such as value
retrieval, ratings, comparisons or rankings, and subjective
assessment, a category of tasks for evaluating the intuitiveness
of an approach, the preference compared to other options or
the subjects’ conﬁdence in their responses when using it. As
noted above, this review focuses on studies directed to the
communication of uncertainty in visualisations and a
complementary paper about impacts of uncertainty visualisa-
tion is being prepared. Thus, we do not report on decision
tasks based on uncertain data here, although some papers
included in this review involve such tasks in addition to
communication tasks.

Few authors explicitly justify the choice of tasks, e.g.
Sanyal et al. (2009) asked domain experts which tasks they
would ﬁnd important for their application. For this reason,
they chose the search of hotspots in uncertainty (‘[the
expert said he] would be interested in looking at regions of
extreme (high or low) uncertainty’, p. 1213) and the count
of features of a speciﬁc combination of data and uncertainty
(‘He also wanted to be able to discern features in the data,
in the presence of uncertainty’, p. 1213).

Objective assessment
Not surprisingly, value retrieval was found to be a common
task in the uncertainty visualisation studies we reviewed. It
is a task with a long history in cartographic communication
research, tracing back to at least Flannery’s 1956 disserta-
tion on graduated symbol map interpretation (results of
which were re-assessed more than a decade later and
published in Flannery, 1971). We identiﬁed two kinds of
value retrieval tasks that are used. In the ﬁrst, data and/or
uncertainty values have to be retrieved separately (Aerts
et al., 2003; Alberti, 2013; Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka, 2011;
MacEachren et al., 1998; Nadav-Greenberg et al., 2008;
Wittenbrink et al., 1996). In the second, retrieval of both
data values and uncertainty happens simultaneously (Blen-
kinsop et al., 2000; Drecki, 2002; Kolbeinsson, 2013;
Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka, 2011). While generally, value retrieval
the ﬁrst kind
tasks help assess basic map reading,
corresponds to univariate and the second one to bivariate
map reading.

A rarely used extension of value retrieval

is
aggregation of uncertainty over an area (Drecki, 2002;
Evans, 1997; Kinkeldey et al., 2014). This task type assesses
the users’ ability to retrieve an overall estimation from a
spatial distribution of uncertainty.

tasks

Some studies use rating tasks in which levels of uncertainty
have to be estimated, typically on a continuous scale (e.g.
from 0 to 100) (Bisantz et al., 2009; Boukhelifa et al., 2012;
Finger and Bisantz, 2002) or on a Likert scale (Drecki,
2002). The difference from value retrieval is that no legend is
provided or needed. These tasks emphasize accuracy of
relative judgments rather than precise value estimation or
legend matching.

tasks

type of

includes

Another

comparisons of

the
uncertainty of different entities (e.g. ‘which entity is more
uncertain?’) (Alberti, 2013; Blenkinsop et al., 2000; Evans,
1997; Kinkeldey et al., 2014; MacEachren et al., 1998;
MacEachren et al., 2012; Schweizer and Goodchild, 1992;
Viard et al., 2011). Some studies involve comparisons for
which subjects have to aggregate uncertainty over an
area or several entities ﬁrst. An example for this is the second
experiment in MacEachren et al. (2012) where the overall
degree of uncertainty of two sets with nine icons each have to
be compared.

Additionally, there are ranking tasks that let subjects
assign an order to a number of entities by their data value
(Bisantz et al., 1999; Finger and Bisantz, 2002) or their
uncertainty (Bisantz et al., 1999; Bisantz et al., 2009;
Blenkinsop et al., 2000; Boukhelifa et al., 2012). Ranking
tasks by combined data value and uncertainty require
interpretation and are thus not included since we focus on
the communication aspects here.

In contrast to the tasks mentioned so far that were dealing
with speciﬁed map objects, there are other tasks including the
search for entities that fulﬁl a certain characteristic, e.g.
extremely high or low values. Several studies incorporate
such tasks, for example, the search for the highest data value
(Viard et al., 2011),
the highest
uncertainty (Sanyal et al., 2009; Wray, 2007), or the
identiﬁcation of patterns such as clusters in the data
(Edwards and Nelson, 2001; MacEachren et al., 1998) or
in uncertainty only (Drecki, 2002; Edwards and Nelson,
2001; Sanyal et al., 2009). Sanyal et al. (2009) extend this
task type further to multiple entities using a counting task for
data values and uncertainty meaning that the number of
clusters in data and uncertainty has to be determined.

the lowest and/or

Subjective assessment
Beside tasks used to measure accuracy and speed of users,
there is another category of tasks used to let subjects
directly assess different aspects of usability, typically by
choosing from a list of options (on a Likert scale or similar)
or by giving a rating (e.g. on a scale from 0 to 100). For
instance, this is used to assess the conﬁdence with a
response (Alberti, 2013; Blenkinsop et al., 2000; Edwards
and Nelson, 2001; Evans, 1997; Grigoryan and Rheingans,
2004; Kolbeinsson, 2013; Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka, 2011;
Leitner and Buttenﬁeld, 2000). Other studies determine
the users’ preference for a certain technique (Boukhelifa
et al., 2012; Gerharz and Pebesma, 2009; Kardos et al.,
2003; Retchless, 2012; Senaratne et al., 2012), assessment
about ease-of-use of a map or visualisation (Grigoryan and
Rheingans, 2004; MacEachren et al., 1998) or judgment of
map attractiveness (MacEachren et al., 1998). Subjective
assessment is also used to determine or the intuitiveness of
different symbols (MacEachren et al., 2012), the difﬁculty
to identify data and uncertainty (Newman and Lee, 2004),
or the degree of visual overload (Newman and Lee, 2004)
perceived by participants. Alternatively, open questions are
used to collect different
the
inﬂuence of predeﬁned answers. For instance, Boukhelifa
et al. (2012) posed open questions to ﬁnd out how users
interpret the meaning of the sketchy line technique.

interpretations without

378

The Cartographic Journal

studies

coarser texture and lower saturation and recommended
colour value as the ﬁrst choice in terms of response
accuracy. Boukhelifa et al. (2012) contributed a number
of
focused on uncertainty with line features,
comparing known signiﬁcation methods (greyscale, blur,
dashing) to a novel representation called sketchiness (an
imitation of hand-drawn lines). They found that in terms of
response accuracy, a greyscale representation performed
better than blur, dashing and sketchiness. While up to four
levels of uncertainty could be distinguished for greyscale
and blur, only three were discriminable for dashing and
three to four for sketchiness (depending on the task).

the manipulation of

Since colour hue and value are often already used for
representing the data itself, and ‘purity’ of colour has been
hypothesized to be intuitive as a method to signify
uncertainty,
colour saturation to
represent uncertainty has been subject to a number of
studies. Sanyal et al. (2009) compared different uncertainty
representations for line charts (1D) and surfaces (2D data in
a 3D display) using artiﬁcial data. Colour-mapping from
saturated blue for low and unsaturated blue for high
uncertainty was compared to coloured glyphs, glyphs of
different size and error bars to represent uncertainty.
Response accuracy for colour saturation was not consis-
tently higher with all tasks, but all
in all the authors
encouraged its use. However,
in other studies, colour
saturation was
found to be less effective than other
approaches (e.g. Drecki, 2002; Kunz et al., 2011). In
direct comparison to colour value, Leitner and Buttenﬁeld
(2000) recommended saturation only if colour value or
texture are not available - with less saturation for higher
uncertainty (unless short response times are more important
for which they recommended more saturated colours for
higher uncertainty). In an extensive evaluation of intrinsic
representations of uncertainty in symbols, MacEachren et al.
(2012) suggested that saturation was amongst the techni-
together with colour hue,
ques with lower accuracy,
orientation and shape. Thus,
from current knowledge,
colour saturation cannot be recommended to represent
uncertainty. Instead, colour hue and value as well as
transparency are better alternatives (Figure 5).

As an alternative to colour value and saturation,
whitening can be used, the representation of uncertainty
by whiteness in the HSI colour model (Hengl, 2003).
Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka (2011) found that the combination of
suitable for continuous
hue and whiteness was not
uncertainty with an unclassed bivariate display, because
the legend was too complex to read. Supporting this,
Gerharz and Pebesma (2009) measured low performance
for whiteness during retrieval of uncertainty values from a
coincident uncertainty display, compared to colour-coded
adjacent maps. But all in all, evidence is still rare to make
well-founded assumptions
the effectiveness of
whitening.

about

The visual variable transparency (or opacity) is a popular
alternative for intrinsic uncertainty representation. In a
study involving land cover maps, Drecki (2002) measured
higher effectiveness for transparency signifying classiﬁca-
tion uncertainty than for colour saturation. Newman and
Lee (2004) support
they compared
transparency to colour mapping and to a number of

this observation;

Figure 5. Three of the recommended intrinsic techniques w.r.t.
user performance: colour hue, color value and transparency (from
certain5bottom to uncertain5top)

DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS

In this section, we summarize ﬁndings from the collection
of studies reviewed here. The following subsections contain
ﬁndings related to ﬁve visual representation method success
metrics. The ﬁrst, and the main part, focuses on objective
measures of user performance (accuracy, speed) that are
subdivided into the visualisation categories as deﬁned in the
UVis3 (see the section on ‘Introduction’). This is followed
by study results on the general acceptance of uncertainty
visualisation and those from user conﬁdence as a subjective
measure of task performance. The last two subsections deal
with users’
i.e.
preference for and intuitiveness of different representations.

judgments about representation forms,

User performance
In this subsection, we discuss ﬁndings related to user
performance that is typically measured as accuracy and
response time. This discussion is divided into subsections
represented by the three main dichotomies:
intrinsic/
extrinsic, coincident/adjacent and static/dynamic.

Intrinsic/extrinsic
In the studies we reviewed, most uncertainty visualisation

techniques under assessment were intrinsic ranging from
manipulation of colour hue, value or saturation to other
visual variables, such as transparency, blur or resolution.

A straightforward approach to depict uncertainty is to use
colour hue and/or value. As an example, Leitner and
Buttenﬁeld (2000) compared the representation of attri-
bute uncertainty in base maps using colour value, saturation
and texture. They found that darker colour value for high
followed by
uncertainty yielded the highest accuracy,

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

379

extrinsic techniques in static 3D scenes. Regarding ease
of identiﬁcation, subjects ranked transparency among the
best techniques for both data and uncertainty. All
in
all,
transparency generally has
for uncertainty depiction than colour
higher potential
saturation.

there is evidence that

In order to depict data plus uncertainty for area data, an
alternative to manipulating colour attributes is to integrate
texture and colour. While texture is often added as an
overlay on top of a data depiction (thus could be
considered extrinsic), the visual result is that colour and
texture are integrated into the areas,
thus becoming
intrinsic. There is some evidence that texture on colour
ﬁll leads to good results (Kunz et al., 2011; Leitner and
Buttenﬁeld 2000; MacEachren et al. 1998; Retchless,
2012).

Another intrinsic approach to represent uncertainty is to
vary resolution. It was used for uncertain symbols in several
studies by Bisantz and colleagues who called the technique
‘icon degradation’. In an early study (Bisantz et al., 1999),
they compared ﬁve sets of symbols (from abstract to iconic)
representing uncertain hostile and friendly identities. Using
resolution to represent uncertainty (with coarser resolution
depicting higher uncertainty), they found that subjects
could appropriately sort both the abstract and iconic
versions of the symbols representing identity (‘friendly’ or
‘hostile’) combined with six levels of uncertainty, resulting
in 13 different symbols. This result was basically supported
by the ﬁrst experiment in Finger and Bisantz (2002) with a
similar setup, but they observed lower user performance in
the ‘hostile’ than in the ‘friendly’ condition. However, this
observation was not made in other studies by the group. In
a study by Kolbeinsson (2013) referring to the work by
Bisantz and colleagues the icon degradation technique led
to decreased user performance compared to symbol shape
when users needed to read a data value and uncertainty in
combination. These ﬁndings suggest that resolution can be
a viable alternative to the manipulation of colour attributes
and transparency.

The study by Bisantz et al. (2009), unlike the studies
before, did not use resolution to represent uncertainty, but
colour saturation, value and transparency. The authors
compared two different backgrounds the symbols were
placed on: a uniform grey area and a map. Surprisingly, they
did not observe a signiﬁcant effect of the background on
user performance. More insight regarding the use of
symbols on maps
is provided by the Edwards and
Nelson’s (2001) study that assessed bivariate circle symbols
with size representing data and colour value representing
uncertainty. They compared bivariate symbols
to an
approach using univariate symbols and an additional
depiction of uncertainty as a reliability diagram in the
legend. Alternatively, uncertainty depiction through verbal
statements in the legend was utilized. The authors found
that generally, circle symbols on a map were much more
effective than a verbal description of
spatially-varied
uncertainty and also more effective than the uncertainty
diagram in the legend. In particular, ‘focus-size’ (colour
value of the boundary of unﬁlled circles depicts uncertainty)
surprisingly resulted in higher accuracy and conﬁdence rates

than ‘value-size’ (the same approach with ﬁlled circles), but
the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant.

Extrinsic methods for representing uncertainty have a
long tradition in scientiﬁc visualisation, e.g. Pang and
colleagues designed glyphs to represent data and uncertainty
in combination.
In an early study by Wittenbrink
et al. (1996), the authors compared arrow glyphs including
uncertainty information (‘verity visualisation’) to common
arrow glyphs without uncertainty and found that they
encoded bearing, magnitude, and uncertainty with almost
the same effectiveness as with the simple arrow glyphs. In
the study by Newman and Lee (2004) already mentioned
above,
three extrinsic techniques received the highest
ratings regarding effectiveness: multi-point, ball and arrow
glyphs. In the static 3D displays they used, these techniques
outperformed intrinsic techniques such as colour mapping,
transparency and aliasing (a combination of transparency and
blur). In related research, Grigoryan and Rheingans (2004)
found that with a spatial task in a 3D display (tell if a marker is
inside of the error margin of a surface), subjects were
signiﬁcantly more accurate and faster when the error margin
was represented by points than with pseudo-colouring of the
surface. In the above mentioned study by Sanyal et al. (2009)
subjects performed well with two kinds of spherical glyphs
(varying size and colour value) in a 2D and a 3D display.
Regarding the use of extrinsic methods in maps, Drecki
(2002) showed that what he labeled as the ‘squares’
technique (square glyphs coloured by land cover type that
are varied in size with smaller squares representing higher
uncertainty) performed as well in terms of effectiveness as
transparency and better than a display where uncertainty was
represented by heights of a 3D surface.

Another set of extrinsic approaches that have rarely been
assessed are grid-based techniques. In two recent studies,
Kinkeldey et al. (2014) assessed ‘noise annotation lines’, a
technique that signiﬁes classiﬁcation uncertainty by a noise
grid. The web-based studies incorporated qualitative com-
parisons of attribute uncertainty between areas in land cover
maps with four to eight uncertainty classes, using different
grid designs. The authors recommend the technique for up
to six uncertainty classes when the most salient grid design is
used. They point out that noise annotation lines can be a
viable alternative to intrinsic methods, especially with
complex map content. Another grid-based approach is the
‘trustree’ technique developed by Kardos et al. (2007) that
varies the level of detail of a tree-structured grid to represent
uncertainty. Since the evaluation did not include measure-
ment of user performance, ﬁndings are limited to subjective
measurement (see subsection on user preference).

All

in all, results on extrinsic displays discussed here
highlight the potential of glyph- and grid-based techniques
for uncertainty representation in maps as alternatives to
intrinsic techniques. On the question of whether to choose
intrinsic or extrinsic techniques, the type of uncertainty to
be displayed is deemed to play a role: Kunz et al. (2011)
suggested that intrinsic approaches may be more suitable
for communicating quantitative and extrinsic approaches
for qualitative information. This was supported by Alberti
(2013) and Kinkeldey et al. (2014) who conclude that the
extrinsic displays they used were especially successful for the
communication of qualitative uncertainty. But there are also

380

The Cartographic Journal

other observations suggesting that types of tasks decide if
intrinsic or extrinsic approaches are more suitable: Slocum
et al. (2003) evaluated the effectiveness of intrinsic vs.
extrinsic visualisation techniques as part of a usability
engineering approach. They compared intrinsic RGB colour
coding, transparency, as well as extrinsic line glyphs and
‘gcm glyphs’ (vertical bars and pyramids). Based on the
interviews the study relied upon, they found that subjects
with a scientiﬁc background preferred glyphs and the less
experienced preferred colour coding and transparency.
Their explanation for this is that intrinsic techniques they
used gave a better overview of uncertainty, but in-depth
analysis was easier with extrinsic techniques. This suggests
that there may be tasks for which intrinsic techniques are
more appropriate and others for which extrinsic approaches
work better.

Coincident/adjacent

This subsection deals with ﬁndings about comparison of
adjacent to coincident (integrated) maps. The obvious
difference between the two approaches is that adjacent
maps require more eye movements (saccades) to retrieve
information than coincident maps. But the latter tend to
become complex and cluttering is a bigger problem when
using a single view for data and uncertainty, compared to
adjacent views.

Amongst the studies involving a direct comparison, some
do not suggest general differences between adjacent and
coincident views (Kunz et al., 2011; Retchless, 2012). Most
studies report on non-signiﬁcant differences between the
two approaches, e.g. Kubıcˇek and Sˇasˇinka, (2011) who
reported that when retrieving data value and uncertainty at
the same time, users were slightly more successful using
adjacent views than a coincident display. In a study already
discussed above, MacEachren et al. (1998) compared
adjacent maps to coincident displays that are visually-
integral
(colour and hue shift) and visually-separable
(colour and texture). Adjacent maps were judged to be
‘more pleasant and easier to use’. But the coincident,
visually-separable texture overlay yielded user performance
comparable to the adjacent views. In the study mentioned
above, Viard et al. (2011) compared adjacent maps to
coincident maps using a texture with varying transparency
to represent the degree of uncertainty. A simple comparison
task yielded similar results for both approaches, but with a
more complex ranking task, adjacent views led to less
accurate answers than the coincident view. Coincident
versus adjacent results for identiﬁcation of spatial patterns
were reported by Edwards and Nelson (2001). The use of a
small uncertainty display in the legend of a map was less
than the coincident alternative using circle
successful

symbols. Gerharz and Pebesma (2009) compared colour-
coded adjacent maps and a bivariate coincident map using
whitening and reported that uncertainty retrieval was more
successful with adjacent maps but no difference existed for
data retrieval. In addition, all ten subjects found the tasks
easy to accomplish with adjacent maps and only ﬁve subjects
had this impression with the coincident map.

There are very few results regarding response time. The
study by Kubı´cˇek and Sˇasˇinka (2011) is an exception, reporting
that in a map reading task of either data or uncertainty values,
coincident maps led to quicker responses than adjacent maps.
This may again be explained by saccades that are necessary
when retrieving values from two adjacent maps.

All in all, past research suggests that both coincident and
adjacent approaches have their applications. There is
evidence that adjacent views may be usable for retrieval of
single values, but less usable when tasks become more
complex and more saccades are needed. Generally, coin-
cident maps can be seen as preferable because the
integration of uncertainty into the display makes it easier
to retrieve data and uncertainty simultaneously. However,
they naturally become more complex than adjacent views
and the map content is more likely to be obstructed by the
additional uncertainty display. For instance, the use of
bivariate colour schemes for data and uncertainty can be
challenging. So, as shown in several studies, adjacent maps
can be a viable alternative to avoid clutter.

Static/dynamic

A number of studies directed to representation of data
uncertainty deal with the use of dynamic approaches such as
animated displays or user interaction. The range of possible
approaches is wide because elements from animation and
interaction can be combined in numerous ways. This makes
it even more difﬁcult to come to consistent conclusions
about the effectiveness of dynamic approaches.

In an early study by Evans (1997) an animated (non-
interactive)
version
‘ﬂicker’ map and an interactive
(‘toggling’) were compared to static maps. The results
showed that static and (non-interactive) dynamic appro-
aches did not differ signiﬁcantly in terms of user accuracy or
speed. This result was not supported by Aerts et al. (2003).
since they observed signiﬁcantly higher accuracy for
uncertainty estimation with a static adjacent view than with
toggling. Referring to these results, Blenkinsop et al.
(2000) reported that a static grey scale display showed
better user performance than serial animation (series of
animated maps) or random animation (animated display of
possible outcomes). In another study comparing static and
dynamic, Drecki (2002) found that blinking (variations in
display time of map entities according to their uncertainty;
Fisher, 1993) was less effective than static representation
through glyphs or opacity, but more effective than a 3D
surface or the manipulation of colour saturation. Senaratne

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

381

et al. (2012) also observed higher user performance with
static than with dynamic approaches.

All in all, there is evidence that animated views have a
potential to successfully represent uncertainty when static
solutions are not feasible but little evidence that they
perform better (or even as well) as more traditional static
depictions. However, as Blenkinsop et al. (2000) suggest,
animated approaches may be suitable for speciﬁc tasks – for
instance, for exploration of uncertainty of a dataset in an
early stage of analysis because they provide ‘a very effective
ﬁrst impression of uncertainty’ (p. 11).

Acceptance
An important overarching evaluation question is how users
generally react when uncertainty is depicted visually. A
number of studies report on this aspect and the ﬁndings are
not consistent: some authors report that adding uncertainty
information to a map had negative effects on map
readability (Schweizer and Goodchild, 1992; Slocum et
al., 2003) and that subjects wanted the display to remain
unobstructed (Kardos et al., 2003). One obvious reason for
this is that displays become more complex when uncertainty
is added. Besides, users tend to be overwhelmed by the
additional
information when they make analyses or
decisions – an aspect we discuss in the second paper on
effects of uncertainty visualisation. But
there are also
ﬁndings suggesting that visualisations including uncertainty
were not judged as too complex or even that addition of
uncertainty clariﬁes the view instead of cluttering it (Aerts
et al., 2003; Alberti, 2013; Edwards and Nelson, 2001;
Kunz et al., 2011; Leitner
and Buttenﬁeld, 2000;
MacEachren et al., 1998; Viard et al., 2011). This suggests
that, when appropriate solutions are found, users do not
necessarily see depicted uncertainty as a burden.

User confidence
When assessing the usability of uncertainty visualisations,
the level of conﬁdence that subjects have with their answers
can be an important aspect. However, in many studies,
conﬁdence was not measured at all. From those that did,
most studies reported that user performance and conﬁdence
were in agreement, e.g. in the study by Blenkinsop et al.
(2000) cited above they observed higher conﬁdence as well
as better user performance with a greyscale display
compared to an animation approach. Edwards and Nelson
(2001) found that bivariate symbols depicting data and
uncertainty (size combined with either focus or colour
value) yielded higher conﬁdence (along with more accurate
results) than verbal and graphical depiction of uncertainty
in the legend. Grigoryan and Rheingans (2004) suggested
signiﬁcantly higher conﬁdence (as well as higher accuracy
and shorter response times) when a point-based representa-
tion of positional uncertainty was used, compared to colour
coding. Kolbeinsson (2013) reported higher conﬁdence for
shape changes than for icon degradation that also corre-
sponded to higher response accuracy. All in all, the majority
of studies measuring conﬁdence provide evidence for the
assumption that the successful use of a technique (in terms
of accurate and/or fast answers) at the same time leads to
high user conﬁdence.

User preference
A number of studies measured user preference for the visual
techniques under evaluation. Generally, it can be stated that
in contrast to conﬁdence, user preference did not always
correspond to user performance, i.e. subjects often preferred
techniques that did not necessarily work best for them. For
instance, although users were not successful with colour
saturation they had a preference for using it (Drecki, 2002).
This effect was also measured in the above mentioned study
by Boukhelifa et al. (2012) with respect to uncertain lines:
Dashing was preferred over blur, greyscale and sketchiness,
but this did not correspond with user performance in which
dashing yielded only three discriminable levels of uncertainty
(fewer than with blur or greyscale).

and preference. Gerharz

However, there are also results suggesting a match
between performance
and
Pebesma (2009) reported that most participants preferred
adjacent maps over a coincident view with whiteness
representing uncertainty and they could also retrieve
uncertainty values most accurately using the adjacent
display. In a study focused on similar datasets but in a
web-based environment, Senaratne et al. (2012) also found
a strong correspondence between preference and user
performance but only for the static techniques they assessed
(contouring, symbols, adjacent maps), not for the dynamic
approaches.

All in all, these ﬁndings show that measuring preference
does not sufﬁce to determine the effectiveness of uncer-
tainty visualisation techniques, but that it can give hints
about what approaches are popular with different user
groups. This information can be taken into account for
choosing useful methods to depict uncertainty when user
acceptance is essential.

Intuitiveness
The intuitiveness of different techniques was assessed by a
few studies only. The ﬁrst part of the study reported by
MacEachren et al. (2012) included three common meta-
phors suggested as appropriate to uncertainty signiﬁcation
including: colour purity (manipulating colour saturation),
fog (transparency) and blur (fuzziness). Fuzziness ranked as
the most
intuitive of all signiﬁcation methods, while
transparency was above average (but with wide variation
in reactions) and colour saturation was not judged as
intuitive. Boukhelifa et al. (2012) tested the intuitiveness of
sketchiness as a representation of uncertainty. Overall, it
was perceived as less intuitive than blur, greyscale and
dashing;
in the
MacEachren et al. (2012) study and greyscale to colour
value, these results support each other. This provides
further evidence for the assumption made above (from
objective measurement of user performance) that manip-
ulating colour saturation is not a recommendable way to
depict uncertainty, compared to other techniques such as
transparency and blur.

since blur corresponds

to fuzziness

Besides the intuitiveness of a method itself, a number of
studies address the question of ‘which end is up’: should
high uncertainty be matched with low or high colour value
and low or high colour saturation? Lighter values signifying
uncertainty result in a ‘fading out’ effect, whereas darker

382

The Cartographic Journal

research focused on
and related domains. Empirical
geographically varied uncertainty (geo-uncertainty) visuali-
sation is probably no less formalized or rigorous than that in
other aspects of geovisualisation, but it is clearly no better.
Thus, all comparisons and generalisations that we offer
here, based on our analysis of the 44 studies reported on in
34 papers, must be considered as starting points toward
developing a deep understanding of geo-uncertainty visua-
lisation, not a deﬁnitive summary.

is

Evaluation goals
From the publications included here, two major goals for
existing research can be identiﬁed. The ﬁrst
the
assessment and improvement of visual displays representing
uncertainty. Here, the question is often ‘does method A
work better than method B’ (with ‘better’ deﬁned in ways
we outlined above). These studies (while not always saying
so explicitly) are essentially following a usability engineering
approach where the goal is to improve a particular product
using a summative assessment rather than to create general
principles. One problem in many of these studies is that the
authors tend to attempt generalisation beyond the speciﬁc
constraints of the test, even though the conceptual framing
of the test was not designed to do this.

The second goal

is to advance understanding of the
cognitive processes involved in using visual displays (both
static and dynamic) for interpreting information that contains
uncertainty. Here, the question is often: how/why does
method A work better than method B or how does any
method of interest change the cognitive process? Such studies
usually are grounded in perceptual and cognitive theory and
as a result have the potential to provide a framework for
relating the generally ad hoc results from studies that adopt a
usability engineering approach. Studies from the second
category are in the minority of those reviewed.

Uncertainty visualisation techniques
When evaluating uncertainty visualisation the appropriate
choice of techniques to be assessed and compared can be a
challenge. As discussed in the introduction, typologies can
help to choose from the universe of possible techniques and
heuristics derived from general guidelines and rules for data
visualisation can support the choice. But when different
techniques are to be compared, it is important that the
scenarios and datasets are informationally equivalent, i.e.
according to Larkin and Simon (1987, p. 67) ‘[t]wo
representations are informationally equivalent if all of the
information in the one is also inferable from the other, and
vice versa’. A goal in testing, then, is often to determine
whether they are also computationally equivalent, or whether
one depiction has an advantage over another, i.e. ‘[t]wo
representations are computationally equivalent if they are
informationally equivalent and, in addition, any inference
that can be drawn easily and quickly from the information
given explicitly in the one can also be drawn easily and
quickly from the information given explicitly in the other,
and vice versa’ (Larkin and Simon 1987, p. 67).

Another crucial aspect is the role of visual metaphors that
have been used to depict uncertainty since the beginning of
this ﬁeld of research, e.g. fog or blur (MacEachren, 1992).

Figure 6. Three best options w.r.t. intuitiveness from MacEachren
et al. (2012): fuzziness, position and colour value (the top depic-
tion in all cases was interpreted to be most uncertain)

colours make regions with high uncertainty more promi-
nent. Bisantz et al. (2009) measured a tendency to assign
lower uncertainty to darker colours when using colour
value, and to more saturated colours when using saturation
to represent uncertainty. This was supported by Kubı´cˇek
and Sˇasˇinka (2011) as the majority of participants picked
the lighter values as the best choice for higher uncertainty
(thus darker value corresponds to lower uncertainty). In
addition, subjects were faster when using this alternative. In
the most recent ‘which end is up’ research, MacEachren
et al. (2012) reported that for colour value,
light for
uncertain and dark for certain was much more intuitive than
the reverse. Unsaturated colours were also more intuitively
associated with uncertainty than saturated colours, but only
slightly. Colour saturation in either order scored near the
mean of all visual variables tested, while colour value (with
light depicting uncertain) scored near the top (just below
fuzziness and location depicted as a point in a coordinate
space – see Figure 6).

LESSONS LEARNED

that

time,

lessons

least half of

Several
learned and recommendations can be
derived from the discussion, the ﬁrst ones referring to
study design in general. While empirical studies of map
reading and use have been carried out for 60 years or more
and uncertainty visualisation has been addressed explicitly
for at
the methods used in
uncertainty visualisation evaluation remain ad hoc. Studies
are often approached more from a usability engineering
perspective of assessing and improving a speciﬁc product
than from a cognitive psychology or science perspective of
developing general understanding of how and why repre-
sentations work or do not work. However, even if consi-
dered from a usability engineering perspective, studies often
do not follow any methodology commonly agreed upon.
This lack of formalisation and rigour in empirical methods
is an issue that is much broader than the study of un-
certainty visualisation focused on here; it is an issue that cuts
information visualisation
across research in cartography,

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

383

The contention is that fog and blur are metaphors for lack of
clarity or focus (as in a camera) and thus directly signify
uncertainty. These metaphors have been suggested to have the
potential to enable a better understanding of uncertainty
(Gershon, 1998) and we make the assumption that the use of
metaphors can lead to more intuitive approaches (Kinkeldey
et al., 2014). But the usefulness of metaphors generally has
rarely been investigated. It would be worthwhile to evaluate
whether metaphors increase the intuitiveness of uncertainty
visualisation, the understanding of geo-uncertainty and the
success of reasoning and decision-making under uncertain
conditions. One start toward addressing this goal is offered in
MacEachren et al. (2012), in which the authors assess the
intuitiveness of several strategies for signifying uncertainty (see
the section on ‘Discussion of ﬁndings’). Follow-up work is
needed to assess the sensitivity of these ﬁndings to the speciﬁcs
of the visual signiﬁcation and the experimental design and to
then address the more challenging questions of the relation-
ship between metaphor-grounded intuitiveness of uncertainty
signiﬁcation and subsequent
information interpretation,
reasoning with that information and decision-making.

Is uncertainty ‘just another variable’?
A question that has not been extensively discussed in the
literature is: Do we treat uncertainty as ‘just another
variable’ to be visually represented or does it need to be
treated differently? For example, when we picture a map
showing air pressure distribution in combination with
temperature, these two variables are certainly dependent
on each other (in physical terms). The same is true with air
pressure and its uncertainty, but we see a stronger
dependency: Uncertainty can be seen as metadata of air-
pressure which we argue makes a difference. Thus, we
support Edwards and Nelson (2001, p. 35) who stated that
‘[p]erhaps data certainty information is unique and will
require a new type of framework for designing symboliza-
tion’. Most studies that assess the usability of uncertainty
visualisations do not contribute to this aspect since they
test the retrieval of data and uncertainty separately, but
from the perspective that there is nothing special about
uncertainty. Traditionally, studies in this ﬁeld focus on
the ability to read both the map content and its uncertainty
at the same time. This may be the mandatory criterion
for a successful use of uncertainty, but the question that
remains is whether this is sufﬁcient to ensure that a user
does not only have two separate values in mind but an
integrated uncertain data value.

Classed/unclassed representations
Another aspect that is often neglected in past studies is
whether to use classed or unclassed schemes for uncertainty
categories. When classed uncertainty is used, the choice of
the number of classes is rarely explained. In the studies
reviewed here, classiﬁcation schemes range from binary
classed, i.e. certain/uncertain (or reliable/unreliable), over
six classes (e.g. Bisantz et al., 1999) to 15 classes (Schweizer
and Goodchild, 1992). All in all, the colour scheme used in
the latter study used 15615 classes; thus, subjects had to
distinguish 225 classes. It is not surprising that the authors
judgments. They justify
reported low user accuracy of

the high number of classes ‘to give the appearance of
continuous shading’ (Schweizer and Goodchild, 1992, p.
689). Their results raise the question of whether a high
number of classes are more complex than a continuous
uncertainty distribution or not; to our knowledge, this
question has not been addressed. In contrast to studies that
use a constant number of uncertainty classes, in the study by
Kinkeldey et al. (2014) about noise annotation lines the
number of classes was deﬁned as an experimental factor. In
this way, they could measure the impact of the number of
uncertainty classes on user performance. More work is
needed on the question of necessary level of detail
in
uncertainty representation to support different tasks using
uncertainty visualisation (Smith et al., 2013).

Types of uncertainty
Traditionally, a distinction is made between attribute (or
thematic), positional (or geometric) and temporal uncer-
tainty (see the section on ‘Analysis of the literature’).
Although these categories seem logical and match with
conceptualisations of data used in geographic database
research and development (Peuquet, 1994), their use may
be limited for the majority of applications of uncertainty
visualisation. In practice, it is hard to clearly distinguish
between these categories: ‘[t]he categories of uncertainty
are often interdependent, and the category boundaries are
often hard to delineate’ (MacEachren et al., 2005, p. 156).
For instance, when a land cover map is created from a
remotely sensed image, the boundaries shown in the map
are uncertain. This can be a result of various sources, e.g.
the vagueness and ambiguity in the deﬁnition of land cover
classes (attribute uncertainty), measurement errors (posi-
tional uncertainty) and the use of images from different
capture dates (temporal uncertainty). If all three types could
be estimated, it might help an expert analyst, but a domain
specialist who is not a remote sensing expert might be
confused. This raises the issue of how the complexity of
uncertainty relates to the categories of user and task – if
someone is trying to create a better satellite system, they
might need the full range of uncertainty information; if they
are trying to decide what crop to plant, they might need a
simple composite depiction of uncertainty.

User issues
A number of lessons learned are related to participants and
recruiting for empirical studies. A general objective should
be to recruit participants who are representative for the
target user group with respect to age, background, skills,
experience, etc. However, the majority of studies we review
here recruited students since they are easily available in the
university context. Thus, most descriptions of expertise
have to be judged critically. Students can be suitable parti-
cipants for studies focusing on perceptual issues where only
expertise in terms of visual literacy and experience with visu-
alisation or maps is important. But even here, students may
not reﬂect the general population well, if that is the target
audience. Students have different
theoretical
expertise typically combined with very limited or no work
experience. Despite this fact, they are often described as do-
main or map ‘experts’ without a more detailed speciﬁcation

levels of

384

The Cartographic Journal

of their experience. Further, if domain expertise plays a role,
e.g. when it is needed to understand the symbology of a
map (e.g. with a geological map), students (even those
studying within the domain of interest) are not yet experts.
Thus, in recruiting and selecting participants for studies, it
is important to differentiate between types of expertise,
including at least:
N expertise in use of maps and related visual displays;
N expertise in design of maps and related visual displays;
N expertise in statistics – thus in understanding probabil-
N expertise in the application domain used for test
N expertise in using uncertainty estimates in the application
N expertise in using any technology that might be relevant
(e.g. if the focus is on interactive interfaces, expertise in that)

ities and related uncertainty metrics;

scenarios (if any);

domain; and

Beyond recruitment of appropriate participant groups, it
has also been shown that training is important for effective
empirical analysis of complex information display inter-
pretation, but it is usually not carried out to a sufﬁcient
extent. An extensive training phase is often necessary, not
only to clarify the scenarios, data and tasks, but also
visualisation techniques used (especially when they are still
unknown to the users) and measures of uncertainty that are
needed. This is an aspect that has rarely been considered by
the studies from our review.

Task dependency
the usability of
Some studies provide evidence that
uncertainty representations can be highly user and task
dependent. For instance, in the study conducted by Sanyal
et al. (2009), search tasks for the lowest and highest
uncertainty values resulted in different user performance
(although using the same data). From their study about
weather forecasting uncertainty, Nadav-Greenberg et al.
(2008) suggest that ‘it is extremely important that designers
of such displays consider both user and task demands because
the usability and usefulness of uncertainty information
depends on these factors’ (Nadav-Greenberg et al., 2008,
p. 44). In their study, a box plot was successful for precise
information whereas the colour-coded maps worked better
for relative comparisons. Similar to this, in a study discussed
above, Slocum et al. (2003) reported that participants who
wanted the ‘big picture’ preferred intrinsic techniques (RGB-
encoding or transparency) whereas others who were aiming
for detailed information tended to prefer extrinsic methods
(i.e. glyphs). These ﬁndings show how tasks can differ
between groups with a different level of expertise in the
problem domain. Further evidence for task dependency of
visual depiction of uncertainty is provided by Blenkinsop
et al. (2000) who support the hypothesis from MacEachren
et al. (1998) that visually separable representation of
uncertainty is preferable for exploratory use, i.e. when it is
not clear what questions will be asked exactly during analysis.
In a focus group initiated by Zhang et al. (2008), domain
their preferred
experts were unable to articulate what
uncertainty visualisation methods were because they were
convinced that this strongly depends on the task.

All this supports the hypothesis that the nature of tasks plays
an important role for the usability of uncertainty visualisation
techniques. This may explain many of
the inconsistent
outcomes from the studies under review; two studies assessing
a speciﬁc technique are likely to yield different results when
tasks and user groups are not comparable. We further address
this aspect in the next section.

CONCLUSION

In this review, we systematically analysed 44 user studies
from 34 publications dealing with uncertainty visualisation.
More precisely, we focused on uncertainty of geospatial data
and geographic displays. The ﬁrst step was a description of
characteristics of the study under review (types of studies,
visualisation techniques under assessment, number and type
of participants, etc.), as well as a summary of the main
ﬁndings regarding user performance, acceptance of uncer-
tainty visualisation, user conﬁdence, preference and intui-
tiveness of techniques. From this, we derived lessons learned
and identiﬁed gaps in past evaluation research. Furthermore,
a number of recommendations and open research questions
for future studies were discussed.

This article focused on evaluating how uncertainty can be
communicated. It did not include issues with reasoning and
decision-making based on uncertainty visualisations – we will
address these aspects in a follow-up publication. Since this
work focused on visualisation of uncertainty in geospatial data
we did not try to be exhaustive for ﬁelds such as information
visualisation or scientiﬁc visualisation (although we did
include publications from those domains when representa-
tion of geographic information uncertainty was a compo-
nent). The fact that we dealt with visualisation of uncertainty
means that we did not review literature on decision-making
under uncertainty. We only included literature on non-visual
communication of uncertainty in cases where that topic is
included in a paper having a visual focus (e.g. studies that
compare uncertainty visualisation to a control of verbal
description or numerical speciﬁcation of uncertainty).

is

Generally, the most important outcome is that we need
to systematize future empirical
studies on uncertainty
visualisation to better enable comparison and generalisation
of the ﬁndings. As mentioned above, one way to advance this
goal
the use of uncertainty visualisation typologies.
However, as also discussed above, existing typologies are
focused on data types, uncertainty categories and representa-
tion types, i.e. they map a description of the data being
displayed to a recommendation of techniques. Based on the
discussion about task-dependency of uncertainty visualisation
usability (see the section on ‘Lessons learned’), we suggest
that future typologies should additionally take different
categories of tasks into account. We propose that at least the
following three high-level task categories deserve attention:
N communication tasks

This category comprises map reading tasks involving
data and uncertainty value retrieval (which location is
most uncertain?). For tasks from this category,
visualisation techniques can be chosen following the
traditional rules from cartography.

A Systematic Review of Geospatial Uncertainty Visualisation User Studies

385

N analytical tasks

Tasks that occur during analysis fall into this category,
meaning that defined analytical questions have to be
answered (what area is most suitable to build a power
plant?). Approaches for uncertainty visualisation
should be tailored to these tasks (e.g. by choosing
uncertainty representations with the number of
classes and level of detail needed to conduct the task).

N exploratory tasks

Tasks from this category occur during exploration of
the data, i.e. tasks for which the strategies for and
outcomes from use of visual displays can hardly be
foreseen. Because of this, visualisation methods need
to be versatile. This can be accomplished through
adaptable and adaptive approaches. Dynamic
approaches, especially those involving interactivity,
play an important role here.

the ways

But this is only one piece of the complex characterisation
of visual depiction of uncertainty. Complementary typolo-
gies are needed to characterize static and dynamic methods
for signifying uncertainty visually, for user tasks related to
uncertainty signiﬁcation, and for
in which
interactivity can apply to enable user access to data, its
uncertainty and their combination. The key goal
in
developing and applying such typologies is to support
repeatability of, make comparisons among, and make
generalisations from empirical studies. Thus, we propose
the following main topics for future research in the ﬁeld:
N the role of intuitiveness and metaphors;
N special requirements of visual depiction of uncertainty
N systematic description of expertise and investigation of
N development of task-centred typologies and guidelines.
Dealing with these topics will help advance the goal of
systematic evaluation of uncertainty visualisation, and, as a
result, will facilitate the development of practical guidelines
in this ﬁeld. Such guidelines are needed to approach the
goal of a wide application of uncertainty visualisation in
geospatial analyses, reasoning and decision making.

compared to other data;

the role of training; and

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Christoph Kinkeldey is a
research assistant and PhD
candidate at HafenCity Uni-
versity Hamburg, Germany
(Lab for Geoinformatics and
Geovisualization). He recei-
ved a university diploma
from Leibniz
(Dipl.-Ing.)
University Hanover in civil
engineering with a speciali-
zation in computer science.
After several years of practi-
cal experience as software developer in the ﬁeld of web
mapping, GIS and remote sensing he became interested in the

role of uncertainty in geospatial data and started his PhD in
2010. His dissertation project deals with uncertainty-aware
geovisual analytics of land cover change. The main question is if
and how users can incorporate visually depicted uncertainty in
change analysis.

REFERENCES

Aerts, J. C., Clarke, K. C. and Keuper, A. D. (2003). ‘Testing popular
visualization techniques
representing model uncertainty’,
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 30, pp.
249–261.

for

Alberti, K. (2013). Web-based visualization of uncertain spatio-
temporal data. MSc thesis. Utrecht University. Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Allendes Osorio, R. S. and Brodlie, K. W. (2008). ‘Contouring with
uncertainty’,
in Proceedings of 6th Theory & Practice of
Computer Graphics Conference (TP.CG.08), ed. by Lim, I. S.
and Tang, W., pp. 59–66, Eurographics Association, Manchester.
Bisantz, A. M., Finger, R., Seong, Y. and Llinas, J. (1999). ‘Human
Performance and Data Fusion Based Decision Aids’,
in 2nd
International Conference on Information Fusion FUSION’99,
pp. 918–925, Sunnyvale, CA, Jul 6–8.

Bisantz, A. M., Stone, R. T., Pfautz, J., Fouse, A., Farry, M., Roth, E.,
Nagy, A. L. and Thomas, G. (2009). ‘Visual representations of
meta-information’, Journal of Cognitive Engineering and
Decision Making, 3, pp. 67–91.

Blenkinsop, S., Fisher, P., Bastin, L. and Wood, J. (2000). ‘Evaluating
the perception of uncertainty in alternative visualization strategies’,
Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic
Information and Geovisualization, 37, pp. 1–14.

Boukhelifa, N., Bezerianos, A., Isenberg, T. and Fekete, J.-D. (2012).
‘Evaluating sketchiness as a visual variable for the depiction of
qualitative uncertainty’, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 18, pp. 2769–2778.

Brodlie, K., Allendes Osorio, R. and Lopes, A. (2012). ‘A review of
uncertainty in data visualization’, in Expanding the Frontiers of
Visual Analytics and Visualization, ed. by Dill, J., Earnshaw, R.,
Kasik, D., Vince, J. and Wong, C, pp. 81–109, Springer, London.
Buttenfield, B. P. and Weibel, R. (1988). ‘Visualizing the Quality of
in Third International Geographic
Cartographic Data’,
Information Systems Symposium (GIS/LIS ’88), San Antonio,
TX, Nov 30–Dec 2.

Cedilnik, A. and Rheingans, P. (2000) ‘Procedural Annotation of
Uncertain Information’, in IEEE Visualization 2000, pp. 77–84,
Salt Lake City, UT, Oct 8–13.

Deitrick, S. (2012). ‘Evaluating implicit visualization of geographic un-
certainty for public policy decision support’,
in Proceedings of
AutoCarto International Symposium on Automated Cartogra-
phy. http://www.cartogis.org/docs/proceedings/2012/Deitrick_
AutoCarto2012.pdf (accessed April 2014).

Deitrick, S. and Edsall, R. (2006). ‘The influence of uncertainty
visualization on decision making: an empirical evaluation’,
in
Progress
in Spatial Data Handling: 12th International
Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, ed. by Riedl, A., Kainz,
W. and Elmes, G. A., pp. 719–738, Springer, Berlin.

Dooley, M. A. and Lavin, S. J. (2007). ‘Visualizing method-produced
uncertainty in isometric mapping’, Cartographic Perspectives, 56,
pp. 17–36.

Drecki, I. (2002). ‘Visualization of uncertainty in geographical data’, in
Spatial Data Quality, ed. by Shi, W., Fisher P. F. and Goodchild, M.
F., pp. 140–159, Taylor & Francis, London/New York.

Edwards, L. D. and Nelson, E. S. (2001). ‘Visualizing data certainty:
a case study using graduated circle maps’, Cartographic Pers-
pectives, 38, pp. 19–36.

Ehlschlaeger, C. R., Shortridge, A. M. and Goodchild, M. F. (1997).
‘Visualizing spatial data uncertainty using animation’, Computers
& Geosciences, 23, pp. 387–395.

Evans, B. J. (1997). ‘Dynamic display of spatial data reliability: does it
benefit the map user?’, Computers & Geosciences, 23, pp. 409–442.

386

The Cartographic Journal

Finger, R. and Bisantz, A. M. (2002). ‘Utilizing graphical formats to
convey uncertainty in a decision-making task’, Theoretical Issues
in Ergonomics Science, 3, pp. 1–25.

Fisher, D., Popov, I. O., Drucker, S. M. and Schraefel, M. C. (2012).
‘Trust me, I’m partially right: incremental visualization lets analysts
explore large datasets faster’,
in Proceedings of the 2012
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
2012), pp. 1673–1682, ACM, New York.

Fisher, P. (1993). ‘Visualising uncertainty in soil maps by animation’,

Cartographica, 30, pp. 20–27.

Flannery, J. J. (1956). The graduated circle: a description, analysis and
evaluation of a quantitative map symbol. Unpublished PhD
dissertation. University of Wisconsin.

Flannery, J. J. (1971). ‘The relative effectiveness of some common
graduated point symbols in the presentation of quantitative data’,
Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic
Information and Geovisualization, 8, pp. 96–109.

Gerharz, L. E. and Pebesma, E. J. (2009). ‘Usability of Interactive and
Non-interactive Visualization of Uncertain Geospatial Informa-
tion’, in Geoinformatik 2009, Osnabru¨ck, Mar 31–Apr 2, pp.
223–230.

Gershon, N. (1998). ‘Visualization of an imperfect world’, IEEE

Computer Graphics and Applications, 18, pp. 43–45.

Grigoryan, G. and Rheingans, P. (2004). ‘Point-based probabilistic
surfaces to show surface uncertainty’, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 10, pp. 564–573.

Hengl, T. (2003). ‘Visualization of Uncertainty Using the HSI Colour
Model: Computations with Colours’, in 7th International Conference
on GeoComputation, Southampton, Sep 8–10, pp. 8–17.

Howard, D. and MacEachren, A. M. (1996). ‘Interface design for geo-
graphic visualization:
tools for representing reliability’, Car-
tography and Geographic Information Science, 23, pp. 59–77.
Kardos, J. D., Benwell, G. L. and Moore, A. (2007). ‘Assessing
different approaches to visualise spatial and attribute uncertainty in
socioeconomic data using the hexagonal or rhombus (HoR)
trustree’, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 31,
pp. 91–106.

Kardos, J. D., Moore, A. and Benwell, G. L. (2008). ‘Exploring
tessellation metaphors in the display of geographical uncertainty’, in
Geospatial Vision – New Dimensions in Cartography, ed. by
Moore, A. and Drecki, I., pp. 113–140, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg.
Kardos, J. D., Moore, A. and Benwell, G. L. (2003). ‘The visualization of
uncertainty in spatially-referenced attribute data using TRUSTworthy
data structures’, in 7th International Conference on GeoCom-
putation, pp. 11–26, Southampton, Sep 8–10, pp. 11–26.

Kinkeldey, C., Mason, J., Klippel, A. and Schiewe, J. (2014).
‘Evaluation of Noise Annotation Lines: Using Noise to Represent
Thematic Uncertainty in Maps’, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, Advance online publication. doi: 10.1080/
15230406.2014.949868, 2014.

Kolbeinsson, A. (2013). Visualising uncertainty in aircraft cockpits. Is
icon degradation an appropriate visualization form. MSc thesis.
University of Sko¨vde. Sko¨vde, Sweden.

Kubı´cˇek, P. and Sˇasˇinka, Cˇ . (2011). ‘Thematic uncertainty visualiza-
tion usability – comparison of basic methods’, Annals of GIS, 17,
pp. 253–263.

Kunz, M., Greˆt-Regamey, A. and Hurni, L. (2011). ‘Visualization of
uncertainty in natural hazards assessments using an interactive
cartographic information system’, Natural Hazards, 59, pp. 1735–
1751.

Larkin, J. H. and Simon, H. A. (1987). ‘Why a diagram is (sometimes)
worth ten thousand words’, Cognitive Science, 11, pp. 65–100.
Leitner, M. and Buttenfield, B. P. (2000). ‘Guidelines for the display of
attribute certainty’, Cartography and Geographic Information
Science, 27, pp. 3–14.
MacEachren, A. M. (1992).

‘Visualizing uncertain information’,

Cartographic Perspectives, 13, pp. 10–19.

MacEachren, A. M., Robinson, A., Hopper, S., Gardner, S., Murray, R.,
Gahegan, M. and Hetzler, E. (2005). ‘Visualizing geospatial informa-
tion uncertainty: what we know and what we need to know’, Carto-
graphy and Geographic Information Science, 32, pp. 139–160.
MacEachren, A. M., Roth, R. E., O’Brien, J., Li, B., Swingley, D. and
Gahegan, M. (2012). ‘Visual semiotics & uncertainty visualization:
an empirical study’, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 18, pp. 2496–2505.

MacEachren, A. M., Brewer, C. A. and Pickle, L. W. (1998).
‘Visualizing georeferenced data: representing reliability of health
statistics’, Environmental and Planning A, 30, pp. 1547–1561.
Nadav-Greenberg, L., Joslyn, S. L. and Taing, M. U. (2008). ‘The effect of
weather forecast uncertainty visualization on decision-making’, Journal
of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making, 2, pp. 24–47.
Newman, T. S. and Lee, W. (2004). ‘On visualizing uncertainty in
volumetric data: techniques and their evaluation’, Journal of
Visual Languages & Computing, 15, pp. 463–491.

Pang, A. T., Wittenbrink, C. M. and Lodha, S. K. (1997). ‘Approaches to
uncertainty visualization’, The Visual Computer, 13, pp. 370–390.
Peuquet, D. J. (1994). ‘It’s about time: a conceptual framework for the
representation of temporal dynamics in geographic information
systems’, Annals of the Association of American Geographers,
84, pp. 441–461.

Retchless, D. (2012). Mapping Climate Change Uncertainty:
Effects on Risk Perceptions and Decision Making, Poster,
AGU Fall Meeting, San Francisco, CA.

Rhodes, P.J., Laramee, R. S., Bergeron, R. D. and Sparr, T. M. (2003).
in Isosurface Volume
in Eurographics 2003, short papers, pp. 83–88,

‘Uncertainty Visualization Methods
Rendering’,
Granada, Spain, Sep 1–5.

Riveiro, M. (2007a). ‘Cognitive evaluation of uncertainty visualization
methods for decision making’, in 4th Symposium on Applied
Perception in Graphics and Visualization (AGPV 2007),
Tu¨bingen, Jul 26–27, p.133.

Riveiro, M. (2007b). ‘Evaluation of uncertainty visualization techni-
ques for information fusion’, in 10th International Conference
on Information Fusion, pp. 1–8, Quebec, Canada, Jul 9–12.
Sanyal, J., Zhang, S., Bhattacharya, G., Amburn, P. and Moorhead, R.
(2009). ‘A user study to compare four uncertainty visualization
methods for 1D and 2D datasets’, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15, pp. 1209–1218.
Sanyal, J., Song Z., Dyer, J., Mercer, A., Amburn, P. and Moorhead,
R. J. (2010). ‘Noodles: a tool for visualization of numerical weather
model ensemble uncertainty’, IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 16, pp. 1421–1430.

Schweizer, D. M., and Goodchild, M. F. (1992). ‘Data Quality and
Choropleth Maps: An Experiment with the Use of Color’, in GIS/
LIS ’92, pp. 686–699, San Jose, CA, Nov 10–12.

Senaratne, H., Gerharz, L., Pebesma, E. and Schwering, A. (2012).
‘Usability of spatio-temporal uncertainty visualization methods’ in
Bridging the Geographic Information Sciences, ed. by Gensel, J.,
Josselin, D. and Vandenbroucke D., pp. 3–23, Springer, Berlin/
Heidelberg.

Slocum, T. A., Cliburn, D. C., Feddema, J. J. and Miller, J. R. (2003).
‘Evaluating the usability of a tool for visualizing the uncertainty of
the future global water balance’, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 30, pp. 299–317.

Smith, J., Retchless, D., Kinkeldey, C. and Klippel, A. (2013). ‘Beyond
the surface: current issues and future directions in uncertainty
visualization research’,
in 26th International Cartographic
Conference (ICC 2013), Dresden, Aug 25–30.

Thomson, J., Hetzler, E., MacEachren, A., Gahegan, M. and Pavel, M.
(2005). ‘A typology for visualizing uncertainty’, Proceedings of
SPIE, 5669, pp. 146–157.

Viard, T., Caumon, G. and Levy, B. (2011). ‘Adjacent versus coincident
representations of geospatial uncertainty: Which promote better
decisions?’, Computers & Geosciences, 37, pp. 511–520.

Vullings, L. A. E., Blok, C. A., Wessels, C. G. A. M. and Bulens, J. D.
(2013). ‘Dealing with the uncertainty of having incomplete sources
of geo-information in spatial planning’, Applied Spatial Analysis
and Policy, 6, pp. 25–45.

Wittenbrink, C. M., Pang, A. T. and Lodha, S. K. (1996). ‘Glyphs for
visualizing uncertainty in vector fields’, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2, pp. 266–279.

Wray, K. (2007).

‘Using the creative design process to develop
illustrative rendering techniques to represent information quality’,
Journal of Young Investigators, 17.

Zhang, Q., Blok, C. and Tang, X. (2008). ‘Animated representation of
uncertainty and fuzziness in Dutch spatial planning maps’, in XXIst
ISPRS Congress Technical Commission II, pp. 1043–1048,
Beijing, China, Jul 3–11.

Zuk, T. and Carpendale, S. (2006). ‘Theoretical analysis of uncertainty

visualizations’ Proceedings of SPIE, 6060, p. 606007.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

