The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 3

pp. 265–280

August 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS Using
the Triangular Model

Yi Qiang1, Delafontaine Matthias1, Tijs Neutens1, Birger Stichelbaut2,
Guy De Tre´3, Philippe De Maeyer1 and Nico Van de Weghe1

1 Department of Geography, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 2Department of Archaeology, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium. 3Department of Telecommunications and Information Processing, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Email: yi.qiang@ugent.be

Rough set and fuzzy set are two frequently used approaches for modelling and reasoning about imperfect time intervals. In
this paper, we focus on imperfect time intervals that can be modelled by rough sets and use an innovative graphic model
[i.e. the triangular model (TM)] to represent this kind of imperfect time intervals. This work shows that TM is
potentially advantageous in visualizing and querying imperfect time intervals, and its analytical power can be better
exploited when it is implemented in a computer application with graphical user interfaces and interactive functions.
Moreover, a probabilistic framework is proposed to handle the uncertainty issues in temporal queries. We use a case study
to illustrate how the unique insights gained by TM can assist a geographical information system for exploratory spatio-
temporal analysis.

Keywords: rough sets,
temporal analysis

imperfect time interval, the triangular model, geographical

information system, spatio-

INTRODUCTION

Every entity has an extent in time, such as the lifetime of an
object or the duration of an event. These temporal extents
are usually described by crisp time intervals bounded by a
well-deﬁned start and end point. However, under some
circumstances, the temporal extent of an entity is imperfect,
and cannot be adequately modelled by a crisp time interval.
On the one hand, some events may start or end gradually
and therefore their start and end points cannot be pinned to
exact time stamps. For example, it is difﬁcult to decide
when the industrial
revolution started and ﬁnished.
Intervals of this kind of events are usually modelled by
fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1965) through the quantiﬁcation of the
graded truth of whether a time point is in the interval,
bringing the concept of fuzzy time interval. On the other
hand, in some other cases, it is only known that the start
and end of a crisp interval are within certain ranges, but no
extra information or assumptions about the distribution of
the start and the end is available. Modelling this kind of
imperfect time intervals with fuzzy sets would induce extra
overhead and unnecessary complexity. In these cases, the
alternative approach, i.e. rough sets (Pawlak, 1982), can
time
excellently suit
intervals. Currently, a lot of disciplines are faced with the

the modelling and handling of

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000008

issue of imperfect time intervals, which is reﬂected in many
contributions in modelling intervals by fuzzy sets (De
Caluwe et al., 1997, 1999; Nagypa´l and Motik, 2003;
Ohlbach, 2004; Schockaert et al., 2008; Garrido et al.,
2009) and rough sets (Bittner, 2002; Bassiri et al., 2009).
However, while most of this work focuses on modelling and
reasoning about imperfect time intervals, techniques and
tools for visualizing and analysing imperfect time intervals
are still lacking. This probably stems from the conventional
representation of time intervals (e.g. Gantt chart, time table
and historical timeline) which represents time intervals as
linear segments along a one-dimensional time line. The
second dimension is often exploited merely to differentiate
intervals of entities and has no temporal meaning. In this
representation, the visual distribution of intervals is variable,
according to the application of different ordering rules in
the second dimension, for example, ordering intervals from
the shortest to the longest, or from the earliest started to
the latest started. The characteristics of the distribution of
intervals cannot be observed in one single display. This is
not convenient for visual pattern detection of time intervals,
let alone imperfect time intervals with more complex
structure.

This issue also exists in geographical information science
(GIScience), which considers time as one of the most

266

The Cartographic Journal

important component of geographical information (Macea-
chren et al., 1999; Peuquet, 2002; Li and Kraak, 2008;
Neutens et al., 2008). In the recent development of
GIScience, considerable effort has been made in handling
the temporal aspect of geographical data (Andrienko et al.,
2003, Smith et al., 2007, Neutens et al., 2007). Due to the
limitations of data acquisition techniques, spatial data are
often linked to imperfect temporal information. Dealing
with imperfect temporal information becomes an increas-
issue in spatio-temporal data analysis,
ingly signiﬁcant
particularly in exploratory spatio-temporal data analysis
(ESTDA) which greatly relies on graphical representations
and visualisations. Since most prevalent techniques and
tools of ESTDA represent time in the linear form, their
ability in dealing with temporal imperfectness in spatio-
temporal data is still not satisfactory.

To address these issues, attempts have been made to
time in a two-dimensional (2D) space. For
represent
example, Keim et al. (2006) arranged time series of ﬁnancial
investments in a 2D representation called the growth
matrix. This matrix is able to display the growth rates of
investments in all possible sub-intervals in the time series.
The TT-plot introduced by Imfeld (2000) applied a similar
idea
these
to analyse movement patterns. Besides
approaches, Kulpa (1997) proposed the ER diagram that
represents time intervals as 2D points, and investigated the
use of this diagram for interval reasoning and arithmetic.
Later, Van de Weghe et al. (2007) named this representa-
tion the triangular model (TM) and applied it in an
archaeological context. Recently, Qiang et al. (2009, 2010)
have extended TM to represent time intervals modelled by
rough sets and fuzzy sets. This work majorly focussed on
the use of TM in temporal reasoning. The practical value of
TM in visualizing and analysing imperfect time intervals is
still yet to be exploited.

To ﬁll this gap, this paper investigates the use of TM in
visualizing and analysing imperfect time intervals. The focus
is on imperfect time intervals that can be modelled by rough
set theory. A probabilistic framework is proposed to model
the uncertainties in the temporal relations of such roughly
described intervals. In order to better demonstrate the use
of TM, a prototype tool is introduced, which implements
TM in a geographical information system (GIS). This tool
support analysis of geographical entities with imperfect
intervals. We show that the advantages of TM in visualizing
and querying roughly described intervals can be better
exploited through a computer application with a graphical
user interface (GUI) and interactive functionalities. In
addition, we use a case study to illustrate how the unique
insights gained by TM can assist a GIS for ESTDA
involving imperfect time intervals.

In the remainder of the paper, we ﬁrst introduce the basic
concept of TM and how rough approximations of intervals
are represented in TM. In Section on ‘Probabilities of
Rough Approximations’, we apply probability theory to
model uncertainties
imperfect
intervals. Section on ‘Implimentation’ presents GeoTM,
including its GUI,
functionalities and supported data
model. In Section on ‘Case Study’, the use of GeoTM is
demonstrated in a concrete use case. The paper ends with a
brief conclusion and an outline of avenues for future work.

in temporal queries of

Figure 1. The transformation from the linear representation to tri-
angular model (TM): (a) the linear representation of time intervals,
(b) the construction of an interval point in TM, (c) the TM repre-
sentation of time intervals

All notations and symbols used in this paper are summar-
ized in the table in the Appendix.

TRIANGULAR MODEL

z. I 2 and I

Representation of time intervals
A time interval I is usually modelled as a convex set of real
z respectively
z] with I 2,I
numbers, i.e. [I 2,I
linear
denote the start and end of I. In the traditional
is represented by a ﬁnite
representation, a time interval
z (see Figure 1a). This
linear segment bounded by I 2 and I
linear representation of time intervals is widely used in our
daily life, for example time tables and historical time lines.
The transformation from the linear representation of a time
interval to TM can be achieved by constructing two lines

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

267

Figure 2. Temporal relations in the linear model and triangular model (TM), taking before as an example: (a) I1a, I1b, I1c and I2 in the linear
representation, (b) I1a, I1b, I1c and I2 in TM, (c) the before zone of I2

through the extremes of an interval (Figure 1b). For an
arbitrary interval I,
lines L1 and L2 are
two straight
constructed, with L1 passing through I 2 and L2 passing
z. a1 is the angle between L1 and the horizontal
through I
axis and a2 is the angle between L2 and the horizontal axis,
with a152a25a. The intersection of L1 and L2 is called the
interval point. The angle a is a predeﬁned constant which is
identical for all
is
mapped to a unique point in the 2D space. Although a can be
any value between 0 and 90u, we consider a545u for
consistency with earlier work (Kulpa, 1997, 2006; Van de
Weghe et al., 2007; Qiang et al., 2010). In this way, TM
represents all time intervals as points in a 2D space, which is
called the interval space (Figure 1c). The interval space is
denoted as I
(Kulpa, 2006). In I , given an interval point
I, the horizontal position indicates its midpoint [e.g. mid(I)]
and the vertical position indicates its duration [e.g. dur(I)].

intervals to ensure that every interval

Representation of temporal relations
Allen (1983) speciﬁed 13 possible relations between two
time intervals (see Table 1), which are referred to as Allen
relations. In TM, every Allen relation can be represented as
a speciﬁc zone (Kulpa, 1997). Given a study interval Is5[0,
100], in TM all examined intervals are located within the
isosceles triangle formed by I{
s and I. Let us consider,
s
for example, a reference interval I2 [33, 66]. Any intervals
(e.g. I1a, I1b and I1c) before I2 (Figure 2a) are located in the
the study area
triangular area in the left corner of
(Figure 2b). Therefore, it is easy to deduce that all intervals
before I2 must be located in the black zone in Figure 2c,
which is called the before zone of I2. Likewise, all Allen

, I{

Table 1. Thirteen Allen relations (Allen, 1983)

I1 equal I2
I1 starts I2
I1 started-by I2
I1 finishes I2
I1 finished-by I2
I1 meets I2
I1 met-by I2
I1 overlaps I2
I1 overlapped-by I2
I1 during I2
I1 contains I2
I1 before I2
I1 after I2

1

1

~Iz
2
vIz
2
vIz
1
wI{
2
2 wI{

ˆ Iz
ˆ Iz
ˆ Iz
ˆ I{
ˆ I{

2

1

1

2

1 vIz
1 vIz
2
vIz
2
vIz
1

ˆ Iz
ˆ I{
ˆ Iz
ˆ Iz

2

1

if I{
1
if I{
1
if I{
1
if Iz
1
if Iz
1
if Iz
1
if Iz
2
if I{
2
if I{
if I{
if I{
2
if Iz
1
if Iz
2

~I{
2
~I{
2
~I{
2
~Iz
2
~Iz
2
~I{
2
~I{
1
wI{
1
1 wI{
1 wI{
2
wI{
1
vI{
2
vI{
1

2

ˆ Iz
ˆ Iz

1 wI{
2
vIz
1

2

relations with respect to an interval can be represented by
zones in I
(Figure 3), which are called relational zones.
For each relation in Figure 3, the reference interval I has
been chosen in the centre of the study period in order to
avoid visual bias. Each relational zone represents the set of
intervals that are in a speciﬁc relation to the reference
interval I, which are denoted as Rel(I). For example, the
during zone of I represents the set of intervals that are
during I and is denoted as during(I). On the other hand,
Rel(I1,I2) expresses the statement that I1 is in the relation
Rel to I2. For example, overlaps(I1,I2) expresses that I1
overlaps I2.

Representation of rough approximation
Incomplete information may result in uncertainties about
the exact start and end of a time interval. This may happen
in many observation activities in which data are acquired at
discrete time stamps, such as images or photographs in
remote sensing. From a sequence of images, for example,
one can determine whether a feature exists at speciﬁc time
stamps. However, the feature’s status between two time
stamps is unknown. With these discrete snapshots, the
interval of the feature’s existence is thus imperfect. If there
is no prior knowledge about the distribution of the start
and end, modelling this kind of imperfect time intervals
with membership functions of fuzzy sets would induce extra
overhead and unnecessary complexity. In these cases, rough
sets can be considered as an appropriate and adequate
solution (Bittner, 2002; Bassiri et al., 2009).

In the rough set approach, an imperfect time interval I is
described by an upper approximation (cid:2)II and a lower
approximation I, with I( (cid:2)II (Figure 4). We call such a pair
of I and (cid:2)II the rough approximation of I, which is denoted
as R(I). Time points in I are deﬁnitely in I, whereas all time
points not in (cid:2)II are deﬁnitely not in I. (cid:2)II is bounded by the
earliest possible start (cid:2)II{ and the latest possible end (cid:2)IIz,
while I is bounded by the latest possible start I{ and the
earliest possible end Iz. In between I and (cid:2)II, there are two
rough boundaries R(I 2) and R(Iz) gathering the time
points that are possibly in I. Unlike fuzzy time intervals
which deﬁne the extent to which the time points are
possibly in I, the rough approximation of I classiﬁes time
points into deﬁnitely in, deﬁnitely not in and possibly in I.
In the linear representation, the rough approximation of
is usually represented as a tripartite linear
an interval
segment (Figure 5a). However, in TM, a rough approx-
is represented by a convex 2D
imation of an interval

268

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Relational zones representing sets of intervals in certain Allen relations to the reference interval I

geometry in I
. To construct a rough approximation R(I)
in TM, two parallel lines are projected from (cid:2)II{ and I{ with
angle a to the horizontal axis, and the other two lines are
projected from Iz and (cid:2)IIz with angle 2a to the horizontal
axis. These four lines form a rectangle (Figure 5b) which
indicates a zone where the exact interval I can be found. In
other words, this zone represents the set of intervals that
are possibly equal to I. The shape and location of the
rectangle completely express the characteristics of R(I). In
this way, the rough approximation of a time interval can be
represented by such a rectangle (Figure 5c). If the lower
approximation is empty, the rough approximation becomes
a triangle on the horizontal axis, e.g. I2 in Figure 5.

PROBABILITIES OF ROUGH APPROXIMATIONS

Because time intervals described by rough approximations
have an uncertain start and an uncertain end, temporal
queries about such rough time intervals may result in
uncertain answers. To handle the uncertainties in temporal
queries, a probabilistic framework is needed. Given a rough
z) deﬁne the ranges
approximation R(I), R(I 2) and R(I
z can be found
where the exact start I 2 and the exact end I
(equations (1) and (2)). As there is no further knowledge
z),
about the distribution of I 2 and I
we assume that the probability distributions in R(I 2) and
z) are uniform. That is to say, every time point in R(I 2)
R(I
to I 2 (i.e.
has
the same probability of being equal
equation (3)). Therefore, the probability density of x5I 2
[where x 2 R (I 2)] is the quotient of 1 and the cardinality
of R(I 2) (equation (4)). In the same way, every time point

z in R(I 2) and R(I

Figure 4. The linear representation of the rough approximation
of I

z

z) has the same probability of being equal to I

z [where x 2 R(I
z)

in R(I
(equation (5)), and therefore the probability density of
z)] is the quotient of 1 and the
x5I
cardinality of R(I
(equation (6)). Based on these
prerequisites, it can be deduced that every interval in R(I)
has the same probability of being equal to I (equation (7)).
Because R(I) deﬁnes the interval set
includes I
(equation (8)), the probability density of x5I [where x 2
R(I)] is the quotient of 1 and the cardinality of R(I)
(equation (9)). Therefore, R(I) can be considered as an
interval set in which every interval has the same probability
of being equal to I. Because TM maps time intervals into
points in a 2D space, the cardinality of an interval set is
proportional to its area, and therefore the probability
density of x5I [where x 2 R(I)] is inversely proportional to
the area of R(I) in TM (see equation (9)).

that

According to equation (9), it can be deduced that, given
a set of intervals A and a rough approximation R(I) (such as
Figure 6), the probability that I is in A is the ratio between
the cardinality of A\R(I) and the cardinality of R(I)
(equation (10)). In the TM representation, this probability
is the ratio between the area of A\R(I) and the area of
R(I) (equation (10)). If R(I) is totally contained in A (i.e.
R(I)(A), the probability that I is in A is 1. If R(I) and A do
not intersect [i.e. R(I)\ a~1], the probability that I is in
A is 0. The interval set A can also be a relational zone of a
certain interval, e.g. before(I9). In this case, the probability
that I is in A can be interpreted as the probability that I is
before I9. With respect to the principles of probability
theory (Jaynes and Bretthorst, 2003), the probabilities of
multiple rough approximations can be deduced. For
example, given an interval set A and two independent
rough approximations R(I1) and R(I2)
the
probability that only one of I1 and I2 is in A can be
obtained from equation (11), and the probability that both
I1 and I2 are in A can be obtained by equation (12).
Analogously, given an interval set A and n independent
i.e. R(I1), R(I2), …, R(In), the
rough approximations,
probability that m intervals (0(m(n) are in A can be
obtained by equation (13). Since interval sets and rough
approximations of intervals are represented as 2D geometries

(Figure 7),

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

269

Figure 7. An arbitrary interval set A and two arbitrary rough
approximations R(I1) and R(I2)

in TM, the probability that an interval is in an interval set is
expressed by the overlap ratio of their geometries. This feature
of TM is similar to Venn diagrams (Venn, 1881) in which the
areas represent the occurrences of a certain event and the
intersection of areas expresses the coincidence of events.
Compared with mathematic formulas, we contend that such
graphic representation is more intuitive for human beings.
Hence, TM can be considered as a promising platform for
visual queries of intervals described by rough approximations.

X

x[R(I {)P(I {~x)~1

X

x[R(I z)P(I z~x)~1

P(I {~x1)~P I {~x2

ð

Þ,

x1,x2 [ R(I {)

fI { (x)~P(I {~x)~ 1

jR(I {)j

x [ R(I {)

P(I z~x1)~P I z~x2

ð

Þ,

x1,x2 [ R(I z)

fI z (x)~P(I z~x)~ 1

jR(I z)j

x [ R(I z)

,

,

P(I ~I1)~P(I ~I2),

I2,I2 [ R(I )

X

x[R(I )P(I ~x)~1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

fI(x)~P(I ~x)~ 1

!

1
Area½R(I )(cid:2)

,

jR(I )j

x [ R(I )

(9)

Figure 5. The transformation from the linear representation to the
triangular model (TM) representation of rough approximations of
intervals: (a) rough approximations of intervals in the linear repre-
sentation. Full lines denote I, and dashed lines denote R(I 2) and
R(Iz). The combination of full lines and dotted lines forms (cid:2)II, (b)
the construction of the rough approximation of an interval in TM,
(c) rough approximations of intervals in TM

Figure 6. An arbitrary interval
approximation R(I)

set A and an arbitrary rough

P(I [A)~ X

x[A

1
jR(I )j

~ jA\R(I )j
jR(I )j

~ Area(A\R(I ))
Area(R(I ))

(10)

270

Figure 8. Representation of spatio-temporal data in GeoTM

P(either I1 or I2 is in A)~P(I1[A ^ I2 =[A)zP(I1 =[A ^ I2[A)
~P(I1[A)|P(I2 =[A)zP(I1 =[A)|P(I2[A)
| jA{½A\R(I2)(cid:2)j
~ jA\R(I1)j
jR(I2)j
jR(I1)j

z jA\R(I2)j
jR(I2)j

| jA{½A\R(I1)(cid:2)j
jR(I1)j

Area½A\R(I1)(cid:2)|Area½A{A\R(I2)(cid:2)zArea½A\R(I2)(cid:2)|Area½A{A\R(I1)(cid:2)
Area½R(I1)(cid:2)|Area½R(I2)(cid:2)

(11)

(11)

P(both I2 and I2 are in A)~P(I1[A)|P(I2[A)
~ jA\R(I1)j
jR(I1)j
~ Area½A\R(I1)(cid:2)
Area½R(I1)(cid:2)

| jA\R(I2)j
jR(I2)j
| Area½A\R(I2)(cid:2)
Area½R(I2)(cid:2)

(12)

P(m intervals of I1, I2, . . . ,In are in A)~
X

½P

P(Ii[A)|P

P(Ij =[A)(cid:2),

Q(S

i[Q

j[(S{Q)

S~(1,2,3, . . . ,n) ^ Q (S ^ jQ j~m

(13)

IMPLEMENTATION

To demonstrate and exploit practical uses of TM, we have
implemented TM into a prototype tool (i.e. GeoTM) which
incorporates TM into a GIS. GeoTM allows visualizing,
querying and analysing spatio-temporal data. More speci-
ﬁcally,
it is able to handle discrete entities with spatial
locations and temporal extents. The spatial locations are
modelled as vector geometries
line and
polygon), while the temporal extents are modelled as time
intervals. In this paper, we will take special care of time
intervals described by rough approximations. Besides spatial
and temporal extents, these geographical entities may have
other attributes. The spatial locations, temporal extents and
other attributes are linked to geographical entities by
unique identiﬁers (ID) of entities. GeoTM is built on

(i.e. point,

The Cartographic Journal

top of ArcGISTM which is a desktop GIS produced by
ESRI (Redlands, CA, USA). Within its object model
(ArcObjects), developers can call on existing functions
and components of ArcGISTM to develop customized
applications. Consequently, GeoTM is compatible with
the supported data formats in ArcGIS, such as shapeﬁle and
dBASE ﬁles. In the representation of geographical entities,
spatial locations and geometries of time intervals are stored
in two shapeﬁles, while the attributes are stored in a
database table (i.e. a dBASE ﬁle). Figure 8 gives an
overview of how geographical entities are modelled and
represented in GeoTM.

GUI of GeoTM
The user interface of GeoTM consists of a map view, a TM
view and controls that can trigger speciﬁc functions or user
forms (Figure 9). The map view is used to display spatial
locations of geographical entities, which are modelled as
points,
lines or polygons. The TM view displays time
intervals of entities, using the TM representation. Rough
approximations of intervals are represented as polygons. In
the TM view, there may exist overlaps of polygons. In order
to display the pattern of overlapped polygons, gradual
colours are assigned to areas according to the numbers of
overlaps: a darker colour is assigned to the areas with more
overlaps. In Figure 9, a dataset of military features in the
World War I (WWI) is displayed in GeoTM. The spatial
locations of these features are displayed in the map view,
while their lifetimes (represented by rough approximations
of intervals) are displayed in the TM view. In this section,
we use this dataset to illustrate the functionalities of
this dataset will be
GeoTM. The entire scenario of
described in Section on ‘The Case Study’. The temporal
resolution of the dataset is one day. Thus, in this context, a
time interval
is the period between two speciﬁc dates
formatted as year/month/day.

Users can interactively browse the map view and TM view
by zooming and panning. In the map view, objects can be
selected by dragging a rectangle. In the TM view, special
selection tools have been designed to select
intervals
according to speciﬁc temporal queries, which will be
described in detail in the next sub-section. Other attributes
of entities are stored in the attribute table that can pop up
when the user clicks the corresponding button. ‘Linked
brushing’ is supported among the map view, the TM view
and the attribute table. This function allows selecting
objects from any of these three views and dynamically
updating the other two views to highlight the correspond-
ing objects. With this function, geographical entities in
GeoTM can be queried with spatial, temporal and attribute
constraints. Additionally, many common functions of a
conventional GIS are supported in GeoTM. For example,
several datasets can be loaded into GeoTM as multiple
layers.

Temporal queries in GeoTM
As introduced in Section on ‘Representation of temporal
relations’, intervals that satisfy a certain temporal relation
are located within a relational zone. Thus, queries based on
temporal relations can be modelled as speciﬁc zones in TM,

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

271

Figure 9. The user interface of GeoTM, consisting of a map view (left) and a TM view (right)

i.e. query zones. A query zone can be a relational zone or
combinations (e.g.
intersection and union) of multiple
relational zones. Whether an interval satisﬁes the temporal
query depends on whether the interval point lies within the
query zone. However, when intervals are described by
rough approximations, in TM the rough approximation can
be partially in the query zone. If this is the case, temporal
queries can be answered with probability thresholds. For
example, within a dataset of rough approximations of
intervals, one can select all intervals that have more than
90% probability of being during an indicated interval. In
TM, this query is expressed by selecting rough approxima-
tions that have more than 90% of its area in the before zone
of the indicated interval. Therefore, in the TM view of
GeoTM, querying tools are available to deﬁne temporal
queries by creating query zones. On the one hand, users can
indicate an interval by moving the cursor to a speciﬁc
position in the TM view. When right-clicking on this
position, a drop-down menu of Allen relations appears.
Next, by clicking an Allen relation in the menu, all intervals
in this relation are selected, according to a pre-deﬁned
probability threshold. Figure 10 shows an example of
selecting intervals that are probably before [1916/06/25,
1917/05/31]. In this example,
the lower probability
threshold is 0.6 and the upper probability threshold is 1.
As a result, intervals with more than 60% probability before
[1916/6/25, 1917/5/31] are selected.

Besides temporal queries of Allen relations, some other
queries can be made by dragging speciﬁc geometries in the
TM view. For example, a convex set of intervals can be
selected by dragging a rectangle whose sides are in a or 2a
angle to the horizontal axis (Figure 11a). A convex interval
set is deﬁned as the set of time intervals in-between two
different time intervals (Kulpa, 2006). We developed this
query tool because convex interval sets can be easily
interpreted by Allen relations or combinations of Allen
relations. %I1,I2& is used to denote a convex interval set
in-between I1 and I2. The formal deﬁnition of %I1,I2& can
be found in equation (14). Moreover, two parallel lines can
be dragged in a or 2a angle with the horizontal axis, in
order to select intervals that starts-within or ends-within a
certain interval (e.g. Figure 11b and c). starts-within (I1) is
intervals whose starts are in I1
deﬁned as a set of
(equation (15)). Analogously, ends-within (I1) is deﬁned
as a set of intervals whose ends are in I1 (equation (16)).
Though the starts-within and ends-within can be expressed
by unions of Allen relations, we design such query tools for
people that are more accustomed to the expressions of
‘starts within’ and ‘ends within’ than unions of Allen
relations. Furthermore, by dragging a range along the
vertical axis, users can select intervals whose durations are in
a speciﬁc range (Figure 11d). In GeoTM, all queries are
carried out with respect to pre-deﬁned probability thresh-
olds. In the examples in Figure 11, the lower threshold is

272

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 10. The selection of intervals probably before [1916/06/25, 1917/05/31], with more than 60% probability: (a) moving the mouse
cursor to the interval [1916/06/25, 1917/05/31], and right-clicking to trigger the menu of Allen relations, and then right-clicking the
‘before’ option, (b) intervals that are probably before [1916/6/25,1917/5/31] are selected

set to 0.6 and the upper threshold is set to 1, meaning that
the selected intervals have more than 60% probability of
satisfying these queries.

clustered in this area varies. By dragging a query zone over the
dark area, one can be aware of the numbers of intervals clustered
in this area with respect to speciﬁc probabilities.

%I1,I2&:fI jmin(I {
1 ,I {
vmax(I {

1 ,I {
2 ) ^ min(I z

2 )vI {
1 ,I z

2 )vI zvmax(I z

1 ,I z

2 )g

CASE STUDY

(14)

(15)

(16)

starts-within(I1):fI jI {

1

vI {vI z
1 g

ends-within(I1):fI jI {

1

vI zvI z
1 g

Based on equation (13), when a temporal query is deﬁned, users
may obtain the probability that a given number of intervals satisfy
this query. For example, GeoTM can return the probabilities that
a certain number of intervals are before [1915/11/21, 1916/
08/30]. In this case, 67 rough approximations have common
parts with (intersect or within) the query zone, while 43 out of
these 67 rough approximations are totally within the query zone.
This means that there are minimum 43 intervals before [1915/
11/21, 1916/08/30] and maximum 67 intervals before [1915/
11/21, 1916/08/30]. The probability that n intervals
(43,n,67) are before [1915/11/21, 1916/08/30] is between
0 and 1. GeoTM can automatically generate the probability that
n intervals are before [1915/11/21, 1916/08/30], from n543
to n567 (Figure 12). In this way, one can know how many
intervals satisfy the query, with respect to a conﬁdence level.
According to Figure 12, there are 59 intervals before [1915/11/
21, 1916/08/30], at 0.9 conﬁdence level. This function is also
useful
in distinguishing ‘real clusters’ and ‘fake clusters’ of
intervals. Because the colours in TM represent the number of
overlaps, which is actually the maximum number of intervals
within the area, an area with a darker colour indicates a potential
cluster of intervals. However, the probability that intervals are

Having introduced basic functionalities of GeoTM in the
previous section, this section will illustrate the use of TM in
supporting GIS for ESTDA by means of a case study.

Dataset
During WWI, a large number of aerial photos in West-
Flanders (Belgium) were taken at discrete time stamps by all
combating nations as an intelligent tool to collect informa-
tion on the enemy’s intentions. These aerial photographs
are preserved in archives all over the world. The largest
collections are held at the Belgian Royal Army Museum, the
Imperial War Museum, the Australian War Memorial and
the Bavarian Military archive. From these aerial photos, one
can observe whether a military feature (e.g. a ﬁre trench,
gun position or barrack) was not yet present, present, or
destroyed (Stichelbaut and Bourgeois, 2009). Although the
state of a feature is uncertain between two snapshots, we
assume that it does not change between two snapshots
which show similar states. Thus, the uncertainty only exists
between two snapshots showing different states. Certainly,
this assumption relies on our knowledge that snapshots are
dense enough to capture most of features’ changes. When
more volatile entities are considered, an appropriate
temporal resolution will be required. In this context, rough
sets are excellently suited for temporal modelling, because
no knowledge is available about the state of a feature
between two snapshots. Thus, we can consider a period of

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

273

Figure 11. Making temporal queries by dragging geometries in the triangular model (TM) view: (a) selecting intervals in-between [1915/10/
01, 1918/04/20] and [1916/05/10, 1917/09/10], (b) selecting intervals that start-within [1915/04/01, 1915/10/20], (c) selecting inter-
vals that end-within [1916/06/01, 1917/04/01], (d) selecting intervals that are longer than 2 years and shorter than 3 years

snapshots showing similar states as the lower approxima-
its neighbouring uncertain intervals as boundary
tion,
regions, and all of them form the upper approximation
(Figure 13). Thus, a feature’s lifetime can be meaningfully
represented by a rough approximation.

More speciﬁcally, four photos determine the lifetime of a
feature (Figure 13): (1) the last photo in which the feature
is not yet present; (2) the ﬁrst photo in which the feature is
present; (3) the last photo in which the feature is present;
and (4) the ﬁrst photo in which the feature is destroyed or
abandoned. The interval between the dates of photos (2)
and (3) is the lower approximation of the feature’s lifetime,
while the interval between the dates of photo (1) and photo
(4) is the upper approximation. Intervals between the dates
of photos (1) and (2), and intervals between the dates of
photos (3) and (4) are the boundary regions, which indicate
respectively the range of the feature’s construction and

destruction/abandonment dates. There are a few excep-
tions, where a feature was not yet present in one photo and
already destroyed in the following photo. In these cases,
photos (2) and (3) are missing, and therefore the rough
approximation has an empty lower approximation. As
described in the Section on ‘Representation of rough
approximation’, such rough approximations are represented
as triangles on the horizontal axis. In this case study, a
rectangular area (around 363.5 km) is selected near Ypres
(Belgium) as the study area, containing 2466 military
features (Figure 14). This study area near Ypres is one of
the most important battleﬁelds of WWI. From 1914 to
1918, there was constant artillery ﬁghting going on. And
more importantly, Ypres was the scene of several
large
offensive actions by both Germans and Allies. Therefore, it
is an ideal area to test the potential of TM in exploratory
analysis.

274

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 12. The line diagram of probabilities that at least n inter-
vals are before [1915/11/21, 1916/08/30]

For analysis, we also take account of spatio-temporal
information of the frontlines during the war. There are 11
snapshots of the states of the German and Allied frontlines
during WWI. From these snapshots, we have observed that
the frontlines were stable in I2 [1915/5/25, 1916/6/14]
(we format a date as year/month/date), but had signiﬁcant
shifts in three time intervals, i.e. I1 [1915/5/23, 1915/5/
25], I3 [1916/6/14, 1917/10/1] and I4 [1917/10/1,
1918/4/15] (Figure 15). Note that the frontline shifts in
I3 and I4 might only take a few days. But from snapshots of
frontlines, it is only known that the shifts happened in these
three intervals and the exact dates of
the shifts are
unavailable. Figure 15 displays the locations and shifts of
frontlines in these four intervals. Note that the German
army was always on the east side of the Allied army. If the
positions of frontlines were out of the study area, such as in
I3 and I4, we use arrows to indicate the direction of the
shifts.

Analysing rough time intervals in GeoTM
First, the dataset of the military features is imported to
GeoTM. The spatial locations of these features are displayed
in the map view, while the rough approximations of their
intervals are displayed in the TM view (Figure 16). To
identify the intervals of frontline shifts, the interval points
and during zones of I1, I2, I3 and I4 are added to the TM
view (Figure 16). The zone with solid boundary is the
during zone of the interval in which the frontlines were
stable, i.e. I2, while the zones with dashed boundaries are
the during zones of the intervals in which the frontlines had

Figure 14. The location of the study area

signiﬁcant shifts, i.e. I1, I3, and I4. As I1 is very short, its
during zone is invisible in this scale. Using the selection
tool, we ﬁnd that 99% of features (2433 out of 2466) in the
study area were built after I1. Considering the frontline shift
in I1, we can infer that the major military activities in the
study area started after I1 when the frontline moved from
the edge of the study area to the centre. Three dark areas
that indicate potential clusters of intervals can be observed
in TM (Figure 16). In the next three sub-sections, these
potential clusters will be analysed with respect to frontline
states in I2, I3 and I4. Note that in the following three sub-
sections, we set the lower probability threshold of all
temporal queries as 0.9 and the upper probability threshold
as 1, in order to select intervals that satisfy the query with
more than 90% probability.

Stable period of frontlines
Most intervals in Cluster 1 and Cluster 2 start-within I2,
when the frontlines were relatively stable. When select-
ing intervals probably start-within I2 (more than 0.9

Figure 13. The rough approximation of the lifetime of a military feature

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

275

Figure 15. The states of German and Allied frontlines in World War I. The map in the solid box shows the period during which the fron-
tlines were relatively stable, while the maps in the dashed boxes show periods during which the frontlines had signiﬁcantly shifted

276

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 16. The rough approximations of the feature lifetimes in the triangular model view, with the during zones of I1, I2, I3 and I4 displayed

Figure 17. The selection of intervals that end-within I2

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

277

Figure 18. The selection of intervals that end-within [1917/7/10, 1917/8/1]

probability), we obtain 1531 intervals (62% of all features in
the study area), which reﬂects that a majority of military
features were constructed during this stable period. There
are also some intervals that end-within I2, which are
lifetimes of features that were destroyed within I2. By
selecting intervals that end-within I2, we obtained 200
intervals (8% of all features) and the map view shows that all
these features were close to the frontlines (Figure 17). This
is reasonable because military features close to the frontline
were easier to be destroyed by artillery attacks or minor
offensives. Therefore, it can be inferred that during I2 there
were no signiﬁcant military actions, and the armies at both
sides were building military features in order to keep their
positions. Only a small portion of features close to the
frontlines were destroyed.

Shift of frontlines in I3
During I3, the frontlines shifted from their positions to the
east of the study area, towards the German side. In the TM
view, it is observable that the intervals in Cluster 2 end-
within I3. More speciﬁcally, the intervals in Cluster 2 end-
within a quite short interval [1917/07/10, 1917/08/01],
which results in a slim shape (see Cluster 2 in Figure 16).
When selecting intervals that end-within [1917/07/10,
1917/08/01], we obtain 1050 features, which is 43% of all
features (2466 features) in the study area. This ﬁnding
reﬂects that a large number of features were intensively
destroyed during [1917/07/10, 1917/08/01]. The map

view shows that all these features were distributed in the
eastern side of
the old frontlines, which were earlier
occupied by the German army (Figure 18). By checking
the attribute table, one can see that 99% of these 1050
features were German features, which was 83% of all
German features (1260 features) in the study area. With
these ﬁndings,
it becomes possible to infer, without
consulting any historical documents, that an overwhelming
and intensive destruction happened to German features in
July 1917 in the study area. Probably due to this
destruction, the German army lost its area and was pushed
to the east. Referring to historical literature (Barton, 2005;
Verbeke, 2006), these ﬁndings reﬂect the fact that during
this period, the Allies intensively destroyed German features
using artillery ﬁre, in a battle which became known as the
Third Battle of Ypres. During the battle, Allied army took
Passchendaele (Belgium), pushing the frontline towards the
east.

Shift of frontlines in I4
Through observation in the TM view, most intervals in
Cluster 1 and Cluster 3 end-within I4. When selecting
intervals probably end-within I4 (with more than 90%
probability), 817 features are obtained and the attribute
table shows that all these features are Allied. This means
that 68% Allied features (817 out of 1206) in the study area
were probably destroyed within I4. Considering that within
I4 the frontlines have moved from east to west towards the

278

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 19. The selection of intervals in Cluster 3

Allied side, it is straightforward to infer that these features
were destroyed due to the offensive by the German army.
Features in Cluster 1 were built earlier (i.e. during I2),
when the frontlines were relatively stable. By selecting
features in Cluster 1, one can see that these features are
mostly located in the eastern part of the study area, which
was occupied by the Allied army during I2. Features in
Cluster 3 were built later (i.e. during I4), and were evenly
distributed over the entire study area (Figure 19). These
ﬁndings reveal that after the Third Battle of Ypres, the
Allied army controlled the whole study area and built
military features over the area (i.e. features in Cluster 3).
Later on, the German army attacked back and destroyed all
Allied features (features in both Cluster 1 and Cluster 3) in
the study area. After this military action, the frontlines
shifted from the east of the study area to the west of the
study area. Known from historical
literatures (Howard,
2002), these ﬁndings probably reﬂect the Battle of Lys (a
part of Spring Offensives of Germany) in April 1918,
during which the German army attacked the Allied army
and pushed the frontline back to the west.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This paper has investigated the use of TM in visualizing and
analysing time intervals modelled by rough sets. Compared
with the fuzzy set approach, the rough set approach is
excellently suited to imperfect time intervals with no prior

knowledge and assumptions about the distribution of their
starts and ends, which broadly exist
in discrete data
acquisitions. In TM, rough approximations of intervals are
represented as polygons in a 2D space. We contend that this
representation is advantageous in visualizing the distribu-
tion of imperfect time intervals, because the patterns (e.g.
clusters) in the distribution can be explicitly displayed. If an
interval is described by rough approximation, its relation
with other intervals may have uncertainties. Due to these
uncertainties, temporal queries may generate uncertain
answers. Therefore, we have proposed a probabilistic
framework to model uncertainties in temporal relations of
roughly described intervals. Since TM represents temporal
relations as 2D geometries, the probability of temporal
relations can be expressed by the overlap rate of the
corresponding geometries, which is analogous to Venn
diagrams. Compared with mathematical expressions, such
graphical representation is potentially more intuitive to
human beings and can offer a promising basis for visual
temporal queries.

In order to evaluate the capabilities of TM, we have
implemented it into a prototype tool (i.e. GeoTM) which
incorporates TM within a GIS. GeoTM shows that the
advantages of TM in visualisation and querying can be
better exploited when it is implemented in a computer
program. Instead of providing a static TM visualisation,
GeoTM supports interactive functionalities that enable
ﬂexible manipulations of the TM display. These function-
alities have potential of assisting visual observation and

Analysing Imperfect Temporal Information in GIS

279

pattern detections. Besides visualisation, GeoTM also offers
possibilities to make temporal queries by creating 2D
geometries. Whether intervals satisfy the query depends on
the extent to which the intervals are part of the query zone.
Moreover, query zones can be directly created on top of the
visualisation of intervals so that users can select an observed
cluster of intervals by designing a proper temporal query. In
order to handle the uncertainties in temporal relations of
roughly described intervals, special functions based on the
proposed probabilistic framework have been applied in
GeoTM, allowing users to make temporal queries with
consideration of probabilities. On the one hand, temporal
queries can be deﬁned with probability thresholds, which
ensure that every retrieved interval satisﬁes the query in a
certain probability. On the other hand, once a query is made,
GeoTM can return the probability that a certain number of
intervals satisfy the query. With this feature, users can be
aware of how many intervals satisfy the query, with respect to
a certain conﬁdence level. With these functionalities, GeoTM
is able to support ESTDA of geographical entities with
reference to roughly described intervals. As shown in the case
study of WWI features, GeoTM can be used to explore the
military features from spatial, temporal and attribute aspects.
From the detected patterns and clusters, users can discover
interesting phenomena in the war without consulting
historical literatures.

In future work,

future extensions will

Not only spatio-temporal data, we believe that TM can
be applied in other contexts that involve roughly described
intervals for purposes of information visualisation, explora-
tory analysis and data mining.
the
applicability of TM needs to be further assessed by more
use cases, preferably covering different research contexts.
Also,
improve the usability and
interactivity of the implementation. Before the implemen-
tation is released to a broader community, its scalability
needs to be systematically evaluated. Furthermore, we plan
to investigate the possibility of representing and analysing
fuzzy time interval by TM. The fuzzy set approach is more
suitable for modelling imperfect
time intervals when
assumptions or knowledge of the distributions of starting
points and end points are available. This extension may rely
on the application of more advanced visualisation techni-
ques such as 3D visualisation.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Mr Yi Qiang (1983) is born
in China. He started his
study on geographical infor-
mation systems from Beijing
Normal University. After
the 4-year undergraduate
study, he has obtained his
bachelor degree in GIS. And
then, he got his master
degree in geographical
in-
formation science in the
University of Edinburgh.
In this master programme,
he
research
about the application of the

initiated the

infrastructure using the

the
Semantic Web in environmental modelling. After
master programme, he worked in the UK National e-
Science Institute in Edinburgh for 3 months. During this
period, he was involved in a research of building a general
technologies of
knowledge
Semantic Web. Afterwards, he went to Belgium and started
to work in the Department of Geography in Ghent
University as a PhD candidate till present. In Ghent, he
has been working on a research project funded by the
Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO). Yi Qiang is
interested in temporal reasoning, information visualisation
and spatio-temporal analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The research work of Yi Qiang, Matthias Delafontaine and
Tijs Neutens is funded by the Research Foundation –
Flanders (FWO).

REFERENCES

Allen, J. F. (1983). ‘Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals’,

Communications of the ACM, 26, pp. 832–843.

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G. and Gatalsky, P. (2003). ‘Exploratory
spatio-temporal visualization: an analytical review’, Journal of
Visual Languages & Computing, 14, pp. 503–541.

Barton, P. (2005). De Slagvelden van Wereldoorlog 1. Van de

Eerste Slag om Ieper to Passendale, Lannoo, Tielt.

Bassiri, A., Malek, M., Alesheikh, A. and Amirian, P. (2009).
‘Temporal
in
Computational Science and Its Applications – ICCSA 2009,
pp. 543–552, Seoul, Korea, Jun 29–Jul 2.

relationships between rough time intervals’,

Bittner, T. (2002).

‘Approximate qualitative temporal reasoning’,
Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 36, pp. 39–
80.

De Caluwe, R., Van Der Cruyssen, B., De Tre´, G., Devos, F. and
Maesfranckx, P. (1997). ‘Fuzzy time indications in natural language
interfaces’,
in Flexible Query Answering Systems, ed. by
Andreasen, T., Christiansen, H. and Larsen, H. L., pp. 163–185,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwall, NA.

De Caluwe, R., Van Der Cruyssen, B., De Tre´, G., Devos, F. and
Maesfranckx, P. (1999). ‘The semantics and modelling of flexible
time indications’, in Computing with Words in Information/
Intelligent Systems 1 (Foundations), ed. by Zadeh, L. A., pp.
229–256, Springer/Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg.

Garrido, C., Marı´n, N. and Pons, O. (2009). ‘Fuzzy intervals of
represent fuzzy valid time in a temporal relational database’,
International
and
Knowledge-Based Systems, 17, pp. 173–192.

of Uncertainty, Fuzziness

Journal

Howard, M. (2002). The First World War, Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

Imfeld, S. (2000). ‘Time, points and space: towards a better analysis of

wildlife data in GIS’, PhD, University of Zurich.

Jaynes, E. T. and Bretthorst, G. L. (2003). Probability Theory: The

Logic of Science, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Keim, D. A., Nietzschmann, T., Schelwies, N., Schneidewind, J.,
Schreck, T. and Ziegler, H. (2006). ‘A spectral visualization system
for analyzing financial time series data’, in Eurographics/IEEE-
VGTC Symposium on Visualization (EuroVis 2006), pp. 195–
200, Lisbon, Portugal, May 8–10.

Kulpa, Z. (1997).

‘Diagrammatic representation for a space of

intervals’, Machine Graphics & Vision, 6, pp. 5–24.

Kulpa, Z. (2006). ‘A diagrammatic approach to investigate interval relations’,
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 17, pp. 466–502.
Li, X. and Kraak, M.-J. (2008). ‘The time wave. A new method of
visual exploration of geo-data in time–space’, The Cartographic
Journal, 45, pp. 193–200.

280

The Cartographic Journal

Maceachren, A. M., Wachowicz, M., Edsall, R., Haug, D. and Masters,
R. (1999). ‘Constructing knowledge from multivariate spatiotem-
poral data: integrating geographical visualization with knowledge
discovery in database methods’, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 13, pp. 311–334.

Nagypa´l, G. and Motik, B. (2003). ‘A fuzzy model for representing
uncertain, subjective, and vague temporal knowledge in ontolo-
gies’, in International Conference on Ontologies, Databases and
Applications of Semantics, (ODBASE), pp. 906–923, Catania,
Italy, Nov 3–7.

Neutens, T., Van de Weghe, N., Witlox, F. and De Maeyer, P. (2008).
‘A three-dimensional network-based space-time prism’, Journal of
Geographical Systems, 10, pp. 89–107.

Neutens, T., Witlox, F., Van de Weghe, N. and De Maeyer, P. (2007).
‘Space-time opportunities for multiple agents: a constraint-based
approach’, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 21, pp. 1061–1076.

Ohlbach, H. J. (2004). ‘Relations between fuzzy time intervals’, in
11th International Symposium on Temporal Representation
and Reasoning (TIME 2004), pp. 44–51, Montre´al, Que´bec, Jul
1–3.

Pawlak, Z. (1982). ‘Rough sets’, International Journal of Computer

& Information Sciences, 11, pp. 341–356.

Peuquet, D. J. (2002). Representations of Space and Time, New

York, The Guilford Press.

Qiang, Y., Asmussen, K., Delafontaine, M., De Tre´, G., Stichelbaut,
B., De Maeyer, P. and Van de Weghe, N. (2009). ‘Visualising
rough time intervals in a two-dimensional space’, 2009 IFSA

World Congress/EUSFLAT Conference, pp. 1480–1485,
Lisbon, Portugal, Jul 19–23.

Qiang, Y., Delafontaine, M., Asmussen, K., Stichelbaut, B., De Tre´,
G., De Maeyer, P. and Van deWeghe, N. (2010). ‘Handling
imperfect time intervals in a two-dimensional space’, Journal of
Control and Cybernetics, 39, pp. 983–1010.

Schockaert, S., De Cock, M. and Kerre, E. E. (2008). ‘Fuzzifying
Allen’s temporal interval relations’, IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy
Systems, 16, pp. 517–533.

Smith, M. J. D., Goodchild, M. F. and Longley, P. A. (2007). Geospatial
Analysis: A Comprehensive Guide to Principles, Techniques and
Software Tools, Troubador Publishing Ltd, Leicester.

Stichelbaut, B. and Bourgeois, J. (2009). ‘The aerial imagery of World
War One: a unique source for conflict and landscape archaeology’,
Photogrammetrie – Fernerkundung – Geoinformation, 3, pp.
235–244.

Van de Weghe, N., Docter, R., De Maeyer, P., Bechtold, B. and
Ryckbosch, K. (2007). ‘The triangular model as an instrument for
visualising and analysing residuality’, Journal of Archaeological
Science, 34, pp. 649–655.

Venn, J. (1881). Symbolic Logic, Macmillan and Company, London.
(2006).
‘De Derde Slag bij Ieper-Passendale: de
Verbeke, R.
in De Laatste Getuige. Het
Honderddaagse slag in 1917’,
Landschap van Wereldoorlog 1 in Vlaanderen, ed. by Chielens,
P., Dendooven, D. and Decoodt, H., pp. 63–66, Lannoo,
Tielt.

Zadeh, L. A. (1965). ‘Fuzzy sets’, Information and Control, 8, pp.

338–353.

APPENDIX: THE SUMMARY OF NOTATIONS USED IN THE MANUSCRIPT

Symbols

Name of symbols

Examples

I
I 2
Iz
dur(I)
mid(I)
I

(cid:2)II
I
(cid:2)II{
(cid:2)IIz
I{
Iz
R(I)
R(I 2)
z
)
R(I
fx(x)
P(X)
|A|

Rel(I)

Rel(I1,I2)
%I1,I2&

A crisp time interval
The start of I
The end of I
The duration of I
The midpoint of I
The interval space, i.e. the universal set
that contains all time intervals
The upper approximation of I
The lower approximation of I
The start of (cid:2)II
The end of (cid:2)II
The start of I
The end of I
The rough approximation of I
The earlier boundary region or the rough start of I
The later boundary region or the rough end of I
The probability density function of X
The probability that the statement X is true
The cardinality of the set A, i.e.
the total number of elements in A. A can be
a set of real numbers or a set of intervals.
A relational zone of I or the set of intervals
that are in a certain relation to I.
The statement that I1 and I2 are in a certain relation.
The set of intervals that are in-between I1 and I2.

fl{ xð Þ is the probability density function of I 2.
P(I151) denotes the probability that I15I is true.
|R(I)| denotes the cardinality of R(I).

before(I) is the before zone of I and denotes the set
of intervals that are before I.
overlaps(I1,I2) expresses the statement that I1 overlaps I2.
The formal definition of in-between can be found
in equation (14)

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

