 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5): 567–589

XXX 
© 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1467-9671
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK

Research Article

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills
Omair Z Chaudhry and William A. Mackaness

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills: 
Automatic Identification of Hills and 
Ranges Using Morphometric Analysis

Omair Z Chaudhry
Institute of Geography
University of Edinburgh

William A Mackaness
Institute of Geography
University of Edinburgh

Abstract
This  article  examines  the  relationship  between  scale  of  observation  and  landform
features and their representation in map form. The research is premised on the idea
that large scale features are defined by the smaller features that comprise them (that
mountain ranges are a collection of clustered yet individually identifiable mountains
or hills). In preference to subjective selection of the higher order features, we propose
a methodology for automatically discerning mountain ranges as well as the smaller
hills that constitute them. A mountainous region can be defined by its prominence
(relative height among surrounding features) and various morphological characteristics
including  the  variability  in  morphology.  The  algorithm  presented  here  uses
derivatives of elevation and the density of morphological properties in order to
automatically identify individual hills or mountains and ranges together with their
extents. Being able to create generalised views of landscape morphology is considered
to be part of the model generalisation process and is an essential prerequisite to spatial
query and to the cartographic portrayal of these features at a range of scales (levels
of detail). For the purposes of evaluation the algorithm was applied to the hills around
Edinburgh city and the hills and ranges around Fort William, Scotland. The research
reflects  on  the  challenge  of  defining  the  subjective  nature  of  what  is  a  ‘hill’  or  a
‘mountain’, but reminds us that a map seeks to capture the essence and characteristic
form of the landscape – something that is necessarily fuzzy and scale dependent.

Morphology, landscape visualisation, morphological partonomies, model generalisation
Keywords: 

1 Introduction

The shape of the earth’s surface reflects a complex interplay between anthropogenic and
physical  processes  –  a  set  of  systems  and  processes  operating  at  a  range  of  spatial  and

Address  for  correspondence: 
Edinburgh, Drummond St, Edinburgh EH8 9XP, UK. E-mail: OmairZubair@gmail.com

Omair  Z  Chaudhry,  Institute  of  Geography,  The  University  of

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9671.2008.01116.x

 

 

 
 
 
 

568

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Figure 1 A  spectrum  and  mix  of  techniques  can  be  used  to  represent  morphometric  ele-
ments and regions such as hachures, hillshade, contours, hypsometric tint, and oriented text
(Figure 1a adapted from Regnauld et al. 2002).

temporal  scales.  The  form  of  that  shape  has  a  huge  bearing  on  patterns  of  habitation,
and land use. Typically we wish to view that surface at multiple levels of detail (or scale)
in order to study the scale invariance of processes, their scale dependency (Wood 1999),
the  relationship  between  complexity  and  scale,  for  example  Andrle  (1996),  or  to
characterise scales at which surface behaviour changes substantially (Mark and Aronson
1984). We wish to be able to view and characterise a landscape at both the fine scale
–  exploring  morphographic  elements  (Evans  1990),  through  to  the  distributional
patterns of landforms (such as glacial or volcanic landforms) – at the level of ‘atlas
cartography’ where the emphasis is on morphostructural regions (rather than indi-
vidually  identifiable  landforms)  (Evans  1990).  In  other  words  we  need  multi  scale
mapping that supports different scales of landform analysis (Summerfield 2005). Our
cartographic  representations  also  need  to  support  the  correct  interpretation  and
‘reading’ of the landscape in support of navigational tasks or safe route planning (Purves
et  al.  2002).  The  breadth  of  cartographic  techniques  developed  over  the  centuries  for
representing  the  earth’s  morphology  is  testament  to  its  importance  in  these  and  many
other tasks (Imhof 1982). 

At  the  very  fine  scale  we  might  use  hachuring  (Figure  1a)  (Regnauld  et  al.  2002),
hill  shading  and/or  contours  to  represent  morphology  (Mackaness  and  Stevens  2006).
At the course scale we might use colour tints, and at a synoptic level we can use text to
convey highly generalised caricatures of components of the earth’s surface (Figure 1b).
Though we use this range of visualisation techniques to support effective interpretation
of  relief  at  different  levels  of  detail  (Figure  1),  they  all  point  to  the  same  underlying
morphological  features  –  from  the  individual  hills,  to  the  connected  set  of  ridges,  and
from  the  collection  of  hills,  to  ranges  and  mountain  chains.  At  the  fine  scale  we  will
discern the relationship between fluvial processes or surficial geology and morphology,
but only at a scale of 1:2,000,000 can  we  separate  out  the  Paris  basin,  the  Alps,  the
Massif  Central  and  the  Pyrenees (Figure 2). 

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

569

Figure 2 The  Paris  basin  is  upper  centre,  the  Alps  lower  right,  the  volcanic  region  of  the
Massif Central lower centre and the Pyrenees middle bottom (Source: NASA imagery)

To minimise redundancy, to facilitate update, and multi-scale analysis, we envisage
a  single  detailed  database  capable  of  supporting  multiple-scale  representations  that
would  enable  representation  of  the  earth’s  morphology  at  various  levels  of  detail,  and
thereby supporting ideas of intelligent zoom (Frank and Timpf 1994) and spatial query
appropriate  to  a  given  level  of  detail.  This  idea  is  reflected  in  the  concept  of  multiple
representation databases (Sarjakoski 2007) that enable us to: (1) have a single point
of  database  update;  (2)  define  in  a  consistent  way  how  generalised  morphologies  are
produced;  and  (3)  support  non-visual  spatial  queries.  By  creating  bounded  extents  we
can  support  creation  of  alternate  forms  of  visualisation  (Figure  1)  such  as  automatic
labelling of mountain ranges. Furthermore by enriching the database (through the crea-
tion of partonomic relationships between individual hills and these regions) (Chaudhry
and  Mackaness  2006)  we  can  answer  questions  such  as:  ‘Does  Ben  Macdui  lie  in  the
Grampians?’  But  before  we  can  offer  such  solutions,  we  need  a  methodology  that
enables  us  to  link  morphographic  elements  to  morphostructural  regions.  This  article

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

570

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

presents  an  approach  for  the  automatic  identification  of  landforms  and  their  extents.
Section  2  describes  the  methodology  and  section  3  considers  its  application  and
evaluation in a number of case studies. 

2 Methodology: Hills and Ranges

In  this  research  we  are  interested  in  automatically  detecting  boundaries  or  extents  of
hills and ranges. The degree to which we can precisely define the boundary of a geographic
object varies enormously (Burrough and Frank 1996, Campari 1996). This observation
is  reflected  in  research  on  the  modelling  of  fuzzy  boundaries  (Clementini  and  Felice
1996, Cohn and Gotts 1996). Nevertheless the boundary that separates the entity from
its  environment  is  one  of  the  marks  of  its  individuality  (Casati  et  al.  1998).  Some
boundaries are general in their form, and it is appropriate to represent those boundaries
at a small scale (such as the extent of a wetland, or a mountainous region) whilst other
boundaries  can  only  meaningfully  be  conveyed  at  the  large  scale  (such  as  a  conveying
the  detail  in  a  property  boundary).  A  systematic  treatment  of  boundaries  has  been
attempted by Smith (1995), who argued that boundaries can be divided into two basic
types:  bona-fide  boundaries  and  fiat-boundaries  (Smith  and  Varzi  1997,  2000).  A
boundary that is ‘bona fide’ is one that is a ‘thing in itself’ and exists even in the absence
of all delineating or conceptualising activity (river-banks or coastlines are examples
of  bona  fide  boundaries).  In  that  sense  they  are  boundaries  which  exist  independ-
ently  of  all  human  cognitive  acts  and  ‘are  a  matter  of  qualitative  differentiations  or
discontinuities  in  the  underlying  reality’  (Smith  1995,  p.  476).  The  other  type  of
boundary is a ‘fiat’ boundary in which the boundary owes its existence to acts of human
decision  or  decree,  in  some  way  related  to  human  cognitive  phenomena.  Thus  ‘fiat
boundaries are boundaries which exist only in virtue of the different sorts of demarca-
tions effected cognitively by human beings’ (Smith 1995, p. 476). These are delineations
which  correspond  to  no  genuine  heterogeneity  on  the  side  of  the  bounded  entities
themselves. Examples would include political borders, property lines, urban settlement,
hill and range boundaries. This article focuses on derivation of the fiat boundaries of
hills and ranges.

The  methodology  is  built  around  the  idea  that  where  there  are  a  collection  of
prominences that have sufficient distinction from adjoining landforms, are of sufficient
density, frequency and extent then they are considered differentiable from other regions
(other ranges, or other morphostructural features such as deltas or plateaus). In essence
the  analysis  of  the  morphology  at  the  fine  scale  enables  us  to  create  ‘containers’  that
define  the  extent  of  a  range  or  mountain  region,  and  from  this  create  a  set  of  ‘parent
child’ relations by which we can define the partonomic membership of each hill within
a region.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  mathematically  define  (and  thus auto-
matically identify) different types of features in the landscape. What constitutes a hill, a
mountain chain or region is a very scale dependent issue. The person asking the question
may  have  a  very  vague  prototypical  view  of  a  particular  region  (Kuhn  2001)  and  that
view  will  alter  depending  on  the  context.  There  again,  someone  may  have  a  precise
mathematical  definition  that,  in  the  context  of  a  spatial  query  returns  a  definitive
answer.  Many  researchers  have  arrived  at  different  definitions  of  what  a  mountain  or
hill  is  (Bonsall  1974,  Campbell  1992,  Cohen  1979,  Purchase  1997)  –  the  definitions
often reflecting localised understandings of the landscape (for example, that the notion

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

571

of a mountain in Scotland is very different when viewed in a Himalayan context). One
example of an attempt to define the mountains of Scotland is reflected in the ‘Munros’
of  Scotland,  named  after  Sir  Munro  who  compiled  and  published  in  1891  a  list  of  all
mountains  over  3,000  feet  in  Scotland  (he  identified  277  separate  mountains).  He  did
not  define  how  prominent  the  mountain  should  be,  only  that  there  be  ‘sufficient
separation’  from  neighbouring  tops  (see http://www.smc.org.uk  for  additional  details).
The subjective definition of what constitutes a Munro is reflected in revisions to the list
in  1995  resulting  in  something  that  was  defined  as  a  ‘Murdo’  (Scottish  hills  at  least
3,000 feet in height with a drop of at least 30 m on all sides) of which there are 444
(Dawson 1995).

At  its  simplest  we  might  use  absolute  height  to  define  a  hill  or  a  mountain.  But
caricature (important to cartography and our conceptual grouping of things) has much
to  do  with  observable  difference  and  being  able  to  sufficiently  differentiate  between
mountains  in  the  landscape.  For  example  each  of  us  has  a  conceptual  understanding
of  plateau,  delta  or  mountain  and  our  labelling  of  these  features  reflects  a  shared
agreement and understanding. Prominence (the amount by which a hill rises above the
local area) clearly influences people’s perception of whether something deserves the
epithet ‘hill’. Additionally its morphological variability as compared with its surround-
ings  is  also  a  critical  factor  (Fisher  and  Wood  1998).  The  morphological  variability
can be measured in terms of the frequency of peaks, passes and ridges, and additionally
in terms of its pits, channels and planes (Fisher et al. 2004). These descriptors are useful
in  modelling  variability  and  can  thus  help  characterise  a  region.  The  methodology
morphological var-
proposed here reflects two essential ingredients: 
.  These  were  derived  from  a  generalised  digital  terrain  model  (DTM),  and
iance
combined to create bounded regions that demarcated the individual hills and extent of
the range. This provided a basis by which the ‘parent child’ relationships between hills
and ranges could be partonomically defined. The end result is a morphologically nested
description of the region (Figure 3) which acts as a framework for model generalisation
and  spatial  query.  In  the  following  sections  we  will  present  different  stages  of  the
approach in more detail.

prominence

 and 

2.1 Calculating the Prominence of a Hill

In topography, prominence, may be referred to in terms of relative height, shoulder
drop (in America) or prime factor (in Europe), or simply relief (Press and Server 1982,
Summerfield 1991) and is a measure of the independent stature of a summit. There are
different  methods  for  calculating  prominence  on  a  contour  map.  Here  it  is  defined  as
the elevation difference between the summit and the lowest closed contour that encircles
that summit and with no summit(s) of higher elevation than itself (reflecting the idea of
elevation difference with respect to the surroundings). This lowest contour that encircles
 of the summit. To be sure
the summit and no higher summit is called the 
that we identify the correct key contour we must consider an extended area of the DTM
that  includes  the  continent  that  the  summit  resides  within.  For  a  summit  such  a  Ben
Nevis (the highest in Great Britain) that extent should in theory incorporate the entire
DTM  of  Great  Britain.  But  this  becomes  too  intensive  computationally.  Instead  it  is
appropriate  to  choose  a  “sufficiently”  large  extent  such  that  the  region  of  interest  lies
well within that extent. By way of an example, a “sufficient” extent for Ben Nevis might
be  a  centred  rectangle  50  km  by  25  km  whilst  for  the  Pyrenees  that  extent  might  be  a

key contour

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

572

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Figure 3 The overall method by which hills and ranges are identified 

rectangle  of  600  km  by  300  km.  The  point  is  that  the  results  for  any  given  region  are
meaningful  within  the  outermost  contour  that  is  “closed”  within  the  selected  extent.
Once the key contour for each summit has been identified, prominence is then calculated
as the elevation difference between the elevation of the key contour and the elevation of
the summit. 

The  prominence  for  each  summit  was  calculated  by  firstly  creating  contours  from
®
the  source  digital  terrain  model  (DTM).  Ordnance  Survey’s  Land-Form  PROFILE
dataset was used, which has a resolution of 10 m. The contours created (using ArcGIS)
from the source DTM were found not to be appropriate for processing because ‘spikes’
were  present  around  the  edges  of  some  contours  and  some  contours  were  attached  to
other contours or were broken (Figures 4a and 4b). To avoid these problems, the input
DTM  was  filtered  using  a  smoothing  algorithm  (Wood  1996b).  The  algorithm  works
by  fitting  a  quadratic  polynomial  with  a  given  kernel  size.  The  kernel  size  for  the
polynomial was empirically determined and was set to 25 cells (25 * 25). The resultant
DTM and contours (interval of 5 m) are shown in Figures 5a and 5b. 

The  resultant  contours  from  the  generalised  DTM  were  used  by  the  algorithm  to
identify  the  summit  points  and  their  prominence.  The  summit  points  were  identified

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

573

Figure 4 (a)  Source  DTM  and  (b)  5  m  contours  derived  from  the  source  DTM  (note  that
some contours have ‘spikes’ and are broken in certain places)

Figure 5 (a) Smoothed DTM and (b) resultant contours at 5 m interval together with height
labels 

using the highest contours (contours that contain no other contour) and finding the cell
from the DTM that has the maximum elevation within each of these contours. For such
cells  a  summit  point  is  generated  that  stores  the  location  and  its  elevation  (Figure  6).
The second step is the calculation of prominence for each summit point. The algorithm
finds the key contour for each summit point using the above definition of key contour.
It  then  calculates  the  prominence  by  subtracting  the  summit’s  elevation  from  the
elevation of the key contour (Figures 6 and 7).

2.2 Modelling Morphological Variance

To determine the areal extent of a hill or a mountain’s summit along with its prominence
we  also  need  to  take  into  account  the  surface  variability  between  the  summit  and  the
key contour. This is because it is not meaningful to define extent purely in terms of the

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

574

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Figure 6 Contours created from a smooth DTM (Figure 5a). Summit points along with their
elevation values are shown within each of the highest contours. Key contours of summit A
and Peak B are highlighted in bold. Note that all the summit points that are inside the key
contour ‘a’ of summit A are of a lower elevation than summit A (232 m) 

Figure 7 Profile of the transect from Figure 6 showing the Prominence of summits A and B 

key contour. Theoretically such a rule would make the coastline of Great Britain the key
contour of its highest peak (Ben Nevis at 1344 m). This does not accord with our own
perception  of  the  extent  of  the  region  that  contains  this  peak  because  the  surface
between the summit and this key contour is not changing sufficiently. Thus in addition

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

575

to prominence we also need to model the amount of change in the surface in order to
identify the extent of a hill, or mountain range.

This change in elevation of a surface can be modelled based on its morphology. One
approach is to classify the surface in terms of its morphometric features or classes (pits,
peaks, passes, ridges, channels and planes). Several methods exist for the identification of
these morphometric features (Maxwell 1870, Evans 1972, Peucker and Douglas 1974,
Tang  1992).  Here  we  have  used  a  technique  developed  by Wood  (1996a)  that  uses  an
approach  based  on  the  quadratic  approximation  of  a  local  window  or  kernel  of  given
size, in order to find the first (slope) and second derivative (curvature) of the DTM. This
method  assigns  each  location  of  the  generalised  DTM  to  one  of  the  six  morphometric
classes. Due to the scale dependent nature of the phenomena there is a degree of fuzziness
in a location’s classification (Wood 1996b, Fisher et al. 2004). This means that a location
classified as a peak at one scale may be viewed as a ridge at another scale, or a plane at some
other scale. There has been a multitude of research dealing with modelling the fuzziness
of  a  landform  (Robinson  1988,  2003;  Robinson  et  al.  1988;  Usery  1996;  Wood  1998;
Fisher  2000).  In  this  research  the  fuzziness  in  classification  was  modelled  by  using  the
method  developed  by  Wood  (1996a,  b),  whereby  the  DTM  is  modelled  at  different
scales using different kernel sizes (3 * 3 to 51 * 51). Each location at each kernel size
is  classified  into  one  of  the  six morphometric classes. The final class of each location
in the resultant surface is the one which is most dominant over all kernels (Figure 8). 

Figure 8 Multiscale morphometric classification of the DTM in Figure 6a. The kernel used
ranged from 3 * 3 to 51 * 51

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

576

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Figure 9 Morphologically  variable  polygons  of  the  morphometric  features  shown  in
Figure 8

The resultant morphometric units or features shown in Figure 8 are converted into
polygons. All polygons that are non plane (i.e. pit, channel, pass, ridge or peak) depict
areas  with  change  in  morphology.  These  polygons  are  called  morphologically  variable
polygons (Figure 9) and are used by the algorithm to identify the extent of each summit
(explained further in the next section).

2.3 Calculating the Extent of Hills and Ranges

We  can  now  combine  the  information  of  prominence,  the  key  contours  and  the
morphologically  variable  polygons  in  order  to  identify  the  extent  of  each  summit.  In
essence  we  identify  the  contour  that  best  overlaps  with  the  morphologically  variable
polygons. We start with the key contour polygon of a summit and intersect it with each
morphologically  variable  polygon  and  calculate  the  area  intersection.  The  total  area
intersection divided by the area of the contour polygon gives the percentage of variability
within that contour. The percentage is compared against a threshold called the minimum
morphology  change  threshold  (MMC).  If  the  percentage  is  below  this  threshold  it
indicates that the surface has low variability and so the next highest contour of the given
summit is selected. This process is repeated until the percentage is above or equal to the
MMC. The value of MMC was determined empirically and was set to 65%. The value
of  MMC  can  be  altered  according  to  different  applications  or  intended  scales.  The
contour polygon selected from this process is assigned as the extent of the given summit.
This sequence of events is illustrated in Figure 10 in which we start with the key contour
for summit A. The percentage of variability is below the MMC (Figure 10a). In Figures
10b and c the next higher contour is selected and the same process is repeated and again
the percentage is found to be below MMC. In Figure 10d the percentage of variability
for summit A is found to be greater than MMC so this contour polygon is assigned as
the  extent  of  summit  A.  Figure  11  illustrates  the  extents  of  all  summits  identified  in
Figures 10a and 6.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

577

Figure 10 Determining  the  extent  of  a  summit  A:  (a)  key  contour  A,  morphologically
variable polygons; (b) next higher level contour is selected; (c) next higher level contour is
selected; and (d) the resultant extent of summit A

Figure 11 (a)  Summits  and  their  extents  identified  in  Figure  10a  and  (b)  the  summits  and
extents of Figure 6

2.4 Modelling ‘Parent Child’ Relationships Among Groups of Hills

One  of  the  most  important  relationships  in  terms  of  spatial  objects  is  partonomic
relationships. These relationships link parts to a whole (composition) (Varzi 2007) and
provide  a  means  of  creating  composite  objects  at  higher  levels  of  abstraction  from

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

578

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Figure 12 The  Parent  Child  Relationship  between  summits  shown  in  Figure  10a.  Using
island  parentage  definition  summit  A  is  the  parent  of  summit  B  and  C.  But  using  the
proposed morphological encirclement parentage definition summit A is parent of summit C
but not of summit B since the extent of summit A does not cover summit B

component objects at high levels of detail, and are thus critical for model generalisation
(Molenaar  1998,  van  Smaalen  2003).  Once  the  extents  of  the  summits  have  been
identified  we  can  model  the  partonomic  relationships  in  terms  of  parent  (whole)  and
child  (part)  hills.  To  identify  these  child-parent  relationships  we  utilise  information
relating  to  the  extent  of  a  summit  and  its  key  contour.  These  concepts  enable  us  to
group summits on a landmass into a hierarchy showing which summits are ‘sub-peaks’
of  others.  In  this  way  ranges  can  be  identified  from  groups  of  individual  hills.  If  a
summit  has  child  summits  within  its  extent  then  it  is  a  range.  On  the  other  hand  if  a
summit does not have any children it can be classified as an isolated hill or a mountain
depending  upon  its  prominence  and  absolute  height.  There  are  several  definitions  for
assigning a parent to a hill (Maizlish 2003, Bivouac 2004). The definition used here is
(Maizlish  2003,  Bivouac  2004).
based  on 
The  island  parent  of  a  summit  is  the  next  highest  summit  in  the  prominence  line  that
has a base contour that surrounds the summit, and its key contour is lower than the key
contour  of  the  summit  in  question.  Using  this  definition  summit  A  is  the  parent  of
summit B in Figure 6. Similarly in Figure 12, summit A is the parent of summit B and
summit C since summit A is the next highest summit and has a contour that surrounds
both summit B and summit C (Figure 12).

island  parentage  or  encirclement  parentage 

In this research we have limited the extent of a summit in terms of the morpholog-
ically  variable  polygon.  We  can  therefore  extend  the  encirclement  parentage  definition
taking into account the extent of the summit. So for a parent summit, in addition to the
abovementioned  properties,  its  extent  also  needs  to  contain  the  child  summit.  We  call
.  Following  this  definition  in  Figure  12
this  the 
summit  A  will  not  be  the  parent  of  summit  B  since  the  extent  of  summit  A  does  not
cover summit B. By this definition a summit might not have any parent (i.e. it may not
fall within the extent of its parent summit). In these cases it is either an individual hill
(it has no children) or it is an isolated range if it has a set of child summits. 

morphological  encirclement  parentage

Once the parent child relationship has been identified we can use this relationship
along  with  the  value  of  prominence  in  order  to  select  only  those  summits  that  are
significant for the intended database’s level of detail. For instance Figure 13 was created

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

579

Figure 13 Using  a  prominence  threshold  of  35  m.  The  summit  B  (prominence  of  19  m),
(see Figure 7) has been aggregated into its parent Peak A (prominence 156 m)

(utilising  the  results  from  Figure  11b)  by  selecting  all  summits  that  had  a  prominence
greater  than  or  equal  to  35  m.  Those  summits  that  had  a  prominence  less  than  35  m
were either aggregated into their parent, or if the summit did not have a parent, it was
simply  deleted.  In  this  way  model  generalisation  can  take  place  such  that  higher  order
objects can be created from component objects. The next section presents a case study
of a few regions on which this methodology was subsequently applied.

3 Case Study Illustrations

The  algorithm  summarised  pictorially  in  Figure  3  and  presented  below,  was  imple-
mented  in  Java,  and  used  functionality  from  ArcGIS  9.0  and  LandSerf  (see  http://
www.soi.city.ac.uk/~jwo/landserf/landserf220/ for additional details). It was applied in
the  derivation  of  hills  and  ranges  intended  for  representation  at  the  small  scale
(1:250,000) directly from a high resolution DTM (Ordnance Survey Land-Form PRO-
FILE dataset with a 10 m resolution). 

Summary of the algorithm:

1. Smooth the detailed input DTM using Landserf with a kernel size of 25 * 25;
2. Create contours at 5 m interval from the smoothed DTM; 
3. Create summit points: Within each highest contour (contour that does not contain
any  other  contour)  create  a  (summit)  point  geometry  to  store  highest  elevation
within that contour;

4. Calculate the prominence of each summit

(a) For each summit find the key contour i.e. the lowest elevation closed contour
that encircles the summit in question and does not contain any other summit
higher than the given summit;

(b) Subtract the elevation of the key contour from the elevation of the summit (this

is the prominence of the summit);

5. Model  the  morphology  in  terms  of  morphometric  classification  of  the  input  DTM
using  Landserf  with  mulit-scale  option  and  a  range  of  kernel  sizes  from  3 * 3  to
51 * 51;

6. Convert the morphometric regions (5) to polygons;

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

580

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

7. Remove all polygons classified as plane regions;
8. Calculate the extent of each summit:

(a) Select the key contour of the given summit;
(b) Calculate  the  total  area  intersection  of  this  contour  with  all  the  intersecting

morphometric polygons (7);

(c) Calculate  the  percentage  of  variability  by  dividing  the  total  area  of  8b  by  the

(d)

area of the contour;
If  area  of  stage  8c  is  less  then  MMC  then  select  the  next  higher  contour  for
the given summit and repeat 8b–8d until the area becomes larger than or equal
to MMC. This contour is the extent of the summit.

9. Assign parent and child relationships:

(a) For a given summit ‘A’, if the first next highest summit whose key contour ‘b’
contains summit ‘A’ and whose extent found from step 8d also contains summit
A then this is assigned as the parent of summit ‘A’.

3.1 The Pentlands

Figure 14 shows the source DTM for a region south of Edinburgh along with the text
points  of  prominent  hills  and  ranges  at  a  1:250,000  scale  selected  from  Ordnance
.  Figure  15  shows  hills  and  ranges  that  have  a  prominence
Survey’s  product  Strategi

® 

Figure 14 DTM (Land-Form PROFILE) south of Edinburgh. The text points are from Strategi
(Ordnance Survey © Crown Copyright. All rights reserved)

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

581

Figure 15 Resultant  hills  and  range  extents  (prominence  above  or  equal  to  35  m)  along
with text points selected from Strategi

greater than or equal to 35 m. Except for Castle law and White Craig, the text points
of all other hills and ranges correctly fall within their extents. Note that some hill and
range  boundaries  do  not  have  any  text  points  associated  with  them.  The  likely  carto-
graphic reasons for this are discussed in section 4.

3.2 Region around Fort William

A  second  test  area  selected  was  the  region  around  Fort  William,  Scotland.  The  input
DTM  for  this  area  along  with  prominent  text  points  selected  from  Strategi  are  shown
in Figure 16. This region contains three major mountain ranges: Ben Nevis range, Ben
Alder range and Mamore range (Figure 17). Ben Nevis Range extends 15 km eastwards
of  Fort  William  (Williams  2000)  and  includes  mountains  such  as  Carn  Mor  Dearg,
Aonach  Beag  and  Aonach  Mor  (Figure  18a).  The  Mamore  mountain  range  is  15  km
long running between Loch Leven and Glen Nevis and contains mountains such as Stob

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

582

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

 

 

 
 
 

Figure 16 DTM (Land-Form PROFILE) for Fort William (Ordnance Survey © Crown Copy-
right. All rights reserved)

Figure 17 Resultant extents of summits from Figure 16 

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

583

Figure 18 Text  points  selected  from  Strategi  and  the  resultant  extents  of  mountains  and
ranges within two of the ranges in Figure 17: (a) Ben Nevis Range and (b) Mamore range 

Ban, Am Bodach, Stob Corie a’ Mahil (Figure 18b). The resultant mountains and range
extents identified by the algorithm are shown in Figure 17. Because of limited space not
all the text points from Strategi representing hills and ranges are included in Figures 16
and 17. Figure 18 shows an inset of the Ben Nevis and Mamore ranges along with the
text points associated with these smaller regions.

4 Discussion

Using  the  name  points  selected  from  Strategi  (1:250,000)  we  performed  an  evaluation
by  checking  if  the  name  points  lay  within  the  footprint  or  extent  of  the  resultant  hills

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(5)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

584

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

and ranges. It is important to point out here that the name points selected from Strategi
are from a cartographic product. Their inclusion and placement has been influenced by
their size, importance, and localised clutteredness. As shown in Figures 15 and 18 most
of  the  text  points  lie  within  the  boundaries  generated  whilst  others  lie  outside,  and  in
some  cases  there  is  no  text  associated  with  the  extent.  In  some  cases  space  constraints
have  led  either  to  their  being  omitted,  or  displaced.  It  is  important  to  realise  that  in
Strategi there is no ‘link’ between the text points and the places they represent but that
the methodology presented here, precisely allows us to do this. It is anticipated that this
information  can  be  used  by  name  placement  algorithms  (Barrault  1995,  Petzold  et  al.
2003)  to  determine  how  much  displacement  might  be  tolerated.  It  can  also  be  used  to
control  orientation,  curling  and  general  ‘fitting’  of  text  to  show  the  extent  of  a  range
(for example in the way that the text ‘Southern Uplands’ is placed in Figure 1b to show
the shape and extent of this range).

4.1 Spatial Query and Partonomic Structures

Another use of these resultant boundaries is in determining the partonomic relationships
among other topographic features. For example, via spatial query we can identify which
buildings fall within a hilly region of Edinburgh (Figure 19), or by identifying the minor

Figure 19 Resultant  hill  boundaries  overlaid  with  OS  MasterMap®  Topography  Layer,
enabling identification of ‘places to live that have a nice view’ (Ordnance Survey © Crown
Copyright. All rights reserved)

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(5)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

585

roads  that  connect  two  remote  villages  via  a  mountain  road,  the  cartographer  can
give  increased  emphasis  to  its  representation.  Thus  knowledge  of  these  different
properties  can  inform  the  cartographic  process  in  terms  of  design  constraints  and
symbolisation. 

4.2 Fuzzy Nature of Hill and Range Boundaries

It is worth remembering that in reality the boundaries to hills and ranges are somewhat
vague  because  of  the  fuzzy  nature  of  the  concept  (Campari  1996,  Usery  1996)  and
because  it  is  difficult  to  create  a  discrete  boundary  when  modelling  continuous
phenomena  (Molenaar  1996).  Any  statement  about  real  world  phenomena  needs  to
be defined, understood and described within a certain context of observation (Molenaar
1993). A multitude of research has been undertaken that deals with modelling fuzziness
in  spatial  objects,  and  in  crisp  and  non  crisp  boundaries  (Molenaar  1993,  1996;
Campari  1996;  Reinke  and  Hunter  2002;  Winter  and  Thomas  2002).  Here  we  have
presented an approach for the creation of fiat boundaries for hills and ranges (Smith and
Varzi  2000)  based  on  their  morphological  properties  along  with  their  prominence.  In
this article we have not modelled the fuzziness in the output boundaries but we believe
that the proposed approach can be utilised in the modelling of fuzziness (Pawlak 1982,
Cohn  and  Gotts  1996,  Worboys  1998,  Fisher  et  al.  2004)  and  this  offers  interesting
avenues for future research.

4.3 Utilising SRTM Data

This article used data provided by the Ordnance Survey as the basis for the application
and development of the algorithm. In order to demonstrate its broader application, we
explored the use of data captured at a lower resolution since the resolution of the DTM
can determine whether or not a particular morphological unit is discernible. The Shuttle
Radar  Topography  Mission  (SRTM)  collected  a  digital  terrain  model  for  80%  of  the
world  (see  http://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/  for  additional  details).  These  data  are
provided in WGS84 latitude longitude coordinates, are freely available, and have a 90 m
resolution  (3  arc  second).  It  was  observed  that  the  SRTM  had  captured  a  ‘softer’,
smoother,  more  diffuse  surface  whilst  the  Land-Form  PROFILE  dataset  with  a  10  m
resolution  has  captured  a  crisp  picture  of  the  landscape,  recording  the  morphology  of
relatively small features. Using different input datasets, varying the amount of smoothing
of the input dataset, changing the contour interval used, or altering the threshold of the
prominence value; all these variables will have an effect on what summits and hills are
identified,  and  what  the  extent  of  a  range  or  summit  will  be.  We  would  argue  that
there  is  no  single,  perfect  DTM  resolution  or  a  single,  ideal  set  of  parameters.  Their
appropriateness will depend upon the context of use, and the types of information that
the user wishes to portray. For example, sometimes the geomorphologist is interested in
a  fine  scale  view  of  the  world,  whilst  at  other  times  they  may  be  interested  in  macro
scale processes and features. From a cartographic point of view, this manifests itself in
the representation of different morphological features that become more generalised at
smaller  and  smaller  scales.  By  way  of  example, Figures  20  and  21  show  the  results  of
deriving  hills  and  ranges  for  the  region  around  Arthur’s  Seat  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland
using SRTM data and Land-Form PROFILE data. A number of observations are made.
The  larger  cell  size  of  the  SRTM  data  records  a  spot  height  of  219.43  m  and  a  key

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(5)

586

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Figure 20 SRTM  morphology  and  results  for  the  region  around  Arthur’s  seat,  Edinburgh
using the same threshold as for the profile created in Figure 21

Figure 21 Profile morphology and results for Arthur’s seat, Edinburgh

contour  value  of  85  m,  giving  a  prominence  value  of  the  summit  as  134.43  m.  The
smaller  cell  size  associated  with  Land-Form  PROFILE  data  means  that  finer  detail  is
recorded – a spot height of 236.28 m and a key contour of 80 m gives a prominence of
156.28 m to the summit. Carlton Hill (with a prominence of 40.2 m) was a hill ‘lost’ in
the  SRTM  data,  but  captured  in  the  Land-Form  PROFILE  data  (Figure  21).  Broadly
speaking,  the  two  have  similar  extents,  but  for  larger  scales,  the  Land-Form  PROFILE
results (Figure 21) are much preferred in terms of their accuracy. 

5 Conclusions

In  this  article  we  have  demonstrated  an  approach  for  determining  the  extents  or
boundaries of continuous phenomena such as hills and mountain ranges so that objects
representing  these  concepts  can  be  created  and  stored  in  a  vector  database.  We  would
argue  that  its  novelty  lies  in  combining  morphological  variability  and  prominence  in
determining  the  extent  of  summits  and  ranges.  By  incorporating  this  information  into

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(5)

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

587

multiple representation databases, we have demonstrated how multi-scale products can
be derived from a single detailed database.

The  morphological  classification  of  landscape  has  application  in  land  capability
mapping and in automatic production of thematic mapping at small scale (say 1:50,000
–  1:1  m).  It  has  important  application  in  semantic  reference  systems  and  spatial  query
and  in  cartographic  generalisation  in  terms  of  symbol  placement,  and  in  model
generalisation  in  the  aggregation  of  source  objects  and  also  for  spatial  analysis.  The
proposed  methodology  has  been  shown  to  be  successful  in  derivation  of  summits  and
extents in different areas with low and high changes in morphology but there are areas
of further study. Firstly, the various parameters used in the analysis need to be evaluated
further in order to assess how generic the algorithm is for different regions of the world.
Future  work  will  therefore  look  at  its  application  to  mountainous  regions  such  as  the
Alps and the Himalayas using SRTM data (90 m resolution). Secondly, future work will
also examine ideas for modelling the fuzzy nature of such continuous surfaces.

The authors are grateful for funding from the Ordnance Survey and The University of
Edinburgh  and  for  the  comments  of  the  reviewers.  Our  thanks  to  Drs  Nicholas
Hulton  and  Ross  Purves  for  their  suggestions  for  improving  the  methodology  and  its
implementation.

Acknowledgements

References

Andrle R 1996 Complexity and scale in geomorphology: Statistical self-similarity vs. characteristic

scales. Mathematical Geology 28: 275–93

Barrault M 1995 An automated system for linear feature name placement which complies with carto-
graphic quality criteria. In Proceedings of AutoCarto 12, Charlotte, North Carolina: 321–30
Bivouac 2004 Canadian Mountain Encyclopedia: Mountain Hierarchies. WWW document, http://

www.bivouac.com/pgxpg/asp?pgxid=280

Bonsall F F 1974 The separation of Munros. Scottish Mountaineering Club Journal 30: 254 –6
Burrough  P  A  and  Frank  A  U  (eds)  1996  Geographic  Objects  with  Indeterminate  Boundaries.

London, Taylor and Francis

Campari  I  1996  Uncertain  boundaries  in  urban  space.  In  Burrough  P  A  and  Frank  A  U  (eds)
Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries. London, Taylor and Francis: 57– 69
Campbell R N 1992 Munro’s tables, 1891–1991. Scottish Mountaineering Club Journal 35: 21–7
Casati R, Smith B, and Varzi A 1998 Ontological tools for geographic representation. In Guarino N

(ed) Formal Ontology in Information Systems. Amsterdam, IOS Press: 77–85

Chaudhry  O  and  Mackaness  W  A  2006  Modelling  geographic  phenomena  at  multiple  levels
of  detail.  In  Proceedings  of  AutoCarto  15,  Vancouver,  Washington  (available  at  http://
www.cartogis.org/publications/autocarto-2006/chaudhrymackaness.pdf)

Clementini  E  and  Felice  P  D  1996  An  algebraic  model  for  spatial  objects  with  undetermined
boundaries.  In  Burrough  P  A  and  Frank  A  U  (eds)  Geographic  Objects  with  Indeterminate
Boundaries. London, Taylor and Francis: 155–69

Cohen  G  1979  Some  unsolved  problems  in  Munroology.  Scottish  Mountaineering  Club  Journal

31: 423–4

Cohn  A  G  and  Gotts  N  M  1996  The  ‘egg-yolk’  representation  of  regions  with  indeterminate
boundaries.  In  Burrough  P  A  and  Frank  A  (eds)  Geographic  Objects  with  Indeterminate
Boundaries. London, Taylor and Francis: 171–87

Dawson A 1995 The Murdos. Stirling, TACit Press

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(5)

588

O Chaudhry and W A Mackaness

Evans  I  S  1972  General  geomorphometry,  derivatives  of  altitude,  and  descriptive  statistics.  In

Chorley R J (ed) Spatial Analysis in Geomorphology. London, Methuen: 17–90

Evans I S 1990 Cartographic techniques in geomorphology. In Goudie A (ed) Geomorphological

Techniques. London, Unwin Hyman: 97–108

Fisher P F 2000 Fuzzy modelling. In Openshaw S and Abrahart R (eds) Geocomputing. London,

Taylor and Francis: 161–86

Fisher  P  and  Wood  J  1998  What  is  a  Mountain?  Or  The  Englishman  who  went  up  a  Boolean

geographical concept but realised it was fuzzy. Geography 83: 247–56

Fisher  P,  Wood  J,  and  Cheng  T  2004  Where  is  Helvellyn?  Fuzziness  of  multi-scale  landscape

morphometry. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 29: 106 –28

Frank A and Timpf S 1994 Multiple representations for cartographic objects in a multi-scale tree:

An intelligent graphical zoom. Computers and Graphics 18: 823–9

Imhof E 1982 Cartographic Relief Presentation. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter
Kuhn W 2001 Ontologies in support of activities in geographical space. International Journal of

Mackaness  W  A  and  Stevens  M  2006  An  algorithm  for  localised  contour  removal  over  steep

Geographical Information Science 15: 613–33

terrain. The Cartographic Journal 43: 144–56

Maizlish A 2003 Prominence and Orometrics: A Study of the Measurement of Mountains. WWW

document, http://www.peaklist.org/theory/theory.html

Mark  D  and  Aronson  P  B  1984  Scale-dependent  fractal  dimensions  of  topographic  surfaces:  An
empirical investigation, with applications in geomorphology and computer mapping. Mathe-
matical Geology 16: 671–83

Maxwell  J  C  1870  On  contour  lines  and  measurements  of  heights.  The  London,  Edinburgh  and

Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 40: 421–7

Molenaar M 1993 Object hierarchies and uncertainty in GIS or why is standardisation so difficult.

GeoInformation Systems 6: 22–8

Molenaar  M  1996  A  syntactic  approach  for  handling  the  semantics  of  fuzzy  spatial  objects.
In  Burrough  P  A  and  Frank  A  (eds)  Geographic  Objects  with  Indeterminate  Boundaries.
London, Taylor and Francis: 207–24

Molenaar M 1998 An Introduction to the Theory of Spatial Object Modelling for GIS. London,

Taylor and Francis

Pawlak Z 1982 Rough sets. International Journal of Computer and Information Sciences 11: 341–56
Petzold  I,  Gröger  G,  and  Plüemer  L  2003  Fast  screen  map  labeling:  Data  structures  and
algorithms.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Twenty-first  International  Cartographic  Association
Conference, Durban, South Africa: 288–99

Peucker  T  K  and  Douglas  D  H  1974  Detection  of  surface  specific  points  by  local  parallel
processing  of  discrete  terrain  elevation  data. Computer Graphics and Image Processing 4:
375–87

Press F and Siever R 1982 Earth (Third Edition). San Francisco, CA, W H Freeman and Company
Purchase  D  1997  The  classification  of  mountains.  Scottish  Mountaineering  Club  Journal  36:

252–71

Purves  R,  Dowers  S,  and  Mackaness  W  A  2002  Providing  context  in  Virtual  Reality:  The
example  of  a  CAL  for  mountain  navigation.  In  Unwin  D  and  Fisher  P  (eds)  Virtual
Reality  in  Geography. London, Taylor and Francis: 175–89

Regnauld N, Mackaness W A, and Hart G 2002 Automated relief representation of archaeological
monuments  and  other  anthropogenic  forms.  Computers,  Environment  and  Urban  Systems
26: 219–39

Reinke K J and Hunter G J 2002 A theory for communicating uncertainty in spatial databases. In
Shi  W,  Fisher  P  F,  and  Goodchild  M  F  (eds)  Spatial  Data  Quality.  London,  Taylor  and
Francis: 77–101

Robinson V B 1988 Some implications of fuzzy set theory applied to geographic databases. Com-

puters, Environment and Urban Systems 12: 89–97

Robinson V B 2003 A perspective on the fundamentals of fuzzy sets and their use in geographic

information systems. Transactions in GIS 7: 3–30

Robinson V B, Miller R, and Klesh L 1988 Issues in the use of expert systems to manage uncer-
tainty in Geographic Information Systems. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Geographic Information Systems, Washington, DC: 89–100

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(5)

Creating Mountains out of Mole Hills

589

Sarjakoski  L  T  2007  Conceptual  models  of  generalisation  and  multiple  representation.  In
Mackaness  W  A,  Ruas  A,  and  Sarjakoski  L  T  (eds)  Generalisation  of  Geographic  Informa-
tion: Cartographic Modelling and Applications. Oxford, Elsevier: 11–36

Shepherd W 1926 Historical Atlas. New York, Henry Holt and Company
Smith  B  1995  On  drawing  lines  on  a  map.  In  Frank  A  U,  Kuhn  W,  and  Mark  D  (eds)  Spatial

Information Theory: Proceedings of COSIT ’95. Berlin, Springer, Verlag: 475–84

Smith  B  and  Varzi  A  C  1997  The  formal  ontology  of  boundaries.  The  Electronic  Journal  of
(available  at  http://ejap.louisiana.edu/ EJAP/1997.spring/

Analytic  Philosophy  5(5): 
smithvarzi976.html)

Smith  B  and  Varzi  A  C  2000  Fiat  and  bona  fide  boundaries.  Philosophy  and  Phenomenological

Research 60: 401–20

Summerfield M A 1991 Global Geomorphology. London, Longman
Summerfield  M  A  2005  A  tale  of  two  scales,  or  the  two  geomorphologies.  Transactions  of  the

Institute of British Geographers 30: 402–15

Tang  L  1992  Automatic  extraction  of  specific  geomorphological  elements  from  contours.  In
Proceedings  of  the  Fifth  International  Symposium  on  Spatial  Data  Handling,  Charleston,
South Carolina: 554–66

Usery  E  L  1996  A  conceptual  framework  and  fuzzy  set  implementation  for  geographic  features.
In  Burrough  P  A  and  Frank  A  (eds)  Geographic  Objects  with  Indeterminate  Boundaries.
London, Taylor and Francis: 71–85

van  Smaalen  J  2003  Automated  Aggregation  of  Geographic  Objects:  A  New  Approach  to  the
Conceptual  Generalisation  of  Geographic  Databases.  Unpublished  PhD  Dissertation,  Wage-
ningen University, The Netherlands

Varzi A 2007 Spatial reasoning and ontology: Parts, wholes, and locations. In Aiello M, Hartmann

I P and van Benthem J (eds) The Logic of Space. Berlin, Springer-Verlag: 945–1038

Williams N 2000 Scrambles in Lochaber (Second Edition). Milnthorpe, Cicerone Press
Winter  S  and  Thomas  B  2002  Hierarchical  topological  reasoning  with  vague  regions.  In
Wenzhong S, Fisher P, and Goodchild M F (eds) Spatial Data Quality. London, Taylor and
Francis: 35– 49

Wood J 1996a The Geomorphological Characterisation of Digital Elevation Models. Unpublished

Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Leicester, United Kingdom

Wood J 1996b Scale-based characterisation of digital elevation models. In Parker D (ed) Innova-

tions in GIS 3. London, Taylor and Francis: 163 –76

Wood  J  1998  Modelling  the  continuity  of  surface  form  using  Digital  Elevation  Models.  In
Proceedings  of  the  Eighth  International  Symposium  on  Spatial  Data  Handling,  Vancouver,
British Columbia: 725–36

Wood  J  1999  Visualisation  of  scale  dependencies  in  surface  models.  In  Proceedings  of  the
International  Cartographic  Association  Annual  Conference,  Ottawa,  Ontario  (available  at
http://www.soi.city.ac.uk/~jwo/ica99/)

Worboys M 1998 Imprecision in finite resolution spatial data. GeoInformatica 2: 257–79

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(5)

