The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2013

Vol. 50 No. 1

pp. 82–90

February 2013

O B S E R V A T I O N S

Implementation of the 1 : 10 000 Scale for Visualisation of
Environmental Changes

Radzym Ławniczak and Jarosław Kubiak

Institute of Physical Geography and Environmental Planning, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan´ , Poland
Email: radzym@amu.edu.pl

This paper is an elaboration of the theses proposed in ‘Cartographic presentation of forms and degradation of the natural
environment: sozological map on a scale of 1 : 50 000’ (Ławniczak and Kubiak, 2009), where a sozological map of Poland was
presented. The said map contained comprehensive cartographic information on the forms of environmental protection and
degradation, made to a scale of 1 : 50 000. The thematic scope of the map has already been modified twice: in 1997 and in 2005,
with the ensuing changes presented in corresponding manuals: Sozological Map on a Scale of 1 : 50 000, in an Analogue and
Digital Form (Chief National Geodesist, 1997) and Technical Guidelines GIS-4. Sozological Map of Poland, Scale of
1 : 50 000, in an Analogue and Digital Form (2005). Many years’ worth of experience gained since the launch of this
cartographic system points out to the need for broadening the presented content and improving the map’s scale. Thus, attempts
have been made at rescaling the map to 1 : 10 000. Increasing the degree of detail is particularly necessary for presenting areas
of intensive human activity. In this paper, the authors propose technical and graphical solutions for the 1 : 10 000 scale.

Keywords: sozological map, thematic cartography, GIS

INTRODUCTION

Sozology is based on a systematic approach, including the
laws and principles of eco-development, as well as constant
gathering, updating, analysis, and publication of information
about the condition of the environment. The best solution
for recording the trends occurring in the environment is to
build geographic information systems for storage of data on
all forms of environmental protection and degradation.

This issue brings to mind the question of obtaining and
visualizing information. Interactions between visualisation
and data play an important role here (Kraak and Ormeling,
1999). Particularly intensive changes occur in places of high
human pressure, such as metropolitan areas, industrial zones
and areas allocated for intensive development. The negative
aspects of this impact inﬂuence all of the closely interrelated
components of the natural environment (Mazurski, 1998).
Maps presenting the above phenomena developed in
Poland thus far have been made to the 1 : 50 000 scale (both
analog and digital maps). The map in question has nearly 60
thematic layers coupled with a database (Z˙ ynda, 1999).

The dynamics of changes occurring in the geosystems of
cities under the inﬂuence of developmental and investment
processes, which are characteristic of large municipal centres,
result in maps thus drawn becoming rapidly outdated
(Kozacki and Z˙ ynda, 1992).

The map’s users point out to the need of reﬁning it, which
necessarily involves rescaling. Therefore, the 1 : 10 000 scale

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000009

was proposed. One of the reasons behind the choice of this
particular scale is the availability of properly scaled topo-
graphic source materials, necessary for correct development
of thematic layers. The scale of 1 : 10 000 is also an excellent
tool for archiving the results of ﬁeld charting.

Attempts at developing a 1 : 10 000 sozological map have
already been made by some students in their graduation
projects on the Faculty of Gegraphical and Geological Sciences
Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznan´ at the Department of
Analysis and Environmental Mapping under the direction of
Professor S. Z˙ ynda. These maps were analogue studies.

The elaboration of an environmental science map on a scale
of 1 : 10 000 is of considerable practical importance. As well as
maps demonstrating the conﬂicts between humans and their
environment, are also made for the purposes of ecophysio-
graphic studies, which in their turn provide documents
necessary for local zoning and spatial development plans.

The base of attributes for an environmental science map
on a scale of 1 : 10 000, proposed in the present study, takes
into consideration currently valid Polish regulations and
legal acts regulating protection of the natural environment
and spatial planning, which have been brought in line with
directives of the European Union.

THEMATIC SCOPE OF 1 : 10 000 SOZOLOGICAL MAP

Practitioners who use sozological map, including planners,
as well as institutions and public bodies dealing with

Visualisation of Environmental Changes

environmental protection, have repeatedly voiced the need
to improve the scale of the map. Rescaling from 1 : 50 000
to 1 : 10 000, as proposed by the authors, will allow to
signiﬁcantly improve the degree of the map’s detail and to
extend the thematic scope of the map.

As far as sozological maps are concerned, a ﬁner scale

instead of points);

respect to the forms of land utilisation;

ensures:
N more extensive qualitative overview, particularly with
N change of the geometrical type of certain items (regions
N lower degree of generalisation of the presented area, thus
allowing to present more details;
N precise location of mapped objects;
N greater analytical capabilities of the system.
Figure 1 contains the proposed scope of content and visual
solutions for a 1 : 10 000 sozological map, constituting an
elaboration of the content included in the 1 : 50 000 map.
The latter is considered as a source material, and therefore
many of its elements have been directly transferred to the
former. The content of the new map additionally includes
some elements of a hydrographic map connected with the
degradation and protection of surface and subterranean
waters. The structure of the key to the map also remains
unchanged — the thematic content is categorized on the
basis of the same information layers. The groups of elements
have been slightly modiﬁed and their number has been
increased. Obviously, the analog version of the 1 : 10 000
map should be accompanied by the digital one. Content-
wise, the analog version is somewhat narrower, due to
limitations affecting the map’s legibility (e.g.
editorial
number of colors used, number of overlapping patterns,
large number of limit lines). In the analog map, some
information cannot be visualized at all. Such limitations do
not apply to the digital map. Table 1 shows the list of all
proposed thematic layers complete with information which
should be available in the database.

The proposed content of the map reﬂects the feasibility of
obtaining the necessary data. The most important stage of the
study concerns conducting a direct ﬁeld inspection, allowing
for veriﬁcation and updating of collected information. The
ﬁeld visits are absolutely necessary if the map is to become a
tool for investigating and diagnosing the condition of the
environment in the quantitative, systematic and forecasting
aspect. Field research includes the following: ﬁeld catalo-
guing, obtaining data from industrial facilities, public utility
companies and public administration units. In addition, the
data should derive from a number of industry-speciﬁc sources
dealing with registration and protection of the environment:
Environmental Protection Inspectorates, Regional Environ-
mental Protection Authorities, Regional State Forest Autho-
rities, National Research Institute, Chemical and Agricultural
Stations, Regional Water Management Authority.

Use is also made of existing cartographic materials and

databases, such as:
N topographic maps on a scale of 1 : 10 000;
N GBDOT (Georeference Database of Topographic
N soil maps on a scale of 1 : 5000 and 1 : 25 000;
N geological maps on a scale of 1 : 50 000;

Objects);

83

N forest maps on a scale of 1 : 10 000;
N orthophoto maps — made available through govern-
mental and commercial geoinformational portals;
N hydrographic maps on a scale of 1 : 50 000;
N acoustic maps on a scale of 1 : 10 000.

CONTENT MODIFICATIONS

The proposed map — just like its original prototype —
must also be done in a numerical form, which means that all
its
thematic layers must be coupled with a database
containing detailed quantitative and qualitative speciﬁca-
tions. A ﬁner scale of the graphical map allows one to make
changes by expanding the attribute databases.

Content modiﬁcation in relation to an environmental

science map on a scale of 1 : 50 000 is as follows:

1.

first layer of information
N in the area of woodlands it was decided to separately
identify shrublands, i.e. clusters of shrubbery and areas
with sparse presence of trees, covered with low woods or
dwarf pines; such separate identification is possible thanks
to increasing the scale of the map and to the application
of the 1 : 10 000 topographic map as a source; two items
have been added to the list of attributes of this layer:
ownership structure and protected items; a numerical
woodland map can also be a source of information;
N ‘arranged green areas’: this group includes parks,
botanical and zoological gardens, green areas in sports,
leisure and palace facilities; garden plots are a new
addition; green areas which cannot be classified in any of
the above categories have been labeled as other green
areas, which include: small squares and greenery along-
side roads and sidewalks, playgrounds, sports pitches,
cemeteries and areas with no clearly identified purpose;
N separate ‘Nature 2000’ areas have been added — these
are protection areas for wildfowl (Directive 2009/
147/EC), natural habitats and areas inhabited by wild
fauna and flora (Directive 92/43/EEC);
N ‘natural monuments’: a new group has been identified:
groups of trees, i.e. clusters of historical trees which
cannot be effectively presented given the map’s scale;
N ‘deep water wells’: other than those serving as water

intakes for residential and industrial purposes;

2.

second layer of information:
N the database of ‘soils susceptible to naturogenic and
farming-related denudation’ has been expanded with
information on slope classes (a division into two classes
has been used), the basis for class separation is the
susceptibility of land to denudation; depending on the
type of soil, this process is activated for slopes with an
inclination of 4 or 8u (Chief National Geodesist, 2005);
N information on the types of inundations has been
added to the database of ‘lands susceptible to rain and
storm flooding’;
N as far as developed areas are concerned, a division into
four categories has been made — these are: ‘built-up
areas’, including multi-storey clustered or dispersed
buildings, dispersed low-rise buildings, ‘industrial and

84

The Cartographic Journal

Visualisation of Environmental Changes

85

Figure 1. The proposed scope of content and visual solutions for a 1 : 10 000 sozological map

Table 1 Proposed thematic layers of the 1 : 10 000 sozological map, their attributes and data source.

Thematic layer

Attributes

I. Form of protection of the natural environment

Data source

Soil maps

Arable lands protected
Arable lands others
Meadows and pastures protected
Meadows and pastures others
Forests protected

Forests others
Shrublands
Arranged green areas

Garden plots
Other greenery

Border of national parks
Border of landscape parks
Border of buffer zones of national
and landscape parks
Border of protected landscape areas
‘Nature 2000’ areas

Nature reserves

Animated monuments of nature

In animated monuments of nature

Ecological lands
Nature and landscape grops
Documentation stations
Water intake points
Protection zones of water intake points
Deep water wells
Main subterranean water reservoirs
requiring particular protection

1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8

9
10

11
12
13

14
15

16

17

18

19
20
21
22
23
24
25

27

28
29

Regional State Forest Authorities,
digital forest maps, Georeference
Database of Topographic Objects

Field research, topographic maps,
Georeference Database of Topographic
Objects, orthophoto maps

Field research, Regional Environmental
Protection Authorities, topographic
maps, Georeference Database of
Topographic Objects

Protected items: soil protection; water
protection; seed stands; permanent
research and experimental areas; animal
refuges; resorts; areas located within
city limits
Ownership structure: public; private
Ownership structure: public; private
Shrubbery; low wood; dwarf pines
Parks; botanical and zoological gardens;
vegetation in sports, leisure and
palace facilities

Greenery alongside roads and sidewalks;
squares; playgrounds; sports pitches;
cemetaries
Name of the park
Name of the park

A, special biotopic protection areas;
B, special birds protection areas
F, faunistical; K, landscape; L, forest, N,
halophyte; P, inanimate nature; R, floristic;
S, steppe; T, peaty; W, water name of the
nature reserves
Single trees, clusters of rare plants, group
trees, tree alley
Erratic boulders; rocks; caves; caverns;
waterfalls; springs
Name of the ecological lands

Surface, subterranean

Field research, hydrographic maps

National Research Institute

26

Deposits of natural resources

Lands susceptible to naturogenic and
cultivation-related denudation

Landslides
Lands susceptible to rain
and storm flooding

ONO, requiring top-level protection
OWO, requiring high-level protection
W, hard coal; B, brown coal; T, peat;
N, rock-oil; G, natural gas; R, metal ores;
S, sulphur; L, rock salt; X, rock minerals;
I, layey raws; K, natural aggregates;
M, mineral waters

II. Degradation of elements of the natural environment
A. Degradation of the land surface
Slope classes:
4–8u, .8u

Inundated areas:
M, marine water (at high sea); R, river
water (river swelling, dry flood control
reservoirs); S, surface run-off water; U,
obstructed water run-off as a result of
economic activity; Z, blocked discharge
of subterranean water

Topographic maps, soil maps

National Research Institute
Field research

86

Table 1 Continued

Thematic layer

30

Built-up areas

31
32
33

34

35
36

37

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

53

54
55
56
57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

Industrial and warehousing areas
Communications areas
Other human-transformed areas

Parking lots

Multi-storey parking lots
Transportation terminals

Opencast operative

Opencast inoperative
Dumps operative
Dumps inoperative
Scope of post-output deformations
Embankments
Dykes
Cementaries
Storage areas of raw materials
Clusters of storage sites
Storage areas of fuels
Fuel storage sites
Petrol station
Fuel storage sites (inoperative)
Petrol station (inoperative)
Industrial wastes storage
areas (controlled)
Industrial wastes storage
areas (uncontrolled)
Storage areas of wastes controlled
Storage areas of wastes (uncontrolled)
Discharge areas of liquid wastes
Reservoirs of industrial waters

Types of degradated soils

Classes of forest damage

Degrading factors

Discharge of waste waters

Discharge of uncontrolled
waste waters
Exceeded physical
contamination indices
Exceeded chemical
contamination indices

Exceeded bacteriological
contamination indices
Contaminated marine
coastal waters

The Cartographic Journal

Data source

Field research, topographic
maps, orthophoto maps

Field research
Field research, topographic
maps, orthophoto maps

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates,
topographic maps

Field research, Chemical
and Agricultural Stations

Regional State Forest Authorities

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates,
hydrographic maps

Field research, hydrographic maps

Environmental Protection
Inspectorates, hydrographic maps

Attributes

Multi-storey clustered or dispersed
buildings, dispersed low-rise
buildings residential buildings,
commercial facilities

Railway junctions, reloading
terminals, airports, unused military
bases, post-industrial areas, clusters
of garages
Concrete or asphalt surface;
ground surface
Underground; surface
Garages and parking lots for trucks,
buses and other vehicles
After exploitation of resources:
B, building; C, chemically; E, power;
H, metallurgical
Numbers stand: relative high of
dumps or depth of opencast

Permanent; non-permanent; others

Industrial, agricultural, forest

Solid, liquid, gas

Liquid, gas, liquid and gas

W, extractive industry; C, chemical;
E, power; H, metallurgical; I, others

Municipal, agricultural, mixed, others

Industrial, municipal, agricultural
Area, point

B. Degradation of soils

Ga, alkalized; Ge, eroded; Gk,
acidified; Gp, dried up; Gs, salty;
Gt, toxic; Gw, watered

C. Degradation of forests

Woodlands with damaged tree stand:
Small, middle, high
Abiotic, biotic, anthropogenic
D. Degradation of surface waters
Fixed, periodic, salty, heated
K, municipal; P, industrial; R, agricultural;
M, mixed the size of the symbol depends
on the size of the discharge ranges:
,100, 100–1000, .1000 m3/24 hours
K, municipal; P, industrial; R, agricultural;
M, mixed
Color, opacity, flavour, temperature, taste

Biochemical and chemical oxygen demand,
oxidisability, dissolved oxygen, pH, nitrogen
compounds, total phosphorus, chlorides,
water hardness, alkalinity, content of sulphites,
manganese, iron, water-soluble gases, trace
elements, toxic substances
Coliform count, pathogenic bacteria

Visualisation of Environmental Changes

Table 1 Continued

Thematic layer

67
68

Dammed up surface waters
Artificial water reservoirs

87

Field research, Regional Water
Management Authority, topographic
maps, orthophoto maps,
hydrographic maps

Attributes

Data source

Area, point
H, fish breading ponds; P, fire
water reservoirs; R, reservoirs; W,
multi-purpose impounding reservoirs;
S, sports and leisure reservoirs; I, others

E, energetics; M, irrigation; U,
floodway; P, industrial; N, navigation

Dry impounding reservoirs
Channels

Loss of hydraulic bonds
Antropogenic disruption of the
hydrological regime of water courses
Beds of technically transformed
water courses
Underflows
Hydrotechnical facilities

Artificial raising of the mirror of
subterranean waters
Artificial lowering of the mirror
of subterranean waters
Areas susceptible to the infiltration
of subterranean
waters with contaminants
Scope of contaminated subterranean waters
Drained areas
Cone of depression

Industrial emitters

Industrial emitters of noxious odours
Group industrial emitters
Centres of low emission sources
of gasses and dusts
Heat emitters
Emitters of noise and vibrations
Excessive noise range
Zones of the approach and
take off aeroplanes
Exceeded permitted contents
of suspended dust
Exceeded admitted concentration of SO2

Motorway, expressway and other
national main roads
High speed railway
Pipelines
Elevated electromagnetic radiation

Other undertakings that may significantly
impact the natural environment

69
70

71
72

73

74
75

76

77

78

79
80
81

82

83
84
85

86
87
88
89

90

91

92

93
94
95

96

97

98

Groynes, wet dock, dams, breakwaters

E. Degradation of subterranean waters

Environmental Protection
Inspectorates, National Research
Institute, geological maps

F. Degradation of atmospheric air
Gasses, dusts the size of the symbol depends
on the size of the emission ranges: ,1000,
1000–5000, .5000 mg/year

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates

Point, line
Road, rail, airplane, industry

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates,
acoustic maps

G. Undertakings that may significantly impact the natural environment

Field research, topographic
maps, orthophoto maps

III. Combating the degradation of the natural environment

Desulphuring, dedusting

Line (high voltage lines), point
(transmitting stations,
transforming substations)
Area, point

R, recycling; B, biogass; K,
compost heap; S, combustion
B, biological; C, chemical; M,
mechanical; K, complex

Equipment for reducing the amount
of discharged pollutants
Acoustic screens

Wind protection strips

99
100 Utilisation of wastes

101

Savage treatment plants

102

Places subject to noise protection

A list of undertakings has been
included in the Regulation of
the Council of Ministers dated
9 November 2010.

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates
field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates,
acoustic maps
field research, orthophoto maps
Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates

Regulation of the Minister for
the Natural Environment, dated
12.06.2007, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates

88

Table 1 Continued

Thematic layer

103

Silent roads

104 Wildlife crossings
105 Wind farms
106
107

Range of sewage systems
Points of monitoring

108

Classes of quality of waters

109

Recultivation

110 Waste lands

The Cartographic Journal

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates,
acoustic maps
Field research

Field research, Environmental
Protection Inspectorates

Environmental Protection
Inspectorates

Attributes

Data source

Sanitary, storm, sanitary and storm
National, regional, local component
measured: surface and subterranean
waters, air, soils, forests
Very good, good, moderate, weak, bad

IV. Recultivation of the natural environment
Agricultural, water, forest, other
forms of recultivation

V. Waste lands

Naturogenic, anthropogenic

Field research

Field research

warehousing areas’, ‘communications areas’, as well as
‘other human-transformed areas’,
including railway
grounds, reloading terminals, airports, unused military
bases and post-industrial areas;
N the ‘parking lots’ category has been added to this level,
whereas the database has been enriched with fields
relating to parking lot surface, determining its perme-
ability, as well as ‘multi-storey parking lots’;
N the ‘transportation terminals’ category has also been
created, including garage and parking areas for trucks,
buses and other vehicles; corresponding information
has been added to database fields;
N the subgroup of ‘surface water degradation’ has been
expanded to include a class identifying places of
uncontrolled discharge of pollutants (industrial, muni-
cipal, agricultural and mixed-type);
N the group of symbols denoting excess values of
physical, chemical and bacteriological contamination
indices has been expanded with detailed information
on the nature of such contamination;
N the ‘artificial water reservoirs’ take into account the
function of a given reservoir; the same principle applies
to ‘channels’;
N the following items have been added to this information
level: ‘underflows’ and ‘hydrotechnical facilities’, includ-
ing river groynes, wet docks, water dams, breakwaters;
N the ‘subterranean water degradation’ group addition-
N the ‘atmospheric air degradation’ group additionally
features a ‘heat emitters’ class (cooling stacks);
N excessive noise range’ has been identified by means of
a limit line — in the database, this layer is broken
down by emission sources and limit ranges of road,
rail, airplane and industrial noise are identified;
N in the ‘undertakings that may significantly impact the
natural environment’, the layer of ‘elevated electromag-
netic radiation’ has been expanded to include such facili-
ties as transmitting stations and transforming substations;

ally features a ‘drained areas’ class;

3.

third layer of information — added content includes:
N ‘places subject to noise protection’ — this group
includes places which by virtue of relevant statutory

reducing surface;

regulations should not be exposed to elevated noise
level, such as schools, hospitals, care homes, places of
prolonged stay of children and adolescents;
N ‘silent roads’, i.e. roads with a special, porous noise-
N ‘wildlife crossings’, i.e. engineering structures taking the
form of overpasses or tunnels enabling wildlife to safely
cross highways, railways or roads of high traffic volume;
N information about sewage system, previously pre-
sented by means of a point mark, has been replaced
with a region;
N the database of the ‘monitoring points’ layer has been
extended to include information on the component
measured at a given point;
N a layer has been added describing water quality classes,
the sign colour serves to distinguish one of five classes
of the ecological condition of surface or subterranean
waters. The classification of the ecological condition of
waters is based on the Framework Water Directive
(2000/60/EC) and the regulations of the Minister
for the Natural Environment ensuing therefrom.

Figure 2 presents a fragment of the sozological map of the
city of Poznan´ made in two scales: map B has been provided
by the Head Ofﬁce of Geodesy and Cartography and it is
valid as of 2004. The same area is presented in map A, being
a proprietary work of the authors. Its content includes the
elements speciﬁed in the table above. The map has been
developed on the basis of aerial photographs and direct ﬁeld
visits in 2011.

SUMMARY

The experience gained while developing sozological maps in
areas subject to varying degrees of human pressure points out
to the need for improving the scale of such maps, particularly
in urban and industrial areas, as well as in other areas
characteristic for intense human activity. Reﬁning the scale
allows one to increase the map’s accuracy, degree of detail,
and scope of content, thus making the map more useful.

It is very important to precisely deﬁne each thematic
layer, because in a dynamically changing environment and
given the map’s scale, correct qualiﬁcation of certain areas

Visualisation of Environmental Changes

89

Figure 2.
(source: Chief National Geodesist, 2004)

(a) Fragment of the sozological map of the city of Poznan´ on a scale of 1 : 10 000. (b) The same area on a scale of 1 : 50 000

will be a frequent problem which may affect the analytical
works taking place at a later stage. It seems reasonable to
develop a manual ﬁnally deﬁning the content of the map,
the graphical form of the analog version and the database
structure for the digital version.

The natural environment is highly dynamic, and thus the
majority of phenomena presented on the natural environ-
ment map may undergo changes. It would therefore appear
proper to periodically conduct ﬁeld research and register in
databases information from various periods in order to

90

The Cartographic Journal

update and archive data. Keeping such a register would be
particularly useful for monitoring the natural environment,
for it would then be possible to track changes over time,
and determine the directions and dynamics of transforma-
tions taking place in the natural environment. Furthermore,
appropriate entries in attribute ﬁelds (e.g. date of updating,
legal basis) would make it possible to observe changes
taking place in the natural environment as a result of legal
and administrative actions. Thus, the structure of layers and
their attributes must be modiﬁed for each and every
legislative change pertaining to the protection of
the
natural environment.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Radzym Ławniczak is
a
graduate (1989) of Geo-
graphy Studies at Adam
Mickiewicz University in
Poznan´ (Poland). He is an
employee of the Institute
of Physical Geography and
Environmental Planning. In
2000, he obtained univer-
sity degree. He did a re-
search of Earth in the ﬁeld
of geography, concerning
his PhD thesis. His research
work
problems
connected with cartogra-
phy, GIS, the cartographic method of research and the
thematic cartography. He was also given an opportunity to
make a lot of thematic maps devoted to environmental
deterioration and protection in Poland. At the Faculty of
Geographical and Geological Sciences, of Adam Mickiewicz

includes

University, he lectures cartography, topography and the-
matic cartography.

REFERENCES

Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of

natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora.

Directive 2009/147/EC of The European Parliament and of
the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild
birds.

Directive 2000/60/EC of The European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 October 2000 on the establishing a framework for
the Community action in the field of water policy

Chief National Geodesist. (1997). Mapa sozologiczna w skali 1 : 50
000 w formie analogowej i numerycznej (Sozological Map on a
Scale of 1 : 50 000, in an Analogue and Digital Form), Gło´ wny
Urza˛d Geodezji i Kartografii.

Chief National Geodesist. (2005). Wytyczne Techniczne GIS-4.
Mapa Sozologiczna Polski w skali 1 : 50 000 w formie
(Technical guidelines GIS-4.
analogowej
Sozological Map of Poland, Scale of 1 : 50 000, in an Analogue
and Digital Form), Gło´ wny Urza˛d Geodezji i Kartografii.

i numerycznej

Chief National Geodesist. (2004). Mapa sozologiczna w skali 1 : 50
000, arkusz N-33-130-D Poznan´ (Sozological Map on a Scale
i
1 : 50 000,
Kartografii.

sheet N-33-130-D). Gło´ wng Urza¸d Geodeaji

Kraak, M. J. and Ormeling, F. (1999). Cartography: Visualisation of

Spatial Data, Pearson Education Limited.

Kozacki, L. and Z˙ ynda, S. (1992). ‘Problemy przestrzennej prezentacji
zmian i zagroz˙en´ s´rodowiska przyrodniczego’, Przegla˛d Geologiczny,
1, pp. 52–56.

Ławniczak, R. and Kubiak, J. (2009). ‘Cartographic presentation of
forms of protection and degradation of the natural environment:
sozological map on a scale of 1 : 50 000’, The Cartographic
Journal, 46, pp. 228–232.

Mazurski, K. R. (1998). Podstawy Sozologii. Kompendium Wiedzy
o Niszczeniu i Ochronie S´ rodowiska, Oficyna Wydawnicza
Oddziału Wrocławskiego PTTK, Wrocław.

Z˙ ynda, S. (1999). Polish Sozological Map at a scale 1 : 50 000, pp.

186–196, The Polish Cartography.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

