This article was downloaded by: [Purdue University]
On: 31 August 2014, At: 20:29
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Professor Oleg McNoleg's
guide to the successful use
of Geographical Information
Systems (Ten ways to say
nothing with GIS)
Published online: 09 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: (1998) Professor Oleg McNoleg's guide to the successful
use of Geographical Information Systems (Ten ways to say nothing with GIS),
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12:5, 429-430, DOI:
10.1080/136588198241725

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241725

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever

or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Purdue University] at 20:29 31 August 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 5, 429± 430

Guest Editorial

Professor Oleg M cNoleg’s guide to the successful use
of Geographical Information Systems
( Ten ways to say nothing with GIS )

1. Never supply a map title, a scale bar, a graticule, a North arrow, details of
the map projection or a legend. This greatly reduces the chances that any
map you produce can be misinterpreted (Globus and Raible 1992 ). If you
feel that the mapped region might still be recognizable then create the map
using a Polar projection (unless the study area is at one of the poles, in which
case use a Mercator projection). Clever use of colour and scale can also
detract from any information the map might still contain.

2. Never include any measures of sensitivity analysis, errors or uncertainty.
These indicate that you are a weak and gutless scientist who is not prepared
to stand up for your work. There are many ways to improve the accuracy of
results, such as by deleting or merging troublesome data. To this end, many
GIS now supply a wide variety of spatial interpolation methods, so you can
experiment until you get the result you require. The most e(cid:128) ective way to
ensure results are error free is to complete all analysis before data gathering
is allowed to begin. If in doubt as to how many data samples are required,
remember that a straight line can always be ® tted between two points on a
graph ( Fortune 1984).

3. Gather as much data as you can. You never know what variables might be
useful, so combine every last map you can get your hands on. Tobler’s ® rst
law of Geography states that `Everything is related to everything else ¼
’
( Tobler 1970 ) so when mapping the habitat niche of the Scottish Highland
Haggis (McNoleg 1996 ), do not forget to include the socio-demographics of
the Transvaal and satellite images of the Great Wall of China.

4. Use as large a variety of map scales as possible. Scales are additive, the more
scales are represented in your source data, the greater the range of scales that
the output can be applied over.

5. There is an old adage. `Measure with a micrometer, mark with chalk, cut
with an axe’. In GIS parlance this becomes. `Measure with di(cid:128) erential GPS,
mark on a 5 km grid, process with a Boolean overlay.’ In GIS, the converse
is more often true. `Take the results from a marketing phone survey, stand-
ardise variables with ¯ oating point precision, combine data using 20 000 lines
of code forming a sophisticated spatial interaction model.’

6. Do not waste your time checking your procedures. GIS are sophisticated
tools designed to ensure that no invalid operations can be performed on
the data by careless use. It is therefore impossible to make a mistake. Many
GIS can now also co-register datasets automatically and with in® nite
precision.

1365± 8816/98 $12´00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [Purdue University] at 20:29 31 August 2014 430

Guest editorial

8.

7. With your thumb nail, carefully scratch o(cid:128) the black cross hairs marked on
the digitizing cursor, since these visually interfere with your view of the
underlying map.
Store all of your remotely-sensed images as topological vector coverages,
since it is well known that coverages based on vectors are more accurate than
those based on raster grids. Additionally, store all of your topological datasets
in raster format because it is well known that map algebra operations are
executed more e(cid:129) ciently in this format.

9. Never read the manual. If a task you wish to perform is not immediately
obvious then this is a fault in the product design that should be reported
immediately to the technical support hotline. It is then your duty to alert
your fellow scientists to the problem, by repeatedly mailing a strongly-worded
complaint to all related newsgroups on the internet.

10. Avoid the expensive and often hazardous process of result validation. There
are only two possible outcomes from a validation exercise: ( i) the analysis is
correct, or (ii ) the validation is incorrect. Validation is a marketing ploy
concocted by an international consortium of retailers specialising in the supply
of clipboards, compasses, tents and insect repellent. If ® eld validation proves
to be unavoidable it should only be conducted by those experienced in survival
techniques (undergraduates).

References
Fortune ( 1984), The Unix `fortune’ program, AT&T Laboratories.
Globus, A., and Raible, E., (1992 ), 13 ways to say nothing with scienti® c visualisation. NASA

Ames Research Report RNR-92± 006, Mo(cid:128) ett Field California, USA.

McNoleg, O., (1996 ), The integration of GIS, remote sensing, expert systems and adaptive
co-kriging for environmental habitat modelling of the Highland Haggis using object
oriented,
fuzzy logic and neural network techniques. Computers and Geosciences,
22, 585± 588.

Tobler, W.,

(1970 ), A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.

Economic Geography, 46, 234± 240.

Oleg McNoleg
Brigadoon University of
L ongitudinal L earning,
School of Holistic Information T echnology,
Noplace, Neverland

Downloaded by [Purdue University] at 20:29 31 August 2014 