This article was downloaded by: [Mount St Vincent University]
On: 07 October 2014, At: 03:52
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Analysing cadastral systems
in uncertain situations: a
conceptual framework based
on soft systems theory
Michael Barry & Clarissa Fourie
Published online: 10 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Michael Barry & Clarissa Fourie (2002) Analysing cadastral
systems in uncertain situations: a conceptual framework based on soft systems
theory, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16:1, 23-40

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810110095039

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,

reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 1, 23± 40

Research Article

Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations: a conceptual
framework based on soft systems theory

MICHAEL BARRY and CLARISSA FOURIE
Department of Geomatics, University of Cape Town, Private Bag, Rondebosch
7700, Cape Town, South Africa; e-mail: mbarry@eng.uct.ac.za,
clarissa.fourie@paulaugustinus.com

(Received 30 November 2000; accepted 24 July 2001)

Abstract. Based on experiences in South Africa, a conceptual framework is
described which makes it possible to analyse how a cadastral system interacts
with other land management sub-systems in volatile, changing situations. Soft
systems theory, strategic management theory and existing cadastral theory under-
lie this framework. The soft systems approach, when applied to the cadastral (cid:142) eld,
makes it possible to move away from the conventional simplistic, hard inter-
ventionist, sub-system-focused design exercises and instead undertake holistic
analyses of complex situations, which include human behaviour and a range of
non-static land management sub-systems. It is also possible to analyse technical
processes from diŒerent points of view, or contexts, over time, which facilitates
more robust and sustainable cadastral systems’ design and management.

1.

Introduction
There is a paucity of substantive and methodological theory within the cadastral
discipline to conceptualize and evaluate a cadastral system in an uncertain, changing
situation. We argue that such a situation lends itself to systems thinking and systems
concepts, in particular soft systems thinking, as analysis of a cadastral system has
to encompass far more than merely the cadastral system itself. Owing to the increased
complexity of a changing situation, a broader investigation of the land management
system is required. This is necessary, (cid:142) rstly, to identify the factors that are key to
the successful achievement of particular land management objectives. Secondly,
factors that impede such achievement need to be identi(cid:142) ed. The third aspect that
needs to be identi(cid:142) ed is whether intervention is required in elements of the cadastral
system and/or in other components of the land management system.

A conceptual framework to analyse and evaluate a cadastral system in the context
of the broader system of land management was developed based on observations
during a period of substantial change in South Africa in the 1990s. During this
period, the hierarchy of sub-systems (e.g. the systems of
land tenure and land
administration) that de(cid:142) ne the requirements of the cadastral system was not clearly

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110095039

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 24

M. Barry and C. Fourie

distinguishable, and there were constantly changing emphases on the major
function (s) of the cadastral system by various role players at both national and
settlement level.

South Africa has served as a case study in that both authors have been participant
observers immersed in a rapidly changing situation. Observations were made at both
national and settlement level in South Africa. At the national level, both authors
participated in working groups to evaluate land tenure systems and alternative
cadastral structures and processes that were set up under the auspices of the minister
of land aŒairs in the 1990s. Settlement level research was conducted on a number of
case studies. These included two informal settlements where residents were scheduled
to be granted ownership of houses in a nearby development; two site-and-service
schemes where people occupied serviced cadastral parcels and they were awaiting
registration; an urban settlement where ownership had already been delivered to
residents; a rural restitution case where agricultural land was in the process of being
given back to people had been forcibly removed from the settlement by the apartheid
regime in the 1960s and a rural case where people who had not had access to land
were being granted ownership of land that they had occupied for a number of
generations. The (cid:142) rst author has been involved in the use of GIS in four of these
cases for various purposes. These included: supporting tenure upgrades, managing
the tenure system in settlements, managing the movement of people to new settle-
ments, and managing the delivery of ownership and housing subsidies to residents
(Mason et al. 1997, Barry 1999, Barry and Mayson 2000, Roux and Barry 2001 ).
Newspaper articles, observation of events by the second author during consulting
projects in a number of other countries in Africa and Southeast Asia, and discussions
with o(cid:141) cials and land professionals in other countries that have experienced some
form of revolution suggest that the framework has general application outside of the
South African situation.

We limit our discussion to the development of a conceptual framework, rather
than methodology, methods or techniques. A conceptual framework provides for
thinking about and understanding a particular situation. Within this framework, an
analyst selects a particular methodology, the guiding principles of method, to address
the situation. Having selected a methodology, the analyst discovers, develops and
selects methods, techniques and tools to tackle particular situations that arise within
the broader situation. Each particular situation may require diŒerent methods and
tools. The experience of Barry in analysing and comparing settlements in various
stages of development was that certain evaluative tools, such as the Technology
Acceptance Model and the Decomposed Theory of Planned Behaviour (Davis 1989,
Ajzen 1991, Taylor and Todd 1995 ), may be appropriate in one settlement but not
in another (Barry 1999).

The analysis of cadastral systems has conventionally utilized a framework based
on a static systems hierarchy where for example the land management system is at
the top of the hierarchy, with land administration being lower down, with the
cadastre being a sub-set of land administration (see (cid:142) gures 1 and 2 ). We are arguing
that the South African and international experience illustrates that this fundamental
intellectual construct is unsuitable during times of rapid change.

We proceed by de(cid:142) ning the concepts land management, land administration,
land tenure and cadastral system. Thereafter, we describe a number of problems that
have been encountered in the implementation of cadastral systems in developing
countries and some characteristics of uncertain situations that may lead to and

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

25

Figure 1. Cadastral system.

exacerbate such problems. We then detail the recent history of South Africa and use
this to illustrate an unstable situation and the key characteristics associated with
such instability, which in(cid:143) uence the cadastre. A conceptual framework based on soft
systems thinking is then presented for the evaluation of cadastral systems during
unstable periods.

It is argued that this framework enables an analyst to build a holistic approach
that incorporates all the systems and sub-systems usually associated with the land
management hierarchy, but which also includes other elements. Firstly, it accommo-
dates complex situations, including human behaviour. Too often situations are over-
simpli(cid:142) ed for technical project management purposes leading to incorrect decisions
and quick (cid:142) xes. This is especially true in developing countries undergoing change.
Secondly, it widens the scope of analysis and evaluation by including the external
environment within which the system works; and also by focusing on the whole land
management system, and not just the sub-system of the cadastre. Thirdly, the frame-
work allows the analyst to conceptualize the situation from a number of diŒerent
frameworks of orientation. This is important for a (cid:142) eld known for its wide range of
land professionals and the vested interests associated with the range. For example,
a land information manager would (cid:142) nd the framework equally as useful as a land
surveyor, politician or solicitor. Finally, it allows a more robust understanding of
how land management sub-systems change relative to each other over time, under
particular conditions, and the eŒect that this has on the cadastre on the one hand,
and the management of land information in general on the other hand.

Against this background, reference is made to the cadastral literature describing
the hierarchy frequently utilized for the analysis of the cadastre (Larsson 1991,
Nichols 1993, Barnes 1994), indicating how it could be used to understand the South
African cadastre at a particular moment. However, as history changed, so it became
less useful as a conceptual framework. For example, in an informal settlement at a
particular time, the land policy of the country was set aside by dominant local

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 26

M. Barry and C. Fourie

factions. This resulted in an alteration to the usual hierarchy of legal boundary
evidence, by the introduction of local forms of evidence (Barry 1999). We show that
in this situation, by using our conceptual framework, the analyst/designer would
conclude that credible land policy and sound governance would need to be put in
place as a priority, rather than (cid:142) rst attempting to ‘(cid:142) x the cadastre.’ Finally, we
conclude that soft systems thinking, when applied to the cadastral (cid:142) eld, makes it
possible to move away from the conventional simplistic, hard interventionist, sub-
system-focused design exercises.

2. Core concepts

There are diverse, overlapping de(cid:142) nitions for many terms that fall within the
umbrella of land management. In the absence of universally accepted de(cid:142) nitions of
certain core concepts that are germane to this discourse, we provide operational
de(cid:142) nitions for the terms land management, land administration, land tenure and
cadastral system. We distinguish land management and land administration from
one another in that management is viewed as a strategic system, and administration
as a functional or operational system. In broad concept, land management is a
system embodying the policy development and strategic planning processes related
to land. Land administration on the other hand comprises the sub-systems that
actualize strategies to implement land policy, and other related policies, within the
land management system (Barry 1999). Land tenure, on the other hand, is a system
incorporating the way in which land is de(cid:142) ned and held by societies. According to
Nichols (1993), tenure is a system of rights, responsibilities and restraints people
have with respect to land. In this context, tenure comprises a matrix of social,
political, physical and legal relationships that support and negate the holding and
use of land by individuals and groups (Barry 1999).

A cadastral system is likely to serve the requirements of a multitude of land
administration sub-systems such as those portrayed in (cid:142) gure 2. The institutional
structure, the process design and the information products of a particular cadastral
system, are likely to have a historical bias toward supporting tenure security (a
juridical cadastre) or taxation ((cid:142) scal cadastre). However, nowadays, cadastral
information that is derived from a system’s primary purpose, (cid:142) scal or juridical, is
likely to serve a number of other purposes. Synthesizing the systems approach of
Checkland (1999) with existing cadastral theory (e.g. Dale and McLaughlin 1988,
Barnes 1990, Hoogsteden and van Zyl 1992), a cadastral system is de(cid:142) ned to comprise
the sub-systems of adjudication, boundary de(cid:142) nition and demarcation, surveying,
registration, and dispute resolution (see (cid:142) gure 1). The nature of the interaction
between these sub-systems is manifested in four factors. These being, (cid:142) rstly, the
formal and informal institutions that underlie these sub-systems; secondly, the process
and structure of communication and information management; thirdly, the organiza-
tion of power, and the knowledge, skills and capacity particular to its human
resources; and, fourthly, the technical resources to operate the processes and manage
the information (Barry 1999).

3. Problems with cadastral systems

A number of attempts to implement cadastral systems in the developing world
have not produced the desired outcomes. Individualization of tenure, cadastral
systems, and land titling and registration can lead to confusion and create more

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

27

uncertainty in a land tenure system than existed before these processes were
implemented.

In the rural context, individual tenure systems upheld by titles have often been
implemented with the object of improving agricultural outputs in developing coun-
tries. Drawing on Shivji (1998, 1995 as cited by Payne 1997 ), Bruce et al. (1994 ),
Barry (1999), Barry and Fourie (2001) and Lawrence (1984), the following problems
can occur:

the process of titling and tenure individualization creates confusion and the
powerful and more in(cid:143) uential get themselves registered as owners or long-term
leaseholders to the disadvantag e of others;
land registers and cadastral maps do not re(cid:143) ect reality on the ground;
land markets do not emerge, or they do not emerge on the scale expected, or
informal markets emerge which discourage the use of land as security for credit;
land is held increasingly for speculative purposes, and the people whom a
particular development project is intended to bene(cid:142) t are marginalized;
registration does not increase the demand for agricultural credit; and
titling often works against the interests of women and children and the process
of registration can legally extinguish de facto rights which existed before a
cadastral system was implemented.

As with the rural cases mentioned above, attempts to apply land registration and
cadastral systems to urban informal settlement situations have often not been success-
ful in the eyes of land administrators. Residents in a particular settlement may hold
positive attitudes to cadastral systems and the potential bene(cid:142) ts that might accom-
pany them. However, a range of complex, interrelated social, political, economic,
legal and physical factors might persuade them not to use the legal cadastral system.
As with rural cases, in the urban context, informal land markets may supersede the
formal market and powerful individuals such as gangsters, warlords and loan sharks
may seize control over the land tenure system (Barry 1999).

The result for the individual is that land tenure security is diminished and, owing
to this uncertainty, land in aŒected areas has little or no value as security for credit
(Barry 1999). Based on Manona’s (1987) observations, this may discourage people
in aŒected areas from investing in their homes. Those who do have money may
leave these areas to purchase homes elsewhere and the areas are likely to become
slums.

4. Uncertain situations

The above situations may be exacerbated by factors aŒecting sound, stable
governance. Events in a number of countries which have undergone substantial post-
colonial change or experienced some form of political revolution suggest that the
following are some of the factors that may impact on the eŒectiveness of the cadastral
system in a rapidly changing, uncertain situation:

lack of land policy and land information policy and/or little coherence between
land-related policies;
lack of regulatory frameworks and legislation to implement policy;
lack of administrative capacity,
revolutionary change in administrative structures and personnel;

funding and substantial post

lack of

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 28

M. Barry and C. Fourie

corruption (evidence in the land registry can be changed) and lack of
transparency in the aŒairs of state;
abuse of power and intimidation by the State, the military and powerful
individuals which may be manifested in arbitrary expropriation of land;
war lordism, where territory is associated with a war lord and rights to land
of whatever type are secure only based on an association with the war lord;
land invasions because of a combination of circumstances such as land short-
ages for indigenous people and/or the poor and/or people who have been
pushed oŒthe land earlier;
destruction of infrastructure such as cadastral records, geodetic records and
geodetic monuments during and after revolutionary activity;
inability of the state to enforce evidence registered in the cadastre;

The above factors may exist in diŒerent forms at diŒerent times. South Africa

provides an indication as to how this progression can materialize.

5. South Africa: an illustration of an unstable situation

South Africa’s recent history is an example of a cadastral system in an unstable
situation. The country has been undergoing a rapid substantial social, political and
economic transformation since the late 1980s and particularly in the 1990s. Where
previously political power was held by a racial oligarchy, South Africa became a
non-racial constitutional democracy in 1994.

To illustrate the context in which substantial change can occur, we describe a
number of events and factors that impacted on the management of land and on the
cadastral system at diŒerent stages of this transition. In summary, during an initial
phase from 1990 to 1994, the power of government to manage the situation was
severely curtailed. There was uncertainty as to the set of land tenure systems that
should be formally recorded and legally supported, and uncertainty as to the role of
the cadastral system in general. After 1994, in a second phase after the change of
government, the level of uncertainty progressively diminished. At various stages in
this second phase of the transition there were policy and legislation vacuums while
old laws and policies were being repealed, new policies were being formulated and
new laws promulgated. Major organizationa l restructuring of provincial and local
government occurred which incorporated a rede(cid:142) nition of the geographical jurisdic-
tions of land administration organizations, the redeployment of personnel and the
replacement of personnel. This period of change was characterized by capacity
problems in local and provincial government. Throughout the 1990s, the power of
government to uphold law and order was severely curtailed. There was an initial
considerable upsurge in political violence during the early part of the 1990s. Whereas
politically motivated violence subsided after the 1994 elections, the incidence of
violent crime remained high.

South Africa has changed from a system of power being held exclusively in the
hands of an ethnic white minority to a non-racial democracy as a result of a
negotiated settlement to a low-key revolution. Brie(cid:143) y, a number of land acts (e.g.
RSA 1913, RSA 1936, RSA 1950, RSA 1966) removed black Africans’ rights to own
land outside of certain areas, which ultimately comprised 13% of the surface area
of the country. Outside of these areas, black Africans and eventually other people
of colour were disenfranchised (Pampallis 1991 ).

Resistance to this racial organization of society ultimately forced the government

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

29

to reach a negotiated settlement. In the 1980s the intensity and variety of revolution-
ary activity increased. The African National Congress (ANC) adopted a strategy to
make the country ungovernable. A series of strikes, mass protest actions and violent
civic unrest characterized the decade (Pampallis 1991, Liebenberg 1993). Moreover,
ANC guerilla activity rose from 20 actions per year in 1980 to an average of
approximatel y 200 per year between 1986 and 1989 (Pampallis 1991). Blacks who
were perceived to cooperate with government during this period were subjected to
violent intimidation, and many were murdered (Liebenberg 1993, Barry 1999 ).

Some initial changes occurred in the political system in the 1980s. However, the
catalyst for substantial, rapid change was the unbanning of political organizations
such as the African National Congress (ANC) and the Pan-Africanist Congress
(PAC) on 2 February 1990, and the release of political prisoners. Thereafter followed
a 4-year period of negotiations that culminated in the country’s (cid:142) rst fully democratic
national and provincial elections in April 1994.

The transition to democracy involved a substantial transformation of South
African society. These changes related to redressing imbalances in access to opportun-
ities, resources and power that the majority of the population had not enjoyed during
the colonial and apartheid eras.

One indicator of the level of turbulence was the level of political violence. The
transition period from the unbanning of political organisations to immediately after
the 1994 elections was, in the authors’ observation, the most turbulent, while negoti-
ations over a new political dispensation between diŒerent stakeholders was underway.
A characteristic of this period was a substantial increase in political violence between
organizations that had been opposed to the State. For example, between 1985 and
1989, when states of emergency had been imposed by the state, 5390 people died in
politically related violence (average of 1348 per year). In the transition period of
rapid change from 1990 to shortly after the national elections in 1995, 17066 people
died in politically related deaths (average 3413 per year). As the country stabilized
after the elections, the (cid:142) gure had dropped to 356 politically related deaths in 1998
(South African Institute of Race Relations 2000). The period was also characterized
by other forms of mass protest such as strikes, and mass demonstrations .

During the initial period of negotiation between 1990 and 1994, the power and
legitimacy of the State to enforce law and order in certain situations was severely
curtailed. As an example relating to land administration and land tenure, there were
a number of land invasions in urban areas, which the state did not, or could not,
forcefully prevent. Forceful prevention would have had both political and racial
implications, something which both central and local government wished to avoid
(SaŒ1996 ). In such situations local government was eŒectively dysfunctional and
unable to carry out its administrative mandate in areas where land invasions had
taken place. Power was (cid:142) rmly held by certain factions within groups of land invaders
(Barry 1999).

At the start of the second phase at the time of the national and provincial
elections in 1994, the second tier of government was fundamentally reorganized,
spatially and institutionally. Areas of jurisdiction changed. In place of a structure of
four provinces, the four ‘independent’ TBVC states (Transkei, Bophuthatswana,
Ciskei and Venda) and a set of seven self-governing homelands, nine new provinces
were created. Substantial restructuring of local government at municipal level fol-
lowed local government elections in May 1996, and metropolitan level restructuring
is still underway. These changes caused a major disruption in the eŒectiveness of
provincial and local government for a period of time.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 30

M. Barry and C. Fourie

Another factor that aŒected the service levels of government during this period
was a strategy to substantiall y change the demographi c pro(cid:142) le of the civil service.
Many o(cid:141) cials were oŒered, and accepted, severance packages in order to make the
civil service more representative of the country’s demographi c pro(cid:142) le. Gaps in skills
and knowledge in certain key positions occurred whilst new people became accus-
tomed to their new positions in new organizationa l structures. As a result of redeploy-
ment and change of personnel, many of the administrative staŒwere unfamiliar with
many of the substantive and procedural issues relating to diŒerent land legislation
in their new jurisdictions.

In the initial phase between 1990 and 1994, the National Party government made
changes while negotiations were taking place, for example the majority of the racially
based land laws were repealed (RSA 1991). In the second phase, the new ANC
government formulated new policies and legislation. Some relevant events in this
second phase were South Africa’s constitution was published in 1996 (RSA 1996)
and land tenure policy was published in 1997 (RSA 1997). A major component of
this policy is a land reform programme, which has three broad objectives. These are:
(1) to redistribute land holdings and to make land accessible to those who were
denied access to land under the previous regime; (2) to provide restitution to those
who had land rights removed under racially based legislation; and (3) to reform land
tenure itself (RSA 1997 ).

6. The South African cadastral system in a changing environment

In this volatile environment of rapid change, conventional methods of evaluating
the cadastral system and its sub-systems, such as cost-bene(cid:142) t analysis (McLaughlin
1975 ), were found to be unsuitable (Barry 1999). International authorities have
extolled the technical quality of South Africa’s land registration and cadastral sur-
veying systems (Simpson 1976). However, in the early 1990s questions were raised
about the ability of these systems to support the immediate and long-term needs of
the country. This concern was raised in professional meetings, public debates and in
working groups organized by government to explore diŒerent alternatives for land
tenure, cadastral surveying and land registration in this changing environment.

At a fundamental level, the need for registration and cadastral surveying at all
was challenged on the basis of these systems being unsuited to mirroring de facto
land tenure practices in both urban and rural areas. Moreover, although the technical
quality of the existing cadastral system was recognized, it was challenged as being
too expensive to meet the demands of the majority of South Africa’s population,
and it was seen as being inaccessible to most people. Therefore, part of the challenge
in evaluating the cadastral system, was to establish, not only whether the system
could deliver services which were wanted by the greater population, but also to
engineer an aŒordable system that provides quality services.

The (cid:142) rst author embarked on a study of the long-term eŒectiveness of the
informal settlements and legally
cadastral system in Cape Town. A number of
formalised settlements in Cape Town were used as case studies to evaluate the
eŒectiveness of a cadastre during transition. Given the background of a country in
transition as described above, a range of questions had to be addressed in the
research, as it was clear at a very early stage that the conventional structure and
goals of a cadastral system did not always apply.

There were two main interest groups that had to be taken into account in the
study. The (cid:142) rst group comprised government and other institutions that place

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

31

demands on the cadastral system (e.g. (cid:142) nance houses), decide the systems’ purposes,
design and manage the system, and use cadastral information as an input into other
sub-systems of
land administration (e.g. (cid:142) scal management) . The second group
comprised the people who should bene(cid:142) t directly from the cadastral system, who,
in South Africa’s case of a juridical cadastral system, are the landholders who want
tenure security.

It was apparent from the behaviour of o(cid:141) cials, politicians and other land tenure
stakeholders that the (cid:142) rst group’s requirements of the cadastral system were not
clear, nor were they homogeneous. Statements by diŒerent people re(cid:143) ected con(cid:143) icting
beliefs about land management, land administration and the cadastral system. In
addition, their requirements changed over time. There were shifts in thinking relating
to factors that de(cid:142) ne the purposes of the cadastral system. These factors include
policy, legislation, land taxation, land tenure, and administrative structures.

A challenge relating to the second group was to establish if existing registration
and cadastral surveying processes were appropriate in upholding proposed systems
of land tenure as part of the land reform programme. For example, did residents of
informal settlements really desire individual freehold titles? If so, how credible were
the systems of land registration and (cid:142) xed cadastral boundaries in upholding these
rights? What other systems were being used or might be used to uphold land tenure?
What would be the long term social, economic, legal and administrative impacts if
these other systems were used in parallel with the cadastral system?

There are three major challenges in performing such an evaluation. Firstly, what
form should the process of evaluation take? Secondly, what are the relevant questions
that should be asked about the cadastral system? Thirdly, given continual change,
for how long is a particular question relevant, and which questions should be
regarded as being of primary importance at a particular time? The theoretical
framework, informed by (cid:142) eld work, was developed to deal with these questions and
in that way supply a robust evaluation framework during times of change.

7. Systems thinking

A system can be de(cid:142) ned as a collection of parts or elements that interact with
one another to function as a whole, thus showing properties of the whole, rather
than properties of the component parts (Smuts 1926, KauŒman 1980, Checkland
1999 ). The philosophy underlying systems thinking is that a particular problem or
phenomenon should be de(cid:142) ned in terms of an irreducible whole. The components
of this whole may be analysed individually but (cid:142) nally it is the whole that should be
the focus of analysis (Checkland 1999). In analysing problem situations, it is di(cid:141) cult
for individuals to visualize the whole pattern of change in a system, because they
are only a component part in the larger systems of human endeavour. Analysts have
a tendency to focus on snapshots of isolated parts of the system, and consequently
the deepest problems (often) do not get solved (Senge 1990).

Systems may be classi(cid:142) ed as hard or soft. Hard systems thinking originated in
engineering solutions to technical problems. Hard systems thinking assumes that
problems can be formulated by the making of a choice between alternative means
of achieving a known end. Hard problems have clearly de(cid:142) ned desirable goals (e.g.
to manufacture a motor vehicle), and are characterized by these goals, while soft
problems do not have clear goals. The hard systems engineering approach involves
a series of steps involving problem de(cid:142) nition, choosing objectives, analysing alternat-
ive systems, prototyping, and systems development and engineering (Checkland

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 32

M. Barry and C. Fourie

1999 ). The hard systems approach may give rise to a project with clearly de(cid:142) ned
objectives and deliverables and a de(cid:142) ned project completion date.

It is this notion of distinct, achievable goals that makes the hard systems approach
inadvisable when analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations. Problem de(cid:142) ni-
tion is in itself a major problem, project objectives are often not achievable, and
consequently projects cannot be completed within the stipulated time. For example,
a number of projects in Cape Town where land rights in a number of informal
settlements were meant to be formalized by the end of 1998 have not reached (cid:142) nality,
land
largely due to complex, continually changing social dynamics. In a rural
restitution case, there is a possibility that much of the project may be abandoned.

Checkland (1999) contends that in contrast to hard problems, soft problems
often have obscure goals. Moreover, if goals can be identi(cid:142) ed, they may be in con(cid:143) ict
with one another. It is not always possible to design a system that is necessarily
appropriate or in fact desired. Unstructured or soft problems are manifest in a feeling
of unease but which cannot be explicitly stated.

According to Checkland, soft systems methodology expresses the situation in
which a perceived problem exists in terms of structure and processes and the relation
between the two, rather than as a clearly de(cid:142) ned problem. Moreover in soft systems,
history always changes the agenda.
‘The contents of such systems are so multi-
various and the in(cid:143) uences to which they are subject so numerous that the passage
of time always modi(cid:142) es the perception of the problem... . Such perceptions of the
problems are always subjective and they change with time.’ Consequently, unstruc-
tured problems should be viewed as conditions to be alleviated, rather than problems
to be solved. In attempting to alleviate such a situation, the analyst should focus on
continually making incremental improvements in terms of the structure and processes
underlying the situation (Checkland 1999).

Soft systems theory provides a useful framework for understanding and analysing
land management and cadastral systems during a period of rapid change. We argue
that the salient feature of soft systems theory, for the purpose of analysing cadastral
systems, is that, (cid:142) rstly, it accommodates complex situations. Human activity is
complex. Attempts to oversimplify situations for project de(cid:142) nition and management
purposes can result in incorrect assumptions about the processes and structures that
underlie a particular situation. The use of soft systems theory precludes such over-
simpli(cid:142) cation and prevents inappropriate interventions, which may merely attempt
to ‘(cid:142) x the problem’. To understand wholly a complex situation, an analyst may need
to conceptualize a number of diŒerent models of what constitutes the diŒerent
systems and sub-systems in a particular situation and how they interact. (S)he then
adopts the particular model(s) that best suits the objectives of the particular analysis
at that particular time. Secondly, because the structure of the interaction between
sub-systems is likely to change over time, conceptual models of a particular system
need to be constructed and analysed continually.

Many of the problems mentioned earlier in implementing cadastral systems is
often the failure of system designers and managers to appreciate the social and
political complexity of the situations in which cadastral systems operate. Cadastral
systems, or sub-systems thereof (e.g. land registration) , should be viewed as only one
of a range of systems that need to function eŒectively to achieve broader land
management objectives. As indicated earlier, during the transition in South Africa
broad questions were raised about the appropriateness of the cadastre. However, in
the authors’ observation, initially these questions were not raised with a sense of

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

33

clearly identi(cid:142) ed objectives for the cadastral system. Also, the nature of the questions
changed over time. For example in the most volatile period in the early 1990s, in
various land management forums, questions were raised as to the need for land
registration and cadastral surveying at all. Such fundamental questions were seldom
raised after the 1994 elections. In this latter, more stable, epoch, in forums in which
the authors were involved, the focus became what tenure systems the cadastral
system should support rather than if it should exist at all. Furthermore, later/
additional areas addressed by government were, what cadastral surveying, land
registration and information management processes should be developed to support
the land reform and land restitution strategies outlined in the land policy (RSA
1997 ). That is, there was a continually changing perception of the cadastral system
by various actors over time. From another angle, these diŒerent perceptions could
also be understood as the actors having diŒerent ‘frames of orientation’.

In analysing and evaluating a particular situation, it is necessary to develop an
understanding of the interrelationships between diŒerent systems. These inter-
relationships may be a purely intellectual construction of a situation; the systems
themselves may not physically exist in reality. According to Cook (1994): ‘A funda-
mental starting point in modern general systems theory is that a system can have a
number of representations, depending on the ‘‘frames of orientation’’ or paradigms
of diŒerent observers. A ‘‘frame of orientation’’ is the means whereby an observer is
oriented intellectually with observations of worldly phenomena.’ It follows that a
frame of orientation is context dependent, and diŒerent observers will understand a
system such as land management or a cadastral system diŒerently, depending on the
context of a particular situation and the observer’s own thinking. This is very true
for the cadastral (cid:142) eld where cadastral system designers working in the (cid:142) eld are
confronted by the diŒerent logic of the landholding populace who are expected to
bene(cid:142) t from using the cadastre, and that of other land professionals and policy
makers. These include politicians, land lawyers, planners, registry staŒ, surveyor
general’s staŒ, local government administrators and private-sector land surveyors.

A means of developing such an intellectual

framework to understand the
relationship between systems is to create a hierarchy of systems, sub-systems and
environments. This hierarchy assists an analyst in conceptualizing which systems
create requirements for, or in(cid:143) uence the character of a particular system being
analysed. Checkland (1999) refers to these requirements or characteristics as the
emergent properties of a system. Emergent properties are the properties that are
meaningful only when attributed to the whole system, not to its component activities
and their structure (Checkland 1999 ).

In conceptualizing a situation, the analyst should establish a de(cid:142) nition of what
constitutes the whole system to be analysed, what constitutes the environment outside
of this ‘whole’ and what can be assumed to be a low-level component of this whole.
According to Checkland, in the formal systems model, environment is what lies
outside the system boundary, and a component is a part of a system that is assumed
to be unchangeable (Checkland 1999 ). In an analyst’s intellectual construction of a
hierarchy comprising a system and its sub-systems, what is important to note on the
one hand is the diŒerence between a system and a component that is not considered
a system; and on the other hand the diŒerence between a higher level system and
an environment. Systems and sub-systems can be engineered. The analyst has su(cid:141) -
cient power and in(cid:143) uence to do this. If analysis is pressed to lower and lower levels
in greater detail, then below sub-systems and sub-sub-systems , etc. will eventually

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 34

M. Barry and C. Fourie

be found items which, from an analyst’s view of a particular situation, are not systems
at all but only system components. Conversely, an environment is a higher level
entity, which in the analyst’s judgement cannot be engineered. The distinction being
that an environment is something that may hopefully be in(cid:143) uenced, whereas a wider
system can in principle be engineered in trying to achieve a speci(cid:142) c objective
(Checkland 1999).

The notion of what constitutes an unstable situation and a stable situation needs
to be clari(cid:142) ed in terms of systems thinking. General systems thinking assumes that
systems exist for long, stable periods where changes are minor and modi(cid:142) cations to
the system oscillate around some stable, static state or trend. Substantial change
occurs rapidly as a system progresses from one state to another. Oscillations in the
system are large and varied during this process. Thereafter the system reaches a new,
but characteristically diŒerent, stable state where oscillations in the system are minor
(Kaufman 1980, Checkland 1999).

The period of short rapid substantial change that occurred in South Africa during
its transformation , was the research focus of the (cid:142) rst author. Soft systems theory
allows the analyst to evaluate such complex situations using diŒerent frames of
orientation, which change over time.

8. Conceptual framework of land management in a stable situation

A conventional land management systems hierarchy in a stable situation (see
is diŒerent from the land management system viewed from the
(cid:142) gure 2 below)
perspective of a cadastral system analyst in a volatile, changing situation (see (cid:142) gure 3).
The conventional structure of the land management systems hierarchy (see
(cid:142) gure 2) follows a commonly used format (e.g. Larsson 1991, Nichols 1993, Barnes
1994 ) to depict the conceptual relationships and interaction between the various
land management sub-systems. Most authors use slightly diŒerent representations
of these systems hierarchies, but in terms of the work of Cook (1994) and Checkland
(1999) mentioned earlier, such diŒerent representations fall within the ambit of
systems thinking.

In a stable situation the system of land policy formulation and development
provides strategic direction to the management of land (see (cid:142) gure 2). Ideally, policy
provides the vision, the objectives and the strategic framework for the management
and administration of land.

Figure 2. Land management system in a stable situation.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

35

Embedded within the land administration system portrayed in (cid:142) gure 2 are a
number of sub-systems such as those relating to the administration of land taxation,
land tenure, utilities, transportatio n and the natural, social and economic environ-
ments. Conventionally the cadastral system is depicted as being embedded within
one of these sub-systems of land administration, such as land tenure (see (cid:142) gure 2).
It is depicted according to three main factors, these being: (cid:142) rstly, the primary
purpose(s) of the cadastral system (e.g. (cid:142) scal or juridical); secondly, the existing
institutional structure of land administration and the cadastral system; and, thirdly,
the structure of the information (cid:143) ows between the diŒerent systems and sub-systems.
There is not a generic model to position the cadastral system within the land
administration system hierarchy portrayed in (cid:142) gure 2. Conventionally, the cadastral
system serves most of the land administration sub-systems. DiŒerent analysts in
diŒerent situations will construct the cadastral system itself and a systems hierarchy
that includes the cadastral system diŒerently within this framework, drawing on the
elements in both (cid:142) gure 1 and (cid:142) gure 2. For example, in South Africa, historically, the
primary function of the cadastral system was the administration of formal land
tenure. The institutional structure of the system, the activities and the information
(cid:143) ows were designed around the cadastral surveying and land registration systems.
In situations where the cadastral system could be deemed to be eŒective, the proper-
ties that emerge from the cadastral system were a land tenure system that in the
authors’ observation was perceived by homeowners and (cid:142) nancial institutions to be
secure. It was primarily a juridical system, but the information derived from the
cadastral system forms the basis of a local land taxation system, as well as providing
for general administration of the built environment. There is interaction between the
cadastral system and all the other land administration sub-systems portrayed in
(cid:142) gure 2.

In a stable situation, it can be assumed that the conceptual map in (cid:142) gure 2
accurately portrays the operation of the hierarchy of the diŒerent systems that
comprise land management and administration. Policies are assumed to be stable,
largely integrated and changes to them are incremental. The demands placed upon
the cadastral system by the higher level systems of land management and land
administration are served by the requirements of all the sub-systems of land admin-
istration. The objectives of the cadastral system and the various tasks that are
performed in terms of these objectives are de(cid:142) ned by these land administration
sub-systems.

The authors’ experience in South Africa in the last decade and in other changing
situations in developing countries has shown that using a rigid systems hierarchy to
analyse the requirements of a cadastral system, such as that portrayed in (cid:142) gure 2, is
inappropriate during times of change. Instead, the challenge to the analyst during
these periods is: (1) how to construct a robust conceptual framework for the systems
hierarchy; (2) how to understand the role of the cadastral system; and (3) how to
intervene in the diŒerent systems and sub-systems which make up land management
at appropriate times. In conducting research to evaluate the eŒectiveness of the
South African cadastral system, speci(cid:142) cally in the urban fringe of the city of Cape
Town, it was found that the above conventional conceptual model depicting the
interaction between the cadastral system and other land management sub-systems
was inadequate (Barry 1999). An alternative conceptual framework needed to be
developed, which is described below.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 36

M. Barry and C. Fourie

9. Land management in an unstable situation

Based on the conceptual framework outlined above, an analyst’s perspective of
the land management systems’ hierarchy, in unstable situations, should include the
macro environment and two main sub-systems, namely the internal system and the
task system (see (cid:142) gure 3).

Adapting and extending work relating to corporate strategy formulation and
organizationa l analysis of Dill (1957) Aguiler (1967) and Fahey (1994), the macro-
environment is de(cid:142) ned as comprising a blend of elements commonly listed in descrip-
tions of organizationa l environment analysis. These elements are the social, political,
legal, physical, technological and economic milieu. In terms of the earlier discussion
on soft systems, the macro-environmen t is considered to be a set of systems that a
cadastral system analyst is unable to engineer. Nevertheless, (s)he may be able to
in(cid:143) uence these systems.

The internal system comprises the various sub-systems that make up the cadastral
system, such as adjudication, boundary de(cid:142) nition and demarcation, surveying, regis-
tration, dispute resolution and information management. The task system sits further
up the hierarchy in the land management system and comprises a number of
sub-systems that lay down the requirements of the cadastral system. These task
sub-systems are land policy, land tenure and land administration.

Whereas in a conventional depiction of these systems that make up the task
system in (cid:142) gure 3, policy is at the top of the hierarchy followed by land administration
and then land tenure at the bottom (see (cid:142) gure 2), we place these as equivalents.
Conceptually this is necessary to enable the analysis of these task-system sub-systems
during change. These task-system sub-systems may continually alter their position

Figure 3. Land management system in an unstable situation.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

37

in a systems hierarchy. For example, in an informal settlement at a particular point
in time, the land policy of the country may be swept aside and replaced by an
alternative local settlement-level land policy dominated by factions within the settle-
ment, or within local government. This may result in alterations, (cid:142) rstly to the de facto
rules and regulations used in the settlement, and secondly to the hierarchy of evidence
used in adjudicating disputes over interests in land, with both legal and informal
boundary evidence being used (Barry 1999).

If one was utilizing a conventional conceptual framework of a hierarchy in this
situation, focused on ‘(cid:142) xing the cadastre’ for use in informal settlements, one might
make alterations by adapting the cadastre to suit the settlement, and then apply it
at national level, based of course on a suitable number of case studies. In this
scenario the cadastral designer would alter the country’s hierarchy of legal evidence,
in relation to boundaries, to admit other forms of local legal evidence.

However, if one is applying our soft systems conceptual framework, it is more
likely that conclusions will be reached that ‘(cid:142) xing the cadastre’ is not the issue.
Instead the analyst/designer would be able to identify that the issue to be addressed
is that land policy is being developed at local settlement level or perhaps regional
level, and that credible national land policy, representing settlement-level demands,
but not necessarily re(cid:143) ecting their practices, needs (cid:142) rst to be put in place, together
with a credible governance structure. Only at this stage would it be possible to
reassess the role of the cadastre to see if it needs ‘(cid:142) xing’, and whether the hierarchy
of evidence needs altering. That is, local alterations in the hierarchy of evidence,
with the introduction of informal and local forms, are primarily an indicator of
inadequate land policy and/or governance, and are not necessarily a re(cid:143) ection of
existing cadastral system design inadequacies.

This example serves to illustrate that while changes are occurring, a framework
such as the one portrayed in (cid:142) gure 3 is more suitable for de(cid:142) ning what should be
measured when evaluating a cadastral system. In concept, as the change process
unfolds, the situation gradually stabilizes, and long-term land management objectives
become clearer. In this way an analyst’s frame of orientation moves toward that of
the conventional hierarchy portrayed in (cid:142) gure 2.

While the framework in (cid:142) gure 3 applies to a particular situation, the objectives
and completion dates of projects that involve the cadastral system should be loosely
de(cid:142) ned. Such objectives and completion dates will have to be continually rede(cid:142) ned
in terms of an analysis of the processes and structures underlying the situation, at
both settlement and regional or national level. It should be recognized that some
projects may not be completed and ultimately may have to be abandoned.

To conclude, the conceptual framework assumes: (1) there are numerous systems
of which the cadastral system is a sub-system in a complex land management system;
(2) the interrelationships between these systems vary over time; (3) a system of
incremental changes in diŒerent land management sub-systems as a situation gradu-
ally stabilizes; and (4) the use of diŒerent analytical frames of orientation.

10. Concluding remarks

By using South Africa as a living laboratory by undertaking research there over
time during its transformation , we have shown that conventional cadastral theory,
in the form of analysis of hierarchical systems, should not be used to ‘(cid:142) x’ cadastral
systems during times of change. Utilizing conventional approaches could instead
decrease tenure security, cause misdirected changes to the cadastral system, or cause

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 38

M. Barry and C. Fourie

contradictions that have to be addressed later. It is unlikely that problems in the
cadastral system in unstable situations will be correctly diagnosed and addressed,
precisely because the more serious problems often lie in the other sub-systems in the
wider land management systems hierarchy.

The development of a robust cadastral system evaluation framework for countries
in unstable situations is critical. In the second author’s experience in consulting
projects, the approach described in this paper does have general application outside
of South Africa to the many developing world countries going through transforma-
tion. In many of these countries attempts are being made to ‘(cid:142) x’ the cadastre, without
taking into account the wider conceptual issues outlined here. However, further
in-depth case study research over long timeframes is required.

Another critical issue, especially for the land information industry, raised by this
approach, is that in unstable situations the de jure cadastral information does not
always match the de facto boundaries on the ground. This is especially true in
informal settlements, which consist of 30–80% of developing world cities (UNCHS
1996 ). In two case studies of site-and-service schemes in Cape Town, where the
process of bestowing ownership on the occupants was underway, large-scale aerial
surveys revealed that 10% and 13% of the temporary dwellings were found to
encroach over the legal boundary lines (Barry 1999). This implies that a land
information manager needs to ensure that other sources of information are available,
when an evaluation of the land management systems’ hierarchy shows it is not static,
which in turn indicates a possible lack of cadastral currency. Additional land informa-
tion will be necessary to compliment or substitute for the cadastre, (cid:142) rstly to manage
the change, secondly to assist with the regularisation (tenure and services) of these
areas, and thirdly to supply initial information/legal evidence to aid the adjudication
during titling.

This paper has attempted to extend the debate around technical,

land and
institutional issues by developing an analytical approach which more closely models
reality. Soft systems thinking, when applied to the cadastral (cid:142) eld, makes it possible
to move away from the conventional simplistic, hard interventionist, sub-system-
focused design exercises. Instead, by rigorously integrating cadastral theory and soft
systems thinking, it is possible to undertake holistic analyses of complex situations,
which include human behaviour and a range of non-static land management sub-
systems. It is also possible to analyse technical processes from diŒerent points of
view, or contexts, over time, which facilitates more robust and sustainable cadastral
systems’ design and management.

Finally, this paper also makes it possible to incorporate change management
models. Both strategic planning models and social change frameworks (ComaroŒ
1982, Fahey 1994, Fourie 1994, Davies and Fourie 1998, Barry 1999) can be linked
to the proposed approach, thus strengthening the framework’s capacity to explain,
predict and be used for social engineering.

References
Aguilar, F. J., 1967, Scanning the Business Environment (London: Macmillan Company).
Ajzen, I., 1991, The theory of planned behaviour. Organizational Behaviour and Human

Decision Processes, 50, 179– 211.

Barnes, G., 1990, A comparative evaluation framework for cadastre based land information
systems (CLIS) in developing countries. PhD thesis, LTC Research Paper 102, Land
Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

39

Barnes, G., 1994, Current cadastral system issues and challenges in developing countries.

South Af rican Journal of Surveying and Mapping, 22, 279–286.

Barry, M. B., 1999, Evaluating cadastral systems in periods of uncertainty: A study of Cape
Town’s Xhosa-speaking communities. PhD thesis, University of Natal, Durban.
Barry, M., and Fourie, C., 2001, Wicked problems, soft systems and cadastral systems in
periods of uncertainty. In Proceedings of CONSAS 2001 Conference, March, Cape
T own.

Barry, M., and Mayson, D., 2000, Informal settlement characteristics in a rural land restitution
case: Elandskloof, South Africa. Sociological Research On-L ine, 5 August 2000,
http://www.socresonline.org.uk /5/2/barry.html.

Bruce, J. W., Migot-Adholla, S. E., and Atherton, J., 1994, The (cid:142) ndings and their imple-
mentation: institutional adaptation or replacement? In Searching for T enure Security
in Africa, edited by J. W. Bruce and S. E. Migot-Adholla (Dubuque, Iowa:
Kendall/Hunt), pp. 251–265.

Checkland, P., 1999, Systems T hinking, Systems Practice (Chichester: John Wiley).
Comaroff, J. L., 1982, Dialectical systems, history and anthropology: units of study and

questions of theory. Journal of Southern African Studies, 8, 143–172.

Cook, J. S., 1994, A cybernetic approach to land management issues. Unpublished PhD thesis,

Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.

Dale, P. F., and McLachlan, J. D., 1988, Land information management. In An Introduction
with Special Reference to Cadastral Problems in T hird World Countries (Oxford:
Clarendon Press).

Davies, C. J., and Fourie, C. F., 1998, A land management approach for informal settlement
in South Africa. South Af rican Journal of Surveying and Mapping, 24(5&6), 239–246.
Davis, F. D., 1989, Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and user acceptance in

Information Technology. MIS Quarterly, 13, 319–339.

Dill, W. R., 1957,. Environment as an in(cid:143) uence on management autonomy. Administrative

Science Quarterly, 2, 409–443.

Ezigbalike, I. C., and Benwell, G. L., 1994,. Cadastral ‘Reform’—at what cultural costs to

developing countries? Australian Surveyor, 39, 177–186.

Fahey, L., 1994, Strategic management: the challenge and the opportunity. In T he New
Portable MBA, edited by E. G. C. Collins and M. A. Devanna (New York: John
Wiley), pp. 303–352.

Fourie, C., 1994, A new approach to the Zulu land tenure system: an historical anthropological
explanation of the development of an informal settlement. PhD thesis, Rhodes
University.

Hoogsteden, C. C., and van Zyl, C. A., 1992, Privatizing the cadastre: four sound reasons
why! In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Cadastral Reform ’92,
(Melbourne: Department of Surveying and Land Information, University of
Melbourne), pp. 412–430.

Kauffman, D. R. (ed.), 1980, Systems: an introduction to systems thinking. In T he Innovative
L earning Series, edited by S. A. Carlton (Minneapolis: The Innovative Learning Series).
Larsson, G., 1991, L and Registration and Cadastral Systems: T ools for L and Information and

Management (Harlow: Longman).

Lawrence, J. C. D., 1984, Overview. In L and T enure and Rural Productivity in the Paci(cid:142) c
Islands, edited by B. Acquaye and R. Crocombe, Institute of Paci(cid:142) c Studies, University
of the South Paci(cid:142) c, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations
(FAO), Rome.

Liebenberg, B. J., 1993, Part 5: 1986–1991. In South Africa in the 20th Century, edited by

B. J. Liebenberg and S. B. Spies (Pretoria: J. L. van Schalk), pp. 488–533.

McLaughlin, J., 1975, The Nature, Function and Design Concepts of Multi-Purpose

Cadastres. PhD Thesis, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Manona, C. W., 1987, Land tenure in an urban area. Development Southern Af rica, 4, 569–581.
Mason, S., Barry, M., Crone, S., Geffen, N., and Camroodien, L., 1998, Information
management system for aŒordable housing provision. South African Journal of
Surveying and Mapping, 24, 129–138.

Nichols, S. E., 1993, Land Registration: Managing Information for Land Registration. PhD
thesis, Department of Surveying Engineering Technical Report No. 168, University of
New Brunswick.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 40

Analysing cadastral systems in uncertain situations

Pampallis, J., 1991, Foundations of the New South Africa (Cape Town: Maskew Miller).
Payne, G., 1997, Urban L and T enure and Property Rights in Developing Countries (London:

Intermediate Publications).

Roux, L., and Barry, M., 2001, Using video imagery in land tenure information systems: a
study of the Algeria Communal Property Association. CONSAS 2001 Conference,
March, Cape Town.

RSA, 1913, Natives Land Act 27/1913.
RSA, 1936, Development Trust & Land Act 18/1936.
RSA, 1950, Group Areas Act 41/1950.
RSA, 1955, Group Areas Development Act 69/1955.
RSA, 1966, Group Areas Act 36/1966.
RSA, 1991, Abolition of Racially-based Land Measures Act 108/1991.
RSA, 1996, Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act 108/1996.
RSA, 1997, White Paper on South African Land Policy. Department of Land AŒairs, Pretoria.
Saff, G., 1996, Claiming a space in a changing South Africa: the ‘Squatters’ of Marconi Beam,
Cape Town. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 86, 235–255.
Senge, P. M., 1990, T he Fifth Discipline. T he Art and Practice of the L earning Organisation

(New York: Doubleday).

Shivji, I. G., 1995, Problems of L and T enure in T anzania: A Review and Appraisal of the Report
of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry in L and Matters 1992 (Arusha, Tanzania:
National Land Policy Workshop).

Shivji, I. G., 1998, Not yet democracy: reforming land tenure in T anzania, Faculty of Law,

University of Dar es Salaam.

Simpson, S. R., 1976, L and L aw and Registration (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Smuts, J. C., 1926, Holism and Evolution (London: MacMillan).
South African Institute of Race Relations, 2000, South Af rica Survey 1999/2000

(Johannesburg: South African Institute of Race Relations).

Taylor, S., and Todd, P., 1995, Assessing IT usage: the role of prior experience. MIS Quarterly,

19, 561–570.

United Nations Centre for Human Settlement (UNCHS), 1996, New Delhi Declaration,
Global conference on access to land and security of tenure as a condition for sustainable
shelter and urban development. New Delhi, 17–19 January, 1996. Preparation docu-
ment for Habitat II, Istanbul.

Downloaded by [Mount St Vincent University] at 03:52 07 October 2014 