International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 24, No. 3, March 2010, 439–463

REVIEW ARTICLE

Spatial data infrastructures as complex adaptive systems

L. Grusa*, J. Crompvoetsa,b and A.K. Bregta

aCentre for Geo-information, Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands; bKatholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Public Management Institute, Leuven, Belgium

(Received 29 May 2008; final version received 7 December 2008)

Many researchers throughout the world have been struggling to better understand and
describe spatial data infrastructures (SDIs). Our knowledge of the real forces and
mechanisms behind SDIs is still very limited. The reason for this difficulty might lie in
the complex, dynamic and multifaceted nature of SDIs. To evaluate the functioning and
effects of SDIs we must have a proper theory and understanding of their nature. This
article describes a new approach to understanding SDIs by looking at them through the
lens of complex adaptive systems (CASs). CASs are frequently described by the following
features and behaviours: complexity, components, self-organization, openness, unpre-
dictability, nonlinearity and adaptability, scale-independence, existence of feedback loop
mechanism and sensitivity to initial conditions. In this article both CAS and SDI features
are presented, examined and compared using three National SDI case studies from the
Netherlands, Australia and Poland. These three National SDIs were carefully analysed to
identify CAS features and behaviours. In addition, an Internet survey of SDI experts was
carried out to gauge the degree to which they consider SDIs and CASs to be similar. This
explorative study provides evidence that to a certain extent SDIs can be viewed as CASs
because they have many features in common and behave in a similar way. Studying SDIs
as CASs has significant implications for our understanding of SDIs. It will help us to
identify and better understand the key factors and conditions for SDI functioning.
Assuming that SDIs behave much like CASs, this also has implications for their assess-
ment: assessment techniques typical for linear and predictable systems may not be valid
for complex and adaptive systems. This implies that future studies on the development of
an SDI assessment framework must consider the complex and adaptive nature of SDIs.

Keywords: spatial data infrastructures; complex adaptive systems; SDI assessment

Introduction

1.
Over the last two decades many countries throughout the world have taken steps to establish
national spatial data infrastructures (SDIs). These actions have sought to provide an infra-
structure for accessing and sharing spatial data to reduce the duplication of spatial data
collection by both users and producers, and enable better utilization of spatial data and
associated services. However, the great variety and large number of stakeholders, their
different needs and the complex relations between them make the implementation of SDIs
a very complex business. Moreover, the adoption of innovative technologies makes SDI
development very dynamic and leads to differences in the architecture of these infrastructures
between countries.

*Corresponding author. Email: lucas.grus@wur.nl

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
# 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658810802687319
http://www.informaworld.com

440

L. Grus et al.

Many researchers have tried to apply various theories to describe and better understand the
complex and dynamic nature of SDIs. The diffusion of innovation theory has been used by
many researchers (Chan 2001), such as Onsrud and Pinto (1991), Masser (2005), Masser and
Onsrud (1993), Campbell (1996), Masser and Campbell (1996) and Chan (1998), to illustrate
and understand the development and adoption of GIS and SDI initiatives within societies.
Rajabifard et al. (2000) used hierarchical spatial reasoning (Car 1997) to describe the complex
hierarchical structure of SDIs. De Man (2006) applied the concept of institutionalization to
explain the linkage between SDIs and spatial data communities and determine how they can be
made effective and sustainable. Chan (2001) claims that the perceptions and descriptions of
SDIs fail to convey their dynamics and complexity and that therefore a theory is still needed to
better understand, describe and evaluate the complex nature of SDIs. Many researchers
have indicated that SDI complexity is the main obstacle to its understanding and assessment
(Grus et al. 2006). Only when the mechanisms behind SDIs are well explored and understood
will it be possible to better develop, manage and evaluate them.

Complex adaptive systems (CASs)

theory has been used in many disciplines
(e.g. economics, social sciences, organizational studies and biology) to describe and better
understand the features, mechanisms and rules of complex phenomena. For example,
complexity theory has been used to evaluate the capacity for collaboration in Health
Action Zones policy (Barnes et al. 2003), and CAS research is used to assess the best
transition paths towards future technological innovations in industry (Franken et al. 2007).
In general, applying CAS theory to other domains may help in better understanding of the
mechanisms and features of complex phenomena.

This research seeks to determine whether SDIs can be viewed as CASs. We analysed
three National SDI cases and conducted a survey on the complex characteristics and features
that can be found in SDIs.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the complex
nature of SDI; Section 3 presents the principles of CASs theory; Section 4 explains the
methodology used to meet the research objective; Section 5 states the research hypothesis
that SDIs can be treated as CASs; Section 6 presents the results of the application of CAS
theory to the selected national SDI cases (Australian, Dutch and Polish) and the results of the
survey of SDI experts on the complex character of SDIs; Section 7 discusses the results of the
analysis of the case studies and survey responses, presents some implications of these results
and makes recommendations for further research on exploring and evaluating SDI; Section 8
describes the conclusions of the research.

2. The complex nature of SDIs
Many authors have already indicated that SDIs have a tendency to become complex (Chan
and Williamson 1999, De Man 2006, Georgiadou et al. 2006). The first SDIs, called first-
generation SDIs (Rajabifard et al. 2003), concentrated mainly on data storage, access and
exchange. The complexity of those early SDI initiatives was mainly technological in nature.
The second-generation SDIs brought an increase in the numbers of users, applications and
requirements. SDI functionality became more complex (Chan and Williamson 1999), as
facilitating the interaction between data and people became a focal point of the SDI concept
(Rajabifard et al. 2002). An SDI can therefore be seen as a sociotechnical assembly rather
than simply a technical tool (De Man 2006). The variety of SDI actors and the intensity of
interactions between them is one of the potential reasons for the complexity of such
assemblies. As new SDI applications emerge the organizational structure grows and thus
the number of people involved and the relations between them increase. As this progresses

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

441

the initially complicated SDI becomes rather complex. Moreover, complexity also arises as
SDIs shift from being data-centric to service-centric infrastructures (Georgiadou et al. 2006).
Following initial enthusiasm about the applicability of SDIs to help solve problems in a vast
number of domains, it became clear that creating and managing SDIs is not easy. Even
the large number of definitions of SDI illustrates the high level of disagreement among
stakeholders about its nature.

It is important to discuss in more detail the role of the human factor in SDIs because
people are probably the main reason for SDI complexity. The architecture of an SDI depends
heavily on the nature of the environment in which it develops, especially the people who
design, implement and work with it. Their experience, expertise, culture and objectives play
a crucial role. Publications like the SDI Cookbook (Nebert 2004) provide useful guidance,
but in practice following the same recipe for building SDIs in different environments usually
leads to different and often unexpected results. Moreover, in the course of time people may
change the SDI concept. For example, one of the main rationales behind the transition from a
product-based to a process-based model (Masser 1999, Rajabifard et al. 2003) was that SDI
users and producers realized that the potential of SDI goes beyond simply managing data.
The introduction of web services, increased data sharing between users and the shift in focus
towards the use of data were the main drivers behind the evolution of SDI towards a process-
based model (Crompvoets 2006). Those changes and the evolution of SDI are only possible
because people play a key role in the SDI concept. Referring to Rajabifard et al.’s (2002) SDI
conceptual model (see Figure 1), it has to be stressed that people are not limited to one side of
the diagram as a separate component, but are rather an integral part of all other components,
especially technology, policy and standards, and the human factor plays a key role in shaping
those components: people develop the technology behind access network facilities; policies
on SDI are solely created and obeyed by people; standards can only be developed and
applied successful if people reach agreement. One of the key provisions of SDI is to improve
spatial data sharing between individuals and organizations. Spatial data sharing depends
mainly on social and cultural aspects because it requires agreements on common definitions
and standards (Calkins and Weatherbe 1995, Omran 2007). SDI development requires an
increase in a number of people to cope with the growth, but increasing the number of people
results in an even faster increase of the number of possible communication channels
(e.g. increasing the number of people from 2 to 4 increases the number of communication
channels from 1 to 6). This effect might explain why human systems (including SDIs)
become so difficult to manage as the number of stakeholders increases. For all these reasons,
the human component of SDI is probably the main reason for its complex nature.

Figure 1. SDI components.
Source: Rajabifard et al. 2002.

442

L. Grus et al.

Table 1. Newtonian versus complex approaches (adapted from Eoyang 1997).

Use Newtonian approach when
the problem is

Use a complex approach when
the problem is

Quiet familiar
Well defined
Closed to outside influences
Related to a small number of people you

New and unique
Fuzzy or unknown
Open to outside influences
Related to a large number you do not know well

know well

succeeded

distinguishable

One you have tried to solve before and

One you have tried to solve before and failed

Linear, the inputs and outputs are clearly

Nonlinear, the inputs and outputs are not clearly

distinguishable

The complex nature of SDIs is the reason for the difficulties encountered in trying to
understand and assess them. The lack of knowledge on how to deal with the complexity of
SDIs makes its assessment difficult. For example, it is difficult to attribute success or failure
to one or more concrete factors. In other words, because SDIs are complex it is difficult to
track cause-and-effect relationships (Rodriguez-Pabon 2005). Moreover, the dynamic and
uncertain relations between the SDI building blocks – data, policies, standards, technologies
and people – are hard to predict and control. In every part of the world, regional, national and
local SDIs have a unique character and behave differently. This makes it difficult to
implement SDIs in different environments in the same way and with the same outcomes.
It has become clear that a proper understanding of SDI requires research that draws on
knowledge from various fields, including technological, legal, economic, social and
organizational domains.

Eoyang (1997) distinguishes two paradigms which can be used to analyse various
phenomena: (1) Newtonian approaches and (2) complex approaches. The Newtonian
approaches assume that the phenomenon is predictable, that certain procedures will lead
to certain objectives, that the final outcome of the phenomenon performance is a sum of the
performance of its parts, etc. In contrast, the complex approaches acknowledge uncertainties
in a system due to emergent mechanisms in its functionality, the flexibility of system
structures and adaptability to external conditions. They also acknowledge complexity rather
than trying to simplify it. The choice of the approach depends on the characteristics of the
phenomenon to be analysed (see Table 1).

The choice of paradigm does not have to be mutually exclusive: Newtonian and complex
approaches can also be used simultaneously. SDIs are quite new (less than two decades of
development), not well defined, not fully explored, changing, not solved and the outcomes are
not well known. Therefore, the choice of the complex approach to analyse SDI is justified.

Understanding SDIs as CASs could help in identifying the mechanisms and forces that
shape SDI development and in finding the best assessment strategy for SDI. The next section
explains the concept of CASs in more detail.

3. Complex adaptive systems
CASs have their roots in the study of chaotic systems (Gleick 1989, Lorenz 1993). Studies
of various systems in different disciplines led researchers to focus on systems that moved
from stable, predictable patterns into unstable, unpredictable behaviour (Kiefer 2006).
Results from further studies led researchers to identify two groups of chaotic systems:

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

443

(1) unpredictable systems and (2) systems that moved through unpredictable states into new,
more complex patterns of behaviour. The latter group has attracted attention from a wide
group of researchers as CASs (Waldrop 1992, Eoyang 1996, Cilliers 1998, Eoyang and
Berkas 1998, Holland 1998). Intensive pioneering research on the concept of CASs was
conducted at the independent Santa Fe Institute (SFI) for multidisciplinary collaboration.
Many other scientists subsequently became interested in the concept of CAS and its
applications, leading to the creation of many research groups at various scientific institutes
all over the world devoted to complexity related research.1

CASs are defined in many different ways. For the purpose of this research we will use the
following definition: ‘CASs are open systems in which different elements interact dynami-
cally to exchange information, self-organize and create many different feedback loops,
relationships between causes and effects are nonlinear, and the systems as a whole have
emergent properties that cannot be understood by reference to the component parts’ (Barnes
et al. 2003).

CASs have a specific number of features and behaviours that make them distinctive from
other types of systems. The features are the set of system characteristics that together make
CASs different from other systems. Similarly, CAS behaviours are the distinctive collection
of system activities and processes that make CAS behaviour unique. The collection of CAS
features and behaviours used in this research is based on many resources on complex
systems (Walldrop 1992, Eoyang 1996, Cilliers 1998, 2005, Eoyang and Berkas 1998,
Barnes et al. 2003, Rotmans 2005). Because the CAS literature we reviewed contained
variations and differences in the number and names of the CAS features and behaviours, for
the purpose of this research we limited the list to those CAS features and behaviours that
were common to the literature sources reviewed.

3.1. CAS features

3.1.1. Components

CASs always consists of relatively stable and simple building blocks (Cilliers 2005) that are
linked via mutual interactions (Eoyang and Berkas 1998, Rotmans 2005). Holland (1998)
states that building blocks are a pervasive feature of CASs.

3.1.2. Complexity
The system’s behaviour emerges because many of the simple components interact simulta-
neously (Waldrop 1992, Cilliers 2005). In principle, this means that there is a constant
exchange of information and needs between the components and the actors in the system.
Complexity also means that the whole of the system is different from the sum of its parts
(Eoyang 2004); complex systems cannot be analysed only by examining their parts
separately.

3.1.3.

Sensitivity to initial conditions

In CASs a small initial action may have a major effect in the future. Very small difference in
the initial state of the system may result in a big change in the outcome. For example,
changes to a single legal document may have a major effect on many organizations, or even
on society as a whole.

444

L. Grus et al.

3.1.4. Openness

CASs interact with their environment (Rotmans 2005) and are susceptible to external
influences (Eoyang and Berkas 1998). It is also difficult to define clearly where the
boundaries of complex and adaptive systems are (Barnes et al. 2003).

3.1.5. Unpredictability
It is hard to be sure about the final outcome of the system’s behaviour. The unpredictability
of CASs is a result of many actors taking independent actions that subsequently influence
other actors and their actions. To make sense of the output of the complex system we must
take into account the mechanisms by which it is produced (Cilliers 1998). However,
predictions can never be made with certainty.

3.1.6.

Scale independence

Different hierarchical levels of CASs have a similar structure (the ‘fractal building’).
This feature can be found in organizations where the same characteristics (e.g. functional
dependencies, relations between employees, policies and rules) can be seen from the bottom
to the top of the management chain (Eoyang and Berkas 1998).

3.2. CAS behaviours
3.2.1. Adaptability

As part of the wider environment, CASs are able to adjust and adapt themselves to external
influences (Cilliers 2005, Rotmans 2005). For example, increasing concurrence in the sector
may force a particular company or organization to adapt by changing its organizational
model to a more efficient one. However, system adaptability may also be a result of internal
factors, like the operation of a system’s memory: the system may change as it learns from its
own experience. According to Holland (1998), adaptation can also be described as a change
in the system’s structure (strategy) resulting from the system’s experience.

3.2.2.

Self-organization

The ability of CASs to develop a new system structure by themselves is a result of their
internal constitution and not a result of external management (Rotmans 2005). According to
Eoyang (1996), a system self-organizes if it is pushed far enough away from its equilibrium
state. Examples of self-organization in human systems are spontaneous group activities, like
revolts. Cilliers (1998) defines self-organization as a process in which a system can develop
a complex structure from fairly unstructured beginnings. The process occurs under the
influence of both the external environment and the history (memory) of the system.

3.2.3. Nonlinear behaviour
In CASs it is difficult to determine the value of a second variable, even when a first variable
is known (Eoyang 1996). Changes are prompted by external or internal factors boosting or
slowing the system down. Cillers (2005) explains this nonlinearity by describing interactions
as dynamic input–output relations. This means that the strength of interaction changes over

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

445

time. For example, changes in political strategies may have a causal influence on CAS
behaviour or development.

3.2.4. Feedback loop mechanism
The system has a tendency to use its own output to adjust its inputs and processes (Eoyang
1996). Two types of feedback loops can adjust the behaviour of CAS: negative and positive.
The evaluation process is an example of a feedback loop, which may be either positive
or negative. It is positive when the system learns from the evaluation and enhances
its performance and negative when negative evaluation results discourage programme
participants. If designed properly, positive feedback mechanisms facilitate change and
adaptation of the system (Patton 1990).

4. Methodology

To determine whether SDIs can be viewed as CASs, we followed three research steps.

First, the common features and behaviours of most CASs were identified. The CAS
features and behaviours presented in Section 3 were selected in two steps: (1) from the
rigorous review of CAS literature we collected all CAS features and behaviours; (2) we
reduced the number of features and behaviours to those that were common to all CAS
literature.

Second, we followed a case study research method to empirically identify CAS features
in three national SDIs. The pattern-matching technique (Yin 2003) was used to analyse the
case study evidence. The technique was applied in the following way: A hypothesis stating
that an SDI is a CAS was made. The hypothesis assumes that certain CAS features and
behaviours (patterns) are present in SDI cases (see Section 5). These hypothetical patterns
were then compared with the empirical evidence from the case study analysis and summar-
ized in a table (see Table 3). If there was strong evidence for a pattern match, we assigned an
‘in agreement’ label. For weaker evidence we assigned a ‘neutral’ label. Where the case
study analysis revealed a different pattern than the one suggested by the hypothesis, we
assigned a ‘not in agreement’ label. In some cases we could not find any information on
CAS features and behaviours in the SDI case studies. In those cases we assigned a ‘no
information’ label.

The rationale for using the case study method for this research was based on four
conditions for selecting case study as a useful strategy for conducting research (Pare
2004): (1) the phenomenon is complex; (2) the existing body of knowledge does not allow
us to pose causal questions; (3) holistic and in-depth investigation is needed; (4) the
phenomenon cannot be studied outside its context. At least the first three conditions are
valid for SDIs as they are complex and the mechanisms behind them are not fully under-
stood, which makes it difficult to pose causal questions. Moreover an in-depth investigation
of the whole SDI is needed to be able to identify CAS features and behaviours. Case studies
of three national SDIs (NSDIs) – from Australia, the Netherlands and Poland – were chosen
for practical reasons. The case study approach requires in-depth analysis of the documents,
which usually are written in the national language and all of them could be accessed and
understood by the authors of this study. Additionally, the three cases represent three different
approaches to setting up and operating SDIs: very hierarchical (Poland), voluntary (the
Netherlands) and a mix of the two (Australia). Each NSDI case description was reviewed by a
key SDI contact person for that country to confirm the validity of the facts. These key people
are actively involved in the development and coordination of the NSDI in their country.

446

L. Grus et al.

Table 2. Characteristics of survey population.

Country

Number

Sector

Number

Role

Number

Government
Academia
Private Sector

12
18
3

Scientists
Policymakers
Data and/or Software Producers

20
8
5

Australia
Belgium
Canada
Cuba
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Nepal
UK
USA

2
3
3
2
1
2
14
1
1
4

Third, an anonymous Internet-based survey was carried out. The survey was sent to 33
participants of the ‘Multi-view framework to assess National Spatial Data Infrastructures’
workshop held at Wageningen University in 2007 (Crompvoets and Grus 2007). The
workshop main topic was the SDI assessment. It also included one presentation in which
the potential relationship between SDI and CAS was mentioned. As a survey population
33 participants were selected out of a total of 45 participants because they attended the
workshop the full three days and as a result they received a similar amount of information.
All workshop participants were professionally closely related to SDI. Table 2 describes the
characteristics of the survey population.

The workshop participants were asked to express their strength of support for 21 state-
ments about the presence of six CAS features and four behaviours in SDI. The statements
were formulated in such a way that the survey respondents could agree or disagree with them
using the following scale: strongly agree, agree, neutral, disagree and strongly disagree. Each
CAS feature or behaviour was described in its SDI context by two statements. In addition, the
workshop participants were asked whether a SDI can also be described as a ‘system’, the
definition of which was adapted from the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English
(LDOCE 1995). The questionnaire focused on the overall concept of SDI and did not specify
any particular SDI levels, such as national, local or regional. The Internet-based survey was
performed 10 months after the workshop. The survey objective, which was to check CAS
features and behaviours in SDI context, was not mentioned to the respondents. The survey
questions were also formulated in a neutral way asking respondents about their opinion about
some SDI characteristics so they could not know that the questions were about to check SDI
and CAS similarity. Therefore, we assume that the respondents were not biased by the past
workshop. The questionnaire and respondents’ answers can be found in Appendix 1.

5. Hypothesis

The hypothesis that we tested is: ‘Spatial Data Infrastructure can be viewed as a Complex
Adaptive System’. The truth of the hypothesis is highly probable if CAS features and
behaviours can also be identified in SDIs. On the basis of the proposed hypothesis, the
following features and behaviours, similar to those found in CASs, are also expected to be
present in SDI:

l SDI consists of a number of identifiable components.
l SDI is a complex phenomenon because it consists of many components and multiple

actors which constantly interact with each other.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

447

l SDI is sensitive to initial conditions, i.e. decisions made about SDI at the initial stage

of its development may have an impact on its future development.

l SDI is open because it interacts with (i.e. adapts to, has influence on, learns from)

other sectors. SDI is also open as it is very difficult to define its boundaries.

l SDI is unpredictable because we cannot be sure how it will look and how it will

function in the future.

l SDI architecture is self-similar on different levels of the hierarchy. For example, in
both local and national SDIs, it is possible to identify similar building blocks (data,
policies, standards, etc.). Each building block also has a similar function in either
local, regional or national SDIs.

l SDI is able to adapt its own structure and functions to new user or market requirements
and demands. It is also able to incorporate new technologies that emerge in other
sectors and might be beneficial for SDI.

l SDI is able to self-organize (or self-regulate) which is the result of communication,
interaction and learning from past actions. Bottom-up activities and initiatives to
improve SDI (e.g. the rapid response of the SDI community to emerging user needs
and requirements) might indicate the self-organizing ability.

l SDI behaviour is nonlinear in such a way that its development may be disturbed by
internal and external factors (e.g. a lack of political support for SDI may slow down its
development or push it in a different direction). As a result, the intended SDI
objectives might not be met.

l SDI has feedback loop mechanisms which enable it to learn from its own experience.
For example, stakeholders may use performance or output assessments to refine their
actions towards developing SDIs. Evaluation, innovation and scientific programmes
embedded in SDIs that emerge during its development might indicate the existence of
feedback mechanisms.

6. Results

This section presents the research results. Section 6.1 presents the results of the case studies
analysis. Each case analysis starts with a description of the SDI case, followed by a short
description of each CAS feature and behaviour in the context of the SDI. Section 6.2 presents
the results of the survey on similarities between CAS and SDI.

6.1. Case studies
6.1.1. The Australian NSDI as CAS

The facts about the Australian SDI (ASDI) are mainly based on Clarke et al. (2003), Chan
et al. (2005), Warnest et al. (2005), Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR)
(2004) and Blake (2005).

The beginnings of ASDIs lie with the Australasian Urban and Regional Information
Systems Association – AURISA (presently part of Spatial Sciences Institute – SSI). In the
late 1970s and 1980s AURISA was a major catalyst for bringing together state agencies to
discuss land information systems. Those efforts energized other states, local governments
and finally the national government. In 1986, by agreement between the prime minister and
the heads of the Australian state and territory governments, an Australian Land Information
Committee was established. In 1991, it became the Australian and New Zealand Land
Information Committee (ANZLIC) and since 2004 it has been known as ANZLIC – The

448

L. Grus et al.

Spatial Information Council. Its formation was a response to the growing need to coordinate
the collection, transfer and promotion of land-related information. ANZLIC’s role is to
establish policies, standards and guidelines to facilitate access to spatial data and services
provided by many organizations dispersed across the country. ANZLIC coordinates the
development of the ASDI through its vision that recognizes that Australia’s spatially
referenced data, products and services should be widely available and accessible to users.
The Australian and New Zealand governments are each responsible for coordinating spatial
information policies in their jurisdictions; ANZLIC encourages the coordination of activities
which are of national importance via ANZLIC representatives that reside in each jurisdic-
tion. At the national level, GeoSciences Australia is a Commonwealth government agency
that collects and maintains small-scale mapping and spatial datasets. Several other bodies
have emerged in the recent years, strengthening the public, private, professional and research
SDI organizational infrastructure. At the national level the key ASDI players are

l ANZLIC, an intergovernmental SDI coordinating agency;
l Public Sector Mapping Agency (PSMA), a public company that integrates critical
spatial data from governmental sources (national and from each jurisdiction) to
support spatial data users. PSMA plays an important role in ASDI because it builds
national spatial data from Commonwealth or state/territory data and utilizes them via
the network of value adders. PSMA’s chair is also a member of ANZLIC;

l Australian Spatial Information Business Association (ASIBA), a professional asso-

ciation that aims to represent industry’s spatial information needs and interests;

l SSI, a national body providing a forum for professional people in the spatial informa-
tion industry in Australia. In the near future it will be named Surveying and Spatial
Sciences Institute;

l Centre for SDI and Land Administration at the University of Melbourne, research
centre established in 2001 within the Department of Geomatics. Its research focuses
on designing and developing SDI, spatially enabling government and society, cadastral
system, land management, etc.

l Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information (CRC-SI), which undertakes
spatial information-related research in location, image analysis, spatial information
systems, remote sensing, etc.;

l The Australian Spatial Consortium (ASC), a consortium supported by CRC-SI whose
objective is to unlock and utilize the potential of spatial information within the industry.

The ASDI framework comprising the aforementioned players operates through consensus.
The Commonwealth has not adopted any legal requirements or pressured the actors within
the ASDI in any way.

6.1.1.1. Components. ANZLIC’s definition of ASDI recognizes people, policies and
technologies as SDI components. According to this definition, these components are
necessary to enable the use of spatially referenced data at all levels of government, the
private and non-profit sectors and academia.

6.1.1.2. Complexity. The complexity of ASDI arises from the requirement for cooperation
between the national government and the nine state governments. Moreover, the large
number and diversity of players who constitute and contribute to ASDI often have
different needs, but have to interact and cooperate with each other. This makes the

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

449

situation even more complex. This complexity, however, is managed by an organizational
structure coordinated by ANZLIC.

6.1.1.3.
Sensitivity to initial conditions. The Australian state agencies for spatial data
focused quite naturally on high-resolution data covering their state territory. Because of
AURISA’s initial activities in bringing together those state agencies to create ASDI (see case
description), the present ASDI can be characterized by relatively strong role of state SDIs
and easy availability of high-resolution datasets.

6.1.1.4. Openness. The creation of the ASC (see case description) to make use of the
potential of spatial information in other industrial domains suggests that ASDI is open to
interaction with other sectors. Also, the existence of ASIBA, which represents the interests
of industry in spatial information, is some evidence that ASDI reaches out beyond its own
organizational boundaries and that SDI applications can serve the real needs of industry.
ASDI is also open to its international environment through the active membership of
ANZLIC in the Permanent Committee on GIS Infrastructure for Asia and the Pacific
(PCGIAP), a regional SDI initiative.

6.1.1.5. Unpredictability. ANZLIC’s strategic plan and work programme is defined until
2010. It is still unknown what will happen after this date: whether all the intended outcomes
have been achieved. The future of ASDI after 2010 cannot therefore be predicted with much
certainty. However, the relatively widespread recognition of SDI benefits and the existence
of many independent bodies playing different roles in the ASDI suggest that its existence is
not in any real danger in the near future. This strong acceptance of the SDI concept in
Australia reduces its unpredictability.

6.1.1.6.
Scale independence. ASDI can be characterized by a clear division between
national and state or territory SDIs. Replication of the SDI model from the higher ASDI
level (ANZLIC) to lower state levels (represented by the Australian Capital Territory
Planning and Land Authority, the New South Wales Department of Lands, the Northern
Territory Department of Planning and Infrastructure and others) is evidence of the scale
independence of ASDI. In other words, similar organizational structures and roles are
through state to federal). Such hierarchical
present on all ASDI levels (from local,
capability for SDI helps to exploit
the main benefits of the concept because SDI
challenges faced at the national level (e.g. standards implementation, data access policy,
data-sharing models) may be similar to those at state or territory levels.

6.1.1.7. Adaptability. Initially ANZLIC focused mainly on land administration (cadastral)
systems. Later, as the general SDI concept was maturing, ASDI recognized the much
broader potential of the ASDI and changed its goals and objectives. It adapted to broader
market requirements by changing the scope of its activities from narrower ‘land-related
information’ to broader ‘spatial information’.

6.1.1.8.
Self-organization. The heterogeneity of players in the ASDI and its openness to
external factors facilitates the flow of information and energy and thus allows the system to self-
organize. ANZLIC was established in response to the need to coordinate the provision of land
information, and the ASDI framework was developed as a distributed system in which multiple
state/territory agencies operate their own SDIs. The Commonwealth does not have any legal
powers to force other players to comply with national policies or standards. Given that the ASDI

450

L. Grus et al.

has been created mainly through consensus and in a very distributed environment, its capacity
for self-organization is rather high. Moreover, the recognition of the geographical information
(GI) sector’s needs and the emergence of new bodies from within the ‘spatial community’ in
recent years indicate that the ASDI has a high self-organizing potential.

6.1.1.9. Nonlinear behaviour. No information that matches this CAS behaviour has been found.

6.1.1.10. Feedback loop mechanism. Each year ANZLIC reports on its performance in
coordinating and implementing the ASDI. These activities form a kind of formalized feedback
mechanism that is an integral part of ANZLIC’s activities. Moreover, activities like those of
Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information (CRC-SI), which recognized the need to
carry out the Spatial Information Action Agenda as a critical step in developing ASDI, can be
regarded as a feedback loop mechanism. This feedback mechanism boosted the development
of the ASDI by supporting and enhancing national research priorities related to spatial
sciences. Another example of a feedback loop mechanism was ANZLIC’s decision to audit
the Australian Spatial Data Directory (ASDD) to check the quality of the metadata. This audit
resulted in a number of recommendations for improving the quality of the ASDI.

6.1.2. The Dutch NSDI as CAS

The facts about the Dutch SDI are mainly based on Bregt (2000), Bregt and Meerkerk
(2007), Spatial Application Division Leuven (SADL) (2006), Ravi (2003), Van Loenen and
Kok (2002), Van Loenen (2006) and Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the
Environment (VROM) (2008).

The development of the Dutch NSDI dates back to 1990 when Ravi, a network
organization for geo-information, was established. Initially, Ravi was an official advisory
committee on land information at the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the
Environment (VROM). In 1993, it became an independent consultative body for geo-
information, its members being representatives from various public sector bodies. In 2007,
Ravi and the National Clearinghouse for Geo-Information (NCGI) merged to form
Geonovum. Geonovum is acting on an operational level of Dutch SDI organization. It is
the NSDI executive committee in the Netherlands with the task of coordinating the devel-
opment of the NSDI and providing better access to geo-information in the public sector. On a
strategic level, the GI-council, established in 2006, advises the Ministry VROM on strategic
actions relating to geo-information sector.

The development of the Dutch NSDI can be described as a combination of many bottom-
up initiatives, with some form of central coordination. For example, the ministry of VROM
has taken on the role of formal geo-coordinator. However, the NSDI initiative has always
been left to develop through a process of self-regulation by the GI sector, which has no
formal powers to compel public agencies to participate in the Dutch NSDI. In 1992, Ravi
presented a structure plan for land information that soon turned out to be a vision for the
Dutch NSDI. The idea was to draw up agreements between authorities to facilitate the
exchange of core registers. By the end of 2002 the objectives of the vision had almost been
achieved. The next stage in the development of the Dutch NSDI is described in a new vision
document called GIDEON (VROM 2008), which is adopted by the Dutch Government.

6.1.2.1. Components. The components of the Dutch NSDI are recognized in the definition
of the NSDI: The National Geographic Information Infrastructure (NGII) is a collection of

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

451

policy, datasets, standards, technology (hardware, software and electronic communication)
and knowledge, providing the user with the geographic information needed to carry out a task.

6.1.2.2. Complexity. In 2002, the Dutch Council of Ministries agreed to invest E20
million in the ‘Space for Geo-Information’ innovation programme (Ruimte voor Geo-
Informatie, RGI) to improve the current geo-information infrastructure and stimulate the
necessary innovation for the future. The number of partners involved in the programme
related to the GI sector and SDI development is about 200. Additionally, the GIDEON vision
document was drawn up through the cooperation and commitment of 21 SDI-related
organizations. The high number and diversity of Dutch GI players and the coordination of
their actions make the Dutch GI community very complex.

6.1.2.3.
Sensitivity to initial conditions. Ravi was initially an advisory body of the
ministry of VROM. This initial close connection to the ministry might be the reason why
governmental bodies continue to give strong support to the GI initiatives and still recognize
its importance, which has allowed the GI sector to develop more easily. Despite the
reorganization of the SDI coordinating bodies (e.g. from Ravi to Geonovum), the people
who were initially involved in the creation of the Dutch NSDI at the beginning of the 1990s
are still involved and the model of cooperation that stresses the importance of bottom-up
initiatives and voluntary actions still persists today.

6.1.2.4. Openness. The openness of the Dutch NSDI is expressed in its cooperation with a
wide range of parties. Ravi (now Geonovum) even found supporters of the vision outside the
geo-information sector, especially in the Ministry of the Interior. The Dutch NSDI is also
open to regional SDI initiatives like the EU INSPIRE Directive and cross-border projects
with Germany. The mission of the Dutch knowledge project ‘Space for Geo-Information’ is
to create ‘a geo-information network that will be more dynamic and open’ within the next 10
years. This means that the network has to be flexibly integrated with adjacent disciplines, has
to exchange knowledge and has to cooperate with them.

6.1.2.5. Unpredictability. The unpredictability of the NGII is exemplified by the knowledge
project ‘Space for Geo-Information’, which is based on the premise that there is no sense in
looking at GI development beyond a 10-year time horizon because of its short history and
probable unpredictability. However, there are currently activities underway with the aim of
continuing the ‘Space for Geo-Information’ initiative after the initial 10-year period. Moreover,
the great number of SDI-related activities in both the public sector and the private sector
provide sufficient grounds to be confident that the Dutch NSDI will continue in future.

6.1.2.6.
Scale independence. Local or institutional SDIs usually comprise the same
components as those listed in the definition of the Dutch NGII. For example, Geodesk, an
SDI created by the research institute Alterra, has the same components (data access facility,
standardization and policy) and has the same functions (improving access to data and data
sharing) as those defined for the NSDI. However, because its highly decentralized
structure makes it hard to identify hierarchical levels in the Dutch NSDI, we cannot
conclude that the scale-independence feature is present at various hierarchical SDI levels.

6.1.2.7. Adaptability. An example of
is the
introduction by Geonovum of a new prototype of the Clearinghouse that provides access
to the Dutch Web Mapping Service, which complies with OGC standards. It is already the

the adaptability of

the Dutch NSDI

452

L. Grus et al.

fourth version of the Dutch Clearinghouse. Each version embraces emerging new IT
technologies that can be used in SDI clearinghouse implementations. Moreover,
the
concept behind the clearinghouse is adapted with each new version – from being a central
(meta)data repository to a network of data providers. The possibility of displaying some of
the available date layers in Google Earth exemplifies how the clearinghouse capabilities are
being adapted to the emerging new technologies (i.e. Google Earth) in the GI sector.

6.1.2.8. Self-organization. According to Masser (2005), the Dutch NSDI falls into the
category of NSDIs that have grown out of existing GI coordination activities. Bottom-up
processes play a crucial role in its development. For example, the new SDI policy document
GIDEON, which sets out a vision, strategy and implementation plan for the Dutch NSDI, was
initiated and created by the main SDI stakeholders and commented on by the relevant
government departments and governmental bodies. The Dutch NSDI development model
can therefore be described as voluntary rather than mandatory. Ravi (since 2007 Geonovum)
has no legal powers, but this does not discourage the stakeholders from basing their SDI
development activities around it. We may conclude, therefore, that the success of the NGII in
the Netherlands lies in the strong self-organizing ability of the GI community.

6.1.2.9. Nonlinear behaviour. The nonlinearity of the development of the Dutch NSDI is
only visible in some of its aspects. Emerging new technologies were one of the reasons for
the relatively unstable development of the Dutch Clearinghouse (for example, the failure of
the NCGI). However, the pursuit of the objectives of the first NSDI strategy went according
to plan. It was therefore relatively linear.

loop mechanism. The

6.1.2.10. Feedback
innovation
programme can be regarded as an outcome of a feedback mechanism within the Dutch
NSDI. Following the successful execution of the first NSDI vision, the NSDI community and
the government recognized the need for further research and the development and the creation of
a new vision for the Dutch GI sector. This resulted in the investment of E20 million over a period
of 10 years to improve the performance and stimulate the further development of the GI sector.

for Geo-Information’

‘Space

6.1.3. The Polish NSDI as CAS

The facts about the Polish NSDI have been drawn mainly from IGiK (2001) and SADL (2007).
The Polish NSDI has been under development for many years, but its status and structure
are still unclear. The first SDI-like initiatives started in the 1970s, when the National Land
Information System was first put into effect. During the 1980s, the system changed and
adapted to the conditions of the market and the economy (Gazdzicki and Linsenbarth 2004).
These initiatives came to an end due to the many organizational, administrative and political
changes over the following two decades, but now the Polish NSDI initiative is emerging
again. Under the Geodetic and Cartographic Law, coordination of the NSDI in Poland was
entrusted (however not in a straightforward way) to the Surveyor General of Poland, the
director of the Head Office of Geodesy and Cartography (GUGiK). Most of the other bodies
participating in the Polish NSDI are representative bodies for geodetic and cartographic
services (the Association of Polish Surveyors, the Association of Polish Cartographers, the
Institute of Geodesy and Cartography, the Polish Spatial Information Association and the
National Association of GI Systems Users GISPOL). The coordination activities are funded
by the Ministry of Infrastructure. The National Land Information System Decree defines the
scope and content of the NSDI and bodies responsible for its establishment and

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

453

management. The NSDI is defined by the Geodetic and Cartographic Law as a database,
procedures and techniques for collecting, updating and disseminating spatial data. It consists
of two types of components: core components (reference datasets), managed by the Surveyor
General, and thematic components, managed by various ministries. The current status of the
Polish NSDI can be characterized as a patchwork of more than 100 spatial information
systems at different administrative levels across the country. One of the objectives of the
NSDI should be the integration of those initiatives, but the degree of coordination is not
clear. Between 1998 and 2000 a research project titled ‘The Concept of the Polish Spatial
Information System’ was commissioned by the Ministry of the Interior and Administration.
Its goal was to propose a general concept for the NSDI in Poland. So far progress with
putting the postulates of this research into effect has been limited and marginal.

6.1.3.1. Components. The Geodetic and Cartographic Law defines the NSDI as a spatial
data database and techniques and procedures for the systematic collection, updating and
dissemination of datasets. To some extent these three defined building blocks – database,
techniques and procedures – can be regarded as components of the Polish NSDI.

6.1.3.2. Complexity. The dynamic and heavily entwined relationships, and especially the
different and often contradicting interests of many of the key NSDI players and institutions,
are evidence of the complexity of the Polish NSDI. Besides, the task of coordinating 100
spatial information systems dispersed across the country is complex enough without these
additional complications.

Sensitivity to initial conditions. Sensitivity to initial conditions has been apparent
6.1.3.3.
in the Polish NSDI since its beginnings. Pre-NSDI initiatives had always taken place mainly
within the geodetic domain, and the geodetic community still has the strongest influence on
the Polish SDI scene.

6.1.3.4. Openness. The knowledge and experience of the geodetic community and related
organizations cannot be questioned. However, their dominance in activities for the creation of
the NSDI in Poland can hinder its openness to cooperation with other domains and other non-
geodetic players. For example, one of the objectives of the GISPOL association of GI users,
which has its roots in geodesy, is to ‘oppose the diffusion of geodetic datasets’ or to ‘give
preference to the supporters of its actions’. This raises questions about the openness of geodetic
bodies, and thus the NSDI, to other players from other domains.

6.1.3.5. Unpredictability. When we look back and analyse the very dynamic and
promising pre-NSDI initiatives of the 1970s (the concept of Information System TEREN),
the 1980s (Multipurpose Cadaster initiative) and current initiatives, it can be concluded that
the development of the NSDI in Poland is very unpredictable. Most of the initiatives were
suspended or not successful due to external factors like political system change or
administrative reform.

6.1.3.6.
been found.

Scale independence. No information that matches this CAS characteristic has

6.1.3.7. Adaptability. The difficulty with adaptation is shown by the limited compliance
of the Polish NSDI with the EU’s INSPIRE Directive, despite the establishment of the Rada
Implementacyjna Inspire (Inspire Implementation Committee) in 2007.

454

L. Grus et al.

6.1.3.8.
Self-organization. The semi-formal mandate given to the Surveyor General, as
the head of GUGiK, to coordinate the operation of the Polish NSDI may be some evidence of
the self-organization ability of the system. However by designating to GUGiK coordination
of Polish SDI tasks, geodetic organizations got relative advantage in building SDI. The
attempts to formalize the creation of the NSDI by geodetic bodies leave little room for
initiatives by other GI players and thus limit the self-organization mechanisms. As a result,
the main Polish NSDI players are concentrated around the well-established and influential
geodesy community without much opportunity for bottom-up approaches.

6.1.3.9. Nonlinear behaviour. The history of Polish SDI development is characterized by
the emergence of many initiatives, which for a number of reasons collapsed (see also
Section 6.1.3.5 above). This is evidence of very nonlinear behaviour in the Polish NSDI.

6.1.3.10. Feedback loop mechanism. The research project ‘The concept of the Polish
Spatial Information System’ may be an example of a positive feedback loop. After a
the Ministry of Interior and Administration
number of attempts to create an NSDI,
reflected on the lessons learned and ordered a research project with the aim of formulating
a comprehensive concept for the Polish NSDI. However, due to formal and organizational
constraints (no formal mechanism to carry out the postulates from the concept) the concept
has not yet been implemented.

Table 3 summarizes the results of the case study analysis. The detailed discussion of

these results can be found in Section 7.

6.2. Results of the SDI as CAS questionnaire

The intention of the questionnaire was to explore the truth of the hypothesis that SDIs can be
considered to be CASs by asking for the opinion of SDI experts. From the 33 questionnaires
sent, we received 27 answers (an 82% response rate). Figure 2 presents a summary of
the results of the questionnaire. Detailed results of the questionnaire can be found in
Appendix 1. Each bar in Figure 2 represents the level of support for the existence of CAS
features and behaviours. The percentages were obtained by summing Strongly Agree (SA)
and Agree (A) or Strongly Disagree (SD) and Disagree (D) responses (depending on the
statement formulation) for each statement relating to a CAS feature or behaviour. The results
show that the level of support for all CAS features and behaviours was more than 50%. The
respondents to the questionnaire expressed the highest support for the statements that SDIs

Table 3. Summary of CAS features and behaviours for each case study country.

CAS features and behaviours

Australia

The Netherlands

Poland

CAS features in SDIs
Components
Complexity
Sensitivity to initial conditions
Openness
Unpredictability
Scale independence
Adaptability
Self-organization
Non-linearity
Feedback loop

In agreement
In agreement
In agreement
In agreement
Not in agreement
In agreement
In agreement
In agreement
No Information
In agreement

In agreement
In agreement
In agreement
In agreement
Not in agreement
Neutral
In agreement
In agreement
Not in agreement
In agreement

Neutral
In agreement
In agreement
Not in agreement
In agreement
No information
Neutral
Not in agreement
In agreement
Neutral

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

455

Figure 2. SDI as CAS questionnaire results: level of support for each CAS feature and behaviour
expressed as a percentage.

are open (96 and 78%). Statements about the sensitivity to initial conditions and the
unpredictability of SDIs also received relatively high support (89 and 78%, and 93 and
70% respectively). The self-organizing behaviour of SDIs was supported by 56% of the
respondents in the first statement and by 89% in the second statement, which was the biggest
difference in the level of support between statements 1 and 2. The existence of a feedback
loop mechanism was supported in two statements by 70 and 74% of the respondents. The
respondents expressed the lowest support to the statements suggesting that SDI is adaptable:
52 and 59%.

7. Discussion

The objective of the research was to determine whether SDIs can be viewed as CASs. To
meet this objective we used two methods: (1) analysing three case studies of NSDIs, (2)
conducting a survey on complex characteristics and features that could be found in SDIs.
Here we discuss the results of using these two methods in our research.

Most of the CAS features and behaviours (with two exceptions where no information
has been found – see Table 2) were identified in all three NSDI cases. In the Dutch and
Australian SDI case studies it was possible to identify similar CAS behaviours and features
to those stated in the research hypothesis. However, in both cases the unpredictability
feature could not be matched with the pattern typical for CAS. The possible reason for this

456

L. Grus et al.

might be that SDIs are rather unpredictable only in their early stages. In the course of time,
as the SDI concept matures and its benefits and necessity are well recognized, the
continued existence of the SDI becomes more certain. This change may also occur for
other CAS features and behaviours. In the Polish NSDI, which is still in its infancy
compared with the Australian and Dutch NSDIs, some CAS features and behaviours are
different from those in the two other NSDI cases. For example, the Polish NSDI is
evidently less open and less self-organizing. This might be typical for early stages of
SDI development, in which the SDI community concentrates only on its own development
and is therefore rather closed.

The result of the questionnaire shows that the majority of workshop participants agree that
SDIs are similar to and behave like CASs. More than half of the workshop participants agreed
that all of the CAS features and behaviours can be identified in SDIs, giving the highest support
to openness, unpredictable behaviour and sensitivity to initial conditions. It is important to note
that the smallest number of workshop participants agreed with the adaptive behaviour of SDI
and one-third of the respondents were neutral on these statements (see detailed data in Appendix
1). This could mean that the respondents do not reject the fact that SDIs are adaptable, but are
not thoroughly convinced. The reasons for the large difference between the levels of support for
the two statements about the self-organizing behaviour of SDI (33%) could be that one of the
statements is wrongly formulated or was not clear to the respondents (see statements 7 and
21 in Appendix 1). This could also explain the inconsistency between the respondents’
answers to the statements about nonlinearity and unpredictability. For both characteristics
the difference between the level of support for the first and second statements is 23%. The
level of support for the remaining pairs of statements is quite consistent: the differences
between the support for statements 1 and 2 vary from 4 to 18%.

The two methods that were used in this study – case study analysis and questionnaire
survey – complement each other. The case studies concentrated specifically on NSDI
implementations and data that were collected only from written documentation, whereas
the questionnaire focused on the general SDI concept and data were collected by means of an
online form filled in by SDI experts. The results of the online questionnaire confirm the
findings of the case study analysis.

We must also discuss the limitations of the research methods that we used. In the case
study analysis, data were collected from official documents and publications. For practical
reasons not all official documents on each country’s NSDI are publicly available and
neither are they available to us. Therefore we must assume that the picture we tried to draw
on each NSDI might be not complete. Additionally, because the documents about each
NSDI were read and interpreted by the authors of this study, the case study analysis may
involve some level of subjectivity. To minimize these limitations we asked SDI experts
from each country to review the text of each NSDI case and confirm the truth of the facts.
The main limitation of conducting an online questionnaire survey is the possibility that the
respondent misinterprets or does not properly understand the questions. In an attempt to
reduce this risk, the respondents were given the opportunity to comment on each statement
to allow us to identify any misinterpretations and take any comments on the nature of the
statement into account.

The mix of respondents to the questionnaire suggests there may be a certain bias in the
results (see Table 2). The number of respondents from the Netherlands is higher than from
other countries. Moreover, the proportion of scientists in the group of respondents is high
and the number of respondents from the private sector is much lower than from government
and academia. Nevertheless, the survey questions were relatively abstract and not related to
any sectoral domain (i.e. private, public or academic) and not related to any territory. As the

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

457

aim of the questionnaire was to gauge the respondent’s mental attitude to the questions that
we asked, we assumed that the respondents’ country of origin and role they play would have
a limited impact on the answers.

The research results suggest that although SDIs do not resemble CASs in every aspect,
they can certainly be treated and analysed as CASs. Viewing SDI through the lens of CAS
theory allows us to better explain and understand SDI. It is clear that features and behaviours
such as openness, level of self-organization, adaptability and existence of feedback loop
mechanisms, play an important role in the efficient and effective functioning of SDI. SDI
should be able to self-organize and be open to create its own structure and to cooperate with
other domains. However, without any coordinating mechanism it is difficult to successfully
establish and manage an SDI. The importance of any kind of positive feedback loop mechan-
isms (i.e. activities that evaluate past SDI activities and set goals for its future development)
cannot be underestimated. Self-organization, openness and feedback loop mechanisms pro-
vide SDI with the capacity to adapt to changes. A high degree of adaptability guarantees that an
SDI can continuously develop by adjusting its structure, behaviour and goals to changing
external circumstances. It is also evident that although unpredictable and nonlinear behaviour
cannot be eliminated, in a well-operating SDI these characteristics can be minimized by a well-
functioning coordination body and by building long-lasting societal and governmental aware-
ness of the necessity of having and maintaining an NSDI. Defining SDI components clearly
helps to systemize and manage its complex structure. Being aware of the fact that SDIs are
sensitive to initial conditions might help in identifying the small factors that play an important
role in shaping SDI structure. Awareness of this SDI feature could help to track the real sources
of some of the problems that SDIs may face.

Viewing SDI as CAS has major implications for SDI assessment. The methods for
assessing CASs require specific strategies that are different from those used for less-
complicated, linear and predictable systems. Many standard assessment tools, techniques
and methods rely on the assumption that the evaluated phenomenon is linear, closed and
predictable. Because these assumptions may not be valid for complex phenomena such as
SDI, we should consider a number of principles underlying the assessment of CASs (Eoyang
and Berkas 1998). For example, the assessment framework should be flexible because CASs
are not stable and their baseline (objectives, definition, etc.) may change over time. The
assessment framework should also include multiple strategies and approaches to allow
assessment from many different perspectives. Cilliers (1998) and De Man (2006) argue
that complex problems can only be investigated using complex resources such as multi-
faceted views. Therefore, when analysing complex phenomena such as SDI we should not
try to simplify the complexity, but acknowledge it and deal with it. Oversimplification of the
assessment framework should be avoided because it might not reflect the complexity and
variability of the assessed phenomena. We therefore recommend that the results of this
research be taken into account when designing an SDI assessment framework.

8. Conclusions

The complexity of SDIs has become a generally accepted fact, but so far little is known about
what to do with this fact. This research provides a new insight into the mechanisms and
functionality of SDIs from the perspective of CASs. By means of case study analysis and
consulting experts it was possible to investigate the possibilities of using CAS theory to
describe SDI. Most of the characteristic features and behaviours of CASs could also be
identified in SDIs. On the basis of such evidence, we can conclude that CAS theory is
applicable to describe SDI.

458

L. Grus et al.

The fact that an SDI can be viewed as a CAS has implications for various studies
regarding SDI, especially its assessment. New assessment strategies, preferably derived
from the research on complex systems, should be further investigated with a view to their
possible application in SDI assessment to improve the validity of such assessments. In
addition, the in-depth analysis of CAS features and behaviours identified and analysed in
this study may lead to a better understanding of SDIs.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge and thank the participants of the workshop on ‘Multi-view framework to assess
National Spatial Data Infrastructures’, held in Wageningen in 2007, for taking the trouble to complete
the online questionnaire. We also thank the Dutch ‘Space for Geo-Information’ (RGI) innovation
programme for providing the necessary resources to conduct this research. We are particularly grateful
to Wojciech Pachelski, Ben Searle, Ian Philip Williamson, Kevin McDougall and Watse Castelein for
reviewing the facts contained in this article about the Polish, Australian and Dutch SDIs respectively.
We also thank the anonymous reviewers of this article for their valuable remarks and suggestions.

Note
1. The main research institutes dedicated to this research are Santa Fe Institute (http://
www.santafe.edu); University of Michigan Center for the Study of Complex Systems (CSCS)
(http://www.cscs.umich.edu/); Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems (NICO) (http://
www.northwestern.edu/nico/); Max-Planck Institute for Physics of Complex Systems (http://
www.mpipks-dresden.mpg.de/);
(http://
for
www.ccsr.uiuc.edu/); New England Complex Systems Institute (NECSI) (http://www.necsi.org/);
Center for Complex Systems (OBUZ) – ISS Warsaw University (http://www.iss.uw.edu.pl/
osrodki/obuz/OBUZNEW_ENG/obuz.htm); Banding Fe
Institute Official Web (http://
www.bandungfe.net/)

Complex

Research

Systems

Center

References
Barnes, M., Matka, E., and Sullivan, H., 2003. Evidence, understanding and complexity: evaluation in

non-linear systems. Evaluation, 9 (3), 265–284.

Blake, S., 2005. The Australian spatial data infrastructure – a stock take. Available from: http://

www.anzlic.org.au/pubinfo/2413334676.html [Accessed 13 December 2007].

Bregt, A.K., and Meerkerk, J. 2007. Space for geo-information: network for geo-innovation in the
Netherlands. 10th AGILE international conference on geographic information science. Denmark:
Aalborg University.

Bregt, A.K., 2000. The Dutch clearinghouse for geospatial information: cornerstone of the national
geospatial data infrastructure (Chapter 15.4). In: R. Groot and J. McLaughlin, eds. Geospatial
data infrastructure. concept, cases, and good practice. New York: Oxford University Press,
262–268.

Calkins, H. and Weatherbe, R., 1995. A case study approach to the study of institutions sharing spatial
data. Urban and regional information systems association (URISA) proceedings, Washington, DC.
Campbell, H., 1996. A social interactionist perspective on computer implementation. Journal of the

American Planning Association, 62 (1), 99–107.

Car, A., 1997. Hierarchical spatial reasoning: theoretical consideration and its application to modelling

wayfinding. Thesis (PhD). Technical University Vienna.

Chan, T.O., 1998. The dynamics of diffusion of corporate GIS. Thesis (PhD). The University of

Melbourne.

tion. Geomatica, 55 (1).

Chan, T.O., 2001. The dynamic nature of spatial data infrastructure: a method of descriptive classifica-

Chan, T.O., Thomas, E., and Thompson, B., 2005. Beyond SDI: the case of Victoria. 36th ISPRS
workshop on services and application of spatial data infrastructure, 14–16 October 2005,
Hangshou, China.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

459

Chan, T.O. and Williamson, I.P. 1999. A model of the decision process for GIS adoption and diffusion
the Urban and Regional Information Systems

in a government environment. Journal of
Association, 11 (2), 7–16.

Cilliers, P., 1998. Complexity and postmodernism, understanding complex systems. London and

New York: Routledge.

255–267.

Cilliers, P., 2005. Complexity, deconstruction and relativism. Theory, Culture and Society, 22 (5),

Clarke, D., Hedberg, O., and Watkins, W., 2003. Development of the Australian spatial data infra-
structure (Chapter eight). In: I. Williamson, A., Rajabifard, and M.E., Feeney, eds. Developing
spatial data infrastructures: from concept to reality. London: Tylor & Francis, 131–145.

Crompvoets, J., 2006. National spatial data clearinghouses. Worldwide development and impact.

Thesis (PhD). Wageningen University.

Crompvoets, J. and Grus, L., 2007. Workshop report ‘Multiview framework to assess (National)
Spatial Data Infrastructures (N)SDI’. Wageningen University, The Netherlands. Available from:
http://webdocs.dow.wur.nl/internet/grs/workshops/Multiview_framework_to_assess_NSDI/
Workshop_report.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008].

De Man, W.H.E., 2006. Understanding SDI; complexity and institunalization. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 20(3), 329–343.

Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR), 2004. Review of the implementation of the
spatial information industry action agenda and the spatial data access and pricing policy. Australian
Government. Available online at http://www.anzlic.org.all/industry_action.htlm

Eoyang, G.H., 1996. A brief introduction to complexity in organizations. Available from: http://

www.chaos-limited.com/Complexity_Intro.htm [Accessed 13 December 2007].

Eoyang, G.H., 1997. Coping with Chaos: seven simple tools. Wyoming: Lagumo, Corp., 196 p.
Eoyang, G.H., 2004. Complex adaptive systems. The Kellogg Fundation.
Eoyang, G.H. and Berkas, T.H., 1998. Evaluation in a complex adaptive system. In: M. Lissac and H.
Gunz, eds. Managing complexity in organizations. Westport, CT: Quorum Books, pp. 313–335.
Franken, K., et al., 2007. A complex systems methodology to transition management. DRUID summer
conference 2007 on appropriability, proximity, routines and innovation, 18–20 June 2007,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Gazdzicki, J. and Linsenbarth, A., 2004. GIS in Poland: development towards SDI, presentation. 10th

EC GI&GIS workshop, ESDI: state of art, 23–25 June 2004, Warsaw, Poland.

Georgiadou, Y., Rodriguez-Pabo´ n, O., and Lance, K.T., 2006. SDI and e-Governance: a quest for
the Urban and Regional

appropriate evaluation approaches. URISA Journal: Journal of
Information Systems Association, 18 (2), 43–58.

Gleick, J., 1989. Chaos: making a new science. New York: Penguin.
Grus, L., Bregt, A., and Crompvoets, J., 2006. Workshop exploring spatial data infrastructures report,
19–20 January 2006, Wageningen University, the Netherlands. Available from: http://www.grs.wur.nl/
UK/Workshops/Exploring+Spatial+Data+Infrastructures/Program/ [Accessed 18 May 2008].

Holland, J.H., 1998. Hidden order: how adoption builds complexity. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Instytut Geodezji i Kartografii (IGiK), 2001. The concept of the Polish Spatial Data Information

Kiefer, K., 2006. Complexity, class dynamics, and distance learning. Computers and Composition

System. Synthesis. Warsaw: IGiK.

Journal, 23(1), 125–138.

LDOCE, 1995. Longman dictionary of contemporary english. 3rd ed. Essex,: Addison Wesley.
Lorenz, E., 1993. The essence of Chaos. Seattle, Washington: University of Washington Press.
Masser, I., 1999. All shapes and sizes: the first generation of national spatial data infrastructures.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13 (1), 67–84.

Masser, I., 2005. GIS worlds, creating spatial data infrastructures. Redlands, CA: ESRI Press.
Masser, I., and Campbell, H., 1996. Great Britain: the dynamics of GIS diffusion. In: Masser, I.
Campbell, H. and M. Cragila, eds. GIS diffusion: the adoption and use of geographical informa-
tion systems in local government in europe. London, UK; Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis.

Masser, I., and Onsrud, H.J., 1993. Diffusion and use of geographic information technologies: an
introduction. In: I. Masser and H.J. Onsrud, eds. Diffusion and use of geographic information
technologies. Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Nebert, D.D., 2004, Developing spatial data infrastructures: the SDI cookbook, version 2.0. GSDI-
Technical Working Group. Available online at http://www.gsdi.org/docs2004/cookbook/
cookbookV2.0.pdf.

460

L. Grus et al.

Omran, E.E., 2007. Spatial data sharing: from theory to practice. Thesis (PhD). Wageningen
University.

Onsrud, H.J., and Pinto, J.K., 1991. Diffusion of geographic information innovations. International

Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5 (4), 447–467.

Pare, G., 2004. Investigating information systems with positivist case study research. Communications

of the Association for Information Systems, 13, 233–264.

Patton, M.Q., 1990. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage

Publications.

Rajabifard, A., Escobar, F., and Williamson, I.P., 2000. Hierarchical spatial reasoning applied to spatial

data infrastructure. Cartography Journal, 29 (2), 41–50.

Rajabifard, A., Feeney, M.E.F., and Williamson, I.P., 2002. Future directions for SDI development.

International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 4 (1): 11–22.

Rajabifard, A., et al., 2003. National SDI-initiatives. In: Developing spatial data infrastructures: from
concept to reality, I. Williamson, A., Rajabifard, and M.E., Feeney, eds. London: Tylor & Francis,
95–109.

Ravi, 2003. Space for Geo-information, BSIK knowledge project proposal. The Netherlands: Amersfoort.
Rodriguez-Pabon, O., 2005. Theoretical framework for the evaluation and comparison of SDI. Thesis

(PhD). University of Laval, Canada.

Rotmans, J., 2005. Societal innovation: between dream and reality lies complexity. Erasmus Research

Institute of Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam.

Spatial Application Division, Catholic University of Leuven (SADL), 2006. Spatial data infrastructure

in Europe: state of play during 2005, The Netherlands.

Spatial Application Division, Catholic University of Leuven (SADL), 2007. Spatial data infrastructure

in Europe: state of play during 2005, Poland.

Van Loenen, B. and Kok, B., 2002. Dutch NGII on course: a practical approach on implementing a

vision. FIG XXII international Congress, 19–26 April 2002, Washington, DC USA.

Van Loenen, B., 2006. Developing geographic information infrastructures. The role of information

policies. Thesis (PhD). Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.

VROM, 2008. GIDEON – Key geo-information facility for the Netherlands. The Netherlands: VROM.
Waldrop, M.M., 1992. Complexity: the emerging science at the edge of order and chaos. London:

Viking.

Warnest, M., Rajabifard, A., and Williamson, I.P., 2005. Collaborative approach to building national
SDI in federated state systems: case study of Australia. Proceedings of FIG working week/GSDI 8,
16–21 April 2005, Cairo, Egypt.

Yin, R.K., 2003. Case study research: design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Appendix 1
Abbreviations:
SA
A
N
D
SD

Strongly Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly Disagree

Questionnaire results on Spatial Data Infrastructures as Complex Adaptive Systems

1. SDI consists of recognizable components. (Components)*

SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

Responses

% Number

7.4
59.3
14.8
11.1
7.4

2
16
4
3
2

(Continued )

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

461

Appendix

(Continued)

Questionnaire results on Spatial Data Infrastructures as Complex Adaptive Systems

2. SDI is isolated from its environment. (Openness)*

3. Decisions on SDI made in the past have an impact on its future

development. (Sensitivity to initial conditions)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

4. New SDI functions can emerge in the future. (Unpredictability)*

SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

5. The main SDI components are similar on different levels of SDI
hierarchy, e.g. Local SDIs, National SDIs (Scale independence)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

6. SDI’s future activities can be predicted with high certainty.

(Unpredictability)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

7. SDI organizers may create their own organizational structure without

necessarily being guided by an external, non-SDI body. (Self-organization)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

8. SDI behaviour may change in an unpredictable way due to

transformations in country’s political strategies. (Non-linearity)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

Responses

% Number

0.0
0.0
3.8
42.3
53.8

25.9
51.9
18.5
3.7
0.0

37.0
55.6
3.7
0.0
3.7

7.4
59.3
11.1
18.5
3.7

0.0
7.4
22.2
63.0
7.4

7.4
48.1
22.2
18.5
3.7

3.8
50.0
23.1
23.1
0.0

0
0
1
11
14

7
14
5
1
0

10
15
1
0
1

2
16
3
5
1

0
2
6
17
2

2
13
6
5
1

1
13
6
6
0

(Continued )

462

L. Grus et al.

Appendix

(Continued)

Questionnaire results on Spatial Data Infrastructures as Complex Adaptive Systems

9. SDI is able to learn from its own experience and improve itself, i.e. by

changing its organizational structure to a more efficient one.
(Feedback loop)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

10. It is difficult to identify SDI’s main building blocks. (Components)*

SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

11. Complexity of SDI is a result of many actors constantly interacting
with each other in a way which is hard to predict. (Complexity)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

12. Current SDI performance is independent of the decision made about

it in the past. (Sensitivity to initial conditions)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

13. It is not easy to determine the boundaries of SDI. (Openness)*

14. SDI is able to change its own structure and strategies over time

due to changing circumstances in its environment. (Adaptability)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

15. On different SDI’s hierarchical levels the constituting components

are similar. (Scale independence)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

Responses

% Number

7.4
63.0
22.2
7.4
0.0

3.7
18.5
14.8
51.9
11.1

19.2
50.0
23.1
3.8
3.8

3.7
3.7
3.7
77.8
11.1

22.2
55.6
7.4
14.8
0.0

3.7
55.6
33.3
3.7
3.7

0.0
59.3
18.5
18.5
3.7

2
17
6
2
0

1
5
4
14
3

5
13
6
1
1

1
1
1
21
3

6
15
2
4
0

1
15
9
1
1

0
16
5
5
1

(Continued )

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

463

Appendix

(Continued)

Questionnaire results on Spatial Data Infrastructures as Complex Adaptive Systems

16. SDI is able to adapt its functionality to the emerging advancements

in other sectors. (Adaptability)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

17. SDI development is linear, i.e. given specifically defined system’s
setup it is possible to be sure about its behaviour. (Non-linearity)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

18. Audits and evaluations (internal or/and external) help to improve

19. SDI can be described as a set of components working together

SDI performance. (Feedback loop)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

for a particular purpose. (System)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

(Complexity)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

(Self-organization)*
SA
A
Neutral
D
SD

20. SDI actors behave according to strictly defined rules and procedures.

21. Bottom-up processes play an essential role in shaping SDI.

Responses

% Number

3.7
48.1
33.3
11.1
3.7

0.0
3.8
19.2
42.3
34.6

22.2
51.9
25.9
0.0
0.0

11.5
42.3
23.1
19.2
3.8

0.0
0.0
40.7
44.4
14.8

25.9
63.0
11.1
0.0
0.0

1
13
9
3
1

0
1
5
11
9

6
14
7
0
0

3
11
6
5
1

0
0
11
12
4

7
17
3
0
0

SA, Strongly Agree; A, Agree; SD, Strongly Disagree; D, Disagree.
*The information in brackets was not included in the version of the questionnaire that was sent to the
workshop participants.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd

and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright

holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

