The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 3

pp. 187–190 UKCC National Report to ICA 2011-Special Issue August 2011

O B S E R V A T I O N S

Better Mapping Campaign, The British Cartographic Society

Mary Spence MBE

Global Mapping Ltd, Brackley, Northamptonshire, UK
Email: maryspence@mac.com

The use of geographic information, digital mapping software and GIS is ever increasing. Maps can be created by anyone
with access to a computer with appropriate software. But what is this ‘democratisation’ of cartography doing to the quality
of the map? Unfortunately, some maps do not communicate their message at all well. A poorly designed map can at least
diminish effective communication of information to users and at worst mislead, perhaps seriously. The Better Mapping
Campaign was launched by The British Cartographic Society to demonstrate the importance of good map design and to
illustrate through the application of a few basic design principles that the end result can be much improved.

Keywords: cartography, mapmaking, map design

MAPMAKING

is no longer

the sole preserve of

Making maps
the
Cartographer. Maps can be created by anyone with access
to a computer and appropriate software. Interactive online
‘live’ maps are prevalent and free data abound. It has been
called ‘democratisation’ of cartography, where anyone can
access data and then add and share their own information.
All of this is to be welcomed but what does it mean in terms
of map quality?

Sadly, many maps do not communicate their message at
all well, either because the mapmaker does not have the
training or expertise to know the difference between a good
and a bad map or does not have the technical ability to
translate such knowledge into good design. Map data are
readily available on the web or in the cloud and bespoke
mapping is no longer the norm. With so many free data,
the perceived value of mapping is at an all time low and the
making of a map can be a hasty afterthought in an other-
wise detailed process of data preparation. Recognizing that
there is little formal training in cartography in the UK and
that new mapmakers are eager to learn how to make better
maps, The British Cartographic Society (BCS) launched its
Better Mapping Campaign in the autumn of 2006 with a
series of training days – the Better Mapping Seminars.

BETTER MAPPING SEMINARS

The Better Mapping Seminars are presentation-based
training days run by BCS with expert presenters delivering
short ‘teaching’ sessions interspersed with contributions
from practitioners showing examples of good practice from
the real world.

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13044121958867

With much exposition of watchwords such as legibility
and clarity, selection and relevance through to user and
purpose and back again, the aim is to impart the message
that maps can be improved easily. Such watchwords are
strangers to the uninitiated but once imparted will stick
forever – especially when supported by example. From this
premise, the outline for a training day was developed.

projections and data;

media and recognizing the difference;

Since the ﬁrst series of seminars, the content of a Better
Mapping Seminar has evolved to its present format but
consistently covering the essential elements of:
N Good and Bad Maps – showing examples from popular
N In the Beginning – a brief
introduction to map
N Sourcing Good Data – documenting the numerous
commercial sources for map data and introducing the
numerous sites from which good-quality free data can be
downloaded;
N Principles of Good Cartographic Design – three teaching
slots highlighting the fundamentals of good design, why
it matters and what can be done to improve a map,
including tips and techniques for enhanced design with
special mention of the use of colour and text on maps;
N Designing Maps for Multiple Output – discussing the
different parameters that occur in designing for the web
or other media;
N Making Sense of Data – a look at the mapping of
statistics and issues relating to the misrepresentation of
numerical data;
N Checklist – emphasizing the importance of checking at
every stage of the process of making a map,
from
ensuring data quality (accuracy, currency and relevance)

188

The Cartographic Journal

to the execution of the design itself to suit the purpose,
user and medium of delivery;
N Summary – to reinforce the message that maps can be
improved with the judicial application of a few carto-
graphic design principles;
N Conclusion – Cartography is what makes the difference

between a good and a bad map.

A brief interlude from the intensity of the day comes in the
form of an interactive ‘looking at maps’ session where
delegates, with their new-found understanding of map
design, study a selection of maps then discuss whether they
serve the purpose and communicate the correct message. In
other words, do they meet the criteria of a good map?

Delegates attending a Better Mapping Seminar are
eligible to receive Continual Professional Development
(CPD) points as part of their annual training objective
towards the Association for Geographic Information (AGI)
CPD scheme and the Royal Geographical Society with IBG
Chartered Geographer (GIS) accreditation.

SEMINAR HISTORY

In the autumn of 2006, the ﬁrst series of seminars visited
Cardiff, Liverpool, Edinburgh and London. In order to
attract the widest possible audience, these ﬁrst events were
sponsored by BCS in an initiative that was to grow and
grow. We had embarked upon a journey which has been
gathering momentum ever since – the aim being to
promote good practice and explore the concepts and value
of good map design while giving delegates practical
guidance on how to make great maps.

In 2008, the BCS teamed up with the AGI to run a series
of four Better Mapping Seminars on a risk/reward model at
signiﬁcantly reduced rates for BCS and AGI members.
These events were aimed at promoting better cartographic
practice primarily within the GIS community and designed
to build on the success of the ﬁrst series, introducing a more
focused practical
instruction session in the afternoon
(Figure 1). Over 200 delegates attended at Cardiff,
Edinburgh, Leeds and London, from central government,
local government, utilities, emergency services and com-
mercial organisations. The feedback was extremely positive
and we came away satisﬁed that we were achieving our aims.
The BCS Roadshow was born in 2009 when four
seminars were repeated on consecutive days in a whirlwind
tour to Bristol, Glasgow, Birmingham and London rather
than being spread over a few weeks as previously. Such an
intense programme was exhausting but exhilarating for the
presenters but exceedingly efﬁcient in terms of consistent
delivery. Once again, these were run in conjunction with
AGI who provided the administrative support leaving BCS
to concentrate on the content. This time we introduced a
guest speaker from a nearby local authority at each venue –
a suggestion incorporated from comments received at the
previous series. Over 100 delegates turned out for this
series to overwhelming approbation – conﬁrmation that the
seminars continued to provide excellent value for money
whilst affording an opportunity for the BCS to underline
the continuing importance of cartography.

BETTER MAPPING II, THE NEXT LEVEL

Since the ﬁrst seminars in 2006, the breadth of content has
consistently improved with each successive series and a call
for more in-depth teaching on aspects of cartography was
growing. Hence – Better Mapping II, the next level, the ﬁrst
of which attracted over 50 delegates
in London in
November 2010 – was again held in conjunction with
AGI. Following a recap on the fundamental principles of
good map design, the focus was to be on more detailed
expositions of the ﬁner points of map design and the whole
event to be more participatory than previous seminars. A
workshop element was introduced where delegates were
asked to represent a set of statistical data in map form. An
interesting array of attempts unfolded and one of the more
wily attendees outsmarted us by recognizing the data as the
Minard map of Napoleon’s attack on and retreat from
Moscow! The table-by-table ‘looking at maps’ session was
and
particularly beneﬁcial with intelligent
discussions on the merits (or otherwise) of the maps
presented for critique. The enthusiastic reception left us
with a feeling that the message about good cartography was
getting through.

comments

BETTER MAPPING BELFAST

In March 2011, the BCS crossed the water to Northern
Ireland (NI) at the kind invitation of our hosts, Land and
Property Services, the HQ of Ordnance Survey of Northern
Ireland (OSNI) mapping (Figures 2 and 3). Local speakers
joined members of the original Better Mapping team to
discuss examples of their work and experiences: representa-
tives from OSNI, GSNI and Police Service of NI. An added
bonus for delegates was a visit to the GSNI 3D Immersive
Suite to be shown examples of underwater terrain model-
ling and LIDAR images of an underground cave network –
a brilliant demonstration of how geological mapping has
advanced from 2D cross sections to 3D models and how
surveyors can carry out desktop analysis before venturing
into the ﬁeld, thus making their work more efﬁcient and less
time consuming. Once again we received very positive
feedback:

Enriching, enlightening
Entertainingly informative
A positive insight to progressive and improved carto-
graphy
Most enjoyable and enlightening - filled in lots of gaps -
thank you

and from one more experienced delegate:

Very useful to be reminded what good cartography is

Through these seminars, I believe that we have demon-
strated that good cartography is essential in the preparation
of maps that communicate their message efﬁciently and
effectively. Cartographers know that the mapping element
should be given as much importance as the data preparation
and by aiding the mapmaker to circumvent some of the
major issues in creating maps, we hope to make the end
product better. At least mapmakers will now recognize that
it matters and are better equipped to create good maps.

Better Mapping

189

Figure 1. Gyles Darkes at the London seminar

Figure 3. Mary Spence at the Northern Ireland Seminar

Figure 2. Northern Ireland Seminar

CARTOGRAPHY: AN INTRODUCTION

its Better Mapping initiative,

No single day of training can cover the immense subject that is
Cartography. The best we can do is raise awareness of the
issues and give some positive tips on how to make good maps.
the BCS
In support of
recognized the need for some ready reference to help the
many mapmakers who have no formal training in their task.
Thus was born ‘Cartography: an introduction’ (Figure 4).
Prepared on behalf of the BCS by Giles Darkes, Cartographic
Consultant, and Mary Spence, MBE, Cartographic Designer,
the 64 pages of this little A6 booklet are crammed full of useful
information to assist the mapmaking community in under-
standing the principles behind the creation of a good map. Its
aim is to provide basic information on what works well in a
map and to get the world thinking about maps and their
messages.

The booklet is not an academic text but rather a simple
and easy reference – an introduction – aimed at those for
whom making maps may be merely an add-on to their daily
work. It covers the fundamentals of mapping including:
why good maps are important; map functions and types;
how maps are made; feature selection and generalisation;
symbolisation of features; data quality and map quality; the
principles of map design; colour and text on maps; page
layout and marginalia; tips on how to make better maps.

Figure 4. Front cover of Cartography: an introduction

Over 2500 copies have been despatched since its publica-
tion in 2008 to more than 20 countries as far aﬁeld as
Colombia, China, Singapore and New Zealand with the
majority of non-UK sales coming from the USA and Canada.

Testimonial:
Wow! I was so impressed and would like to congratulate
you on such a worthwhile and very useful publication.
This is exactly what I have been searching for for such a
long time. The pages that relate to the actual ‘art’ of
cartography (symbols, colour, generalisation, text place-
ment etc) are priceless. So many cartographers, GIS
operators not to mention students will benefit from this
wonderful book.

190

Damien Demaj,
Chief Cartographic Consultant on ‘Earth’,
the largest world atlas ever produced
Victoria, Australia

The booklet retails at £4.99 plus p&p and can be
ordered from http://www.cartography.org.uk. Delegates
at the Better Mapping seminars each receive a copy of the
booklet.

WHAT NEXT?

Now that the Better Mapping Seminars are well established,
the aim is to repeat both the fundamental day and the more
advanced event at regular intervals subject to demand. At
the same time, we can offer one-to-one training within an
organisation covering topics to suit speciﬁc requirements.
Such an event was organized for Natural England in 2010
where BCS talked about cartographic best practice, con-
tributed to workshop sessions and helped develop in-house
cartographic conventions.

At the BCS Annual Symposium, members of the Better
Mapping team offer a Cartographic Surgery workshop
where individuals are invited to submit maps for construc-
tive advice on how to improve them. Alternatively, maps in

The Cartographic Journal

the public domain can be brought along for analysis and
discussion.

I believe that we have turned the corner and now have
the attention of the wider mapmaking community who are
keen to learn about cartography. There is an appetite for
more information and while people are keen to learn, BCS
will be more than happy to assist.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Mary Spence, MBE,
is
Project Manager at Global
Mapping Ltd where part of
her work involves applying
cartographic principles to
enhance mapping
pro-
duced from GIS data. She
is also a freelance consul-
specializing in all
tant
aspects of map design. Her professional career spans over
30 years in cartographic publishing culminating in being
awarded an MBE in 2004 for Services to Cartographic
Design. Mary is a Chartered Geographer and Fellow of the
Royal Geographical Society, Past President of BCS and
organizer of the Better Mapping Seminars.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

