The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Testing the Usability of OpenStreetMap's iD Tool

Jan Behrens, Corné P. J. M. van Elzakker & Manuela Schmidt

To cite this article: Jan Behrens, Corné P. J. M. van Elzakker & Manuela Schmidt (2015) Testing
the Usability of OpenStreetMap's iD Tool, The Cartographic Journal, 52:2, 177-184, DOI:
10.1080/00087041.2015.1119457

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1119457

Published online: 26 Nov 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 53

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi]

Date: 01 April 2016, At: 04:19

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 52 No. 2
q The British Cartographic Society 2015

pp. 177–18

84

International Cartographic Conference, Rio 2015 - Special Issue May 2015

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Testing the Usability of OpenStreetMap’s iD Tool

Jan Behrens1, Corne´ P. J. M. van Elzakker 2 and Manuela Schmidt1

1Department for Geodesy and Geoinformation, Vienna University of Technology, Austria. 2Faculty ITC, University of
Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
Email: jb3@tzi.de

The objective of this study is to investigate the usability of the iD editor of OpenStreetMap (OSM). To this end a usability
test with 18 participants has been conducted. The participants were given mapping tasks to complete using iD and observed
with the thinking aloud method as well as screen recording and mouse/keyboard logging. Additionally, the test persons were
interviewed after each test. The data gathered were analysed with regard to key usability criteria such as learnability,
efﬁciency, error tolerance, and subjective user satisfaction. The outcome of this study is the identiﬁcation of usability issues
from which possible improvements of the tool have been derived. The study shows that iD is an overall usable tool for novice
users, but still shows opportunities for improvement especially in terms of learnability and error handling.

Keywords: OpenStreetMap, VGI, usability, iD editor

INTRODUCTION

Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) has been in the
focus of research since Goodchild ﬁrst coined the term in
2007, referring to it as “the widespread engagement of large
numbers of private citizens, often with little in the way of
formal qualiﬁcations, in the creation of geographic infor-
mation” (Goodchild, 2007, p. 2). The phenomenon has
emerged from the Web 2.0 paradigm that web-based content
production is not only done by experts anymore, but also by
amateurs – i.e. the ones who were previously only meant to
consume content. Simultaneously, the lack of free and open
sources of geographic information has led to the develop-
ment of VGI platforms which increasingly provide an
alternative to (costly) authoritative and commercial geodata.
The relevance of VGI has been proved by, among other
things, the great success and growth of collaborative geodata
projects such as OpenStreetMap (OSM).

OSM (URL 1) is the best-known and biggest collabora-
tive geodata project today, numbering more than 1.7 million
registered contributors (URL 2). OSM’s goal is to collect
geographic data for the whole world, and this goal
is
pursued with the help of a crowd of volunteers. In this
context, the term ‘crowdsourcing’ is widely used, referring
to any community-based activity aiming at content
generation including, for example, Wikipedia (URL 3).

In OSM, as in Wikipedia, any person (provided they have
registered an account) can edit and improve the map with
their local knowledge. Raw OSM data are freely accessible,
meaning that everyone is free to take it and use it for
individual purposes, such as creating a custom map or
setting up a location-based service. OSM has become one of
the most popular resources for map production, enabling
laypeople to put geographic information to their

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1119457

suppliers of

personal use. It is being increasingly adopted by the media
and commercial
location-based services,
e.g. Nestoria (URL 4) or Flickr (URL 5), who have made
the switch to using OSM on their websites, or the navigation
system Skobbler (URL 6), which solely relies on OSM data.
With the popularity of OSM rising constantly, an
increasing number of studies investigate the phenomenon
with respect to user characteristics, users’ motivation to
contribute, and data quality (Budhathoki, 2010; Nedovic´-
Budic´ and Budhathoki, 2010; Lin, 2011; Haklay, 2010).
Several studies of OSM have highlighted the need for better
usability of OSM tools in order to lower the barriers to
contributing, especially for new users. Jones and Weber
(2012) pointed out that a “chasm” exists in the transition of
OSM contribution rates from a small number of pioneer
users to mass adoption. This is an indication that (among
other things) ﬂaws in the editing tools might prevent the
project from gaining a greater amount of dedicated and
actively contributing members.

Therefore, investigations into the tools that contributors
work with in order to make their edits are vital. If these tools
importantly, usable enough,
are appealing and, most
a bigger fraction of potential users will adopt the system.
Within the scope of this study a usability test of one of
OSM’s editing tools, iD, has been conducted.

iD is a recently developed online editor for OSM,
integrated directly into the main OSM website. It has been
designed primarily for beginners and casual contributors, but
may also serve as an alternative for more advanced users.
Programmed in JavaScript, it was intended as a replacement
for the previous Adobe Flash-based online editor Potlatch 2.
It was launched on the OSM main page in May 2013 (URL 7)
and set as the default online editor in August 2013 (URL 8).

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016  
4
178

The Cartographic Journal

The iD tool has been chosen because it is currently the
most used editor for OSM data (measured by changesets
and distinct users; URL 9) and because so far no scientiﬁc
usability study exists about it. The objective of this research
is to investigate the usability of the iD editor for OSM. The
outcome of this research is the identiﬁcation of usability
issues that are indicative of possible improvements of the
tool.

RELATED RESEARCH

Contributing to OSM
OSM data are collected by volunteer enthusiasts using
techniques such as Global Positioning System (GPS),
tracing from aerial
imagery, or local knowledge. In the
mapping process, the gathered information is translated and
integrated into the OSM raw data format. This conversion is
facilitated by editor programs that provide an interface
between the geographic data collected and their represen-
tation within OSM.

fraction of

The major amount of user-generated geodata in OSM is
its members.
contributed by only a small
Nielsen’s ‘90-9-1 rule’ that states that “in most online
communities, 90% of the users are lurkers who never
contribute, 9% of users contribute a little, and 1% of users
account for almost all the action” (Nielsen, 2006) helps
shape a rough picture of OSM contributions. Statistical
analyses of OSM distributions have indeed shown that 1% of
users account for approximately 80% of the data (URL 10).
On the other hand, only 35% of the users who create an
OSM account actually make edits to the database (Jones and
Weber, 2012), which is more than the 10% suggested by
Nielsen, but still a number that could be increased for
OSM’s beneﬁt.

The questions why people withdraw from contributing and
why certain users do not contribute at all, although they have
some initial motivation for it, remain to be investigated more
extensively. In research done by Schmidt et al. (2013) users
who do not contribute anymore reveal that the time-
consuming aspect of mapping and complexity in editing
were some of
the reasons why they withdrew from
contributing. From this fact, it follows that research on the
usability of editors is necessary in order to lower the barriers to
contributing, especially for novices and passive users.

Usability of VGI interfaces
Usability is a concept of human –computer interaction
improving and
science widely referred to in testing,
validating software, websites, and web tools. According to
Gould and Lewis (1985), a usable system should be “easy to
learn (and remember), useful, that is, contain functions
people really need in their work, and be easy and pleasant to
use” (p. 300). Nielsen (1992) lists ﬁve usability criteria
commonly referred to: “learnability, efﬁciency of use once
the system has been learned, ability of infrequent users to
return to the system without having to learn it all over,
frequency and seriousness of user errors, and subjective user
satisfaction” (p. 15). An evaluation of iD with a focus on
these criteria is the main objective of this study.

Usability testing has been used to test neogeography
maps and VGI applications as well, such as in a study by
Jones and Weber (2012). They conducted a usability test of
Potlatch 2, an OSM online editor that was integrated in the
OSM website in November 2010 (URL 11), i.e. the direct
predecessor of iD. Using screen recording, eye tracking, and
thinking aloud, the researchers tested the user interface with
10 test persons who had no prior experience with OSM.
The analysis,
focused on the usability criterion of
learnability, showed that there were signiﬁcant problems
with the tool, e.g. misplaced interface elements, inconsistent
interaction, insufﬁcient warnings etc.

Furthermore, Jones and Weber (2012) developed a set of
usability heuristics based on previous work in the ﬁeld
of usability science and tailored to the speciﬁcs of VGI
interfaces. These measures are,
in addition to Nielsen’s
criteria, used in the analysis of the results of this study. This
study differs from Jones & Weber’s work in a way that it not
only works with novices, but also with experienced OSM
mappers (not ones experienced with iD), and that a broader
spectrum of usability criteria is taken into account (not only
learnability).

METHODOLOGY

Observation methods
In order to produce useful qualitative information on iD’s
usability, observation techniques are used that elicit
unbiased data about the participant’s interaction with the
study object,
i.e. thinking aloud, screen recording, and
mouse and keyboard logging. Additionally, interviews are
used to gain a clearer picture of the participants’ subjective
interpretations of the tests. Although thinking aloud is a
time-consuming effort in terms of both execution and
analysis, it is the chosen method for this research, because it
may be expected to produce the most valuable results; since
testing with real users has shown to produce better results
than heuristic methods (Gould and Lewis, 1985).

The test persons’ utterances from the thinking aloud were
recorded with a headset microphone, which was attached to
the computer also running the iD application. After the
tests, the thinking aloud data were analyzed and relevant
portions of them were tagged with certain codes and ﬁnally
transcribed by the word, including descriptions of what the
participant did.

Through screen recording the computer’s screen was
captured and saved to a video ﬁle. With this method, the
interface the user is confronted with is recorded as well as
cursor movements. In combination with thinking aloud it
facilitates a very detailed analysis of the user’s interactions,
enabling the detection of misled behaviour resulting from
possible usability issues of the system.

Screen recording, however, is not fully capable of taking a
record of mouse clicks or keyboard strokes: although one
can spot occurrences of mouse clicks and keyboard strokes
whenever there is a visible feedback to them, one cannot
identify them when there is no visual feedback, e.g. a click on
an area of the screen that is not a button or does not react
otherwise. To take a record of all mouse and keyboard
interaction, the “key-mon” tool (URL 12) was used, which

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 Usability of OpenStreetMap’s iD Tool

179

displays a small panel on the screen showing the buttons
pressed on the mouse or keyboard in real time. As the panel
is displayed on the screen, it is embedded within the screen
recording videos.

User groups
The test was conducted with two user groups:
. 9 users who have not edited OSM before, except maybe

one or two times (the ‘novice’ group),

. and 9 users who have some more experience with OSM,
but have not, or rarely, used the iD editor before (the
‘mapper’ group).

The distinction between these two user groups is important
because those who have edited OSM before are certainly
more familiar with the basic concepts of OSM editing – such
as the tagging system, the ways how map objects should be
drawn, or how aerial imagery can be interpreted. As users of
the novice group usually lack this knowledge, they were
expected to perform differently on the editing tasks and thus
to reveal different usability issues with the editor. However,
with respect to the iD editor all test persons were (almost)
novice users.

The conclusions that can be drawn for any improvement
of iD will certainly depend on the developers’ and the OSM
community’s opinion which user group the program is to be
targetted at (who, as indicated in Section 1, are mainly
novices to OSM). The usefulness of the test results will, for
that matter, be increased by the possibility to differentiate
between the groups of users that have produced them.

Test plan
The test persons were selected with the aid of an online
survey (see Survey Response). In the survey, the candidates
were asked questions used to assign them to the novice and
mapper groups, as well as to collect some background
information about their contributing characteristics and
their experience with related technologies such as IT, GIS,
and social media in order to better interpret the test results
afterwards. All test persons were required to complete the
survey prior to the actual test.

The actual test has been designed to simulate a real use case
as authentically as possible. Solving the tasks required different
activities typical of a beginner level OSM mapping session,
with a more advanced extra task for the mapper group.

The ﬁrst task was intended to make the test person familiar
with the OSM website and the iD tool. The test person is
asked to navigate to a target map area by using the search
function. Afterwards he/she is supposed to go through the
iD walkthrough, which is a built-in introduction to the basic
functionality of the editor. The reason why this is done is that
the walkthrough is an integral part of the editor and
therefore deserves to be tested with respect to its usability as
well. If it proves to be a useful tutorial for novice users, it
certainly contributes to the ease of learning to use iD.
Besides, it is a rather easy task and therefore very suitable as a
starter (also for test persons to practise thinking aloud).

In the second task, the test person is asked to add features
to the map that are annotated on a printed “Field Paper”.
Field Papers (URL 13) are automatically generated

printouts of a chosen map area in OSM that can be taken
out into the ﬁeld, ﬁlled with notes, and afterwards scanned
and loaded into the editor program. Although the scanning
is optional, they are a useful (and popular) way of taking
notes during a mapping survey. The Field Paper provided
for this task contains annotations of typical map objects,
such as a restaurant, a car park, or a foot path (Figure 1).
In this task the test persons are required to make use of the
functionality they have become acquainted with during the
walkthrough.

In the third task, the test person is asked to use the aerial
imagery, which is displayed as a background layer in the
editor, to make additional edits. In this task the test person is
supposed to add two objects of his/her choice and to
improve the geometries of two existing building outlines.
This task may be more demanding, because editing of
geometries is not covered in the walkthrough (but still a very
common thing to do when editing OSM).

A fourth task is given to the participants of the ‘mapper’
group only. They are asked to add a piece of information
derived from ﬁctitious local knowledge (a speed limit
imposed on a particular section of a road) to the map. This
task requires the test persons to make use of a function of iD
not needed in any of the previous tasks (splitting a line). The
reason why this task is not given to the novice participants is
because this mapping technique is not very commonly used
by ﬁrst-time mappers and also because the ﬁrst three tasks
are likely to be time-consuming enough for participants of
that group.

While working on the tasks, the test persons were allowed
to use two external help sources, the OSM wiki (URL 14)
and the iD introduction on the “LearnOSM” website
they needed information on
(URL 15),
mapping recommendations or additional help with using
the editor.

in case

Immediately after the test, the participants were asked for
their opinions on their performance in the tests. The
questions were targetted at the test persons’ pleasure and
satisfaction in using the tool, and were intended to elicit
retrospective comments on, e.g., situations in which they
struggled or got lost.

RESULTS

Survey response
An online survey was sent out to the OSM community,
mainly to attract test persons of the mapper group. In order
to attract participants for the novice group – as far as they
could not be found through the OSM community – we also
reached out to acquainted persons. The goal was to ﬁnd test
persons with diverse characteristics and backgrounds for
each group. The survey was announced on the OSM
community’s regional mailing list for Hamburg “OSM-
HH”, on the German-language OSM mailing list “Talk-
de”, and on the general discussion list “OSM-talk”.

Altogether 13 valid responses (i.e. completely ﬁlled forms
with valid contact information) of the novice type and 26
type were received.
the mapper
valid responses of
Respondents were invited to the tests successively, each
time only as many as needed. When any of the invited

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 180

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. The Field Paper used in task 2

candidates cancelled or did not reply at all, another round of
invitations was started until a sufﬁcient number of test
persons were found. Eventually 18 test persons were found,
9 of the novice group and 9 of the mapper group. This can
be considered a sufﬁcient number as, according to Nielsen
(1994), approximately 80% of the usability issues can be
found with ﬁve test persons in a thinking aloud test.

Completion of the tasks
Task 1. The ﬁrst task was to complete the walkthrough and
was successfully completed by all test persons, as they only
needed to follow the instructions given on the screen.

Task 2. The second task entailed entering map
information that was given on a Field Paper in analogue
form. Success in this task can be measured by whether the
test persons achieved to add the information that the task

wanted them to add. There were nine objects to be added or
modiﬁed. Figure 2 shows the amount of test persons from
each group who were successful in applying the correct
feature types to the map objects given on the Field Paper and
Figure 3 shows the amount of test persons adding the
correct attributes to the respective features.

Task 3 asked the test persons to add two objects of their
choice to the map using the aerial imagery in the editor’s
background layer. As the test persons were given a lot of
freedom in completing this task, one can only measure if any
meaningful feature types have been used at all. This is in fact
true for all features that have been added except two that
have been added by novice users: they added area objects
using the generic feature type Area and only added a name
to it.

The extra task 4, given only to test persons of the mapper
group, asked the test persons to add attributes to segments

Figure 2. Success in using the correct feature types in task 2, n ¼ 9
(*Hotel/Novice: n ¼ 8)

Figure 3. Success in using the correct attributes in task 2, n ¼ 9
(*Hotel/Novice: n ¼ 8)

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 Usability of OpenStreetMap’s iD Tool

181

requiring them to use the split
of existing lines,
functionality. This task was successfully completed by all
nine mapper users.

Analysis of the observations
In this section, some of the observations elicited from the
participants’ thinking aloud data are presented. Relevant
sections of the recordings that exhibit issues with the editor or
other interesting remarks by the participants have been
identiﬁed and coded depending on the type of interaction they
were related to. Some of the most interesting excerpts from the
thinking aloud are quoted and discussed here, structured by
the types of interaction they are related to.

Walkthrough
While all
test persons managed to complete the
walkthrough tutorial, in some instances there was some
confusion about the meaning of interaction elements, or the
procedure.

A common issue users got stuck with in this task was
adding a name to the cafe. The walkthrough did not react
when a name had been entered, so many did not know how
to move forward. The situation appears not only after
adding the name for the cafe, but also after changing the
cafe’s name and after adding the names to the playground
and the residential road. However, the ﬁrst instance was the
most problematic case, because no indication was given by
the tutorial that the feature editor needed to be closed until
the user clicked somewhere outside of the name ﬁeld.

Novice 1: presses Enter; “I press enter, it doesn’t react to
my command. so I’m gonna try with the plus sign”; clicks
‘ þ ’ next to the name ﬁeld; reads: “The feature editor
can be closed by clicking on the close button. Close the
feature editor”; clicks close button

As with drawing areas, most users succeeded at the task of
drawing a road, but several did not ﬁnd the correct place to start
drawing. Some clicked on existing roads until they realized that
the road was supposed to be traced from the imagery.

Navigation
Apart from the walkthrough task, various issues arose during the
remaining tasks. Panning the map by dragging and dropping
could result in accidentally moving nodes when the mouse was
clicked on an existing point feature. Also, zooming the map with
the mouse wheel was too slow for several test persons.

Search
The search function that is built into the iD editor has not
been found by all users, so some closed the editor and used
the main page’s search function instead. If users did use the
editor’s search function, they often had trouble spotting the
searched feature on the map, because it was not
automatically centred on the map.

Selecting a feature type
A major issue test persons complained about was the
procedure of selecting the feature type of a newly created

object, as well as changing an existing object’s feature type.
First, some users often did not ﬁnd the correct feature types
because they simply did not use the search function.

Second, they sometimes did not ﬁnd the feature type they
were looking for, because they did not search for the correct
terms, or simply because the feature type they had in mind
did not exist.

Third, several users did not understand the feature type
category buttons (appearing like layers of buttons and
expanding a list of subtypes when clicked) and were
confused by them.

Novice 2: “Well, what does a parking come under. place
of worship.”; scrolls up and down the list; “under Land
Use.”; clicks on Land Use; clicks again; double-clicks;
clicks repeatedly; “I’d say I have selected it. but nothing
happens”; clicks many more times, clicks in the map, then
goes back to the feature type selection; “. or is Land Use
some kind of super-category?”; scrolls down and selects
Area

Lastly, a few users were looking for a feature type for
which they had the actual tags in mind. They missed a
possibility to select the feature type directly by its tag.

Editing interactions
The line drawing functionality was picked up quickly by the
majority of test persons. In a few cases, however, it was not
clear to the test persons how the line could be ﬁnished,
although this had been covered in the walkthrough.

Drawing areas was, like drawing lines, convenient for
most users. What affected the users’ workﬂow negatively in
some cases was that when the undo button was used to
revert the last node, the editor cancelled the drawing mode,
making it impossible to resume drawing the area.

Besides creating new lines and areas, many test persons
had issues with modifying existing ones, most notably
moving and adding nodes to ways or areas. In an attempt to
move a node, some users looked for a button or other type
of interaction instead of simply dragging the node.

Not only moving nodes raised issues, but also adding
nodes presented a challenge to several test persons. In iD
there are two ways to add nodes to lines or areas: by double-
clicking on an edge, and by dragging and dropping the
“virtual nodes” signiﬁed by grey dots and located in the
middle of two existing nodes. But these options were not
always obvious; instead the circular menu (Figure 4) was
often (and erroneously) believed to be useful.

Post-test interviews
After each test the test persons were asked a number of
questions about their personal experiences while working with
the iD editor. While several users reported they were very
satisﬁed with the overall experience except minor difﬁculties,
some users expressed more mixed feelings about it. Two
novice and three mapper users said they were very pleased by
the editing experience and would recommend the program to
others. Five novice and ﬁve mapper users gave an overall
positive feedback, but also expressed some dissatisfaction.
Rather negative responses were given by two novice users and
one mapper user: the novice users reported a range of issues

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 182=

The Cartographic Journal

acceptable for them, others remained in discomfort with it all
the way through the test.

What seems relevant in terms of learnability, too, and what
was observed with several test persons (especially novice users)
was their failure to add nodes to existing lines or areas, or to
move nodes. While the circular menu provided opportunities
for all sorts of editing tasks, adding and moving nodes was not
included in it. The functionality was not introduced by the
walkthrough either. The confusion may have been increased
by the fact that moving line and area objects as a whole was an
option from the circular menu, whereas moving nodes was
not.

Referring to some of the usability heuristics that Jones and
Weber (2012) have developed speciﬁcally for learnability
issues of VGI interfaces, another perspective on the
learnability of iD can be presented as follows:

Ensure clarity and consistency of the editing process for
different map objects. Jones & Weber have criticized major
inconsistencies in Potlatch 2, e.g. that it takes different
approaches to adding point, line and area features, respectively.
iD’s concept of adding things is much more consistent, always
following the same pattern of clicking the Point/Line/Area
button, drawing it, and ﬁnally editing its attributes. One thing
that is inconsistent in iD, however, is the way objects are
moved: while points (and nodes that are part of lines or areas,
for that matter) are moved by dragging and dropping, lines
and areas can only be moved by selecting the appropriate
option from the circular menu.

Have consistent and standardized map controls and clear
interaction elements for both editing and viewing different
windows. iD has a dedicated map panel on the right side that
is consistent with the map panel on the OSM main page.
Apparently for some test users, however, the search function
within the editor was hard to ﬁnd: it shows up only when the
main pane is not occupied by anything else, which is not
always the case. Thus, it would be better to have a search
button or form that is always visible.

Minimize editing errors by preventing similar interaction
actions for different VGI edits. Jones & Weber observed that
with Potlatch 2 test persons often inadvertently moved map
objects when they intended to pan the map. The fact that the
same mouse interaction (moving the mouse while pressing
down the left mouse button) was functional for different
kinds of interaction, made the test persons do things they
did not want to do. Unfortunately, the developers of iD
have not learned this lesson: moving points and panning the
map are still done the same way. While this may make
working with the tool more efﬁcient for users who are aware
of it and thus work carefully enough, to inexperienced users
it poses a conceptual difﬁculty as well as a danger of making
mistakes.

Enable users to escape easily from editing errors. Preventing
and mitigating errors are vital to the usability of VGI editors as
much as to any other kind of software. What has been observed
is iD’s unforgiving behaviour when the undo button is pressed
while a user is drawing a line or area. It takes control away from
the user and, when it happens, there is also no clear indication
that he/she is not in drawing mode anymore.

To summarize, the case study revealed a number of
learnability issues of iD, most notably the absence of a
conﬁrm interaction in the feature editor, difﬁculties with

Figure 4. The circular menu offering contextual options for map
features

they had with the program, preventing them from developing
a satisfying workﬂow, whereas the mapper explained that he
did not like working with predeﬁned categories, which
bothered him as an advanced user.

Conclusions regarding iD’s usability
In terms of usability, the thinking aloud only gave an
impression of what the most crucial issues were. The results
have been further analyzed with respect to the speciﬁc
usability measures of learnability, efﬁciency of use, frequency
and seriousness of errors, and subjective user satisfaction
(Nielsen, 1992) as well as the usability heuristics for VGI
interfaces formulated by Jones and Weber (2012).

Learnability
Learnability is deﬁned as the extent to which “the system [is]
easy to learn so that the user can rapidly start getting some
work done with the system” (Nielsen, 1993, p. 26). In the
case of OSM, which depends on a large amount of active
contributors who do not necessarily need to have great
expertise, this is especially important. The easier the tool is
to learn, the more likely it is that interested users will adopt
the system and start editing.

Although iD has primarily been designed as a program for
novice users, some particular interactions were signiﬁcantly
hard to learn for the test persons, even with the walkthrough
completed. The most striking example turned out to be the
procedure of editing feature attributes, such as a name, and
having the changes accepted. Almost all test persons expected
to ﬁnd a button reading something as “OK”, “Save”, or
“Conﬁrm” and were often uncomfortable with simply closing
the feature editor (of which one user said it reminded him of a
“Cancel” interaction). On the other hand, this peculiarity was
carefully introduced during the walkthrough. While some test
persons said that once they were taught the concept, it was

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 Usability of OpenStreetMap’s iD Tool

183

adding and moving nodes of
inconsistency in the way map objects are moved.

lines and areas, and an

Efﬁciency
According to Nielsen (1993, p. 26), a “system should be
efﬁcient to use, so that once the user has learned the system,
a high level of productivity is possible”. Of course, it is not
always clear whether the participants in a test like this have
already “learned” the system (or parts of it) at some point
during the test, but nevertheless it can be observed whether
a user has developed a smooth workﬂow with respect to a
speciﬁc subtask. For example, many test persons quickly
adopted the procedure of adding simple features in iD. Most
test persons internalized it during task 2, in which nine map
objects were to be added from information given on a Field
Paper.

However, with regard to the editing of existing features
test persons, especially novices, had
(task 3), several
signiﬁcant problems: the average completion time for task
3 among the mappers was almost only half the time the
novices needed – a difference more signiﬁcant than in any of
the other tasks (see Table 1). This may be due to the fact that
in some ways, speciﬁcally in the way objects are modiﬁed, iD
makes use of functionality known from other editors, giving
advantage to users who are experienced editing OSM. This
is, of course, essentially a good thing as long as novice users
are given proper guidance to learning this functionality.
Unfortunately though, the walkthrough does not cover the
essentials of modifying the geometries of existing map
objects.

Errors
Nielsen (1993, p. 26) suggests that “the system should have
a low error rate, so that users make few errors during the use
of the system, and so that if they do make errors they can
easily recover from them”. This has basically two aspects:
errors within the system and the way the system deals with
user mistakes.

Software errors in the system (“bugs”) have appeared
rather frequently: during the walkthrough task the system
hung 13 times. This must be ﬁxed, for “catastrophic errors
must not occur” (Nielsen, 1993, p. 26). A more thorough
analysis is needed with respect to the way the editor deals with
the users’ mistakes, of which a few examples shall be given.
. At least eight test persons had problems selecting points
on the map, i.e. either they clicked near but not exactly on
the point they wanted to select or they moved the mouse
while pressing the mouse button down, which resulted in
panning of the map.

. While drawing lines or areas, users sometimes realized that
they had made a mistake and wanted to undo the last node,

Table 1. Average task completion times by user group

Task

Average time (novices)

Average time (mappers)

Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4

9 min
17 min
15 min
–

6 min
15 min
8 min
5 min

so they clicked the undo button. Then, however, the
program ﬁnished the object and left the drawing mode so
that it was not possible to resume the drawing. Most test
persons who found themselves in this situation deleted the
object they had started drawing and then started to draw
the object from scratch again.

Altogether, besides the critical bug that has been observed
many times during the walkthrough, iD is too sparing with
feedback when users make mistakes. While too many system
messages can slow down the user’s ﬂow of work, some more
feedback would probably be helpful.

Subjective user satisfaction
An overview of the statements the test persons have made in
the debrieﬁngs after each test has already been given in Post-
Test Interviews Section. Given that seven out of nine test
persons from each group have given mostly positive
iD’s user
feedback about
experience can be regarded as a mostly pleasant one.

their subjective satisfaction,

However, two in three novice users mentioned at least
one situation in which they got stuck and which took them
rather long to resolve, e.g. while selecting a feature type,
moving and adding nodes, etc. The mapper users, on the
other hand, complained less about difﬁculties they had using
the editor, but more frequently about speed issues or
functionality they missed; generally the mapper users
seemed to have learned the tool more easily, perhaps due
to their prior experience with OSM.

CONCLUSION

This study has highlighted a number of usability issues with
iD found through a user test.

The analysis has shown that iD is an easily learnable tool,
as the majority of test persons have picked up its basic
functionality quickly. The walkthrough certainly contributes
to that and is itself an easy thing to do as well. However, the
tests have revealed a number of issues that should be
mitigated in order to make the program even more attractive
to novice users. Especially more feedback about the system’s
status, clarity and consistency of editing options, and more
help options are needed.

Based on the results presented, iD can also be regarded as
an efﬁcient tool. Although it suffers from speed issues, most
of the test persons got used to the program quickly.

In terms of errors and error prevention, it was often
observed that users had to spend too much effort into
correcting their own mistakes, e.g. misplaced nodes or
inadvertently connected objects. As this can be very
frustrating for ﬁrst-time users, it is important that iD deals
with user errors much better.

By the time this paper is published, however, iD has
certainly developed further away from the version that has
been evaluated in this study. Therefore further investi-
gations into the tool will be needed in the future.

This study has been limited by the decision to use
consumer equipment for the testing – in order to allow for
greater ﬂexibility in the planning of the tests – which led to
technical difﬁculties with the recordings. A usability test
conducted with a high-end laboratory equipment would

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 184

The Cartographic Journal

likely have produced better results in terms of technical
quality. With better equipment one might also use eye
tracking and/or video recording as additional observation
methods, which could help to discover even more usability
issues with the study object (see e.g. Kveladze, 2015).

Any future research on the topic that will help to
overcome the shortcomings mentioned will be welcomed by
the scientiﬁc and the OSM community. Usability testing of
newer versions of iD is therefore strongly recommended.

Usability testing will beneﬁt OSM and its future development
as the prime alternative to commercial and authoritative
geodata sources as more contributors need to be attracted to
and kept engaged with OSM. Lowering the barriers for
contributing needs to remain a main goal of the project,
requiring successive investigations into the usability of the tools.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

a

Jan Behrens graduated in the
International Master Pro-
gramme in Cartography at
TU Munich, TU Vienna and
TU Dresden in 2014. He has
been
to
OpenStreetMap for several
years
in
open geodata, Volunteered
Geographic Information and
web mapping. He lives in
Hamburg, Germany.

and specialises

contributor

REFERENCES

Budhathoki, N. R. (2010). Participants’ Motivations to Contribute
Geographic Information in an Online Community. Dissertation.
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.

Goodchild, M. F. (2007). ‘Citizens as sensors: the world of volunteered

geography’, Geo-Journal, 69/4, pp. 211–221.

Gould, J. D. and Lewis, C. (1985). ‘Designing for usability: key
principles and what designers think’, Communications of the
ACM, 28/3, pp. 300–311.

Haklay, M.

‘How good is volunteered geographical
information? A comparative study of OpenStreetMap and Ordnance

(2010).

Survey datasets’, Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design, 37/4, pp. 682–703.

Jones, C. and Weber, P. (2012). ‘Towards usability engineering for
online editors of volunteered geographic information: a perspective
on learnability’, Transactions in GIS, 16/4, pp. 523–544.

Kveladze, I. (2015). Space – Time Cube: Design and Usability. ITC
Dissertation Number 268. University of Twente, Enschede. DOI
10.3990/1.9789036538596

Lin, Y. -W. (2011).

‘A qualitative enquiry into OpenStreetMap
making’, New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia, 17/1,
pp. 53– 71.

Nedovic´-Budic´, Z. and Budhathoki, N. R. (2010). ‘Motives for VGI
participants’,
in Presentation in VGI for SDI Workshop,
Netherlands Geodetic Commission/Wageningen University,
Wageningen.

Nielsen, J. (1992). ‘The usability engineering life cycle’, Computer,

25/3, pp. 12–22.

Nielsen, J. (1993). Usability Engineering, Academic Press, Boston.
Nielsen, J. (1994). ‘Estimating the number of subjects needed for a
thinking aloud test’, Human Computer Studies, 41/3,
pp. 385–397.

Nielsen, J. (2006). Participation Inequality: Encouraging More
to Contribute. http://www.nngroup.com/articles/

Users
participation-inequality/ [Accessed August 6, 2014].

Schmidt, M., Klettner, S. and Steinmann, R. (2013). ‘Barriers for
contributing to VGI projects’,
in Proceedings of the 26th
International Cartographic Conference, pp. 243, ICA, Dresden,
Germany.

URL 1 OpenStreetMap, http://www.openstreetmap.org/
URL 2 OpenStreetMap stats report, http://www.openstreetmap.org/

stats/data_stats.html

URL 3 Wikipedia. http://www.wikipedia.org/
URL 4 Why (and how) we’ve switched away from Google Maps –
Nestoria Blog, http://blog.nestoria.co.uk/post/43883369968/
why-and-how-weve-switched-away-from-google-ma

URL 5 Around the world and back again – Flickr Blog, http://blog.
ﬂickr.net/en/2008/08/12/around-the-world-and-back-again/

URL 6 Skobbler. http://www.skobbler.com/
URL 7 OpenStreetMap: The Maps In Your Apps Are About To Get A
Lot Better, http://readwrite.com/2013/05/07/openstreetmaps-
the-maps-in-your-apps-are-about-to-get-a-lot-better

URL 8 iD In-Browser Editor Now Default on OpenStreetMap, http://
blog.openstreetmap.org/2013/08/23/id-in-browser-editor-now-
default-on-openstreetmap/

URL 9 Editor usage stats – OpenStreetMap Wiki, http://wiki.

openstreetmap.org/wiki/Editor_usage_stats

URL 10 Stats – OpenStreetMap Wiki, http://wiki.openstreetmap.

org/wiki/Stats

URL 11 OpenStreetMap editor Potlatch 2 launched, http://blog.
openstreetmap.org/2010/11/29/openstreetmap-editor-potlatch-
2-launched/

URL 12 key-mon, https://code.google.com/p/key-mon/
URL 13 Field Papers, http://ﬁeldpapers.org/
URL 14 Main Page – OpenStreetMap Wiki, http://wiki.

openstreetmap.org/wiki/Main_Page

URL 15 iD editor – LearnOSM, http://learnosm.org/en/editing/

id-editor/

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 04:19 01 April 2016 