G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

THE CASE STUDY METHOD IN EXAMINING
LAND REGISTRATION USAGE

Michael Barry and Lani Roux, The University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta

The case study method is appropriate for examining how and why landholders choose to use or not use
land  registration  to  effect  transactions  after  first  registration.  The  paper  covers  two  related  approaches  to
building theory that explains land registration usage behaviour. The methodologies may be extended to exam-
ining usage of other forms of land tenure information system (LTIS). Land titling and registration projects have
proliferated in the developing world since World War II, often motivated by the theory that economic benefits
will flow from the capital vested in the land that is freed up as a consequence of registration. Many of these
projects fail to produce the desired results because the intended beneficiaries do not register transactions after
first registration. Surprisingly, few studies investigate the reasons for the failure of land titling projects from
the perspective of the intended beneficiaries. The case study method is suited to examine the strategies that
landholders use to secure transactions. The advantages of case studies are that they may include all the data
the  researcher  deems  relevant,  they  emphasise  the  local  context,  and  certain  phenomena  may  be  examined
more  deeply  than  other  methods  of  inquiry  allow.  In  case  studies,  researchers  can  examine  issues  at  the
grassroots level while at the same time incorporating the influences of local politics, social change, land
administration agency behaviour and the influence of local and national law and policy.

La méthode d’étude de cas est un choix judicieux pour examiner comment et pourquoi les propriétaires
fonciers choisissent d’utiliser l’enregistrement des terres pour effectuer des transactions après le premier
enregistrement.  L’article  se  penche  sur  deux  approches  connexes  pour  confirmer  la  théorie  qui  explique  le
comportement  lié  à  l’usage  du  registre  des  terres.  Les  méthodologies  peuvent  être  étendues  et  englober
l’examen de l’utilisation d’autres genres de systèmes de tenure des terres (STT). Depuis la Seconde Guerre
mondiale, les titres fonciers et les projets d’enregistrement ont proliféré dans les pays en développement, et sont
souvent motivés par la théorie que des avantages économiques découleront du capital investi dans les terres
libérées en conséquence de l’enregistrement. Plusieurs de ces projets ne réussissent pas à produire les résul-
tats désirés parce que les bénéficiaires visés n’enregistrent pas leurs transactions après le premier enregistre-
ment. Fait surprenant, peu d’études se penchent sur les raisons de l’échec des projets de titres fonciers du point
de vue des bénéficiaires visés. La méthode d’étude de cas est conçue pour examiner les stratégies utilisées par
les propriétaires fonciers pour effectuer et confirmer les transactions. Les avantages des études de cas sont
qu’elles  peuvent  inclure  toutes  les  données  que  le  chercheur  juge  pertinentes,  elles  placent  l’accent  sur  le
contexte local et certains phénomènes peuvent être examinés plus à fond que le permettent les autres méthodes
d’enquête. Dans les études de cas, les chercheurs peuvent examiner les problèmes à leur niveau fondamental
tout  en  incorporant  les  influences  des  politiques  locales,  des  changements  sociaux,  du  comportement  de
l’agence d’administration des terres et de l’influence des lois et politiques locales et nationales.

1. Introduction

There is a need to develop theory that explains
and  predicts  why  and  how  land  titling  programme
beneficiaries  choose  to  register  or  not  register  land
transactions after first registration. In our experience,
at the micro-level the case study method is the most
appropriate method for examining the phenomenon
and  developing  relevant  theory.  Case  studies  are
most  commonly  used  in  land  tenure  and  cadastral
systems  doctoral  research  studies,  but  most  of  the
researchers have a background in geodesy [Çağdaş
and  Stubkjaer 2009],  which  suggests  that  they  are
not  well  equipped  to  do  qualitative  social  research

when they start their studies. This paper addresses a
gap in the case study literature which deals with land
tenure  and  cadastral  systems  case  studies  that
involve community level interviews. 

Case studies are distinguished from other social
research  strategies  (e.g.  ethnography,  questionnaire
surveys,  grounded 
theory,  phenomenological
research) in that they examine a particular phenom-
enon  in  its  natural  setting.  They  operate  within  a
bounded  system  (e.g.  bounded  by  one  or  more  of
space,  time,  institution,  and  social  unit),  they  use

Michael Barry
mbarry@ucalgary.ca

Lani Roux
lroux@ucalgary.ca

GEOMATICA  Vol. 67, No. 1, 2013, pp. 9 to 20

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

multiple  sources  of  data,  and  context  is  a  highly
significant  part  of  the  study  [Myers 1997;  Stake
1998;  Creswell 2007,  2009;  Yin 2009;  Flyvbjerg
2011]. This paper covers two strategies for applying
the  case  study  method  to  land  registration  usage,
based on twelve completed and ongoing land tenure
and cadastral systems case studies in South Africa.
A  recent  case  in  Ghana  draws  on  aspects  of  both
two  strategies.  The  context  is  land  registration
usage,  but  the  methodologies  may  be  adapted  to
other  land  tenure  and  administration  studies  that
incorporate door-to-door interviews and interviews
with officials, politicians and land professionals.

Surprisingly,  there  are  not  many  urban  and
peri-urban studies that fully examine how and why
people choose to register or not register a transac-
tion, nor are there theories which explain the phe-
nomena  adequately.  Colonial  authorities  imple-
mented  a  number  of  land  titling  programmes  in
Africa  after  World  War  II,  and  many  former
colonies continued with similar programmes post-
independence,  often  with  the  support  of  agencies
such as the World  Bank  and  UN-FAO.  Registered
titles, the economic justification theory goes, should
provide  tenure  security,  which  in  turn  provides
access  to  credit  using  the  land  as  collateral.  The
credit can then be used to finance agricultural and
other economic inputs [Shipton 2009]. While many
were  questioning  the  efficacy  of  these  strategies  in
the 1980’s and 1990’s, de Soto [2000] reinvigorated
the theory as a development and poverty alleviation
strategy in a widely acclaimed work.

Given  the  right  circumstances,  registered  titles
may  be  one  element  of  the  system  that  underpins
economic development and possibly poverty allevi-
ation.  However,  the  literature  shows  that  land
titling  programmes  in  rural  customary  areas  or  as
part  of  pro-poor  programmes  in  urban  and  peri-
urban areas seldom generate the desired economic
outcomes.  Registered  titles  may  improve  tenure
security for some, but reduce security of others. An
uncritical  implementation  of  titling  may  create
uncertainty  in  situations  where  the  local  politics
were  stable  prior  to  the  intervention  [Middleton
1988;  Platteau 1996;  Gilbert 2002;  Cousins  et  al
2005;  Mitchell  2005;  Barnes  and  Griffith-Charles
2007; Payne et al 2009; Roux and Barry 2011; Roux
2013]. Shipton [2009:26] wryly notes; “people like
to experiment on other people’s soil.”

There are numerous case studies in land regis-
tration  and  cadastral  studies,  as  evidenced  by  the
large  number  of 
related  presentations  at
International Federation of Surveyors (FIG) confer-
ences,  one  of  the  few  forums  that  address  these
issues. Case studies are suited to cadastral research,

as they include social, management and operational
elements in the same study [Williamson and Fourie
1998; Barry 1999] and, as noted above, they are the
preferred  method  in  many  cadastral  systems  PhD
studies [Çağdaş and Stubkjaer 2009]. However, the
majority of land administration case reports tend to
be narratives, case descriptions and reports on action
research, and not focussed on theory development.
We appreciate their value in a professional confer-
ence setting. Moreover, they provide empirical sup-
port  (or  falsification)  for  existing  theories,  even
though the authors may not express the underlying
theory explicitly if their article’s primary purpose is
not  theory  development. We  are  arguing  for  more
case studies that specifically set out to develop the-
ory, and do so rigorously.

This paper covers the nature of theory and the
type of theory that case studies may produce, and the
types of reasoning that develop theory. It then pres-
ents  two  methodological  approaches  to  settlement
level case studies that we have conducted. The first
method  generates  a  number  of  hypotheses  prior  to
starting the case, tests these during the course of the
research, affirms and discards some as the study pro-
gresses,  and  develops  alternative  explanations  and
additional  hypotheses  as  the  study  progresses.  The
second method develops theory from the bottom up,
with some of the main concepts defined beforehand.
It draws on methods that are commonly associated
with  grounded  theory  method,  but  are  also  used  in
other forms of qualitative research.

2. The Nature of Theory

For this discussion, a case study’s explicit pur-
pose is to develop theory; that is, generalised, con-
ceptual models of reality. We exclude case descrip-
tions, narratives, and action research [Benbasat et al
1987; Eisenhardt 1989; Yin 2009].

Describing  phenomena  in  abstract  theoretical
terms  is  essential  for  good  practice  as  theories
allow critical debate and comparison between dif-
ferent situations, which mere description does not.
Well-developed  theory  then  informs  practice.
Practitioners  who  eschew  theory  and  apply  what
they believe to be a practical approach to problems
are often “slaves of some defunct theory, frequently
furthering  the  interests  of  particular  sections  of
society”  [Keynes 1936;  Coetzee  et  al 2001:3].  The
maxims  “nothing  is  as  practical  as  a  good  theory”
[Lewin 1945:129] and “nothing is as dangerous as
bad theory” [Ghoshal 2005:86] are particularly rel-
evant. As  noted  above,  many  titling  projects  have

10

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

been motivated on overly parsimonious, naïve the-
ory,  formulated  at  the  macro  level,  which  pays
scant attention to micro-level realities.

Gregor [2006] argues that there are five purpos-
es  a  theory  can  assume;  (1)  analysing  phenomena,
(2) explaining phenomena, (3) predicting phenom-
ena,  (4)  explaining  and  predicting,  and  (5)  design
and  action.  In  a  utopian  world,  design  and  action
theory  pertaining  to  a  particular  phenomenon
should follow the other four theory types. In reality,
however,  most  often  explanatory  theory  follows
practice as evidenced by the predominance of land
administration papers presented at FIG conferences
that describe design implementations or promote a
particular design.

Conventional wisdom is that a major difficulty
with case studies is generating theory which stands
up to rigorous testing, a view associated with strict
adherents  to  Karl  Popper’s  tenet  that  valid  theory
has to be stated in a form that allows it to be falsi-
fied [Popper 2002; Gorton 2006; Yin 2009]. A relat-
ed  criticism  is  that  case  studies  are  unsuited  to
developing  theory  which  can  be  generalised  to  a
sufficient  level  to  guide  policy  and  practice.  The
argument  goes  that  there  are  too  many  uncontrol-
lable factors in case studies and therefore they are
ill suited to developing theory beyond the substan-
tive  level  [Flyvbjerg 2006].  Substantive  theory  is
the most basic in a hierarchy; a paradigm is at the
top of the hierarchy as the most generally applica-
ble theory, extending through grand theory, formal
theory,  and  substantive  theory  to  hypotheses  and
concepts  at  the  bottom  [Kuhn  1962;  Glazier  and
Grover 2002; Barry and Roux 2012). 

Numerous researchers challenge “conventional
wisdom” on case study method. They argue that an
advantage  of  rigorous  case  studies  is  that  they
enable broad ranging, holistic and deep investiga-
tion  of  certain  phenomena  and  rigorous  theory
building.  A  number  of  scientists  reject  the  second
criticism that case studies are only suited to gener-
ating substantive theory (theory that applies to the
particular case or local situation only) and not more
widely applicable, generalised levels of theory such
as formal or grand theory [Lee 1989; Benbasat et al
1987;  Flyvbjerg  2006;  Yin 2009].  Multiple  case
studies that explore a phenomenon may well gener-
ate  higher  level  theory  with  the  added  advantage
that  the  data  collection  and  analysis  processes  are
more  inclusive  than  most  other  research  methods
[Flyvbjerg 2006].  Moreover,  the  greater  inclusivity
offered  by  case  studies  should  address  cautions
about the dangers of bad theory which is too parsi-
monious or too narrowly focussed. Case studies are
well suited to asking how and why questions, which

are fundamental to explanatory theory, as they study
a situation in its natural setting and, theories can be
generated  from  practice,  and  they  incorporate  the
complex  context  of  the  situation  [Benbasat  et  al
1987]. They are not bound by a particular data col-
lection and analysis strategy either; they should use
all the data available. They may draw on qualitative
methods alone or mixed qualitative and quantitative
methods [Yin 2009].

Although  multiple  cases  tend  to  create  more
robust theory, single cases can be used to build theo-
ry.  In  fact,  when  an  unsual  opportunity  presents
itself, a single case study may be the most appro-
priate research strategy; theory flowing from a single
case  study  can  be  tested  by  additional  cases  or  by
other  methods  later  on  [Benbasat  et  al. 1987;  Lee
1989; Stake 2000; Yin 2009; Flyvbjerg 2011]. 

3. Reasoning and
Theory Development

A researcher should be familiar with the types
of reasoning that are applied in generating theory.
As described more fully below, particular types of
reasoning  strongly  influence  the  method  that
researchers choose in their case studies. 

Theory may be generated through a combina-
tion of deductive, inductive and abductive reasoning.
In inductive reasoning, theory is generated from the
researcher’s observations of case study data. It is a
bottom up process, which identifies themes and pat-
terns in the data and then builds an explanation with-
out a hypothesis to guide it. Deductive reasoning is
top down—it starts with a generally accepted prem-
ise or hypothesis, which the researcher then accepts,
rejects or modifies based on their empirical findings.
A priori hypotheses or patterns are examined against
the research findings, and the researcher may expand
upon the patterns they started with, or reject them
and generate rival explanations. Abductive reason-
ing generates a hypothesis that might explain a phe-
nomenon  for  which  other  hypotheses  do  not  yet
exist,  or  it  may  be  a  preliminary  postulation  to
explain the discovery of a surprising fact. There are,
however,  likely  to  be  numerous  other  theoretical
statements  that  might  explain  the  surprising  fact
[Pelto and Pelto 1978; Wirth 1998; Carbone 2009].
Unlike hypotheses generated by deductive reason-
ing,  hypotheses  generated  by  abductive  reasoning
are  yet  to  be  tested  through  empirical  work.  In
some  instances  they  may  be  nothing  more  than  a
good idea; they may be speculative, but prima facie
reasonable, explanations for a phenomenon. 

11

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

An understanding of these forms of reasoning
helps the researcher in understanding their own the-
ory  development  processes  and  in  understanding
theories  submitted  by  key  persons  in  interviews.
For  example,  in  a  land  registration  usage  case
study, as part of the data collection strategy, a com-
mon starting point is to interview a number of key
persons,  such  as  officials,  community  leaders  and
land professionals. They may describe certain phe-
nomena  in  the  case(s)  and  venture  opinions  to
explain  them,  and  these  opinions  may  form  the
basis  of  preliminary  hypotheses  to  guide  the  case
study.  It  is  important  that  the  researcher  examine
opinions critically, and especially establish if their
opinions are grounded in empirical evidence or not
(e.g. “How did you come to know this?”), and then
weight the interview data accordingly. At one pole
in  a  continuum,  some  participants  may  express  a
hypothesis  that  has  its  origins  in  “somebody’s”
abductive reasoning, but has no empirical support
and  really  is  no  more  than  a  myth  that  has  been
repeated  often  enough  by  a  number  of  different
people in various workshops and other forums for
it  to  gain  momentum  and  be  widely  believed.
Alternatively it may be an opinion that the intervie-
wee believes the interviewer wants to hear, or per-
haps an opinion expressed with a bias that the inter-
viewee believes will assist them in advancing a par-
ticular agenda. At the other pole, participants may
form an opinion based on an inductive analysis of
their  own  observations  of  the  phenomenon  under
scrutiny.  Clearly,  the  latter  should  be  afforded  a
great deal of weight. The others should be treated
with some scepticism; all of these opinions should
be tested thoroughly.

We  now  describe  two  case  study  approaches
that we have followed in examining land registra-
tion usage.

4. Method 1: Continual
Hypothesis Building
and Testing 

This  case  study  method  draws  on  the  generic
inductive  qualitative  research  method  (GIQM).  In
GIQM, “Researchers move back and forth among
data  collection,  data,  analysis,  study  design  and
focus, and emerging theory.” [Hood 2007:153]. In
contrast  to  research  strategies  that  draw  on
Grounded Theory Method, discussed below, GIQM
allows for the use of existing theory in developing
theory  and  interpreting  results  [Hood 2007].

Hypotheses and codes may be generated and linked
to  the  research  objectives  prior  to  the  research
[Glaser and Strauss 1967; Hood 2007]. 

Defining the relevant terms, a common method
to  express  a  theory  is a  simple  central  statement,
such as “land titling creates tenure security” plus a
set  of  associated  hypotheses  and  condition  state-
ments.  A  hypothesis  is  a  theoretical  proposition
expressed in a form that renders it suitable for test-
ing [Grover and Glazier 1986].The condition state-
ments  indicate  when  and  how  a  theory  is  likely  to
hold [Reynolds 1971]. Coding is a system of classi-
fying  data  to  identify  patterns  in  the  data,  and  it  is
one of the strategies that lead to the formulation and
testing of hypotheses. It varies across methodologies
and research projects, depending on the purpose of
the  coding.  In  simple  form,  a  code  is  a  word  or
phrase  that  labels  a  line  or  fragment  of  interview
data.  In  this  way  the  coding  serves  to  reduce  and
conceptualise the data, and patterns in the data may
be extracted from the coding process.

This case method involves generating a set of
research  questions  and  a  set  of  initial  hypotheses
that are derived from the literature, general discus-
sions,  workshops  and  key-informant  interviews
conducted prior to the main body of the field work.
As the field work and other forms of data collection
proceed,  the  initial  hypotheses  are  tested  against
the data. As the study progresses they are accepted,
modified, rejected outright or judged to hold only
under  certain  conditions.  At  the  same  time  the
researcher  generates  and  tests  rival  hypotheses  to
the initial set. They are also likely to generate and
test  new  hypotheses,  most  probably  to  explain
unexpected facts, expressions of beliefs and opin-
ions that emerge as the study progresses. 

The first author originally used this method in
examining the effectiveness of land registration and
cadastral boundary systems in post-apartheid South
Africa after the new government came to power in
1994 [Barry 1999; 2006]. The context was a rapidly
changing society that had to supply more than a mil-
lion houses to people who not been allowed to own
land  in  urban  areas  for  generations.  Most  of  them
were poor; some 7 million people lived in informal
settlements at the time. The housing challenge was
(and  remains)  enormous  and  the  political  climate
dictated that land and housing problems needed to be
addressed urgently.

The  researcher  was  a  member  of  a  working
group  on  land  registration  and  cadastral  boundary
options set up by Nelson Mandela’s administration.
In  the  working  group,  numerous  theories,  designs
and solutions on registration and boundary systems
were postulated from people within the country and

12

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

by international advisors. Some of these were pro-
posed as the basis for pilot studies in the workshops.
However, a number of them had no empirical foun-
dation  (see  the  discussion  on  abductive  reasoning
and myths above) and some advice was premised on
the  assumption  that  designs  that  had  supposedly
worked  elsewhere  would  apply  to  South  Africa.
Proposals included local level community based reg-
istration and boundary surveys, replacing the fixed
boundary system with general boundaries, discard-
ing  the  high  precision  cadastral  boundary  system
with  cheaper  low  precision  methods  of  surveying
boundaries  [Fourie 1994],  and  mid-point  cadastral
systems  where  dwellings  with  an  occupation  title
could be referenced to a stake in the ground [Jackson
1996].  The  first  author’s  contribution  was  a  pro-
posal  for  group  block  titles  in  urban  areas  where
individuals could negotiate internal boundaries with
their  neighbours.  Over  time,  the  original  ground
level occupants could sell off rights in a high rise
residential development, which in turn would con-
tribute to compact, sustainable cities [Barry 1995].
What  was  lacking  was  input  from  the  people
who  were  supposed  to  benefit  from  these  designs.
The  first  author  studied  four  cases  involving  an
informal  settlement,  two  site-and-service  schemes
with  shacks  on  surveyed  sites  and  an  established
housing estate. The initial objective was to identify
user  needs  to  design  appropriate  registration  and
boundary  systems.  However,  the  objectives  were
changed very soon after the study started to devel-
oping theory to explain and predict how people on
the  ground  use  artifacts  such  as  boundary  monu-
ments,  documents,  and  social  processes  to  gain
access  to  land  and  secure  their  tenure  during  far-
reaching social and political change. The objectives
were  changed  because  major  factors  that  had  not
been  considered  at  the  outset  were  the  manifesta-
tions of social change in local politics such as the
power  struggles,  social  inequalities,  coalition  for-
mation  and  opportunistic  behaviour  and  conflict
that may accompany it, and the influence on local
level politics of weak local authorities when it was
undergoing  major  reorganisation  and  personnel
change as part of the post-apartheid national trans-
formation process [Barry 1999; 2006].

The  data  collection  and  analysis  strategy
worked on the basis of continual hypothesis build-
ing  around  a  number  of  issues  that  were  being
explored in each case study. Initial hypothesis were
deduced from the literature; from notes from work-
ing group meetings on land registration and cadas-
tral  survey  options  and  a  number  of  other  similar
workshops that occurred at the time; and from dis-
cussions with officials, land professionals, academ-

ics, community leaders and other key role players.
The initial hypotheses were tested against empirical
evidence,  and  accepted,  adapted,  or  rejected  as
false. Some remained untested in a particular case
as data relevant to the hypothesis did not emerge to
support  or  falsify  them.  Many  of  the  initial
hypotheses  were  rejected  very  early  in  the  three
year  study.  As  per  the  discussion  above,  some
turned  out  to  be  no  more  than  myths  which  had
gained momentum of their own for which there was
little or no empirical foundation. 

The researcher adopted a nuanced approach to
interpreting data as the case studies were in process.
Additional hypothesis were formulated as each study
progressed.  He  formulated  hypotheses  that  might
explain a phenomenon as a case progressed through
inductive reasoning as new theory emerged from the
data. Data in this instance included explanations for
particular phenomena offered by participants in the
study. Certain participants may offer an explanation
or express support for emerging explanations (con-
firming samples) or disagree with them (disconfirm-
ing  samples)  and  perhaps  offer  rival  explanations
[Creswell 2007]. Further hypotheses were generated
as  unexpected  facts  emerged  or  interviewees
expressed a belief or opinion that had not been con-
sidered before. A set of hypotheses, including rival
hypotheses, would be postulated that might explain
the new facts or opinions. Some of these might be
generated inductively from the data itself, and there
was  sufficient  data  to  support  them. A  number  of
others might be valid if sufficient further observa-
tions emerged to support them i.e. they might rea-
sonably explain the phenomenon but they remained
speculative.  Adequate  empirical  support  had  not
yet emerged from the data. 

To  manage  the  interpretation  of  hypotheses
developed  through  different  forms  of  reasoning,
empirical  support  for  a  particular  hypotheses  or
group  of  interrelated  hypotheses  was  classified  as
(1) conclusive, (2) false, (3) persuasive, or (4) spec-
ulative in each case study. 

If different types of data (i.e. well triangulated
data) supported a hypothesis directly, then the sup-
port  was  considered  conclusive.  If  sound,  direct
support  for  a  hypothesis  was  found  and  other
“nuanced” evidence suggested the hypothesis was a
reasonable  explanation  for  a  particular  behaviour,
and triangulation was incomplete but other forms of
validation  supported  the  hypothesis  (e.g.  the
researcher’s knowledge from long engagement with
social  housing  projects),  then  the  support  for  the
hypothesis was considered persuasive. (As an aside,
there may be a case to divide this classification into
“compelling”  and  “persuasive”  classes  in  some

13

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

studies). If a hypothesis appeared to be a reasonable
explanation,  but  minimal  support  existed  in  the
data  or  no  support  was  uncovered,  it  was  consid-
ered  speculative.  In  speculative  classifications,
empirical  support  was  insufficient,  but  in  the
researcher’s opinion the hypothesis remained a rea-
sonable  explanation  and  the  data  provided  some
empirical support for it. This classification was also
tied to a nuanced interpretation of how responses to
questions  or  scenarios  occurred  in  the  field.  For
example, a person or a focus group might make a
particular  statement,  but  their  body  language  sug-
gested they were uncomfortable with it, or a partic-
ipant might (in the researcher’s observation) distort
information which did not tally with other data. As
a  data  item,  if  accepted  uncritically  the  statement
might support or falsify a hypothesis; instead it was
tagged as questionable.

Hypotheses  were  carried  from  case  to  case.
They were then classified in terms of their empirical
support in each case. Thus cross case analysis was
conducted on the fly.

The  method  is  exemplified  in  the  first  case
study,  which  was  a  site-and-service  scheme  where
occupants  had  been  drawn  from  three  different
informal  settlements.  People  lived  on  a  surveyed,
serviced  site.  A  local  administrative  office  kept  a
register  of  occupation  permits  (rent  cards)  and  a
property  administration  file  for  each  parcel.  The
occupation  permit  carried  the  expectation  of  being
granted ownership, registered in the Deeds registry,
of a fully subsidised brick and mortar house on the
occupants’ site in future. The case had had a violent
history of conflict between factions aligned to dif-
ferent warlords and wider factions opposed to the
apartheid  government  and  those  supported  by  ele-
ments in the security forces during political struggle
in the 1980’s [Goldstone 1993]. The first author sur-
veyed part of the site-and-service layout as a practis-
ing land surveyor in 1990 and then returned several
years later to conduct research on the effectiveness
of cadastral boundaries and land registration. 

The following is an extract from part of the case
study analysis and theory building process pertain-
ing to the occupation permit registration system:

After  a  period  of  7  years,  non-usage  of  the  rental
registration  system  was  reflected  in  a  mismatch  of
approximately 10% between the names on the offi-
cial rental register and the de facto occupants of the
parcels.  The  following  three  hypotheses  were  put
forward by officials working in the community being
studied explaining why people did not use the local
registration system:

H1) Informal sales or transfers to strangers; 

H2) Informal transfers or sales to family members;

H3) Incorrect adjudication and registration of orig-

and 

inal lessees.

The  following  hypothesis,  derived  from  the  discus-
sion with key informants, and the data collected in
this case study may explain why informal transfers
of occupation permits occur:

H4) High  financial  costs  and  other  impedances  in
using the local registration system discouraged
residents from using it.

H5) A  culture  of  non-compliance  with  local  or
national government systems, rules and regula-
tions that carried over from boycotts and revo-
lutionary activities in the 1980’s.

H6) Attitudes to land registration systems are posi-
tive, but landholders believe that it is not neces-
sary to register every transaction in land and the
implications of using or not using land registra-
tion are not fully understood; 

H7) Residents may not have used the system as they

saw no benefit in using it;

H8) Residents may have avoided using the system to
hide  the  transaction  from  factions  within  the
community such as street committees and war-
lords for a variety of reasons.

What was established was that there were inac-
curacies in the local level register. The figure of 10%
could not be verified as the field study could not be
completed.  However,  what  was  relevant  was  how
and why people some people did use the register and
some did not register.

Hypotheses  H1,  H2  and  H3  were  generated
from  a  limited  number  of  interviews  and  were  to
serve  as  hypotheses  to  guide  door-to-door  inter-
views  and  group  discussion.  H4  was  generated
from the literature and the author’s notes from var-
ious  workshops,  interviews  and  meetings  prior  to
commencing  the  study.  It  was  rejected  as  false  in
this case study because registration was free - there
were  no  financial  costs  involved  in  recording  a
transaction and the local administration office was
a 10 minute walk from the site. Functional imped-
ances (as opposed to impedances assignable to con-
trol factors such as local politics, power and social
inequalities) to recording a transaction in the local
records system were minimal. Hypotheses H5 – H8
were  generated  both  abductively  and  inductively
from the contextual description of the case and dis-
cussions with officials and NGO workers who had
worked with this case and similar cases. (H8 covers
possible  intimidation  which  may  be  considered  a
type of impedance, but which the researcher prefers
to classify as a control factor [Barry et al 2012]).
These hypotheses, H5 - H8 and H1 – H3, could not

14

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

be tested (i.e. supported or falsified) in the field in
this  case  study  as  the  researchers  were  prevented
from interviewing people on the ground. As noted
above, the case had a history of violent conflict and
so  we  can  speculate  that  a  study  of  this  nature
might  not  have  been  welcome  by  certain  groups
and individuals. What was omitted as a hypothesis
at  that  stage  was  that  people  did  not  register
because they did not trust the officials. If true, this
might be related to H8 if officials were perceived to
be collaborating with particular factions. 

The above hypotheses were carried forward to
other  cases,  but  modified  to  cater  for  each  local
context.  For  example  the  revised  hypotheses
changed the influence of warlords to powerful fac-
tions. Warlords were present in this case only, but
there were factions in the other cases that did use
violence and intimidation. As the study proceeded
and  more  cases  were  studied,  so  each  hypothesis
could be explored, perhaps modified, and examined
in  terms  of  its  relationship  to  other  hypotheses.
More hypotheses were added as the study proceed-
ed and hypotheses were examined against the data.
At the same time, others were rejected and not car-
ried forward to other cases if the data showed them
to be false.

Direct  empirical  support  for  some  of  these
hypotheses was minimal right through to the end of
the  study  as  data  to  support  them  did  not  emerge.
Thus they remained speculative. However, they had
not been not falsified empirically either. Adopting a
nuanced  approach  indicates  that  they  may  well  be
valid, but they require further empirical testing when
and  if  the  opportunity  arises.  Certain  theories  that
had  been  generated  before  the  study  were  rejected
given  the  circumstances  at  the  time  the  study  was
conducted.  The  notions  of  block  titles,  mid-point
cadastres and low precision, low cost boundary sur-
veys  were  rejected  as  design  and  action  theory
given  the  circumstances  at  the  time.  Nothing
emerged  at  household  level  in  the  case  studies  to
support these concepts, while conclusive support for
rival theories emerged in some case studies [Barry
1999; 2006]. However, they should not be rejected
outright as they may apply if circumstances change.
At the end of each case, the hypotheses were
then compared against broader level concepts and
contexts  such  as  land  policy  objectives  and  land
administration  concepts  and  context.  Importantly,
hypotheses  were  not  examined  in  isolation  from
each  other  as  they  are  interconnected.  They  were
continually incorporated into rich pictures and sys-
tems diagrams [Checkland 1999] to interrelate the
different  hypotheses,  concepts,  structures  and
processes. 

Advantages, Disadvantages and
Limitations of the Method

The major advantage of this type of continual
hypothesis  building  approach  is  the  researcher
starts developing theory and thinking in theoretical
terms at a very early stage of the case study. Thus it
is  well  suited  to  the  inexperienced  case  study
researcher  and  the  inexperienced  interdisciplinary
researcher, especially if they have little experience
in qualitative social research. If the case is accessi-
ble over a long period, they can start collecting data
and  learn  through  continual  reading,  analysis  and
reflection as they go along.

Provided  the  researcher  has  expressed  their
primary  objective  as  developing  theory  which
addresses an incisive set of research questions that
are clearly articulated at the outset, the researcher
should  maintain  focus  and  not  be  distracted  into
side issues. Distraction can occur easily, given the
complexity  of  many  land  tenure  administration
cases. The  method  should  produce  results  quickly
as the case analysis is written up while the case is
in  process  and  the  study  can  be  completed  soon
after  the  field  work  is  completed.  Formulating
hypotheses at the outset focuses the data collection
and analysis procedures. Continually incorporating
all the concepts and hypotheses in rich pictures and
systems diagrams which relate them, or adopting a
similar  integrating  strategy,  should  safeguard
against too narrow a focus.

Hypotheses are carried forward and developed
from  case  to  case,  and  so  cross  case  comparison
between  cases  is  close  to  complete  once  the  last
case has been completed. The level of generalisa-
tion—substantive  or  formal  theory—can  also  be
established  quickly.  It  is  useful  when  results  are
required quickly. 

One  limitation  is  that  a  researcher  may  miss
important phenomena if they focus too narrowly on
the initial hypotheses at the early stage, and do not
continually  reflect  on  the  biases  in  their  research
approach,  their  personal  biases  and  the  worldview
they adopt in their study. A mechanistic, as opposed
to systemic approach to a study, improper validation
strategies, and general lack of rigour by a researcher
or field worker  may generate spurious results. It is
conceivable  that  data  may  be  made  to  fit  the
hypotheses using this approach. 

Thus  continual  reflection  (including  self-
reflection of the researcher`s personal biases), sys-
tems  diagrams,  ongoing  peer  review  of  research
methods and results, and other forms of critique are
advisable.  Writing  up  interviews,  and  analysing
data at the end of each day’s field work is essential.

15

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Nowadays, we advocate coding and memo writing
at the end of each day as part of the analysis as per
method 2 below. 

To  maintain  a  broad  focus,  data  collection,
hypothesis formation, and strategies to interconnect
hypotheses  should  incorporate  a  number  of  local
level political issues, such as the manner in which
local  political  power  is  contested,  social  inequali-
ties and class formation, coalition formation around
particular  issues,  and  the  influence  of  both  local
and  broader  context.  Moreover,  it  is  important  to
adopt a nuanced approach to hypothesis generation
and  accept  that  data  cannot  be  collected  to  match
and validate or falsify each hypothesis conclusive-
ly.  Local  political  dynamics  are  likely  to  thwart
attempts to obtain direct answers to sensitive ques-
tions. A strictly empiricist approach, where the data
have  to  emerge  to  support  each  hypothesis  might
well yield invalid results.

5. Method 2: Drawing on
Grounded Theory Method 

The  second  case  study  method  draws  on
grounded theory method (GTM), without applying
what many consider to be GTM. GTM is arguably
the most widely known [Haig 1995] and most com-
prehensive  qualitative  social  research  method  in
current  use.  Researchers  who  apply  the  method
tend to adopt symbolic interactionism, pragmatism
or social constructionism as a world view (research
paradigm)  [Haig 1995;  Corbin  and  Strauss 2008;
Creswell 2007].  In  GTM,  an  inquirer  develops  a
theory that is shaped by the views of participants to
explain a process, action or interaction [Corbin and
Strauss 2008;  Creswell  2007].  What  constitutes
grounded  theory  is  contentious,  and  the  people
credited  with  creating  it,  Barney  Glaser  and
Anselm  Strauss,  fell  out  over  what  defines  it.
However, a generally agreed assumption that is rel-
evant to land tenure information systems is that all
social order is negotiated and continually changing
[Glaser and Strauss 1967].

GTM  develops  theory  from  the  data  alone.  In
contrast to method 1 based on GIQM, the researcher
does not postulate codes, patterns and hypotheses a
priori.  These  have  to  be  grounded  in  the  data  and
emerge from the data [Haig 1995]. At the outset, the
method allows for the possibility of completely new
theory  emerging.  In  GTM,  it  is  only  at  the  final
stage that the theory that emerges from a study are
compared and related with existing theories.

In GTM, the explicit purpose is to develop the-
ory. Conceptualisation of abstract terms to describe
aspects of phenomena is important from the outset
when the first codes are developed. It is a continu-
al  spiral  incorporating  data  collection,  coding,
analysis, writing, design, theoretical categorization,
then  starting  again  at  data  collection,  from  which
theory  emerges  through  a  number  of  iterations
[Glaser and Strauss 1967]. 

As soon as data are collected, the analysis starts
with coding the data. Codes are key ideas in the data,
and  are  developed  from  the  data,  not a  priori.
Coding is the first level of abstraction as the data are
segmented and labelled in a process of simultaneous
categorisation and summarising, also referred to as
open coding [Corbin and Strauss 1990]. Throughout
the  analysis  process,  the  codes  and  categories  are
compared  (constant  comparison)  so  that  the  cate-
gories and their properties that are significant to the
research  questions  emerge.  Theoretical  saturation
drives the data collection strategy rather than repre-
sentative  sampling.  Saturation  is  achieved  once  no
new  properties  emerge  in  the  sampling  process
[Corbin  and  Strauss 2008;  Charmaz 2006;  Glaser
and Strauss 1967; Hood 2007). 

Adding  to  this,  Corbin  and  Strauss [2008]
emphasise  the  systemic  or  dialectical  nature  of  a
social situation. In response to events, situations or
problems, for individuals and social units there is a
flow  of  action/interaction/emotion,  which  may  be
strategic, routine, random, novel, automatic, and/or
thoughtful. Situations are not static, and changes in
the structure and/or process of a situation may trig-
ger adjustments in activities, interactions, and emo-
tional  responses.  There  are  often  major  variations
in how responses to change in structure and process
may  be  observed  in  a  particular  situation;  it
depends on how a group or individual perceives it
and  the  meanings  they  assign  to  the  situation
[Corbin and Strauss 2008].

Critics  of  GTM  argue  that  it  is  naïve  [Haig
1995]. The lack of relationship to existing theories
and  an  unclear  epistemological  basis  are  seen  as
flaws  in  the  approach  [Carbone 2009;  Charmaz
2006]. In addition, the micro-level focus means that
it is difficult to use the emerging theory as a policy
input.

Proponents of GTM counter that valid theory
does emerge, providing the concepts are systemati-
cally  related;  i.e.  different  concepts  are  linked
[Corbin  and  Strauss 2008].  Moreover,  the  method
should  be  credible  in  terms  of  width  and  depth  of
empirical  observations  and  the  logical  connection
between  the  data  gathered  and  the  argument  and
analysis.  Ideally  a  study  should  produce  original

16

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

ideas—it  should  have  a  thoughtful,  innovative  and
creative component, and the resulting theory should
be  useful  for  people  to  use  in  everyday  practice
[Charmaz 2006; Corbin and Strauss 2008].

Case Study and Grounded
Theory in Examining Land
Registration Usage

Aspects  of  GTM  have  been  incorporated  into
case studies of land registration usage in the Western
Cape, South Africa. The second author’s PhD study
investigates  why  buyers  choose  to  register  or  not
register  a  purchase  in  social  housing  estates  [Roux
2013].  It  is  a  follow  up  study  to  the  first  author’s
study  [Barry 1999],  and  five  cases  in  three  rural
towns are in progress. 

Some 3 million houses have been delivered in
South African government subsidised social hous-
ing programmes since 1996, but off-register (infor-
mal)  transactions  are  a  major  concern  [Financial
and Fiscal Commission 2012]. The research project
is  a  response  to  these  concerns.  The  aim  was  to
develop  explanatory  theory  based  on  the  buyers’
experiences when transacting and securing land in
social housing estates. 

The  method  departs  from  what  is  generally
considered GTM in that broad theoretical concepts
but not hypotheses were drawn from existing work
and the literature to guide the theory development.
It differs from the first approach in that hypotheses
are postulated as the cases progress, and not a pri-
ori; hypotheses emerge from the data. Using GTM
alone  was  considered  initially,  but  abandoned  as
unsuited  to  the  purposes  of  the  study  and  the
research questions. 

Each  case’s  context  is  bound  spatially  and
socially  by  the  social  housing  project  and  institu-
tionally  by  the  local  authority,  land  professionals,
local politicians and institutions within the housing
project.  The  influences  of  relevant  provincial  and
national forces as part of the external system, such as
housing  policies  and  the  regulatory  framework  are
also included here. Delimiting the case to the social
housing estate reduces the complexity in the mean-
ings  held  by  people,  since  the  residents  in  a  social
housing estate share information sources, life expe-
riences, history and local power structures. In addi-
tion,  with  some  exceptions,  the  initial  state  of  the
land records at the completion of a housing project is
homogenous.  The  aim  of  the  South African  social
housing  projects  is  to  systematically  transfer  the
properties to the beneficiaries. Typically, all the title
deeds document the same set of rights and title con-

ditions (encumbrances). In many projects the regis-
tration  component  is  not  completed  within  a  short
time  [Gordon  et  al.  2011].  However  there  is  some
internal consistency to projects.

The main components examined are firstly the
strategies  to  securing  a  transaction  and  how  and
why  people  adopt  them.  The  second  component
examines  the  influence  of  local  power  structures
and regulatory institutions on how and why people
choose a particular strategy.

Similar  to  method  1,  the  case  study  data
includes door-to-door interviews with people in the
community, some of their life histories, interviews
with  officials,  interviews  with  powerful  actors  in
the  community,  and  interviews  with  land  profes-
sionals.  Documentary  data  comprise  municipal
council  minutes  and  other  municipal  documents,
cadastral  maps,  newspaper  archives  (some  going
back  to  the  1950`s  when  grand  apartheid  policies
were formulated), evidence from court cases, docu-
ments  that  participants  handed  to  the  interviewers
in  the  field,  and  transaction  data  from  the  Deeds
Office. Items of data, i.e. facts, are validated or fal-
sified using triangulation techniques such as com-
paring  parts  of  interview  data  with  Deeds  Office
data and council minutes (e.g. a statement such as
“I  am  an  original  beneficiary”  can  be  checked  to
see if the interviewee is the original beneficiary or
has acquired the house off-register), and following
up  with  officials  and  land  professionals  (e.g.
lawyers)  who  have  become  aware  of  a  particular
type of problem or dealt with it personally.

In overview, the spiral of theory development
starts  with  processing  interview  and  documentary
data as they are collected. Neighbourhood histories
and  chronologies  of  relevant  events  are  created
from  participants`  life  histories  and  documentary
evidence  to  develop  a  contextual  description. The
effects of relevant policies, laws and regulations are
then linked to the interviews. Interviews, policies,
laws  and  regulations  and  other  documentary  evi-
dence  are  then  used  to  identify  different  power
structures relevant to each case. 

Recorded  interviews  and  field  notes  are  tran-
scribed,  indexed,  and  filed,  and  transaction-secur-
ing processes extracted. Participants` demographic
data  and  housing  histories  are  tabulated  and  sum-
marised, and codes and themes identified on a daily
basis. Applying  Charmaz [2006],  the  transaction-
securing  processes  and  other  components  of  the
interviews  are  coded.  Coding  involves  labelling
segments of text to summarise, and categorise the
data. Constant comparison is applied as the codes
are developed; data are compared with data, cate-
gory  with  category  and  incident  with  incident  to

17

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

identify  similarities  and  differences.  This  cycle
continues  until  all  the  codes  had  been  compared
and refined and then revisited as concepts emerge. 
Emerging concepts are associated with a theo-
retical framework developed from the literature. In
addition, the methodological design allows theoret-
ical  concepts,  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  in
terms of the theoretical framework, to emerge from
the  coding.  These  emerging  concepts  resulted  in
changes  to  the  theoretical  framework  (as  noted
above, developing the broad theoretical concepts at
an  early  stage  is  where  the  method  departs  from
GTM). As theory emerges, the process cycles back
to compare concepts and theory against the initial
codes and the data through a number of iterations. 
Once each case is completed, cross case analy-
sis should establish if the different components of
theory emerging from each case can be considered
more  general  than  substantive;  i.e.  can  it  explain
phenomena outside the context of the case study or
not? Each case has associated substantive level the-
ory that is valid for that case only. But since there
are  two  cases  in  two  of  the  towns  and  all  three
towns  share  national  and  provincial  policies  and
operate  under  the  same  legal  framework,  theory
that is general to all the cases and to pairs of cases
in  a  particular  town  may  emerge.  Both  detailed,
rich local level theory and more generalised theory
may be generated in this way.

Advantages, Disadvantages and
Limitations of the Method

The  advantage  of  this  method  is  that  a  study
should  develop  rich,  detailed  theory.  It  is  designed
explicitly  to  generate  theory  from  the  data  and  the
theory emerges from the experiences of the research
participants.  The  coding  and  constant  comparison
techniques should construct theory rigorously, theo-
ry which is grounded in the case study data. 

The  main  disadvantages  are  the  intensive
analysis period and the uncertainty of relying on a
theory emerging, as opposed to testing and devel-
oping  existing  theory.  As  described  above,  the
analysis includes various strategies. These processes
are not linear and the analysis may go through a few
cycles of coding, categorising, constant comparison
with frequent returns to the data before the theoret-
ical  models  are  stable.  When  testing  an  existing
theory,  many  of  the  constructs  are  established
beforehand. But, when developing theory from the
ground  up,  there  is  no  certainty  that  theory  will
emerge, and before a theory emerges, the researcher
will need to manage a great deal of uncertainty. Thus
the method is not for the inexperienced researcher.

The method is suited to developing explanato-
ry  theory  that  is  based  on  deep  investigation  into
the case study. Due to the long time frames required
to  complete  a  study,  at  least  by  an  inexperienced
researcher,  it  is  ideal  when  seeking  to  explain
behaviours that result from implementing a particu-
lar  land  registration  strategy.  It  is  not  oriented  to
explaining a situation in order for design and action
theory to follow. 

6. Concluding Remarks 

We have covered two approaches to case studies
which examine land registration usage in the same
South African  province. The  two  studies  occurred
during vastly different levels of change and uncer-
tainty in both the national and micro-level contexts,
and different emphases on the outcomes. 

Ideally  a  case  study’s  purpose  and  method
should be clear at the outset. However, our experi-
ence  suggests  that  a  study’s  purpose  and  the  case
study method should be examined together as part of
the  ongoing  case  study  review  /  reflection  process,
especially  during  times  of  change.  The  first  author
changed the purpose of his study, and consequently
the method, soon after starting. Results were needed
urgently  as  large  scale  housing  programmes  were
proceeding which used the existing land registration
and cadastral survey systems, in spite of a number of
observers expressing concerns over whether this was
an  appropriate  strategy.  The  second  author  made
minor  revisions  to  her  study  method  at  an  early
stage. This study focussed on explaining behaviour
relating to land registration strategies at the outset. It
follows  up  on  predictions  that  motivated  the  first
study and the findings that flowed from that study.

The first method, based on GIQM, can produce
results  quickly  if  the  objectives  are  clear  and
focussed  at  the  outset. A  caution  is  that  important
data or evidence may be omitted and a study that is
too  narrowly  focussed  may  generate  spurious
results. The second method is primarily inductive,
and  used  coding  and  constant  comparison  tech-
niques drawing on GTM, to develop theory based
on  the  case  study  data  alone. There  was  no  initial
premise that any design or action might flow from
such  a  study.  The  method  should  produce  more
detailed,  richer  explanatory  theory  at  the  micro
level than the first method. It does however involve
a prolonged study period and requires a high level
of qualitative analytical skills.

Finally, while the two methods are different forms
of the case study method, they need not be exclusive.
Our recent case studies draw on both of them.

18

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

References

Barnes,  G.  and  C.  Griffith-Charles.  2007. Assessing  the
formal land market and deformalization of property
in St. Lucia. Land Use Policy, 24(2), 494-501.
Barry, M. 1995. Conceptual Design of a Communal Land
Registration System for South Africa, South African
Journal of Surveying and Mapping, 23(3)(139) 153-
162.

Barry, M. 1999. Evaluating Cadastral systems in Periods
of  Uncertainty:  A  Study  of  Cape  Town’s  Xhosa-
speaking  Communities.  PhD  thesis,  University  of
Natal, Durban.

Barry,  M.  2006.  Formalising  Informal  Land  Rights:  the
case of Marconi Beam and Joe Slovo Park. Habitat
International. 30(2006), 628-644.

Survey 

Barry, M. and L. Roux. 2012. A Change Based Framework
for  Theory  Building  in  Land  Tenure  Information
Systems, 
DOI
10.1179/1752270612Y.0000000003, May 22, 2012.
Barry, M., L. Roux and E. Danso. 2012. Land Registration
Usage Theory: A Case Study in Ghana. World Bank
Conference on Land and Poverty, Washington, D.C.
April 23-26, 2012.

Review, 

Benbasat,  I,  D.K.  Goldstein,  and  M.  Mead. 1987. The
Case  Strategy  in  Studies  of  Information  Systems,
MIS Quarterly 11(3): Sept 1987: pp. 369-386.
Çağdaş, V.  and  E.  Stubkjaer.  2009.  Doctoral  research  on
cadastral  development.  Land  Use  Policy,  26  (2009)
869-889. 

Carbone, D. 2009. An Evidence-Based Health Information
System  Theory,  Ch  VI  in  Yogesh,  K.D.,  Lai,  B.,
Williams,  M.D,  Schneberger,  S.L.  and  Wade,  M.
(Eds),  Handbook  of  Research  on  Contemporary
Theoretical  Models 
Information  Systems.
in 
Information Science Reference, New York.

Charmaz, K. 2006. Constructing grounded theory. A prac-
tical  guide  through  qualitative  analysis.  Thousands
Oaks: Sage.

Checkland, P. 1999. Systems Thinking, Systems Practice:
Including  a  30  year  Retrospective.  John  Wiley  &
Sons.

Coetzee, J.K., J. Graaff, F. Hendricks and G. Wood. 2001.
Introduction,  Ch  1  in  J.K.  Coetzee,  J.  Graaff,  F.
Hendricks and G. Wood (eds), Development Theory,
Policy and Practise. Oxford University Press.
Corbin,  J.  and  A.  Strauss.  1990.  Grounded  Theory
Research:  Procedures,  Canons,  and  Evaluative
Criteria, Qualitative Sociology, 13(1), pp. 3-21.
Corbin,  J.  and  A.  Strauss.  2008.  Basics  of  Qualitative
Research, Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory. 3rd Edition. Sage Publications.
Cousins,  B.,  T.  Cousins,  D.  Hornby,  R.  Kingwell,  L.
Royston and W. Smit. 2005. Will formalising proper-
ty  rights  reduce  poverty  in  South Africa’s  “Second
Economy?”  Questioning 
the  mythologies  of
Hernando  de  Soto.  Policy  Brief.  Debating  land
reform,  natural  resources  and  poverty. N°  18,
(October  2005),  1-6,  PLAAS,  Programme  for  Land
and Agrarian Studies. 

Creswell,  J.W.  2007.  Qualitative  Inquiry  &  Research

Design. Sage, Thousand Oaks.

Creswell,  J.W.  2009.  Research  Design:  Qualitative,
Quantitative  and  Mixed  Methods  Approaches.  3rd
Edition. Sage, Thousand Oaks, California.

De Soto, H. 2000. The mystery of capital: why capitalism
triumphs in the west and fails everywhere else. New
York: Basic Books.

Eisenhardt,  K.M.  1989.  Building  Theories  from  Case
Study  Research. The  Academy  of  Management
Review, 14(4) (Oct., 1989), pp. 532-550.

Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission.  2012.  Building  an
Inclusionary  Housing  market:  Shifting 
the
Paradigm  for  South  Africa.  Report  on  the  Public
Hearings on Housing Finance. 31 January 2012.
Flyvbjerg,  B.  2006.  Five  misunderstandings  about  case-
study research, Qualitative Inquiry, 12(2), pp. 219-45.
Flyvberg, B. 2011. Case Study. In N.K. Denzin and Y.S.
Lincoln (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative
Research.  4th  ed. Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage,  301-
316.

Fourie, C.D. 1994. Options for the Cadastre in the New
South Africa.  Report  to  the  South African  Council
for Professional and Technical Surveyors.

Ghoshal,  S.  2005.  Bad  Management  Theories  are
Destroying Good Management Practices. Academy
of Management Learning and Education, 4(1), 75-
91.

Gilbert,  A.  2002.  On  the  Mystery  of  Capital  and  the
Myths of Hernando de Soto: What Difference Does
Legal  Title  Make?  International  Development
Planning Review, 24 (1), 1-19.

Glaser, B. and A. Strauss. 1967. The discovery of ground-
ed  theory:  Strategies  for  qualitative  research,
Aldine, Chicago.

Glazier,  J.D.  and  R.  Grover.  2002. A  Multidisciplinary
Framework  for  Theory  Building.  Library  Trends,
50(3), Winter 2002, 317-329.

Goldstone, R. 1993. Goldstone Commission : Report on
Violence  at  Crossroads.  Sandton,  November  11,
1993. http://www.anc.org.za/show.php?id=4221.
Accessed January 14, 2013.

Gordon, R, M. Nell and A. di Lollo. 2011. Investigation
into 
to
Beneficiaries  of  Housing  Projects  funded  by  the
capital subsidy. UrbanLandMark, Pretoria.

issuing  Title  Deeds 

the  delays 

in 

Gorton, W.A. 2006. Karl Popper and the Social Sciences.
State University of New York Press, Albany.
Gregor,  S.  2006.  The  Nature  of  Theory  in  Information
Systems. MIS Quarterly, 30(3), 611-642/September
2006.

Grover, R. and J. Glazier. 1986. A conceptual framework
for  theory  building  in  library  and  information  sci-
ence. Library and Information Science Research, 8,
227-242.

Haig, B.D. 1995. Grounded Theory as Scientific Method,

Philosophy of Education, 28(1), 1-11.

Hood,  J.C.  2007.  Orthodoxy  vs  Power:  Defining  the
Traits of Grounded Theory. Ch 7 in Bryant, A. and
Charmaz,  K.  (eds)  2007.  The  SAGE  Handbook  of
Grounded Theory. Sage, London. 151-164.

19

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Jackson, J. 1996, Extending the South African cadastral
system  using  a  mid-point  method,  South  African
Journal of Surveying and Mapping, 23(5), 277-284.
Kerlinger,  F.N.  1979.  Behavioural  Research:  A
Conceptual Approach. Holt, Reinhart and Winston,
New York. 

Keynes, J.M. 1936. The General Theory of Employment,

Interest and Money. Macmillan, London.

Kuhn, T.S. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.

Chicago III. University of Chicago Press.

Lee,  A.S. 1989. A  Scientific  Method  for  MIS  Case
Studies, MIS Quarterly 13(1): March 1989: pp. 33-
50.

Lewin,  K.  1945.  The  Research  Centre  for  Group
the  Massachusetts  Institute  of

Dynamics  at 
Technology. Sociometry, 8, 126 -136.

Middleton, J. 1988. Foreword in Downs, R.E. and Reyna,
S.P. (Eds) 1988. Land and Society in Contemporary
Africa. University of New Hampshire, University of
New England Press, Hanover NH.

Mitchell, T. 2005. The work of economics: how a disci-
pline  makes  its  world.  European  Journal  of
Sociology. 46(2), 297-320.

Myers, M.D. 1997. Qualitative Research in Information
Systems, MIS Quarterly 21(2), June 1997, pp. 241-
242. 

Payne, G., A. Durand-Lasserve and C. Rakodi. 2009. The
limits  of  land  titling  and  home  ownership.
Environment and Urbanization, 21(2), 443-462.
Pelto,  J.P.  and  G.H.  Pelto.  1978.  Anthropological
Research.  The  Structure  of  Inquiry. 2nd  Edition
Cambridge University Press.

Platteau,  J.P.  1996.  The  Evolutionary  Theory  of  Land
Rights as Applied To sub-Saharan Africa: A Critical
Assessment,  Development  and  Change,  27(1996),
29-86.

Popper,  K.  2002.  Conjectures  and  Refutations.  3rd  edi-

tion, Routledge Classics, London.

Reynolds, P.D. 1971. A Primer in Theory Construction.

Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis and New York.

Roux,  L.  and  M.  Barry.  2011.  Land  Transactions  in
Social  Housing  in  the  Western  Cape  of  South
Africa:  A  Narrative  of  Kransdorp. Proceedings
AfricaGeo, Cape Town  May 31-June 2, 2011.

Roux, L. 2013. Land Registration Use: Sales in a State-
subsidised Housing Estate in South Africa. PhD the-
sis, University of Calgary.

Shipton,  P.  2009.  Mortgaging  the Ancestors.  Ideologies
of Attachment in Africa, Yale University Press, New
Haven.

Stake,  R.  1998.  Case  Studies.  In  N.K.  Denzin  and Y.S.
Lincoln  (Eds.),  Strategies  of  qualitative  inquiry.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 86-109.

Stake,  R.  2000.  Case  Studies.  In  N.K.  Denzin  and Y.S.
Lincoln  (Eds.),  The  Handbook  of  qualitative
research.  2nd  ed. Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage,  435-
454.

Williamson,  I.P.  and  C.  Fourie.  1998.  Using  The  Case
Study  Methodology  For  Cadastral  Reform.
Geomatica, 52(3), 283-295.

Wirth,  U.  1998.  Abductive  inference,  in  P  Bouchard
(ed.),  Encyclopedia  of  Semiotics,  Oxford,  UK:
Oxford University Press.

Yin,  R.K.  2009.  Case  Study  Research  -  Fourth  Edition,
Applied  Social  Research  Methods  Series,  Vol  5,
Sage.

MS Rec’d 13/01/16

Authors

Mike  Barry is  a  professor  and  holds  the  John
Holmlund  Chair  in  Land  Tenure  and  Cadastral
Systems in the Geomatics Engineering Department
at  the  University  of  Calgary.  He  has  a  PhD  from
University of KwaZulu-Natal, and BSc(Survey) and
MBA degrees from the University of Cape Town.

Lani Roux holds a BSc in Land Surveying and
a  MSc  in  Engineering  (Geomatics)  from  the
University of Cape Town (South Africa). She will
receive  her  PhD  in  Geomatics  Engineering  from
the University of Calgary in June 2013. !

20

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 05/30/20For personal use only. 