This article was downloaded by: [Nanyang Technological University]
On: 28 April 2015, At: 10:20
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

GIS‐based DSS for priority setting in
humanitarian mine‐action
Snjezana Knezic a & Nenad Mladineo a
a Faculty of Civil Engineering and Architecture , University of
Split , 21000 Split, Croatia
Published online: 20 Feb 2007.

To cite this article: Snjezana Knezic & Nenad Mladineo (2006) GIS‐based DSS for priority setting
in humanitarian mine‐action, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 20:05,
565-588, DOI: 10.1080/13658810600607303

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810600607303

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 20, No. 5, May 2006, 565–588

Research Article

GIS-based DSS for priority setting in humanitarian mine-action

SNJEZANA KNEZIC* and NENAD MLADINEO
Faculty of Civil Engineering and Architecture, University of Split, 21000 Split, Croatia

(Received 26 July 2005; in final form 21 December 2005 )

Mine contamination is one of the main obstacles to economic recovery and other
types of progress in mine-affected countries. Therefore, the primary goal of
humanitarian demining operations is to clear all suspected minefields and restore
them so as to make them available for their previous use. The customary
financial shortfall results in the need for priority setting in the mine removal
process. This paper describes and investigates a new approach to priority setting
within mine action, with the introduction of a hierarchic GIS-based decision
support system (DSS). The proposed DSS is aimed at determining the objective
priorities required to reduce the risks stemming from mine contamination. DSS is
based on a combination of GIS analysis and a multicriteria method in order to
enable efficacious mine action management, namely setting humanitarian
demining priorities in order to optimally reduce the risk caused by mines. GIS
is outlined as a powerful tool for the generation of aggregated information used
in multicriteria analysis, as is the link between hierarchic decision levels in the
proposed DSS. The results of a demonstration of the proposed GIS-based DSS
on mine-affected water resources in Croatia are supplied.

Keywords: DSS; GIS; Humanitarian mine action; Multicriteria analysis

1.

Introduction

Existing experiences emphasize the fact that the process of humanitarian demining is
an extremely complex, slow and expensive job. Moreover, it is very specialized work,
which unfortunately includes human victims, a detail which more than any
emphasizes the importance of striving for increasing efficacy and efficiency of
humanitarian demining activities, as well as of resource usage. The limited funds
available require increased efficiency, which can be obtained by careful priority
setting of the mine removal process. By assessing the specific priorities of each mine-
affected territory one can easily determine which territories offer the greatest
potential benefits upon the removal of mines and the resumption of normal
activities thereon. Evidently, such territories should be decontaminated first. Even
a small percentage reduction in humanitarian demining costs presents big savings
and often exceeds the value of investments and implemented methodological
improvements.

In the immediate post-war period, mine action activities are usually seen as an
integral part of the reconstruction effort, and priorities are determined by plans for
reconstruction, the return of refugees and displaced persons, as well as special
projects to upgrade the national infrastructure, and to clear the territory, etc. In this

*Corresponding author. Email: knezic@gradst.hr

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2006 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810600607303

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 566

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

sense, mine action is ‘demand led’ in its initial phases and, in general, the priorities
are starkly clear. As is normal, however, the problem of identifying priorities
becomes increasingly difficult as the most obviously pressing problems are
addressed. The report,
‘Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Mine
Action mission in Croatia’ (Filippino and Paterson 2002), states that ‘to some
outside observers,
it was unclear how priorities were being
established within each county, whether politicians in the different counties were
setting priorities based on similar criteria, and the degree to which socio-economic
factors were considered when setting priorities’. The purpose of this research is to
assess the relevance and effectiveness of the methods used to develop the pilot
County Mine Action Plan in Croatia.

including donors,

collaborated closely with international

Mine contamination is one of the main obstacles to economic, and other aspects
of progress,
in Croatia. Therefore, the main goal of humanitarian demining
operations is to clear all suspected minefields and restore the area according to its
previous use, all by 2010. In 1998 the Croatian government declared the foundation
of the Croatian Mine Action Centre (CROMAC), which has taken charge of the
management of all humanitarian demining operations in Croatia. This organization
has
institutions and organizations.
CROMAC has developed intensive and efficient counter-mine action, which, in
its first years, developed clearly specified priorities. However, as time has passed, the
priority assessment task has become more complex and complicated, and the annual
evaluation of humanitarian demining plans demands a more complex methodolo-
gical approach. In Croatia, major state organizations take care of the management
and development of particular resources, such as transportation systems, energy
infrastructure, state forests, water resources, etc. These departments are most
interested in the humanitarian demining of their own priority areas.

During mine action activities it is necessary to evaluate areas contaminated with
mines, and to consider where humanitarian demining would pose the biggest
positive effect as regards decreasing the risk to human life and to property, the
repatriation of refugees, and the revitalization of economic and social life, in such a
way as to minimize potential costs. As there are evident conflicts of interest and
this paper describes the necessity of developing a
local political pressure,
methodology that would render the decision-making process more objective, as
regards the optimal policies for risk reduction, by basing it on real world
parameters. The need for the inclusion of a larger number of stakeholders in the
decision-making process, who often have conflicting criteria, emphasizes the
importance of multicriteria analysis. In practise, conflicts between the various
objectives in a particular project of humanitarian demining occur very often, and
objectives from external interests are often in conflict with objectives generated
within the decision-making system. These conflicts are carried forward to the
decision-making criteria, which thus consist of conflicting positions. The incon-
sistency of the criteria creates the need for the multicriteria approach, because
‘classical’ methods, including intuitive decision making, cannot evaluate compro-
mised (optimal) solution in regard to the specifics of humanitarian demining.

In analysing the humanitarian demining problems, the following problematic
characteristics were identified: the high cost of demining, conflict of interests,
spatiality of the problem, and the hierarchical nature of the problem (regarding
several solution levels). These aspects of conflict suggest the need for implementa-
tion of a methodological approach based on GIS and multicriteria analysis, for

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

567

planning and implementation of humanitarian demining activities. For this reason,
this paper will present a novel approach to the problems of mine action management
with the use of a decision support system (DSS). The presented DSS, based on GIS
in conjunction with multicriteria analysis, is found to be a powerful tool for spatial
decision-making.

The techniques of multicriteria analysis and multicriteria decision-making
the methods
(MCDM) originate in the early 1980s. The main objective of
(Guitouni and Martel 1998) developed since then has been to help decision-makers
solve complex problems concerning criteria that are usually conflicting and
qualitative. The idea of multicriteria decision-making is nowadays implemented
world-wide in tackling a wide range of problems involving selection, sorting, and
ranking, as well as in various fields of research: social sciences, economics,
environmental issues, technology, and many more. The multicriteria models have
become vital components of complex decision support systems, combined with other
OR methods and decision models. However, MCDM could be seen as part or one of
the various models within the decision support system (Sprague and Carlson 1982).
The idea that combines GIS with multicriteria tools is not new (Malczewski 1999),
because a significant number of problems from many fields can be characterized as
both multicriterial and spatial at the same time. Therefore, many authors have tried
to combine these two tools in recent years. Jankowski (1995) suggests two ways of
coupling GIS and MCDM. The first is in a linking mechanism and another is in the
integration of GIS and MCDM functions using the same database. Moreover,
Jankowski et al. (1997) discuss the involvement of many stakeholders in solving
spatial decision problems. They present SDSS for groups called Group Choice.
Additionally, Jankowski et al. (2001) present a new prototype of SDSS emphasizing
the need for the improvement of the typically limited role of maps as support tool, to
move toward the use of maps as a source of structuring in multiple criteria spatial
(2005) discusses the integration of
decision-making. In his paper, Marinoni
PROMETHEE in a GIS. He considers both the deterministic and stochastic
approach of multicriteria analysis,
thus showing how the combination of a
sophisticated decision-support methodology with powerful spatial analysis and
visualization capabilities can be applied to evaluating decision alternatives.
Alternatives were made up of both regularly and irregularly shaped zones of raster
cells. Martin et al. (1999) used the PROMETHEE method and coupled it with
vector-based GIS. They actually used the decision systems as a means of improving
the outcome of human decision-making and as a tool to capture and transfer the
technical process of watershed management. Moreover, Pereira (2001) presented a
combination of multicriteria evaluation and robust search methodology such as
genetic algorithms to generate alternative road routes taking into account various
criteria. The criteria are referenced to the space together with the roads so the
methodology is embedded into GIS. In his paper, Hill (2005) examines the case for
inclusion of new methods in spatial systems for multicriteria decision analysis
(MCDA) in the context of the history and application of ASSESS, a spatial
implementation of the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) (Saaty 1980) which has
been used extensively for MCDA in a policy environment. Joerin and Musy (2000)
present the MAGISTER (Multicriteria Analysis with GIS for TERritory) model,
which is based on GIS and multicriteria analysis. The model proposes a decision
support method to integrate multiple actors of land management. They use the
function based on the same principle as the valued outranking relation used in

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 568

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

ELECTRE (Roy 1990), which is then used to select the best zones, or classify them
in predefined category. In their study, Uran and Janssen (2003) search for
explanations or reasons for success or failure of SDSS for coastal zone and water
management. The findings of the study show, amongst others, that SDSS only
provide limited or no support for analysing and evaluating the output generated by
SDSS.

However, each new aspect of combining multicriteria analysis and GIS, such as
mine action management, has its own particularities, perhaps because the problem
shapes the decision-making process, not the tools themselves.

2. Mine action management

As the need for mine action has increased in the past years, a variety of problem-
solving tools have been implemented at the operational level, in areas such as
priority setting, trust building, selection processes and impact assessment, as
methodologies inevitable in mine action management. Harpviken et al. (2003) argue
about the lack of common approaches to impact assessment. There is a need for
transparency, enabling relevant stakeholders to take part in a well-informed
discussion about where and how limited mine action resources should be best used.
In their paper, Millard et al. (2002) review specific measures that mine action
agencies have used to build trust,
looking at the strengths and weaknesses of
different approaches. The analysis concludes by suggesting general guidelines for
how mine-action practitioners can facilitate trust, and by outlining some promising
avenues for future research. Goslin (2003) proposes task impact assessment (TIA) as
a tool for mine action operators. The tool is designed by NPA (Norwegian People’s
Aid) to target the organization’s activities in the field effectively, in order to ensure
that its humanitarian demining activities actually achieve their objectives and
correspond to the needs of identified target groups and beneficiaries. The paper
suggests that TIA, as developed and used by one mine action operator, provides
results relevant for other operators, and could provide a standardized tool to assist
all mine action organizations within a given country to select their tasks. Another
method for priority setting in the field of mine action is Task Assessment Planning
(TAP) (GeoSpatial 2004). TAP integrates both technical and socio-economic
considerations in the planning of the humanitarian demining process. Van der
Merwe (2003) proposes a priority-setting concept for mine-action activities which is
based on quantifying the result of blockages removed, not on the measurement of
success. This priority setting is based on a central question, whether the removal of
blockages will be sufficient for the area under consideration to obtain the desired
usage, or if it will need more investment. Lisica (2003) uses qualitative classification
for determining priority levels. The methodology combines the most important risk
indicators with socioeconomic impact. Scales for each indicator are defined
separately.

As regards multicriteria decision-making, de Leeneer and Pastijn (2002) use
multicriteria analysis as a tool in the selection of the best sensor combination in the
field of land mine detection from an airborne platform. They compare results
obtained from the ORESTE multicriteria analysis method, a simple additive
aggregation method which uses a qualitative ranking of criteria to assess the relative
performance of each of the alternatives with regard to each of the specified criteria
using this ranking to rank the alternatives (Roubens 1982) with an outranking
PROMETHEE methods (Brans et al. 1984).

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

569

The development of geographic information systems (GIS) has opened new
possibilities in the management of spatial data. As in the other fields where spatial
data dominate, GIS is already in use in disaster/emergency management (Chang
et al. 1997) and mine action (Gentile et al. 1997, Mather 2000, Benini et al. 2003,
Williams and Dunn 2003), usually as a database for information systems. Gentile
et al. (1997) use GIS as a database within humanitarian demining management,
while Mather (2000) explores the implementation of GIS in humanitarian demining.
Williams and Dunn (2003) analyse GIS as a tool for gathering and analysis of data
in the process of risk assessment, as well as in the development of priorities for
landmine clearance. The GICHD (Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining) develops and deploys the Information Management System for Mine
Action (IMSMA). In 1998, the Swiss Government funded the development of a
powerful GIS element for IMSMA, called Field Module. The Field Module was
defined and developed for use at country Mine Action Centre (MAC) and regional
centre levels. The recent version of the IMSMA combines GIS with a powerful
relational database. The system is currently in use in more than 80% of mine action
programs around the world. Unlike other mine action programmes, CROMAC has
developed its own GIS-based Mine Information System.

The main objective of the research presented in this paper is to involve more
participants in the decision-making process, and to give them a more active role; for
example, representatives of communities which so far have been taking passive part
during questionnaire surveys. This proposes the coupling of the decision-making
process with the conflicting interests of stakeholders. There is certainly a need for
more objective criteria during the evaluation of humanitarian demining priority, i.e.
optimal policies for risk reduction.

Therefore, herein, for the purposes of risk management in mine action, the main
idea is to combine GIS with multicriteria analysis to make an effective DSS
platform. The multicriteria character of priority-setting problems within risk
management suggests the need to implement this kind of analysis in this particular
field.

3. Methodology

The proposed GIS-based DSS for risk management in mine-affected areas supports
the needs for different approaches at different decision levels, thus modelling the
decision process in the most appropriate way (Mladineo et al. 2003). As a result of
the multi-level approach is
the problematic characteristics of mine action,
developed: for each problem level, a specific procedure for criteria and action
(solution) evaluation is developed (figure 1). This means that at each decision level a
separate ‘set of actions’ is developed (projects for humanitarian demining of socio-
political entities, such as counties, municipalities, villages, mine fields, homogenous
areas, etc.). Such sets are created by GIS, and evaluated by applying multicriteria
analysis. Each particular ‘set of actions’ is created according to territorial aspects
and the political organization of the country in question. Therefore, three basic
levels should be recognised in mapping the DSS structure (Mladineo et al. 2003).

When of a strategic nature, problems

should be treated at state level;
consequently, counties, regions, or districts make up a logical set of actions being
evaluated by multicriteria analysis. Alternatively, at the state level, homogenous
zones can equally be defined as a set of actions. In this context ‘homogenous zones’
are defined as parts of territories with common characteristics, for example: unique

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 570

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

Figure 1. Hierarchic approach in humanitarian demining operations (example for water
resources).

agriculture areas or forests or rural areas with domestic backyards, etc. Actions are
ranked according to the humanitarian demining priorities, which stem from
assessment of the primary assets of the country (energy production zones, water
supply zones, transportation and other infrastructure, ecologically valuable areas,
tourism, fire-endangered areas, areas that are under special state auspices, etc.).

At the tactical level, the problem should be treated at a lower territorial and socio-
political level, such as the levels of county, region, and district, so municipalities,
communities or larger city areas make up a logical set of actions. Alternatively, at
this level, homogenous zones can be defined as a set of actions which are ranked
according to the humanitarian demining priorities related to the basic orientations
of counties, regions or districts. Generally, at this level, homogenous zones can be
defined according to the criteria that concerns:

terrain characteristics (slope, pedology, accessibility, etc.), and suspected mine
field characteristics (mine density, risk degree, information reliability, mine types,
etc.);

social parameters, such as demographic data (population structure, nationality,

family structure, etc.);

economic parameters (basic economic mainstay of population, employment,
average income, potential of the area, expected positive effect after humanitarian
demining, etc.);

political parameters, such as direct intervention from the state level or donors

(return of refuges, areas under special state auspices, boundary areas, etc.);

legislative parameters (property structure, general purpose of the area, etc).

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

571

At the operational level, problems should be treated with respect to humanitarian
demining projects, mine fields, selection of humanitarian demining company and
technological support, etc.

According to this stratification, a particular ‘criteria set’ for each multicriteria
evaluation has to be developed. However, for each decision level, a team of experts
has to make the criteria set more detailed, by co-coordinating it with the demands
characteristic of that particular level, as well as with ‘partners’ in the decision
process.

The strategic decision level is the macro-approach (using macroeconomic and
other global parameters) to coordinate strategic partners: government, competent
ministries and international organizations.

for political stability and/or satisfaction of

The tactical level is the approach which takes account of the parameters most
important for development of a particular region, as well as parameters that are
important
the local population
(comprehensible and global criteria that apprehend the personal interests of each
inhabitant, especially in areas where there is the possibility of national conflicts, or
conflict caused by the ratio of resident and in-coming inhabitants, etc.). At the
tactical level, the partners included in the discussion about criteria are, firstly, socio-
political organizations of counties, refugees’ associations, and important infra-
electro-works,
structure
telecommunications, big agricultural system, etc.). At this level various donors
can also participate as partners in discussions.

such as public

(waterworks,

corporations

systems

Operational decisions are taken at the micro-approach level, related to the
technical and technological aspects of particular mine action, as well as economic
parameters in the valorisation of each project or demining company. At the
operative level, the partners in the decision process are: municipal organizations,
corporations, demining companies’ delegations, etc.

The hierarchic approach is very useful because, at the strategic level, it makes
distribution of money for the humanitarian demining of mine-affected counties
easier by simulating results attained from multicriteria analysis. At the tactical level,
the county distributes finances to the endangered municipalities or similar entities,
again based on multicriteria analysis. At the operative level, the municipality
distributes approved funds to particular projects, for the use of communities or
infrastructure, based on its own criteria and the results of the multicriteria analysis.
Conceptualized DSS (figure 2) consists of segments and modules which can be
built into the model at any phase of the system’s development. Segments are related
to the hierarchic structure of DSS organization, as well as to the other decision
support systems, which may exist separately for the purpose of risk-management of
various resources. Modules are related to both data and model bases. The database
is based on GIS for general data, which contains topological, social, political and
economic data about the country. In addition, another GIS, the mine information
system (MIS), functions as the central tool for mine risk-management. GIS has an
important role, and it is mainly used as:

an integration tool for the hierarchical levels of DSS;
a tool for the definition of the spatial entities which are used as elements for ‘sets

of actions’ in multicriteria analysis;

a tool for the generation of input data for multicriteria analysis and other models.
Besides basic digital topological maps and digitalized suspected minefields, the
GIS segments/modules contain data about natural resources, so it is possible to

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 572

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

Figure 2. Structural layout of DSS.

form input data for multicriteria analysis by the overlay of thematic layers. This
method avoids very expensive and sometimes imprecise terrain surveys, and at the
same time enables very simple visual control of the parameters used. Due to the
easier manipulation of data, DSS contains segments oriented to the dominant
resources contaminated with mines such as infrastructure (energy, telecommunica-
tions, road network), water resources, forests, etc.

The model base is a centrally important module of DSS, which, besides other
models, includes routines for the various spatial operations and multicriteria models
necessary for particular estimations, assessments and valuations. In this system a
multicriteria model is emphasized and put into a separate module.

Although mine action problems often use criteria for different priority settings,
such problems cannot be seen as multicriteria decision-making because priorities are
assigned according to only one criterion. For example, humanitarian demining
priorities could be ranked as follows: houses and yards, agriculture fields,
infrastructure, etc. However, this is not the multicriteria approach in both the
mathematical and practical sense. It is very easy to show that an area from one
priority group (e.g. houses and yards) would be ranked very low in multicriteria
analysis if it was ranked as being less important according to the other criteria.
Other ranking methods, such as weighted sum and utility function methods, can
lead to significant subjective mistakes during the ranking procedure.

The literature emphasizes that unicriterion, or intuitive, decision-making nowa-
days can be right only by chance, due to very complex relations of interactive

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

573

relationships with real world concepts, as well as due to the fact that in real
problems there are no criteria that dominate, especially as regards humanitarian
demining problems. Mutual comparisons of relevant political, social, economic,
technical and technological parameters are practically inconceivable without
multicriteria techniques and decision-making methods.

Among various multicriteria methods (Guitouni and Martel 1998) for the purpose
of priority assessment of mine action, the methods PROMETHEE I and II, as well
as GAIA (Geometrical Analysis for Interactive Aid) are proposed (Brans et al. 1984,
Brans and Mareschal 1991 and 1994). This selection is based on the authors’
experience in the application of PROMETHEE and GAIA methods in other
engineering problems (Milicic and Mladineo 1985, Ribarovic and Mladineo 1987,
Mladineo et al. 1987, 1992, 1993, Vuk et al. 1991, Knezic and Margeta 2002,
Margeta and Knezic 2002). PROMETHEE methods are well accepted by decision-
makers because they are comprehensive and have the ability to present visualized
results. Thus it is quite easy to discuss obtainable results with decision-makers.

Method PROMETHEE I ranks actions by a partial pre-order, with the following

dominance flows:

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

leaving flow : Wz að Þ~

1
n{1

X

x[A

p a, x
ð

Þ,

entering flow : W{ að Þ~ 1
n{1

X

x[A

p x, a
ð

Þ:

where ‘a’ denotes a set of actions, ‘n’ is the number of actions and p is the aggregated
preference index defined for each couple of actions. The PROMETHEE I method
gives the partial relation a net outranking flow:

W að Þ~Wz að Þ{W{ að Þ

is obtained from PROMETHEE II method which ranks the actions by total pre-
order. In the sense of priority assessment net outranking flow represents the
synthetic parameter based on defined criteria, priorities among criteria and criteria
weights. Since during the evaluation of the optimal policies for risk reduction several
groups are involved in the decision process, the activities in the process of problem
solving are thus defined:

criteria (the definition of the problem scope);

N definition of the characteristics, namely, the set of activities and the set of
N bringing together the sets of actions and criteria with ‘partners’ in the decision
process (it is usual to add some of the criteria due to the partners’ insistence,
during the group decision making);

N definition of the weights and preference types for each criterion;
N bringing together (negotiating) criteria weights, in order to achieve consensus;
N definition of alternative scenarios of the criteria weights assessment, assessing
the problem and
to certain criteria groups; modelling of
more weight
presentation of numerical and graphed results of ranked actions (mine
contaminated areas) by PROMETHEE methods;
N sensitivity analysis, namely, checking the stability of criteria weights for each
N application of the GAIA method in order to visualize problem characteristics;

weight scenario;

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 574

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo
N presentation of the multicriteria analysis results to the participants in the
decision-making process, and evaluation of additional scenarios (criteria
weight variations as a results of negotiation);
N elaboration of the multicriteria analysis results (interpretation of the priority

ranks obtained).

At each decision level the relevant data within GIS is generated. For the
evaluation of those parameters that cannot be evaluated by GIS experts, teams are
formed (for example, an estimation of the number of refugees who will return after
mine clearance operations, or an estimation of the costs–benefit ratio for a
humanitarian demining operation, etc.). Figure 3 shows a schematic procedure
(Mladineo et al. 2003), which contains GIS analysis as a first step, with evaluation of
relevant criteria presented as thematic layers. For criteria that cannot be spatially
presented using GIS analysis, specific numerical values, as the input for multicriteria
analysis, are evaluated by expert teams.

Figure 3. Layout of the methodological procedure for priority assessment in mine-affected
areas.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

575

4.

Implementation of GIS-based DSS for mine-affected water resources

4.1 Background

Regarding the importance of water resources as facilities used on a daily basis, one
of the priorities of the state was to demine areas near rivers and lakes. During the
war conflict watercourses were exposed to mining activity from both the enemy side
and, defensively, from the Croatian Army. Watercourses made a natural border and
frequently a separation line. This explains their high degree of mine contamination
during the conflict in Croatia. Mine-contaminated areas restrain basic water
management activities to a great extent: flood management, water supply systems,
and navigation, influencing directly the safety and standard of living of people, and
at the same time limiting efficient economic development. For this reason, in this
paper the DSS that comprise of the water resources segment will be presented as an
example of GIS-supported mine action priority setting.

The normalization of everyday activities on former battleground areas requires
the normal functioning of water supply systems and other water resources systems,
so ‘Croatian Waters’ have been intensively included in mine action, pointing out
priorities and contributing funds for the humanitarian demining of water resources.
World Bank loans and other donations have helped to demine numerous water
supply system structures as well as channel systems. The establishment of a
digitalized database of suspected minefields in CROMAC, and the overlaying of this
data with that obtained by ‘Croatian Waters’ about water resources can give real
insight into the rather large areas exposed to mine risks under the auspices of
‘Croatian Waters’.

A significant number of suspected minefields under the patronage of ‘Croatian
Waters’ have initiated this basic approach in the definition of strategy, namely mine
action priorities. By applying a systematic approach to problem solving, the
intention was to develop a complete insight into the problem and the most efficient
way to solve the problem of mine contaminated water resources.

The problem of humanitarian demining in the context of water management
activities is very complex and has to be analysed taking several aspects into account.
Due to a lack in the data needed for comprehensive analysis, only a partial
presentation of results can follow. For the first 10 ranked actions, in order to make
the decision process more transparent, a detailed survey regarding other
characteristics could be made. The aspects could be grouped as follows.

N Aspects regarding water management activities are mainly reflected in the
inability of the people who maintain or manage the structures, and their
machines, to safely approach to the structures that have to be regularly
maintained. It has to be emphasized that most water resource structures are
extremely large in dimensions, so the inability to maintain even a small part of
the structure can cause dysfunction of all the structure, thus endangering the
safety of people and goods in the wider area. Furthermore, absence of regular
maintenance activities for watercourses can extensively change the flow
conditions in the riverbed, and it is almost impossible to predict where the
mines might eventually be deposited. Therefore, complete downstream
watercourses, banks and inundated areas must be considered as potentially
mine-contaminated areas.
N The sociological aspect of the problem of mine contaminated watercourses is
raised because most of the activities in the settlements near rivers take place on

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 576

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

the river banks, regardless of whether they are transportation, economic or
recreation activities. Achieving a satisfactory degree of problem resolution is a
special difficulty because the problem requires the exercise of control over long
distances (and large areas). If it deals with hydraulically sensitive parts of
watercourses, restricted rights of approach should be considered.

in order

The aforementioned aspects point to the extreme complexity of the problem,
the potentially negative
demanding detailed analysis
consequences of the interaction of water and mine-contaminated areas. Regarding
possible consequences, the problem of watercourse mine contamination should be
solved by priority assessment. Regarding the above mentioned problems caused by
mines, it is clear that the main goal is to demine the territory under the auspices of
‘Croatian Waters’ as soon as possible, thus eliminating all existing risks.

to prevent

4.2 Problem evaluation

For the implementation of the GIS-based DSS two modules were conceptualized in
the first phase of the project:

N GIS module which integrated data from general GIS base, MIS and particular
N Multicriteria analysis module which integrated tools and data for decision

data from ‘Croatian Waters’ GIS.

support, namely data and software for the multicriteria analysis.

For the purpose of improving water management and providing support to the
decision-making process, the Croatian Water Management Directorate concluded
that it was necessary to improve the water information system. Therefore, the spatial
water information system (GIS) harmonized with EU standards was developed, and
is now managed, by ‘Croatian Waters’.

followed at a lower level by large river watersheds,

Most of the discussion during the initial phase of the project realisation was about
‘action set’ definition, namely how to define the subjects that appear in the ranking
process. Considering the management structure of ‘Croatian Waters’, there were
certain dilemmas about the hierarchic structure of watercourse characteristics
(figure 1). For example, at the highest level would be river basins or groups of
including
watersheds,
accompanied tributaries, bigger lakes and accumulations. At the following level
one finds smaller rivers with tributaries (streams, channels and ditches). In this
hierarchy, the lowest-level ‘action set’ would be streams (permanent or temporary),
torrent waters, etc. However, after the analysis of other data it was concluded that
using water resource entities as homogenization criteria would be problematic
because other data relevant for the problem were not structured according to such
entities. For example, socio-economic criteria are generated mostly from statistical
data about municipalities (demographic data, etc.) along with economic data, which
are also based on municipality structure. For these reasons, in this project the
administrative municipalities’ boundaries are used as criteria for the development of
each ‘action set’. A similar approach to the definition of the ‘action set’ is used in
other projects (Benini et al. 2002). It is obvious that at the lowest operational level
the elements of an ‘action set’ which have to be ranked are often called
‘humanitarian demining projects’. The practice is to give spatial areas (not too
big) to a demining company chosen by way of a public auction.

It is necessary to keep in mind that while engaging in the identification of the
hazardous areas during the decision process concerning ‘What to demine’, on the

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

577

other side of the table, as stakeholders, are the representatives of socio-political
bodies which aggressively stand for the interests of their communities, spatially
defined by administrative boundaries. Therefore, during multicriteria analysis it is
important to involve representatives of social and political associations from the
communities’ territory, which are included in the priority ranking, in order to obtain
results that would be accepted by them as those most suitable. Namely, at the state
level funds target for the humanitarian demining are divided among counties and
they distribute money to the municipalities within their territory. Within each
municipality, funds are used in humanitarian demining projects which target
settlements and infrastructure. Sometimes donors directly decide which territory is
to be demined, but even in these cases there is competition between potential
beneficiaries who want to assure donors that they are the most endangered.
Consequently, for the particular project that this paper investigates, for each of the
criteria the weights were assigned by a stakeholder involved in the decision process.
Regarding the GIS module, there is different accuracy provided as support at
different decision levels, so at the strategic level, scale 1:100,000 is often used, while
for the lowest operative level, the scale 1:5000 (or even more precise scales) are used.
For the purpose of this project GIS was implemented in ESRI software (ArcGis) as
it was already in use for the mine action and water resources databases. Table 1
shows the area of the suspected minefields under the auspices of ‘Croatian Waters’
obtained by GIS, and classified according to the current
‘Croatian Waters’
categorization.

Watercourses digitalized as lines (smaller rivers, streams, channels, ditches, etc.)
were transferred into the polygons using a ‘buffer’ function (50 m on each side of a
watercourse according to local experience), and by intersecting them with suspected
minefields, risky areas were identified. The total watercourses with suspected
minefields came to almost 170 km2, representing a rather significant problem for
‘Croatian Waters’. Moreover there were about 5 km2 of other structures under risk,
such as: embankments, pump stations, bridges, accumulations, retentions, etc. Areas
endangered by possible floods present a particular problem, due to the difficulty in
approaching these areas (i.e. access is unsafe), thus disturbing all activities connected
to flood management. On the other side, there has been real risk from eventual
deposits and/or dislodging of dragged mines downstream to areas that are currently
not suspected minefields. Such areas cover 280 km2, and even though they are not

Table 1. Amount of suspected minefields on water resources areas.

Thematic layer

Small rivers (including streams, channels, etc.)
Big rivers

Total mined watercourses

Embankments
Pump stations (buffer 50 m)
Accumulations and retentions
Plain retentions
Waterways
Bridges (buffer 50 m)
Permanent floodplains
Frequent floodplains

Total flood endangered areas

Area (m2)

131,063,329
39,638,263
169,695,693
5,113,372
37,693
63,180
11,405,651
789,794
78,606
18,978,752
132,535,419
280,719,185

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 578

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

under the direct auspices of ‘Croatian Waters’ they were also considered. Figure 4
shows an area classified as a 100-year floodplain according to ‘Croatian Waters’
categorization. Based on a series of hydrologic data the probability of a flood
occurring can be calculated.

As has already been mentioned in the initial phase, for the purpose of the
multicriteria analysis, the project apprehended criteria derived from the water
resources environment, called technical criteria. Table 2 presents an example of
technical criteria for priority assessment regarding the administrative components of
‘Croatian Waters’. Weights are obtained by calculating the mean values, based on
experts’ estimates during interviews.

During the project certain circumstances enabled state institutions to participate
in the humanitarian demining procedure. Therefore, the criteria which are crucial in
the consideration of social and political dimensions were included in the decision
process such as: potential return of refuges, population safety, the demining of
backyards, as well as numerous criteria concerning demining of other infrastructure.
Using GIS, the population safety/risk was estimated and presented spatially.
Figure 5 shows the territory (circles) presenting possible contact between members
of the population and unexploded ordinances (UXO). The obtained area presents an
‘estimated risk’ for the population, calculated by dividing the number of inhabitants
of a settlement that is within, or on the border of mine-suspected areas, by the
average population density of the study area. In addition, the parameter values of
infrastructure situated on suspected minefields was also calculated indirectly.
Around infrastructure, a 100-m double-sided buffer was determined, and after that
by implementation of spatial operations, an area of intersecting minefields and
infrastructure installation was determined. In a similar manner, for the mine-
contaminated areas of each analysed municipality, the estimated parameter values
for other criteria were evaluated.

During the project it became apparent that the ranking of a larger number of
actions (for example, municipalities) could be obtained according to the criteria
generated from GIS, or obtained by expert estimates (quickly and with relatively

Criteria

Weight

Table 2. Technical criteria.

C1: Minefields on ‘small watercourses’
C2: Minefields on ‘big watercourses’
C3: Minefields on frequent floodplains
C4: Minefields on potential floodplains
C5: Minefields on plain retention
C6: Minefields on watercourses near settlements
C7: Minefields on channels
C8: Number of pump stations on minefields
C9: Minefields on embankments
C10: Minefields on accumulations and retentions
C11: Minefields on water and watercourses on

the protected nature areas
C12: Minefields on waterways
C13: Number of bridges over or near mined

watercourses

6
8
10
8
8
10
6
7
4
8
7

4
4

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

579

Figure 4. Thematic layers used for generation of floodplains on suspected minefields
(Mladineo and Knezic 2003).

low estimation costs). It was determined that further economic assessment and cost–
benefit analysis should be performed for the first 5, 10 or more ranked actions (with
the greatest mine accident risk). Cost–benefit analysis or humanitarian demining

Figure 5. Layout of possible contact of population and UXO (Mladineo et al. 2003).

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 580

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

feasibility analysis of certain areas demands more serious, and at the same time
more costly, assessment of the parameters included in the analysis.

4.3 Ranking procedure

Herein, the numerical part of the multicriteria analysis for the technical criteria is
shown. The software ‘Decision Lab 2000’, which supports the PROMETHEE and
GAIA methods, was used. For the purpose of the proposed technical criteria, data
were generated using GIS. The data transfer from ESRI GIS software to ‘Decision
Lab 2000’ and vice versa was easy because both software support
table
(spreadsheet)-oriented data organization. By application of spatial functions to
the minefields and the thematic layers of water resources as well as related objects,
new layers were obtained. The main structure of the data drawn from the GIS for
the purpose of the multicriteria analysis is in the area of mine-contaminated entities,
which were chosen as the criteria.

In some cases this operation generated a huge number of polygons, so the
available GIS functions and operations were used to join the polygons into the
bigger ones. The following work within the project was to homogenize the polygons,
namely to transform the big polygons into smaller areas, or if they were too small
thematic layers
into bigger ones. Homogenization was based on additional
contained in a general-purpose GIS module (for example, terrain slope, landcover,
pedology, etc). Figure 6 shows the results of overlaying mine-contaminated areas
with watercourse thematic layers at county level. Figure 7 shows the results of an
operation intersecting suspected minefields with the thematic map of landcover. It is
easy to notice borders of new homogenized polygons with common general
characteristics.

In this paper the ranking procedure for Sisacko-Moslavacka County is presented
hereinafter. Criteria C1 and C2 (big and small watercourses) are related to the most
important water resource features so the procedure started with them. Combining
the mine-contaminated areas/polygons with thematic layers related to the criteria C1
and C2 resulted in 113 polygons. These polygons could have been seen as actions for
multicriteria analysis. However, in accepting the hierarchic structure of the DSS it
had been already decided to accept municipalities as actions. Therefore these
polygons were overlaid with municipalities, showing that the polygons belonged to
the 49 different municipalities, which then became the actions for multicriteria
analysis. Since some municipalities/actions did not have any minefields covering
important features or objects included in the rest of the criteria (for example,
pumping stations); to avoid zero values in the analysis, criteria C3, C4 and C9 were
used as selection factors. Namely, floodplains (C3 and C4) and embankments (C9)
were recognized as very important for the safety of the population. Therefore, if the
municipality had such a site contaminated with mines, it was included in the analysis
even though there may have been other criteria with zero values. After this
operation, 20 municipalities/actions remained, thus representing one relevant action
set. Table 3 shows the final ‘action set’ and accompanied values for each technical
criterion.

Table 4 presents the results of the multicriteria analysis by the PROMETHEE
method. For all the criteria a linear preference function was used, because
decision-makers thought that each criterion differed actions gradually. Decision-
makers chose the weights for the criteria in the range from 1 to 10 (table 2). All

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

581

Figure 6. Layout of the thematic layers from which data for multicriteria analysis were
generated (Mladineo and Knezic 2003).

Figure 7. Results of intersection operation of suspected minefields and landcover thematic
map (Mladineo and Knezic 2003).

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Table 3. Input data for multicriteria analysis generated in GIS-a (m2, in thousands).

Municipality

C1

C3

C4

C10

C11

C12

C13

Petrinja
Skradin
Sunja
Bilje
Sˇ odolovci
Sisak
Glina
Darda
Dvor
Osijek
Petlovac
Benkovac
Jagodnjak
Drnisˇ
Lasinja
Jasenovac
Tordinci
Karlovac
Hrvace
Petrijevci

2.854

7.976

595

477

128
124

1.121
1.313
13
877

1.535
82
1.517

369
974

1.864
67
428

8.168

211

C2

7.906
5.425
5.082
3.953
3.592
3.305
2.704
2.601
2.550
2.339
2.274
2.081
1.750
1.750

965
868
859
814
788
694

50
2.179

131

3.308
19
28
338
391
1
207
416
47
423
187
148
341
25
48
6.997
25

5.275
0
12.542
0
0
1.989
6.939
0
120
0
0
0
0
83
7.709
1.679
0
6.296
0
0

Criteria

C6

314
0
96
0.7
0
1
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
101
1
0
17
237
0
3

C5

14.750
0
7.225
22.859
1.650
1.519
21.637
18.754
0
1.822
8.823

491
10.592
0
8.929
13.795
0
4.857
0
627

C7

411
0
291
647
0
0
0
406
14
189
528
139
508
0
0
794
0
50
0
0

C8

3.620
1.526
0
7.624
0
1.688
0
0
0
126
0
0
0
1.448
0
1.370
0
0
0
0

C9

10
0
0
0
0
2
0.7
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
11
0

0
0
100
68
0
19
0
51
0
74
132
0
95
0
0
31
0
0
0
30

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0

0
0
22
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.196
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0

5
8
2

S

.

K
n
e
z
i
c

a
n
d
N

.

M
l
a
d
i
n
e
o

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

583

Table 4. Results from PROMETHEE evaluation.

Municipalities

Phi Plus

Phi Minus

Ranking

Petrinja
Skradin
Sunja
Bilje
Sˇ odolovci
Sisak
Glina
Darda
Dvor
Osijek
Petlovac
Benkovac
Jagodnjak
Drnisˇ
Lasinja
Jasenovac
Tordinci
Karlovac
Hrvace
Petrijevci

0.3469
0.1088
0.2902
0.3283
0.0470
0.0625
0.1121
0.1155
0.0100
0.0556
0.1250
0.0147
0.1120
0.0715
0.0603
0.2879
0.0053
0.0415
0.2636
0.0108

0.0706
0.1294
0.0809
0.0606
0.1494
0.1362
0.1112
0.0963
0.1599
0.1254
0.0976
0.1539
0.1013
0.1475
0.1368
0.0896
0.1731
0.1475
0.1356
0.1669

Phi Net

0.2763
20.0207
0.2093
0.2677
20.1024
20.0737
0.0009
0.0193
20.1498
20.0697
0.0274
20.1391
0.0107
20.0760
20.0765
0.1983
20.1678
20.1060
0.1280
20.1560

1
10
3
2
15
12
9
7
18
11
6
17
8
13
14
4
20
16
5
19

criteria were maximised. Evaluated ranks represent the priority assessment for the
20 most contaminated municipalities (the presented results are not the final optimal
solution). The achieved parameter ‘Phi Net’ represents a valorisation of priorities
based on defined criteria, weighing coefficients and preference functions for each
criterion, according to the PROMETHEE method.

Table 4 shows that the municipalities Petrinja and Bilje are ranked first and
second accordingly, representing humanitarian demining priorities (the riskiest
areas), because their total values, ‘NetPhi’ of 0.2763 and 0.2677, dominate other
actions. After the first two municipalities follow the ranks of the others. In addition,
the PROMETHEE method enables online weight
stability analysis, vitally
important during the process of weight assessment by decision makers (figure 8).
The possibility of modifying the values of the weights (the lower part of figure 8) and
immediately seeing the change of the PROMETHEE II ranking on the upper part of
the screen, as changed heights of the bars representing the dominancy of a particular
action (municipality), gives decision-makers the opportunity to analyse the structure
of the problem. Some weights have a very short range within which they do not
influence the raking of the actions, and therefore one should be very careful when
deciding their value.

Figure 9 shows the layout of the relations between 13 criteria, obtained by GAIA.
The GAIA visual modelling method provides the decision-makers with information
about the conflicting character of the criteria and the impact of the weights on the
final results. Principal Component Analysis is applied on PROMETHEE I flows,
and a plane is defined on which as little information as possible is lost by projection
of the k-dimensional space of the problem (k is the number of criteria). Insight into
the criteria relations is very important for an understanding of the problem and
recognition of the correlation between the different parameters of criteria. As

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 584

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

Figure 8. Layout of the ‘screen’ with resulting ranking of 15 municipalities based on 13
criteria.

figure 9 shows, the criteria are dispersed and uncorrelated, meaning they are in
conflict positions, which supports the approach presented in this paper and the
application of multicriteria analysis for this problem.

5. Conclusions

Mine action management often deals with limited funds, and thus requires efficient
tools for the establishment of mine clearance priorities. There are many stakeholders
involved in the humanitarian demining process, so consequently decision-makers
face the problem of how to incorporate various objectives and wishes into the
priority evaluation process. The methodology described herein demonstrates the
possibility of putting together conflicting interests as well as establishing a
comprehensive hierarchic structure of mine action management. A hierarchic
approach is quite helpful because it gives the framework for the definition of the
entities which can be used in both multicriteria evaluation and the money
distribution process. Coupling GIS and multicriteria analysis in one system enables
the development of a system capable of efficient priority-setting with regard to
humanitarian demining, thus reducing risk in mine-affected regions. Furthermore,
the presented GIS-based DSS for risk assessment of mine action, using multicriteria
analysis, pointed out the possibility of the objective valorization in humanitarian
demining, acceptable for most stakeholders in the decision-making process. The
relatively small data collection costs by using existing spatial data from GIS, by
editing and analysing with simple controls and transparency throughout hierarchic
levels, as well as the involvement of all stakeholders (either directly or indirectly) in
the decision-making process, give such an approach an advantage in relation to the
other methods used. The implementation of DSS in the field of humanitarian
demining of water resources, even if it is implemented only from the ‘Croatian

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

585

Figure 9. Geometrical presentation of the relations between criteria is shown by the GAIA
method.

Waters’ aspects, demonstrates the significant methodological advantages of this
approach to a real and complex problem. The establishment of risk management in
mine-contaminated water resources, namely the procedure of priority assessment
using GIS and multicriteria analysis, if it is correctly implemented, demands the
collaboration of social and political authorities and practically involves all interested
parties, which are numerous in the humanitarian demining problem. Extension of
the problem by involving social criteria as it is discussed in this paper emphasizes the
benefits of the methodology. Between the ‘small’ farmers, whose backyards are
contaminated, and the county and community councils, forums and representatives,
there is direct or indirect exposure to mine accident risks on several levels. All of
them, more or less, expect that their problem should be treated as the priority, so
their involvement in the decision-making process lowers tensions and significantly
reduces the frustrations that may result from a prolongation of the problem solving
process. On the other hand, an insight into the priority evaluation procedure, as
regards the objectively evaluated priority levels, creates a climate of trust and
confidence that priorities are being evaluated properly because all interested parties

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 586

S. Knezic and N. Mladineo

are involved in the process. It is apparent that during the risk management decision
process transparency of the available data, that are the basis for the analysis, is very
important because everyone can check whether ‘his’ parameters are correctly
evaluated. Moreover, multicriteria analysis in conjunction with GIS offers various
options for post-analysis, such as ‘what-if’ analysis with different weight scenarios in
order to eliminate the subjectivity that is always present during risk evaluation. The
results of the presented application of the GIS-based DSS are accepted and used for
a development of the mid-term plans for mine removal on the territories under the
auspices of ‘Croatian Waters’. A further intention is to employ such an approach on
other natural resources, such as forests. Additionally, the proposed methodology
can be applied to any similar problem when priority assessment within spatial
entities is the crucial issue. More research should also be done to allow both
automatic and intelligent
the spatial data from the GIS to
PROMETHEE methods, as well as to build an adequate interface. Consequently,
future efforts should be made in popularising the approach, so as to be accepted by
a wider range of users, especially at state directorates and organizations.

transfer of

References
BENINI, A.A., MOULTON, L.H. and CONLEY, C.E., 2002, Landmines and local community
adaptation. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 10, pp. 82–94.
BENINI, A.A., CONLEY, C.E., SHDEED, R., SPURWAY, K. and YARMOSHUK, M., 2003,
Integration of different data bodies for humanitarian decision support: an example
from mine action. Disasters, 27, pp. 288–304.

BRANS, J.P., MARESCHAL, B. and VINCKE, P.H., 1984, PROMETHEE—a new family of
outranking methods in multicriteria analysis. In Operational Research IFORS 84, J.P.
Brans (Ed.), pp. 477–490 (Amsterdam: North Holland).

BRANS, J.P. and MARESCHAL, B., 1991, THE PROMCALC & GAIA Decision Support System
for Multicriteria Decision Aid (Brussels: Centrum voor Statistiek en Operationeel
Onderzoek, Vrije Universitet).

BRANS, J.P. and MARESCHAL, B., 1994, PROMCALC & GAIA: a new decision support

system for multicriteria decision aid. Decision Support Systems, 12, pp. 297–210.

CHANG, N.-B., WEI, Y.L., TSENG, C.C. and KAO, C.-Y.J., 1997, The design of a GIS-based
decision support system for chemical emergency preparedness and response in an
urban environment. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 21, pp. 67–94.

DE LEENEER, I. and PASTIJN, H., 2002, Selecting land mine detection strategies by means of
outranking MCDM techniques. European Journal of Operational Research, 139, pp.
327–338.

FILIPPINO, E.M. and PATERSON, T., 2002, Report on the GICHD Mission to Validate the Pilot

County Mine Action Plan for Croatia (Geneva: GICHD).

GEOSPATIAL INTERNATIONAL INC., 2004, Task Assessment & Planning (TAP) Cambodia

Proposed Project Framework.

GENTILE, J., GUSTAFSON, G., KIMSEY, M., KRAENZLE, H., WILSON, J. and WRIGHT, S., 1997,
Use of imagery and GIS for humanitarian demining management. SPIE—The
International Society for Optical Engineering, 3128, pp. 104–109.

GOSLIN, B., 2003, Making analytical tools operational: task impact assessment. Third Word

Quarterly, 24, pp. 923–938.

GUITOUNI, A. and MARTEL, J.-M., 1998, Tentative guidelines to help choosing an appropriate
MCDA method. European Journal of Operational Research, 109, pp. 501–521.
HARPVIKEN, K.B., MILLARD, A.S., KJELLMAN, K.E. and SKARA, B.A., 2003, Measures for
mines: approaches to impact assessment in humanitarian mine action. Third World
Quarterly, 24, pp. 889–908.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 Humanitarian mine action

587

HILL, M.J., BRAATEN, R., VEITCH, S.M., LEES, B.G. and SHARMA, S., 2005, Multi-criteria
decision analysis in spatial decision support: the ASSESS analytic hierarchy process
and the role of quantitative methods and spatially explicit analysis. Environmental
Modelling & Software, 20, pp. 955–976.

JANKOWSKI, P., 1995, Integrating geographical information systems and multiple criteria
decision-making methods. International Journal of Geographic Information Systems, 9,
pp. 251–273.

JANKOWSKI, P., ANDRIENKO, N. and ANDRIENKO, G., 2001, Map-centred exploratory
approach to multiple criteria spatial decision making. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 15, pp. 101–127.

JANKOWSKI, P., NYERGES, T.L., SMITH, A., MOORE, T.J. and HORVATH, E., 1997, Spatial
group choice: a SDSS tool for collaborative spatial decision-making. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 11, pp. 577–602.

JOERIN, F. and MUSY, A., 2000, Land management with GIS and multicriteria analysis.

International Transactions in Operational Research, 7, pp. 67–68.

KNEZIC, S. and MARGETA, J., 2002, Integrated management of coastal sewerage systems: the
case of Kastela Bay, Croatia. Water Resources Management, 16, pp. 279–305.
LISICA, D., 2003, Bosnia and Herzegovina mine problem: priority setting. Journal of Mine

Action, 7(2), pp. 14–16.

MALCZEWSKI, J., 1999, GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis (New York: John Wiley).
MARGETA, J. and KNEZIC´ , S., 2002, Selection of the flood management solution of Karstic

Field, Vrgorsko polje case study. Water International, 27, pp. 431–441.

MARINONI, O., 2005, A stochastic spatial decision support system based on PROMETHEE.

International Journal of Geographic Information Science, 19, pp. 51–68.

MARTIN, N., ST-ONGE, B. and WAAUB, J-P., 1999, Geographic tools for decision making in
watershed management. In Spatial Multicriteria Decision Making And Analysis—A
Geographic Information Sciences Approach, J.C. Thill (Ed.), pp. 309–334 (New York:
Ashgate).

MATHER, C., 2000, Geographical information systems and humanitarian demining. South

African Geographical Journal, 82, pp. 56–63.

MILICIC, J. and MLADINEO, N., 1985, Application of multicriteria analysis to the problem of
reinforcement improvements in concrete works. European Journal of Operational
Research, 21, pp. 339–346.

MILLARD, A.S., HARPVIKEN, K.B. and KJELLMAN, K.E., 2002, Risk removed? Steps towards

building trust in humanitarian mine action. Disasters, 26, pp. 161–174.

MLADINEO, N., MARGETA, J., BRANS, J.P. and MARESCHAL, B., 1987, Multicriteria ranking of
alternative locations for small scale hydro plants. European Journal of Operational
Research, 31, pp. 215–222.

MLADINEO, N., LOZIC, I., STOSIC, S., MLINARIC, D. and RADICA, T., 1992, An evaluation of
multicriteria analysis for DSS in public policy decision. European Journal of
Operational Research, 61, pp. 219–229.

MLADINEO, N., KNEZIC, S., PAVASOVIC, S. and SIMUNOVIC, I., 1993, Development of ‘Land
information systems.

rent model’ using multicriteria analysis and geographical
Journal of Computing and Information Technology, 1, pp. 243–251.

MLADINEO, N., KNEZIC, S. and GORSETA, D., 2003, Hierarchic approach to mine action in

Croatia. Journal of Mine Action, 7(2), pp. 41–45.

MLADINEO, N. and KNEZIC, S., 2003, Decision support system for demining waterways.

Journal of Mine Action, 7(3), online only.

PEREIRA, A.G., 2001, Evolutionary modeling of routes. In Spatial Evolutionary Modeling,
R. Krzanowski and J. Raper (Eds), pp. 180–202 (New York: Oxford University
Press).

RIBAROVIC, Z. and MLADINEO, N., 1987, Application of multicriterion analysis to the ranking
and evaluation of the investment programmes in the ready mixed concrete industry.
Engineering Costs & Production Economics, 12, pp. 367–374.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 588

Humanitarian mine action

ROUBENS, M., 1982, Preference relations on actions and criteria in multi-criteria decision

making. European Journal of Operational Research, 10, pp. 51–55.

ROY, B., 1990, The outranking approach and the foundations of ELECTRE methods. In
Reading in Multiple Criteria Decision Aid, C.A. Bana e Costa (Ed.), pp. 155–183
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag).

SAATY, T.L., 1980, The Analytic Hierarchy Process (New York: McGraw Hill).
SPRAGUE, R.H. and CARLSON, E.D., 1982, Building Effective Decision Support System

(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall).

URAN, O. and JANSSEN, R., 2003, Why are spatial decision support systems not used? Some
experiences from the Netherlands. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 27,
pp. 511–526.

VAN DER MERWE, J., 2003, Priority setting for mine action. Journal of Mine Action, 7(3),

online only.

VUK, D., KOZELJ, B. and MLADINEO, N., 1991, Application of multicriterial analysis on the
selection of the location for disposal of communal waste. European Journal of
Operational Research, 55, pp. 211–217.

WILLIAMS, C. and DUNN, C.E., 2003, GIS in participatory research: assessing the impact of
landmines on communities in North-west Cambodia. Transactions in GIS, 7, pp.
393–410.

www.visualdecision.com/PROMETHEE

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 10:20 28 April 2015 