The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 51 No. 4

pp. 291–300 November 2014

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Changing the Light Azimuth in Shaded Relief
Representation by Clustering Aspect

Fabio Veronesi and Lorenz Hurni

Institute of Cartography and Geoinformation, ETH Zu¨rich, Zu¨rich, Switzerland
Email: fveronesi@ethz.ch

Manual shading, traditionally produced manually by specifically trained cartographers, is still considered superior to
automatic methods, particularly for mountainous landscapes. However, manual shading is time-consuming and its results
depend on the cartographer and as such difficult to replicate consistently. For this reason there is a need to create an
automatic method to standardize its results. A crucial aspect of manual shading is the continuous change of light direction
(azimuth) and angle (zenith) in order to better highlight discrete landforms. Automatic hillshading algorithms, widely
available in many geographic information systems (GIS) applications, do not provide this feature. This may cause the
resulting shaded relief to appear flat in some areas, particularly in areas where the light source is parallel to the mountain
ridge. In this work we present a GIS tool to enhance the visual quality of hillshading. We developed a technique based on
clustering aspect to provide a seamless change of lighting throughout the scene. We also provide tools to change the light
zenith according to either elevation or slope. This way the cartographer has more room for customizing the shaded relief
representation. Moreover, the method is completely automatic and this guarantees consistent and reproducible results.
This method has been embedded into an ArcGIS toolbox.

Keywords: shaded relief, hillshading, clustering, dynamic light change, multiple light sources, azimuth changes

INTRODUCTION

Representing terrain complexity using a mix of light and dark
brushes has been a pictorial device for centuries. The ﬁrst
example of such a technique used for mapping was drawn by
Leonardo da Vinci in 1502 when he created the map of
Tuscany for the Medici family (Da Vinci, circa 1502). This
map featured an oblique perspective, as if the cartographer
looked at the landscape from a high mountain. After this ﬁrst
test, relief shading was quickly recognized as a powerful way of
depicting the landscape in a way that is intuitively understood
by the human eye, even and especially by non-cartographers.
Since then, the visual quality of relief shading has substantially
increased and improved with the adoption of the orthogonal
perspective, which is the standard still in use today. This
technique was ﬁrst developed by the Swiss cartographer Hans
Conrad Gyger (1668), for his map of Zurich.

Over the centuries, the creation of relief shaded maps was
perfected and ﬁnally elevated to an art form by the Swiss
School of Cartography and the work of Eduard Imhof
(1982). With his work Imhof developed detailed guidelines
to lead cartographers in the production of state of the art
manual depictions of the Swiss landscape. Those maps were
so well executed that today they are still considered superior
to any digitally produced shaded representation, particularly
in mountainous regions (Jenny, 2001).

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000100

The Swiss style of shading is much more that a method to
depict landscapes illuminated from an angle, it requires the
cartographer to have a deep understanding of the landscape
and this is translated into ﬁne artistic depictions. Manual
shading implies a preliminary analysis of the landscape by the
cartographer, aimed at breaking down the study area into its
main elements. Ridges and channels are ﬁrst extracted and
used to delineate slope areas for which the light source needs
to be changed. Each of these is treated as part of the same
structural unit so that it will stand out in the shaded relief
representation. This result is achieved by changing light
azimuth and zenith according to these major morphological
units, in order to represent all slopes from the angle that best
highlight ridges and drainage network, while decreasing the
visual impact of low relief areas, i.e. valleys.

This technique guarantees the best visual output but it
also decreases the reproducibility of the work. Manual
shading requires a subjective interpretation by the carto-
grapher, and therefore there is no consistency in the results
(Leonowicz et al., 2010). Moreover, it is a labour-intensive
and time-consuming task, which is why numerous attempts
to automate the whole shading process have been made.
Yoe¨li (1959, 1965, 1966, 1967) was the ﬁrst to test
computer generated shading, using the cosine law devel-
oped by Lambert (1760) and adapted to hillshading by

292

The Cartographic Journal

Wiechel (1878). Nowadays, this same technique is widely
available in most GIS applications as ‘Analytical Hillshad-
ing’. It provides a fully automatic and consistent way of
producing shaded relief representation. However, while
hillshading can consistently achieve the effect of tridimen-
sionality, it does not provide the user with a framework to
replicate manual shading results. Hillshading depicts the
landscape illuminated from a single light source, the user
can select its direction and inclination but there is no way of
introducing multiple light sources.

This is the reason why a lot of research has been done in
the past 40 years to reproduce digitally the results achieved
manually. In 1974, Brassel dedicated his PhD to recreate on
a computer the results obtained by Imhof (Brassel, 1974).
He implemented azimuth changes, and correction for
ridges and channels. His research however required an
extensive work load, not just because of the technology
available at the time but because in his framework the
cartographer had to manually digitize all the main ridges
and channels before shading. Since then terrain general-
ization, the discipline that aims at removing unnecessary
and distracting details from DTMs in order to accentuate
important landforms, has produced numerous works where
cartographers ﬁrst extract important landscape features or
simplify the terrain, and then proceed with the visualization
phase (Jenny, 2001; Leonowicz et al., 2010; Jenny et al.,
2011; Leonowicz et al., 2012). Other techniques involve
illuminating the scene from several angles and merging each
illuminated raster in order to provide more details along the
structural grain (Mark, 1992; Loisios et al., 2007). Similar
results can be obtained by using imaging software to overlay
images illuminated from different angles (Patterson, 2001a,
2001b; Patterson and Hermann, 2004; Patterson, 2013).
Other approaches involve the use of DEM derivatives to
obtain a shaded relief where ridges and channel are
enhanced (Kennelly, 2008; Leonowicz et al., 2010).
Jenny (2001) used an interactive process to locally change
the light source, coupled with several other techniques to
simulate all the details of manual shading.

These efforts elevated analytical hillshading to levels almost
matching manual shading, but failed in creating standardized
and fully automatic techniques. In fact, a tool to automatically
changing the light source direction and inclination does not
currently exist in literature. In this work we propose a new
method for changing the light direction and inclination
continuously throughout the image. This is achieved by
clustering aspect and changing the inclination based on
elevation or slope. This technique is effective in producing
shaded relief representations that feature local light changes
and was embedded into an ArcGISTM toolbox (ESRI, 2011).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study area
We tested this method over
in Southern
Switzerland, Canton of Ticino. The area has an extent of
approximately 440 km2, and stretches around the city of
Biasca (Figure 1). This particular area has been selected for
the presence of Pizzo Erra, which is the mountain above

an area

Biasca (Figure 2). This peak is of particular interest because
its ridge has an NW–SE orientation. This makes it parallel
to the light direction generally chosen for analytical
hillshading, i.e. 315uN. With such a light source Pizzo
Erra is rendered with the same grey tone on both sides, thus
reducing its visual impact and giving the impression to the
reader that its elevation is lower than the rest of the peaks.
In reality Pizzo Erra is 2400 m which is in line with the
elevation of other peaks in the area, in particular the ones
towards the south (Figure 2).

interest

Another feature of

is the large valley that
surrounds the city of Biasca. Despite the typical alpine
setting,
this area is highly populated and the human
intervention is still visible in the DEM, even after a phase
of noise reduction executed by technicians at Swisstopo
(Swisstopo, 2004). This is an important characteristic of
high resolution DEM, because for some application the
noise in the valleys presents a form of unnecessary visual
distraction.

Analytical hillshading
The hillshading algorithm implemented in ArcGIS
, and
other applications, is a modiﬁcation of Lambert’s cosine
law, ﬁrst adapted to hillshading by Wiechel (1878). With
this method the grey tone of each cell of the DEM is
computed as follows

TM

Shading~255|cosh

(1)

where h is the angle between the light vector and the vector
normal to the DEM cell.

When Wiechel proposed this method the only way to use
it was calculating h manually. The extreme difﬁculty of
doing so, made the method disappear
from shading
research until almost 100 years later when Yoe¨li tried to
implement it on a computer. However, in the 1950s the
process was still time-consuming and remained so until the
creation of DEM derivatives (Evans, 1979), which eased
some of the processing involved.

Nowadays, the most common implementation of the

cosine law is the following

Shading~255| cos(Z ):cos(Sl)
½
sin(Z ):sin(Sl):cos(Az{As)

(cid:2)

½

(cid:2)z

(2)

where Sl is slope, As is aspect, Az is Azimuth, which is the
direction of the light vector, and Z is Zenith, which is the
inclination angle above the horizon of the light vector. All
these values are here expressed in radians. This equation is
(ESRI, 2011) for producing analytical
used in ArcGIS
hillshading maps.

TM

Clustering
Clustering is a technique that allows the subdivision of a
dataset into homogeneous subsets. The aim of this analysis
is creating sets of samples or variables that are as similar as
possible within clusters, and as different as possible between
clusters (Reimann et al., 2011). In this research, we used
the common k-means algorithm (Kaufman and Rousseeuw,
1990) that divides the dataset based on the distance

Changing Light Azimuth in Shaded Relief Representation

293

Figure 1. Location of the study area

between each element of the dataset and a set of centroids.
In cluster analysis the term distance refers to the level of
similarity between elements. The process starts by randomly
selecting a series of centroids and assigning each elements of
the dataset to the closer centroids. Then it iteratively re-
computes the cluster centroids and reallocates the cluster
elements, until the level of similarity is maximum within
clusters and minimum between them. With k-means
clustering, the number of centroids is selected a priori by
the user.

In this research clustering is employed to divide the
aspect derivative of the DEM. Aspect measures the angle
between the North and the vector normal
to the
topographic surface, in other words it give the direction
towards which each cell on the DTM is facing. Subdividing
aspect into four main directions (0–90u, 90–180u, 180–
270u and 270–360u), should guarantee the extraction of
major landforms. This in fact should guarantee that ridges
and channels will have one side belonging to one cluster
and the other belonging to another cluster. For this reason
we set the number of centroids to four, thus they should fall
within those ranges of angles. This is crucial as the shading
is performed by changing the light direction (i.e. azimuth)
in each of the four clusters, according to their range of
angles. Clusters that include aspect values in the ranges 90–
180u (oriented towards SE) and 270–360u (oriented
towards NW) are illuminated with an azimuth of 315u
(we will refer to those as Clusters A), while the other two
clusters, with aspect angles in the ranges 0–90u (oriented

towards NE) and 180–270u (oriented towards SW) are
illuminated from an azimuth of 280u (we will referred to
those as Clusters B).

Smoothing
A problem with this technique lies in the level of details of
clustering. If a cluster analysis is performed using values of
aspect calculated using a 363 cells window, the result is
going to be too much detailed to be useful for shading. The
only way of obtaining meaningful cluster is by smoothing
the result, until the clusters outer boundaries are close to
the ridge lines. This way each cluster will deﬁne a single
slope and therefore the shading will treat this area as a
uniform landscape element.

We applied two levels of smoothing in order to eliminate
all the artefacts created from using the clustering algorithm.
The ﬁrst smoothing requires a majority ﬁlter, applied on a
25625 window. This algorithm merges small clusters and
creates large homogeneous areas that deﬁne major land-
form elements. In addition, we also performed a mean ﬁlter,
again on a 25625 window, to eliminate sharp boundaries
between clusters. This was done to eliminate a series of
artefacts that the previous smoothing was unable to erase.

Light azimuth
After applying the smoothing process described in the
section on ‘Smoothing’, we obtained a series of smoothed
clusters that varied continuously between clusters A and B.

294

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 2. Map of the study area showing DEM (Swisstopo, 2004), road network, major settlements, and major peaks (Swisstopo, 2014). In
the NE side of the area is located Pizzo Erra, which has a ridge parallel to the light direction normally used in analytical hillshading
(i.e. 315u)

are available in literature to extract linear features and other
landforms from DEMs (few examples are: Dikau, 1989;
Wood, 1996; Pike, 1988; Burrough et al., 2000; Weiss,
2001; van Asselen and Seijmonsbergen, 2006; Iwahashi and
Pike, 2007; Jasiewicz and Stepinski, 2013), each with its
pros and cons, and a perfect method does not seem to
exist. Moreover, by introducing more intermediate steps
it quickly becomes complex
into the shading process,

In order to determine the right azimuth angle for each
cluster, we ﬁtted a sine wave function with the following
equation

Az~A:sin(vxzQ)zD

(3)

where Az is the azimuth value; A is the amplitude of the
wave; v is the frequency of the wave, and it is equal to
(2p)/l; Q is the horizontal offset; and ﬁnally D is the vertical
offset. A graphical explanation of the signiﬁcance of all these
parameters is presented in Figure 3. The dynamic shading is
achieved by simply replacing the Az value resulting from
equation (3) in equation (2).

Zenith corrections
Landforms that are generally considered important, and
therefore highlighted in manual shading, are ridges and
channels. Moreover, valleys are generally considered less
important and represented using a ﬂat grey tone. As
mentioned in the introduction, one way to approach this
is precede the shading with some form of terrain general-
ization or landform extraction, in order to interpret the
landscape and then focus the shading on important areas.
This may result in better shaded representations, but
certainly it is not a standardized method. Several methods

Figure 3. Graphical explanation of the signiﬁcance of the para-
meters of the sine wave function

Changing Light Azimuth in Shaded Relief Representation

295

and therefore less adapted to practitioners outside carto-
graphic disciplines.

There are ways however to increase the quality of relief
representations while avoiding the need for complex
procedures. In manual shading, valleys are represented with
a ﬂat grey tone, a similar effect can be achieved using a light
source perpendicular to the ground. On the other hand, if
the whole image is illuminated perpendicularly, the tone
will be set according to the principle ‘the steeper, the
darker’, the scene would look ﬂat and the only feature that
is going to be highlighted is slope. For this reason we
created two corrections for zenith, the ﬁrst according to
elevation and the second according to slope, so that the
user may decide which features to be highlighted through
shading. With these corrections the tridimensionality effect
is still present, but practitioners can better customize the
ﬁnal output.

In both cases we started by transforming elevation and
slope into weights, using a formula already used by Jenny
(2001)

Ew~ hc{hmin
hmax{hmin

where Ew is the elevation weight, hc is the elevation of each
cell on the raster, while hmin and hmax are respectively the
maximum elevation and the minimum elevation of the
DEM. The same formula has been used for creating a slope
weight (Sw), replacing the elevation values with slope values.
Subsequently, these weights are used to correct zenith
values continuously across the landscape using the follow-
ing two equations

ZE~(90{ZMIN)Ew

where ZE are the zenith values corrected for elevation, ZMIN
is the minimum value of zenith and is selected by the user.
The weights always assume values equal
to 1 where
elevation is equal to hmax, and 0 where is equal to hmin.
Thus, by multiplying the maximum value of zenith for the
weight it is possible to obtain values close to ZMIN on
mountain tops and values of 90u above valleys. This
translates into a bright white tone for valleys that hide the
noise typical of high resolution DEMs, and a progressively
darker tone at high altitudes, which enhance the sharpness
of the ridges.

A similar process is employed for slope correction, using

the following formula

ZS~(90{ZMIN)Sw

(4)

(5)

(6)

In this case SW changes according to slope; it takes value
1 on vertical slopes, and value 0 on ﬂat surfaces. The
resulting shading will have a bright white tone on valleys
and channels, and a dark tone for high slopes, such as rock
outcrops.

TM

toolbox

ArcGIS
The method presented in this paper was used to create an
ArcGIS
there is a module for

toolbox. In ArcGIS

TM

TM

clustering that can be used as the main part of the method.
The smoothing is easy to implement because both majority
and mean ﬁlters are available.

The sine wave function was implemented using the raster
calculator function. Even though we are presenting a
shaded relief where the light comes from 315 and 280u,
the user can change these values according to his needs.

For the azimuth corrections, we created three different
tools so that the user can decide which correction to use.
There are three options: default, where the zenith values
can be chosen by the user but remains constant across the
whole DEM, similarly to the standard method presented in
the section on ‘Study area’; elevation, where zenith is
calculated solving equation (5); slope, where zenith is
calculated solving equation (6). With elevation and slope
options, the user can choose the maximum zenith value,
ZMIN.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The hillshading algorithm, presented in the section on
‘Analytical hillshading’, has been standardized over the
years and now it features in most GIS applications. It is fast,
reliable and it produces consistent results, in contrast with
manual shading where different interpretations (and carto-
graphers) produce different results. In contrast, this method
is customizable only in the selection of the azimuth and
zenith angles, it does not offer local light changes or zenith
corrections. For this reason the amount of landforms that
may be represented is limited. This is the why manual
shading is still considered superior to hillshading, particu-
larly in mountainous landscapes (Jenny, 2001).

The problem with manual shading is that it is a highly
interpretative discipline and even if the method has been
standardized (Imhof, 1982), the results are often incon-
sistent. In other words, if two cartographers produce a
shaded relief representation of the same area, chances are
the two maps will look different. This is due to differences
in interpreting the landscape by different cartographers,
who will then focus their shading on distinct landforms.
This highly decreases the consistency and reproducibility of
the method. For this reason, there is a need for automatic
methods that can increase the visual quality of analytical
hillshaded representation, while maintaining a level of
automation that can guarantee consistent and reliable
results.

Manual shading is still considered superior because by
performing the shading manually the cartographer can
adapt it to the local terrain features. For example, in the area
we chosen for testing our approach, the analytical hillshad-
ing method presented in the section on ‘Analytical
hillshading’ is not able to properly render Pizzo Erra. Its
ridge makes the two slopes parallel to the light source and
therefore to the human eye the mountain appears lower
than it actually is. Manual cartographers would recognize
this and would change the direction of the local
light
source. By doing so Pizzo Erra would be illuminated from
an angle that gives to one side a bright white tone and to
the other a darker tone, rendering its shape and scale in a
way that is more recognizable by the viewer.

296

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Results of clustering aspect without any smoothing: (a) clusters overlaid on top of hillshading, (b) results of shading using clusters
and two light sources, 315uN for clusters NW and SE, 280uN for clusters NE and SW, (c) detail of an area of the image rendered with classic
hillshading, (d) same area rendered with clustering hillshading, here are noticeable some artefacts that are produced by the low level of gener-
alization of the clustering algorithm

In this research we focused on this particular aspect of
manual shading, namely the dynamic light shifting that is
necessary to render each landform in the most appropriate
way. We tested a method based on clustering the aspect
derivative of the DEM. Clustering algorithms allow the
subdivision of aspect into homogeneous subsets. We exploit
this characteristic by constraining the clustering algorithm
into creating four aspect subsets. This divided aspect into
subsets according to the four quadrants of the circle
diagram: 0–90u, 90–180u, 180–270u, and 270–360u.

By creating homogeneous sets of aspect values we could
theoretically expect to be able to extract major landforms,
such as the entire SW facing slope of Pizzo Erra. We could
also expect the clusters to be split exactly along ridge lines,
being these separation lines between slopes of contrasting
orientation. The results however are different from the
expectations.

First of all, the topographic surface is extremely complex
and therefore if we use just the clustering algorithm we are
not perfectly able to extract all the major geomorphological
units (Figure 4a). For example, along Pizzo Erra SW facing
slope we have a predominant red colour (cluster of aspect
values facing SE), but we can also see numerous of smaller

clusters. If we use these results for adjusting the light source
we would obtain frequent changes in grey tone, which will
look like artefacts (Figure 4d).

To solve this problem we tested the use of a smoothing
algorithm, described in the section on ‘Smoothing’. This
should help merging the smaller clusters into the pre-
dominant clusters in each area. By using a majority ﬁlter, we
were able to create areas that divide the landscape into
meaningful subsets. For example, it is clear from Figure 5a
that most of the clusters are divided across ridges and
valleys. With such subdivision we can change the light
source based on the rules explained in the section on
‘Clustering’ (azimuth of 315u for SE and NW clusters,
280u for the others) and obtain an effect similar to the
light changes in manual cartography. However because the
majority ﬁlter is not constrained by anything, it does not
follows ridge lines very accurately. In some cases, where
the ridge is very clear and sharp,
the subdivision is
accurate, in other cases it is not (Figure 5b). This is a
problem, because if we change the light source of two
orthogonal clusters that do not follow the ridge line, we
will end up with changes in grey tone across ridges and
other artefacts (Figure 5d).

Changing Light Azimuth in Shaded Relief Representation

297

Figure 5. Results of applying a majority smoothing ﬁlter to the clusters: (a) smoothed clusters overlaid on to of hillshading, (b) detail of an
area where it is visible that even if they appear to describe major landforms, the smoothed clusters are not able to perfectly follow ridge lines,
(c) same area rendered with the classic hillshading algorithm, (d) area rendered with the shading computed with the smoothing clusters. Here
are visible some of the artefacts caused by the smoothing algorithm

There is a way to solve this issue. It involves an additional
layer of smoothing on top of the majority ﬁlter. If we apply
a mean ﬁlter to the clusters, we can smooth the transition
between them. The results of the mean ﬁlters are depicted
in Figure 6a and b. At this point we can illuminate the
source
landscape by continuously changing the light
between clusters, with the method presented in the section
on ‘Light azimuth’,
thus decreasing the impact of
boundaries between clusters (Figure 6d). The right angle
of illumination is determined by applying equation (3) on
the smoothed clusters, between a maximum of 315 and
280u. The areas in between clusters, which were smoothed
with the mean ﬁlter, are illuminated with angles between
those two endpoints. The results of the dynamic illumina-
tion are depicted in Figure 7.

With this process we can achieve results comparable with
manual shading,
in terms of changing the illumination
direction according to the terrain features. This increases
the visual impact of the map, because it illuminates each
part of the landscape from the best possible direction. For
example, with the change of lighting we can increase the

impact of Pizzo Erra, which now appears much
visual
higher than before, in line with other peaks towards the
south of the study area.

Light changing is not the only visual trick used in manual
cartography to increase the visual impact of a mountainous
landscape. Another essential feature of manually shaded
maps is the azimuth correction, which allows cartographers
to conceal uninteresting details in valleys while increasing the
contrast along ridges and steep areas. In order to incorporate
this aspect in our method, we created the two zenith
corrections described in the section on ‘Zenith corrections’.
The ﬁrst corrects zenith according to elevation, solving
equation (5). In this case valleys are represented with a
bright white tone, which hides most of the distracting
noise. For example here the main valley around Biasca is
highly populated and even though the DEM has been
ﬁltered by technicians at Swisstopo (2004), most of the
roads are still visible. With this simple correction all this
noise disappears. Moreover, because the zenith angle
changes with the increase in elevation, its value becomes
equal to ZMIN close to the ridges. This enhances the

298

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. Final results created by applying an additional mean ﬁlter to the clusters: (a) clusters overlaid on top of hillshading, (b) detail of
the area showed in Fig. 5b, in this case we can see that along ridges the clusters change seamlessly between clusters A and B, (c) detail of the
same area rendered with the classic hillshading algorithm, (d) same area shaded with the illumination driven by clusters. The artefacts have
disappeared completely

contrast of the ridges, which appear sharper than with the
standard method (Figure 8a).

The second corrections calculates zenith solving equa-
tion (6). In this case zenith is corrected proportionally to
slope. This means that
for high slope values, zenith
increases and therefore the area appears darker. The results
of this correction are shown in Figure 8b. This may be
useful when there is a need to highlight rock outcrops or
particular geomorphological structures. This correction
does not produce the same result as a light
source
perpendicular to the DEM. In that case the only shading
principle that would be honoured is ‘the steeper, the
radically decrease
darker’, which enhance slope but
tridimensionality. By retaining two light
sources and
changing their inclination based on slope, we can produce
images where the tridimensionality effect is still present, and
slope is enhanced. This correction highlights not only rock
outcrops but also channels and ridges, even though
probably less than an elevation correction. The transition
from valley to slopes is certainly more emphasized that with
elevation correction, and also alluvial
fans are better
represented.

TM

A clustering algorithm is available in the latest version of
and it was therefore relatively easy to create a tool
ArcGIS
to translate the process described in this paper into a
toolbox for this GIS application. Clustering and smoothing
is provided by features available within the model builder,
while the other equations were translated with the raster
is a quick and simple
calculator function. The result
implementation of the clustering method in ArcGIS

TM

.

CONCLUSIONS

The method presented in this paper provides an automatic
way of changing the light direction in shaded relief
representations. By clustering aspect we were able to create
macro-regions of homogeneous terrain features, which we
used to change the light direction of the shaded representa-
tion. This provides a relatively simple and completely
automatic way of obtaining results that elevate the visual
quality of computer generated shading

The method developed in this work was embedded into
toolbox. This makes it available for a wide

an ArcGIS

TM

Changing Light Azimuth in Shaded Relief Representation

299

Figure 7.
(a) study area shaded with the standard Hillshading
algorithm available in ArcGISTM, (b) shaded relief produced with
the clustering method, without any zenith correction

Figure 8.
(a) shaded relief by clustering with zenith corrected
according to elevation; (b) shaded relief by clustering with zenith
corrected according to slope

range of practitioners, both within the scientiﬁc community
and outside. With this method everyone, even non-
cartographer, can produce highly informative shaded relief
representations, particularly in mountainous
landscapes
where the standard method is sometimes ineffective.

SOFTWARE

TM

The ArcGIS
toolbox is available at the following address:
http://www.fabioveronesi.net/Cluster_Shading/Cluster_
Shading.tbx

The method was developed and tested with ArcGIS

TM

10.0 SP1.

TM

To install the tool, ﬁrst save the right version on your PC,
then open ArcGIS
and the ArcToolbox. Here click on the
title at the top, ‘ArcToolbox’, with the right mouse button
and select ‘Add Toolbox’. A selection window will appear
where you can navigate where you saved the sine wave
toolbox. Click once on the ﬁle and then on ‘Open’, do not
double-click on the ﬁle.

Each tool creates several temporary intermediate ﬁles that
are needed to perform the shading but are deleted when the
process is terminated. These ﬁles are saved locally in a folder
named temp (C:\temp), which if not present needs to be
created by the user.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Fabio Veronesi graduated
from the University of
Ferrara in 2007 with a
thesis in geological survey
of the Eastern Dolomites.
For two years after gradu-
ating he worked in the
private sector doing geo-
physical surveys, and then
decided to continue with
an academic career and
moved to Britain. He
began PhD studies in soil
science and spatial analysis
at Cranﬁeld University. In June 2013, he obtained the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy with a thesis entitled ‘3D
Advance Mapping of Soil Properties’. After completing his
PhD, he moved to Switzerland, and was hired for a postdoc
in a project about the perfection of hillshading with the
purpose of automatically imitating the results achieved
manually in the Swiss style shaded relief. Within this project
he tested several techniques of spatial statistics adapted to
shaded relief, one of which was k-means clustering of the
aspect derivative of the DEM.

300

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the Swiss National Science
Foundation (SNF) under grant number: 200021_127224.

REFERENCES

Brassel, K. (1974).

‘A model

for automatic hill-shading’, The

American Cartographer, 1(1), pp. 15–27.

Burrough, P. A., van Gaans, P. F. M. and MacMillan, R. A. (2000).
‘High-resolution landform classification using fuzzy k-means’,
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 113(1), pp. 37–52.

Da Vinci, L. (circa 1502). Map of Tuscany and the Chiana Valley.
Dikau, R. (1989). ‘The application of a digital relief model to landform
analysis in geomorphology’, in Three Dimensional Applications
in Geographic Information Systems, ed. by Raper, J., Taylor and
Francis, London.

ESRI. (2011). ArcGIS 9.2–10, Redlands, CA, USA.
Evans, I. S. (1979). An integrated system of terrain analysis and slope
mapping, Department of Geography, University of Durham.

Gyger, H. C. (1668). Map of zurich.
Imhof, E. (1982). Cartographic Relief Presentation, deGruyter, Berlin.
Iwahashi, J. and Pike, R. J. (2007). ‘Automated classifications of
topography from DEMs by an unsupervised nested-means algo-
rithm and a three-part geometric signature’, Geomorphology,
86(3–4), pp. 409–440.

Jasiewicz, J. and Stepinski, T. F. (2013). ‘Geomorphons — a pattern
recognition approach to classification and mapping of landforms’,
Geomorphology, 182, pp. 147–156.

Jenny, B. (2001). ‘An interactive approach to analytical relief shading’,
Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic
Information and Geovisualization, 38(1), pp. 67–75.

Jenny, B., Jenny, H. and Hurni, L. (2011). ‘Terrain generalization
with multi-scale pyramids constrained by curvature’, Cartography
and Geographic Information Science, 38(2), pp. 110–116.
Kaufman, L. and Rousseeuw, P. (1990). Finding Groups in Data: An
Introduction to Cluster Analysis, Wiley Series in Probability and
Mathematical Statistics. Applied Probability and Statistics, New York.
Kennelly, P. J. (2008) ‘Terrain maps displaying hill-shading with

curvature’, Geomorphology, 102(3), pp. 567–577.

Lambert, J. H. (1760). Photometria.
Leonowicz, A., Jenny, B. and Hurni, L. (2010). ‘Automated reduction
of visual complexity in small-scale relief shading’, Cartographica:
The International Journal for Geographic Information and
Geovisualization, 45(1), pp. 64–74.

Leonowicz, A. M., Jenny, B. and Hurni, L. (2012). ‘Terrain sculptor:
generalizing terrain models for relief shading’, Cartographic
Perspectives, 67, pp. 51–67.

The Cartographic Journal

Loisios, D., Tzelepis, N. and Nakos, B. (2007). ‘A methodology for
creating analytical hillshading by combining different lighting
directions’, Proceedings of 24th International Cartographic
Conference, Moscow, Aug 4–10.

Mark, R. (1992). Multidirectional, oblique-weighted, shaded-relief
image of the Island of Hawaii, US Geological Survey, http://
pubs.usgs.gov/of/1992/of92-422.

Patterson, T. (2001a). ‘DEM manipulation and 3-D terrain visualiza-
tion:
techniques used by the US National Park Service’,
Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic
Information and Geovisualization, 38(1), pp. 89–101.

Patterson, T. (2001b). See the light: How to make illuminated shaded
relief in Photoshop 6.0. Tutorial on North American Cartographic
Information Society (NACIS) Shaded Relief Homepage.

Patterson, T. (2013). ‘A desktop approach to shaded relief produc-

tion’, Cartographic Perspectives, 28, pp. 38–39.

Patterson, T. and Hermann, M. (2004). Creating Value Enhanced

Shaded Relief in Photoshop.

Pike, R. (1988). ‘The geometric signature: Quantifying landslide-
from digital elevation models’, Mathematical

terrain types
Geology, 20(5), pp. 491–511.

Reimann, C., Filzmoser, P., Garrett, R. and Dutter, R. (2011).
Statistical Data Analysis Explained: Applied Environmental
Statistics with R, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.

Swisstopo. (2004). DOM: High precision Digital Surface Model. 2 m
LIDAR model of Switzerland, http://www.geocat.ch/geonet-
work/srv/eng/metadata.show?uuid5041e4c01-6f04-4a34-bdf3-
ff0f9b93e6c1&currTab5default.

Swisstopo. (2014). VECTOR200 - 2D Landscape Model, http://
www.swisstopo.admin.ch/internet/swisstopo/en/home/products/
landscape/vector200.html.

van Asselen, S. and Seijmonsbergen, A. C. (2006). ‘Expert-driven
semi-automated geomorphological mapping for a mountainous
area using a laser DTM’, Geomorphology, 78(3–4), pp. 309–
320.

Weiss, A. (2001). ‘Topographic position and landforms analysis’, ESRI

User Conference, San Diego, CA, Jul 9–13.

Wiechel, H. (1878). ‘Theorie und Darstellung der Beluchtung von
nicht gesetzma¨ssig gebildeten Fla¨chen mit Ru¨cksicht auf die
Bergzeichnung’, Civilingenieur, 24, pp. 335–364.

Wood, J. D. (1996). ‘The geomorphological characterisation of digital

elevation models’, PhD thesis, University of Leicester, UK.

Yoe¨li, P. (1959). ‘Relief shading’, Surveying and Mapping, 19(2),

pp. 229–232.

25(4), pp. 573–579.

Yoe¨li, P. (1965). ‘Analytical hill shading’, Surveying and Mapping,

Yoe¨li, P. (1966). ‘Analytical hill shading and density’, Surveying and

Mapping, 26(2), pp. 253–259.

Yoe¨li, P. (1967). ‘The mechanisation of analytical hill shading’, The

Cartographic Journal, 4(2), pp. 82–88.

