Geoinformatica
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10707-020-00398-8

Bi- and three-dimensional urban change detection
using sentinel-1 SAR temporal series

Meiqin Che1 · Paolo Gamba1

Received: 15 December 2018 / Revised: 10 June 2019 / Accepted: 9 January 2020 /

© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract
Urban areas are subject to multiple and very different changes, in a two- and three-
dimensional sense, mostly as a consequence of human activities, such as urbanization, but
also because of catastrophic and sudden events, such as earthquakes, landslides, or floods.
This paper aims at designing a procedure able to cope with both types of changes by com-
bining interferometric coherence and backscatter amplitude, and provide a semantically
meaningful analysis of the changes detected in both city inner cores and suburban areas.
Specifically, this paper focuses on detecting multi-dimensional changes in urban areas using
a stack of repeat-pass SAR data sets from Sentinel-1A/B satellites. The proposed procedure
jointly exploits amplitude and coherence time series to perform this task. SAR amplitude is
used to extract changes about the urban extents, i.e. in 2D, while interferometric coherence
is sensitive to the presence of buildings and to their size, i. e. to 3D changes. The proposed
algorithm is tested using a time-series of two years of Sentinel-1 data, from May 2016 to
October 2018, and in two different Chinese cities, Changsha and Hangzhou, with the aim to
understand both the temporal evolution of the urban extents, and the changes within what is
constantly classified as “urban” throughout the considered time period.

Keywords SAR temporal series · Interferometric coherence · Change detection

1 Introduction

Urban areas are constantly changing, and monitoring this change is one of the most impor-
tant task to understand the interaction between humans and the environment. In this sense,
change detection and change tracking using temporal sequences of remotely sensed images
is becoming essential to keep pace with this task. Indeed, remote sensing allows monitoring
urban areas in any place of the world with an unprecedented revisit frequency and spatial
resolution, thanks to new satellite platforms that provide open and free data sets, such as the
Sentinel constellation by the European Space Agency (ESA).

(cid:2) Paolo Gamba

gamba@unipv.it

1 Department ECBE, University of Pavia, Via A. Ferrata, 5, Pavia, Italy

Geoinformatica

To understand changes affecting urban areas, it is necessary to design data analysis tech-
niques capable to recognize a large number of possible transformations, corresponding to
different temporal patterns, with respect to the spectral and spatial characteristics of human
settlements. For instance, for exposure and risk mapping involving human population, it
is increasingly important to map urban growth and changes in the urban-rural fringe [1].
Instead, to understand urban density and discriminate among different land uses, it is inter-
esting to detect block refurbishments in urban cores [2], as well as urban densification in
residential areas [3]. Finally, there is a recent trend in urban remote sensing to try and detect
not only two-dimensional changes, but also three-dimensional ones, because megacities are
developing not only by expanding, but also by substituting low-rise buildings with high-rise
ones.

With respect to urban extents mapping, the use of Earth Observation data makes it pos-
sible to have an objective and physically-based approach to recognize built-up structures,
using optical [4] or radar data [5], or a suitable combination of them [6]. It is more difficult,
instead, to detect a change involving only built-up volumes and shapes. To this aim, in recent
years novel procedures have been proposed to detect mixed 2D/3D changes, such as the
transformation of a residential area into a shopping district. At the moment, there are exam-
ples in technical literature involving scatterometers and nighttime lights [7], polarimetric
SAR data [8], stereo optical images [9], and interferometric SAR series [10].

More specifically, so far urban area change detection approaches involving SAR tem-
poral series involve either interferometric processing and 3D point extraction via SAR
tomography [11] or backscatter field amplitude change analysis [12]. There is no approach
considering Sentinel-1 (S-1) image sequences, jointly exploiting interferometric and ampli-
tude features, and aimed at recognizing different urban change patterns in two and three
dimensions. In our previous research [13], we have considered fully-polarized SAR data for
this task, with limited success. In this work we aim instead at designing a novel technique
to automatically and contemporarily detect in S-1 repeat-pass data series both the changes
to the urban extents, and those inside the urban core due to constructions, demolitions or
completions of built-up structures. This technique is going to provide a complete analysis of
the evolution of different portions of urban areas, a basic input to modeling tools for urban
meteorology, hydrology, micro-climatology, and citizen health.

2 Methodology

To cope with the objectives described above, the procedure proposed in this paper comprises
two different parts, each one realized by a specific processing chain and more accurately
described in the following subsections. Indeed, a procedure trying and solving the overall
problem of urban change detection, and able to discriminate among different change pat-
terns, should be on the one side able to track changes to the urban extents, and on the other
side capable to understand changes due to upgrade of the built-up/recreational areas (e.g.,
because of roof reconstruction for old buildings), as well as the enlargement or upgrade of
specific built-up elements. Examples are the change in the number of floors for a single
building, or the change of a residential area block from traditional to more modern build-
ings. The approach presented in [14] has been specifically developed to map urban area
extents from S-1 data, with encouraging results. It can be thus used to map, image by image
and time frame by time frame, the urban area extents, as well as to compute the changes
from one date to the following one.

Geoinformatica

To discriminate among different change patterns, a mask consisting of the areas consis-
tently mapped as “urban” is obtained by a logical AND among the urban extents extracted
from the temporal series of SAR amplitude data, while the rest of these urban masks is
aggregated into a map of locations that, at some point during the analyzed period, have tran-
sitioned from a “non-urban” to the “urban” class. While the former map identifies areas
consistently within the urban core, the latter one allows a temporal reconstruction of the
outbound dynamics and growth of the whole urban area.

The second part of the procedure aims at a better understanding of the dynamics of
the urban core, recognizing that, as mentioned in the introduction, there are a number of
changes that do not result into a change in the urban extents, but rather in a difference in
the backscattered electromagnetic field. It is reasonable to guess that this change can be
detected looking at the temporal series of amplitude values, but a different, and possibly
more sensitive, measure of the same effect may be achieved by using a temporal series of
the interferometric coherence between two temporally adjacent images. The interferomet-
ric coherence value is stable in areas with artificial structures that do not change [15], while
it undergoes strong variations in case of a change in built-up structures [16]. The standard
deviation σc of the sequence of coherence values along time for each pixel is an indicator of
its temporal stability or change at the corresponding location in the scene. Accordingly, σc
may be used to discriminate between urban blocks that did not change and those that were
subject to constructions, demolitions or renovations. The latter group can subsequently be
better characterized by looking at the temporal patterns of the average coherence values in
each block. These patterns are clustered in three classes, expecting to catch the above men-
tioned three types of changes, e.g. an increase in coherence due to constructions, a decrease
due to demolitions, and a more variable pattern in case of renovations or transformations.

A graphic representation of the overall procedure is provided in Fig. 1, where the area
with a large standard deviation in the temporal coherence is labeled as “change mask”, while

Fig. 1 A graphical representation of the overall workflow of the procedure described in this work, highlight-
ing the two main parts of the approach, i.e. the mapping of urban extents using SAR amplitude, as well as
the detection of change patterns at the urban fringe and inside the urban core using both SAR amplitude and
InSAR coherence

Geoinformatica

its intersection with the area that is consistently mapped as “urban” using the amplitude
image is labelled as “image change map’.

2.1 Urban extents extraction

As mentioned above, once the series of SAR (in this work, S-1) data has been collected, the
method reported in [17] is used to extract urban extents, labeled Xi , i = 1, . . . , N, where
N is the number of images of the stack. The approach is based on the backscattering effect
of built-up structures, the so called “double bounce effect”, which makes the amount of
power backscattered from built-up areas particularly large. More specifically, and referring
the interested reader to [17] for all the details, the main processing is structured in three
steps after speckle denoising with a Lee filter.

1. Seed extraction: starting from the time-averaged backscattering coefficient in the SAR
sequence, a limited number of points with very high backscattered power are selected,
assuming that they correspond to very strong backscatterers due to artificial structures.
This step is performed using a threshold that depends on the number of SAR images in
the stack.

2. Pixel aggregation: other strong scatterers that are spatially close (in all directions) to
the seeds are iteratively aggregated to the clusters, growing them into a more and more
refined approximation of the urban extents. This step is performed considering a second
lower threshold, that depends on the average backscattering value in a large area around
the seeds.

3. Post-processing: the extracted extents are refined considering a digital terrain model
(e.g., the SRTM DTM). Specifically, seeds and urban extents in areas with steep slopes
are discarded.

Although this approach has already proved to be accurate enough for most applications,
has been refined to be used for S-1 [14], and works irrespectively of the geographical loca-
tion of the urban area under analysis, it is still subject to errors due to the noise, as well
as in the changes in the viewing angle of the sensor. To reduce these negative effects, and
taking into consideration the fact that there is a sequence that can be exploited, two types
of temporal filters are applied to the urban extent masks. The first filter is based on major-
ity principle, and validates a urban or non-urban pixel by looking at its value in the current
urban extent mask and the two temporally adjacent masks. The second filter assumes that
urbanization is irreversible along the timeline and validates the “urban” label only if it is
confirmed by previously assigned urban labels in the same location.

After extraction and post-processing, the urban area extents Xi, i = 1, . . . , N are aggre-
gated into two different maps. The first one, obtained by means of a logical AND among all
maps in the temporal series, identifies the “urban core”, i.e. the area that, in the considered
period, is always classified as urban. The second one includes the complementary infor-
mation, i.e. areas that have been gradually added to the urban core along time. This map
depicts, with different colors according to the date, the changes in the urban-rural fringe,
providing a quantitative and visual description of the urban growth and its direction(s). An
example of these two maps for the city of Changsha, P.R. China, is presented in Fig. 4.

2.2 Interferometric coherence time-series

As mentioned above, although an analysis based on amplitude values and their spatial pat-
terns is able to detect urban area extents, the use of temporal SAR series allows considering

Geoinformatica

interferometric processing, too. As a result, and following what has been considered in tech-
nical literature since quite a few years [15], interferometric coherence maps are computed
and eventually utilized to include additional information for change detection. In this paper,
once all the images of the temporal series are co-registered with one master image like for
the usual interferometric processing, only adjacent co-registered interferometric pairs are
processed to generate a series of coherence values. Specifically, coherence is computed in a
m × n window according to the following formula:

γc(t1, t2) =

(cid:4)(cid:3)m
i=1

(cid:2)
(cid:3)m
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)n

j =1

i=1
(cid:2)
(cid:2)It1

(cid:3)n

It1

j =1

(xi, yj )2

(xi, yj )I ∗
(xi, yj )
t2
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)m
(cid:3)n
(cid:2)It2
(cid:2)

j =1

i=1

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(xi, yj )2

(1)

where It1
sets, recorded at time t1 and t2, respectively.

(xi, yj ) and It2

(xi, yj ) are the master and slave Single Look Complex (SLC) data

As proved in [18], any source of decorrelation decreases the coherence between an image
pair. More specifically, decorrelation may be due to the time difference (e.g., changes in the
spatial distribution of scatterers or their electrical characteristics along time), the difference
in the geometry acquisitions (e.g., changes in the viewing angle), a change in the surface
(e.g., because of deformations), or the difference in atmospheric contents. By computing
the coherence only between two temporally adjacent repeat-pass images, the intent is to
constrain the effect of temporal and geometry decorrelation to single out as much as possible
the component caused by human activities.

To this aim, the average value μc and standard deviation σc of the sequence of coherence
values along time are computed. Then, a stack composed of the ratio σc/μc and the μc
value is used to discriminate, using the Otsu threshold method on either band and a logical
AND, between areas with small and areas with large variations of the coherence in time with
respect to its average value. The pixels belonging to the latter class most likely correspond
to areas that underwent a significant change during the period of interest. If they are located
inside the “urban core”, they presumably identify changes in the built-up. The remaining
part of the urban core map, instead, is labeled the “urban unchanged map”, and contains
locations that are stable both in terms of the SAR amplitude (because they belong to the
urban area for all the dates there were analyzed) and of the coherence.

The final processing step is a clustering analysis within the changed portion of the urban
core, performed by a simple combination of the PCA and K-means algorithms applied to
the coherence and amplitude sequences together. Specifically, the two series of coherence
values for the VH and VV polarizations, as well as the two series backscattering coefficient
σ0 for both the same polarizations, are reduced into one univariate series by PCA, and set
as input to the clustering procedure performed by K-means. The idea is to cluster urban
locations with respect to the temporal patterns of both coherence and amplitude. The final
identification step, that assigns these clusters to peculiar changes that affected the urban
core, is performed manually, by visually analyzing these patterns in locations that have been
assigned to each cluster.

3 Experimental results

The above mentioned approach has been tested using S-1 data sets over the two cities
of Changsha and Hangzhou, P.R. China. The main reason for this selection is in the fast
growing status of these two cities, which produces both a wide expansion of the urban

Geoinformatica

Fig. 2 Changsha test site: a S-1 June 2016 SAR false color image using VV, VH, VV/VH; b Optical image
in the same period

extents, and a renovation of several portions of the inner core of both urban areas. We
expected these two cities to provide enough examples of different behaviors with respect to
changes in amplitude and coherence to allow understanding the advantages and describing
the shortcomings of the proposed technique.

3.1 First test cite: Changsha

The city of Changsha is located in the Hunan Province of the P.R. China. Being the core
area of Changsha-Zhuzhou-Xiangtan urban agglomeration, Changsha is a typical inland
city experiencing a rapid urbanization. Specifically, the urbanization level has reached 64%
at the end of 2015 [19]. To study this area, 30 IW Interferometric Wide Swath mode (IW)
single look complex (SLC) SAR images, from May 2016 to October 2018, were considered.
Coherence and backscattering coefficient series for both the VH and VV polarizations were
extracted. No digital terrain model was used to improve the urban extent extraction because
the test site is in a flat area. A false color S-1 image for Changsha is shown in Fig. 2, together
with an optical image at a close date.

The interferometric processing for the whole SAR data series was performed considering
the image in Sept. 2017 as the master, and the temporal and perpendicular baselines [21]
are reported in Fig. 3. Note that the master image selection is selected in order to minimize
the effect of geometry decorrelation.

As mentioned above, the first part of the procedure is meant to extract the urban extents
from each of the 30 images in the S-1 sequence, which are subsequently edited using the two
temporal filters mentioned in the previous section. Eventually, the series of urban extents
are merged into a map of the human settlement which has been always mapped as such in
all images, and a map of the temporal changes along the considered timeline, both reported
in Fig. 4.

Geoinformatica

Fig. 3 Temporal baselines (in days) and perpendicular baselines (in meters) for the S-1 sequence over
Changsha, considering as master the image in Sept. 2017

Fig. 4 Changhsa test site: a urban core map; b areas that have become urban along the same timeline (the
blue to red legend marks less to more recent changes). The area identified by a white rectangle is the one
considered for further, more detailed analyses in the next figures

Geoinformatica

Fig. 5 The portion of the Changsha test site identified by a white rectangle in Fig. 4: a ratio of standard
deviation to the average value of the coherence stack; b areas identified as changed areas inside the urban
core; c results of the temporal clustering. The resulting three clusters are identified by the blue, yellow and
green colors

Following the proposed algorithm, inside the area identified as the urban core by the
amplitude analysis, an additional binary discrimination is performed using the coherence
time series (29 coherence images) to detect portions that underwent a large coherence vari-
ation, hence suggesting that some kind of changes has been experienced. The results, for
the portion of Changsha highlighted by a white rectangle in Fig. 4, are reported in Fig. 5b,
while Fig. 5a shows the input data to this binarization, i.e. the ratio between the standard
deviation and the average of the coherence in time for each location. To validate the changes
inside this area, the change map is transformed into object patches and checked versus a
visually extracted ground truth (see Table 4). The reported overall accuracy is 80.85%, with
a ˆκ of 0.617 (Tables 1 and 2).

Eventually, temporal clustering is implemented on the coherence time series for this area.
The results of this clustering analysis, performed considering three classes, are provided in
Fig. 5c, where three patches, two of them selected to represent changed areas, and one an
area that did not change, are identified by differently colored squares and by the letters A,
B and C, respectively.

To understand the semantic meaning of the clusters, the temporal behaviors of the coher-
ence and amplitude average values for the selected patches are reported in Fig. 6 and 7.

Geoinformatica

Table 1 The confusion matrix for the object-based validation of urban changes inside urban core of Changsha

Ground truth

Changed

Unchanged

Producer accuracy (%)

Classifier results

Changed

Unchanged

User accuracy (%)

77.7

80

23

13

72

84.7

86.0

75.8

Patch A identifies an area where partially completed constructions were initially located,
but these buildings were completed during the selected time frame. Patch B presents a sim-
ilar construction project, while patch C is an unchanged building. As visible in the graphs
reported in Fig. 6, for the first patch a significant change of the coherence series is clear,
because of the building under construction and unfinished, while this is absolutely unap-
parent while observing the backscattering amplitude series. The same comment is valid for
the second patch, where changes can be detected by looking at the coherence but not to
the amplitude series. Finally, the third patch proves that, in case of an unchanged building,
both the coherence and amplitude values remain stable and large. For validation purposes,
three multispectral images, at the beginning, the end and in the middle of the time period,
respectively, are provided for each of the test sites in Figs. 6c and f and 7c.

As a comment, in the Changsha case study it is found that the coherence is more sensitive
than the backscattering coefficient to changes to the 3D structure of urban elements. The
amplitude sequences, instead, do not allow to understand the changes, and present a signif-
icant difference in the scattering level between the VV and the VH polarization. This result
stresses the fact that combining coherence and amplitude information unearth more change
patterns, because coherence reflects deformations, (re)constructions, and 3D changes, while
the amplitude depends on the spatial (i.e. 2D) configuration of the dihedral structures.

3.2 Second test site: Hangzhou

The second test site is the city of Hangzhou. Located in the eastern coastal region of
P.R. China, Hangzhou is the capital of the Zhejiang Province, and expanded by 5 times from
1986 to 2001 [20]. 74 IW SLC SAR images from November 2015 to October 2018 were
selected and considered for this test area. The first one in the sequence of S-1 images used
in this work is depicted in Fig. 8, together with an optical image for the same period. Like
for the previous test case, no digital terrain model was used to improve the urban extent
extraction because the test site is in a flat area.

The Hangzhou urban core area, with highlighted the results of the clustering procedure
after using the temporal series, is depicted in Fig. 9, where three patches, like for the previ-
ous test site, have been extracted. The corresponding coherence and amplitude time series

Table 2 The object-based validation on changes of growth over Changsha

Ground truth

Changed

Unchanged

Producer accuracy (%)

Classifier results

Changed

26

4

86.67

Geoinformatica

Fig. 6 The trend of the average coherence and backscattering amplitude coefficients for the patches A and B
identified in Fig. 5, to be checked against optical images for validation purposes. The two curves in red and
blue refer to the two polarizations of S-1 data

are reported in Fig. 10, showing that the first (blue) patch is an area subject to demolition of
old buildings, as visible from the decrease in the temporal series of the coherence and the
amplitude values, the second (green) patch is a construction site with buildings that were
originally partially built and the third (yellow) one is a totally new construction site. The
difference between the last two patches is clear looking at the amplitude series, that does
not present any significant trend in the first case, while it shows an increasing trend in the
second one.

Geoinformatica

Fig. 7 The trend of the average coherence and backscattering amplitude coefficients for patch C identified
in Fig. 5, to be checked against optical images for validation purposes. The two curves in red and blue refer
to the two polarizations of S-1 data

Like for Changsha, a validation was performed. The results are shown in Table 3 with
ˆkappa of 0.685. Erroneous identifications correspond
an overall accuracy of 84.71% and a
to areas where the coherence temporal pattern is not significantly different from the “no
change” case. This problem may be reduced by using more clusters than just three as in our
tests. These misclassifications are also dependent on the extension of the changed area, as
the analysis is performed on the average coherence and amplitude patterns in an identified
patch (Table 4).

Fig. 8 Hangzhou test site: a S-1 June 2016 SAR false color image using VV, VH, VV/VH; b Optical data
image for the same period

Geoinformatica

Fig. 9 Hangzhou test site: the urban core area (on the left), a smaller area where clustering results are reported
(on the right), inside which three patches (in blue, green and yellow) are identified

Fig. 10 The trend of the average coherence and backscattering amplitude coefficients for the three patches
identified in Fig. 9 for the Hangzhou test site (the two curves in red and blue refer to the two polarizations of
S-1 data)

Table 3 The confusion matrix for the object-based validation of urban changes in Hangzhou

Ground truth

Changed

Unchanged

Producer accuracy (%)

Classifier results

Changed

Unchanged

User accuracy (%)

131

28

82.4

11

85

88.5

92.3

75.2

Geoinformatica

Table 4 The object-based validation on changes of growth over Hangzhou

Ground truth

Changed

Unchanged

Producer accuracy (%)

Classifier results

Changed

27

3

90.0

4 Conclusions

This works provides a first attempt to exploit temporal sequences of S-1 data, and extract
information about different changes that have happened in an urban area. Specifically, the
proposed approach is able to catch the urban growth by mapping accurately the changes
in urban extents. It is also capable to detect changes due to constructions, renovations and
demolitions exploiting the temporal series of interferometric coherence values, eventually
resulting into a more accurate understanding of the changing urban landscape.

With respect to the change or trend recognition, the results in both test sites confirm
that there are differences between the coherence and the backscattering coefficient patterns,
but minor distinction between VV and VH polarization. The coherence series provides
a far better temporal characterization than the amplitude series, but the high correlation
between coherence values for VV and VH polarizations makes them somehow redundant.
Accordingly, as far as this research, the benefit from the use of multiple polarization is
limited.

The approach has been validated considering two fast growing cities in P.R. China, that
are experiencing many different urban change patterns, captured by the the short revisit time
and the fine spatial resolution of S-1 data. Our tests proved that:

–

–

the proposed approach allows characterizing purely two-dimensional effects, such as
the growth of urban extents and mixed two- and three-dimensional changes inside the
inner part of human settlements;
by jointly exploiting amplitude and coherence data from high temporal and spatial res-
olution S-1 data sets it is possible to recognize and discriminate among different types
of changes.

Next steps will be devoted to the (semi)automatic selection of semantic labels for the
change patterns that are obtained as output of this approach, as well as the combination of
this approach with other 2D/3D change detection techniques based on scatterometer and
nighttime data.

References

1. Nguyen LH, Nghiem SV, Henebry GM (2018) Expansion of major urban areas in the US Great Plains

from 2000 to 2009 using satellite scatterometer data. Remote Sens Environ 204:524–533

2. Huang X, Liu H, Zhang L (2015) Spatiotemporal detection and analysis of urban villages in mega city
regions of China using High-Resolution remotely sensed imagery. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens
53(7):3639–3657

3. Huang B, Xie C, Tay R (2010) Support vector machines for urban growth modeling. Geoinformatica

14(8)

4. Melchiorri M, Florczyk AJ, Freire S, Schiavina M, Pesaresi M, Kemper T (2018) Unveiling 25 years
of planetary urbanization with remote rensing: perspectives from the Global Human Settlement Layer.
Remote Sens 10(5):768

Geoinformatica

5. Esch T, Heldens W, Hirner A, Keil M, Marconcini M, Roth A, Zeidler J, Dech S, Strano E (2017)
Breaking new ground in mapping human settlements from space - the Global Urban Footprint, ISPRS. J
Photogramm Remote Sens 134:30–42

6. Haas J, Ban Y (2017) Sentinel-1 SAR and Sentinel-2 MSI data fusion fo urban ecosystem service

mapping. Remote Sens Appl Soc Environ 8:41–43

7. Frolking S, Milliman T, Seto KC, Friedl MA (2013) A global fingerprint of macro-scale changes in

urban structure from 1999 to 2009. Environ Res Lett 8:024004

8. Che M, Gamba P (2018) Possibilities and limits of urban change detection using polarimetric SAR data.

Proceedings of IGARSS’18, Valencia, pp 6079–6082

9. Tian J, Reinartz P, Dezert J (2015) Building change detection in satellite stereo imagery based on belief
functions. Proceedings of 2015 Joint Urban Remote Sensing Event (JURSE). Unformatted CD-ROM,
Lausanne

10. Yang C, Kenduiywo BK, Soergel U (2016) 4D change detection based on persistent scatterer inter-
ferometry. Proceedings of 2016 IAPR Workshop on Pattern Recogniton in Remote Sensing (PRRS).
unformatted CD-ROM, Cancun

11. Fornaro G, Serafino F, Reale D (2010) 4-D SAR Imaging: the case study of Rome. IEEE Geosci Remote

Sens Lett 7(2):236–240

12. Marin C, Bovolo F, Bruzzone L (2015) Building change detection in multitemporal Very High

Resolution SAR images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 53(5):2664–2682

13. Che M, Du P, Gamba P (2018) 2- and 3-D Urban Change Detection With Quad-PolSAR data. IEEE

Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 15(1):68–72

14. Lisini G, Salentinig A, Du P, Gamba P (2018) SAR-Based urban extents extraction: from ENVISAT to

Sentinel-1. IEEE J Sel Top Appl Earth Observ Remote Sens 11(8):2683–2691

15. Usai S, Klees R (1999) SAR Interferometry on a very long time scale: a study of the interferometric

characteristics of man-made features. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 37(4):2118–2123

16. Arciniegas GA, Bijker W, Kerle N, Tolpekin VA (2007) Coherence- and amplitude-based analysis of
seismogenic damage in Bam, Iran, using ENVISAT ASAR data. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens
45(6):1571–1581

17. Gamba P, Lisini G (2013) Fast and efficient urban extent extraction using ASAR Wide Swath Mode

data. IEEE J Sel Top Appl Earth Observ Remote Sens 6(5):2184–2195

18. Zebker HA, Villasenor J (1992) Decorrelation in interferometric radar echoes. IEEE Trans Geosci

Remote Sens 30(5):950–959

19. Ma S, Li X, Cai Y (2017) Delimiting the urban growth boundaries with a modified ant colony

optimization model. Comput Environ Urban Syst 62:146–155

20. Li L, Lu D, Kuan W (2016) Examining urban impervious surface distribution and its dynamic change in

Hangzhou metropolis. Remote Sens 8:265

21. Canaslan F, Ustun A (2012) Impact of perpendicular and temporal baseline characteristics on inSAR

coherence maps. Procedings of FIG Working Week

Publisher’s note
and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps

Meiqin Che received the B.S. degree in resources environment and
management of urban and rural planning from Northwest Univer-
sity, Xi’an, China, in 2008, the M.S. degree in Northwest cartography
and geography information system from Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China, in 2016, and is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in the Telecommunications and Remote Sensing Laboratory, Univer-
sity of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. His research interests include SAR, change
detection, machine learning and image processing.

Geoinformatica

Paolo Gamba is Professor at the University of Pavia, Italy, where
he leads the Telecommunications and Remote Sensing Laboratory.
He received the Laurea degree in Electronic Engineering “cum
laude” from the University of Pavia, Italy, in 1989, and the Ph.D. in
Electronic Engineering from the same University in 1993.

He served as Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters from 2009 to 2013, and as Chair of the Data Fusion
Committee of the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society
(GRSS) from October 2005 to May 2009. He has been elected in the
GRSS AdCom since 2014, and as GRSS President in 2019.

He has been the organizer and Technical Chair of the biennial
GRSS/ISPRS Joint Workshops on “Remote Sensing and Data Fusion
over Urban Areas” from 2001 to 2015. He also served as Technical
Co-Chair of the 2010 and 2015 IGARSS conferences, in Honolulu
(Hawaii), and Milan (Italy), respectively.

He has been invited to give keynote lectures and tutorials in sev-
eral occasions about urban remote sensing, data fusion, EO data for
physical exposure and risk management. He published more than 140 papers in international peer-review
journals and presented nearly 300 research works in workshops and conferences.

