The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 3

pp. 172–178 UKCC National Report to ICA 2011-Special Issue August 2011

O B S E R V A T I O N S

Governing Location Information in the UK

Robin McLaren1 and Robin Waters2

1Know Edge Ltd, Edinburgh, EH14 1AY, UK. 2RSW Geomatics, St. Ives, Cambridgeshire, PE27 6UJ, UK
Email: robin.mclaren@KnowEdge.com

Progress in transforming the UK’s fragmented location (geographic) information landscape over the past 4 years into a
well-governed, easily discovered and accessed, interoperable information resource for government and beyond is reviewed.
The impact and progress in implementing the influential UK Location Strategy and the EU INSPIRE Directive are
analysed in the context of wider public sector information policy drivers and future challenges for progress are identified.

Keywords: UK Location Strategy, INSPIRE, NSDI, transparency, Open Data

THE UK LOCATION INFORMATION LANDSCAPE

The UK has been at the forefront of the digital mapping/
geographic information systems revolution since the late
1960s. Location information now supports a wide range of
policy and operational decision making in both public and
private sectors, including planning for communities, environ-
mental management, health, education, security, construc-
tion, transport, crime prevention, insurance, retail, ﬂooding,
climate change, agriculture, heritage, sport, employment and
statistics. However, despite this signiﬁcant role, many loca-
tion-enabled publicly owned datasets have not been easy to
access, assemble and analyse across local and central govern-
ment bodies. There is much duplication, many restrictions on
access, too little re-use and too little interoperability between
datasets. The effective use and beneﬁt of location information
has not lived up to its potential.

This situation has been exacerbated by the business
models adopted by the two Ordnance Surveys – OSGB and
OSNI – under considerable pressure from the governments
of the day. They have pursued semi-commercial policies
with high levels of cost recovery resulting in expensive
datasets and restrictive licences. These have excluded many
users, especially medium-sized enterprises and the third
from fully participating in the exploitation of
sector,
location information and also reduced the potential for
commercial value-added suppliers.

Further complications have arisen from the UK govern-
ment’s devolution policies. In the absence of a UK
government lead, each devolved administration developed
its own geographic information strategy, although this does
not apply to the English regions which have much less
autonomy. The net result is a very fragmented set of policies
across the UK.

In 2005, the Ofﬁce of the Deputy Prime Minister (now
the Department of Communities and Local Government)

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13044121958902

government;

announced the formation of a UK wide, advisory body – the
Information (GI) Panel’. The members
‘Geographic
represented key interest groups in government, the private
sector and other GI interests across the UK. The GI Panel
aimed to:
N identify key medium to long-term GI issues and advise
N encourage more effective, extensive and systematic use of
GI, led by the example of some government departments
and other public bodies;
N facilitate a coordinated position on potential legislation,
both national and international, that might impact on
the GI market; and
N promote a coherent approach to the management of GI

in the UK.

The GI Panel developed a ‘GI Strategy’ for the UK with the
ﬁrst version available internally in late 2006. Finally termed
the ‘UK Location Strategy’, this was delivered to ministers
in October 2007 and was published in November 2008 as
‘Place Matters: The Location Strategy
for the United
Kingdom (Place Matters, 2008). Its principle aim was to
maximize the value of location information to the public,
government, UK business and industry.

This paper describes the UK Location Strategy, identiﬁes
wider public sector information policy drivers encouraging
adoption of the strategy, details progress in the implementa-
tion of the strategy and recognizes some future challenges.

THE UK LOCATION STRATEGY 2008

The UK Location Strategy aims to provide a framework to help
deliver European, national, regional and local
initiatives.
infrastructure for
Implementation will build a coherent

Governing Location Information in the UK

173

Figure 1. Hierarchy of spatial information strategies

‘place-based’ (location) information to assist policy formation,
service delivery and operational decision making. It will reduce
costs of data collection, increase re-use of data and improve
efﬁciency. The strategy is ‘owned’ by central, devolved and
local governments. Implementation will result in location
based information – on land, at sea and in the air – being:
N fit for purpose;
N collected once to universally accepted standards;
N appropriately maintained and used many times by the
N referenced to a definitive information framework sup-
N better able to support cross-organisational business
N easy to discover, and with clear terms for use;
N simple to access and easy to share and integrate;
N understood sufficiently to maximize its application;
N aligned with European requirements and the INSPIRE

porting seamless combinations;

public and private sectors;

processes;

and

Directive1.

The strategy sets out ﬁve strategic actions for public services
to:
N know what data exist and avoid duplicating it;
N use common reference data to link disparate datasets;
N share data with common technology, standards and
N gain appropriate skills to support its use;
N drive strong governance through the UK Location
Council, thus enabling change, and implementing the
strategy and INSPIRE.

business relationships;

The strategy is therefore aimed primarily at the public
sector, but will also beneﬁt the private sector and the citizen
needing to access, share or re-use ‘place-based’ information.
lead to more effective measures for
In turn, this will
sustainability and the management of climate change;
greater productivity and lower transaction costs in the
public and private sectors; and improved global competi-
tiveness. Figure 1 shows the hierarchy of spatial information
strategies applicable to the UK.

DRIVERS FOR CHANGE

Acceptance and implementation of
the UK Location
Strategy have coincided with parallel developments in
Public Sector Information policy in the UK and the EU
and global changes to the location information sector.

INSPIRE
The EU INSPIRE Directive (European Council, 2007)
mandates member states to provide access to public sector
datasets required for environmental management as speci-
ﬁed in a set of Implementing Rules. These cover the scope,
speciﬁcations and timescale for availability – between 2010
and 2019. INSPIRE introduces a legally binding element
into the UK Location Programme that is coordinating the
implementation of INSPIRE in the UK. The statutory
instruments
transposing INSPIRE into UK law were
published in December 2009 – separately for Scotland.
INSPIRE objectives are in line with the UK Location
Strategy – to maximize the use of geographic information
being collected for public use.

174

The Cartographic Journal

Public sector information policy
The Directive on the re-use of public sector information
(European Council, 2003) was transposed into UK law in
July 2005 and encourages public sector
information
resources to be made available for re-use wherever possible.
UK has consistently taken the lead within the EU on
implementation of this Directive. The Power of Information
Taskforce promoted the concepts of access, innovation and
openness and published a ﬁnal report (Cabinet Ofﬁce,
2009) in March 2009. Recommendations include: the
‘freeing up’ of location information; reform of Ordnance
Survey GB; simpliﬁed and standardized licensing condi-
tions; easier access to location data by the third sector;
simpliﬁed discovery and evaluation of data resources; and
developing skills in the public sector more effectively to
exploit location information on the web.
The Ofﬁce of Fair Trading (OFT)

report on the
Commercial Use of Public Information (CUPI) (OFT,
2006) and the ‘Cambridge’ report on Models of Public
Sector Information Provision via Trading Funds (Newbery
et al., 2008) prompted the government to order an assess-
ment of the business strategies and information trading
activities of the six major Trading Funds. The conclusions
were announced as part of the UK Budget Report 2009.

This led to Ordnance Survey GB announcing their
new Business Strategy (Ordnance Survey, 2009) and, in
November 2009,
the Prime Minister announced that
certain Ordnance Survey GB small- and medium-scale
products would be available online and free for re-use.

The White Paper Putting the Frontline First: Smarter
Government (HM Government, 2009) was published in
December 2009 and emphasized the social and economic
beneﬁts of opening up public data, for citizens, commu-
nities and commerce. It included principles to enable access
to public data and promote transparency. Public data will
be:
N published in reusable, machine-readable form;
N available and easy to find through a single online portal
N published using open standards and following W3C
N represented as Linked Data if in ‘raw’ form;
N usually released under an open licence enabling free –
N will be published in reusable form for others to use; and
N published with continued protection for personal,
classified, commercially sensitive and third-party data.

including commercial re-use;

(http://www.data.gov.uk/);

recommendations;

This report builds on the proposals of Sir Tim Berners-Lee
and Professor Nigel Shadbolt. The resulting Making Public
Data Public initiative will increase the availability of non-
personal public data for re-use and reinforces many of the
UK Location Council’s key recommendations.

The UK Location Programme will use the http://
data.gov.uk portal and is also recommending the use of
Linked Data which is becoming recognized as
‘best
practice’
sharing, and connecting data,
information and knowledge. Linked Data, in effect, turn
the web into a giant database of linked, machine readable
resources enabling automatic, online queries that access
data whenever, and from wherever, it is required.

for exposing,

Openness
‘Open’ is generally thought to be a ‘good’ word. However,
open is now used in many ways which may not be
equivalent and may often be ambiguous. Open does not
necessarily mean free or ‘free of charge’ and may often
co-exist with different types of licences for software or
datasets.

‘Open government’ has become a mantra for politicians
anxious to reclaim the high ground of public trust and there
have been various measures taken to publish more data and
details of the workings and the cost of both local and central
governments. This has
relating to
eGovernment, Transparency, Open Government, etc. The
Guardian newspaper has run a ‘Free Our Data’ campaign
(Guardian, 2010) with a large proportion of its effort
devoted to location related datasets.

included initiatives

UK government datasets have indeed become more
‘open’. They are now often more accessible with reduced
(or eliminated) charges and under more ﬂexible licensing.
In 2010, the Ordnance Survey GB launched OpenDataTM
making several popular products available free for re-use
under the much more ﬂexible Open Government Licence
(see essay by Lilley in this issue).

from cuts

Open source software is becoming ubiquitous and has
been growing in importance in the GI sector with added
impetus
to public sector budgets. Several
government departments and local authorities are now
using Open source GI software in addition to their well-
established use of open source web servers and other
‘general purpose’ software. During 2011, Ordnance Survey
will be releasing open source applications for various
INSPIRE requirements. Open source software is usually
released with a licence that allows users to copy it, add value
and charge for associated services – provided that the source
is acknowledged and that any changes are made available to
any potential user under the same terms.

‘Open data’

is a more recent concept encompassing
several trends. OpenStreetMap was started by Steve Coast
in 2004 and relies on volunteers to input information. It is
perfectly adequate for many applications and is completely
free to re-use under the Creative Commons licence. This
was the original ‘crowd sourced’ or ‘volunteered’ geo-
graphic information’ (VGI) and has certainly inﬂuenced
both public and private sector data suppliers. The licensing
regime and the ‘ﬁtness for purpose’ have set an example to
which many public sector suppliers now aspire.

The Google factor
Google EarthTM and Google MapsTM were launched in
2005 and changed everything. They have set new standards
for functionality and ease of access to datasets that had
previously been available only to professionals. They have
now added new datasets (such as Streetview) and new
functions which have set the standards for any web access to
geospatial
information. In UK, Google relies on aerial
rather than satellite imagery at high resolutions. The main
impact of Google has been to show everyone – from
Internet savvy children to CEOs – the potential for the use
of geographic information. It has also provided a simple
platform for any individual or organisation – for fun or for

Governing Location Information in the UK

175

proﬁt – to add their own information and make it available
to the rest of the world.

PROGRESS IN IMPLEMENTING THE UK LOCATION
STRATEGY 2011

UK Location Council
The UK Location Council is chaired by a representative
from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs (Defra) and the majority of members are senior
ofﬁcials from major public sector providers and/or users of
location information, which are prepared to contribute
ﬁnancially or in kind. It also includes representatives of the
devolved administrations and from the Association for
Geographic Information (AGI) to provide engagement
location
with a range of
information sector.

in the wider

stakeholders

The Council’s terms of reference aim to ensure that the

and efficient services to the public;

UK Location Programme initiatives:
N deliver ‘public good’ outcomes through more effective
N are driven by user needs and priorities to deliver these
N the outcomes are coordinated and that best practice is

‘public good’ benefits; and that

promulgated and adopted.

The Location User Group [business focus] and Location
Information Interoperability Board [technology focus]
ensure that the private, academic and third sectors are
enabled to engage with the programme.

UK Location Programme
The UK Location Programme (UKLP) team was formed in
2009 to establish the Location Information Infrastructure
(UKLII) that will
fulﬁl the objectives of the Location
Strategy and INSPIRE. The UKLII consists of a number of
legal, business and technical frameworks, to underpin and
promote best practice in managing and using location
information. Open standards and re-use of existing solu-
tions are being encouraged wherever possible.

The initial 4-year programme has an overall Conceptual
Design framework and will deliver: governance arrange-
ments; transposition of the INSPIRE Directive into UK
(achieved by December 2009);
statutory instruments
supporting policies,
standards, guidance and training
packages for publishing, interoperability and data sharing
– including rights management, security and charging.
There will also be a technical publishing infrastructure,
based on the http://data.gov.uk portal, and coordination
of core reference geographies, INSPIRE themes and other
location information. The programme will engage with
business to stimulate demand for publishing information
including gathering
into the UKLII and for its use,
evidence of business beneﬁts.
require
assurance services for compliance as well as performance
monitoring and reporting.

INSPIRE will

Key elements of the infrastructure will be developed by
June 2011 to meet the INSPIRE timetable for publication

of ‘discovery’ and ‘view’ services and there will be early
demonstrations of ‘end user’ value to stimulate engagement
and demand, to secure resources, and to achieve an early
return on investment. This will be achieved by encouraging
‘early adopters’ which will gather evidence of beneﬁts and
best practice.

set up Theme Groups

INSPIRE implementation roadmap

INSPIRE
(European
The
Council, 2011) stretches from 2010 to 2019. Already
(spring 2011) there have been deadlines for delivering
reports on progress, provision of metadata and availability
of ‘discovery’ and ‘view’ services. Annex I datasets (which
include the Core Reference Geographies) have been fully
speciﬁed and UKLP has
to
coordinate their delivery across the organisations con-
cerned. Annex II and III data speciﬁcations are not yet
ﬁnalized and appropriate Theme Groups will be organized
when necessary. Individual public sector data providers are
ultimately responsible for publication of their own datasets
in prescribed forms, but neither the EC nor the UK
speciﬁes particular mechanisms for delivery of services, data
or metadata. There is a UKLP brokered agreement between
Defra, the Cabinet Ofﬁce (responsible for overall govern-
ment information policy) and Ordnance Survey GB for the
latter to provide a suite of open source software that will be
available for any data providers to meet their INSPIRE
implementations.

National Address Gazetteer
One of the core reference geographies to be delivered within
the UKLII is a set of geo-coded addresses – a coordinate
reference linked to a combination of building name/
number, street, village/town names and postcodes. This
gazetteer provides a framework for linking and integrating
many other datasets, which include address information. In
December 2010, the government announced (Ordnance
Survey, 2010a) an agreement between OSGB and the Local
Government Group (for England and Wales) to set up a
joint venture – GeoPlace – to create a ‘National Address
Gazetteer’. Products from this database will be made
available to the public sector under the Public Sector
Mapping Agreement (PSMA) and under commercial terms
to the private sector. This should remove wasteful duplica-
tion and provide a single authoritative source of compre-
hensive, accurate and up-to-date information.

Simpler licensing
The National Archives has developed the UK Open
Government Licence, which was launch in October 2010.
It provides a single set of terms and conditions for anyone
wishing to use or licence freely available government
and entrepreneurs
information.
wishing to use government data to create new applications
without any formal application for permission.
is
interoperable with other internationally recognized licen-
sing models, such as Creative Commons. Ordnance Survey
GB has now adopted the OGL for its OS OpenData
channel, which provides free download or delivery on disc,

allows developers

It

It

176

The Cartographic Journal

and allows commercial or non-commercial use without
restriction.

Ordnance Survey GB historically had a series of condi-
tions and licences for different parts of local and central
governments and for devolved administrations. These were
rationalized in Scotland in 2009 through a ‘One Scotland
Mapping Agreement’ and in England and Wales in 2011
through the ‘Public Sector Mapping Agreement’. These
10-year agreements provide access to core geographic
datasets which are free at the point of use for all eligible
public sector bodies.

A long-standing issue for many public (and private) sector
users of Ordnance Survey GB maps and data has been the
deﬁnition of derived data and the applicable licensing terms.
Ordnance Survey GB has enforced Crown Copyright for
many years and this has been vital to its status as a Trading
Fund. However, copyright also extends to maps or informa-
tion that are derived from or based upon original products.
Copyright has therefore deterred many potential users and/
or driven them to use other data sources such as aerial
imagery and, latterly, OpenStreetMap and similar datasets.

In 2010, Ordnance Survey GB revised their licensing
terms (Ordnance Survey, 2010b) for all users as well as
launching OpenDataTM. It has also relaxed and better
deﬁned the terms relevant to derived data.

Paying for ‘free’ data
Data always have costs to the providers. In some cases, that
cost is unavoidable because the organisation needs the data
for its own use, but in other cases, the data are gathered
purely as a service to others
(e.g. Mapping Agency
mapping). Many ‘free’ mapping services are effectively
funded by advertising and/or value added services – they
are loss leaders. Commercial users of such services do not
normally get them for free.

Governments can also decide that public sector data
should be made available free for re-use to enable users to
create value added products and services that may provide
tax revenue and economic uplift in excess of the cost of
collecting and publishing the data. This is the ‘post hoc’
the US Federal Government’s policy
justiﬁcation for
typiﬁed by the USGS (post hoc because it has never claimed
copyright and has only ever priced maps and data at the cost
of reproduction). Various studies have argued this case but
have, in the UK, been ignored in favour of self-sufﬁciency
for Trading Funds and a policy of making the individual
users pay. During the 1990s, the Ordnance Survey GB
made collective agreements with local government and
central government, which enshrined this policy, but which
came to be seen as very restrictive and bureaucratic – with
each individual organisation still having to account for its
use of particular products. This has now been dramatically
simpliﬁed – to the satisfaction of most parties – with
the new ‘Public Service Mapping Agreement’ and ‘One
Scotland Mapping Agreement’ which are centrally funded
by Government. This frees individual public sector users
(including health services) to use most Ordnance Survey
GB products internally and cooperatively amongst them-
selves. There are still constraints on the use of Ordnance
Survey GB data on public facing websites and when offering
commercial services.

EMERGING ISSUES

Crowdsourcing
The difference between crowdsourcing and outsourcing is
similar to that between amateurs (in the old fashioned
sense) and professionals. However good the amateurs, they
do not have an enforceable contract. Citizens volunteer to
collect and sometimes maintain information for a variety of
applications, e.g. bird counts, climate change and bathing
water quality. These online communities self-organize into
productive units and have delivered some excellent results,
especially in the area of VGI where datasets, after some
quality control, can be very valuable and ﬁt for many
purposes. The most high proﬁle example is OpenStreetMap,
the free WIKI world map that is created and maintained by
volunteers; currently there are over 350,000 volunteers and
over two billion GPS points have been uploaded. The
Dutch navigation company TomTom has introduced a
facility called ‘MapShare’ that is basically crowdsourced map
maintenance.

As sources of crowdsourced or VGI increase across the
UK, the UK Location Strategy needs to consider how this
valuable source of information can be effectively incorpo-
rated into the UK Location Information Infrastructure.

Public sector budget cuts
In 2011, the UK will see unprecedented cuts to the budgets
of all levels of government. This will mean that all public
sector services will be examined for justiﬁcation relative to
other services, potential reductions in scope, efﬁciency
savings and possible outsourcing. In some cases, location
information will have already established itself as an
absolutely vital core for many corporate functions. In
others, it may be seen as an expensive luxury to be axed
completely or perhaps sold off to the highest bidder – if any.
If location information is well integrated and is helping to
deliver legally mandated services (and that will now include
INSPIRE), it will still need to be seen to be efﬁcient and
may still be subject to staff cuts and/or outsourcing. Where
services or where
it
commercial or non-proﬁt organisations can provide alter-
natives, there are likely to be major changes. Already we
have seen amalgamation of ‘back ofﬁce’ services of local
authorities. The PSMA (see above) removes some of the
previous constraints on such collaboration – even between
dissimilar organisations. Savings can, at least in theory, be
made by using cheaper (maybe even ‘free’ open source
software) solutions, by reducing the frequency with which
data are collected or distributed, and by partial or complete
automation of manual processes. Across
the location
information sector organisations are being challenged to
justify their existence and deliver more efﬁcient solutions;
the outcome will be a more sustainable sector.

is being used for non-essential

Institutional changes
In late 2010, the idea of a Public Data Corporation was
mooted and consultation on what form this should take has
already begun. It has been suggested that this might
manage, standardize or regulate the data supplied by

Governing Location Information in the UK

177

government departments and/or trading funds, including
the terms under which it is supplied. In the location
information world,
the Met Ofﬁce,
Ordnance Survey GB, Land and Property Services in
Northern Ireland, Land Registry, Registers of Scotland,
Environment Agency and others.

this might affect

In a time of austerity, it would seem likely that some
organisations will disappear or be merged. We have seen the
merger of the separate Ordnance Survey NI, valuation ofﬁce
and land registry in Northern Ireland into a single Land and
Property Service. Although there are no formal moves to
amalgamate local authorities, there are already several that
are merging some ‘back ofﬁce’
functions into shared
services.

Data privacy
Public interest in data privacy in general and location
privacy does not appear to be a major issue yet. Genuine
concerns about social networks and automatic number plate
recognition systems, not to mention CCTV, are perhaps
more pressing. The UK has a history of ad hoc regulations
addressing speciﬁc applications as they arise; there has so far
been no comprehensive attempt to regulate from ﬁrst
principles. Arguably there is now a case for the Information
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce to update the Privacy and Electronic
Communications Regulations 2003, and for the mobile
telephone operators to update their Codes of Practice. It
has also been suggested that a revision of
the Data
Protection Act might be more appropriate. This could deal
with, for example, retention of location records, linkage on
the basis of location,
location obfuscation and location
spooﬁng. There should also be a debate on what resolution
of location information is private on a spectrum from ‘is the
in the country’ to ‘is located here to a resolution of x
metres’ (Raper, 2010). Without this debate and proactive
location privacy challenges may
revision of regulations,
ultimately restrict the use of location technologies.

Capacity building
The UK Location Strategy identiﬁed the need for capacity
building to enable the beneﬁts of the use of
location
information to be fully exploited. The UKLP has, however,
been severely constrained by lack of resource to pursue this
strand of the strategy and to embed new spatial skills across
it has
professional groups
sponsored various seminars and workshops on the devel-
opment of the programme and INSPIRE.

in government, However,

Ordnance Survey GB has

run a free (paper) map
programme for schools for several years and all publicly
funded schools are now parties to the PSMA. University
courses do not generally specialize in location information
at undergraduate level. However, many postgraduate
courses are devoted to or include a large element of
GI science. Edina run by the University of Edinburgh and
MIMAS Landmap at Manchester provide a nationwide
information service for all further and higher education
institutions that includes access to government datasets,
remotely sensed
e.g. Ordnance Survey GB Mapping,
imagery and various ancillary services. These two centres
operate licensing and monitoring facilities for the data and

services which are ‘state of the art’ and which are being
exploited in EU and other international projects.

and

(CPD)

The AGI plays a key role in offering Continued
Professional Development
the Royal
Geographical Society now offers a professional qualiﬁca-
tion-based on the AGI CPD credits. AGI is also cooperat-
ing with the British Cartographic Society to present ‘Better
Mapping’ days which aim to raise the standard of web
mapping in particular (see essay by Spence this issue). AGI
also runs an annual conference which attracts around 600
people for a 2-day programme and several commercial
providers also run conferences and shorter events.

CONCLUSIONS

Four years ago, the knowledge, use and sharing of location
information, and hence the economic beneﬁts, were
relatively limited in the UK due primarily to high costs,
complex and restrictive licensing, lack of data interoper-
ability standards and limited capacity to exploit
the
resource. However, the launch and implementation of the
UK Location Strategy in 2009 and signiﬁcant changes to
EU and UK Public Sector Information policies have
radically changed the location information landscape.
Location information is now well and inclusively governed
and the implementation of the EU INSPIRE Directive has
ensured that progress is continued to be made within the
difﬁcult economic times being experienced by the UK.

Most signiﬁcant progress has been made in: simplifying
licensing arrangements; releasing major portions of the
Ordnance Survey GB’s data free for re-use and creating
communities of innovation; raising the awareness of the
economic beneﬁts of location information across all levels of
government and beyond; and integrating the discovery and
access to location information within the wider Public Sector
Information portal http://data.gov.uk. However, the sig-
niﬁcant challenges of location privacy, the cost of migrating
existing data to new standards, alternative sources of
crowdsourced data, lack of capacity and dynamic institutional
change threaten to slow the progress being made.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Robin McLaren is Director
of Know Edge Ltd, an
independent
consultancy
specializing in location in-
novation. He has been at
the forefront of the geo-
graphic information system
revolution and is
recog-
nized as a world expert in
Spatial Data Infrastructures
and has worked extensively
in Eastern Europe
and
worldwide to strengthen
land tenure to support eco-
nomic reforms. Robin supported the UK government in
formulating the UK Location Strategy and has been a
member of the UK Location Council over the past 2 years.

178

The Cartographic Journal

Robin Waters is Director of RSW Geomatics Ltd and
consults on the use and abuse of geographic information
particularly in the context of the INSPIRE Directive and in
the land and property sector. He has worked with
international agencies, with central and local governments
and with the private sector. Robin chairs the INSPIRE
the Association for Geographic
working group for
Information and represents
Institution of
Chartered Surveyors on the UK Location User Group.
He is a Fellow of the British Cartographic Society.

the Royal

NOTES
1 The EU INSPIRE Directive is about improving the access
to and the interoperability of location information across
Europe to better inform environmental policy and the
public, e.g. monitoring the effects of climate change across
national boundaries.

REFERENCES

Cabinet Office. (2009). Power of Information Taskforce Report,
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100413152047/
http://poit.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/poit/ (accessed 22 February 2011).
European Council. (2003). Directive 2003/98/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 on the re-use
of public sector information, http://ec.europa.eu/information
_society/policy/psi/docs/pdfs/directive/psi_directive_en.pdf (ac-
cessed 2 February 2001).

European Council. (2007). Directive 2007/2/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2007 establishing an
Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community
(INSPIRE), http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.cfm (accessed 3
February 2011).

European Council. (2011). INSPIRE Road Map, http://inspire.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/index.cfm/pageid/44 (accessed 22 February 2011).
Guardian. (2009). Free Our Data: The Blog, http://www.freeourdata.

org.uk/blog/ (accessed 22 February 2011).

HM Government. (2009). Putting the Frontline First: Smarter
Government, http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/
cm77/7753/7753.pdf (accessed 22 February 2011).

Newbery, D., Bently, L. and Pollock, R. (2008). Models of Public
Sector Information Provision via Trading Funds, http://www.
opsi.gov.uk/advice/poi/models-psi-via-trading-funds.pdf
(acce-
ssed 22 February 2011).

OFT. (2006). Commercial Use of Public Sector Information (CUPI),
http://www.oft.gov.uk/shared_oft/reports/consumer_protection/
oft861.pdf (accessed 22 February 2011).

Ordnance Survey. (2009). New Ordnance Survey Strategy 2009,
http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/media/news/2009/
may/strategylaunch.html (accessed 22 February 2011).

Place Matters. (2009). Place Matters: The Location Strategy for the
United Kingdom, http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/
communities/locationstrategy (accessed 19 January 2011).

Ordnance Survey. (2010a). Government Initiative for National
Addressing, http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/media/
news/2010/dec/nationaladdressing.html (accessed 22 February
2011).

Ordnance Survey. (2010b). New Pricing and Licensing Agreement
Launched, http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/business/
licences/index.html (accessed 22 February 2011).

Raper, J. (2010). Data Privacy Policy, AGI Foresight Study – the
Geospatial Industry in 2015, http://www.agi.org.uk/storage/
AGI%20Foresight%20Study%20Summary%20Report%201.1.pdf
(accessed 22 February 2011).

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

