101

RESEARCH ARTICLE

NRCan’s Compliance Program for high accuracy,
GNSS services: ensuring compatibility with the
Canadian Spatial Reference System

Jason Bond, Brian Donahue, Mike Craymer, and Geoff Banham

Abstract: There are currently over 700 Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) reference
stations actively broadcasting corrections (Active Control Stations — ACSs) in Canada. This
number has been consistently growing since the early 2000s. In 2009, the federal, provin-
cial, and territorial members of the Canadian Council on Geomatics (CCOG) recognized that
consumers of GNSS corrections data had very little ability to verify that service providers
were following best practices to ensure the quality of their work. It is common for surveyors
to delineate property boundaries or to define the location of civil infrastructure with signifi-
cant economic value, so being dependent upon another party without quality assurance was
perceived as a major risk. Additionally, this new dependence upon commercial ACSs for
GNSS corrections posed a threat to the consistency of position values in Canada. To address
this concern, CCOG tasked its Canadian Geodetic Reference System Committee (CGRSC)
with developing a plan to describe, validate, and provide certification of the GNSS correc-
tions services consumed by industry. This paper summarizes the development of Natural
Resources Canada’s (NRCan) Compliance Program for High Accuracy, GNSS Services, and
how it can benefit professional surveyors across Canada.
Key words: GNSS, RTK, compliance agreement, surveying.

Résumé : Il y a actuellement plus de 700 stations de référence du Système mondial de nav-
igation par satellite (GNSS) qui diffusent activement des corrections (Stations de contrôle
actif – SCA) au Canada. Ce nombre a constamment augmenté depuis le début des années
2000. En 2009, les membres fédéraux, provinciaux et territoriaux du Conseil canadien de
géomatique (CCOG) ont reconnu que les clients des données de corrections du GNSS
avaient très peu de moyens pour vérifier que les fournisseurs de services adoptaient les
pratiques exemplaires afin d’assurer la qualité de leur travail. Il n’est pas rare que les
arpenteurs-géomètres fixent les limites des propriétés ou définissent l’emplacement d’in-
frastructures civiles ayant une valeur économique importante et la dépendance à une
autre partie sans assurance de la qualité était perçue comme étant un risque majeur. De
plus, cette nouvelle dépendance aux SCA commerciaux pour les corrections du GNSS a
constitué une menace à la constance des valeurs de positions au Canada. Pour répondre
à cette préoccupation, le CCOG a confié à son Comité canadien du système de référence
géodésique (CCSRG) la tâche d’élaborer un plan pour décrire, valider et fournir une
certification des services de corrections du GNSS consommés par l’industrie. La présente
communication résume le développement du Programme de conformité de RNCan
pour la haute précision des services du GNSS de Ressources naturelles Canada et la façon

Received 8 January 2019. Accepted 15 April 2019.

J. Bond, B. Donahue, and M. Craymer. Canadian Geodetic Survey, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa, ON K1A 0Y7,
Canada.
G. Banham. Geodetic Control Unit, Alberta Parks and Environment, Edmonton, AB T5K 2J6, Canada.
Corresponding author: Jason Bond (email: jason.bond2@canada.ca).
This work is free of all copyright and may be freely built upon, enhanced, and reused for any lawful purpose without
restriction under copyright or database law. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal
Public Domain Dedication (CC0 1.0).

Geomat. 72: 101–111 (2018) dx.doi.org/10.1139/geomat-2019-0001

Published at www.nrcresearchpress.com/geomat on 25 April 2019.

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.102

Geomat. Vol. 72, 2018

dont il peut profiter aux arpenteurs-géomètres professionnels à l’échelle du Canada.
[Traduit par la Rédaction]

Mots-clés : GNSS, droit de savoir, entente de conformité, arpentage.

Introduction

Differential Global Navigation Satellite Systems (D-GNSS) have been widely embraced for
surveying, construction, and engineering applications. Real-time, Kinematic (RTK) D-GNSS
surveys have introduced efficiencies in these sectors by providing instantaneous access to
centimetre-level positioning. D-GNSS surveys require at least one reference station to gener-
ate GNSS corrections. When a polygon of reference stations are used around a region,
D-GNSS performance can be enhanced. In this scenario, D-GNSS corrections can be interpo-
lated between stations rather than extrapolated from a single location (InsideGNSS 2011).

The establishment of a reference station requires careful consideration for site location.
Good satellite visibility is needed to maximize the number of commonly viewed satellites
when a user is in the field, a condition that is required for differential data processing
(Leick 1990). Equipment must be located in a secure location. Power and telemetry options
must also be considered. Finding suitable reference locations can take time.

Organizations within the private sector, public sector, and academia have recognized the
value of continuously operating, GNSS reference stations. Such investments can signifi-
cantly reduce the time required to conduct a survey by eliminating the setup and tear down
of a temporary reference station. Additionally, positioning accuracy and ambiguity resolu-
tion time can be improved by leveraging a polygon of permanent reference stations.

Currently, there are over 700 GNSS reference stations actively broadcasting corrections
(Active Control Stations — ACSs) in Canada. This number has been consistently growing
since the early 2000s. In 2009, the federal, provincial, and territorial members of the
Canadian Council on Geomatics (CCOG) recognized that consumers of GNSS corrections
data had very little ability to verify that service providers were following best practices to
ensure the quality of their work. It is common for surveyors to delineate property bounda-
ries or to define the location of civil infrastructure with significant economic value, and
their being dependent upon another party without quality assurance was perceived as a
major risk. Additionally, this new dependence upon commercial ACSs for GNSS corrections
posed a threat to the consistency of position values in Canada.

To address this concern, CCOG tasked its Canadian Geodetic Reference System
Committee (CGRSC) with developing a plan to describe, validate, and provide certification
of the D-GNSS RTK corrections services consumed by industry. This paper summarizes the
development of NRCan’s Compliance Program for High Accuracy, GNSS Services, and how
it can benefit professional surveyors across Canada.

Solution considerations

In devising a solution to address the concerns of CCOG, several considerations needed to

be addressed. These included the following:

a.

Ensuring tight integration of ACSs into the Canadian Spatial Reference System
(CSRS). Canadian Geodetic Survey (CGS) is responsible for the definition, maintenance,
and access to the Canadian Spatial Reference System (CSRS). The CSRS currently uses the
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) at epoch 2010 as the official datum for determin-
ing horizontal position and ellipsoidal heights. The Canadian Geodetic Vertical Datum of
2013 is the official CSRS vertical datum. To allow access to the CSRS, CGS maintains a

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.Bond et al.

103

national network of ACSs whose GNSS data is made freely available. The CSRS can also be
accessed through passive geodetic control monuments for which coordinates have been
published. The increased use of commercial services for accessing position information
has necessitated a means to ensure their compatibility with the CSRS. This can be achieved
by applying a common methodology to computing coordinates for commercial reference
stations. These coordinates can then be assigned by commercial service providers so that
all derived surveys are compatible with the CSRS.

Additionally, ACSs must seamlessly integrate with passive geodetic control monuments

for various reasons, as follows:
(cid:129) passive control monuments provide users of real-time services the independent ability

to confirm system performance (albeit at an instant in time);

(cid:129) passive control monuments allow for traditional reference or rover RTK setups to be
employed when cellular service is not available, and coordinates determined using this
approach should agree with those calculated using real-time services; and

(cid:129) historic surveys derived from passive control monuments should have position values

that can be directly compared with those derived from real-time services.

It is also important to note that corrections enabled by an ACS may originate in one
province but extend into another. It is critical that a homogenous national referencing sys-
tem is achieved by leveraging coordinate values of consistent quality for all reference sta-
tions across the country.

b. Making end users aware when a reference station’s true position no longer matches
its published coordinate value. If the coordinates assigned to a reference station do not
reflect its true position, positioning biases equivalent to the discrepancy size can occur
for end users in the field. Amongst other causes, discrepancies between actual and pub-
lished values can be introduced by the following:

(i)

(ii)

thermal expansion of the materials used to construct the reference station or of the
structure to which the reference station’s antenna is attached
seasonal thermal effects such as freeze–thaw cycles of the ground where a monument
is embedded

(iii) unstable monument construction
(iv) unstable ground where the reference station is located
(v)

changes in station hardware (e.g., antenna or antenna mount) without proper
bookkeeping

(vi) accumulation of snow on a reference station’s antenna
(vii) natural (e.g., bird’s nest on the antenna) or human-induced (e.g., placement of an

object on the antenna) changes at the reference station
(viii) environmental changes near the site (e.g., vegetation growth)

c. Making end users aware when a station is offline. In Network RTK (NRTK), a polygon of
reference stations is used to generate corrections. The closest reference station generally
has the most influence on the calculated GNSS correction because it should have the high-
est error correlation. If the closest reference station goes offline, reference stations further
away have greater influence on the received correction value. Depending upon reference
station spacing, accuracies may degrade from ±2 to ±4 cm or more. For applications such
as road construction, this degradation in performance may not meet project requirements.
It is important that end users are able to verify station uptime during the course of a
survey.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.104

d.

Stakeholders

following:

Providing recommendations to service providers on how to meet stability and
uptime needs. There is never a guarantee that a reference station will behave as expected,
but by following certain best practices, performance anomalies can be minimized. This is
critical in an industry where end users are dependent on another party for accurate results.

Geomat. Vol. 72, 2018

Key stakeholders in the delivery of high accuracy, GNSS positioning services include the

b.

a. High accuracy, GNSS service providers. There are presently at least six companies offer-
ing high accuracy, GNSS corrections services in Canada. Their target markets include the
surveying, construction, and agriculture industries. Technological advances have opened
up new opportunities in machine automation and artificial intelligence applications,
increasing the likelihood of new entrants to this market.
End users (e.g., surveyors, survey technologists, and construction workers). There are
currently more than 2 000 professional surveyors in Canada and more than 10 000 survey
technologists. These consumers of high accuracy GNSS corrections depend upon GNSS ser-
vice providers to provide reliable data. Erroneous data can have significant liability implica-
tions for subscribers due to the nature of their work.
Canadian Geodetic Survey. CGS is responsible for defining, maintaining, and providing
access to the national referencing system — the CSRS. Access to the CSRS is provided in sev-
eral ways including the following:

c.

(i) maintaining a national network of passive geodetic control monuments having pub-

lished coordinates that can be accessed by industry;

(ii) maintaining a national network of active geodetic reference stations whose data can

be accessed for D-GNSS positioning; and

(iii) offering online Precise Point Positioning (absolute) services that can determine a
user’s position in the CSRS by submitting GNSS data for the location of interest.

d.

Provinces. Provincial geodetic agencies are responsible for defining, maintaining, and pro-
viding access to provincial coordinate referencing systems, which should integrate with
the national system. Access to provincial coordinate referencing systems is provided by

(i) maintaining a provincial network of passive geodetic control monuments having pub-
lished coordinates that can be accessed by industry (many provinces are no longer
doing this); and

(ii) maintaining a provincial network of active geodetic reference stations whose data can

be accessed for D-GNSS positioning (half of the provinces are currently doing this).

e.

f.

Cities and municipalities. Cities and municipalities have also recognized the value of hav-
ing access to high accuracy, GNSS positioning and many have invested in one or more con-
tinuously operating reference stations to broadcast GNSS corrections. Some cities and
municipalities also define, maintain, and provide access to a local coordinate referencing
system. Some maintain networks of passive geodetic reference stations.
Academia. Some universities and colleges with geomatics programs have installed contin-
uously operating reference stations.

Tools

In response to the previously described solution considerations, tools have been devel-
oped to help address industry needs as subsequently described. The tools have been in

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.Bond et al.

105

development since 2011, through ongoing consultations between CGRSC and service
providers.

Best practices for GNSS service providers

There is never a guarantee that a reference station will behave as expected, but by fol-
lowing certain best practices, performance anomalies can be minimized. To assist GNSS ser-
vice providers in installing stable reference stations having high uptime, best practices
were compiled. The best practices are based upon the installation experiences of CGS and
other provincial geodetic agencies and best practices developed by other nations. Topics
such as choice of construction materials, antenna mast design, and data handling are dis-
cussed (CGS 2017).

Coordinate calculation services

CGS now offers coordinate calculation services at no charge for organizations operating
reference stations whose data is consumed by a third party. As subsequently described, it is
expected that the organization will commit to making the station’s data available for analy-
sis on an ongoing basis. Interested organizations must provide sufficient data (2 weeks or
more) to facilitate initial coordinate calculations. By offering such a service, it is hoped that
the integrity of the CSRS will be maintained.

Currently, CGS routinely processes data from several commercial RTK networks, most of
whom provide reference station data on a daily basis. Rigorous, geodetic processing tech-
niques are employed to achieve the highest accuracy. Each network is processed separately
in combination with a set of global reference frame stations (e.g., the Canadian Active
Control Stations) to provide network constraints.

Daily data files for each network are processed following the International GNSS Service
(IGS) processing standards. Bernese GNSS Software, absolute, antenna phase centre, calibra-
tion models, and IGS Final precise ephemerides are used. Each daily solution is integrated
directly into the current version of the geodetic reference frame by using the global refer-
ence frame stations as constraints. These daily, Bernese coordinate solutions are then com-
bined into a weekly solution that is used for monitoring the stability of the reference
stations (see next section).

Each month, all of the weekly solutions (coordinates and full covariance matrices) are
combined into a cumulative solution. At this stage, coordinates at the official epoch (cur-
rently 2010.0) and their velocities are estimated. Station velocities are estimated only for sta-
tions that have more than 1 year of data. Experience has shown that using less data can
result in unreliable velocity estimates.

For a station with less than 1 year of data, coordinates are estimated at the mean epoch
of the weekly solutions in which the station is included and then propagated to the official
epoch using CGS’s velocity model. These coordinates are supplied to the RTK network oper-
ators for adoption at their reference stations. The cumulative solution at the end of each
year is considered the latest official or published solution for adoption. Because frequent
changes to reference station coordinates can cause confusion, service providers are only
required to update their reference station coordinates to the new official solution if they
have changed by more than 2 cm horizontally or 3 cm vertically. These thresholds reflect
values that can be detected using RTK.

When new stations are added or existing stations are relocated, new coordinates are
needed quickly by service providers. In such cases, CGS will provide preliminary coordi-
nates from the latest monthly cumulative solution where the new or relocated stations
have more than 2 weeks of data. CGS uses IGS Final ephemerides that have up to a 14-day
latency after the end of the week. It takes approximately 1 week to estimate the new weekly

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.106

Geomat. Vol. 72, 2018

coordinate solutions and to combine it into an updated cumulative solution. Consequently,
preliminary coordinates from the monthly cumulative solutions typically take a minimum
of 3 weeks to generate once 2 weeks of data is made available for processing.

Reference station position monitoring

As described, a reference station’s position may vary or change for a number of reasons.
At some point, the difference between the true and published coordinate values will exceed
the user’s error tolerance, negatively impacting survey results. For monitoring purposes,
thresholds of 2 cm horizontally and 3 cm vertically were deemed to be the maximum toler-
able errors before RTK results become negatively affected, while at the same time not put-
ting onerous demands on service providers to constantly update coordinate values.

As described in the previous section, weekly solutions are used to monitor the stability
of a reference station. Figure 1 gives an example of a detected horizontal discontinuity that
could be caused, for example, by a sudden shift in reference station location or by a change
in the antenna mounting hardware. In such circumstances, it is often necessary to estimate
a new reference station position after the discontinuity.

Figure 2 illustrates a station exhibiting large seasonal variations in the vertical position.
Such variations can cause a station to exceed agreement thresholds during specific times of
year (often during the winter months). Thermal expansion of the antenna mast, thermal
expansion of the building on which the antenna mast is mounted, snow and ice on the
antenna, and other environmental effects can cause this type of behaviour. In such cases,
it is advisable to find and mitigate the source of the variation, which may involve moving
to another site.

A reference station may also illustrate a runaway trend, as illustrated in Fig. 3. In this sce-
nario, a reference station illustrates a velocity that may be caused by an unstable monu-
ment or a geophysical effect, for example. A new coordinate can be generated for the
station, but unless the underlying cause of the velocity is addressed, the problem will con-
tinue to occur. This may mean relocating the station to a less precarious geophysical region
or stabilizing the monument’s construction.

The majority of reference stations monitored by CGS illustrate behaviour similar to that
illustrated in Fig. 4. The reference stations are relatively stable over time, illustrating only
small variations from the published position and minimal data outages. It is impossible to
predict how a reference station will behave once installed and to prevent all data outages,
but by following best practices and implementing monitoring tools like the ones developed
by CGS, the needs of industry can be protected.

Data availability monitoring

In the best practices for GNSS service providers, it is recommended that service provid-
ers promptly advise subscribers when a station goes offline. It is also recommended that
service providers make available station uptime plots so that subscribers can verify refer-
ence station uptime for the duration of a survey. By service providers agreeing to transfer
daily GNSS data files to CGS, CGS can also determine when data outages occur over a longer
term, adding a further level of protection for users of the technology.

GNSS reference station status web site

A web page was developed that allows users of the technology to query the status of
GNSS reference stations in Canada (Fig. 5). Information regarding reference station stability
and data availability can be obtained. Information is available for reference stations of
organizations that willingly participate in an NRCan Compliance Program for High Accuracy,
GNSS Services, which is subsequently described.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.Bond et al.

107

Figure 1. Example of a station exhibiting a horizontal position discontinuity. Green circles indicate when
the calculated position agrees with the published position; red triangles indicate when they do not agree.
[Colour online.]

Figure 2. Example of a station exhibiting large seasonal variations in the vertical position. Green circles indicate
when the calculated position agrees with the published position; red triangles indicate when they do not agree.
[Colour online.]

Figure 3. Example of a station exhibiting an unexpected change in horizontal velocity. Green circles indicate
when the calculated position agrees with the published position; red triangles indicate when they do not agree.
[Colour online.]

Figure 4. Example of a “good” reference station, illustrating only small seasonal vertical variations and few
discontinuities in its data. Green circles indicate when the calculated position agrees with the published
position. [Colour online.]

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.108

Geomat. Vol. 72, 2018

Figure 5. NRCan web page displaying the status of GNSS Reference Stations in Canada (NRCan 2019). [Colour
online.]

Compliance program

In 2014, CGS began entering into formal agreements with interested service providers to
address the concerns of CCOG. CGS is a key member of CGRSC, having the largest resource
capacity to undertake such an endeavour. Through the agreement, NRCan agrees to the
following:

provide official CGS generated reference station coordinates, integrated into the CSRS;

1.
2. maintain a public record of these official coordinates; and
3. monitor and display publically the differences between the current (weekly) coordinates

and the official published coordinates.

At the same time, the service provider agrees to the following:

provide continuous access to reference station GNSS observation data using open Internet
protocols;

2. maintain station metadata in the format prescribed by the International GNSS Service’s

(IGS) site log (or other mutually agreed upon) format; and
adopt the official CGS supplied coordinates for their reference stations.

1.

3.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.Bond et al.

109

Once the provider confirms that they have adopted the official coordinates for their
reference stations, their GNSS reference station network is added to the CGS GNSS refer-
ence stations monitoring website. Each service provider’s network is shown separately on
a map of Canada. The web page displays each station in green, yellow, or red depending
on the station’s status (Fig. 6) using the following criteria:

(cid:129) A station’s status is considered “compliant” and displayed in green if both their GNSS data
have been made available to CGS for coordinate estimation and the latest weekly estimated
position propagated to epoch 2010 is within the agreed tolerance level from the official pub-
lished coordinate.

(cid:129) A station’s status is considered “unknown” and displayed in yellow if there are no coordinate
estimates in the previous two weekly solutions, which normally indicates there are no GNSS
data available for those weeks.

(cid:129) A station is considered “non-compliant” and displayed in red if either there are no coordinate
estimates in the previous three weekly solutions, or if the latest weekly coordinate estimate
at the reference epoch is outside the tolerance level.

Other considerations
Adoption into standards of practice by professional surveyors’ associations

Seeing that the Compliance Program protects the best interests of consumers of GNSS
corrections, professional surveyors’ associations are encouraged to update their standards
of practice to only allow GNSS corrections to be consumed from service providers who have
entered into a compliance agreement with CGS. This will acknowledge the voluntary efforts
of the service providers that are currently compliant and add incentive for others to
become compliant. It will also ensure that the services that surveyors rely upon are compat-
ible with the CSRS.

Public network integration

Although the original target of the Compliance Program was commercial GNSS service
providers, it is clear that there is benefit to including any organization offering high accu-
racy GNSS corrections services to another party. For example, the Compliance Program
can apply to public infrastructure operated by provinces, municipalities, or cities. Such an
effort will also help to ensure that surveyors relying upon services from this infrastructure
will obtain results compatible with the CSRS.

Real-time, Precise Point Positioning services

In recent years, Real-time, Precise Point Positioning services have emerged as an alterna-
tive approach to D-GNSS for high accuracy GNSS surveys. Although the GNSS reference sta-
tion infrastructure is hidden from the user with this approach, similar concerns for station
stability and data availability exist when generating GNSS corrections. There is therefore
also value to service providers of such services to have their reference stations monitored
through the Compliance Program.

Outlook

High accuracy, real-time position information caters to the rapidly growing global geo-
spatial technologies market, which is forecasted to hit $439.2 billion by 2020 (GeoBuiz
2018). Satellite positioning has become a worldwide utility. It is predicted that GNSS will en-
able over eight billion devices by 2020 (ESA 2017). High accuracy, real-time GNSS corrections
are automating the guidance of lawn mowers, haul trucks in mining, cargo ships, gantry
cranes, shuttle buses, and other vehicles. Although the focus of this discussion has pri-
marily been on applications in surveying, it is clear that the technology is becoming

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.110

Geomat. Vol. 72, 2018

Figure 6. Example GNSS Reference Station web page display. Compliant stations are displayed in green,
indicating that both their GNSS data have been made available to NRCan for coordinate estimation and the
latest weekly estimated position propagated to the reference epoch is within the agreed tolerance level from the
official published coordinate. Stations with an Unknown status are displayed in yellow when there are no
coordinate estimates in the previous two weekly solutions, which normally indicates that there are no GNSS data
available for those weeks. Non-compliant stations are displayed in red when either there are no coordinate
estimates in the previous three weekly solutions, or the latest weekly coordinate estimate at the reference epoch
is outside the tolerance level (NRCan 2019). [Colour online.]

embedded in our daily lives and the need for quality control and quality assurance in this
industry has never been greater. It is anticipated that the services offered by CGS will con-
tinue to evolve as new applications for the technology emerge and tighter requirements
for quality control are needed.

Conclusion

In response to concerns raised by CCOG regarding the provision of commercial GNSS
positioning services, a compliance agreement has been created. The agreement is volun-
tarily entered into with CGS by organizations providing access to high accuracy, GNSS cor-
rections. Through the agreement, CGS provides coordinates to the service provider for
their reference stations and monitors the stability and uptime of the stations. The service
provider provides CGS with access to the stations’ data, maintains an accurate site log,
and implements the CGS-generated coordinates for the site. Through this relationship,

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.Bond et al.

111

the integrity of positioning in Canada can be upheld by ensuring that service providers are
compatible with the CSRS. It is anticipated that the services offered by CGS will continue to
evolve as new applications for the technology emerge and tighter requirements for quality
control are required. The full benefits of this service will only be realized when professional
associations relying upon positioning services embrace the agreement in their standards of
practice.

Further reading

Guidelines for RTK/RTN GNSS Surveying in Canada available for download from NRCan website

at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/geomatics/geodetic-reference-systems/9056.

References
CGS. 2017. GNSS reference station installation and operation best practices. Canadian Geodetic Survey, Natural
Resources Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada. [Online]. Available from https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/
files/earthsciences/pdf/BestPractices_GNSS_Reference_Station.pdf [22 Apr. 2019].

ESA. 2017. GNSS Market Report 2017. European GNSS Agency, Prague, Czech Republic. [Online]. Available from

https://www.gsa.europa.eu/market/market-report [22 Apr. 2019].

GeoBuiz. 2018. GeoBuiz 2018 Report. Geospatial Industry Outlook and Readiness Index. [Online]. Available from

https://geobuiz.com/geobuiz-2018-report.html [22 Apr. 2019].

InsideGNSS. 2011. What is a virtual reference station and how does it work? InsideGNSS, 11 July. [Online]. Available

from http://insidegnss.com/what-is-a-virtual-reference-station-and-how-does-it-work/ [22 Apr. 2019].

Leick, A. 1990. GPS satellite surveying. John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, USA. 352 pp.
NRCan. 2019. RTK networks. Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), Ottawa, ON, Canada. [Online]. Available from

https://webapp.geod.nrcan.gc.ca/geod/data-donnees/rtk.php?locale=en [22 Apr. 2019].

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2018.72:101-111.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Santa Barbara (UCSB) on 09/03/19. For personal use only.