bs_bs_banner

Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00): 00–00

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land
Administration

Behnam Atazadeh, Mohsen Kalantari, Abbas Rajabifard,
Serene Ho and Tuan Ngo

University of Melbourne

Abstract
Current land administration systems mainly use 2D plans to deﬁne and secure ownership rights associated
with properties in high-rise buildings. These 2D plans may not effectively communicate and manage the
spatial complexity associated with multi-layered and stacked properties in such buildings; additionally,
multiple pages of plans (representing sections of the building) are required to represent all ownership boun-
daries. In response, land administration organizations have been investigating a 3D digital approach to
managing information about ownership rights in high-rise building structures. In this article, Building
Information Modeling (BIM) is proposed as a feasible approach for managing land and property informa-
tion in high-rise buildings. BIM provides a collaborative, digital and intelligent 3D data environment for
managing building information throughout the lifecycle of buildings. However, there is currently no
capacity in BIM for recording and representing information about ownership and boundaries of proper-
ties, which is core land administration information. Therefore, this article proposes an extension to the
BIM standard, which is implemented in a prototype BIM model of a complex building to showcase the
potential capability of using BIM for high-rise land administration and for modeling 3D ownership rights.

1 Introduction

Land administration systems lay the foundation for supporting the processes of determining,
recording and disseminating information about the tenure, value and use of land (Williamson
et al. 2010). These systems utilize cadastral data models to manage the spatial dimension of
rights, restrictions, and responsibilities (RRRs) associated with a piece of land or property
(Kalantari 2008). According to Enemark (2009, p. 1), “rights are normally concerned with
ownership and tenure whereas restrictions usually control use and activities on land. Responsi-
bilities relate more to a social, ethical commitment or attitude to environmental sustainability
and good husbandry”.

Every land administration system has its own cadastral data model for managing RRRs.
However, major cadastral data models that have been developed are the core cadastral data
model (Henssen 1995), ArcGIS Parcel Data Model (Meyer 2001), Legal Property Object
(Kalantari et al. 2008), US Cadastral Data Content Standard for the National Spatial Data
Infrastructure (FGDC 2008), ePlan model (ICSM 2010), and ISO 19152-LADM (ISO 2012b).
The differences between these cadastral data models mainly stem from the fact that each juris-
diction has its own requirements and expectations for managing RRR information and there-
fore implement these models variably. However, most cadastral data models have one thing in

Address for correspondence: Behnam Atazadeh, Department of Infrastructure Engineering, University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010
VIC, Australia. E-mail: batazadeh@student.unimelb.edu.au

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12199

2

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Figure 1 An example of future complex building structures (Arbre Blanc tower, Courtesy of the
Nicolas Laisn(cid:2)e* Architecte agency)

common: they rely on two-dimensional (2D) land parcels as the basis for recording and com-
municating RRR information (Kalantari 2008, McDougall 2006).

Over the last few decades, rapid urbanization has resulted in substantial pressure on devel-
opment and use of land in urban environments. The growth in complex and high-rise building
structures, such as the one shown in Figure 1, poses new challenges for current 2D-based land
administration systems. In order to address these challenges, land administration agencies are
now supporting research on three-dimensional (3D) digital management of land and property
information in high-rise buildings (Rajabifard et al. 2012).

3D digital management of land and property information in high-rise buildings requires
two main dimensions, namely legal and physical information (Aien et al. 2013, Jazayeri et al.
2014). Legal information refers to ownership information, boundaries of properties, common
properties and easements. Legal information is a prerequisite for managing RRRs in the build-
ing subdivision process and is associated with concept of legal spaces which include ﬁat (invisi-
ble) cadastral objects (Karabin 2014, Ying et al. 2014). Physical
information includes
geometric and semantic components. Geometric information refers to the shape and geometri-
cal aspects of building elements such as precise surveying data, coordinate systems and meas-
urements. Semantic information is deﬁned as physical descriptions about building elements
with examples being thickness and materials of building elements, roof data, and facade data
(Jazayeri et al. 2013). Physical information is related to the concept of physical spaces which
consist of bona ﬁde (visible) and real world spatial objects (Karabin 2014, Ying et al. 2014).

Recent advancements in techniques for 3D digital modeling have accelerated the produc-
tion of 3D physical models of buildings and other urban infrastructures worldwide (Becker
et al. 2013). The most comprehensive and intelligent 3D digital approach for managing

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

3

information during the lifecycle of complex and high-rise buildings is Building Information
Modeling (BIM) (Krygiel and Nies 2008). BIM is a rich and shared knowledge resource for
managing building information in three physical dimensions and enables multi-disciplinary col-
laboration among different stakeholders involved in the development of high-rise buildings
(Eastman et al. 2011). BIM provides many beneﬁts and resource savings during design, plan-
ning, and construction phases of a building (Azhar 2011, Forbes and Ahmed 2010). The open
data model for BIM is the Industry Foundation Classes (IFC), which facilitates interoperability
in the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) industry (Liebich 2013). IFC is an
object-oriented data model and it includes a comprehensive set of entities describing the geomet-
ric and semantic aspects of a building throughout its lifecycle. From a land administration per-
spective, IFC provides highly detailed physical information about buildings; however, it does
not specify legal information associated with ownership of properties inside those buildings.

The ability to encapsulate legal information in BIM can potentially address current chal-
lenges of high-rise land administration. Therefore, this article aims to investigate how IFC can
be extended to accommodate legal information as a ﬁrst step towards leveraging BIM for man-
aging land and property information in high-rise buildings.

2 Background

2.1 Current Challenges in High-rise Land Administration

In this section, City of Melbourne (CoM) has been selected as a case study area to contextualize
challenges currently experienced in high-rise land administration. It has been recently reported
that the density of buildings in the central area of the CoM is four times more than other major
cities around the world (Hodyl 2015). Figure 2 indicates that the majority of new apartment
dwellings in the CoM are in buildings with more than ﬁve stories built between 2006 and
2012; towers with more than 30 levels have had the fastest rate of increase (Birrel and Healy
2013).

The high-rise building subdivision process in the CoM includes ﬁve main phases: design,
planning, construction, registration and strata management (Ho et al. 2015). There are two

Figure 2 Rate of increase in apartment dwellings in City of Melbourne between 2006 and 2012,
adapted from Melbourne City Council (2012)

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

4

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

categories of technical challenges associated with recording, managing and communicating
ownership rights in this process: 1) challenges with subdivision plans prepared in the planning
phase to delineate boundaries of each individual ownership property; 2) challenges with cadas-
tral data models used in the registration phase. These challenges are discussed in detail in Sec-
tions 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, respectively.

2.1.1 Delineating boundaries in building subdivision plans

The ﬁrst technical challenge associated with delineating boundaries in building subdivision
plans is that the complex reality of ownership spaces with interweaving and irregular shapes
may not be effectively recorded and managed via 2D paper-based drawings or even 2D digital
plans. These subdivision plans also include complicated textual information which is difﬁcult
for non-specialized actors (with limited background on land administration) to understand
(Shojaei et al. 2013). Secondly, although 2D subdivision plans are functional, it might be costly
because multiple pages of 2D diagrams are used to describe RRR information associated with
superimposed properties in high-rise buildings (Jazayeri et al. 2014, Shojaei 2015). For
instance, over 50 pages of 2D plan drawings are required to represent the overall parcel as well
as individual property boundaries for a 40-storey apartment building in the CoM (Rajabifard
et al. 2013).

Although multiple 2D plans can represent ownership boundaries for properties restricted
to one level, utilizing these plans to communicate the ownership boundaries of properties
encompassing parts of several levels is a very difﬁcult task. This challenge is more severe than
the two previous ones. In Figure 3, a common property area, comprising the corridors, lobbies
and stairs of a building, is highlighted in red to provide an example of this challenge.

As shown in Figure 4, some property boundaries can be deﬁned by referencing a building’s
physical structures such as walls, windows or doors. The boundary lines are deﬁned using one
of three relationships with the physical structure: either the interior or exterior face, or the
median of the structure itself. This could potentially be misunderstood by a person without suf-
ﬁcient knowledge to interpret what the lines mean and who could easily misinterpret the
boundary and, hence, the RRR information.

Figure 3 An example of a complex property covering parts of four levels

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

5

Figure 4 Boundaries referencing physical structures: (a) Physical elements within building; and
(b) Plan depiction (LandVictoria 2012)

2.1.2 Challenges of cadastral data models used in registration phase

The ﬁrst issue with most cadastral data models is inefﬁcient communication of the spatial
dimension of 3D RRR. In these data models 2D land parcels usually provide the basic spatial
units to map ownership boundaries (Kalantari et al. 2008). This mode of communication is efﬁ-
cient for simpler buildings and developments but may not effectively communicate ownership
boundaries of properties inside complex and vertical urban developments such as high-rise
buildings (Aien et al. 2013). Currently, few cadastral data models support spatial representa-
tion of 3D RRR, and those that do, do so with limited capabilities. These include the Land
Administration Domain Model (LADM) (ISO 2012b) and the recently proposed 3D Cadastral

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

6

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Data Model (3DCDM) (Aien 2013). LADM uses a multi-surface approach, which is not as
strong as solid models for visualising 3D spatial objects (Pouliot et al. 2011, 2013). Solid mod-
els can facilitate visualization of 3D spatial objects (Jarroush and Even-Tzur 2004) and enable
volumetric computations and various 3D analyses required in land administration, such as 3D
visibility analysis of properties which is useful in valuation and taxation of properties (Navratil
and Fogliaroni 2014). In response to these limitations, 3DCDM utilizes both multi-surface and
solid models for modelling the geometry of 3D spatial objects (Aien 2013). However, the
geometry of spatial objects in 3DCDM is developed based on a GML proﬁle (ISO 2007), which
only supports boundary representation (B-Rep) and not other types of solid models such as
Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) – both CSG and B-Rep are relevant solid models for 3D
cadastral applications (Peres and Benhamu 2009). In addition, 3DCDM is a conceptual data
model and has not yet been implemented for modelling a high-rise building in a real case study
scenario.

The second issue is that most cadastral data models in use do not include sufﬁcient seman-
tic information about 3D properties. In high-rise buildings, boundaries of ownership spaces are
mainly deﬁned based on physical structures such as walls, doors, windows or ceilings. In
LADM, the “LA_BoundaryFace” entity, which is used to represent the boundary surfaces
(Lemmen et al. 2015), does not distinguish a wall boundary surface from a ceiling boundary
surface; neither does not specify whether the boundary is located in the interior, exterior or
median of the physical structure. Such ambiguity in deﬁning various boundaries can be resolved
by enriching cadastral data models with more semantic information. In addition, sufﬁcient
semantic information would eliminate spatial data integration issues and facilitate interoper-
ability of land administration systems with other urban systems (Aien et al. 2013).

The last issue is that cadastral data models mostly include legal entities and do not inter-
nally incorporate physical information. LADM supports connecting legal objects to their corre-
sponding physical structures via external links. This means that physical information is kept
and maintained in other databases with different data structures. In order to integrate two spa-
tial data sets from different sources, two main issues need to be resolved: transforming geomet-
ric information and harmonizing semantic information (Isikdag et al. 2008). Even though these
issues are addressed, there might be some inconsistencies in matching 3D legal objects with
their physical counterparts (Aien 2013, Stadler and Kolbe 2007). This is why cadastral data
models should be internally extended with physical entities. This was proposed by Aien (2013)
in 3DCDM, but the proposed integration of physical information with legal information is still
yet to be tested using real data and 3DCDM has not been implemented to represent physical
entities together with legal entities in an integrated data environment.

2.2 BIM

The widely-used acronym BIM refers to two distinct contexts: product and process. As a pro-
cess, BIM (Building Information Modelling) is an approach to create, manage, derive and share
building information among different actors involved in the building development process in
order to facilitate collaboration and communication among them (Eastman et al. 2011). Conse-
quently, the result of the BIM process is a BIM product (Building Information Model) which
includes 3D digital spatial information as well as semantic information about a building to sup-
port decision making throughout its lifecycle (Smith and Tardif 2009). The main characteristics
of a BIM product are object-oriented data structure, rich semantic and spatial information,
models spatial relationships between building elements and extensibility of its standard data
model (Isikdag et al. 2007).

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

7

Figure 5 Simpliﬁed conceptual data schema of the IFC standard, adapted from (ISO 2013)

Within the AEC industry, BIM has had a signiﬁcant impact on resolving issues associated
with 2D drawings or even 3D CAD models (Arayici et al. 2011, Mihindu and Arayici 2008).
Although BIM brings many beneﬁts for productivity within the AEC industry, some challenges
associated with adoption of BIM need to be addressed. The most important challenge is the
interoperability between different BIM tools since each tool has its own data format for manip-
ulating BIM data (Isikdag et al. 2007). This issue can be addressed by developing an open data
model which facilitates data transfer issues between different BIM tools (Eastman et al. 2011).
The international BuildingSMART organization therefore developed the IFC standard to facili-
tate interoperability between BIM tools (Liebich 2013).

2.2.1 IFC and relevant 3D spatial data models

IFC is an open BIM data model which includes physical entities describing the whole lifecycle
of buildings. As indicated in Figure 5, the IFC standard includes four main conceptual layers,
each of which has several subschemas (ISO 2013). The resource layer includes subschemas
which hold basic concepts and generic entities like time, date, geometry and cost (ISO 2013).
These entities are utilized in the higher layers to deﬁne value type of attributes. The core layer
contains the “Kernel” subschema and the other core extension subschemas (ISO 2013). The
“Kernel” subschema includes “IfcRoot” entity which is the most abstract entity in the IFC
standard. This subschema also includes general entities like object, property and relationship
which are the subclasses of “IfcRoot” entity. Interoperability layer includes the subschemas
which usually used for sharing and exchanging building information across AEC disciplines
(ISO 2013). For instance, “Shared Building Elements” subschema includes entities such as

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

8

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Figure 6 A high-rise building with 3D holes (The Elephant building located in Bangkok, Thailand)

“IfcWall”, “IfcDoor”, “IfcWindow”, “IfcSlab” and “IfcRoof”. In domain layer, the entities
related to a speciﬁc AEC discipline is deﬁned within each subschema. Currently, the domain
layer includes subschemas for nine AEC disciplines, namely building controls, plumbing and
ﬁre protection, structural elements, structural analysis, heating, ventilation, and air condition-
ing (HVAC), electrical, architecture, construction management, and facilities management
domains (ISO 2013).

Besides IFC, there are other open data models developed for exchanging 3D spatial infor-
mation. 3D spatial data models can be classiﬁed into three main categories: pure geometric
models, models with structured geometry but limited semantic information, and models com-
prising structured geometry as well as comprehensive semantics (Kolbe et al. 2009, Stadler and
Kolbe 2007). VRML (ISO 2004), X3D (ISO 2005), COLLADA (ISO 2012a) and KML (Wilson
2008) are examples of the ﬁrst category. The geometry of models in the second category can be
constructed through automatic interpretation of photogrammetric data or laser scan point
cloud (Kolbe et al. 2009). The constructed geometry can then be enriched with limited semantic
information. Examples of the last category are CityGML as well as IFC. CityGML standard is
an open 3D spatial data model for managing and visualizing urban objects in ﬁve Levels of
Detail (LoD) (Kolbe 2009).

Here, the reasons for selecting IFC rather than CityGML will be discussed. First, CityGML
only utilizes the B-Rep method for representing geometry of 3D objects (Kolbe 2012). How-
ever, IFC is more ﬂexible in modelling the geometry of 3D objects and it not only supports
B-rep but also other types of solid models such as CSG and swept solids (Gr€oger and Pl€umer
2012). B-rep more effectively supports 3D topology relationships in comparison with CSG
(Ekberg 2007); however, CSG is more ﬂexible in constructing complex spatial objects (Jarroush
and Even-Tzur 2004). For instance, CSG can efﬁciently model a spatial object with a hole
inside in comparison with B-rep. To illustrate this situation, a real world building with two
holes has been shown in Figure 6. These holes can be created in CSG by using one subtraction
operation for each hole, which is subtracting the whole building object from the shape of the
hole. In contrast, if the building model is constructed by the B-rep model, topological primitives
must be appropriately deﬁned, namely vertices, edges and faces, which is a time consuming and
difﬁcult task. The second reason is that although LoD4 of CityGML provides all the entities
needed to represent legal information, the data of LoD4 does not exist for most cities. Another
reason is that in the design phase of a high-rise subdivision process, land surveyors currently

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

9

use 2D CAD ﬁles, which they receive from architects, as the basis for creating subdivision plans
for high-rise buildings (Ho et al. 2015). It is highly likely that this workﬂow would continue,
i.e. if land surveyors are to create a 3D digital plan of subdivision for a building, they would
likely request a 3D digital model of the building from architects. Currently, given that 3D
building data in IFC format is very prevalent among architects (Shojaei 2015), it is perhaps
more feasible that in future land surveyors would receive 3D building models from architects in
IFC format, rather than CityGML, which they might use to create 3D digital building
subdivisions.

2.2.2 Related BIM work in land administration

One of the opportunities of bringing BIM into the spatial domain is to enable 3D registration
of ownership rights in apartments in a digital environment (Isikdag et al. 2011, Isikdag and
Zlatanova 2009) and facilitate land management in urban areas. This section reviews related
work investigating the role of BIM in land administration in order to distinguish the difference
between the work presented here and relevant research projects. Some of the earliest researches
on utilizing BIM for land administration was by Clemen and Gr€undig (2006), who indicated
the need to import different entity types into IFC ﬁles based on processed surveying measure-
ments and observations to manage indoor cadastral information. However, they did not pro-
vide the data model for managing cadastral information within the IFC schema. More recently,
El-Mekawy and €Ostman (2012, 2015) investigated the extension of Uniﬁed Building Models
(UBM) with four types of boundary surfaces to represent 3D properties for a hospital building
in Sweden. These boundary surfaces are “Building Elements Surfaces”, “Digging Surfaces”,
“Protecting Area Surfaces”, and “Real Estate Boundary Surfaces”. UBM is a reference data
model for bi-directional mapping between the IFC and CityGML standard (El-Mekawy 2010).
However, the extended cadastral UBM only represents how legal boundaries can be deﬁned
and does not model other main cadastral entities, which include information about interest
holders and legal documents. In a further study by El-Mekawy et al. (2014), the authors pro-
posed that enriching BIM with those four boundary surfaces could facilitate the interaction
between BIM and the 3D property domain but they did not showcase a BIM model enriched
with 3D property information. Finally, Isikdag et al. (2014) investigated linking 3D cadastral
models with 3D semantically enriched building models such as IFC, arguing that this could
potentially improve property valuation practices in different countries around the world.

Although the studies outlined above all show different degrees of leveraging BIM for sup-
porting land administration functions, none of the studies has explored how the IFC standard
can be extended to accommodate legal information, which is critical for the adoption of BIM
for land administration purposes. In the next section, this article proposes to extend this stand-
ard with cadastral entities.

3 BIM-based Approach for High-rise Land Administration

The IFC standard includes a rich amount of 3D physical entities but cannot yet accommodate
3D cadastral or legal entities. To do so requires ﬁrstly, an investigation into how this standard
manages physical information. Subsequently, in line with the logic of the data model, this arti-
cle proposes an extension to the standard to manage legal information. Finally, the proposed
extension is implemented in a prototype BIM model and the results are discussed in the context
of whether BIM can be feasibly adopted to support high-rise land administration.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

10

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Figure 7 Physical data entities in IFC data model

3.1 Modelling Physical Information in IFC

Physical entities in IFC are deﬁned as subclasses of the “IfcProduct” entity. Also,
it is
noticeable that all physical entities are aggregated into the “IfcProject” entity. This means
that “IfcProject” is the uppermost container for all information in an IFC exchange ﬁle
(Liebich 2009). In addition, this entity provides context information such as default mea-
surement units, the coordinate system, the accuracy of geometric information, and direc-
tion of true north with respect to the world coordinate system. There is only a single
instance of the “IfcProject” entity within each IFC exchange ﬁle. Figure 7 shows that IFC
models physical data entities in a hierarchical data structure. In this ﬁgure, the most
abstract entities are depicted in grey.

Two main entities have been deﬁned to model physical information in the IFC standard,
namely “IfcSpatialStructureElement” and “IfcBuildingElement”. The “IfcSpatialStructureElement”
is the superclass for concepts which deﬁne the spatial structure of an IFC standard ﬁle. This class
and its subclasses are shown in blue in Figure 7. These spatial elements are (Liebich 2009):

1. “IfcSite”: Any IFC project can include several sites which may be connected or discon-
nected from each other. This entity models supplementary information, such as land title

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

11

number and site address, about the site of the building and may represent the topogra-
phy of the terrain around the building site.

2. “IfcBuilding”: This entity includes supplementary information about the whole building
itself. This information includes the elevation of ground ﬂoor relative to the sea level,
the minimum elevation for the terrain at the perimeter of the building, and the address
of the building. Normally, there is no shape representation for the “IfcBuilding” since its
constituting sub-elements determine its shape (cf. Figure 8).

3. “IfcBuildingStorey”: This IFC class is deﬁned to provide information about the stories of
the building such as the elevation for each storey of the building. This entity also does
not have its own shape representation and its constituting components determine its
shape (cf. Figure 8).

4. “IfcSpace”: This entity is used for managing spaces as functional volumes. For indoor
spaces, “IfcSpace” is related to an “IfcBuildingStorey” entity. However, for outdoor
spaces, it can be directly related to an “IfcSite” entity. This entity can be considered as a
good candidate for managing 3D legal property objects. In the next subsection, how
deﬁning a subclass of “IfcSpace” entity can facilitate managing 3D legal properties will
be described .

The abstract class “IfcBuildingElement” is the superclass for all the physical building ele-
ments. This entity and its subclasses are represented in red in Figure 7. Physical building ele-
ments constitute the primary parts of
the buildings. These elements include windows
(IfcWindow), doors (IfcDoor), walls (IfcWall), slabs (IfcSlab), stairs (IfcStair), and similar com-
ponents (as shown in Figure 8).

The geometry of both spatial elements and physical building elements is inherited from
“IfcProduct” entity. This entity utilizes two main entities for modeling the geometry, namely
“IfcObjectPlacement” and “IfcProductRepresentation”. These entities are shown in orange in
Figure 7. The “IfcObjectPlacement” entity models the placement of a spatial or physical build-
ing element in the space. The placement of physical elements can be done through three
approaches: (1) Absolute placement relative to the world coordinate system; (2) Relative place-
ment to the other building elements; and (3) Constraint placement relative to the grid axes. The
“IfcProductRepresentation” entity is used for modeling the shape of spatial elements and physi-
cal building elements.

Figure 8 Physical information in the IFC standard, adapted from (Nagel 2014)

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

12

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Figure 9 Legal entities deﬁned within IFC schema

3.2 Extending IFC with Legal Information

In order to enrich the IFC data model with legal information, the necessary legal entities should
be identiﬁed. In this article, the main legal entities identiﬁed in Aien (2013) will be adopted as
those required for managing legal information. These entities include 3D legal property objects,
different types of legal documents, and interest holders. Each of these entities should be appro-
priately deﬁned within the IFC data model and this requires selecting proper IFC entities to
deﬁne relationships between them and legal entities. Figure 9 shows the legal entities deﬁned
within IFC schema. The proposed entities are depicted in yellow.

3.2.1 3D legal property objects in IFC

3D legal property objects have been envisaged as 3D volumes representing the legal spaces for
properties. Therefore, they can be considered a subclass of “IfcSpace” entity, inheriting all the

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

13

Table 1 Attributes of the ‘IfcLegalPropertyObject’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type

Multiplicity

RRR
LegalObjectUnit
LegalObjectClass Describes the class of the

The type of the legal object
The unit of the legal object

IfcRRREnum
1
IfcLegalObjectUnitEnum 1
IfcLegalObjectClassEnum 1

Volume
LotEntitlement

The volume of the legal object
The entitlement portion of the

IfcSolidMeasure
IfcText

LotLiability

The liability portion of the

IfcText

0..1
0..1

0..1

legal object

legal object

legal object

LandUse
LegalObjectState

The land use of the legal object
The state of the legal object

IfcLandUseEnum
0..1
IfcLegalObjectStateEnum 0..1

Table 2

Enumeration values for some attributes of the ‘IfcLegalPropertyObject’ entity

Value Type

Enumeration Values

IfcRRREnum
IfcLegalObjectUnitEnum
IfcLegalObjectClassEnum
IfcLandUseEnum
IfcLegalObjectStateEnum

Ownership, Common Ownership, Easement, Covenant, License
Administrative, Single, Multipart, Part
Lot, Easement, Common Property, Air Space
Residential, Commercial, Mixed Use
Adjoining, Affected, Created, Extinguished

general characteristics of space objects (cf. Figure 9). However, 3D legal property objects have
their own semantic information which differentiates them from the other types of space objects
in IFC. The “IfcLegalPropertyObject” entity represents all types of legal property objects such
as 3D ownership spaces for units, common properties and easements. Table 1 shows the spe-
ciﬁc attributes associated with “IfcLegalPropertyObject” entity. Some attributes have enumera-
tion values listed in Table 2.

3.2.2 Legal documents in IFC

Text documents, such as reports or spreadsheets, are not part of IFC ﬁles and their actual con-
tents are not modeled within IFC ﬁles. However, they can be referenced externally in IFC. In
the resource layer of the IFC schema, there is “External Reference Resource” subschema
which includes entities used for referencing external resources as well as managing meta-
information about
the
“IfcExternalInformation” entity is the superclass for managing meta-information about exter-
nal resources. The “IfcDocumentInformation” is a subclass of “IfcExternalInformation” entity
and it is utilized for managing meta-information about documents associated with an IFC ﬁle.
Therefore, meta-information about legal documents can be modelled by deﬁning new subclass
entities for the “IfcDocumentInformation” entity. There are ﬁve legal documents associated
with each 3D legal property object: title, parent title, property description, mortgage and

these resources (BuildingSMART 2013a). Within that schema,

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

1

1

1
1

1
1
1
1

14

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Table 3 Attributes of the ‘IfcPropertyTitle’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type

Multiplicity

Volume

Folio

The volume number of the title

IfcInteger

The folio number of the title

IfcInteger

SecurityNumber

The security number of the title

IfcText

0..1

CreationDate

The date and time when the title for

IfcDateTime

0..1

NumberOfParentTitle

The number of the parent title for

IfcInteger

0..1

for the property

for the property

for the property

property is produced

the property

Table 4 Attributes of the ‘IfcParentTitle’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type

Multiplicity

Volume
Folio

The volume number of the parent title
The folio number of the parent title

IfcInteger
IfcInteger

Table 5 Attributes of the ‘IfcPropertyDescription’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type

Multiplicity

LotNumber
PlanNumber
TypeOfPlan
DescribeInfo

The lot number in the title
The plan number in the title
The type of the plan
Provides additional information

about the lot in the title

IfcText
IfcText
IfcPlanTypeEnum
IfcText

caveat documents. Therefore,
“IfcParentTitle”, “IfcPropertyDescription”, “IfcMortgage”, and “IfcCaveat” (cf. Figure 9).

the entities for legal documents are “IfcPropertyTitle”,

“IfcPropertyTitle” entity includes meta-information about the title, deed or agreement
associated with each 3D legal property object. The attributes of the “IfcPropertyTitle” are
from the
“CreationDate”
listed
“IfcDocumentInformation” entity.

in Table

3. Only

inherited

attribute

the

is

Each title can refer to zero or more parent titles. The “IfcParentTitle” entity is used for
managing meta-information about parent titles. The attributes for this entity are listed in
Table 4.

The speciﬁcations for each 3D legal property object, such as the plan number or the plan
type, are managed through the “IfcPropertyDescription” entity (Cf. Table 5). The enumeration
values for the “IfcPlanTypeEnum” value type are “Title Plan”, “Strata Plan”, “Cluster Plan”,
“Subdivision Plan”, and “Consolidation Plan”.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

15

Table 6 Attributes of the ‘IfcMortgage’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type Multiplicity

MortgageReference The reference number for the mortgage
MortgageDate
BankName

The date for the mortgage
The name of the bank providing the mortgage IfcText

IfcText
1
IfcDateTime 1
1

Table 7 Attributes of the ‘IfcCaveat’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type

Multiplicity

CaveatReference
CaveatDate
Caveator

The reference number for the caveat
The date for the caveat
The name of the caveator

IfcText
IfcDateTime
IfcText

1
1
1

Table 8 Attributes of the ‘IfcInterestHolder’ entity

Attribute

Description

Value Type

Multiplicity

0..1
Name
Share
0..1
InterestHolderType The type of the interest holder IfcInterestHolderTypeEnum 0..1

Interest holder’s name
The share of ownership

IfcLable
IfcInteger

Each title can be associated with zero or more mortgages. Mortgages are registered as
restrictions on the title. The “IfcMortgage” entity is used for providing information about the
mortgages (cf. Table 6).

Similar to mortgages, each title can be associated with caveats which are registered as
restrictions on the title. Information about the caveats is managed through “IfcCaveat” entity
(cf. Table 7).

3.2.3 Interest holders in IFC

Interest holders are the actors who have a particular interest (RRR) in 3D legal properties.
There are various types of interest holders such as a person, an organization or a group. In
order to deﬁne an entity for interest holders, this entity should be considered as a subclass of
the “IfcActor” entity in the IFC schema because “IfcActor” represents all stakeholders and
human agents involved in the development cycle of an IFC project (BuildingSMART 2013b)
(cf. Figure 9). The speciﬁc attributes for the “IfcInterestHolder” entity are provided in Table 8.
The enumeration values for the “IfcInterestHolderTypeEnum” value type are “Person”,
“Group”, “Organization”, “Association”, “Tribe” and “Family”.

3.3 Implementation of a Prototype Model

In order to realize the extended IFC data model, a prototype BIM model for four ﬂoors of a
complex high-rise building located in the City of Melbourne was developed and visualized. The

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

16

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Figure 10 The approach for preparing and visualizing the prototype BIM model

data of the prototype model was prepared in Autodesk’s Revit software environment. Firstly,
the geometry of all the essential physical structures were created, namely interior walls, exterior
walls, sliding doors, single-ﬂush doors, awning windows, ﬁxed windows, stairs and slabs. After
that, the created physical building elements were enriched with semantic information such as
thickness, material and so on. 3D legal property objects were then created to show the legal sta-
tus of private property units as well as common properties in the building. Legal property
objects were modelled using the “Room” capability in Revit and their boundaries were
delineated based on 2D subdivision plans. Revit software does not have the capability to show
both physical elements and legal property objects simultaneously; therefore the created BIM
model was exported as an IFC ﬁle from Revit, then published as a web service using the open
source BIMServer1 software (Beetz et al. 2010). The open source JavaScript client
“BIMviews2” was used to connect to the BIMServer to visualize both physical objects as well
as legal spaces. BIMviews software utilizes WebGL technology, which is a powerful, platform
independent and plug-in free approach for representing 3D objects on the web browsers. This
process is summarized in Figure 10.

Figure 11 shows the prototype with 3D legal property objects visualized together with
physical building elements. 3D legal property objects are represented in 3D volumes. Each
volume shows the ownership space for individual property units and common properties.
As an example, one legal property object is highlighted and associated legal information is
shown in the “Properties” section. The prototype showcases that how semantic informa-
tion associated with 3D legal property objects can be managed and accessed within BIM
environment. For instance, the user can easily ﬁnd information about the title, such as its
number and volume, as well as the owner of the property. Additionally, it is indicated
that BIM can facilitate representation of the spatial complexity of 3D legal property
objects within high-rise buildings. Such representation of 3D legal property objects in a 3D
digital environment of BIM can help non-technical people, such as owners, to easily under-
stand the delimitation of 3D properties.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

17

Figure 11 Managing the legal information in the developed prototype BIM model

Figure 12 shows how the prototype model can represent different types of boundaries. In
Figure 12a, only the legal spaces for two 3D properties have been shown and it is difﬁcult to
ﬁnd the position of the boundary between 3D properties. This means that pure legal representa-
tion of 3D properties itself cannot adequately communicate the spatial extent of ownership
spaces within high-rise buildings. However, incorporating physical information facilitates com-
munication of ownership boundaries. As indicated in Figure 12b, the boundaries of both green
and grey property units touch the interior faces of the wall. This means that both owners do
not have any right to or responsibility for the wall and it belongs to the common property area
of the building. Figure 12c shows that the boundary between property units is a median one
and each owner has a right or responsibility on the half of wall on their side. Figure 12d repre-
sents that the boundary touches the exterior face of the wall and the owner of the green prop-
erty unit has the full rights to or responsibilities for the wall. These examples illustrate that
physical structures can be utilized as auxiliary elements to resolve ambiguity in understanding
various ownership boundaries within high-rise buildings.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

18

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Figure 12 Signiﬁcance of physical information in communicating different ownership boundaries:
The type of boundary cannot be determined by only legal spaces (a); interior wall boundary (b);
middle wall boundary (c); and exterior wall boundary (d)

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

19

4 Discussion

The proposed BIM-based approach for high-rise land administration would bring the following
advantages:

1.

It would provide improved visualization of ownership boundaries of multi-layered and
stacked properties in high-rise buildings.

2. The IFC standard supports entities for modelling both CSG and B-rep solid models,
which means that 3D building models constructed through both CSG and B-rep
approaches can be stored within the IFC schema. This means that
the proposed
approach can address current limitations of cadastral data models in modelling complex
spatial objects. It can effectively support representation of complex building structures.
In addition, the volume of 3D properties can be computed through utilizing solid mod-
els. The computed volume can be useful in valuation and taxation of 3D properties.
3. There are entities within the IFC standard that support some topological relationships
between
the
space
“IfcRelSpaceBoundary” relationship is relevant since it deﬁnes the connectivity relation-
ship between an ownership space and its bounding building elements (cf. Figure 7). For
instance, by using this relationship, it would be possible to extract which walls or slabs
provide the 3D boundaries of an apartment unit.

elements. Among

elements

building

entities,

these

and

4. The IFC standard has the capacity to support a rich amount of semantic information.
Encoding 3D legal property objects into this standard would provide sufﬁcient semantic
information about 3D properties, which can facilitate interoperability of land adminis-
tration systems with other urban systems.

5. The prototype showcased the potential capability of the proposed extension in represent-
ing and managing legal information with physical information internally in an integrated
data environment. Integration of legal information and physical information within the
same dataset would prevent data integration issues and inconsistencies.

On the other hand, incorporating legal information into BIM also provides beneﬁts for the
BIM domain since legal information plays an important role throughout the lifecycle of build-
ings. For instance, legally deﬁned entitlements and liabilities of properties are fundamental to
building and property management: lot entitlement is a number expressing the extent of each
private property owner’s interest in any common property; lot liability is a number expressing
the proportion of the administrative and general expenses that each private property owner is
obliged to pay. In the ongoing management of the common properties of a building, entitlements
and liabilities provide the legal basis for dealing with disputes and dissatisfaction. Therefore, the
proposed extension emphasizes that enrichment of the IFC standard with legal information
would increase the functionality of BIM in terms of managing the lifecycle of buildings.

The proposed extension and realization of connected 3D digital data representing both
legal and physical attributes of land and property is likely to facilitate collaboration between
the land administration industry and the land development and facilities management indus-
tries. The proposed extension can potentially advance current cadastral data environments
from one based on 2D digital data to a 3D digital and interactive environment. In turn, this
information is likely to lead to better management and governance of the built environment.

The major barriers for using the proposed extension are likely to be institutional ones. The
current institutional arrangements for managing ownership rights in high-rise buildings are
highly entrenched in using 2D subdivision plans. Ho et al. (2015) identiﬁed a range of
“invisible” constraints, namely regulatory, normative and cultural-cognitive, which are

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

20

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

impeding the move towards 3D-enabled land administration practices and would arguably
apply to the adoption of the proposed IFC extension in existing procedures. There are also
some technical bottlenecks associated with implementing BIM for high-rise land administra-
tion. Firstly, the IFC data model includes a large number of physical data elements and some of
them, such as plumbing or electrical data elements, are not important in the context of land
administration. Therefore, 3D building models in IFC format should be generalized to elimi-
nate unnecessary physical information. Another issue is that initial BIM data provided by archi-
tects is the design model, which may differ from the as-built model. The as-built model
provides ownership boundaries in the real-world. This requires that the design model should be
veriﬁed by land surveyor after construction of the building.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this article, it was elucidated that 2D building subdivision plans as well as cadastral data
models encounter some challenges in managing superimposed and complex ownership proper-
ties in high-rise building structures. A BIM-based approach was proposed as a possible candi-
date to potentially address challenges in management and communication of ownership rights
in high-rise buildings. BIM provides highly detailed and valuable physical information; how-
ever, legal information is currently not supported and stored in BIM. The current data model
of the IFC standard was therefore investigated to decipher an appropriate approach for incor-
porating legal information into this standard. The proposed extension of the IFC standard dem-
onstrated how legal
information could be logically embedded in this standard and the
implemented prototype model showcased the potential beneﬁts of BIM for high-rise land
administration. Conversely, encapsulating legal information into the IFC standard could poten-
tially support those stakeholders who are already using BIM by providing richer information
about ownership and RRR which is fundamental to ongoing management of buildings.

The proposed extension was based on the data elements identiﬁed from the literature
review. Future work could include further development by incorporating additional data ele-
ments required in current practice for high-rise land administration; empirical testing of the
prototype by users in terms of its efﬁciency, usability and reliability; developing a generaliza-
tion approach to automatically extract required physical information from IFC ﬁles; utilizing
the Nine-Intersection model, as proposed by Egenhofer and Herring (1990), to model the topo-
logical relationships, which are not deﬁned within IFC schema, between building elements and
ownership spaces; and evaluation of the proposed extension, particularly by those involved
with building subdivision processes as well as experts involved in the development of the IFC
standard.

1 BIMServer can be downloaded from http://bimserver.org/
2 More information about BIMviews can be found at http://bimvie.ws/

Notes

References

Aien A 2013 3D Cadastral Data Modelling. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Melbourne
Aien A, Kalantari M, Rajabifard A, Williamson I, and Wallace J 2013 Towards integration of 3D legal and physi-

cal objects in cadastral data models. Land Use Policy 35: 140–54

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

21

Arayici Y, Coates P, Koskela L, Kagioglou M, Usher C, and O’Reilly K 2011 Technology adoption in the BIM

implementation for lean architectural practice. Automation in Construction 20: 189–95

Azhar S 2011 Building information modeling (BIM): Trends, beneﬁts, risks, and challenges for the AEC industry.

Leadership and Management in Engineering 11: 241–52

Becker T, Nagel C, and Kolbe T 2013 Semantic 3D modeling of multi-utility networks in cities for analysis and
3D visualization. In Pouliot J, Daniel S, Hubert F, and Zamyadi A (eds) Progress and New Trends in 3D
Geoinformation Sciences. Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Cartography and Geoinformation: 41–62
Beetz J, de Laat R, van Berlo L, and van den Helm P 2010 Towards an open building information model server.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Design and Decision Support Systems in Architec-
ture and Urban Planning, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

Birrell B and Healy E 2013 Melbourne’s High Rise Apartment Boom. Melbourne, Victoria, Monash University

Centre for Population and Urban Research Report

BuildingSMART 2013a IFC External Reference Resource Subschema. WWW document, http://www.buildings-

marttech.org/ifc/IFC4/ﬁnal/html/schema/ifcexternalreferenceresource/content.htm

BuildingSMART 2013b IFC Actor Entity. WWW document, http://www.buildingsmarttech.org/ifc/IFC4/ﬁnal/

html/schema/ifckernel/lexical/ifcactor.htm

Clemen C and Gr€undig L 2006 The Industry Foundation Classes (IFC): Ready for indoor cadastre? In Proceed-

ings of the Twenty-third International FIG Congress, Munich, Germany

Eastman C, Teicholz P, Sacks R, and Liston K 2011 BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building Information Modeling

for Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers and Contractors. New York, John Wiley and Sons

Ekberg F 2007 An approach for Representing Complex 3D Objects in GIS Applied to 3D Properties. Unpublished

MS Thesis, University of G€avle

El-Mekawy M 2010 Integrating BIM and GIS for 3D City Modelling: The Case of IFC and CityGML. Unpub-

lished MS Thesis, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

El-Mekawy M and €Ostman A 2012 Feasibility of building information models for 3D cadastre in uniﬁed city

models. International Journal of E-Planning Research 1: 35–58

El-Mekawy M and €Ostman A 2015 A uniﬁed building model for a real 3D cadastral system. In Silva C N (ed)
Emerging Issues, Challenges, and Opportunities in Urban E-Planning. Hershey, PA, IGI Global: 252–79
El-Mekawy M, Paasch J, and Paulsson J 2014 Integration of 3D cadastre, 3D property formation and BIM in Sweden.

In Proceedings of Fourth International Workshop on 3D Cadastres, Dubai, United Arab Emirates: 17-34

Egenhofer M J and Herring J 1990 Categorizing Binary Topological Relations between Regions, Lines, and Points

in Geographic Databases. Bangor, ME, University of Maine Technical Report

Enemark S 2009 Managing Rights, Restrictions and Responsibilities in Land. In Proceedings of Gthe SDI-11

World Conference, Rotterdam, the Netherlands

FGDC 2008 Cadastral Data Content Standard for the National Spatial Data Infrastructure – Version 1.4. Wash-

ington, DC, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Forbes L H and Ahmed S M 2010 Modern Construction: Lean Project Delivery and Integrated Practices. Boca

Gr€oger G and Pl€umer L 2012 CityGML: Interoperable semantic 3D city models. ISPRS Journal of Photogramme-

Raton, FL, CRC Press

try and Remote Sensing 71: 12–33

Henssen J 1995 Basic principles of the main cadastral systems in the world. In Proceedings of the One Day Semi-
nar held during the Annual Meeting of Commission 7, Cadastre and Rural Land Management, of the Inter-
national Federation of Surveyors (FIG), Delft, the Netherlands

Ho S, Rajabifard A, and Kalantari M 2015 ‘Invisible’ constraints on 3D innovation in land administration: A

case study on the city of Melbourne. Land Use Policy 42: 412225

Hodyl L 2015 To Investigate Planning Policies that Deliver Positive Social Outcomes in Hyper-dense, High-rise Resi-
dential Environments (2014 Churchill Fellow). Canberra, ACT, Winston Churchill Memorial Trust of Australia
ICSM 2010 ePlan Model. WWW document, http://icsmeplan.govspace.gov.au/ﬁles/2010/11/ICSM-ePlan-Model-

v1.0.pdf

Isikdag U, Aouad G, Underwood J, and Wu S 2007 Building information models: A review on storage and

exchange mechanisms. In Proceedings of Twenty-fourth CIB W78 Conference, Maribor, Slovenia

Isikdag U, Horhammer M, Zlatanova S, Kathmann R, and Van Oosterom P J M 2014 Semantically rich 3D
building and cadastral models for valuation. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Federation of Sur-
veyors (FIG) Workshop on 3D Cadastres, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Isikdag U, Underwood J, and Aouad G 2008 An investigation into the applicability of building information mod-
els in geospatial environment in support of site selection and ﬁre response management processes. Advanced
Engineering Informatics 22: 504–19

Isikdag U and Zlatanova S 2009 A SWOT analysis on the implementation of building information models within
the geospatial environment. In Krek A, Rumor M, Zlatanova S, and Fendel E M (eds) Urban and Regional
Data Management. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 15–30

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

22

B Atazadeh, M Kalantari, A Rajabifard, S Ho and T Ngo

Isikdag U, Zlatanova S, and Underwood J 2011 An opportunity analysis on the future role of BIMs in urban data
management. In Zlatanova S, Ledoux H, Fendel E M, Rumor M (eds) Urban and Regional Data Manage-
ment. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 25–36

ISO 2004 Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) ISO/IEC 14772-1:1997 and ISO/IEC 14772-2:2004.

Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization

ISO 2005 ISO/IEC FCD 19775: 1r1:200x Information Technology – Computer Graphics, Image Processing and
Environmental Representation – Extensible 3D(X3D) – Part 1, Architecture and Base Components.
Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization

ISO 2007 ISO19136: Geographic information – Geography Markup Language (GML). Geneva, Switzerland,

International Organization for Standardization

ISO 2012a ISO/PAS17506: Industrial Automation Systems and Integration – COLLADA Digital Asset Schema
Speciﬁcation for 3D Visualization of Industrial Data. Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for
Standardization

ISO 2012b ISO19152: Geographic Information – Land administration Domain Model (LADM). Geneva, Swit-

zerland, International Organization for Standardization

ISO 2013 ISO16739: Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) for Data Sharing in the Construction and Facility Man-

agement Industries. Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization

Jarroush J and Even-Tzur G 2004 Constructive solid geometry as the basis of 3D future cadastre. In Proceedings

of the FIG Working Week, Athens, Greece

Jazayeri I, Rajabifard A, and Kalantari M 2013 3D data sourcing for land and property information: A geometric
and semantic perspective. In Proceedings of GSDI 14 World Conference – Spatial Enablement in Support of
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Jazayeri I, Rajabifard A, and Kalantari M 2014 A geometric and semantic evaluation of 3D data sourcing meth-

ods for land and property information. Land Use Policy 36: 219–30

Kalantari M 2008 Cadastral Data Modelling: A Tool for e-Land Administration. Unpublished PhD Dissertation,

Kalantari M, Rajabifard A, Wallace J, and Williamson I 2008 Spatially referenced legal property objects. Land

University of Melbourne

Use Policy 25: 173–81

Karabin M 2014 A concept of a model approach to the 3D cadastre in Poland: Technical and Legal Aspects. In

Proceedings of Fourth International FIG 3D Cadastre Workshop, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Kolbe T H 2009 Representing and exchanging 3D city models with CityGML. In Lee J and Zlatanova S (eds) 3D
Geo-information Sciences. Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography: 15–31
Kolbe T H 2012 BIM, CityGML, and related standardization. In Proceedings of the 2012 Digital Landscape

Kolbe T, Nagel C, and Stadler A 2009 CityGML–OGC Standard for Photogrammetry. In Proceedings of Photo-

Architecture Conference, Bernburg/Dessau, Germany

grammetric Week, Stuttgart, Germany: 265–77

Krygiel E and Nies B 2008 Green BIM: Successful Sustainable Design with Building Information Modeling. New

York, John Wiley and Sons

LandVictoria 2012 Building Subdivision Guidelines. Melbourne, WWW document, http://www.dtpli.vic.gov.

au/__data/assets/word_doc/0018/218124/Building-subdivision-guidelines-update-delwp.doc

Lemmen C, van Oosterom P, and Bennett R 2015 The land administration domain model. Land Use Policy 37: in

press

Liebich T 2009 IFC 2x Edition 3: Model Implementation Guide (Version 2.0). High Wycombe, UK, AEC3 Ltd
Liebich T 2013 IFC4: The New BuildingSMART Standard. High Wycombe, UK, AEC3 Ltd
McDougall K 2006 A Local-State Government Spatial Data Sharing Partnership Model to Facilitate SDI Develop-

ment. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Melbourne

Melbourne City Council 2012 Dwelling Stock and Diversity in the City of Melbourne. WWW document, http://
www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/BuildingandPlanning/FutureGrowth/Documents/Dwelling_Stock_Diversity_
City_of_Melbourne.pdf

Meyer N V 2001 ArcGIS Land Parcel Data Model. Redlands, CA, Esri Press
Mihindu S and Arayici Y 2008 Digital construction through BIM systems will drive the re-engineering of construction
business practices. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Visualisation, London, UK: 29-34
Navratil G and Fogliaroni P 2014 Visibility Analysis in a 3D Cadastre. In Proceedings of Fourth International

FIG Workshop on 3D Cadastres, Dubai, United Arab Emirates: 183-96

Peres N and Benhamu M 2009 3D Cadastre: Geometry, topology and other technical considerations. In Proceed-

ings of the FIG Working Week, Eilat, Israel: 1-14

Pouliot J, Vasseur M, and Boubehrezh A 2011 Spatial representation of condominium/co-ownership: comparison
of Quebec and French cadastral system based on LADM speciﬁcations. In Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national Workshop on 3D Cadastres, Delft, the Netherlands: 271–90

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Building Information Modelling for High-rise Land Administration

23

Pouliot J, Vasseur M, and Boubehrezh A 2013 How the ISO 19152 Land Administration Domain Model per-
forms in the comparison of cadastral systems: A case study of condominium/co-ownership in Quebec (Can-
ada) and Alsace Moselle (France). Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 40: 68–78

Rajabifard A, Kalantari M, and Williamson I P 2012 Land and property information in 3D. In Proceedings of the

FIG Working Week, Rome, Italy

Rajabifard A, Williamson I, Marwick B, Kalantari M, Ho S, Shojaei D, Atazadeh B, Amirebrahimi S and
Jamshidi A 2013 3D-cadastre, a multifaceted challenge. In Proceedings of the Twenty-ﬁrth FIG Interna-
tional Congress, Engaging the Challenges, Enhancing the Relevance, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Shojaei D 2015 3D Cadastral Visualisation: Understanding Users’ Requirements. Unpublished PhD Dissertation,

University of Melbourne

Shojaei D, Kalantari M, Bishop I D, Rajabifard A, and Aien A 2013 Visualization requirements for 3D cadastral

systems. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 41: 39–54

Smith D K and Tardif M 2009 Building Information Modeling: A Strategic Implementation Guide for Architects,

Engineers, Constructors, and Real Estate Asset Managers. New York, John Wiley and Sons

Stadler A, and Kolbe T H 2007 Spatio-semantic coherence in the integration of 3D city models. In Proceedings of

the Fifth International Symposium on Spatial Data Quality, Enschede, the Netherlands

Williamson I P, Enemark S, Wallace J, and Rajabifard A 2010 Land Administration for Sustainable Develop-

Wilson T 2008 OGC Implementation Speciﬁcation 07-147r2: OGC KML. Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Con-

ment. Redlands, CA, Esri Press

sortium Technical Report

Ying S, Guo R, Li L, Van Oosterom P, and Stoter J 2015 Construction of 3D Volumetric Objects for a 3D Cadas-

tral System. Transactions in GIS 19: 758–79

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

