T m c t i o n s  in GfS,  IW6, v d .   I ,  m.  I, p. 3 

Economic,  legal,  and public policy issues influencing the 
creation,  accessibility, and use of GIS databases 

DAVID W WIND 

Ordnance S w c y ,  Romscy Road, Southampton, SOlG 4GU, UK. 

cmail: d r h i n d @ o r d n a n c c - s u g o ~ . ~  

Introduction 

In  the  1980s, one concept  of  what  constituted  a  GIS 
(Tomliaron  er  al  1976) was  widely  accepted.  But  the 
growch of desk-top mapping,  the encapsulation of whole 
GIS  as just  one  capability within  major  operational  I T  
systems, the growing use of sdeaed GIS functionality as 
pan  of  readily  available  spradshcets,  and  the  rapid 
development  of  multi-media  (in  which  multiple  data 
types  have  become  commonplace)  has  blurred  the 
situation. This paper assumes a catholic definition of GIS 
simply  as  any  system  capable  of  coping  with  geo- 
referenced  data  and p e ~ t t h g  some form of gmspatial 
selection or query. The terminology used here also departs 
the  past:  in  Europe 
from 
‘Geographic Information’ is  widely used,  notably by  the 
European Commission in  such  projects as their GI2000 
initiative. In  rhe  USA,  the  term  ‘spatial’ data  has  been 
widely used  bur  is  confusing  in  certain other countries 
where  it  is  widely  regarded  as  pertaining  to  extra- 
terrestrial matters. For this reason, ‘geospad data’ is used 
here to refer to the totality of gco-referenced  data to avoid 
ambiguiry. This  usage  is  becoming  more  common  (see, 
for instance. FGDC  1995 and Nanson et al  1995). 

that  commonplace 

in 

The  creation  and  maintenance  of  gcospatial 
databases manikdy requires substantial expenditure. As 
one example from Britain, the gross cost of converting all 
Ordnance  Survey’s  ( 0 s )  230000 paper  maps  into 
computer  form,  of  updating  them  continuously,  of 
improving their quality  in  various ways.  and of  making 
the data and maps available to customers over the period 
from 1973 to 1995 has amounted to about f l  billion ( 0 s  
1995). Such  apcnditurrs  require careful  justification, 
especially since many arc on-going. Thcy also  ensure that 
the legal  aspects of databases assume great importance: a 
necessary and self-evident condition for the creation and 
continuation  of commercial databases is that they can be 
protmed from thdr then duplication  and  unauthorized 
sale.  If  some  such  protmion  is  not  available, databases 
will  not  normally  be  created  within  rhc  private  sector. 
Various  legal devices exist  to  provide this protection.  Set 
against  this  protection  of  the  creator,  however,  is  a 
codicring requirement to provide for the public  interest 
and to  avoid perpetual  monopolies: for this reason, most 
legal devices arc time-limited. 

The  majority  of  existing  geospatial  databases, 
however,  have  originated  from within  the  public,  rather 
than  the  private,  sector.  Until  about  1992, many 

1361-1682/96/0001-0003 

0 P a r o n  Profcrriorul Lrniccd  1996 

3 

D W Rhind 

governments  wcre extremely  relaxed  about widespread 
dissemination of material collecred in furrhervlce of thcir 
remit.  Indeed,  as a  IMKU  of  principle  the  US  federal 
government  sd wishes  to  dksuninate  such data at the 
cost  of  copying;  P u r i ~  (1994)  has  pointed  out  the 
mutually reinforcing roles of the Freedom of Information 
Acc  (FOIA) and the Office of Managcmcnt and Budgcr’s 
Circular A-130  (the  latter  now having  been  codified as 
section 3506(d) of T h e  Paperwork Rtduccion An  1995) 
in  fostering  this  approach.  Yet  many  other  national 
governments  now  see  their ‘information  holdings’ as a 
commodity to be aploited for the generation of revenue 
and consequent reduction of taxes. This approach is  also, 
wherever possible, prcdicated on the user - rather than the 
taxpayer - paying  for  the  creation  of  the  material  and 
hence  having  an incentive  to  prioritize  thcir spending. 
This trend towards charpg is a nunif;rtltion of a world- 
wide move  t o d  reinventing government as a leaner, 
more efficient, and more c u s t o m e r - f a d  entity. Rhind 
(1995a,  1995b)  has  summarized  the  advantages  and 
disadvantages of the different charging policies. 

These factors combine  with the effimc of  rapidly 
technology.  Commercial  organizations 
changing 
in  d i n g  GIS  is  p d y  
recognize  that  their  SUCCQS 
dependent  on the  availability of  ‘core’ dam  sets.  As a 
result, many of them arc actively urging governments to 
continue  to  provide information  ‘free’. The commercial 
the  information  in  ways 
organizations  then  pa+ 
which differentiate it  from  the offerings of rivals.  Other 
commercial firms (including some in the USA) argue that 
they would happily pay licence fees to government if that 
would  ensure  the  information  was  of more consistent 
quality and updated regularly. Any such changes in public 
such  an  approach,  for  ocunplc, 
policy  have  aadc-o&: 
might  reduce  the  number  of  competitors  and  militate 
against small firms. 

whilst the general principles m y  be  dear  in  any 
one national  contar,  a  multiplicity  of  factors  r y p i d y  
determines  what  happens  to  any  one database  and  any 
one user of it.  For instance, where commercial firms have 
created a  database,  either  & novo or  by  ad% 
value  to 
that  obtained  from governments,  they generally  protect 
their  IPR  fiercely in  the  courts - but  not invariably, as 
demonsuatcd  by  the  Environmental  Systems  Research 
Institurci (ESRI) free dissemination ofArcVicwI over the 
Internet  once  ArcVcw2  was  available. The  growth  of 
broad  band  information  highways  and  the  rapid 
globalization of  database  creation,  including the  use  of 
‘offshore’ enterpriies to create copies of databases illegal in 
their  home  territories,  facilitates  dissemination  of 
picrures, maps, text, and sound in digital form irrespective 
of whether  the supplier  is  acting  legally or illegally. The 
status of  legal  protection  for  geospatial  databases  in 
particular differs in  different  countries and  is  constantly 

4 

mutating. Meanwhile, different branchu  of government 
often  have  difkrent operational  roles and  ak different 
of ‘thcir’ dam Finally,  the 
vim  about the -on 
rights of the  individual over personal dw. such  as their 
address, telephone number, and perhaps even  the  image 
of thcir house may well become a hctor.  AU this ensures 
that  the  next  decade  will  see many  legal  acrions.  This 
paper sets  out  to highLght some  of the  issues  in  what  is 
the  most  significant  factor 
ever  more  obviously 
controlling the growth of GIS in all its manifestations. 

Fadon influencing the need for protedion 
of  geospatial information 

The primary factors  XM to  be  the  agendas of  the  key 
‘players’,  the  incidence  or  likelihood  of  theft  of 
information, and the transiency of the data. 

T h e  agendas of the key ‘players’ 
A simplistic summary of the agendas of governments and 
of commercial suppliers of  gcospatial data  is  set  out  in 
Table 1. It is obvious that different bodies will have very 
diffcrcnr  agendas  and  thcse may  diffcr  markcdly  in  the 
shorc  and  long  t m .  For instance, the  overwhdming 
importance  of  cash  flow to  many  businesses  is  obvious. 
Equally,  many  government  bodies  have  to  cope  with  a 
multiplicity  of  ccnuaUfedcral  government  policy 
initiatives which  may  indicate different actions: Table  2 
shows  some  of  the  myriad 
influences  upon  one 
government information  supplier. 

Commercial imperatives are generally obvious. The 
situation  in  government  is  much  more c o m p l a   Since 
government  has  typically  been  the  main  source  of 
geospatial data  to  date and  since there have  becn recent 
major changes in many governments world-wide, further 
consideration of the public sector agenda is essential. 

involved 

Global changes  in goYmtmrntpoliry  nlcvant to 
geopatial data provirion 
in  a 
Most  governments  are  currently 
comprehensive rc-evaluation of the role of the state and of 
its public s e m t s .  Together with  its equivalents in  Ncw 
Zealand,  Canada,  France,  and  other  countries,  for 
instance,  the  present  UK  government  regards  t h e  
improvement  of  public  scrvices and  reduction  of  their 
cost  as major  elements of  its  policy.  To  put  these  into 
effect,  citizens  and  government  departments  alike  are 
regarded  as  the  customen  of  service  providers.  These 
customers  have  a  right  to  good  service.  To  foster  the 
reduction  of  costs  and  improve  quality,  the  UK 
government has  enforced the testing of services  provided 
by the Civil Service against the best that the private sector 
can offer. Failure to succeed in such competition generally 
leads  to  the  service being  contracted  out  to  the  private 

Table 1 .  Some agendas of players in  the information provision ‘gunc’. 

sector. T h e  policy applies across  almost  all  of  the state’s 
remit. Though the UK government has not spelled out in 
detail what the services are that only the state can provide 
- unlike  the  situation  in  the  USA  - the presumption  is 
that  very  few  activities  must  necessarily  be  carried  out 
dircdy by  the state. 

Currently, however, many services arc still provided 
by the sure itself. To achieve better management of these 
services and greater value for taxpayers’ money, some 65% 
of all civil  servants formerly working in UK government 
departments have been transferred to about 100 Executive 
Agencies in the period since  1989. E v c n d y  some 80% 
of  civil  servants are  cxpmed to  work  in  such  agencies. 
Each  agency  has  to  create  a  corporate  plan  and  meet 
annual  targets  set  by  Ministers  covering  financial 
measures,  operational  efficiency and  quality  of  service. 
The  targets  and  results  arc  widely  publicized  and 
performance  pay  (and  even  jobs)  depend  upon  their 
achievement. Recruitment  of  non-civil servants as chief 
executives  has  occurred in  nearly half of  these  agencies; 
open  recruitment  through  advertising  is  the  norm.  To 
help  it  achieve  its  targets,  each  agency  has  somewhat 
greater freedoms than hitherto in the public sector though 
thcsc  freedoms  do  not  indude  raising  loan  capital  or 
competing  aggressively  with  the  private  sector.  Finally, 

each agency is revicwcd rhree years after its inception and 
every five years  t h d c r  to see whether its function still 
needs to  be met and, if so,  whether it cannot  be  met by 
the  private  sector.  In  many  respects  the  creation  and 
operation  of  t h e   agencies  have  anticipated  acrions 
recommended in  Osbornc and  Gacbler‘s  1992 book  on 
‘kinventing govcmmcnr‘. 

that 

It  will  be  obvious 

such  operating 
circumstances have significant effects upon the actions of 
the  Executive Agencies. Thus the policy on  information 
collection  and  supply  becomes  largdy  a  local  matter, 
dictated  substantially  but  indirectly  by  the  other 
performance urgers set by Ministers. 

Ordnance Survey as an examp& of  an agm9 prouiding 
geospatial &a 
Ministerial targets have ensured that 0 s  has been subject 
to the need to recover an increasing proportion of its cost 
of  operations  since  1966  and  this  has  necessitated 
operating  in  an  increasingly  business-like  manner. 
Ordnance  Survey’s  progress  in 
implcmencing  this 
approach  is  illustrated in  Figure  1. All  these figures are 
calculated 6n a commercial basis (i.e. they indude interest 
on capital, accommodation charges, etc.).  That 0 s ’  is nor 
the  only  national  mapping  organization  rquired  to 

5 

D w Rhind 

Dote 

Figurc 1.  Pcrccnuge cost recovery by Ordnance Survcy G t u r  
Briuin  since 1979. 

counma), crated  new  products.  such as  the  national 
address  database,  and  introduced  new  scrviccs, such as 
'print on demand' mapping. The number of customers for 
digital  data  has 
spectacularly.  Moreover, 
independent  surveys show that USCK  are generally p l d  
with the  service  they  receive  (see  Fw 3). In  short, 
charging for geospatial infoxmation can be a major succcss 
story - contrary to what is often assumed in the USA 

risen 

Tablc 2. Thc 'codmil' of laws, policies, conventions, and 
p d c n a  which influence rhc aniLbiity and price of 
gcospatial data for Ordnance Survey in  Briain. 

generate substantial fractions of  its  cost  of operations  is 
shown  in  Figure  2.  A  valuable  summary  of the  similar 
pressures  faring geological  surveys world-wide  has  been 
given  by  Earon  (1995). Pressures  to  raise  cost  rccovery 
have  become commonplace in  the macornlogical  offices 
and  hydrographic offices  around  the world and  the  UK 
Cenud Statistical Office has p d y  increased its revenues 
since 1983, following the example set by Australia. 

be 

ht such  a  focus on 

the 

to  the  q a F r  does nor 

reduce choice,  product  range,  or user  satisfaction.  Over 
the last few years, 0 s  has completed the digiral coverage 
of  Britain  (some  years  ahcad  of  the situation  in other 

6 

Figure 2. Cornpaison of cost rccovery lcvds achieved by 
diffcrcnr national mappingagcncies in  1992-94. 

Source: A n n d  ' c p ~ r n  to CERCO and pmod dircupiom Virh k q  n& 
Norc Nou Zcllrnd md  tknmvlt figuro indudc land qisuarion  d h o  

~~~"~d~~~:,~~~~.~~~~~o,d 
b~ d

~

indiclrivc d c r  rhrn  nnaIy mmpurblc. 

d

 

Emomic, i m p / ,  and public policy issues in GIS 

T h e  benefits to  the  nation  of  these  0 s  activities 

have  been as follows: 

early completion and hence availability of the digital 
databases 
widespread use of these  databases by commerce, in 
certain sectors of c c n d  government, and in d 
sectors of local government 
minimal cost to the taxpayer. T h e  tocal government 
apenditure of taxpayers’ funds on 0 s  is now only 
about one quarter of that in  1979180 
fostering of the GIS industry. 0 s  has well over 20 
Value Added IL-sellers of its products 

One caveat is  necessary,  h o m e r :  even though the 
cost recovery approach has been made to work by  0 s  for 
over  18 years, it will not necessarily be ideal for all other 
data-providing  organizations. Apm  from  management 
skills  required,  the  characteristics  of  the  data  to  be 
provided, and the political, legal, and cultural contat in 
which  the  organization  functions  will  affccr  what  i 
possible. 

Incidence of theft 
Theft is  a well-known  phenomenon  in  the  information 
fidd and  is  partly  related  to  the  perceived  value  of  the 
particular  information  and  partly  to  the  certainty  of 
dctmion and retribution. T h e  next section describes the 
complexity of assigning value to  geospatial information. 
Rhind 
(1995a)  has  summarized  the  geographical 
variations claimed  to  exist  in  the  incidence of  sofrware 
theft; its incidence has prompted  software suppliers to act 
together to minimize it. 

It seems inevitable that identical problems arc likely 
to occur in global trading of other information. Ordnance 
Survey,  for  instance,  has  recently  intercepted  Russian 
copies  of  its  flagship  product  (the  1:SOOOO  scale 
Landranger  maps) and legal action has been  taken by the 

the  informarion 

Icelandic national mapping agency against East European 
firms working for West German publishers. This has both 
resource  and  technical  implications:  d u r l y  all  “ding 
organizations have to devise ways of monitoring illegal use 
of  their  assets  and,  wherever  possible,  they  have  to 
to  establish  beyond 
‘fingerprint’ 
argument irs provenance. This is particularly troublesome 
for geospatial data  because the  ‘fingerprinting’ has  to  be 
invariant under  transformation and other changes which 
arc readily made and preferably it has also  to be  invisible 
to all but  the originator. Some progress has been made in 
this respect. On an institutional front, a group of UK data 
producers has founded the Data Federation, a component 
body of the  Foundation @nst  S o h e  Theft, to  take 
action against chose involved in data theft. 

Transiency of the information 
Some geospatial data are, for most purposes, much  more 
ephemeral  than  others - thus the  bulk  of  the  value  of 
meteorological data is  much more transient  than  that  of 
geology. The m o d  for information providers - if they arc 
only  information providers - is  that  hey  should  build 
transiency  into  their  data  wherever  they  can  persuade 
customers to accept it, and impose a leasing arrangement, 
rather  than  one-off  sales.  Curiously, there  is  increasing 
evidence that data of supposed short commercial ‘half-life’ 
may well have longer term commercial value;  Landmark, 
a start-up firm in the UK, seems to have found a valuable 
market  for  historical  information  on sites  which  might 
possibly  be  contaminated  through previous  industrial 
land  uses. Overall,  though,  it  is  dur that  we  presently 
transiency  of 
understand 
information,  though  organizations such as Microsoft are 
betting  heavily  on the  value  of  historical  material  in 
purchasing  libraries  like  the  Bettmann  Archive  of 
photographs. 

little  of  the  ephemeral 

Periodic refkbishment  of a stock item, such  as the 

7 

'loctlizltion'  of  the  information  in  Microsoft's  Encam 
CD-ROM, is a good secondary strategy to reenergize the 
information  mukct.  A  more  comprehensive  approach 
wherc  profissional  mvkm  an concuncd  is  to  build 
services and supply of solutions on top of the supply of 
information. 

The economics of geospatial information 

The theory 
It is usually argued that information is, in general.  a public 
good.  Consumption  by  one  person  does  not  ltfccr its 
availability to others  and - unlike defence - it is possible 
to opt either to take it or not.  Love  (1995), howcvcr, has 
pointed  out  that, in practice, the accessibility and cost of 
the systems which permit w of information do influence 
whether or not it is  in practice a public good. He argued 
that  information  is  b a r  defined  as a  quasi-public  good 
since it may be non-rival but its consumption can also be 
excluded  and  controlled.  He also  points  out  that  the 
pecunivy  value  of  i n f o d o n  may  wcll  d q x n d   on 
rcsrricting its  adability wfiilst  its  social  value  may  be 
enhanced  by  precisely  the  opposite  approach.  The 
approach  to  economics  which  is  adopted  partially 
detcnnina the end resuit. 

Taking geospatial information as a simple sub-sct of 
information generally (Arrow 1986), it seems to have two 
possible values: 

for consumption. Individuals will decide how much 
value they assign to it based upon their valuation of 
pleasure, time saving, or some other metric and thcir 
awareness of the uses of the potential benefits of the 
information 
as a fictor of production,  where the information is 
used as part of a good or service. The end-user of that 
good or service will make hislhcr decision on the uses 
to which it can be put, irs adabiility to others (more 
means less in thii use), and the o s e  of 
substitutability. One obvious example is the use of 
geospatial information in making planning decisions 
in government and in commerce. It follows that some 
decisions will place a high aonomic value on the 
information whilst others will give it a high social 
value. Measuring these d u e s  is rather difficult so 
discussion thus far has typically bcen  at a wy high 
conceptual Ievd 

One  chamxcristic  of  the  market  for  geosparial 
information  is  its  immaturity  compared to  that  of other 
types  of information - and ~ c ~ a i n l y  
than  that  for other 
commodities. The reasons for t h i s  include the following: 

the expectations of many customers is that geospad 
information  is a free good as well as a public good 

a 

since it has bccn provided historically by govcrnmcnts 
to taxpayers 
certain dcuiled geospatial data has some of the 
chu?ceuircics of a "Ed monopoly - for instance, 
once a complete set of information is available for 
cvcry house in the country and the majority of the 
cosrs arc sunk ones, it is unlikely that duplication of 
information  source can be made competitive or is in 
the national  inrucst 
the dative lack of transiency of much traditional 
gmspatial data which is analogous to 'reference 
books' 
the skills of the user and the available sofoKuc 
determine how much can be done with the data 
the value wia by many orders of magnitude to 
different users, and knowledge of this on the part of 
the information producers is limited at present 
the extent of hkagc with other data which is 
possible 
the poor levd of quality specification of most existing 
products and the rclativcly untested legal W i i t y  
issues involved in their use 

AU  of this is  largely of thcomical interat to  those 
commercial data  suppliers working  mainly in  the  short 
term.  They  can  (and  ofccn  must)  treat  the  provision  of 
information  as  much  more  akin to  that  of  any  other 
commodity  than  can  government.  The  information 
provider in  the  latter  sector is  not  only  constrained by 
rules outlawing  adusive deals,  diffcrcntial pricing on a 
major  scale,  etc.,  hdshe  is  arpmed to  W a v e  to  the 
highest  standards  of  equity,  probity,  propriety,  and 
consistency. There arc awesome penalties for not doing so 
- such u public dissection on T V  by the Public Accounts 
Committee in  Britain  and the  associated cow  of  senior 
management time. 

In the USA, such considerations do not loom large 
for  the  fedcral  government  where  recovery  of  corn  is 
restricted  to  the  corn  of  preparing  the  material  for 
dissemination  and  for  the  dissemination  itsclf.  Pcrrirt 
(1994)  has  powerfully argued the  case on  constirutional 
and  technical  grounds  for  dissemination  of  fedenl 
government information at the cost of copying and urged 
its extension to state and loul governments. It should be 
noted h o m e r  that economic theory is nor easily applied 
to  the  w e  of  geospatid  information  in  a  world  of  the 
Internet.  An  obvious  practical  problem  is  the  likdy 
violation  of  an  assumption  of  no  arbirragc.  But  other 
problems arise from the high fmed costs and low variable 
costs typical of creating and running a geospatial database. 
Them is la&  of realistic differentiaton between marginal 
cost pricing and  dissemination cost  pricing b r  standard 
products  - only  if  there  is  d o r i i g  of  products  drawn 
to  suit  individual 
from  a  database  and  fashioned 

customers  is  there  anydung  approaching  the  n o d  
manuhcnrring model on which such economic theory is 
b a d .  This is  important  because long run rnarginal cost 
pricing is  theoretidy the  bcsr  allocative  procedure,  at 
least  in a perfecdy competitive market (which assumes  a 
large  number  of  producers  and  consumers,  all  with 
complete information  and  no distortions of  the  market 
such as through subsidies).  Dissemination cost pricing, as 
pracciscd  by  the  US  federal  government,  is  generally 
regarded  by  economists  as  a  s u b - o p t i d   allocation 
procedure  unless there are  substantial mcrnal  benefits. 
This situation  may  be  true  for  gcospatial  data  but 
measuring such  benefits  is  likely to  bc very  difficult  at 
best. Moreover, on-going subsidy of thii type is also very 
likely  to  lead  to  enforced  cutting of  resources  for  data 
collmion:  the  result  may  well  be  a  reduction  of  the 
quality and quantity of ncw data bcing made available. An 
am consideration  is  that  only  if  the  users  contribute 

Table 3. The process of adding d u e  to information according 
to Perria ( 1994). 

Economic, hq& 

and pfdk p d i q  issues in GIs 

something significant to  the  costs of purchase can we be 
sure that priorities arc properly bcing wessed and set. AU 
of the above relates only to allocarivc efficiency. The most 
effective  theoretical  and  practical  approach  to  foster 
productive  efficiencies  is  to  ensure  users  have  some 
leverage through their purchasing power. 

A  hal  consideration  relates  to  how  benefits  arc 
measured in  government. Them  is  an  apparent  paradox 
between the ‘atomizltion’ of p w n m c n t  into units whose 
pcrformancc  is  individually  assessed  on  financial  and 
other  criteria  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  ‘gestalt’ 
economic benefits which arc anacipated from ubiquitous 
use of the information superhighway (POST 1995). It has 
been argued that the latter can only flourish if individual 
government  organizations  make  available 
their 
information in  a readily accessed,  consistently priced  (or 
free),  and  frequently updated  way. Yet  the  costs  to  the 
‘ a t o d  units’ inherent in  producing  nebulous  overall 
benefits seem almost certain to complicate the meeting of 
individual  puformance  targets.  The  likely  outcome  in 
these circumstances is self-evident. 

Soura: Perrim H H  1994 Gmmercialimdon of govunmmt 
infomudon: Comparisons bctwccn rhe h r o p a n  Union and the United 
States. Inunur Research 4 (2): 7-23. 

Methods of adding value 
The least  heralded  ycx  most  fundamental  advantage of 

9 

D W Rhhd 

through 

GIS may wcll tum out to bc its capacity to add nluc (sec, 
for instulce, N v w n  er  al  1995). Various w a ~  of adding 
value  to  gcospad  data  have  bccn  identified.  Thex 
indudc linkagc of multiplc data sets  to expand the range 
of applications which may be envLcagcd and improving the 
intersection  of 
quality  of  data 
independently 
identify 
inconsistencies (such as the use of Royal Mail data and 0s 
m ; l p S   tO  produce  thC M U O d  a d k  WUC). Yet  the 
options  are  much  wider  than  that. Table  3  shows  how 
Perrirt  (1994)  summvized  the  cypa of added  value 
operations  for  information  as a  whole.  Though  this  is 
highly suggestive, no quivalent fypology for adding value 
to gcospatial data is known to the author of this paper. 

logical 
databases 

compiled 

to 

The legal framework 

The  law  impinges  on  the  collection,  description, 
conditions  of  sale,  protection,  and  liability  aspects  of 
gcospatial data.  h atcnsive  discussion of  some  of  the 
issua  involved,  at  least  in  an  American  contat,  is 
provided by Onsrud (1995). 

Defined in  the widest sense, at least eight rypes of 
law  influence the  marketing  of  information  world-wide 
(set, for instance, Perrin 1994). Some of these,  of course, 
do not apply in any one c o u n v ,  some of them apply only 
to the public scctor. The cypa of law arc: 

statutory or Ministerial authority for public agencies 
to involve in trading activities 
public accecs laws such as Freedom of Information 
Aw 
human rights laws 
fair trading (or anti-trust) laws 
copyright and other intellectual property rights laws 
data protection laws 
public procurement laws or rcgulatitisns 
I& 

liability laws 

For the  present  purposes, however.  only  IPR l a w  
embracing patents,  copyright,  and  trade  setrcui  will bc 
considered, with  particular  emphasis  on  copyright  law. 
There are  great international variations in IPR laws. The 
1992  French  IPR  legislation,  for  instance, makes  no 
distinction between the status (private or public scctor) of 
an  organization  holding  ownership  of  these  rights. 
Prormion  is  given  against  reproduction.  representation, 
adaptadon,  and  transformation  by  all  means  and  on  all 
media though h, ideas, and  1;1w  data are not covered. 
The  protection  covers  LWO  areas  (Grelot  1995):  moral 
protection  and  material  protection.  Under  the  material 
protection provision, the author can control who uses the 
information,  the  uses  to  which  it  can be  put,  and  the 
duration of the licence. 

So  far  as copyright law is  concerned, there is  also 

10 

presently no standard approach in Europe. National laws 
appear to be arcrcmely heterogeneous (Hugcnhola 1994) 
both as to  the  scope of  the  protected  (or restricted)  acts 
and to  the scope and content of the limitations. In some 
rcspecu the UK law is at one extreme: w h h  all counuia 
have limitations on reproduction of e l m n i c  information 
s t o d  in ‘permanent’ form (for oumplc, on magnetic  or 
optical disks), only the UK law defines nznsienr elmronic 
reproduction as a rrsaicrai act (for aamplc, display on a 
screcn). In  the  USA,  fed&  government is  not generally 
able  to  assert  copyright  &ts 
though  there arc  some 
potentially  important  exceptions  to  thii  rule.  The  US 
commercial sector asscrtc its copyright on most ocwions. 
In general t e r m s ,   it is  dear that on-line  access and 
distribution  do  not  fit  wry  wcll  with  many  existing 
national copyright laws. According to Hugcnholu (1994), 
this is particularly so in Gumany where them is no g c n d  
right  of  communication  to  the  public  and  other rghts 
(such as distribution and broadcasting rights)  are narrowly 
defined. Samuclson  (1994a), at last by  impliarion, says 
that  the  authors  of the  rcporc  on  I n t e l l d  Property 
R&ts  on  the  National  Information  Infnsvucrurc were 
seeking  to  bring  about  a  restriction in  US  copyright  of 
digial information  similar  to that on transmission which 
occurs  in  the  British  legislation  through +g 
the 
vicwing  of  information  transferred  from hard disk  to 
screcn  to  be  a  resrricrcd  act.  Such m c r s  arc  highly 
controversial. 

As  in  ocher  aspeccs  of  IPR  law,  the  ‘Fair use’ 
conditions  of  copyrighted  material  vary  widely  from 
country to  country. Whit the  UK  has suong copyright 
proteccion for  creators  andor publishers,  that  country’s 
law  also  has  a  ‘breathtaking  set  of  library  privileges’ 
(Hugenhola  1994:  36) so  far as limitations  to  statutory 
restrictions are concerned Samuelson (1 994b) states that 
four  h o r s  generally determine  wherher c o m  find  for 
‘Fir uc’ in the USA: whether the copying is for personal, 
non-commerd  use;  the  MKWC of  the copynghtcd work 
(whether  entertainment  or  factual  works); 
the 
‘substantiality of the taking (judgcd qualitatively as w d  as 
quantitatively); and  the  harm or potential  harm  to  the 
market  for  the  copyrighted  work arising from  the  non- 
approved  copying.  T h e  cases  reviewed  by  S a m d s o n  
(1994b) appear to suggrst that  the US  c o w s  will find  in 
favour  of  the  author or  publisher  in  any  circumstance 
where the copying is done within a commercial operadon. 
It is difficult  to see why the same outcome will not occur 
where such copying is  carried out in a government body, 
especially  one  which  buys  in  goods and  services. These 
issua  are not  academic: a specific aample where the use 
of fair  trading provisions form  the  basis  for an on-going 
court case  is  the  action  berween  the  Belgian  national 
mapping agency (IGN) and the commercial organization, 
TdeAtlaS. 

One  imporrant  issue in  most laws is  wherhcr  the 
material in question can be considered ‘faas’ or otherwise. 
The correct interpretation  is  ofien not obvious, especially 
to those inexpen in geospaual dam Au small s a l e  maps 
contain  an  clement  of  artistry  because  of 
the 
gcnullization  which  is  inherent  in  them  and  in  any 
dqyatly encoded  version.  The  same  is  m e  for  certain 
dasses of large scale maps where these have been compiled 
by  methods  which  demanded  much  skill  and  some 
interpretation. O n  the other hand, maps created through 
automated  interpretation  of  automatically  collected 
imagery seem  unlikdy  to be protccrcd accpt under  the 
European Union’s Database Directive - and even then the 
a t e n t  of  protecrion  is  unclear if updates  are  integrated 
with  the original data.  The level of protection enjoyed by 
multi-media  databases thus seems  likely  to  vary greatly 
according to various criteria and be subject to debate and 
possible litigation. 

Finally,  the  increasing  frequency  of  data  theft 
ensures  that  publishers  will  have  to  devise  a  standard 
armoury  of  techniques  to  investigate  and  ‘reverse 
engineer’ images to assert and prove provenance. Though 
encryption  of  dara  may  be  valuable,  thii  typically only 
protects the  ‘first time  read’ of the dara rather than  any 
subsequent  onward  transmission.  Perritt  (1994),  in 
adcnowlcdgng the problem of illegal copying, argues that 
the solurion is for a pricing regime which charges modest 
mounts  via  credit  c u d   use  for  small  amounts  of  tm 
retrieved  from  a database using search keys (for example, 
as in  Lexus),  with down-loading  of  the  whole  database 
king impossibly apensive. The on-going developments 
in encryption of credit card details may make the Internet 
and other ncnvorks ‘safe’ in  the future but at present this 
seuns  rather  risky.  It  is  also  not  dar how  chis can be 
u-anslared into the geospatial domain: there is often huge 
value  to be obtained  by  a pass rhrough the database and 
finding  a  null  or  minimal  response  (for  example,  of 
competing businesses in a d&ed  area). 

The question of privacy 
Thus far it has been assumed that the only d u e  which can 
be  assigned to information is a commercial one measured 
in  money or  some surrogate for it. This is  dearly nor so. 
information  may  have  military 
Some  geosparial 
significance.  In  addition,  some  informarion  has  an 
intrinsic  personal  d u e  to  individuals  dared  to  their 
privacy - at least in those countries where  the concept is 
in  law.  Branscomb  (1994)  has described  the 
rcco@ 
considerable difficulties  in  assessing ownership and d u e  
of  much  information  commonly  regarded  as  personal 
(such as home telephone number and postal address). She 
has  shown  how  commercializarion of  this  ‘geosparial 
information’  is  now  being  anempted.  What  constitutes 
personal information in the geospatial multi-media field? - 

€cvmmic,  legai, and pubk $icy 

issves in GIs 

a  picnrrc  of  my  h o w ?  - a  plan  of  my  land? (not  in 
Sweden). It XMS 
inevitable that grar national variations 
will occur in  how such persod inbnnuion  is  qardcd 
under law. 

Conclusions 

Based upon recent aperience and what has already been 
described above, the following may be concluded: 

the laws of IPR arc lagging behind  the developing 
technology 
commercial and, increasingly, public sector 
organizations can not afford to neglect the IPR in 
their assets acept in limited circumsrances 
there is g r a t  variation in national IPR laws, yet 
geospatial (and other) information  busincsses are 
becoming global or at least regional. This s e e m s  
cerrain to lead to major investments in legal experrise 
on the part of information uaden and to a growing 
number of court cases 
to achieve good protection  requires sophisticated 
analytical tools, especially in the case of gmspatial 
information 
a major factor in minimizing the problem of illegal 
use of information is a cultural one - to persuade 
individuals that information can be a commodiry 
owned by someone else and unauthorizcd  use of it is 
tantamount  to theft 
the present chlnctcr of the Internet is likely to be 
unamardve  for use by commercial organizations and 
by  government agencies which arc trading, other than 
as a free advertising facility (though the advent of  The 
‘on-line’ Tima is an aception) 
the economics of different ways  of treating geosparial 
data are complex, with the results depending very 
much upon the input assumptions 
practical apcriencc shows that g m s p d  information 
uading can be successful and generate national 
ben&  but it is probably impossible to prove that the 
greatest benefits arise &om one parricular pricing 
policy or another 
in the last resort, most decisions on how to deal with 
information trading will be &en  on the basis of local 
business benefit and hence a very varied partem will 

OCCUT 

Acknowledgements 

Some porrions of this paper first appeared in papers given 
to  the  National  Center  of  Geographic  Information  and 
Analysis’ conference on ‘Law and  information  policy for 
spatial databases’ in Tempe  in  1994, at  the ‘Cambridge 
Conference  for  National  Mapping  Organisarions’  in 

D w Rhind 

Gmbridge  in  1995,  and  at  the  ‘Fmt  International 
Conference for Spatial Multi-media  and V d  Rcaliry’ 
in  Lisbon  in  1995.  The  organken  are  thanked  for 
permission to use extram from thcsc earlier papers. 

References 

Arrow K 1986 T h e  d u e  of and demand for information. 
In McGuire C B and Radncr R (ah) Decirion and 
organisation.  Minneapolis,  Universiry  of 
Minneapolis Press 

Branscomb A W 1994 Who owns infinnution? New Yo&, 

Basic Books 

Eaton  G  1995 Evolution of the ghbal j o b  markct in  the 
earth  Kirnces.  Invited address  to  the  American 
Geophysical  Union,  July  1995  in  Baltimore. 
Accessible  on  the  Internet  at  http:l/www.usgs. 
gov/whars-nrw/global-jobs. hunl 

FGDC 1995 Nationulgeoqarial datafmmnvork and also 
The national geopatial data ckringhme. Rctton, 
Federal  Geographic  Data  Committee,  US 
Geological Survey 

Grelor  J-P  1995 Activities  and  h d i n g  of  the  French 
National  Mapping  Organisation.  Proceedings 
Cambridge  Confcfcnce for  National  Mapping 
Organktions,  1995.  Southampton, Ordnance 
survey 

Hugenholu P B 1994 Analysis of law relating to copyright 
and  electronic  delivery  in  Europe.  Proceedings 
Confcencc  of  European  Commission;  Legal 
Advisory Board on  ‘Legal q e c t s  of  multimcdk and 
GIs’, Lisbon,  I994 33-8 

Love J  1995 Pricing govunmcnt information. In  Agenda 
infinnution 
f i r   accm:  public  accm  to  Fe&ml 
Information 
the 
f o r   sustainabili~ through 
Supcrhighway.  Washington  DC,  Bauman 
Foundation: 117-40 

Nanson  B,  Smith  N  S and  Davey  A  1995 Wha is  the 
British National Gtospatial Database? Proceedings 
Association f i r  Goppphic Infinnation Confnmce, 
Birmingham, 1995. AGI 

Onsrud H (cd) 1995 LawandinfirrmMonpohyfirzpatial 
databum.  Orono,  National  Center 
Geographic Infbrmation and Analysis: 82-93 

for 

0 s  1 995 The j q  back’ on going dgid An assessment of tbe 
ylllrrr  to  the  nurion  of  tbe  adoption 
O m h u e  
Survry  of  digital  mapping.  Southampton, 
O h c c  Survey Information Paper  1011995 

Osborne D and Gvbler T 1992 Rcinwntinggmmmnmt. 

€&ding, Addison Wesley 

Pcma  H  H 1994  Commerckliucion  of  government 
information: Comparisons k e n  chc European 
Union  and  the  United States. Intmvt Rnramh 4 
(2): 7-23 

POST 1995 InjGnnution superhighways:  tbe  UK Nutional 
Infinmiion Injkumutum.  London, Pariiamentary 
OEcc  for  Science  and  Tdnology,  House of 
CollUIlOnS 

Rhind D W 1992 Dam accccss, charging and copyright and 
thcir implicarions b r  GIs. Intcrnatiod Journul of 
Grographical Infirmarion $stem  6 (1): 13-30 

Rhind  D  W  19951 Spatial  databases  and  information 
policy:  a  British  puspectivc. In Onsrud  H (ed) 
1995  Law  and  infirmation  policy  for  zputial 
databaa. Orono. National Center for Geographic 
Infbrmvion and Analysis 

Rhiid D W 1995 b Making a busincss out of government’s 
spatial data. Proceedngs Gmbndge C o n j k u e f i r  
Nationul  Mapping  Organizations.  Southampton, 
ordnance survey 

Sarnuelson P 19941 The NII Intdccrual Properry %OK. 

Comm.  Association for  Computing  Machinrry 
32 (12): 21-7 

SarnuJson  P  1994b  Copyright‘s  faL use docnine  and 
digital  &ca.  Comm  Association  f i r   Computing 
Machinny 32 (12): 21-7 

Tomlinson  R  F,  cakins H W  and  Marble  D  F  1976 
Computer handhg of geographical data. Nazuml 
Resourcrs  Rcsrorrh  Snvicn  13.  Paris.  UNESCO 
Press 

12 

