The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

The President’s Address to the British Cartographic
Society 2017

Alexander J. Kent

To cite this article: Alexander J. Kent (2017) The President’s Address to the British Cartographic
Society 2017, The Cartographic Journal, 54:4, 370-374, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1430115

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1430115

Published online: 19 Feb 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 16

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 54 No. 4
© The British Cartographic Society 2018

pp. 370–374

November 2017

V I E W P O I N T

The President’s Address to the British Cartographic
Society 2017

Alexander J. Kent

Email: alexander.kent@canterbury.ac.uk

This address was given at the 54th Annual General Meeting of
the Society, which was held at the McCrum Lecture Theatre,
Corpus Christi College, University of Cambridge on Tuesday
14th November 2017. It offers a reflection on the changing role
of maps in society and the challenges and opportunities that this
presents to us as cartographers and as the British Cartographic
Society.

THE RISE OF CARTOGRAPHY

People love maps. Each one offers us a new way to see the
world, whether we are remembering a favourite place from

our childhood or discovering somewhere new; whether we
are navigating across a city or following an imaginary
journey across a fantasy landscape. Maps kindle our imagin-
ation and make the world both more accessible and more per-
sonal. The cartographer’s eye is able to transform the
presentation of data into the communication of places, feel-
ings and ideas, using a visual, graphical language which is
engaging, expressive and intimate.

Whenever and wherever they were made, maps connect
us with people and places long after the currency of their
information fades. They can be shared – and visually con-
sumed – in an instant (especially via social media) or give
more lasting enjoyment (e.g. in print). The last two years
have seen many books published on maps and cartography
(a selection is shown in Figure 1), and perhaps this last
decade has seen more published than in recent decades,

Figure 1. A selection of books on maps and cartography all published sometime between 2015 and 2017

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1430115

The President’s Address 2017

371

especially those books which have been aimed at a more
general audience. We can rightfully surmise that society’s
current appetite for maps, particularly as a source of curios-
ity and fascination, is healthy.

So, why has this renewed interest in maps arisen and what
opportunities and challenges does it bring to today’s carto-
graphers? Before attempting to address these questions, I
think it is important to remember life before the technologi-
cal advances of web map servers, such as MapQuest (1996)
and Google Maps (2005), and the arrival of OpenStreetMap
(2004) and Google Earth (2005). At the end of the last
century, fears were expressed about the role of cartography
in society. In particular, with the advent of digital mapping,
concerns were raised about whether cartographic design
would continue to have a place in map-making and
whether cartography itself – as an applied discipline – was
still relevant. Some had a sense that cartography was, quite
simply, a dying art. Consider, for example, the views of
Gary Brannon, published in 1991:

Cartography in the twenty-first century seems certain to
follow the well-trodden path laid down in the last five
decades of technological change. As more and more
maps are produced digitally, design skills will inevitably
continue to diminish and aesthetics will no longer be in
the vocabulary of the map-maker. At that point, I fear,
map design will become a lost art.

cartography was

In a later paper, Brannon (1998) exclaimed that maps were a
‘largely unimportant factor in the lives of most ordinary
people’. From within the context of a technocratic society
which seemed to offer increasingly less scope for creative car-
tographic solutions to geographical problems, some went as
far as proclaiming that ‘cartography is dead’ (Wood, 2003).
Yet, others saw the advent of digital mapping as an oppor-
tunity to advance cartography. A former convener of the BCS
Map Design Group, Alan Collinson (1997), for example,
argued that
too conservative in its
methods and that it was time to leave the limiting vocabulary
of abstract symbols behind. Through his Virtual Worlds –
digital renditions of landscapes that pursued realism – he
demonstrated that mapping should embrace new technol-
ogies; in this case, to better express and communicate the
beauty of its subject. It was as if the fundamental role of
the cartographer was to construct a better, more pleasing,
world, and that new ways were open for the cartographer
to achieve this goal. While Brannon was worried that a lack
of concern for aesthetics would lead to the demise of carto-
graphic design, Collinson’s visionary portrayals demon-
new aesthetic
strated
possibilities for the cartographer and user. Indeed, aesthetics
and cartography cannot be separated, since every map reaches
us through our senses (usually sight, but touch and smell are
also utilized by cartographers). Choosing what to show and
how to show it are political and aesthetic decisions that
govern map-making and whether cartographers acknowl-
edge it explicitly or not, the desire to creatively express a
better world appears
to cartography,
however digitally literate they or the users of their maps
may be.

that new technology

to be inherent

allows

It is clear to see how these aesthetic and political ends were
united in Soviet cartography. Indeed, for the thousands of
map-makers working in cartographic factories around the
Soviet Union, it would have been impossible to imagine any-
thing but the utopian vision of global communism that they
were constructing through their vocabulary of symbols as
instructed by posters such as those in Figure 2. The same
vision shines through the many thousands of military plans
of
they
foreign cities, e.g. Cambridge (Figure 3), as
conform to the Soviet cartographic ideal.

(where

solutions

Form follows function and as technology matures, aes-
thetics becomes more crucial for its ongoing success. There
is no doubt that freedom from the constraints of paper has
brought greater fluidity and movement between scales,
areas and the type and amount of data presented in maps,
enabling cartographers to be more articulate in the art of geo-
visualization. Yet there is also a decontextualization of knowl-
edge
isolated from associated
are
information) and an over-reliance on technology. It is all
too easy to forget that maps can find value, purpose and
use in non-digital media. A simple example comes from a
recent train journey I made via Newark-on-Trent, where pas-
sengers were left confused after having to walk across the
town to change trains without the provision of a map at
the station or a mobile phone signal; even the most basic
paper map on the station noticeboard would have sufficed
(allowing travellers to take a photograph for reference).

But maps offer more than helping us to solve problems or
to satisfy our curiosity. The enduring appeal of maps is rooted
in their ability to symbolize meaning – and thereby to symbo-
lize our search for meaning per se. The rise in the popularity
of, for example, books on maps (not just historical maps)
that draw on their visual appeal, perhaps reflects a wider
acceptance of cartography as an art, and, therefore, that
maps can provide some meaningful insights about society
and about us, far beyond the maps’ original function. The
their
value of maps therefore outlives the purpose of
design. Cartographers contribute something to the human
journey beyond the plotting of places; maps encapsulate
our search for meaning beyond the immediacy of our experi-
ence. If the rise of web map servers and, especially, the launch
of Google Earth has brought us to a watershed moment that
has apparently satisfied society’s quest for ‘universal’ mapping
and a totality of geographical knowledge, it has also served to
propel cartography further into the realm of the artist,
leading to more interest in how the cartographer sees rather
than what they see. Although aerial photography has been
with us since the nineteenth century, imagery was not as
prevalent until the digital globes of the new millennium.

There is perhaps some similarity here with how visual art
(especially painting) overcame the idealized traditions of aca-
demic art in the nineteenth century and was transformed after
the introduction of photography. As accumulations of effort
towards ever-more accurate, comprehensive and idealized
visual representations became less important, new artistic
directions were explored which sought to better communi-
cate a fresh realism through how the artist experiences a
scene (e.g. Impressionism) and freedom from representation
to explore concepts and forms (e.g. Cubism and Abstract
Expressionism). For a future critical theory of cartography,
it may be more helpful to follow approaches more aligned

372

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 2. A Soviet poster designed to instruct military cartographers in the use of symbols for describing settlements and building a Soviet utopian
future (reproduced with permission from a private collection)

Figure 3. Extract from the Soviet 1:10 000 military plan of Cambridge (1989) (reproduced with permission from a private collection)

The President’s Address 2017

373

with the history of art for understanding currents and devel-
opments in its aesthetic language. Indeed, this might offer a
way for investigating how maps capture the public imagin-
ation and gain emotional resonance through the cartogra-
pher’s way of seeing. This will be increasingly important if
we are witnessing a shift in public perception as society
becomes more open to accepting maps as art and finding par-
ticular value in them as such.

NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR CARTOGRAPHY

As opposed to being dead, cartography is very much alive
today and there are more people making and enjoying maps
than ever before. During his keynote speech at ICC2017,
Tom Patterson of the US National Park Service declared that
‘there is no better time to be a cartographer’. Of course, it
would be easy to assume that a wider participation in
mapping is the same thing as a broader engagement with car-
tography. But can one really exist without the other? What is
building without architecture? What are data without
design? And what is expression without communication?

Advances in technology will always change the way we
perform tasks, but understanding how best to apply that
technology involves learning new theoretical approaches and
practical skills. This presents new opportunities for cartogra-
phers and for cartographic societies. If we see the introduction
of new technologies at the start of the millennium as funda-
mentally changing the way we map (especially, for example,
the increased accuracy for consumer-grade GPS devices after
the removal of Selective Availability on 2nd May 2000),
there is a good reason to ‘reboot’ cartography and to strip

away its non-essential elements by re-focusing on its core prin-
ciple – communication. Sometimes with new visualizations,
the goal seems not to be to produce a meaningful map, but
an image of sufficient complexity that mirrors the complexity
of its subject (e.g. Figure 4). Where complexity is valued in
society, the drive for clarity that characterizes the cartographic
eye can be at odds with the intended message; delivering an
impression of complexity is different from achieving ease of
use. At its heart, cartography is an applied discipline and the
process of design involves definition and performance.

As new technologies continue to develop, we will always
find new data to visualize and new ways to visualize data,
but cartographers should always be at the forefront of
demonstrating and developing new ways to apply carto-
graphic principles. Recent examples include James Cheshire
and Oliver Uberti’s mapping of ‘big data’ on themes associ-
ated with London and with animal migration, and Łukasz
Halik’s development of cartographic symbolology for aug-
mented realities. Cartography offers a versatile and multi-dis-
ciplinary
communicating space. Many
conceptual developments in mapping occur in the film indus-
try and these can provide some suggestions (and perhaps
some clues) for future visualizations. Cartographic research,
therefore, has much to offer through its critical evaluation
of the methods of visualization, which will be relevant to
many fields.

language

for

To further this aim, cartographic societies should facilitate
better interaction between academia and industry. This could
take the form of product design and development through
apprenticeships, work placements and a more effective
sharing of good practice. Events should, therefore, be inten-
sely practical and outward-facing. Since perfectionism and

Figure 4. A visualization of a human brain’s threads of white matter (chains of nerve cells surrounded by a protective layer of fat). Reproduced courtesy
of the USC Laboratory of Neuro Imaging and Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Consortium of the Human Connectome Project
(www.humanconnectomeproject.org)

374

The Cartographic Journal

conservatism can inhibit innovation and sap confidence, the
cartographic community should not, therefore, seek to act
as a policing force (people will always make badly designed
maps) but strive to inspire and encourage new map-makers
by being open to discuss new techniques and exchange
their knowledge and expertise. While map-making is often
undertaken by individuals, there is a greater resilience in
the face of technological change by learning new skills
together. This strengthens the community and creates a
healthy professional ethic of competence that is not achieved
in isolation. Ethical principles that aim to distinguish pro-
fessionals rather than denigrate others is far more important
in a world where more people are making and publishing
their own maps. Cartography involves finding creative sol-
utions to spatial problems, but good design solutions
deserve to be replicated. We must be far more explicit
about what makes good cartography and the difference that
this can and does make. Good design speaks for itself.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

There are always new things to be mapped and old things to
be mapped in new ways. Technological advances have facili-
tated the proliferation of cartography, but the relevance and
value of good cartography endure for two key reasons.
First, that good cartography offers better ways to visualize
and overcome spatial problems beyond the immediacy of
our experience, and, second, that design (and aesthetics in
particular) is necessary for the successful advance of technol-
ogy, including that associated with mapping. New technol-
ogies open up new possibilities for cartography, particularly
in terms of discovering new techniques for communicating
information effectively and also for widening the
spatial

aesthetic language and appeal of maps. We must not forget
that cartography is about communication and communi-
cation is about people understanding one another. Hence,
by their nature, maps are revolutionary; they offer the possi-
bility of change, both in us and in the world. So, the most
powerful thing maps offer is not knowledge, but possibility.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Alex is Reader in Cartography and
Geographic Information Science at
Canterbury Christ Church University
in the UK, where he lectures on map
design, GIS,
remote sensing, and
European and political geography.
His research explores the relationship
between maps and society, and in par-
the intercultural aspects of
ticular,
topographic map design and the aesthetics of cartography.
Alex is also the President of the BCS and the Chair of the
ICA Commission on Topographic Mapping.

REFERENCES
Brannon, G. (1991) ‘Is map design a lost art?’, The Bulletin of the

Society of Cartographers, 25 (2), pp. 7–8.

Brannon, G. (1998) ‘Living in a world without maps: some thoughts
about cartography in a spatially dysfunctional world’, The Bulletin
of the Society of Cartographers, 32 (2), pp. 5–8.

Collinson, A. (1997) ‘Virtual worlds’, The Cartographic Journal,

34 (2) pp. 117–124.

Wood, D. (2003). ‘Cartography is dead (thank God!)’, Cartographic

Perspectives, 45 (1), pp. 4–7.

