INT. J. GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE
VOL. 18, NO. 7, OCTOBER-NOVEMBER 2004, 665–689

Research Article

Assessing the worldwide developments of national spatial data
clearinghouses

J. CROMPVOETS, A. BREGT
Wageningen University, Centre Geo-Information, PO Box 47, NL-6700 AA,
Wageningen, the Netherlands; e-mail: Joep.Crompvoets@wur.nl

A. RAJABIFARD and I. WILLIAMSON
Centre for Spatial Data Infrastructures and Land Administration,
Department of Geomatics, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

(Received 19 June 2003; accepted 18 October 2003 )

Abstract. Many countries have spent considerable resources over the past few
years debating optimal national spatial data infrastructures. One of the (main)
elements of these infrastructures is the national spatial data clearinghouse, which
facilitates access to required spatial data and provides complementary services.
With this in mind, in April 2000, 2001, 2002 and December 2000, 2001, 2002, a
web survey was carried out to assess systematically the developments of these
national clearinghouses worldwide. Regarding the development in the number of
implementations, it can be considered a worldwide success. However, of concern
are the declining trends in use, management and content. One of the main
reasons for these negative trends could be the dissatisfaction of the spatial data
community with the functional capability of current clearinghouses. The
functional capabilities of clearinghouses should likely be changed from a
data-oriented to a user and application-oriented focus. This is in accord with the
objectives of the second generation of spatial data infrastructures. The main
factors, therefore, that will have positive impacts on developments in this ﬁeld
are the inclusion of web services, stability of funding and creation of user-
friendly interfaces.

1.

Introduction
Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) is about the facilitation and coordination of
the exchange and sharing of spatial data between stakeholders in the spatial data
community. With this objective in mind, many countries are developing SDI to
manage and use their spatial data assets more efﬁciently. These countries are
ﬁnding it necessary to develop SDIs to assist in decision-making that has an
important impact within their national boundaries. Over the past few years, many
countries have spent considerable resources on debating optimal National SDI
(NSDI). One of the main elements of a NSDI is the national spatial data
clearinghouse (McLaughlin 1991, Clinton 1994, FGDC 1997, 2002, Coleman and

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810410001702030

666

J. Crompvoets et al.

McLaughlin 1998, Onsrud 1998, Groot and McLaughlin 2000, AUSLIG 2001). The
national clearinghouse is the access network of an NSDI that facilitates access to
the spatial data. It provides complementary services and improves the exchange and
sharing of spatial data between suppliers and users.

Based on an overall assessment, the average cost of a spatial data clearinghouse
(including some services) is around J1.5 million a year (INSPIRE Architecture and
Standards Working Group 2002). This money is spent
in management and
coordination costs, GIS and Internet application development, training, hardware,
network server, standardization activities, legal environment creation, and metadata
preparation. Currently, 67 national clearinghouses have been implemented and 13
countries have projects for implementation. Based on these 80 initiatives, it means
that globally around J120 million worldwide is spent yearly for clearinghouse
management. Up to now, this money has never been audited or evaluated (certainly
not globally).

these national clearinghouses. To the best of

Since 1994, a fast development in national clearinghouse implementation has
taken place throughout the world. Not many studies exist about the worldwide
development of
the authors’
knowledge, no systematic periodical survey has taken place with regard to the
development of national clearinghouses (Crompvoets 2002). The purpose of the
its main objectives being to assess worldwide
present paper is to ﬁll this gap,
developments, to analyse and describe these developments, to understand the
reasoning behind them and to determine the critical factors for success.

This paper assesses and presents the developments of all national clearinghouses
throughout the world, with reference to the concepts, deﬁnitions and history of SDI
and clearinghouses. The assessment methodology has been described based on a
longitudinal survey and the main development results are presented using the main
SDI components: policy, access network, standards, people and data. Additionally,
these development results are discussed and some key factors for success are
determined.

2. Spatial data infrastructures and clearinghouses
2.1. Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDIs)

Viewing the core components of SDI as policy, access networks, technical
standards, people (including partnerships) and data, Rajabifard et al. (2002)
suggested that different categories could be formed based on the different nature of
their interactions within the SDI framework. Considering the important and
fundamental role between people and data as one category, a second can be
considered consisting of the main technological components: the access networks,
policy and standards. The best example of access network is the clearinghouse. The
nature of both categories is very dynamic due to the changes occurring in
communities (people) and their needs, as well as their ongoing requirement for
different sets of data. Additionally, with the rapidity with which technology
develops, the need for the mediation of rights, restrictions and responsibilities
between people and data are also constantly subject to change (ﬁgure 1). This
suggests an integrated SDI cannot be composed of spatial data, value-added
services and end-users alone, but instead involves other important issues regarding
interoperability, policies and networks. This in turn reﬂects the dynamic nature of

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

667

Figure 1. Nature of and relations between SDI components (adopted from Rajabifard et al.
2002).

the whole SDI concept. It is an issue also highlighted by Groot and McLaughlin
(2000).

The concept of SDI can be deﬁned as an integrated, multilevelled hierarchy of
interconnected SDIs based on partnerships at corporate,
local, state/provincial,
levels. This enables users to save
national, regional (multinational) and global
resources, time and effort when trying to acquire new datasets by avoiding
duplication of expenses associated with the generation and maintenance of data and
their integration with other datasets.

With this in mind, every nation undertakes to some extent the development of
strategic national mapping and spatial data activities to meet
their national
planning and management needs. The accumulation of these activities over time has
resulted in the identiﬁcation of key linkages between institutional and technical
aspects similar in many respects to other forms of infrastructure, and occurring in a
continuum of development strategies. Based on this, Rajabifard et al. (2003)
distinguished and reported on two generations of SDIs, the ﬁrst and the second
generations.

The ﬁrst generation of SDIs development has emerged since the mid-1980s when
the USA and Australia,
started to develop the data access
relationships, which became the precursor to the development of NSDI initiatives.
At this time, countries developing SDI on any jurisdictional level had only very
limited ideas and knowledge about different dimensions and issues of the SDI
concept, and rather less experience of such development.

for example,

Within this generation, each country designed and developed SDI based on their
speciﬁc requirements and priorities and nationally speciﬁc characteristics. The
ultimate objectives of the SDI initiatives in this generation as summarized by
Masser (1999) were to promote economic development,
to stimulate better
government and to foster environmental sustainability. A signiﬁcant milestone
overcome by the ﬁrst generation, for whom there were few experiences and existing
SDI developments from which to learn, was the documentation of researchers’ and
practitioners’ experiences and status reports on their SDI initiatives and as part of
that report on their clearinghouse activities which facilitated their SDI initiatives.
This achievement not only gave countries a knowledge-base from which to learn
and/or develop their initiatives, providing exposure to the developmental strengths

668

J. Crompvoets et al.

and weaknesses of different SDI initiatives, but also provided social capital to share
and foster SDI developments in other countries. Consequently, many countries
involved in SDI development over the ﬁrst generation took a product-based
justiﬁcation and
the dominant model
approach, which became
development partially through a lack of awareness of other options.

for SDI

However, the transition to the second generation can be marked by a change in
focus on SDI development by several countries (Australia, USA, Canada) involved
in developing the concept from the beginning. This led to a rapid increase in the
number of countries becoming involved in SDI development, fostered by the
deﬁnition of an SDI community where experiences could be shared and exchanged
experiences. This shows the continuum of strategic spatial data development.

The second generation started around 2000 when some of the leading countries
on SDI development changed their development strategies and updated their
conceptual models. In second-generation SDI, the strategy for SDI development is
changing towards a more process-based approach (Rajabifard et al. 2003). This
approach focuses on the creation of a suitable infrastructure to facilitate the
management of information assets instead of the linkage to existing and future
databases.

The second generation of SDI developments characteristically falls into two
groups: those countries that started to develop an SDI initiative during the period
of the ﬁrst generation and are gradually modifying and upgrading the initiative, as
well as those countries that have recently decided to design and develop an SDI for
their respective countries and/or have just commenced doing so (Lance and Hyman
2001, Wehn de Montalvo 2001).

The distinguishing features of the second generation include leverage of the
experiences, expertise, social capital of SDI development and the development of
clearinghouse systems derived from the ﬁrst generation. For the ﬁrst generation,
initiative
data were the key driver for SDI development and the focus of
development. However, for the second generation, the use of that data (and data
applications) and the need of users are the driving force for SDI development.
Introduction of web services is the main technological
indicator of second-
generation SDI because such services are partly able to fulﬁl the needs of users and
improve the use of data. In summary, second-generation SDI development has been
relatively quick due to the concept gaining momentum and because of the existence
of early prototypes, clariﬁcation on many initial design issues, increased sharing
and documentation of experiences to facilitate implementation and face the
complexity of decision-support challenges.

2.2. Spatial data clearinghouses

A spatial data clearinghouse can be deﬁned as an electronic facility for
searching, viewing, transferring, ordering, advertising and/or disseminating spatial
data from numerous sources via the Internet and, as appropriate, providing
complementary services. Such a clearinghouse usually consists of a number of
servers that contain information (metadata) about available digital data.

A clearinghouse is based on a distributed network of people (spatial data
suppliers, managers and users) linked electronically (Clinton 1994, FGDC 2002).
The term ‘distributed system’ refers to a distributed collection of users, data,
software and hardware, whose purpose is to meet some predeﬁned objectives (Bishr

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

669

the condition of

and Radwan 2000). The clearinghouse allows suppliers to make known what spatial
data exist,
these data and instructions for accessing these
data. Each data supplier describes available data in an electronic form and
provides these descriptions (or metadata) to the network using a variety of software
tools. Additionally, the data supplier can offer access to his produced data. Users
can discover who has what spatial data and their type and quality (Radwan
2002).

The main reason for creating a clearinghouse is the desire of users to have a
single source for accessing all the available resources. A spatial data clearinghouse
is a system to provide this capability serving as a central point for sharing data
among data producers and users (Phillips 1998, Noori-Bushehri and Rajabifard
2001, Rajabifard 2002).

To make a clearinghouse as the access network operational within an SDI, it
has to be strongly linked to the other SDI components: people, data, policy and
(technical) standards (Rajabifard and Williamson 2001). A clearinghouse can only
be a success within an SDI when there is a strong cohesion between these
components. The use, management and supply of data and the content, and/or
quality of these data determine its success subject to the quality of the standards,
response time of the clearinghouse and legal/economical policy.

There are different understandings of the deﬁnition of clearinghouses. The
Australia and New Zealand Land Information Council (2000) deﬁnes clearing-
houses in a much wider context. It incorporates: discovery, transfer and access
services;
legal arrangements including supporting custodians’ ability to control
access to their data; coordination and management functions; and the spatial
information commercial market place in which data are value-added and integrated
to produce products, services and solutions. The deﬁnition of the US Federal
Geographic Data Committee (FGDC 1997)
the technical
mechanism also the institutional aspect of clearinghouses. However, mainly out
of practical reasons, this paper focuses on the most tangible product of the
clearinghouse; the electronic facilities for discovery, transfer and access.

includes besides

The latest deﬁnitions of the clearinghouse play more emphasize on the inclusion
the position paper of INSPIRE Architecture and
of services. For example,
Standards working group (2002) describes a clearinghouse (Portal) as a site
featuring a suite of commonly used services, serving as a starting point and gateway
to the Web for a user community. This service-oriented approach is in accord with
the objectives of the second generation of SDI. Examples of services which could be
included within a clearinghouse environment are: map service, coverage service,
feature service, gazetteer service, coordinate transformation service, authentication
service, analysis/spatial data fusion service; web pricing and ordering service. These
web services will change the implementation of clearinghouse functional capability,
as well as the way in which users use them in their own applications (Bernabe´ et al.
2002).

A national clearinghouse for spatial data is a central web-portal at national/
federal level that focuses on the facilitation of spatial data discovery, access, and
services recognized (in legal or institutional sense) by the national government
(mainly through the national council for geo-information) as the country’s main
clearinghouse for spatial data. It is not a national repository where datasets are
stored. It aims to be a kind of shopping mall for all national-wide available spatial

670

J. Crompvoets et al.

data as acquired by main (national) governmental agencies and/or industrial bodies.
It is important to know that many differences in implementations exist. The way a
national clearinghouse is set up depends on its technological, legal, institutional,
cultural, commercial environment and management. This environment determines
to what extent the clearinghouse management retains control over their products.
Besides national clearinghouses, there are clearinghouses at the local, state and
regional levels. The national clearinghouse is different from the others in the sense
that it is embedded in the nation’s institutions and legal framework. Examples
of national clearinghouses are: USA, National Geospatial Data Clearinghouse;
Australia, Australian Spatial Data Directory; UK, GIgateway and the Netherlands,
Nationaal Clearinghouse Geo-Informatie.

The US Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) established the ﬁrst
national (federal) clearinghouse in 1994. The implementation of this clearinghouse
among federal agencies was motivated by a desire to minimize duplication of effort
in the collection of expensive digital spatial data and foster partnerships where
common needs exist (Rhind 1999, FGDC 2000). At this moment, the FGDC
focuses on the extension of the clearinghouse network that provides ‘one-stop’
access to standardized spatial data, applications, programs and products from all
federal agencies and incorporates similar non-federal information, and it establishes
web mapping and online data services to meet general requirements of government
and citizens users. After initial deployment and testing of the comprehensive web
portal, reusable commercial replication services will be required (FGDC 2002).

3. Survey methodology

To assess national clearinghouse developments around the world, a longitudinal
web survey was undertaken whose main intention was to examine the developments
of all existing national clearinghouses. Added to this survey is the word ‘web’ to
emphasize that the required information was mainly collected on the Web. The
Internet is an excellent means to gather regularly the needed information quickly
and objectively, because of the easy access of the clearinghouse sites.

The survey was conducted systematically and periodically (April 2000,
December 2000, April 2001, December 2001, April 2002, December 2002). The
intention was to have a survey each half year because developments in information
communication technology are difﬁcult to monitor and keep up with. However, for
practical reasons it was chosen to have a survey in April and December.

The methodology used in this survey consisted of the following two steps:

Step 1. Making an inventory of all existing national clearinghouses on the
Internet.
Step 2. Measuring several characteristics to describe each clearinghouse.

The inventory (Step 1) was periodically compiled by extensive browsing of the
Internet, reading related literature, and contacting experts and several webmasters.
Clearinghouses were characterized (Step 2) based on the following criteria: ease of
measurement, objective character and clear presentation of history, access network,
people (suppliers, coordination, users), data, policy, and standards of the national
clearinghouse
following characteristics were periodically
measured and recorded:

environment. The

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

671

(1) Year of ﬁrst implementation.
(2) Number of data suppliers.
(3) Monthly number of visitors.
(4) Number of web references (Alta Vista and Google).
(5) Languages used.
(6) Frequency of web updates.
(7) Level of (meta)data accessibility.
(8) Number of datasets.
(9) Most recently produced dataset.
(10) Use of maps for searching.
(11) Registration-only access.
(12) Metadata standard applied.

in cases of uncertainty,

Almost all the above information was sourced from clearinghouse web pages.
Additionally,
language problems or missing data the
webmaster/system administrator was contacted. The history of the clearinghouses is
described by characteristic (1); people by (2–6); data by (7–9); the access network by
(10); policy by (11); and standards by (12). In the following sections, some of the
characteristics identiﬁed above will be explained and their developments will be
discussed in greater depth.

Additionally, for analytical purposes, to improve the understanding of the
development processes, extra information (especially about access network) was
collected during January/February 2003 as follows:

(a) Status of national clearinghouse.
(b) Name of national clearinghouses.
(c) (De)centralized network architecture.
(d) Mechanisms for searching.
(e) Availability of view (web mapping) services.
(f) Type of coordination body.
(g) Percentage of periodically changed web addresses.
(h) Funding stability.

The access network is additionally described by characteristics (a–e); people by (f,
g); and policy by (h). When referring to these characteristics below, the number or
letter related to the characteristic is placed in parentheses.

4. Results

The presentation of the results is grouped using SDI component classiﬁcation,
which has been mentioned above (access network, people, data, policies and
standards). First, the history of national clearinghouses is presented, followed by
the results related to each of the SDI components. To present some of the
developments in ﬁgures, both the average and median are used (ﬁgures 5, 6, 8 and
11). Due to the highly skewed distribution of
the clearinghouse
characteristics, the median is less sensitive to extremes than the average. In these
cases, the median is more informative than the average. Some of the results are
presented by region (this division in regions is derived from Dorling Kindersley
1997).

some of

672

4.1. History

J. Crompvoets et al.

The history of national clearinghouses is characterized by the year of ﬁrst
implementation (1) on the Web. When implementing a clearinghouse, there are
several activities that interact: design and implementation of discovery, transfer and
access
legal/institutional
environment creation and standardization deﬁnitions. The most tangible product
derived from all these activities is the placement of a national clearinghouse on the
Web.

services, metadata preparation/validation/publication,

From 1994, the number of national clearinghouses has been steadily increasing
(ﬁgure 2). Now 67 countries have an implemented version on the Web.
Additionally,
it is known that 13 countries have projects for implementation
(with all its related activities). Based on these developments, it can be expected that
increasingly more clearinghouses will be established.
Implementing national
clearinghouses is a global activity; however, the variety in number between the
different regions is considerable (table 1). For example, in Europe and America,

Figure 2. First year of national clearinghouse implementation: per year (columns) and
cumulative (line).

Table 1. First year of national clearinghouse implementation (distributed per region).

First year of
implementation

Total number
of countries

Number of
African
countries

Number of
Asia-Paciﬁc
countries

Number of
European
countries

Number of
American
countries

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
1994–2002
2003/04?
No implementation

1
3
6
5
14
9
13
10
6
67
13
113

1

1

1
2
5
5
41

4
2
3

2
1
2
14
3
47

3
1
3
5
5
3
3
2
25
3
15

1

5
4
8
5

23
2
10

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

673

more than 50% of the countries have established a national clearinghouse, whereas
in Africa and Asia-Paciﬁc, this is less than 20%. The many project initiatives in
Africa are promising.

Note that 113 countries did not conduct any initiative to build such a national
facility. This may be due to several reasons, e.g. a country may not have
appropriate network architecture or have institutional/legal bottlenecks preventing
implementation (Crompvoets and Bregt 2003).

4.2. Access network

The access network component of an SDI is critical from a technical perspective
to facilitate the use of data by people. This component seeks to facilitate access to
relevant data sources and spatial information services by anyone, anywhere. The
best example of an access network at national level is the national clearinghouse.
The clearinghouse as access network is characterized by the status of national
clearinghouse (a), by the name of a national clearinghouse (b), by (de)centralized
network architecture (c), by mechanisms for searching (d), by use of maps for
searching (10), and by the availability of view (web mapping) services (e). The
differences in implementation status, network architectures, search mechanisms and
view service provisions between the clearinghouses are broad.

example,

According to the status of national clearinghouse implementation (a), three
classes are distinguished: project, product-portal and clearinghouse. An imple-
mentation is considered a project when no clearinghouse is established on the Web
where a project plan to establish one is already available. It is still in the stage
of designing, preparing metadata, creating a legal/institutional environment or
deﬁning standards. For
countries as Latvia, Poland, Botswana,
Madagascar, Nigeria, Israel and India have set up projects for implementation.
A national clearinghouse has the status of a product-portal when the spatial data
are sourced from only one supplier. According to the clearinghouse deﬁnition, a
clearinghouse should have spatial data from numerous sources. However, in several
countries there is only one dominant national spatial data supplier (national
(military) geographic institute). These countries are mainly located in South
America and Europe. Most of these suppliers present their (meta)data as products.
That is the reason why these types of national clearinghouses are called product-
portals. This difference in the number of sources is the only difference between
product-portals and clearinghouses. Examples of product-portals are: FO¨ MI-
Products (Hungary, Institute of Geodesy, Cartography and Remote Sensing),
Clearinghouse-SNIT (Chile, Military Geographic Institute), National Geospatial
Data Clearinghouse (Peru, National Geographic Institute), and Geospatial
catalogue (Venezuela, Geographic Institute of Venezuela Simon Bolivar). A
national clearinghouse is classiﬁed as a clearinghouse when it completely fulﬁls all
the criteria of the clearinghouse deﬁnition. The majority of the existing national
clearinghouses have the status of clearinghouse (72%). Examples of classiﬁed
clearinghouses are: MIDAS, Meta-Information DAtabase System (Czech Repub-
lic), Slovenian National Data Catalogue, Spatial Data Discovery Facility (South
Africa), GeoConnections Discovery Portal (Canada), Geospatial Data Clearing-
house of Dominican Republic, Geographic Data Clearinghouse of El Salvador, and
National Clearinghouse of Geographic Data (Uruguay).

Within the spatial community, various names have been assigned to this

674

J. Crompvoets et al.

national
facility (b); examples are catalogue services (OpenGIS Consortium
(OGC)), Spatial Data Directory (Australia) and Clearinghouse (USA). Although
they have different names, the goals of discovering and accessing spatial data
through the metadata properties they report are the same. As shown in ﬁgure 3, the
most popular names are Clearinghouse and (Meta)data information system.
Clearinghouse is especially used within the American continent.

A national clearinghouse could consist of a number of servers on the Internet
that contain information about available data. A clearinghouse is an example of a
client-server architecture (c). The server machines hold the metadata and services.
The clients request metadata or services by visiting the server(s), usually through a
web browser. A clearinghouse with a decentralized network architecture (c) means
the (meta)databases and services are distributed over numerous servers
that
installed at different suppliers interconnected through a network with each server
running autonomously. In total, nine decentralized national clearinghouses exist,
mainly in countries of Anglo-Saxon origin (USA, UK, South Africa, Australia).
However, the majority has implemented a centralized version wherein all the
metadata and services are stored on servers installed at the main supplier or
coordination body.

When searching on a clearinghouse, the user has the ability to choose different
mechanisms for spatial data searching (d), like predeﬁned search terms (hypertext
links), Location (spatial search), Maps with Predeﬁned boundaries (index maps),
Free keyword search, Place name (gazetteer) and Production time. The most
popular mechanisms are Predeﬁned terms and Free keyword (ﬁgure 4). Searching
by means of Predeﬁned terms is mainly done by Name database (text index), theme,
organization and geographical name. The use of digital maps when searching (10)
is very popular. Maps can be used for locating an area of interest or by clicking on
an area with predeﬁned boundaries. These maps improve the data discovery.
few national clearinghouses are using this
Nevertheless,
mechanism. Fifteen national clearinghouses have made a link to the FGDC’s
search page by using the search-and-retrieve protocol known as ANSI Z39.50 or
ISO 10163. Recently, OGC Catalog Service version 1.0 came on the market, which
is an improved version to query, search and present search results to the user. It

the trend is

that

Figure 3. Distribution (%) of national clearinghouses based on naming.

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

675

Figure 4. Distribution of national clearinghouses based on a mechanism for searching.

was recommended in The SDI Cookbook (Nebert 2001) that clearinghouses should
use this new OGC Catalog Services Speciﬁcation.

A relatively new facility within the domain of national clearinghouses is the
standardized view services for documented data (INSPIRE Architecture and
Standards Working Group 2002). This viewing of geographic information over the
Internet is also referred to as web mapping (e). This service is a typical tool for
second-generation SDIs. It includes the presentation of general-purpose maps to
display locations and geographic backdrops, as well as sophisticated interactive and
customizable mapping tools. Viewing is supported by simple queries. Related to the
viewing is the requirement that the geographic information presented must be given
a context, made easy understandable and of value to end-users. Understanding
thematic geographic information coming from different sources requires standar-
dization of the way in which the information is portrayed. The technology behind
web mapping is aimed at portraying spatial information quickly and easily for most
users, requiring only basic map reading skills. At
this moment, 14 existing
clearinghouses have already implemented services to view for documented data.
They are mainly in Europe, North America and Asia. In Asia-Paciﬁc especially this
view service is very popular.

Other examples of services that are already implemented in some of national
clearinghouses are download and e-commerce services. It is expected that these web
service-based developments will dominate the ﬁeld for the coming years.

4.3. People

Through increased use and awareness of spatial information, a dramatic growth
has occurred in the user base. With the proliferation of online web mapping, and
navigation/direction information, an increasing number of people are using GIS,
this is obviously of importance in the development of an SDI to facilitate spatial
data activities.

The people involved in a clearinghouse environment can be categorized into
three groups: data suppliers, managers (service administrators) and end-users. The
data suppliers represent the spatial data providers and developers. The behaviour of

676

J. Crompvoets et al.

people is characterized by the number of data suppliers (2), by the number of
monthly visitors (3), by the number of web references (4), by the languages used (5),
by the type of coordination body (f), by the frequency of web updates (6), and by
the number of periodically changed web addresses (g).

Characteristic number of data suppliers (2) describes the variety and quantity of
data providers and the spatial data developers of the national clearinghouse. The
power of a clearinghouse is that several data suppliers can disseminate their
products via this facility. The number of data suppliers was measured four times
(December 2000, 2001, 2002, April 2002). As shown in ﬁgure 5, the average number
of data suppliers participating in a clearinghouse is high (especially when compared
with the median), however the variety between the clearinghouses is extremely high.
For example, more than 1500 suppliers use the clearinghouses of Canada or USA
to disseminate their data. This is in contrast with the more than 45 clearinghouses,
which have less than 10 suppliers. The median is very low because of the high
number of product-portals. The recent trend is that the average and median are
decreasing. Based on this development, it seems that a national clearinghouse is
losing its popularity to participate as a data supplier and to supply spatial data.
From a spatial distribution context around the world, the very low number of data
suppliers in South America is remarkable. The reason may be the dominant role of
the leading mapping agencies.

Characteristic monthly number of visitors (3) indicates quantitatively the use of
national clearinghouses to access spatial datasets by end-users. This number relates
to the monthly number of visitors who have visited the homepage of
the
clearinghouse. It does not really present the usability of the clearinghouses for
searching spatial data, because it does not identify the behaviour of the users within
the clearinghouse and the number of different visitors. This characteristic is
measured six times. The numbers relate to the month just before the measurement.
This is the reason that March and November are presented (ﬁgure 6). For
November 2002, the average number of visits exceeds 5000 visitors (however, the
median is just above 1000). Note that the difference in visiting numbers between the
clearinghouses is high. The most visited are those of the USA, Portugal, Finland,

Figure 5. Number of data suppliers during time (average and median) Due to practical
reasons, this characteristic was not measured in April 2000 or April 2001.

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

677

Figure 6. Number of monthly visitors during time (average and median).

Canada and Slovenia. In general, the highest numbers of visitors are found in
Europe and North America. The recent development is that the numbers are
stabilizing and not increasing. This could be an indication that the clearinghouse is
losing its popularity to access spatial data.

Based on the gathered data, it seems that the implementation of web mapping
facilities within the national clearinghouse environment increases the number of
visitors. The average and median of the clearinghouses with web mapping are much
higher than those that have not have such mapping (table 2). Therefore, web-
mapping facilities could increase use. However, an important limitation of web
mapping is the costs of implementation: J150 000 summed with J50 000–100 000
for each participating organization (INSPIRE Architecture and Standards Working
Group 2002).

Another aspect that could increase the use of a national clearinghouse is the
number of suppliers. This is based on the correlation coefﬁcient (r) between the
number of suppliers and the monthly visitors of December 2002: 0.73.

The characteristic number of web references (4) can be interpreted as a means to
measure the popularity (use) of the national clearinghouse site within the Internet
network. Used is the ‘LinkPopularity.com, Free Link Popularity Service #’ (http://
www.linkpopularity.com) (The PC Edge, Inc.), which measures the number of links
to the homepage of the national clearinghouse that can be checked by the following
search engines: AltaVista and Google. A well-linked popular web site can
dramatically increase trafﬁc to the speciﬁc web site. The link popularity of national
clearinghouse is high, which means that they are an excellent source of consistent

Table 2.

Impact of web mapping facilities on the number of monthly visitors (data between

parentheses are the number of measured national clearinghouses).

Web mapping
facilities

Yes (10)
No (22)

Average number
of visitors

13 324
1750

Median number
of visitors

5000
1280

678

J. Crompvoets et al.

and targeted web trafﬁc. This characteristic is measured six times. The differences in
numbers between the national clearinghouses are huge. The national clearinghouses
with the highest number of web references are: Finland, South Africa, Australia,
Canada, the USA and Colombia. Compared with other regions, the national
clearinghouses of Africa have much lower numbers than the other regions. Since
April 2002, Google has generally a higher number of web references than AltaVista.
The correlation coefﬁcient (r) of 0.71 between the number of web references
(Google) and the number of monthly visitors, and r~0.75 between the number of
web references (Google) and the number of data suppliers show that the number of
web references is an appropriate indicator of the use of national clearinghouses.
The development is that both numbers of web references on AltaVista and Google
are decreasing. The number of web references searched by AltaVista is already
decreasing since April 2001 and the one searched by Google since April 2002. This
is another indication that the national clearinghouses are losing their popularity.
Characteristic languages (5) refers to the language used at the ‘search’ page of
the national clearinghouse. It indicates the ease for searching, the number and
diversity of end-users able to access data, because of
their familiarity and
knowledge of given language. The percentage of clearinghouses in which data can
be searched using the English language is slightly increasing. In December 2002,
60% of the clearinghouses have search facilities written in English. The percentages
of ‘Spanish’ clearinghouses are stabilizing (around the 25%) and the ones of the
multilingual clearinghouses are increasing. This means that people capable of
understanding English have access to more spatial data. However, the metadata are
mainly written in one language, mostly in one of a country’s ofﬁcial languages.

The organization that provides the national clearinghouses as a service to
society is characterized by the type of coordination body (f). It is the intermediary
between the data users and the suppliers for the clearinghouse. It facilitates the
integrity of access to the required data by ensuring system technical services as well
as the administrative, data security and ﬁnancial services necessary to broker
between data suppliers and data users within the information policies governing the
SDI. The main coordination of the national clearinghouses is mainly in the hands
of the national mapping agencies (ﬁgure 7). In addition, the environmental agencies
are of relatively high importance. This coordination characteristic has already been
measured twice (December 2001, 2002). Additionally, a prediction for 2003 is made
based on the existing information of projects for implementation. The relative
trends (%) are generally very stable. The percentages related to national mapping
and environmental agencies are slightly increasing, meanwhile the percentages
related to cadastre, geological services, national councils for geo-information and
commercial companies are slightly decreasing. The contribution of environmental
agencies is particularly remarkable. It seems that environmental policy triggers
focus on the need for SDI around the world.

Characteristic frequency of web updates (6) refers to the management in the
national clearinghouse. It is the duration (days) between the day of the last web
update and the date of measurement. High numbers of days refers to a low
frequency of web update. One indication of a well-managed clearinghouse could be
seen by the high frequency of updated information. It does not directly refer to the
updates of the data itself, but to the updates of the clearinghouse web site. This
characteristic is measured six times (ﬁgure 8). For consistency, it was measured each

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

679

Figure 7. Distribution (%) of national clearinghouses based on the type of coordination
body.

Figure 8. Frequency of web updates during time (average and median).

time on Fridays in the ﬁrst week of April and December. The average number of
days from the last update is high for the whole population of clearinghouses due to
instances of poor management (with some updates exceeding 1 year). However, the
median is low. The variation between clearinghouses is high as, alongside the
poorer managed clearinghouse, numerous excellently managed facilities operate
(update within 1 day). The update frequency is generally high in South America
and low in North America and Africa. The development is an increase of the
duration of the days of web updates, and so a lower frequency of these updates.
The median shows an increase in trend. This could relate to a decrease of interest
by clearinghouse managers.

Another characteristic to express management of national clearinghouses is by
percentage of periodically changed web addresses (g). This refers to the change of
URL address of the homepage of the same clearinghouse site during the period
between the two times of measurements. This change is measured for ﬁve periods.

680

J. Crompvoets et al.

During period April–December 2002, 17% of all existing national clearinghouse in
April 2002 changed their address in another one (ﬁgure 9). Most of the changes
were in Europe. The development is an increase of the percentage of periodically
changed web address. This dynamism could be an indication that the clearinghouse
managers are struggling to create the right (technological) environment.

4.4. Data

Interoperability is a key consideration of both the standards and data
component of an SDI. Data within an SDI should be compatible in terms of
format, reference system, projection, resolution and quality. Data are described by
the following characteristics: the level of (meta)data accessibility (7), the number of
(10). The
spatial
difference in quantitative and qualitative content of accessible data between
different clearinghouses is very high.

(meta)datasets (8) and the most recently produced dataset

Characteristic level of (meta)data accessibility describes the presentation of the
data content within national clearinghouses. In most cases clearinghouses provide
access to standardized metadata. However, in a few cases these metadata are not
standardized. In other cases, the user has the ability to access the data directly by
means of its metadata. Delivery of data over the Internet can be realized in various
ways. Some clearinghouses transmit data via e-mail; others serve the data through
what OGC calls a Web Feature Server. Four classes are distinguished: prototype,
non-standardized metadata, standardized metadata and data (zstandardized
metadata). Prototype refers to the level when ﬁnal metadata security checks have
to be arranged. Data (zstandardized metadata) refers to direct access to data
through the clearinghouse without contacting the producer. In a spatial context,
Asia-Paciﬁc has many clearinghouses that allow the user an opportunity to
download spatial data directly. This is in contrast with the American region. In a
relative sense, the percentages of standardized metadata access over time are very
stable and the percentages of data (zstandardized metadata) access are only
slightly increasing (ﬁgure 10). Once a clearinghouse is established, the level of
accessibility is unlikely to be changed.

A special form of non-standardized metadata is a graphical presentation (e.g.
jpeg or bitmap format) of a subset of described dataset. This alternative is partly

Figure 9. Percentages of periodically changed web addresses during time.

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

681

Figure 10. Percentages of the level of (meta)data accessibility during time.

based on the concept that ‘a picture tells more than a thousand words’. It is
particular popular in Europe. The recent development is a continuous increase of
this type of metadata presentation.

A possible means to quantify the content of a national clearinghouse is
characterized by the number of datasets. This number refers to the metadata
records, where each describes one dataset. This characteristic does not represent the
importance of the accessible datasets to the economic and social development of the
country. This characteristic is measured ﬁve times. The variety in the number of
datasets is enormous. For example, the US Federal clearinghouse allows the user
access to more than ¡139 000 datasets, while the 25 European clearinghouses
together give access to only ¡10 000 datasets. This is the reason that the average
and median are so different (ﬁgure 11). It is remarkable that the average and
median are decreasing over time. This trend could relate to the decreasing trend of
the number of data suppliers. This observation is based on the very strong r~0.85
between the number of suppliers and the number of datasets (December 2002). In
the past, the total summed number of datasets of all the clearinghouses was steadily
increasing. However, recently this trend has stopped and is stabilized around

Figure 11. Number of datasets during time (average and median) Due to practical reasons,
this characteristic was not measured in April 2001.

682

J. Crompvoets et al.

210 000. The trend of a decreasing number of monthly visitors could also partly
relate to the decreasing number of datasets presented in the national clearinghouse.
An r between the number of spatial datasets and the number of monthly visitors is
0.64.

The characteristic most recently produced dataset (9) describes the up-to-date
nature of content and partly the management of content
in the national
clearinghouse. It is the duration (months) between the date of the most recently
produced dataset described in the national clearinghouse and the date of
measurement. It is measured six times. In general, the most recently produced
datasets are in Europe and the least in North America and Asia-Paciﬁc. The
average time of most recently produced dataset is 33 months and the median is 20
months (December 2002). The recent development is a slight increase of the average
and median duration. Therefore, the data of the national clearinghouses are
becoming less up to date. This trend could have a negative impact on usage (r
between the most recently produced dataset and the number of visitors is 20.45).

4.5. Policy

The policy and administrative component of the SDI deﬁnition is critical for the
construction, maintenance, access and application of standards and datasets for
SDI implementation. In general, policies and guidelines are required for SDI that
incorporate: spatial data access and pricing;
funding, spatial data transfer;
custodianship; metadata; and standards. SDI component policy is only described
by funding stability (h) and registration-only access (11).

Funds are mainly used to design and establish discovery, transfer and access
services, metadata preparation/validation/publication, and legal/institutional envir-
onment creation. The most easily identiﬁed funding of clearinghouses comes from
governmental agencies. Nevertheless, some signs suggest that other parties, mainly
other public agencies, make enormously important contributions. Identiﬁcation can
be difﬁcult because some are indirect, e.g. some are provided in kind through the
time of staff already on payrolls, which are not properly attributed, or in returns to
government through the tax system (Rhind 2000). The identiﬁable contribution to
the national clearinghouse from the private sector is modest. An example that
reﬂects partly this statement is that the government or other public agencies directly
control 94% of the national clearinghouses. Funding of the national clearinghouses
is mainly piecemeal (72%). Additionally, even a few clearinghouses exist that were
is
never funded (6%)! A small number were continuously funded (22%). It
interesting that 25% of existing national clearinghouses were initially funded by
foreign agencies such as the US Agency for International Development (USAID).
It seems that the stability of funding has a positive impact on people’s use and
management and of the quantity of the data of the national clearinghouses (table 3).
It was expected that personal registration in a clearinghouse could have a
negative impact on end-users due to privacy. For this reason, registration-only
access was introduced as a characteristic to be measured. Sometimes, before
accessing the data, end-users have to register themselves by entering personal
details. In 15% of all clearinghouses, the user should register him/herself by ﬁlling in
‘registration template’ (December 2002). The percentage of clearinghouses with
registration obligations ﬂuctuates around 15% over time. Based on acquired

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

683

Table 3.

Impact of funding stability on the number of monthly visitors, the frequency of

web updates, the number of suppliers and datasets (average and median).

Funding
stability

Visitors,
average

Visitors,
median

Updates,
average
(days)

Updates,
median
days)

Suppliers,
average

Suppliers,
median

Datasets,
average

Datasets,
median

Stable
Number

6487
5076

5093
1322.5

107
239

28
68.5

176
15

16.5
2

12 563
467

207
42

information, it seems that this registration has no impact on the number of users
and so it is no limitation for the users.

4.6. Standards

To ensure interoperability amongst the datasets and access mechanisms deﬁned
by an SDI, standards are essential. Standards can be applied at many different
levels within an SDI. In terms of data, Australia’s former national mapping
organization, the Australian Land Information Group (AUSLIG 2001), identiﬁed
that standards are required ‘in reference systems, data models, data dictionaries,
data quality, data transfer and metadata’. This component is represented by the
application of a metadata standard (12) in the national clearinghouse. With the
diverse sources from which spatial databases are built, it is extremely important to
maintain information about the content, quality, source and lineage of the data.
A number of standard organizations have developed, or are in the process
of developing, standards for storing and maintaining metadata. The Federal
Geographic Data Committee and the European Committee for Standardization
(CEN/Technical Committee 287) have developed the main metadata standards.
These meta-standards form the backbone of national clearinghouses. The FGDC
metadata standard (Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata, Version
2.0, 1998; FGDC 1998) is the most applied and distributed one around the world
(26 clearinghouses, December 2002). Application of this standard is stabilizing at
between 40 and 50% of all the national clearinghouses (ﬁgure 12). In Europe, CEN/
287 Env 12657 (CEN/TC287 1996) is widely accepted. Recently, the International
Organization of Standardization TC/211 has created the ISO19115 standard (ISO/

Figure 12. Distribution (%) of national clearinghouses based on the application of metadata
standards.

684

J. Crompvoets et al.

TC-211 2001). Many countries have set up projects
that deal with the
harmonization of their metadata standard with the ISO standard 19115 for
Geographic Information — Metadata in order to adopt the ISO standard as
national standard (27 countries, December 2002). Many countries are creating their
own proﬁle of ISO 19115. That is the reason why the percentages of national
metadata standards are increasing over time. The scope of the metadata standard
ISO 19115 speciﬁes that it deﬁnes metadata for services as well as data. ISO/TC 211
Project Team 19, which deals with ISO 19119 — Services, is developing more
detailed service metadata. This ISO 19119 Services standard is at the Draft
International Standard stage (Østensen 2001).

5. Discussion of results

The main objectives of

the present paper are to analyse the worldwide
developments, to describe these developments, to understand the reasoning behind
these developments and to determine the critical factors for success. Each objective
will be discussed in turn.

One of the survey’s objectives was to analyse the worldwide developments.
Through this Web survey,
it was possible to examine the developments of all
national clearinghouses on a worldwide scale. Using this approach, it was possible
to gather the needed data quickly and objectively and on a regular-temporal basis.
A traditional survey research described as a method for collecting information by
asking a set of preformulated questions in a predetermined sequence in a structured
questionnaire to individuals would not have been a very suitable approach to
collect quickly, objectively and easily the required information. Of great importance
was the back up of the numerous webmasters/system administrators in case the
necessary information could not been collected directly from the Web. The response
of these webmasters to the e-mailed questions was overwhelming. More than 80%
of the e-mails sent were answered. A frustrating aspect of the followed approach
was the high change of web addresses for the same national clearinghouse site.

A complementary study to this Web survey could be to analyse some case
studies more deeply to determine the business requirements that have shaped the
purpose, scope, design and implementation of the process and technical aspects of
the national clearinghouses. An appreciation of these business requirements could
improve the explanation of
in the
clearinghouse.

the trends in usage and in investment

Another objective of the survey was to describe the developments. The number
of national clearinghouses implemented is steadily increasing over time. In the near
future, it is very likely that increasingly more countries will establish their national
clearinghouse. From an implementation point of view, the introduction of national
clearinghouse as a concept for the dissemination and access of spatial data can
be considered as a success. This implementation of national clearinghouses is
becoming almost a global activity. Not only is it rich countries that have built
effective clearinghouses. Examples of relatively poor countries with suitable
national clearinghouses are Chile, Colombia and Uruguay. However, currently, a
decrease of interest in managing national clearinghouses is observed, which is a
warning development. This observation is based on the decreasing number of data
suppliers, frequency of web updates and the stabilizing number of datasets. These
trends are almost all related to poor management of data providers and (especially)

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

685

clearinghouse managers. Another concerning trend is the decline in use. This
development refers to the decreasing number of monthly visitors, suppliers and web
references. Additionally, another negative trend is the lowering quantity and quality
of data content. This development is based on the decrease of the number of
datasets and the less up-to-date nature of the produced dataset. Of concern is also
the way national clearinghouses are funded. Only a small number are funded
continuously.

Although the differences in management, use, content and technology between
the clearinghouses are high, the developments are very similar. After an initial peak,
ﬁgures gradually enter a decline in the management, use and data content (only a
few show a continuous increase in use and content).

In the future, many national clearinghouses are likely to give more access to
spatial data and provide complementary services such as online mapping. These
web services will change the functional capability of clearinghouses as well as the
use of them to applications. At this moment, many clearinghouses are in kind of
‘identity crises’. During the period of ﬁrst-generation SDI, data were (the only) key
driver for clearinghouse development. During the transition to second-generation
SDIs, the use of data (data application) and the need of users is becoming the main
driving force for national clearinghouses. These trends are reﬂected by the variety
of search mechanism alternatives, the introduction of web services and the increase
of multilingual clearinghouses.

The dynamic nature of SDI and clearinghouses is well reﬂected by the
application of metadata standards to improve the interoperability amongst the
datasets and access mechanisms. Many countries have set up projects to harmonize
their metadata standards with the new ISO standard 19115.

Another objective of the survey was to understand the reasoning behind these
developments. The reason that more national clearinghouses are implemented is
that more countries realize the need and potential power of having one. Most of the
existing clearinghouses are established in Europe, South East Asia, and North and
South America. Nevertheless, numerous countries have still not shown any
initiative to build one. There are several reasons for this. For example, a country
may not have an appropriate network architecture or might have institutional,
legal, cultural or economic bottlenecks.

It

seems

functional

The declining trends in use, management and content reﬂect the changing
demands on clearinghouses.
that after a stage of orientation to
clearinghouse implementations, SDI people are becoming dissatisﬁed with the
existing clearinghouse
capabilities. This dissatisfaction could be
the consequence of the fact that the existing clearinghouses do not ﬁt anymore
the current expectations of the second-generation SDI people. This difference in
demands relates to the dynamic nature of SDI, which has been highlighted by
Rajabifard et al. (2002). Therefore, the implementations and concepts behind
clearinghouses to share data between suppliers and data users are likely to be
changed and resolved.

Another possible reason of these declining trends could be that the majority of
clearinghouses are only funded in a piecemeal way. Management of clearinghouses
is directly affected by funding. A consequence of bad management could be worse
data content, which again could have a negative impact on use. These trends could
also have a negative impact on the data suppliers who are no longer willing to

686

J. Crompvoets et al.

disseminate their data through the clearinghouse. This again could have a negative
impact on use. These observations can be justiﬁed by the high correlation
coefﬁcients between the number of suppliers, the number of datasets and the
monthly number of visitors.

As mentioned above, the focus on the need of the users is becoming a crucial
aspect for implementation. At this moment, users have the right to expect more of
these types of facilities. A point of concern is that clearinghouses are not always
user friendly. It seems that the concepts of metadata and clearinghouses are too
complicated; the terminology used is too discipline speciﬁc and too focused on the
data alone. Therefore,
it seems that clearinghouses do not fulﬁl the current
demands of the users.

Several external developments are also impacting on the development of
national clearinghouses and they will continue to inﬂuence the evolution of their
application of
expanding technologies, market-demand,
changing business models, sustainable development, e-government and participa-
tory democracy (Williamson et al. 2003). The introduction of web services within
the clearinghouse environment is partly the technological answer to some of these
developments.

clearinghouse:

this

The last objective was to determine the critical factors for success. Because of
technical and
each country’s unique historical,
cultural setting, no single best solution or recipe exists. However, the following are
some indications of critical success factors:

institutional, economic,

legal,

. Be speciﬁc about the purpose of the clearinghouse under consideration. To be
successful, there has to be a direct need to share data and services. When the
context for implementation is missing, people will become frustrated to
implement clearinghouses only out of fashion.

. Provide good communication channels for the community for sharing and
using datasets instead of aiming only toward the linkage of available
databases.

. Create stable funding. Stability of funding is needed to build a suitable

framework that facilitates the management of information assets.

. Create trust and authority in the clearinghouse. Stability of funding could

support this process.

. Create more user-friendly interfaces with less discipline-speciﬁc terminology.
. Introduce web services to clearinghouse. It is very likely that the software for

web services will become cheaper in the future.

. Motivate data suppliers and web service providers to participate within the
clearinghouse. The more data and web service providers, the more data and
services are available. This improvement of the content will attract end-users.
. Motivate the clearinghouse managers to update their environment regularly.

6. Conclusions

Through the methodology followed, it was possible to assess the developments
of all national clearinghouses on a worldwide scale. The strength of the web survey
was the ease, speed and objectivity to measure the required data regularly.

The number of national clearinghouses is steadily increasing over time. It is
expected that more countries will have implemented clearinghouses in the future.

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

687

From this perspective, the implementation of national clearinghouses can be
considered a success.

This contrasts with the decline in the use, management and content of national
clearinghouses. One of the main reasons for these concerning trends could be the
dissatisfaction of the spatial data community with the functional capability of SDIs
and clearinghouses. It seems that with the transition to the second-generation SDI,
the demand on the efﬁciency of clearinghouses as well as how they are used is
changing. Clearinghouses during the ﬁrst-generation SDI were only data oriented,
while in the second-generation SDI they are becoming more user and application
oriented. Another reason for these declining trends could be that the majority of
clearinghouses are only funded in a piecemeal way, which means that no suitable
framework can be built to facilitate the management of information assets.

The main success factors that have a positive impact on the development of
national clearinghouses are the inclusion of web services within clearinghouses,
stable funding, the clarity of purpose of the clearinghouse, the provision of good
the creation of user-friendly interfaces with clear
communication channels,
terminology, and trust and authority in the management environment. Addressing
these factors will go a long way towards meeting the immediate needs of the current
the
users. The full
clearinghouse.

implementation is a major challenge for the future of

Another challenge is to keep spatial data suppliers, clearinghouse managers and
end-users motivated for and informed about this mechanism. This is really needed
the worldwide activities related to the
when one considers their role in all
implementation of national SDIs wherein national clearinghouses form the key
component.

Based on the demands of the people to the second-generation SDI, the usability
of spatial data and web services are the main research topics that have to be
investigated to improve the functional capability of national clearinghouses.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Dr Wies Vullings of Wageningen UR, Ir. Bastiaan van
Loenen of Delft University of Technology and Brian Goodsell for comments and
suggestions on earlier versions of this paper. The authors also acknowledge the
support of all the webmasters of the national clearinghouses in the preparation of
this paper. Their contributions were crucial for the results.

References
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND LAND INFORMATION COUNCIL, 2000, Outcomes of

the
ANZLIC Clearinghouse Workshop, 3–4 May 2000, Adelaide (available at: http://
www.anzlic.
org.au/news/workshop/outcomes.htm).

AUSLIG, 2001, Australian Spatial Data Infrastructure (Australian Land Information Group)

(available at: http://www.auslig.gov.au/asdi/index.htm).

BERNABE´ , M. A., GOULD, M., MURO-MEDRANO, P. R., NOGUERAS, J., and ZARAZAGA-
SORIA, F. J., 2002, A spatial data catalogue based initiative to launch the Spanish
SDI. In Proceedings of the 6th Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Conference, ‘From
Global
to Local’, Budapest, Hungary, September 2002 (available at: http://
www.eurogi.org/gsdi6/index.html).

BISHR, Y., and RADWAN, M., 2000, GDI architectures. In Geospatial Data Infrastructure:

688

J. Crompvoets et al.

Concepts, Cases and Good Practice, edited by R. Groot and J. McLaughlin (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), pp. 135–150.

CEN/TC287, 1996, Geographic Information–Data Description–Metadata. Technical Report,

prEN12657 (Brussels: CEN).

CLINTON, W., 1994, Coordinating Geographic Data Acquisition and Access to the National
Spatial Data Infrastructure. Executive Order 12096, Federal Register 59, 17671-4
(Washington, DC).

COLEMAN, D. J., and MCLAUGHLIN, J., 1998, Deﬁning Global Geospatial Data
Infrastructure (GGDI): components, stakeholders and interfaces. Geomatica, 52,
129–144.

CROMPVOETS, J., 2002, Developments of national clearinghouses for geo-information. In
Proceedings of the 6th Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Conference, ‘From Global
to Local’, Budapest, Hungary, September 2002 (available at: http://www.eurogi.org/
gsdi6/index.html).

CROMPVOETS, J., and BREGT, A., 2003, World status of National Spatial Data Clearing-
houses. URISA Journal [Special Issue on Public Participation GIS], 15, APA I, 43–50
(available
http://www.urisa.org/Journal/accepted/1PPGIS/crampvoets/world_
status_of_national_spatial_data.htm).

at:

DORLING KINDERSLEY, 1997, World Atlas (London: Dorling Kindersley).
FGDC, 1997, Metadata to Clearinghouse Hands-on Tutorial (Washington, DC: Federal

Geographic Data Committee) (available at: http://www.fgdc.gov/clearinghouse).

FGDC, 1998, Content Standards for Digital Geospatial Metadata Workbook. Version 2.0

(Washington, DC: Federal Geographic Data Committee).

FGDC, 2000, Questions and Answers about Clearinghouses (Washington, DC: Federal
(available at: http://www.fgdc.gov/clearinghouse/

Geographic Data Committee)
background.html).

FGDC, 2002, Geospatial One-Stop; Ofﬁce of Management and Budget Capital Asset Plan
(Exhibit 300). Version 3 (Washington, DC: Federal Geographic Data Committee).
GROOT, R. and MCLAUGHLIN, J. (eds), 2000, Geospatial Data Infrastructure: Concepts,

Cases and Good Practice (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

INSPIRE ARCHITECTURE AND STANDARDS WORKING GROUP, 2002, INSPIRE Architecture
and Standards Position Paper. Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe
(Brussels: Commission of the European Communities) (available at: http://www.ec-
gis.org/inspire/).

ISO/TC-211, 2001, Geographic Information: Metadata, International Standard 19115.
LANCE, K., and HYMAN, G., 2001, Adoption and implementation of national spatial data
infrastructure in Latin America and the Caribbean. In Proceedings of the 5th Global
Spatial Data Infrastructure Conference, Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, May 2001
(available at: http://codazzi4.igac.gov.co/gsdi5/m_sesion7.htm).

MASSER, I., 1999, All shapes and sizes: the ﬁrst generation of National Spatial Data
Infrastructures. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13, 67–84.
MCLAUGHLIN, J., 1991, Towards National Spatial Data Infrastructure. In Proceedings of the
1991 Canadian Conference on GIS, Ottawa, Canada (Ottawa: Canadian Institute of
Geomatics).

NEBERT, D. D. (ed.), 2001, Developing Spatial Data Infrastructures: The SDI Cookbook,
Version 1.0 (GSDI-Technical Working Group) (available at: http://www.gsdi.org/
pubs/cookbook/cookbook0515.pdf).

NOORI-BUSHEHRI, S., and RAJABIFARD, A., 2001, A proposal for a workshop on APSDI-
Clearinghouse. In Proceedings of PCGIAP-WG2, 7th PCGIAP Meeting, 24–27 April
2001, Tsukuba, Japan.

ONSRUD, H. J., 1998, Compiled Responses by Question for Selected Questions. Survey of
national and regional spatial data infrastructure activities around the globe. Global
Spatial Data Infrastructure Survey (available at: http://www.spatial.maine.edu/
yonsrud/gsdi/Selected.html).

ØSTENSEN, O. M., 2001, The expanding agenda of geographic information standards. ISO

Bulletin, July, 16–21 (available at: http://www.isotc211.org).

PHILLIPS, A., 1998, A metadata management system for Web-based SDIs. MSc thesis,

Department of Geomatics, University of Melbourne.

Worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses

689

RADWAN, M., 2002, The Development of Geographic Information Infrastructure ‘GDI/SDI’ to

Support Access to Spatial data in Distributed Environment (Enschede).

RAJABIFARD, A., 2002, Diffusion for Regional Spatial Data Infrastructures: particular

reference to Asia and the Paciﬁc. PhD thesis, University of Melbourne.

RAJABIFARD, A., FEENEY, M. E., and WILLIAMSON, I. P., 2002, Future directions for SDI
Development. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation,
4, 11–22.

RAJABIFARD, A., FEENEY, M. E., WILLIAMSON, I., and MASSER, I., 2003 Chapter Six
National SDI-initiatives. In Developing Spatial Data Infrastructures: From Concept to
Reality, edited by I. Williamson, A, Rajabifard and M. E. Feeney (London: Taylor &
Francis), pp. 95–109.

RAJABIFARD, A., and WILLIAMSON, I. P., 2001, Spatial Data Infrastructures: an initiative to
facilitate spatial data sharing. In Global Environmental Databases — Present Situation
and Future Directions, Vol. 2, edited by R. Tateishi and D. Hastings (Hong Kong:
International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS-WG IV/8)),
pp. 108–136.

RHIND, D., 1999, National and internal geospatial data policies. In Geographical Information
Systems: Principles, Techniques, Management and Applications, edited by P. Longley,
M. Goodchild, D. Maguire and D. Rhind (New York: Wiley), pp. 767–787.
RHIND, D., 2000, Funding an NGDI. In Geospatial Data Infrastructure Concepts, Cases and
Good Practice, edited by R. Groot and J. McLaughlin (Oxford: Oxford University
Press), pp. 39–55.

WEHN DE MONTALVO, U., 2001, Strategies for SDI implementation: a survey of national
experiences. In Proceedings of the 5th GSDI Conference, Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia, May 2001.

WILLIAMSON, I., RAJABIFARD, A., and FEENEY, M. E., 2003, Developing Spatial Data

Infrastructures: From Concept to Reality (London: Taylor & Francis).

