International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 25, No. 12, December 2011, 1913–1930

Trust in Web GIS: the role of the trustee attributes in the design of
trustworthy Web GIS applications

Artemis Skarlatidoua,b*, Muki Haklayb and Tao Chengb

aDepartment of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK; bDepartment of Civil,
Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, London, UK

(Received 20 April 2010; ﬁnal version received 31 December 2010)

Since the introduction of Xerox PARC Map Viewer, there is a high growth in the number
of Web GIS (Geographical Information System) applications for public use in different
contexts. These applications instruct, advise and provide the tools for spatial analysis to
their users, and the people who use them depend or rely on these systems. Many of these
users are non-experts who have no GIS expertise and a limited understanding of spa-
tial data handling. These inherent characteristics of non-expert interaction establish risk
and uncertainty, which are further increased due to the complexity of Web GIS inter-
faces. These issues of uncertainty, risk perception and dependence are all trust-related
aspects. Online trust has been repeatedly identiﬁed as a major concept for online infor-
mation systems and its value recognised as it inﬂuences the intentions to use and the
acceptance of online systems and the overall user experience. However, there is a very
limited understanding as to exactly how trust is constructed when people, especially
non-experts, interact with Web GIS. To improve knowledge in this domain, this article
explores the theoretical foundations on how trust can be investigated in this context.
Trust studies (mainly from the e-commerce domain) suggest that a trust-oriented inter-
face design may improve the trustworthiness of online systems, and such attention can
be given to Web GIS interfaces. Such studies are reviewed and their applicability is
considered in the Web GIS context, taking into consideration their special characteris-
tics. A case study is used to discuss how some features may potentially inﬂuence the
trustworthiness of Web GIS applications. This article concludes by suggesting future
research directions for the implementation of a holistic approach, which is necessary to
investigate trust in this context.

Keywords: Web GIS; HCI; trust; usability; WIYBY

1.

Introduction

Trust has been a topic of research in different disciplines and it is widely recognised as a
vital element in a well-functioning society (Wang and Emurian 2005). However, trust does
not exist only in human relationships. The ways in which people interact with computing
devices and web applications demonstrate that they respond socially to technology and that
they relate to computers in ways that are somewhat similar to interactions with other human
collaborators (Lee and See 2002, Fogg 2003). Trust is therefore considered an important
element of human–computer interactions (HCIs), and this realisation has resulted in the

*Corresponding author. Email: a.skarlatidou@ucl.ac.uk

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.557379
http://www.tandfonline.com

1914

A. Skarlatidou et al.

new ﬁeld of trust research, in the context of online and ofﬂine environments. Existing stud-
ies suggest that people’s trust perceptions of online environments inﬂuence their intentions
to engage, to use and to accept these systems and inﬂuence the perceived user experience
(e.g. Shneiderman 2000, Egger 2001, Fogg 2003).

It has been almost 20 years since the introduction of the World Wide Web (the Web),
which since its inception has been heralded as important in facilitating wider public access
to spatial information and knowledge and in its contribution to the democratisation of
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) (Dragicevic 2004, Dunn 2007). More geograph-
ical information than ever before is now available to users, but, as with Wikipedia, the
reliability of this information is a major issue. This aspect of assessing and trusting geo-
graphical information has received almost no attention from researchers in the area of
GIS. Web GIS – deﬁned broadly in our context as the myriad of applications that allow
users to browse, view and potentially contribute geographical information – are power-
ful and popular tools. Although the majority of research papers on online trust focus on
e-commerce applications, it is important to extend this research to the area of Web GIS,
so that such systems, especially when they are used to involve the public in decision-
making processes, can be designed to be trustworthy, while also taking into consideration
their special characteristics that emanate from the use and manipulation of geographical
information.

The complexity of Web GIS interfaces and the fact that they are mostly used by
non-experts are both widely acknowledged (Unwin 2005, Haklay and Zaﬁri 2008). These
inherent characteristics of Web GIS directed the attention of the GIS community to HCI,
and more speciﬁcally to usability engineering principles, which are gradually being incor-
porated into their design and development. The complexity of geographical data and Web
GIS interfaces further increases the elements of risk and uncertainty that, according to the
literature, are preconditions of trust and therefore reduce trust in the system (Mayer et al.
1995, Grabner-Kräuter et al. 2006).

Moreover, Web GIS applications are used in domains in which uncertainty is inherent,
as in environmental decision-making. For example, research on Public Participation GIS
suggests that Web GIS can enhance public participation and engagement (Carver et al.
1998, Haklay 2003). The trust literature provides evidence that people engage with systems
that they perceive as trustworthy and avoid those that they mistrust (Sillence et al. 2006).
However, to our knowledge, trust in the Web GIS context has yet to be explored.

The aim of this article is to investigate and highlight the importance of trust in the
design of effective Web GIS applications. By reviewing online trust and considering the
special features of Web GIS, this article sets the theoretical foundations and provides sug-
gestions as to how trust can be examined and improved in the Web GIS context, through
interface design. This trust-oriented interface design emphasises the improvement of those
speciﬁc attributes that inﬂuence the trustworthiness of the system.

This article begins with a conceptual overview of trust, and the discussion then narrows
down to online trust perspectives. The most inﬂuential studies of online interface design
are discussed. In the second part, this theoretical overview is applied in the Web GIS con-
text and a case study is provided to understand which interface design elements are most
likely to inﬂuence the trustworthiness of Web GIS applications. This article concludes with
suggestions for future trust-based research in the Web GIS context.

2. Overview of trust
From the outset, we should note that there is no single deﬁnition of trust. One reason for
this is that trust has been a topic of research in several different disciplines (Corritore

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1915

et al. 2001). Each of these disciplines approached trust from its own perspective, resulting
in ‘a confusing potpourri of deﬁnitions’ (Shapiro 1987, p. 625). For example, in philoso-
phy, trust was described as conﬁdent reliance on somebody else ‘to take care of something
which we care about, but which they could harm or steal if they wished’ (Bailey 2002,
p. 1). In psychology, trust was examined as a personality characteristic (interpersonal trust)
and as a social and institutional construct (social, institutional trust). For sociologists and
economists, however, the emphasis was on how people cope with the uncertainty associ-
ated with transactions, and in management studies the main interest was on trust within
organisations (organisational trust).

Another aspect of trust, which challenges scientists to agree on a common deﬁni-
tion (Wang and Emurian 2005), is that trust encapsulates different meanings (Williamson
1993). For example, credibility, reliability and honesty are all trust-related concepts that,
although conceptually different, are used interchangeably. For example, Fogg (2003) sug-
gested that trust and credibility are similar terms, but credibility is the believability of
something (e.g. a system), whereas trust can be described as dependability on something.
Despite the lack of a commonly agreed deﬁnition, researchers agree on the importance
of trust in different contexts. Deutsch (1962) and Mayer et al. (1995) argued that trust
allows people to handle risky and uncertain situations. Luhmann (1979) and Barber (1983)
suggested that trust can decrease the complexity of our otherwise complex world, by elim-
inating the number of options in given circumstances. Putnam (1995) and Misztal (1996)
described trust as a part of social capital, which is a form of social networking. Koehn
(1996) suggested that trust in business is the key to successful transactions and long-term
relationships.

Finally, there are speciﬁc components of trust that are used to explain trust, and these
can help to conceptualise trust effectively, so that it becomes a measurable attribute.
These general trust components, which are also applicable to online trust perspectives,
are introduced in the next section.

2.1. Trust components

Any trusting relationship involves two parts: a trustor and a trustee (Figure 1); within the
general context of trust, the trustor is a person, whereas the trustee may be, for example,
another human collaborator, a governmental body or an organisation. These two parts inter-
act in such a way that the trustor is willing to depend on the trustee, while being conﬁdent
that the trustee will act according to his/her beneﬁts (Kini and Choobineh 1998). If the
trustor is not willing to depend or rely on the trustee then trust is either limited (Blomqvist
1997) or there is distrust: a concept with very different implications.

In addition from the willingness to depend, the elements of risk and uncertainty are
also trust preconditions. Chopra and Wallace (2003) suggested that ‘The presence of risk
creates a need for trust’ (p. 3), and Wang and Emurian (2005) explained that ‘Trust is only
needed, and actually ﬂourishes, in an environment that is uncertain and risky’ (p. 111).
In this perspective, trust is described as a mechanism that reduces complexity and as a
mental shortcut that reduces uncertainty in situations where limited cognitive resources are
available (Grabner-Kräuter and Kaluscha 2003).

A trusting relationship is inﬂuenced by the trustor’s properties and the trustee’s
attributes. The trustor’s properties involve two elements. First, the disposition or propensity
to trust, which encompasses ‘a person’s general willingness to trust others’ (Grabner-
Kräuter et al., 2006, p. 237). Second, the trustor’s trusting beliefs about the trustee explain
how speciﬁc attributes of the trustee are perceived by the trustor (e.g. the trustee’s honesty
and reliability).

1916

A. Skarlatidou et al.

Risk, dependence,
uncertainty

Trustor
Person who
interacts
with Web GIS
application

Trust
–Context specific-
The context that the Web
GIS application is used

Trustee
Web GIS
application

Properties
1.Propensity to
trust
2. Trusting beliefs

Affective and cognitive trust

Attributes
Functionality,
perceptual
attributes and
trust cues

Figure 1. Trust components.

The trustee’s attributes inﬂuence the trustor’s beliefs, and as a result the willingness to
depend. The literature describes several attributes associated with the trusted party, includ-
ing such concepts as ability, integrity and predictability. These attributes depend on the
context of the trusting relationship, which is further inﬂuenced by who the trustee is (e.g.
a friend, a relative, a computerised system). As this article focuses on online trust, where
the trustee takes the form of an online environment/information, in the next section more
emphasis will be paid to those attributes that inﬂuence their perceived trustworthiness. The
reason for this is that these may be very different from those of a human collaborator.

Trust has both affective and cognitive dimensions. The cognitive dimension is based
purely on a search for evidence or knowledge that will make the trustor willing to depend
on the trustee. For example, if there is no prior interaction or knowledge about the trustee,
then trust is built on cognition and an exploration of the trustee attributes, which will
determine whether the trustor enters the trusting relationship or not. However, there are
situations where there is a mutual identiﬁcation between the two trusting parties that further
establishes a bond and where trust also has affective dimensions (Rousseau et al. 1998).

3. Trust in online environments
People not only respond socially to technology but also rely on technology for many daily
activities, and therefore it is not surprising that a trustee may take the form of a comput-
erised system. Lee and See (2002) suggested that trust research can explain this reliance
of people on technology, including online environments and web applications. Moreover,
Nielsen (1999) suggested that people’s trust dispositions and beliefs are not favourable for
the Web, and although many more people are using online banking and systems such as
Facebook, to which they disclose many personal details, there are also ongoing discussions
on privacy issues, identity theft, hackers’ attacks and several other elements that make
people cautious and suspicious, and therefore inﬂuence their online behaviour and action.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1917

It is therefore no surprise that online trust has become a critical research area. The
next section ﬁrst explains the components of online trust, and is followed by a discussion
of online trustee attributes, and of the studies that suggest that a trust-oriented interface
design can improve the perceived trustworthiness of computerised systems.

3.1. Online trust components

The trust components that exist in an online electronic context do not differ signiﬁcantly
from those described in Section 2.1 and in Figure 1. Chopra and Wallace (2003) explained
that the following elements are relevant to online trust: a speciﬁc context; the preconditions
of dependence, uncertainty and risk; the trustor’s conﬁdence that trust will be upheld and
the willingness to act on that conﬁdence; the factors that inﬂuence the perceived trust
(propensity to trust and trusting beliefs); the dimensions of trust (cognitive and affective
trust); and the trustee attributes.

One important difference from the trust components reviewed in Section 2.1 is asso-
ciated with a trustee who is not another human collaborator. In the context of online
trust, the trustee may take the form of online information, an online information sys-
tem, an e-commerce website or a system that supports online relationships (Chopra and
Wallace 2003). Therefore, the trustor is a person who is willing to depend or rely on that
system/information and who is conﬁdent that the system will act to protect or promote
his/her beneﬁts.

As noted, risk and uncertainty are also trust preconditions in the context of online trust.
For example, if there is a need for a person to depend on a system, but there is no fear
of losing something, then there is no uncertainty and thus no need to undertake any risk,
and therefore also no reason to develop any trust perceptions. However, if the trustee is,
for example, an e-commerce environment, and the trustor wants to depend on this system
to make an online purchase, then the risk associated with losing money can lead to the
development of trust perceptions.

In this context, the trustee attributes play an important role, because they have a
major inﬂuence on the decision to rely on the system. Several studies explain how trustee
attributes can be designed such that the system’s trustworthiness can be improved. For
example, such an online trustee attribute, or a trust cue, is a seal of approval that can
increase the trustor’s conﬁdence and eventually result in the decision to depend on the
trustee (cognitive trust).

In the particular case of Web GIS, there is no knowledge of the attributes that inﬂuence
the trustworthiness of such systems, or for what reasons, if any, they are trusted by their
end users. By and large, the popularity of public mapping websites, and the willingness
of their users to use them to undertake visits to unfamiliar places, and to choose travel
routes, indicates that some level of trust is associated with Web GIS. Beyond this indirect
and potentially false observation (maybe the users know that the information is not trust-
worthy), we do not know what exactly the trust relationships between these systems and
their users are. However, before exploring Web GIS, it is necessary to review the online
trustee attributes, as suggested by previous studies, and then consider their applicability in
the Web GIS context.

3.2. Online trustee attributes

Understanding the trust-related attributes of a system may facilitate the design process of
more trustworthy systems. However, in the literature the trustee attributes are not consis-
tently described in the same way, and in several cases these attributes have been shown to

1918

A. Skarlatidou et al.

be difﬁcult to measure or evaluate. For example, Chopra and Wallace (2003) argued that the
trustee attributes of online environments are the trustee’s competence, positive intentions,
ethics and predictability. In this case, how easily or objectively ethics or positive intentions
can be measured and evaluated, so that they can be improved, is of critical concern.

Although different studies describe trustee attributes in different ways, as is evident
from Table 1, in almost all cases there are two categories of attributes. The ﬁrst cate-
gory of attributes, deﬁned in this article as perceptual attributes, refers to the source itself.
According to Grabner-Kräuter et al. (2006), such perceptual attributes are the source’s
honesty, integrity and reliability, which deﬁne the source’s trustworthiness and inﬂuence
its reputation. McKnight et al. (2002) suggested that the source’s reputation is a crit-
ical perceptual attribute. In fact, Barnes and Vidgen (2000) found that the reputation
of Amazon.com increased its sales signiﬁcantly, and Jarvenpaa et al. (1999) found that
perceived reputation had a positive effect on trust formation about e-vendors.

The second category of attributes (deﬁned herein as functional attributes) refers to the
system itself and, as McKnight et al. (2002) explain, to the system quality. For example, the
aesthetics of a system may inﬂuence its perceived trustworthiness. In this sense, Sappho’s
popular quotation that ‘what is beautiful is good and what is good will soon become beau-
tiful’ seems relevant here. Dion et al. (1972) found that participants in an experimental
study considered the physically attractive person a good person, rather than the opposite,
and Fung and Lee (1999) suggested that a high-quality website with a good interface
design increases perceived trust levels. Additional functional attributes are the system’s
functionality, which inﬂuences the system’s usability (Corritore et al. 2003) and which is
strongly linked to the system’s predictability (e.g. an easy to use system can be more pre-
dictable and thus minimise the degree of risk involved, thus inﬂuencing the formation of
trust perceptions).

Fogg (2003) used the term credibility (believability) rather than trust, which also has
two dimensions: perceived trustworthiness (perceptual attribute) and perceived system’s
expertise (functional attribute). It is interesting that, as Fogg suggests, these two dimensions
may vary, so that ‘If one dimension of credibility is strong while the other dimension is

Table 1. Perceptual and functional trustee attributes.

Perceptual attributes (refer to the source)

Functional attributes (refer to the system)

Trustworthiness (refers to the source’s

Predictability

Competence, Positive Intentions, Ethics,
Benevolence, Honesty, Integrity, Credibility)

Chopra and Wallace (2003), Grabner-Kräuter
et al. (2006), Fogg (2003), Corritore et al.
(2003)

Reputation
McKnight et al. (2002), Fogg (2003)

Chopra and Wallace (2003), Grabner-Kräuter

et al. (2006)

Usability
Corritore et al. (2003)
Aesthetics
McKnight et al. (2002)

Expertise (as a function of Knowledge, Skill and

Experience)

Fogg (2003)
Functionality
Corritore et al. (2003), McKnight et al. (2002)

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1919

unknown the computing product may be perceived as credible, due to the “halo effect” ’
(p. 124).

Thus, in summary it can be said that there are two categories of attributes that inﬂu-
ence the perceived trustworthiness of a system. The perceptual attributes are related to the
source and its reputation, which is inﬂuenced by such attributes as honesty, credibility and
reputation (left column of Table 1). The functional attributes (right column of Table 1) are
related to the evidence collected through interaction with the trustee and the assessment of
its quality (aesthetics, usability, predictability, expertise and functionality). Also, there is
enough evidence, derived mainly from the HCI literature, that both categories of attributes
can be improved through interface design. The next section reviews some of these studies.

3.3. HCI studies for trust-oriented interface design
Based on the previous discussion, we can conclude that functional attributes are easier to
evaluate and improve than perceptual attributes, which are more abstract and subjective.
However, it is noteworthy that several studies argue that a trust-oriented interface design
can improve both types of attribute.

Perceptual attributes can be improved by such elements as seals of approval and brand-
ing, which emphasise the credibility and reputation of the source (Cheskin Research Report
1999). Shneiderman (2000) also suggested that the perceived trustworthiness of a system
can be improved by trust cues, such as branding (e.g. logos) and references of past per-
formance (testimonials). Trust cues, such as testimonials and feedback, have a direct or
indirect impact on perceived trustworthiness. Ba and Pavlou (2002) examined the web-
site of eBay and found that feedback mechanisms that provided comments about sellers
inﬂuenced buyers’ trust levels. Fogg (2003) also provided a detailed list of the additional
elements that potentially increase the perceived trustworthiness, and which include, among
others, providing contact details and external links that direct the user to credible and
reputable sources.

Concerning functional attributes, the Cheskin Research Report (1999) further sug-
gested that navigation and presentation are important trust-building blocks, whereas
Shneiderman (2000) explained that, for trust enhancement, good design, based on clear
commitments and usability, is necessary. Fogg (2003) provided further examples of func-
tional attributes and explained that elements such as professional design, regular updates
and working links inﬂuence trust perceptions.

More evidence that a trust-oriented interface design can increase trustworthiness
is provided by Egger (2001), who suggested that trust cues are particularly important
because they create the ﬁrst impressions about the website, as is also noted by Wang and
Emurian (2005). Wang and Emurian (2005) suggested four design dimensions for trust
enhancement: Graphic, Structure, Content and Social-cue design dimensions.

The Content and Social-cue designs refer to the use of trust-inducing features. In par-
ticular, the Content design suggests the use of features such as logos and seals of approval,
as well as correct and accurate information. The Social-cue design emphasises design fea-
tures that create an atmosphere of social presence, as, for example, photographs, videos and
chats. Blogs or forums that connect people can also be considered trust-inducing features.
The system’s quality attributes in the context of online trust refer to usability, func-
tionality and aesthetical elements. Wang and Emurian (2005) suggested that the Graphic
design dimension includes such elements as the use of pastel and cool tones and the use
of high-quality photographs. Design quality is also mentioned not only by the Cheskin
Research Report (1999), but also by several other studies (e.g. Nikander and Karvonen

1920

A. Skarlatidou et al.

the literature provides ample evidence that

2000). Moreover, Karvonen (2000) linked aesthetics to trustworthiness and discussed, in
particular, how the beauty of simplicity (clean and clear design) inﬂuences usability and
affects online trust.
In summary,

trustworthiness can be
enhanced by a trust-oriented interface design. The trustee attributes that are linked to
trustworthiness are the website’s quality (e.g. aesthetics, functionality and usability), trust-
inducing features that emphasise the source provider and its reputation (e.g. logos) and
additional trust cues, such as testimonials, feedback and forums. It should also be noted
that the presence of trust cues clearly depends on the context of the speciﬁc application and
on the user needs.

The context of the application has a major effect on those trustee attributes that
inﬂuence perceived trustworthiness, and all the previous studies derive mainly from the
e-commerce domain. The main user consideration in the context of an e-commerce web-
site is to make a purchase successfully and easily, but this is the not the case with Web
GIS applications, and therefore interface design elements, such as videos or chats, may
not be relevant in this context. At the same time, usability and aesthetics are suggested
as particularly important elements in the formation of trust perceptions in the e-commerce
domain, which are usually simple websites. However, the usability and aesthetical elements
of a Web GIS application may be more complex, as these refer not only to the rest of the
website but also to the cartography of the map, the legend, the spatial navigation tools and
so on.

It should be noted that a user, especially a non-expert, may have several trust concerns
while using such a system: for example, whether the data are correct and up to date, whether
the maps were constructed by a professional and thus do not contain any errors and whether
the analysis and the results are correct and accurate. However, a non-expert rarely has
the expertise to assess all these elements and make an informed decision. Even so, the
functional and perceptual attributes of the system can still inﬂuence trust perceptions. This
means that a non-expert can still evaluate the aesthetics and usability, and the source’s
reputation, and develop any trust perceptions accordingly. Thus, apart from focusing on the
information provided, it is also important to emphasise both the perceptual and functional
attributes, as well as the trust cues that can be used in this domain, so that the users’
conﬁdence can be improved and trust will increase.

Web GIS have their own special characteristics, which inﬂuence the ways in which
people interact with these systems and also their decisions to rely on them. At the same
time, it is as yet unknown what, if any, usability, aesthetical or functional elements inﬂuence
trust in the Web GIS context, or if there are any additional interface elements that can be
considered as trust-inducing features.

4. Trust in Web GIS
Based on Figure 1, the trust components of a Web GIS include a trustee (a Web GIS appli-
cation) and a trustor who is willing to undertake some risk, based on the conﬁdence that
the trustee will act according to his/her beneﬁts (i.e. data, analysis results and additional
information are all accurate and reliable). Such a trusting relationship is inﬂuenced by the
trustor’s properties, the trustee’s attributes, the cognitive and affective dimensions of trust
and the context of the application itself. Risk and uncertainty should be existent. These
trust components are now discussed separately for the Web GIS context.

Web GIS as the trustee: Fogg (2003) suggested that computers’ credibility mat-
ters when computerised systems ‘instruct or advise users, report measurements, provide

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1921

information and analysis. . .’ (p. 126). It can be argued that Web GIS serve all three of these
functions. For example, there are now several Web GIS applications that enable people to
ﬁnd places or to provide driving directions (e.g. Google Maps) and measure distances. If
the systems are usable but the instructions or measurements provided are not accurate, then
the system will lose credibility, and vice versa. Moreover, there are also more sophisticated
Web GIS applications that provide additional information, and also guide users in the spa-
tial analysis and decision-making processes, and there is also a need for people to rely on
the system and its results.

The trustor properties: A trustor is a person who is willing to rely on the Web GIS
application and the information it provides. In this perspective, it is necessary to differenti-
ate between a trustor as a person with GIS education and a trustor as a non-expert user, as
this knowledge can inﬂuence the trustor’s properties, and especially his/her trusting beliefs
about the trustee. This means that a trustor with GIS education assesses some of the trustee
attributes, for example, the data source provider and how the maps were constructed, almost
immediately, but this can have an inﬂuence on the formation of overall trust perceptions.
However, this is not the case with non-expert users, which makes trust an even more impor-
tant consideration, taking into account also the increasing number of non-expert users who
use Web GIS applications. In Section 4.1, some Web GIS user aspects and their HCI con-
siderations are brieﬂy introduced, along with some of the interaction barriers that also refer
to speciﬁc trustee attributes (e.g. usability).

Risk and uncertainty: As explained in the ﬁrst part of the article, the elements of
risk and uncertainty play a role in trust along with the context. First, Monmonier (1996)
explained that, apart from the deliberate lies that can be told with a map (e.g. political
propaganda, advertising), map attributes such as scale, symbolisation and projection may
misinform and confuse the users, whereas non-expert users have limited experience in
understanding these elements and in assessing the trustworthiness of the ﬁnal map. For
Web GIS applications, especially where the screen’s size and the resolution are not the
same for all users and can be poor, elements such as generalisation or symbology can
further increase uncertainty and risk.

Second, to realise further the importance of the context in Web GIS, for a trustee, we
here provide two examples, both of which refer to environmental decision-making, but their
risk elements differ. The ﬁrst system was designed by Steve Carver for the identiﬁcation
of a suitable location for a nuclear waste repository in the UK1, and the second is the
Environment Agency (EA)’s ‘What’s In Your Back Yard’ (WIYBY) website2. The latter
provides information to the public about ﬂoods, air quality and other environmental issues,
using a GIS interface, and it is a tool that inﬂuences decision-making. For example, a user
who wants to buy a house might ﬁrst refer to the website to assess the ﬂood risk in various
different locations.

The context in these two examples is different and so is the risk, and this inﬂuences
the willingness to depend on the system. In the ﬁrst case, a wrong decision regarding the
location of a nuclear waste repository could have catastrophic consequences. Even in the
second example, accepting the information provided might well have higher risks than
buying something from an e-commerce website. This is because the wrong information
could have health consequences (e.g. wrong data about air quality, which misinform a
person with breathing problems) or even threaten the user’s ﬁnancial security (e.g. buying
inappropriate home insurance). Indeed, in reality the risk involved in house purchase is so
high that an environmental information search is part of the task of the lawyer who carries
out the conveyancing.

1922

A. Skarlatidou et al.

However, it is not the only element of risk that is deﬁnitely present in this con-
text. Haklay (2002) suggested that accuracy and uncertainty are integral to environmental
information and that errors in its analysis are unavoidable. Even when data accuracy is
established, geographical information can be very complex and requires a complicated set
of techniques for its analysis. In the GIS area, there is an extensive research literature on
uncertainty, concerning especially data quality and issues such as fuzziness, errors and pre-
cision. Couclelis (2003) further addressed additional uncertainty sources in the geospatial
domain, such as the lack of skills and confusion, which further inﬂuence geospatial knowl-
edge production. However, communicating such uncertainty to end users remains an open
research problem.

In addition, the fact that non-experts have limited knowledge about spatial data han-
dling and GIS operations creates additional complications. Usability, learnability and
predictability are crucial factors for successful use of these systems, but these alone are
not enough. To ensure that users will be willing to depend on the system, to accept its
results and to engage with it, it is necessary to ensure that they will ﬁrst trust it.

4.1. GIS: user aspects and HCI considerations

The capabilities and beneﬁts of GIS for the exploration, analysis and visualisation of geo-
graphical data are widely recognised. Although the usability of GIS has improved over
the years, modern desktop GIS environments remain complex, and they are used mainly
by experts. The Web, therefore, is critical in creating and delivering GIS applications
and maps to the public, thus leading to the democratisation of spatial data (Dragicevic
2004).

Since the introduction of Xerox PARC Map Viewer in 1993 (Putz 1994), a plethora
of web-mapping applications has been developed, allowing end users to interact in new
and innovative ways. Web GIS provide the tools to explore geographical data and to per-
form spatial analysis, and in some cases they provide the tools for public involvement in
decision-making processes. Extensive research in the Public Participation GIS area exam-
ines how GIS can be used to enhance public participation, because this changes the ways in
which people interact and communicate with maps, and it can also support visual thinking
(MacEachren 1994, MacEachren and Kraak 1997, Sieber 2006, Dunn 2007).

A common characteristic of Web GIS is that these systems provide tasks that may
seem extremely complex to a non-expert. The increased complexity creates interaction
barriers and thus makes HCI principles particularly important. Recent usability studies
of Web GIS show that non-experts have signiﬁcant interaction problems, which increase
complexity, reduce predictability and thus establish uncertainty. Skarlatidou and Haklay
(2006) performed a usability evaluation study and compared some of the most popular
public web-mapping sites, in terms of user performance. They found that a considerable
number of people failed to perform fundamental tasks. A similar study by Nivala et al.
(2008) reported the identiﬁcation of 403 usability problems and concluded by presenting
some usability guidelines for the development of public web-mapping sites.

Moreover, Ishikawa et al. (2005) evaluated climate maps and found that users were not
able to interpret the map in the way that the map designer had intended, which demon-
strates that experts are not always capable of producing effective and easily understood
visualisations, or even systems. A subsequent solution is the implementation of design
approaches that consider users’ needs and expectations. For example, Kramers (2008)
described the beneﬁts of a user-centred design approach, as a way of overcoming the
difﬁculties that non-experts face when the tools are based entirely on technology-driven

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1923

designs. The signiﬁcance of a user-centred design approach is also acknowledged by Van
Elzakker (2005) in his study of maps’ usability.

As we have seen, usability is only one of the system attributes that contribute to the
formation of the overall trust perceptions. The next section illustrates, through the WIYBY
example, some Web GIS trustee attributes and problematic features that could inﬂuence
trust in this context and that could result from improved interface design intended to
increase trustworthiness.

5. Examination of trust on WIYBY website

We selected the EA’s WIYBY website for several reasons. First, it has a GIS element, which
allows the user to explore and interact with environmental maps. Second, it incorporates
the elements of risk and uncertainty, which are trust preconditions. Finally, previous studies
(Alsop 2008, Francis 2009) have shown that the website has signiﬁcant usability problems
that may inﬂuence its trustworthiness.

As explained above, trust is multidimensional and there are several factors that inﬂu-
ence the formation of trust perceptions, such as the trustor’s propensity to trust, trusting
beliefs and trustee attributes. For a holistic approach as to how trust is constructed, elements
such as the trustor’s trust perceptions regarding the Internet, Web GIS applications, data
source providers and governmental organisations, such as the EA, should be considered
and researched further.

Moreover, trust in a Web GIS application also refers to conﬁdence that the data, the
analysis results and also any additional information provided are accurate and reliable,
although this is not always easy for a non-expert user to assess. However, a review also
found that trust can be improved through a trust-oriented interface design, which focuses on
such elements as usability, aesthetics, functionality and other trust cues, which emphasise
the website provider and its reputation. The aim of this section is to demonstrate, using the
example of the WIYBY website, how these functional attributes, which are suggested in
the general trust literature, can inﬂuence trust in this context.

In terms of the trust-based design principles suggested by Wang and Emurian (2005),
it can be argued that the website complies with several of them. For example, as
Figure 2 shows, simple, clear, pale colour tones are used, the green colour used in the
website increases trust, based on Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions (Plutchik 1980), the EA
logo is clearly visible, there are links to online communities (e.g. Facebook) and also links
to Privacy Policy and contact details for enquiries (perceptual attributes). One negative
aspect may be that the menu does not match popular menu visualisations, which for Web
GIS is an important consideration, because non-experts need additional time to familiarise
themselves with the GIS component, and this has implications for their learning curve.

To enter the GIS interface, the user must click on the ‘Go straight to maps’ link,
then select a topic (e.g. ﬂood, air pollution) and also enter the postcode of interest. The
GIS interface for the topic of air pollution for the postcode WC1E 6BT is illustrated in
Figure 3.

At this stage a preliminary investigation based on the literature reviewed, on the GIS
usability guidelines suggested by Nivala et al. (2008) and also on the author’s expert judge-
ment, based on the experience in Web GIS evaluation, reveals several problematic features
which might further inﬂuence trust, although some trust-inducing features, such as the EA
logo and the Crown Copyright, are still present.

The search box is clearly visible, although a signiﬁcant problem is the small map size,
which is further blocked by the legend, even though there is a signiﬁcant amount of unused
white space on the right-hand side of the website. As yet it is unknown whether map

1924

A. Skarlatidou et al.

Figure 2. What’s In Your Back Yard (WIYBY) interface provided by the Environment Agency
(http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk).

size inﬂuences trust perceptions, although a previous study by Skarlatidou (2005) showed
that users prefer large map interfaces. A large map size supports greater spatial cogni-
tion, because it presents more spatial elements on the same map tile. The need to drag the
map is reduced, as is the possibility of losing any reference points during map navigation.
Previous studies have showed that satisfaction is linked to trust and loyalty (Flavian et al.
2005), and thus it is believed that a larger map interface could provide users with more
control, conﬁdence and satisfaction, all of which could subsequently increase their trust in
the system.

Another issue is that the results overlap and the top layer hides the bottom layers, and
a non-expert may be unfamiliar with the GIS functionality of selecting/deselecting layers
to reveal all important information. In that case, users might have the impression that the
website is trying to hide some data from them. Trust is fragile and easily broken, and it
may take a considerable amount of time to rebuild. Taking this into consideration, different
transparency levels in the colours used to describe the results, or guidance about how to
use speciﬁc functions, could increase the perceived trustworthiness.

Below the map there is a link ‘Text version of results’ where the user can ﬁnd
more information about each result. However, the user cannot explore each feature while
navigating on the map, because the link directs the user to a new page. If the user was able
to read the text version results and to refer to the map at the same time, this would increase
his/her conﬁdence and trust regarding the data and the map.

Aesthetics, as explained above, also inﬂuences the perceived trustworthiness. Some
other elements that may inﬂuence trust are the base maps, which might not be perceived as
particularly pleasant aesthetically, but they are professionally designed for the context of

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1925

Figure 3. GIS interface of the WIYBY website, after searching for air pollution in the area of
WC1E 6BT (http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk).

this speciﬁc application. The base maps include spatial features not explained by the leg-
end, and in several cases these features can create confusion because they are represented
using the same colours as the results.

One critical feature that is missing from this part of the website is direct and clear links
to additional information, information as to how the maps were constructed and when the
data were last updated. This information could potentially help to build and improve trust.
The website exhibits additional problems, such as broken links and some functions
that do not work properly, acronyms that are only explained once, textual information that
requires linear reading and other problems which decrease trust, according to the trust-
based literature.

As reviewed above, additional trust cues can increase perceived trustworthiness (e.g.
feedback mechanisms, logos, chats, testimonials, forums or seals of approval). It is prob-
ably the case that not all of these features are relevant to the Web GIS context; however,
user expectations and needs were never investigated in relation to trust in this particular
context.

6. Summary and conclusions
Based on the general trust and online trust literature, it can be concluded that trust is an
important consideration when there exist risk and uncertainty that inﬂuence the decision
to rely or depend on a system. The risk and uncertainty elements in the Web GIS context
were thoroughly explained in the previous sections. At the same time, increasing numbers

1926

A. Skarlatidou et al.

of people are using these systems on a daily basis, and the sophistication of Web GIS is
growing, and this potentially increases the need to research trust further in this context.

Only a few years ago, with the appearance of the ﬁrst web-mapping applications (e.g.
Multimap and MapQuest, which were developed in 1995 and 1997, respectively), people
ﬁrst used them to query locations, but have now progressed to performing tasks such as
customised routes (e.g. Google and Bing). Through neogeography, and as non-expert users
become more familiar with Web GIS environments, the future of Web GIS use involves
exposure to applications such as ‘Where can I live?’3 and to even more sophisticated Web
GIS that supports more advanced decision-making processes. In such cases, ﬁrst, there
might be a need for people to rely on these systems and accept the analysis results, which
could subsequently generate questions about their trustworthiness.

Web GIS provide online maps, and thus it can be suggested that they support visual
thinking, understanding and easier communication of spatial information, as was pre-
viously suggested for maps and their use in stimulating visual thinking (Kraak 2004).
However, interaction with these systems, more particularly non-expert interaction, fur-
ther establishes uncertainty and risk. For example, the increased complexity of Web GIS
interfaces, the uncertainty and risk associated with the context of these applications, the
geographical information and spatial analysis and the fact that non-experts have limited
knowledge about GIS operations all increase the elements of risk and uncertainty and could
further inﬂuence their trustworthiness.

The existing online trust literature, as it was previously discussed, suggests that a sys-
tem’s trustworthiness is inﬂuenced by the person’s propensity to trust, his/her trusting
beliefs about the trustee and its attributes. For a holistic research approach for trust in Web
GIS, all these elements should be investigated. First, for trustor’s trust propensity in the
Web GIS context, this involves further researching the end users’ trust perceptions about
the Web, and more speciﬁcally about online maps as mediums for communicating spatial
information. This investigation could potentially help to answer research questions such as
‘Do people trust online maps?’, but could also improve our understanding of what people
think about online maps and the tactics they develop to assess their trustworthiness (e.g.
Do people check the data source provider before trusting an online map?). Other attributes
of particular interest that such an investigation might involve include what map features
(e.g. scale, map size, map tutorials, symbology) and aesthetic elements (e.g. map colours)
potentially inﬂuence trust, focusing on both cognitive and affective elements.

Second, HCI studies from the online trust literature provide evidence that trust can
be improved by improving the functional and perceptual attributes of the trustee and by
incorporating trust-inducing features (or else trust cues) into the interface design of these
systems. However, most of these studies focus on e-commerce environments, which are
very different from Web GIS applications. For example, it is not clear whether the use of
pictures or chats and blogs in the Web GIS context does indeed improve their trustworthi-
ness. Thus, further research is required to identify the speciﬁc Web GIS trustee attributes
that inﬂuence users’ trust perceptions. An HCI-based approach can support such an inves-
tigation. It should not be forgotten that as the trust perceptions of different user groups may
be formed based on different attributes, it is essential to clearly deﬁne the user group (e.g.
experts or non-experts) to which such investigations refer.

Speciﬁcally, HCI methodology can ﬁrst guide GIS researchers in a trust evaluation of
different existing Web GIS applications, preferably with the involvement of real users. This
will help to understand people’s trust concerns, their expectations and needs in the wider
context of Web GIS applications and also to understand how the functional attributes, the
system’s reputation and other trust cues interact with each other in the formation of the

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1927

overall trust perceptions. For example, such an investigation would help to identify whether
map size is indeed a functional attribute that inﬂuences trust perceptions in this con-
text. After understanding which attributes inﬂuence trust, a subsequent research approach
might involve the development of alternative Web GIS interfaces for the same information
(context) to measure the inﬂuence of speciﬁc trust-related features in a more controlled
environment and to understand how these should be designed (e.g. provide users with the
same map in different sizes, to understand which one is perceived as most trustworthy).

The previously described research approach could potentially assist the development
of a set of trust-based guidelines in the Web GIS context. Existing interface design guide-
lines, derived mainly from the e-commerce domain, can help designers to build trustworthy
systems while emphasising on the Graphic, Structure, Content and Social-cue design
dimensions. Although it might be the case that these design dimensions are relevant to
Web GIS, further research is required to categorise the problematic features in each spe-
ciﬁc design dimension and subsequently build a set of trust-based guidelines for Web GIS.
For Web GIS it might be necessary to investigate the map functionality and map visuali-
sation aspects as a separate dimension of a trust-based design. It is not known how map
visualisation and functionality inﬂuence trust perceptions although previous studies proved
that users had signiﬁcant interaction problems with both elements.

A set of interface design guidelines that can potentially increase the perceived trust-
worthiness can be an advantage for Web GIS design and implementation, as it can improve
interaction with these systems and the overall user experience. Trust design in this con-
text can further be beneﬁcial from the user perspective as it can reduce the uncertainty
associated with the rapid development and use of Web GIS applications (Skarlatidou 2010).
The recent trends in Web Mapping 2.0 and neogeography had a signiﬁcant impact on
the development and use of online maps (Haklay et al. 2008) and increase the urgency of
investigating trust in this context. For example, Web GIS applications can now be easily
developed, using application programming interfaces, by anyone (including non-experts),
thus the users cannot only rely on the skill of the cartographer before trusting a map. The
users probably do not have the knowledge or expertise to judge whether these features
are correct, valid or uptodate, nor are they aware that there is no intention to misinform
them. This should probably raise further concerns in the GIS community, which should
start considering the establishment of trust standards and the subsequent development of
trust-inducing features that would ensure users that an application complies with these
standards. In addition, the GIS community should further consider investigating the spatial
literacy of these non-expert users and identify ways to improve their spatial abilities, as this
might well assist them in their trust assessments when they interact with online maps.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and
Arup.

Notes

waste/

lang=_e

1. Where to dispose of Britain’s nuclear waste: http://www.ccg.leeds.ac.uk/teaching/nuclear

2. WIYBY: http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk/wiyby/wiybyController?ep=maptopics&

3. Where-Can-I-Live: http://www.where-can-i-live.com/londonproperty

1928

A. Skarlatidou et al.

References
Alsop, R., 2008. What’s in your backyard? A usability study by persona. Thesis (MSc in GIS).

University College London.

Ba, S. and Pavlou, P.A., 2002. Evidence of the effect of trust building technology in electronic

markets: price premiums and buyer behavior. MIS Quarterly, 26 (3), 243–268.

Bailey, T., 2002. On trust and philosophy [online]. Open2.net. Available from: http://www.

open2.net/trust/downloads/docs/ontrust.pdf [Accessed 17 October 2009].

Barber, B., 1983. The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Barnes, S.J. and Vidgen, R., 2000. Information and interaction quality: evaluating internet bookshop
web sites with WebQual. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Bled Electronic Commerce
Conference, Bled Slovenia, 19–21 June, pp. 426–444.

Blomqvist, K., 1997. The many faces of trust. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 13 (3),

271–286.

Carver, S., Kingston, R., and Turton, I., 1998. Accessing GIS over the Web: an aid to public
participation in environmental decision-making [online]. University of Leeds. Available from:
http://www.geog.leeds.ac.uk/papers/98-3/ [Accessed 8 June 2009].

Cheskin Research and Studio Archetype/Sapient, 1999. eCommerce trust study [online].
http://www.cheskin.com/cms/ﬁles/i/articles//17__report-

from:
Cheskin.
eComm%20Trust1999.pdf [Accessed 10 September 2009].

Available

Chopra, K. and Wallace, W.A., 2003. Trust in electronic environments. In: Proceedings of the 36th
annual Hawaii international conference on system sciences, 6–9 January 2003, Hawaii, 331–340.
Corritore, C.L., Kracher, B., and Widenbeck, S., 2001. Trust in the online environment. In: M.J.
Smith et al., eds. Usability evaluation and interface design: cognitive engineering, intelligent
agents and virtual reality. Mahwey, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum Associates Inc, 1548–1552.

Corritore, C.L., Kracher, B., and Wiedenbeck, S., 2003. On-line trust: concepts, evolving themes,

a model. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58, 737–758.

Couclelis, H., 2003. The certainty of uncertainty: GIS and the limits of geographic knowledge.

Transactions in GIS, 7 (2), 165–175.

Deutsch, M., 1962. Cooperation and trust: some theoretical notes. In: M.R. Jones, ed. Nebraska

symposium on motivation. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 275–319.

Dion, K.K., Berscheid, E., and Walster, E., 1972. What is beautiful is good. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 24, 285–290.

Dragicevic, S., 2004. The potential of Web-Based GIS. Journal of Geographical Systems, 6 (2),

79–81.

Dunn, C., 2007. Participatory GIS-a people’s GIS. Progress in Human Geography, 31 (5), 617–637.
Egger, F.N., 2001. Affective design of e-commerce user interface: how to maximize perceived trust-
worthiness. In: M. Helander, H.M. Khalid & M.P. Tham (Eds.), Proceedings of CAHD2001:
Conference on Affective Human Factors Design, 27–29 June Singapore. Singapore: ASEAN
Press 317–324.

Flavian, C., Guinaliu, M., and Gurrea, R., 2005. The role played by perceived usability, satisfaction

and consumer trust on website loyalty. Information and Management, 43, 1–14.

Fogg, B.J., 2003. Persuasive technology: using computers to change what we think and do. San

Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, An Imprint of Elsevier.

Francis, N., 2009. Investigating usability and perceived trustworthiness of the WIYBY website:

a study using eye-tracking. Thesis (MSc in GIS). University College London.

Fung, R.K. and Lee, M.K., 1999. EC-trust (trust

in electronic commerce): exploring the
antecedent factors. [online]. AIS Electronic Library. Available from: http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1536&context=amcis1999 (Accessed 8 February 2011).

Grabner-Kräuter, S. and Kaluscha, E.A., 2003. Empirical research in on-line trust: a review and

critical assessment. International Journal of Human-Computer-Studies, 58 (6), 783–812.

Grabner-Kräuter, S., Kaluscha, E.A., and Fladnitzer, M., 2006. Perspectives of online trust and sim-
ilar constructs: a conceptual clariﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 8th international conference
on electronic commerce: the new e-commerce: innovations for conquering current barriers,
obstacles and limitations to conducting successful business on the internet, 13–16 August, New
Brunswick, Canada. New Brunswick: ACM Press, 235–243.

Haklay, M., 2002. Public environmental information systems: challenges and perspectives. Thesis

(PhD). University College London.

Haklay, M., 2003. Public access to environmental information: past, present and future. Computers,

Environment and Urban Systems, 27 (2), 163–180.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1929

Haklay, M., Singleton, A., and Parker, C., 2008. Web mapping 2.0: the neogeography of the GeoWeb.

Haklay, M. and Zaﬁri, A., 2008. Usability engineering for GIS: learning from a screenshot. The

Geography Compass, 2 (6), 2011–2039.

Cartographic Journal, 45 (2), 87–97.

Ishikawa, T., et al., 2005. Climate forecast maps as a communication decision-support tool: an empir-
ical test with prospective policy makers. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 32
(1), 3–16.

Jarvenpaa, S.L., Tractinsky, J., and Saarinen, L., 1999. Consumer trust in an internet store: A cross-
cultural validation [online]. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. Available from:
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol5/issue2/jarvenpaa.html [Accessed 7 August 2009].

Karvonen, K., 2000. The beauty of simplicity. In: Proceedings of the ACM conference on universal

usability, 16–17 November 2000 Arlington, VA. New York: ACM Press, 85–90.

Kini, A. and Choobineh, J., 1998. Trust in electronic commerce: deﬁnition and theoretical consider-
ations. Proceedings from 31st Hawaii international conference on system sciences, 6–9 January
Kohala Coast, 51–61.

Koehn, D., 1996. Should we trust in trust? American Business Law Journal, 34 (2), 183–203.
Kraak, M.J., 2004. The role of the map in a Web-GIS environment. Journal of Geographical Systems,

6 (2), 83–93.

Kramers, R.E., 2008. Interaction with maps on the internet- a user centred design approach for the

Atlas of Canada. The Cartographic Journal, 45 (2), 98–107.

Lee, J.D. and See, K.A., 2002. Trust in computer technology and the implications for design and
evaluation. In: C. Miller, ed. Etiquette for human-computer work: technical report FS-02-02.
Menlo Park, CA: American Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 20–25.
Luhmann, N., 1979. Trust and power. Chichester, England: John Willey & Sons.
MacEachren, A.M., 1994. Visualization in modern cartography: setting the agenda. In: A.M.
MacEachren and D.R.F. Taylor, ed. Visualisation in modern cartography. New York: Elsevier
Science Inc, 1–12.

MacEachren, A.M. and Kraak, M.J., 1997. Exploratory cartographic visualization: advancing the

agenda. Computers and Geosciences, 23, 335–344.

Mayer, R.C., Davis, J.H., and Schoorman, D.F., 1995. An integrative model of organizational trust.

Academy of Management Review, 20 (3), 709–734.

McKnight, D.H., Choudhury, V., and Kacmar, C., 2002. The impact of initial trust on intentions to
transact with a web site: a trust building model. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11
(3–4), 297–323.

Misztal, B.A., 1996. Trust in modern societies: the search for the bases of social order. New York:

Polity Press.

Monmonier, M., 1996. How to lie with maps. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Nielsen, J., 1999. Trust or bust: communicating trustworthiness in web design [online]. Useit.com.

Available from: http://www.useit.com/alertbox/990307.html [Accessed 12 July 2005].

Nikander, P. and Karvonen, K., 2000. Users and trust in cyberspace. In: Proceedings of Cambridge
2000 workshop on security protocols, 8th International Workshop, 3–5 April 2000 Cambridge,
24–35.

Nivala, A.M., Brewster, S., and Sarjakoski, L.T., 2008. Usability evaluation on web mapping sites.

The Cartographic Journal, 45, 129–138.

Plutchik, R., 1980. A general psycho-evolutionary theory of emotion. In: R. Plutchik and
H. Kellerman, eds. Emotion: theory, research, and experience: vol. 1. Theories of emotion. New
York: Academic, 3–33.

Putnam, R.D., 1995. Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal of Democracy, 6 (1),

Putz, S. 1994. Interactive information services using World-Wide Web Hypertext. Computer

Rousseau, D.M., et al., 1998. Not so different after all: a cross-discipline view of trust. Academy of

Networks and ISDN Systems, 27(2), 273–280.

Management Review, 23 (3), 393–404.

Shapiro, S.P., 1987. The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal of Sociology, 93 (3),

Shneiderman, B., 2000. Designing trust into online experiences. Communication of the ACM, 43

3–10.

623–658.

(12), 57–59.

Sieber, R., 2006. Public participation geographic information systems: a literature review and

framework. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 96 (3), 491–507.

1930

A. Skarlatidou et al.

Sillence, E., et al., 2006. A framework for understanding trust factors in web based health advice.

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 64 (8), 697–713.

Skarlatidou, A., 2005. The current state of the online mapping industry: a usability study of mul-
timap’s public service and that of its competitors. Thesis (MSc in GIS). University College
London.

Skarlatidou, A., 2010. Web-mapping applications and HCI considerations for their design. In:
M. Haklay, ed. Interacting with geospatial technologies. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons,
245–264.

Skarlatidou, A. and Haklay, M., 2006. Public web-mapping: preliminary usability evaluation. In:

Proceedings of GIS research UK 2005, 5–7 April Nottingham.
Unwin, D., 2005. Fiddling on a different planet. Geoforum, 36, 681–684.
Van Elzakker, C.P.J.M., 2005. From map use research to usability research in geo-information pro-
cessing. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international cartographic conference, 9–16 July, A Coruña,
Spain.

Wang, Y.D. and Emurian, H.H., 2005. An overview of online trust: Concepts, elements, and

implications. Computers in Human Behaviour, 21 (11), 105–125.

Williamson, O.E., 1993. Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of Law and

Economics, 24 (1), 453–486.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd

and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright

holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

