G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

CLASSIFICATION OF SUBMERGED AQUATIC
VEGETATION IN BLACK RIVER USING 
HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGE ANALYSIS 

Roshan Pande-Chhetri, University of Florida, School of Forest Resources and Conservation—

Geomatics, Florida

Amr Abd-Elrahman, University of Florida, School of Forest Resources and Conservation—

Geomatics, Gulf Coast Research and Education Center, Florida

Charles Jacoby, St. Johns River Water Management District, Palatka, Florida

Monitoring aquatic vegetation is an important component of water resource management due to the
ecological services provided by these habitats. Spectrally-rich hyperspectral imagery can be an efficient tool for
mapping and classifying macrophyte communities. Identification of submerged vegetation in aquatic regions is
complicated by variations in optical properties of water constituents, sun-water-sensor geometry, water depth
and the spectral/structural complexity of the plants. Many studies have attempted to detect aquatic vegetation
in coastal waters; however, few studies have targeted shallow, black-water rivers tainted with chromophoric
dissolved organic matter (CDOM). This study investigates methods to analyze airborne hyperspectral imagery
and detect and classify aquatic vegetation in a black-water riverine system. Images were normalized to account
for  reflectance  from  the  water  surface  and  varying  water  depth  before  being  analyzed  by  the  Maximum
Likelihood (ML) and three other non-parametric classifiers: Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Support Vector
Machine  (SVM)  and  Spectral  Angular  Mapper  (SAM).  Quality  assessment  analysis  indicated  a  general
classification  and  detection  accuracy  improvement  when  non-parametric  classifiers  were  applied  on  the
normalized and depth invariant images. A maximum classification accuracy of about 69% was achieved when
the ANN classifier was applied on the normalized images, and maximum detection accuracies of 93% and 92%
were obtained when the SAM and the SVM classifiers were applied on depth invariant images, respectively. 

Le contrôle de la végétation aquatique est un élément important de la gestion des ressources en eau en
raison  des  services  écologiques  rendus  par  ces  habitats.  L’imagerie  hyperspectrale  dense  sur  le  plan
spectral  peut  être  un  outil  efficace  pour  cartographier  et  classifier  les  communautés  macrophytes.
L’identification de la végétation submergée dans les régions aquatiques est compliquée par les variations
des propriétés optiques des constituants de l’eau, de la géométrie des capteurs d’eau et d’ensoleillement, de
la profondeur de l’eau et de la complexité spectrale/structurale des plantes. Plusieurs études ont tenté de
détecter la végétation aquatique dans les eaux côtières; mais peu d’études ont ciblé des rivières peu profondes
aux  eaux  noires  teintées  contaminées  par  des  matières  organiques  dissoutes  du  groupe  chromophore
(CDOM). La présente étude examine les méthodes pour analyser l’imagerie hyperspectrale aéroportée et
pour détecter et classifier la végétation aquatique dans un système fluvial d’eaux noires. Les images ont été
normalisées afin de tenir compte de la réflexion de la surface de l’eau et de la profondeur changeante de
l’eau avant leur analyse par le classificateur à vraisemblance maximale (ML) et trois autres classificateurs
non paramétriques : le réseau de neurones formels (ANN), la machine à vecteurs de support (SVM) et un
appareil de cartographie angulaire spectral (SAM). L’analyse de l’évaluation de la qualité a indiqué une
amélioration générale de la détection et de la classification lorsque les classificateurs non paramétriques
étaient appliqués aux images normalisées et à profondeur constante. Une précision maximale de classification
d’environ 69 % a été atteinte lorsque le classificateur ANN était appliqué aux images normalisées et des
précisions maximales de détection de 93 % et de 92 % ont été atteintes lorsque les classificateurs SAM et
SVM étaient appliqués aux images à profondeur constante, respectivement.

Roshan Pande-
Chhetri
roshan@ufl.edu

Amr Abd-Elrahman

1. Introduction

Charles Jacoby

Rigorous  mapping  of  aquatic  vegetation  in
rivers  and  estuaries  is  a  vital  component  in
management of these ecosystems. Field surveys to
map aquatic vegetation are labor intensive and time

consuming. Remote sensing represents an efficient
tool for discriminating vegetation in shallow waters
through spectral analysis. The difficulties associated
with extracting bottom signal from remote sensing

dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2014-302

GEOMATICA  Vol. 68, No. 3, 2014, pp. 169 to 182

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

imagery in black-water systems are evidenced by
the  small  number  of  studies  in  this  field.  Black-
water  systems  are  considered  a  special  type  of
Case  2  waters,  as  defined  by  Gordon  and  Morel
[1983]  as  waters  other  than  open  ocean  whose
optical  properties  are  significantly  influenced
by  constituents such  as  mineral  particles  and
dissolved organic matter (CDOM) whose concen-
trations  do  not  co-vary  with  phytoplankton
concentration.  In  black-water  systems,  much  of
the  visible  light  is  absorbed  by  high  concentra-
tions of chromophoric CDOM, which poses addi-
tional  analytical  challenges  compared  to  other
turbid Case 2 waters. 
Interpretation 

vegetation
reflectance is complicated by the Inherent Optical
Properties  (IOPs)  of  the  water,  scene  geometrical
properties,  varying  water  depth  and  vegetation
complexity,  which  vary  among  plant  species  and
above-ground  morphologies.  Unlike  many  other
substrates,  beds  of  aquatic  plants  are  structurally
and  compositionally  complex.  Their  reflectance
properties are influenced by many factors, includ-
ing plant species and density, canopy architecture,
vertical structure, leaf orientation, water depth and
level of submergence. 

aquatic 

of 

Various supervised classifiers have been used
to  classify  land  cover  types,  including  wetlands.
The  Maximum  Likelihood  (ML)  classifier  is  a
widely used parametric classifier that assumes the
spectral information for each class in each band is
normally distributed. The classifier calculates the
likelihood that a pixel belongs to a specific class
and assigns the pixel to the class with maximum
probability  [Jensen 2005].  The  Spectral  Angular
Mapper  (SAM)  algorithm  is  a  popular  non-para-
metric classifier that compares the spectral angle
( )  between  pixel  and  reference  spectrum  and
assigns the pixel to the reference class that yields
the  smallest  angle  [Kruse  et  al.  1993].  Other
non-parametric methods, such as Artificial Neural
Network  (ANN)  and  Support  Vector  Machine
(SVM),  have  received  more  attention  in  recent
years, especially for land cover classification and
pattern  recognition  applications  [Corsini  et  al.
2003; Gualtieri and Chettri 2000; Heermann and
Khazenie  1992;  Jensen  et  al. 2009;  Melgani  and
Bruzzone 2004; Pal and Foody 2010].

Semi-analytical models of radiation transfer
have  been  utilized  in  many  studies  of  natural
waters  to  retrieve  water  depth,  water  column
properties and bottom types. Earlier studies used
simplified  models  for  direct  parameter  retrieval
from remotely sensed data for oceanic or coastal

waters  [Lyzenga 1985;  Bierwirth  et  al. 1993;
Schweizer  et  al. 2005].  These  methods  were
applied primarily to multispectral satellite imagery
and  they  required  considerable  field  sampling.
Inverse  modeling  approaches  were  used  in  recent
studies. These approaches utilize analytical models
to retrieve key parameters simultaneously and indi-
rectly  either  by  inverse  modeling,  with  conver-
gence  and  iteration  to  minimize  error  [Albert  and
Mobley 2003; Klonowski et al. 2007; Brando et al.
2009],  or  by  matching  spectra  to  one  derived  by
modeling [Mobley et al. 2005; Hedley et al. 2009].
These methods are highly sensitive to data quality.
They require high image signal-to-noise ratios and
narrow  contiguous  bands  in  addition  to  ancillary
observations,  such  as  sky  condition,  water  quality
parameters  and  bottom  types.  Since  radiance
reflected  from  black-water  has  a  low  signal-to-
noise ratio, these models typically produce unstable
solutions. 

This  study  applies  various  classifiers  to
normalized  images  and  evaluates  their  success  in
detecting  and  classifying  structurally  complex
aquatic  vegetation  in  a  black-water  river.  We
hypothesize  that  non-parametric  classifiers  will
perform better than traditional classifiers. Airborne
hyperspectral  images  of  lower  St.  Johns  River  in
Florida,  as  an  example  of  a  Case  2  black-water
system,  were  analyzed.  Field  data  were  used  for
classification  training  and  accuracy  assessment.
The  classifiers  were  implemented  on  the  original
images  and  on  images  normalized  for  surface
water reflectance and water depth. Simple indices
were  also  developed  to  detect  aquatic  vegetation,
separate emergent and submerged vegetation, and
mask broadly distributed categories of upland and
deep-water  regions.  Quality  assessment  was
performed  using  a  portion  of  the  field  data  set
aside for this purpose.

2. Site and Background

2.1 Site Description and Data 

Hyperspectral images of the southern segment
of the lower St. Johns River basin (Figure 1) were
analyzed to classify submerged aquatic vegetation.
St. Johns River is a northward-flowing black-water
river  in  the  north-eastern  sector  of  Florida.  The
southern  segment  of  the  river  is  characterized  by
broad cross-sections and slow flow. It is inhabited
by  different  types  of  aquatic  vegetation,  which
provide  food  and  shelter  for  many  organisms

170

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

including  fish,  invertebrates  and  manatees.  St.
Johns  River  water  contains  chlorophyll,  CDOM
and  non-algal  particles  in  appreciable  quantities
[Gallegos 2005]. The CDOM concentration, which
is  responsible  for  the  black  colour  of  the  water,
varies spatially and temporally. It is usually high dur-
ing the rainy season and less during the dry season.
Water  quality  parameters  measured  in  April
2006 at water quality stations in the river indicated
chlorophyll-a  (Chl-a)  concentration  varying  from
5  to  29  g/L  with  14  g/L  mean  value;  total
suspended  solids  (TSS) from 7 to 31 mg/L with
16 mg/L mean value; and colour value from 70 to
100 CPU with 90.5 mean value. It should be noted
here that such water quality concentrations, espe-
cially  Chl-a  and  suspended  particles,  may  vary
significantly  in  the  near  shore  areas,  where
aquatic vegetation grows. 

Eight  hyperspectral  images  of  1.2  m  spatial
resolution and 17 bands with narrow (7.4 nm) average
band-width captured with the airborne CASI hyper-
spectral sensor were used in this study. These bands
are not contiguous, as shown in Figure 2. The images
have  widths  of  about  0.6  km  and  lengths  varying
from 6 km to 15 km. They were acquired in the peri-
od from April 13 to April 16, 2006. Data was collect-
ed during clear weather in the morning and afternoon
times  such  that  sun  zenith  angle  was  maintained
between 25° and 45° in order to minimize sun glint. 
Field  polygons  were  surveyed  along  the
shoreline at selected sites in the period from April
5  to  May  4,  2006.  Figure  1  shows  field  sampling
site  locations.  Within  these  selected  sites,  58
polygons  were  surveyed  by  field  crews.  Polygon
boundaries  were  surveyed  using  navigation-grade
GPS  receivers  in  differential  mode.  The  data  col-
lected  by  the  field  crews  includes  species  type,
aggregate  percent  coverage,  plant  foliar  density,
water  depth,  average  plant  height  and  substrate
type. Among  the  surveyed  58  polygons,  35  poly-
gons were found to be pure polygons representing
specific  classes  with  80%–100%  coverage.  Field
polygons were then shrunk by 1 pixel (1.2 m) along
the  border  in  order  to  compensate  for  potential
positional errors. Half of these pure class polygons
were  selected  to  train  the  classification  and  the
remaining half were used for accuracy assessment.
These  polygons  represented  four  aquatic  vegeta-
tion species and bare bottom as shown in Table 1.
Figure  3 shows  examples  of  surveyed  aquatic
vegetation  types.  In  addition  to  field-surveyed
polygons,  regions  of  interest  for  upland  vegeta-
tion,  upland  ground/built-up,  deep  water  and
glinted  water  classes  were  manually  digitized
from the images.

Figure 1: Study area—Lower St. Johns River basin.

Figure 2: Central wavelength (nm) of image bands. 

Table 1: Field-surveyed classes. 

Class

Bare
Val
Najas
Algae
Emer

Description

Bare bottom
Vallisneria americana
Najas guadalupensis
Plants heavily covered with algae
Emergent plants

171

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 3: Examples of aquatic vegetation (A) Vallisneria americana (B) Najas guadalupensis (source: UF IFAS
Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants).

2.2 Image Preprocessing

Captured  images  were  atmospherically
corrected  and  converted  to  reflectance  values
using the ENVI FLAASH module based on the
MODTRAN4 atmospheric model [Adler-Golden et
al. 1999].  The  atmospherically-corrected  images
were geo-rectified using proprietary software to 2
pixels  (~2.4  m)  positional  accuracy  [Dobberfuhl
and  Hart  2009].  Water  areas  in  the  resulting
ratios.
images  have 
Maximum  Noise  Fraction  (MNF)  [Green  et  al.
1988]  de-noising technique was applied on these
images by selecting only MNF bands with signif-
icant signal and inverting back to image domain.
In  this  study,  ENVI  4.8  and  IDL  programming
were mostly used in this analysis.

signal-to-noise 

low 

2.3 Radiation Transfer Models

In this section, a simplified radiative transfer
model  for  shallow  water  is  introduced  following
Albert and Mobley [2003]. Total water reflectance
captured by an above-surface sensor is com-
posed  of  a  portion  directly  reflected  from  the
surface
water 
reflectance)  and  another  portion  upwelling  from
the  water  body  (R).  For  each  wavelength  in  the
image, this relationship can be expressed as:

(i.e.  water 

surface 

R

tot

=

R

surf

+

R

Water  surface  reflectance 

does  not
retain  any  information  about  water  column  or
bottom  properties  and  therefore  is  eliminated  or
minimized  in  most  studies.  Sun  glint  is  a  special
type  of  surface  reflectance  that  can  usually  be
avoided  by  planning  proper  imaging  time  and

direction. When light propagates through water, it
is  attenuated  due  to  absorption  and  scattering  by
water and water constituents. 

In the case of shallow water, reflectance from
water (Rsh) has two components—reflectance from
water column and reflectance from bottom layer. In
general,  a  radiative  transfer  model  for  shallow
waters can be expressed as:

)

(

)

(

2

−

−

uB

uW

H

H

sh

.  

=

R

(2)

R
b

K K
+
d

K K
+
d

(
1

A e
− .  
1

R A e
.   +
.  

)
where Kd, KuW and KuB are attenuation coefficients
of  downwelling  irradiance,  upwelling  radiance
from water, and upwelling radiance from bottom,
respectively; H refers to water depth in metres; Rb
is  bottom  material  reflectance;  andcoefficients  A1
and A2 are closer to one [Albert and Mobley 2003].
By approximating A1 ≈ A2
1 and KuW ≈ KuB ≈ Ku,
this equation can be rewritten as:

sh

R

R
− = −

e

−

(

K K H

)

+

d

u

R e
.   +

−

(

K K H

)

+

d

u

.  

R
b

=

(

R
b

−

)
R e

−

(

K K H

)

+

d

u

(3)

Taking the natural log of both sides of Equation 3
produces a linearized form of the equation, 

ln

(

sh

R

−

R

)

=

ln

(

R
b

−

R

)

−

(

K

d

+

)
K H
u

(4)

(1)

Deducting  deep  water  reflectance  Rtot from  total
and using Equation 1
reflectance of shallow water
in addition to the definition of both terms, 

Rtot

sh

R

sh
tot

−

R

tot

=

sh

R

+

R

surf

(

)

−

(

R R
+

surf

)

=

sh
−R

R

(5)

172

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Taking  the  natural  log  of  Equation  5 produces  a
linearized form of the equation:

ln

(

R

sh
tot

−

R

tot

)

=

ln

sh

R

−

R

(

)

(6)

Equation 5  demonstrates  that  subtracting  deep
water  total  reflectance  from  total  shallow  water
)
water  surface
reflectance
reflectance and can substitute the term (Rsh – R) in
Equation 3.

cuts out

sh
−R
tot

R

(

tot

The above equations show that water reflectance
values  are  attenuated  non-linearly  with  negative
power  function  of  water  depth.  The  equations  also
show  the  influence  of  bottom  and  deep  water
reflectance on upwelling water reflectance. Equation
3 shows that the shallow water reflectance value nor-
malized by deducting deep water reflectance relates to
normalized bottom reflectance times negative power
function of water depth and attenuation coefficients. 

3. Methodology

3.1 Image Normalization

Image  reflectance  values  were  normalized  for
water  surface  reflectance  by  deducting  deep-water
spectra as per Equation 5. The deep-water region of

interest  was  selected  for  each  image  in  the  open
deep water area without sun glint or cloud shadow,
where water depth was more than 3 m. Rather than
using  minimum  spectral  values,  low  deep  water
spectra  was  determined  by  calculating  the  mean
value and subtracting two times the standard devi-
ation of each band values within the ROI, in order
to avoid outliers of darker spectra. Image normal-
ization  was  then  conducted  by  deducting  low
deep-water  spectral  values  band  by  band.  This
normalization improved the imagery of the aquat-
ic region by removing water surface reflectance to
make  it  relate  directly  to  bottom  reflectance  and
negative power function of water depths and atten-
uation coefficients, as shown in Equations 3 and 5. 

3.2 Depth Invariant Transformed
Image

The  image  data  was  transformed  into  depth
invariant  bands  based  on  a  method  proposed  by
Lyzenga et al. [1985]. The natural log was computed
for  each  band  of  the  normalized  image  values
(Equation 5 and 6) to compute band X as follows:

X

=

ln

sh

R

−

R

(

)

(7)

According  to  this  method,  the  scatter  plot
between  two  bands  for  pixels  with  varying  water

Figure 4: Scatter plot between X values of two bands; (A) theoretical examples for different bottom types as
per Lyzenga’s method, (B) from our hyperspectral sample data for sand bottoms in Image ID25.

173

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

depths  and  the  same  bottom  type  are  linear  and
parallel  to  similar  scatter  plots  produced  from
different bottom types.

Figure  4 shows  an  illustrative  sketch  of
scatter plots  for  three  different  bottom  types  and
an  actual  scatterplot  for  sand  bottom  extracted
from one of the study images. The intercept value
derived from the band pair scatter plot is therefore
unique  for  each  bottom  type  and  independent  of
water  depths.  Lyzenga  [1981]  utilized  a  visible
spectrum  band  pair  of  Landsat  MSS  correspon-
ding  to  Band  1  (Green  band)  and  Band  2  (Red
band)  to  derive  a  depth  invariant  transformed
image,  which  is  then  used  to  discriminate  major
bottom strata types. 

In our case of hyperspectral imagery of shallow
waters,  multiple  log  band  pairs,  as  calculated
using  Equation  7,  were  evaluated  for  the  same
bottom  type.  For  this  purpose,  field  polygons  of
same  bottom  type  (e.g.  bare  sand  bottom)  with
varying  water  depths  were  used  as  regions  of
interest  for  analysis.  Scatter  plots  of  pairs  of  log
bands  from  the  selected  regions  of  interest  were
analyzed  and  band  pairs  with  high  correlation
were selected. The ratio of attenuation coefficients
then was calculated for each of these pairs and a
depth  invariant  band  (Y)  was  created  using  the
equations presented in Lyzenga [1981]. From the
selected  regions  of  interest  of  the  same  bottom
type, a coefficient (coefficient c) was computed as:

c

=

(
Var Var
−
i
Cov
.  
ij

2

j

)

where Xi and Xj are log values of the i and j band
pair; Vari and Varj are the variance of the Xi and Xj
bands; and Covij is the covariance of the Xi and Xj
bands  for  selected  regions  of  the  same  bottom
strata with varying depths.

Then  the  ratio  of  attenuation  coefficients

(Ki / Kj) was calculated as:

Finally,  the  depth  invariant  band  was  created

for each band pair using:

K
K

i

j

c
= +

2

c

(

+

)
1

Y
ij

=

X

i

−

(

K
K

i

j

X

j

)

(8)

(9)

(10)

3.3 Classifiers

Three  non-parametric  classifiers,  (i) Artificial
Neural  Network  (ANN),  (ii)  Support  Vector
Machine (SVM) and (iii) Spectral Angular Mapper
(SAM),  were  investigated  and  compared  with  the
Maximum  Likelihood  (ML)  classifier.  These  four
classifiers  were  applied  on  the  filtered  original
images,  normalized  images  and  depth  invariant
transformed images using the selected training sets.
Visual  inspection  of  the  images  revealed  that  the
first  four  bands  were  heavily  contaminated  with
noise  and  stripes.  Preliminary  results  showed  that
the  exclusion  of  these  four  bands  leads  to  better
classification results. Accordingly, classifiers were
tested on only 13 of the 17 original bands. 

The ANN  classifier  is  a  mathematical  model
consisting of interconnected groups of nodes. It is
used as a non-linear data modeling technique and is
often used in classification and pattern recognition
applications [Haykin 1994; Keiner and Yan 1998].
In  our  experiments,  a  single  hidden  layer  feed-
forward ANN classification technique was employed
using  back-propagation 
learning  algorithm.
Different activation functions and back propagation
training parameter values were tested. 

Support  Vector  Machine  is  another  non-
parametric classifier that separates the classes with a
decision surface, known as optimal hyperplane, such
that  it  maximizes  the  margin  between  the  classes
[Cortes and Vapnik 1995]. It provides better classifi-
cation results for complex and noisy data and can be
implemented  as  a  non-linear  classifier  through  the
use  of  non-linear  kernels.  We  experimented  with
different kernel types including the non-linear second
degree  polynomial  and  the  radial  basis  function
kernels and with different training parameter values. 
Spectral Angular Mapper is a non-parametric
spectral  classifier  commonly  used  with  hyper-
spectral  images.  The  classifier  compares  image
and reference class spectra through computing the
angle  between  these  spectra  as  n-dimensional
vectors.  SAM  is  known  to  be  insensitive  to  illu-
mination  or  albedo  as  it  compares  only  vector
direction  rather  than  the  magnitude  of  the  two
spectra [Kruse et al. 1993; Van der Meer 2006].

3.4 Indices for Broad Class
Categorization and Submerged
Vegetation Detection

where Yij is the depth invariant band using the Xi
and  Xj band  values  and  Ki  / Kj is  the  derived
attenuation coefficient ratio.

Study  of  image  spectra  collected  at  field
polygon  locations  showed  that  typically  Band  9

174

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 5: Typical spectra of aquatic vegetation, bare bottom and deep water.

(Red 682 nm) has lower values and Band 12 (short
Infrared  710  nm)  has  higher  values  when  aquatic
vegetation exists compared to bare bottom. Figure
5 shows  some  typical  spectra  highlighting  this
observation.  Emerging  vegetation  yields  much
higher values for infrared bands. Upland pixels are
separable  due  to  overall  brighter  values  for  all
bands.  On  the  other  hand,  deep-water  spectra  is
characterized by lower values for all bands except
in glint regions.

With  numerous  empirical  experiments  on
band  and  band  ratio  combinations,  the  following
simple indices were developed and found efficient
in separating aquatic vegetation from bare bottom,
upland pixels and deep water regions:

• Veg_bare index: (Band12 – Band9) / (Band8 –
Band3) separates aquatic vegetation from bare
bottom.

• Aqua_veg index: (Band14 – Band11) / (Band11
– Band9) separates upland vegetation, emerging
aquatic  vegetation  and  submerged  aquatic
vegetation.

• Deep_water index: (Band12 – Band4) isolates

deep water pixels.

Optimum  index  thresholds  were  determined
using  the  training  dataset. A  combination  of  these
indices was used to broadly categorize the images
into  upland,  shallow  water  and  deep  water  broad
classes and to detect aquatic vegetation regions.

3.5 Assessment Methods 

Quality  assessment  was  performed  using  the
18 pure class field polygons previously set aside for
assessment.  These  polygons  contained  more  than
700 pixels in total. Two types of accuracy (classifi-
cation and detection accuracy) were considered to
assess the results of the implemented classifiers:

Classification accuracy refers to the accuracy
of  classifying  the  data  into  the  five  aquatic
classes  listed  in  Table  1.  Upland  and  deep
water classes were not included in the assess-
ment because our main focus in this study was
to detect and classify submerged aquatic vege-
tation. Moreover, the inclusion of upland pix-
els  was  found  to  overestimate  the  achieved
overall classification accuracy.
Detection  accuracy refers  to  the  accuracy  of
detecting  aquatic  vegetation  versus  bare  bot-
tom. In addition to the accuracy obtained using
the tested classifiers, the detection accuracy of
a  simple  3-band  index  (Veg_bare  index)  was
also evaluated.
Overall accuracies (classification and detection)
were computed in two different forms based on the
training  set  pixels  and  polygons.  The  pixel-based
overall pixel accuracy was computed as the ratio of
sum of correctly assigned pixels to total number of
pixels.  Polygon-based  accuracy  was  derived  by

175

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

computing the percentage accuracy of each polygon.
Then the average of individual polygon accuracies
was  computed  to  give  the  overall  polygon-based
accuracy. These two accuracies differ slightly due
to  the  differences  in  the  training  polygons’  sizes.
Accuracy values were presented as the average of
overall pixel-based and polygon-based accuracies.

4. Results and Discussion

4.1 Depth Invariant Transform 

Image ID25 of the dataset was used to derive
depth invariant parameters due to the availabili-
ty of field polygons with varying water depths up
to  0.7  m.  Scatter  plots  of  pairs  of  log  bands  for
pixels  in  these  polygons  were  analyzed  and  12
pairs  were  found  to  be  highly  correlated.  These
parameters  were  used  to  create  depth  invariant
images  for  all  images  used  in  the  study.
Attenuation  coefficients  were  calculated  for
these 12 band pairs, as shown in Table 2. Then,
twelve depth invariant bands were created using
Equation  10.  An  example  of  a  depth  invariant
image is shown in Figure 6-C.

4.2 Supervised Classification 

As mentioned earlier, image classification was
performed  using  non-parametric  classifiers  ANN,
SVM  and  SAM  in  addition  to  the  ML  classifier.

Table 2: Attenuation coefficient ratios for 12 band pairs.

Y Band Band pair Correlation Attenuation 
coeff. ratio

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

K5:K6
K7:K6
K8:K6
K9:K6
K10:K6
K11:K6
K12:K6
K13:K6
K12:K15
K13:K15
K16:K15
K17:K15

0.9909
0.9990
0.9987
0.9840
0.9916
0.9912
0.9902
0.9867
0.9921
0.9915
0.9902
0.9924

0.9451
0.9981
0.9588
0.6184
0.6948
0.6964
0.7636
0.9602
0.6098
0.7662
0.8671
0.9145

Figure 6: Depth invariant transformed image example; (A)
original Image 17, (B) normalized image and (C) depth invari-
ant bands (Y7:Y4:Y1) of the same image.

176

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

These four classifiers were applied on the following
sets of images:

1. Filtered original images: original image filtered

using MNF-based de-noising technique.

2. Normalized images: image data after deducting

open deep-water spectra.

3. Depth  invariant  transformed  images:  image

data normalized for water depth.

A  multilayer  perceptron  ANN  with  back-
propagation  training  algorithm  was  applied  to  the
images.  Preliminary  experiments  showed  that  the
use of ‘Logistic’ model and one hidden layer provided
better classification results for our images. Figures
7A and 8A show sample results of the ANN classi-
fier  applied  to  the  normalized  and  depth  invariant
images.  The  classified  images  were  visually
inspected  and  found  appealing  and  less  pixelated.
The  classification  results  of  the  upland  classes
(trees  and  ground)  and  the  deep-water  class  were
found appropriate as well. The SVM classifier was
used  with  the  polynomial  2nd  degree  non-linear
kernel,  which  was  selected  due  to  its  superior
performance  in  our  preliminary  analysis.  Figures
7B and 8B show the results of classifying the nor-
malized and depth invariant images using the SVM
classifier. Again, visual inspection of the produced
images  showed  less  pixelated  results  compared  to
the ones achieved using the ANN classifier. 

The  SAM  was  applied  on  the  images  with
maximum angle threshold set to zero. Results of the
SAM classification images are shown in Figure 7C
and 8C. Classification in shallow water looked visu-
ally appealing. Deep-water regions were more pixe-
lated due to high noise level. Upland regions were
misclassified in some areas, which can be attributed
to the confusion caused by matching spectral angle
of upland ground pixels with those of aquatic class-
es regardless of pixel value level. The ML classifier
was implemented with a probability threshold set to
zero  in  order  to  allow  all  pixels  to  be  classified.
Figure  7D  and  8D show  the  ML  classification
results on the normalized and depth invariant trans-
formed images. In the aquatic region of the image,
classification  looked  more  pixelated  compared  to
the rest of the classifiers. Accuracy of each classifier
in  the  shallow  aquatic  region  is  evaluated  and
summarized in the quality assessment (Section 4.4).

4.3 Index Implementation Results 

Multiple  indices  (Section  3.4)  were  used  to
separate  aquatic  vegetation,  bare  bottom,  upland
and  deep  open  water.  This  serves  as  a  simple
method for detection of aquatic vegetation. It also

can  broadly  categorize  (mask)  uplands  and  deep
water to eliminate spectral confusion and improve
classification in the aquatic region. Figure 9 shows
an example of an index-based classified image. The
results are sufficient for the purpose of broad cate-
gorization  and  aquatic  vegetation  detection.
Aquatic vegetation (green and dark green) matches
well  the  results  of  the  non-parametric  classifiers.
Upland  and  deep-water  regions  were  categorized
remarkably  well.  Accuracy  of  index  detection  is
summarized in the quality assessment (Section 4.4).

4.4 Quality Assessment 

Assessment of the classification results (Table
3)  indicates  that  the  non-parametric  classifiers
(SAM, ANN and SVM) performed better with over
60%  accuracy  for  classification  and  over  84%  for
detection  when  applied  to  filtered  original  images
with  13  bands  (excluding  first  four  noisy  bands).
The ML classifier was found to be least accurate for
both  classification  (45%)  and  detection  (59%)
accuracy.  We  can  attribute  this  partially  to  its
inability  to  incorporate  the  non-linear  optical
characteristics  of  the  aquatic  environment  as
explained  in  Section  2.3.  Image  normalization  for
water surface reflectance led possibly to improve-
ment in accuracies when non-parametric non-linear
classifiers (e.g. ANN and SVM) were applied to the
normalized  images. We  believe  that  the ANN  and
SVM  classifiers  could  have  been  able  to  learn
the  non-linear  optical  complexity  of  the  aquatic
environment  in  the  study  area.  Results  of  the
SAM  classification  on  the  original  filtered  and
normalized  images,  however,  showed  unchanged
accuracies.  The  ANN  classifier  yielded  the  best
results,  69%  for  classification  and  90%  for  detec-
tion. Results of classifying the normalized images
using ML improved slightly but still were signifi-
cantly lower than the other classifiers. Index-based
detection  yielded  good  85%  accuracy,  which  is
better than the accuracy of all ML detection results
and  comparable  to  the  results  of  other  classifiers
applied to the original images.

The use of the ANN and SVM non-parametric
classifiers on the depth invariant images produced
mixed  results.  Accuracies,  especially  detection
accuracy, of the SVM classifier improved; however,
the  ANN  accuracy  slightly  declined.  Applying
SAM  on  depth  invariant  images  resulted  in  the
highest  detection  accuracy.  The  ML  classifier
remarkably  improved  for  both  classification  and
detection accuracies when using the depth invariant
images. 

177

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 7: Classification of Image 17 normalized for water surface reflectance using (A) ANN, (B) SVM, (C) ML, and (D)
SAM. (Green, dark green and orange colour represents aquatic vegetation while cyan and blue colours represent bare 
bottom and deep water.)

178

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 8: Classification of depth invariant bands of Image 17 using (A) ANN, (B) SVM, (C) ML, and (D) SAM. (All green and
orange color represents aquatic vegetation while cyan and blue colors represent bare bottom and deep water.)

179

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 9: Indices-based classification of Image 17.

4.5 Discussion 

Overall, the non-parametric classifiers (SVM,
ANN  and  SAM)  performed  better  than  the  tradi-
tional  ML  classifier  in  classifying  and  detecting
aquatic  vegetation.  Normalization  by  deducing
deep-water  spectra  improved  image  classification
results for the ANN and SVM. These non-parametric
classifiers  likely  incorporated  spectral  variation
induced  by  variations  in  water  depth.  The  SAM
classifier showed good results with original filtered
images. In all cases, the ML classifier was found to
be least accurate despite improvements with depth
invariant  images.  Depth  invariant  transform
seemed  to  have  enhanced  image  interpretation  by

allowing ML, SVM and SAM to improve accuracy.
The  ANN  classifier,  which  performed  best  with
normalized  images,  did  not  improve  further  with
depth  invariant  images. As  mentioned  earlier,  the
attenuation  coefficient  ratios  used  to  derive  all
depth invariant image transforms (for all images in
the  study)  were  determined  from  a  single  image
due  to  sample  insufficiency,  which  might  have
limited  the  accuracy  of  classifying  some  of  the
images.  Adequate  samples  for  each  image  would
allow  computation  of  individual  coefficient  ratios
to produce improved depth invariant images.

Indices  developed  empirically  based  on  the
study  of  spectral  patterns  was  useful  to  separate
broad  categories  such  as  upland  and  deep  water

Table 3: Accuracy assessment results using different classification methods.

Classifier

Original clean image
(13 bands)

Normalized image
(13 bands)

Depth Invariant Image
(12 bands)

Classification Overall accuracy:
ANN
SVM
SAM
ML

62.16%
61.91%
64.53%
45.37%

Detection Overall accuracy:
ANN
SVM
SAM
ML
Indices

89.03%
84.49%
86.43%
59.12%
84.80%

68.73%
64.42%
58.60%
49.01%

89.72%
88.99%
87.92%
71.51%

59.71%
62.35%
64.85%
57.17%

88.73%
91.57%
92.95%
81.25%

180

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

pixels and as a supplement to other classifiers such
as  the  SAM  classifier.  Indices  were  also  used  to
detect  aquatic  vegetation  with  moderate  overall
accuracy  (85%)  besting  the  detection  accuracy
achieved using the ML classifier. Refinement of the
indices is recommended for future study with more
field samples and multiple sets of images.

This  study  is  based  on  available  limited  field
sample size. Only 17 field polygons of pure classes
with  over  700  inner  pixels  were  used  for  training
the  classifiers  and  a  similar  sample  size  was  used
for assessment. The number of polygons was lower
than  what  is  generally  recommended  for  typical
remote  sensing  classification  study;  however,  it
was  large  enough  to  have  a  sufficient  number  of
pixels  for  the  analysis.  This  study  and  the  results
are  worthwhile  to  make  general  comparison
between various methods of processing and classi-
fication  and  to  recommend  prospects  of  further
studies. Further studies with larger sample sizes are
needed  to  conduct  subtle  comparison  between
performances of these non-linear classifiers. Depth
invariant  transformation  of  the  images  can  be
improved  if  sufficient  field  samples  are  available
and coefficient ratios for all images are computed.
With  adequate  sample  size  and  study  of  different
types of hyperspectral images, indices for detection
might be refined and improved as well.

5. Conclusion

This research investigated the use of three non-
parametric  classifiers, ANN,  SVM  and  SAM,  and
the ML traditional classifier applied to filtered orig-
inal  images,  images  normalized  for  water  surface
reflectance and depth invariant transform of CASI
hyperspectral images. The results showed that non-
parametric  classifiers  (ANN,  SVM  and  SAM)
yielded better results. The ANN and SVM produced
a visually smooth classification map in all aquatic
and  upland  regions.  The  SAM  classifier  was  the
best  in  analyzing  shallow  water  regions  using
depth  invariant  images;  however,  it  required  the
application  of  a  preprocessing  step  to  broadly
categorize the upland and deep open water classes.
In our experiments, the best classification accuracy
of 69% was yielded when ANN was implemented
on  the  normalized  images,  and  the  best  detection
accuracy of around 93% resulted from applying the
SAM on depth invariant images. The SVM classi-
fier  came  in  slightly  inferior  to  the  SAM  results
with  around  91.6%.  Spectral  indices  were  devel-
oped  to  categorize  broad  classes  and  to  detect
aquatic  vegetation.  Index-based  detection  of

aquatic  vegetation yielded good accuracy but was
inferior  to  the  results  of  the  non-parametric
classifiers. We recommend further study with larger
sample sizes to improve depth invariant classifica-
tion  results  and  to  conduct  subtle  comparison
between performances of non-parametric classifiers.

References

Adler-Golden, S.M., M.W. Matthew, L.S. Bernstein, R.Y.
Levine,  A.  Berk,  S.C.  Richtsmeier,  P.K.  Acharya,
G.P.  Anderson,  G.  Felde,  and  J.  Gardner.  1999.
Atmospheric  correction  for  short-wave  spectral
imagery based on MODTRAN 4. Proc SPIE Int Soc
Opt Eng. 61-69. 

Albert, A., and C. Mobley. 2003. An analytical model for
subsurface irradiance and remote sensing reflectance
in  deep  and  shallow  case-2  waters.  Optics  Express.
11(22): 2873-2890. 

Bierwirth, P., T. Lee and R. Burne. 1993. Shallow sea-floor
reflectance and water depth derived by unmixing mul-
tispectral  imagery.  Photogrammetric  Engineering  &
Remote Sensing (United States). 59(3): 331-338.
Brando, V.E., J.M. Anstee, M. Wettle, A.G. Dekker, S.R.
Phinn  and  C.  Roelfsema.  2009.  A  physics  based
retrieval and quality assessment of bathymetry from
suboptimal  hyperspectral  data.  Remote  Sensing  of
Environment. 113(4): 755-770. 

Corsini,  G.,  M.  Diani,  R.  Grasso,  M.  De  Martino,  P.
Mantero, and S. Serpico. 2003. Radial Basis Function
and  Multilayer  Perceptron  neural  networks  for  sea
water optically active parameter estimation in case II
waters:  a  comparison.  International  Journal  of
Remote Sensing. 24(20): 3917-3932. 

Cortes, C., and V. Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks.

Machine Learning. 20(3): 273-297. 

Dobberfuhl,  R.D.,  and  C.E.  Hart.  2009.  Distribution  of
submerged aquatic vegetation in the Lower St. Johns
River:  2006  Atlas.  Professional  paper  SJ2009-PP2,
St. Johns Water Management Distribution.

Gallegos,  C.L.  2005.  Optical  water  quality  of  a  black-
water  river  estuary:  the  Lower  St.  Johns  River,
Florida, USA. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science.
63: 57-72. 

Gordon, H. R., and A.Y. Morel. 1983. Remote assessment
of  ocean  color  for  interpretation  of  satellite  visible
imagery: a review. Lecture Notes on Coastal and
Estuarine  Studies.  Springer-Verlag,  New  York
1983. 4: 114.

Green,  A.A.,  M.  Berman,  P.  Switzer,  and  M.D.  Craig.
1988.  A  transformation  for  ordering  multispectral
data in terms of image quality with implications for
noise  removal.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Geoscience
and Remote Sensing. 26(1): 65-74. 

Gualtieri,  J.A.,  and  S.  Chettri.  2000.  Support  vector
machines  for  classification  of  hyperspectral  data.
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2000.
2000
IGARSS 
Proceedings. 
International. 2: 813-815. 

2000. 

IEEE 

181

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Haykin, S. Neural network: a comprehensive foundation.
Upper  Saddle,  NJ,  USA:  Prentice  Hall  PTR.  1994,
pp. 1-768.

Hedley, J., C. Roelfsema and S.R. Phinn. 2009. Efficient
radiative transfer model inversion for remote sensing
applications.  Remote  Sensing  of  Environment.
113(11): 2527-2532. 

Heermann, P.D., and N. Khazenie. 1992. Classification of
multispectral remote sensing data using a back-prop-
agation  neural  network.  IEEE  Transactions  on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing. 30(1): 81-88. 
Jensen,  J.R.  Introductory  digital  image  processing:  a
remote  sensing  perspective.  3rd  ed. Upper  Saddle
River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall. 2005, pp. 337-406.

Jensen, R.R., P.J. Hardin and G. Yu. 2009. Artificial neural
networks and remote sensing. Geography Compass.
3(2): 630-646. 

Keiner, L.E., and X.H. Yan. 1998. A neural network model
for estimating sea surface chlorophyll and sediments
from  thematic  mapper  imagery.  Remote  Sensing  of
Environment. 66(2): 153-165. 

Klonowski,  W.M.,  P.R.  Fearns  and  M.J.  Lynch.  2007.
Retrieving  key  benthic  cover  types  and  bathymetry
from  hyperspectral  imagery.  Journal  of  Applied
Remote Sensing. 1(1): 011505. 

Kruse,  F.,  A.  Lefkoff,  J.  Boardman,  K.  Heidebrecht,  A.
Shapiro, P. Barloon, and A. Goetz. 1993. The spectral
image processing system (SIPS)—interactive visual-
ization  and  analysis  of  imaging  spectrometer  data.
Remote Sensing of Environment. 44(2-3): 145-163. 

Lyzenga,  D.R.  1981.  Remote  sensing  of  bottom
reflectance and water attenuation parameters in shal-
low  water  using  aircraft  and  Landsat  data.
International Journal of Remote Sensing. 2(1): 71-82. 
Lyzenga,  D.R.  1985.  Shallow-water  bathymetry  using
combined  lidar  and  passive  multispectral  scanner
data. International Journal of Remote Sensing. 6(1):
115-125. 

Melgani,  F.,  and  L.  Bruzzone.  2004.  Classification  of
hyperspectral  remote  sensing  images  with  support
vector  machines.  IEEE Transactions  on  Geoscience
and Remote Sensing. 42(8): 1778-1790. 

Mobley,  C.D.,  L.K.  Sundman,  C.O.  Davis,  J.H.  Bowles,
T.V.  Downes,  R.A.  Leathers,  M.J.  Montes,  W.P.
Bissett,  D.D.R.  Kohler  and  R.P.  Reid.  2005.
Interpretation  of  hyperspectral  remote-sensing
imagery  by  spectrum  matching  and  look-up  tables.
Applied Optics. 44(17): 3576-3592. 

Pal, M., and G.M. Foody. 2010. Feature selection for clas-
sification  of  hyperspectral  data  by  SVM.  IEEE
Transactions  on  Geoscience  and  Remote  Sensing.
48(5): 2297-2307. 

Schweizer, D., R. Armstrong and J. Posada. 2005. Remote
sensing characterization of benthic habitats and sub-
merged  vegetation  biomass 
in  Los  Roques
Archipelago National Park, Venezuela. International
Journal of Remote Sensing. 26(12): 2657-2667. 
Van der Meer, F. 2006. The effectiveness of spectral simi-
larity  measures  for  the  analysis  of  hyperspectral
imagery.  International  Journal  of  Applied  Earth
Observation and Geoinformation. 8(1): 3-17. 

Authors

Dr.  Roshan  Pande-Chhetri obtained  his  PhD
degree  in  Geomatics  concentration  from  the
University of Florida in 2012 and worked there as
a post-doctorate research associate. He also holds a
Master’s  degree  in  GIS  Planning  and  Bachelor’s
degree  in  Civil  Engineering.  Dr.  Pande-Chhetri’s
research focuses on mobile mapping, remote sensing
technologies and applications in aquatic ecology and
environment.  He  currently  works  as  a  Geomatics
Engineer for US Imaging Inc. He previously worked
as a Civil Engineer and a GIS Supervisor in Nepal
and  as  a  GIS  System Analyst  for Alachua  County
Board of Commissioners in Florida.

Dr.  Amr  Abd-Elrahman is  an  Associate
Professor  of  Geomatics  at  the  University  of
Florida.  He  acquired  his  PhD  degree  in  Civil
Engineering  with  a  Computer  Engineering  minor
from the University of Florida in 2001. He received
his MS and BS degrees from Ain Shams University,
Cairo,  Egypt  in  1990  and  1995,  respectively.
Before joining the University of Florida in 2007 as
Assistant  Professor,  Dr. Abd-Elrahman  worked  as
Assistant Professor at Ain Shams University and as
Visiting  Research  Engineer  at  the  University  of
Central  Florida.  His  main  research  interest  is
geospatial analysis, multispectral and hyperspectral
image  analysis,  object-based  image  segmentation
and classification, and LiDAR data processing. Dr.
Abd-Elrahman  has  more  than  22  referred  journal
publications. He serves as a reviewer and editorial
board  member  for  several  journals  and  scientific
organizations.  Dr.  Abd-Elrahman  teaches  several
undergraduate and graduate courses in the geograph-
ic  information  system  analysis,  image  processing
and surveying courses areas.

Dr.  Charles  A.  Jacoby obtained  his  PhD  in
Biological Sciences from Stanford University. His
research  has  addressed  the  ecology  of  estuarine,
coastal  and  deepwater  habitats  off  California,
Florida,  the  Bahamas,  the  northeastern  United
States, Australia and New Zealand. He is currently
the  Supervising  Environmental  Scientist  for  the
Estuaries  Section  of 
the  St.  Johns  Water
Management District, the Program Scientist for the
Indian  River  Lagoon  National  Estuary  Program,
and a Courtesy Associate Professor in the Soil and
Water  Science  Department  at  the  University  of
Florida. In these roles, Dr. Jacoby is responsible for
creating  and  translating  scientific  insights  into
management practices. q

182

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by YORK UNIV on 12/22/18For personal use only. 