bs_bs_banner

Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129)): (cid:129)(cid:129)–(cid:129)(cid:129)

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail
Gasoline Market: An Agent-Based Modeling Approach

Alison J. Heppenstall,* Kirk Harland,* Andrew N. Ross† and Dan Olner*

*Centre for Spatial Analysis and Policy, University of Leeds
†School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds

Abstract
Simulating the dynamics and processes within a spatially inﬂuenced retail market, such as the retail gaso-
line market, is a highly challenging research area. Current approaches are limited through their inability
to model the impact of supplier or consumer behavior over both time and space. Agent-based models
(ABMs) provide an alternative approach that overcomes these problems. We demonstrate how knowledge
of retail pricing is extended by using a ‘hybrid’ model approach: an agent model for retailers and a spatial
interaction model for consumers. This allows the issue of spatial competition between individual retailers
to be examined in a way only accessible to agent-based models, allowing each model retailer autonomous
control over optimizing their price. The hybrid model is shown to be successful at recreating spatial
pricing dynamics at a national scale, simulating the effects of a rise in crude oil prices as well as accurately
predicting which retailers were most susceptible to closure over a 10-year period.

1 Introduction

Simulating the dynamics and processes within a spatially inﬂuenced retail market is a challeng-
ing research area with a deep history of analysis (e.g. Schendel and Balestra 1969, Plummer
et al. 2012). Spatial economic systems evolve both spatially and temporally, with different
places exhibiting their own unique characteristics. This complexity is driven by the interaction
of consumer and competitor behavior. The ‘hybrid’ model presented here uses two distinct
approaches for each of these two sides of the retail counter. Consumer behavior is modeled
using an aggregate-level spatial interaction approach, while an agent-based model approach is
used to model individual retailers capable of making their own pricing decisions. ABM allows
the issue of spatial competition to be examined in a way not accessible to other approaches.
The competitive effect of individual price decisions has, in the past, necessarily been modeled
as game-theoretic equilibria (Eisel et al. 1993). Instead, by treating retailers as individual
agents, the models presented here crack open that static box to examine day-to-day interac-
tions and their market outcomes.

This ability to model agent choice is the key advantage of ABM, but it is computationally
demanding to scale. By linking to an aggregate consumer model, this ‘hybrid’ approach takes
the best from both modeling methods to maximize its effectiveness. We focus on the retail
gasoline market in Scotland (UK) to examine the potential of applying an agent-based model
(ABM) to the effects of competition between autonomous retailers. While the model presented
could be applied to any spatially inﬂuenced market with individual outlets, the gasoline
market was selected because it allows a clear examination of the interaction of price, space

Address for correspondence: Alison Heppenstall, Centre for Spatial Analysis and Policy, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK. E-mail:
a.j.heppenstall@leeds.ac.uk
Acknowledgements: This work forms part of the ESRC funded Modeling Individual Consumer Behavior project (RES-061-25-0030)

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12027

2

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

and competition. As Ning and Haining (2003, p. 2132) argue, gasoline does not face messy
elasticities jostling together in a “basket” of stock-keeping units (SKUs) and, coupled with
consumers showing little brand loyalty as regards fuel-buying, this makes it particularly useful
for studying pricing and competition.

An ABM is used to represent individual retailers supplying fuel. This is linked to a spatial
interaction and network model providing consumer behavior. A series of experiments has been
designed to demonstrate the ﬂexibility and potential of this approach for understanding retail
markets. Idealized data is used to recreate spatial pricing trends. Next, we build in consumer
behavior and assess the success of this model in simulating spatial patterns in real data. The
ability of the model to predict the proﬁtability of stations is then tested, while the ﬁnal experi-
ment simulates the effect of a rapid increase and decrease of crude oil prices (the “rockets and
feathers” effect) on the behavior and pricing of the stations.

The history of gasoline retail in the UK (covered in detail by both the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission 1990 and Ofﬁce of Fair Trading 1998) shares a key feature with retail
generally – the rise of large formats, and especially of the supermarket. However, this high-
lights the uniqueness of gasoline as a product. Studies in both the UK and the US have found a
diverse retail ecosystem has developed in spite of large format power (e.g. Karamychev and
van Reeven 2009, Wrigley et al. 2009, Wrigley and Dolega 2011, Bonanno et al. 2012) even
though there has been a radical process of ‘creative destruction’ (Paruchuri et al. 2009). In
contrast, the story of gasoline retail has been much more clear-cut: the rise of the larger
formats at the expense of small independent retailers. The main reason has already been men-
tioned and is obvious enough: selling a single substitutable product leaves retailers with little
else to compete on apart from scale. Although at the same time – as the Ofﬁce of Fair Trading
(1998, p. 3) noted – the scale of the more powerful market players has enabled the shift to
petrol as part of a “much wider range of products and services in order to compete, not only
with the oil company-supplied outlets, but with major supermarket petrol retailers.”

2 Approaches to Modeling the Retail Gasoline Market

The hybrid model presented here uses a different location modeling method for consumers
versus gasoline retailing agents. This section explains the rationale for this by putting gasoline
in the context of retailing and discussing the key roles of location, price and competition. It
then ﬁnishes with some criticisms of other approaches to modeling gasoline retail.

2.1 Location in Retail and Gasoline

The importance of location as a key factor in retail markets is surprisingly absent in a great
deal of the modern retail literature. Many rely on survey and questionnaire data where con-
sumers are asked to self-report on their own recalled or predicted behavior. For example, work
on multi-purpose trips (Leszczyc et al. 2004) and competition between and within store
formats (Gonzalez-Benito et al. 2005), whilst discussing spatial and location effects, builds
models on survey data.

However, self-reporting on the importance of proximity leads to hugely divergent ﬁnd-
ings. Pan and Zinkhan’s meta-analysis ﬁnds people’s self-reporting of location as a predictor
of patronage having R2 values between -0.05 to 0.76. (Pan and Zinkhan 2006, p. 234).
Different studies use widely varying approaches to location, often subsuming it under the
broad heading of ‘convenience’, as for example in Louviere and Gaeth (1987) where self-

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

3

reporting on the importance of ﬁve or 10 minutes’ distance must nestle alongside assess-
ments of the importance of an in-store bakery or the width of aisles. As Pan and Zinkhan
(2006, p. 238) note, in this way, “most retailing studies are not really designed to allow
location to display its key effect (e.g. much of the location effect may occur below the con-
scious level)”.

This turn towards self-reporting is a relatively recent occurrence. This article is more in
line with a traditional take on the “revealed preference” nature of location. For exampe, Fik
(1988, p. 42) remarks “. . . spatial structure and ﬁrm density are the predominant forces which
shape the geography of price”. Referring to Eaton and Lipsey (1975), Craig et al. (1984, p. 7)
point out that

space introduces monopolistic elements that are absent from aspatial competition
. . . and, in fact, in spatial markets, all ﬁrms enjoy some degree of monopoly power
over their immediate market area. As a result, spatial competition often leaves some
ﬁrms with excess proﬁt and poses a barrier to entry to new ﬁrms.

However, early “spaceless” models were characterized by accounting for spatial price vari-
ation in integrated markets through transport cost differences, market power of producers and
imperfect information on the part of the consumers (Takayama and Judge 1964). By not
allowing individual buyers and sellers to occupy speciﬁc locations, sellers could not locate stra-
tegically. The location of these individuals carry important price implications (Fik 1991). For
example, consumers will vary both in their knowledge of the sellers (in terms of convenience
and cost) and in their social-economic proﬁle. Together, these different elements characterize
the market area and thus inﬂuence the spatial distribution of price variations (Ning and
Haining 2003).

This is not to dismiss the importance of more ﬁne-grained analysis, but the key rationale
behind creating the hybrid model is to seek out an effective balance between model power and
complexity. Adding more complexity may improve predictive power, but the marginal gains
will be minimal. Indeed, certain kinds of additional complexity may muddy the picture
without ﬁrst testing understanding of where useful predictive and analytic power lies. It may
be true, as Louviere and Gaeth say, that “our ability to understand and predict consumers’
decision-making depends on our ability to create better and more accurate representations of
their decision processes” (Louviere and Gaeth 1987, p. 44), but this drive towards breaking
down the minutaie of consumer behavior and ‘store image’ has led to a sprawling set of
factors. For instance, Grewal and Levy (2009, p. 524) give a long list of “critical drivers”:
“goals, schema, information processing, memory, involvement, attitudes, affect, atmospherics,
and consumer attributions and choices”. Addressing this complexity may work well if stake-
holders are engaged, for instance, as Weber et al. (2011) demonstrate, but it is not appropriate
for all analyses.

The default mode of much agent modeling, however,

is to insist on an increasingly
detailed ‘realism’ (Moss and Edmonds 2005). This has overlapped with the direction of some
key retail work where, as Kopalle (2010) puts it, the goal is to build the “virtual customer” in
the belief that, if they “mimic human behavior, retail managers will be able to use them to test
the impact of their decisions before implementing them in the real world?” (Kopalle 2010,
p. 119–120) The goal of this article is instead to argue for an approach that maximizes the
power of different methods. An SI model is effective for capturing most of the decision proc-
esses of large amounts of consumers, and an ABM approach is appropriate for modeling single
ﬁrm decision-makers (see below).

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

4

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

2.2 Competition

The empirics of competition underpinning price variation are quite a tangle. Generally, the
more isolated a retailer, the higher the price. This is due to higher relative ﬁxed costs in lower-
populated catchment areas. Fik (1991) noted that in areas where retailers clustered, lower
overall prices are promoted and price patterns reﬂect the relative location of ﬁrms and the dis-
tance to the nearest and next-nearest rivals. Local competition factors (such as clustering of
ﬁrms) are thus important, as are the effects of price wars (Claycamp 1966; Slade 1992;
Haining 1983, 2003; Dudley 1990; Economides 1986). The studies of Haining (1983) and
Plummer et al. (1998) demonstrated that prices were lowest at sites that concentrated only on
selling gasoline, had a relatively large number of pumps, sold non-branded gasoline and
enjoyed a high level of accessibility within the urban area.

Competition within the UK gasoline market is intense, driven almost solely by price. This
is in part because consumer behavior towards gasoline has developed quite distinct heuristics:
single-digit changes in price will have a noticeable effect, where in other retail contexts (as
Levy points out) consumers “do not notice the last digit of a price” (Levy et al. 2004, p. xvii).
Gasoline retailers also make rapid and constant price shifts, in contrast with other store
formats and stock-keeping units (SKUs), where menu costs make price changes expensive
(Levy et al. 1997). The examination of pricing asymmetries over time has formed a signiﬁcant
part of the work on price variations within gasoline retail. According to Galoetti et al. (2003),
these studies differ in one or more of the following aspects: the country under scrutiny; the
time frequency and period of data used; the focus on crude oil prices or retail gas prices, and
ﬁnally the dynamic model employed (see Reilly and Witt 1998, Galoetti et al. 2003, Clemenz
and Gugler 2006, Deck and Wilson 2008).

The hypothesis that gasoline prices increase at a faster rate than they decrease in times of
turbulence within international crude oil markets (the “rockets and feathers” effect) was ﬁrst
investigated by Bacon (1991) using data on the UK market. Further evidence was found within
the UK market by Manning (1991) and Borenstein and Cameron (1997). Galoetti et al. (2003)
used comparable data to assess different international markets; application of a suitable
dynamic regression model allowed distinctions to be drawn between short-lived variations and
asymmetries. The results found overwhelmingly that the rockets and feathers effect dominates
the price adjustment mechanism in many European gasoline markets. This research will repli-
cate this behavior in Experiment 3.

2.3 Criticisms

Attempts to understand the processes and dynamics that occur within the retail gasoline have
typically used elaborate regression models. These have examined the relationship between
price and one or more variables, normally crude oil price. The work of Reilly and Witt (1998)
is a representative example, seeking to examine the relationship between the net retail price,
crude oil price and exchange rate. The coefﬁcients are found by ﬁtting the equation to the
data.

The model of Reilly and Witt (1998) along with similar work by Sheppard et al. (1998)
and Chan et al. (2007) exemplify several limitations to these approaches. No account is taken
of geography, all the stations operate the same rules and the market is assumed uniform. It
would be impossible to apply such highly idealized models to a real market. Assumptions are
made about the probabilistic distribution of market share based on factors such as price and
distance and on the basis of these, proﬁt levels calculated. This results in models speciﬁc to a

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

5

certain set of locations and markets. They can be used to model the impact of a station
closing, but could not be applied to dynamic real data scenarios.

Furthermore, these models present certain general problems. For example, empirical
models link up parameters that are all on the same scale of analysis. It is not possible to make
the behaviors executed at the ‘micro’ level correspond with the global variables measured at
the ‘global’ level. Equations used within these models are typically complex, containing large
numbers of parameters that are difﬁcult to estimate and lack realism. Finally, it is difﬁcult to
take into account the actions of individuals and therefore the modiﬁcations to the environment
which results from their behavior.

3 Agent-Based Modeling

Agent-based modeling (ABM) is a new paradigm for modeling social systems, described by
Gilbert and Terna (2000) as a “breakthrough in computational modeling in the social sci-
ences”. An ABM is composed of individual, autonomous “agents”, each capable of making
decisions and interacting with both other agents and their environment (Bonabeau 2002).
As the model takes individual time-steps, each agent has the ability to assess its circums-
tances and, based on a set of rules, make an informed decision about its future course of
action (Bonabeau 2002). Through this mechanism, more
can be
incorporated (Moss and Edmonds 2005) and models can be used to create systems which
mimic real scenarios and produce a dynamic history of the system under investigation (Axtell
2000).

realistic behavior

ABM advocates decomposition of the problem into small components – a natural meta-
phor for modeling complex systems with multiple interactions. In addition, unlike traditional
aggregate mathematical techniques which smooth out the dynamic interactions that occur at
the micro level (Batty 2005), ABM allows interactions at this level to be tracked. Applications
of ABM range from modeling the movements of aphids (Parry and Evans 2008) through to
simulation of burglary patterns (Malleson et al. 2010). For a thorough discussion, refer to
Wooldridge and Jennings (1995). The advantage of ABM for simulating processes in retail
markets is clear. Individual “stores” can be assigned their own rules or behavior and given
knowledge of their nearest competitors. Stores can update their own information and strategy
each time step. ABM can be linked to other models, e.g. spatial interaction models to simulate
consumer movement or optimization methods such as genetic algorithms to “breed” optimal
solutions. Risk free exploration of possible impacts of strategic decisions is important for
industry players and ABM offers the potential to increase the level of realism that can be rep-
resented in such decision support models.

Ning and Haining’s (2003) work, mentioned above, surveyed the gasoline price decisions
of forecourt managers in Shefﬁeld, UK. The simplest strategy was “mimic my neighbor”.
Kopalle (2010, p. 118) argues that “a basic weakness of these rule-based approaches is that
they have absolutely nothing to do with the optimal retail decisions for a SKU. Rather, these
approaches based their conclusions on what has been done in the past.” But is that true? Suc-
cessful strategies survive; as Baumol (1976, p. 5) points out, consistently poor decision-making
quickly weeds out suboptimal ones. Recent analytic advances may have superseded those rule-
based approaches, but compare two situations: gasoline retail managers setting price in the
copycat manner found by Ning and Haining (2003), using nothing but their own daily obser-
vations (or, for example, a small quantity of purchased price data from surrounding stations
from Experian’s Catalist database, collected from loyalty card use). Or, each station using

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

6

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

sophisticated data collection to inform their pricing decisions. For each of those, what actual
impact can those tools have in comparison with the difference that price will make? The
method presented here offers a way to examine these issues. This can help assess, for instance,
the marginal beneﬁt of increasing the intensity of market-research based approaches to pricing
optimization.

Despite the wide uptake of ABM in the social sciences, there are still relatively few retail
focused applications. Of the published examples, the majority focus on modeling the consumer
(demand) side,
in particular concentrating on varying aspects of consumer behavior (see
Arentze and Timmermans 2005, Zhang et al. 2005, Izquierdo and Izquierdo 2007). Studies
examining the supply (retailer) side focus on investigating the potential for improving perform-
ance within supply-chain management (Garcia-Flores et al. 2000, Julka et al. 2002, Signorile
2002). These applications hint at the possibilities offered by ABM: the ability to model
complex market processes, ultimately furthering our understanding of these systems. However,
studies to date have tended to concentrate on temporal complexities, with research focused on
the spatial complexities being rarer and largely avoided (exceptions include Castiglione 2000,
Lombardo et al. 2004, Schenk et al. 2007).

A hybrid ABM was constructed by Heppenstall et al. (2005). This approach used agents
to model the decisions and strategies taken by individual gasoline stations whilst a spatial
interaction (SI) model was employed to represent the effects of consumer behavior and predict
sales and station proﬁt (a brief overview of this framework is presented here). This framework
was successful, with initial results reported in Heppenstall et al. (2006) supporting the use of
this methodology for a dynamic, locally interacting system such as the retail gasoline market.
The work presented here extends this original research, applying the model on a national scale
(to the country of Scotland), simulating the effect on proﬁt levels of rising crude oil prices and
long term evaluation of model predictions.

4 An Agent-Based Model for Gasoline Pricing

4.1 Model Overview

A diagrammatic overview of the model is presented in Figure 1. The model is divided into
three interlinked layers; the gasoline stations (represented as agents), the spatial interaction
matrix for consumers (a representation of the location, size and behavior of a population) and
the travel network (movement of the population around the study area). Analyses of multi-
purpose trips (Leszczyc et al. 2004) and competition between and within store formats
(Gonzalez-Benito et al. 2005) point to the deeper complexity of consumer store choice but this
article keeps to a simpler method as a broad-brush way to redistribute demand between peo-
ple’s work and home addresses. From examination of available literature and real data, this
architecture was chosen as a balance between the simplicity required to make the article’s
argument and a reﬂection of different layers seen within the real life system. A brief description
of each component is given in the following sections; for a detailed description of the model
construction, the reader is referred to Heppenstall et al. (2005).

The ABM approach allows gasoline stations to be represented as discrete entities with
their own price setting strategies. This enables the simulation to model, for example, the
pricing policies of different multinational companies (such as BP and ESSO) or supermarket
chains. Each individual gasoline station is created as an agent-object and is located in space.
The price-setting behavior of each station is governed by a predeﬁned rule set that is directed

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

7

Figure 1 Diagrammatic representation of the different layers within the model

at maximizing proﬁt levels. After an assessment of their own and their neighbors’ prices, the
following rules, illustrated in Figure 2, are instigated.

The rules were formed on the basis of published information on retailer behavior (for
example ESSO’s “Price Watch” policy that matched the price of any competitor within three
miles), analysis of real data for a gasoline retailer with known geography over a three month
period and through experiments. The rules are the same for all stations unless stated.
However, each station, or corporation, could be assigned identical or different rule sets. A list
of model parameters and their deﬁnitions can be found in Appendix 1.

In the work presented in this article, each gasoline station applies the rule set using its
proﬁt history to generate a new price strategy aimed at maximising/maintaining its proﬁt
levels. As illustrated in Figure 2, if a station is maintaining or experiencing an increase in
proﬁt, its strategy remains unchanged. However, if proﬁt levels are declining, an alternative
strategy is employed; this involves either increasing or decreasing the price.

4.2 Adding Realism: Simulating Consumer Dynamics

To account for both consumer behavior and a proﬁt-based strategy within the agent model, a
spatial interaction (SI) model and a travel to work network were incorporated. Spatial interac-
tion models are used for a variety of purposes including “what-if?” scenarios, projection and
simulation modeling. Within this research, the SI model is used to calculate customer numbers
and, hence, volume of sales information by assuming a constant, average, customer fuel
requirement. The volume of sales is used to calculate proﬁt levels; these feed into pricing rules.
Model fuel consumption was set using data from the Family Expenditure Survey (ONS); a
survey of 6,500 UK households taken annually that focuses on buying habits.

The SI model is in two parts: the relative amounts ˆSij

m of fuel of type m sold by station j to
the population of ward i (UK Census area of approximately 400 to 35,000 people) is given by:

ˆ
m
S
ij

=

δ
m
j

[

exp

−

β
d

ij

−

λ
m
p
j

]

.

(1)

Equation (1) shows how the amount sold decays exponentially with the distance dij between
m of fuel m at station j. l and b
the centroid of ward i and station j, and also with the price pj

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

8

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Figure 2 Diagrammatic representation of rules operated by each individual station

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

9

are two empirical constants, usually determined by calibrating the model to real data. The
variable δj
m is set to 1 if station j sells fuel type m and to 0 otherwise and ensures no sales from
stations where a particular fuel type is unavailable. The use of an exponential to represent the
phenomena of distance decay in retail sales is traditional in SI models and well matched by
many retailing examples (Birkin et al. 2002).

In stage 2, the Sij

m are then normalized to give the actual volume sold using:

m
S
ij

=

m

H F
i

ˆ
m
S
ij
∑
ˆ
m
S
ij

(2)

where Hi is the number of households within the ward i and Fm is the amount of fuel of type m
required per household per day. Equation (2) ensures that the total volume of each fuel sold to
each ward equals the demand HiFm (the amount of fuel type m required by car owners in ward
i per day). This gives the actual amount sold in each ward.

This model assumes that monetary costs of collecting the fuel are of no signiﬁcance to the
customer. This is a reasonable assumption, the research of Plummer (1998) and Ning and
Haining (2003) demonstrates that consumers rarely make special trips to purchase gasoline,
instead journeys form part of other trips, for example travel to work. The interaction between
the agent model and the SI model is summarized in Figure 3.

While the use of a SI model replaces the computationally and conceptually difﬁcult alter-
native of modeling millions of individual consumers; this approach has an over-simpliﬁed
notion of when people buy fuel. To partly rectify this disparity, a network model was added as
most people tend to buy fuel as part of a multi-purpose trip, often including the journey to
work (Plummer et al. 1998, Ning and Haining 2003). The network model reallocates people
to wards on the basis of non-cascading travel to work data (derived from UK Census data).
Dijkstra’s (1959) shortest path algorithm was used to calculate an optimal route between the
origin and destination of the consumer (using population weighted centroids in each wards to
create the network or “roads” that people moved along). Car users were then redistributed to
the home, destination and intervening wards evenly to reﬂect the fact that consumers are likely
to purchase fuel from stations that lie close to their route and not just from those close to their
home.

4.3 Recreating Spatial Pricing Trends Using Idealized Data

Using the ABM structure as outlined above and applying the rules in Figure 2, a simple model
is created. Idealized data is used to represent both consumers and suppliers of fuel to test the
conceptual operation of the model, ensuring the production of intuitively reasonable results
and patterns under ideal circumstances. The ability of the model to simulate spatial trends is
tested using a grid measuring 80 km by 80 km (Figure 4a). Three “geographical” areas are
represented: urban (stations located every 1.0 km with a population of 10,000 per km2); sub-
urban (stations located every 2.5 km with a population of 4,000 per km2); and rural (stations
located every 5.0 km with a population of 250 per km2). This corresponds to a consumer
base of 10,000, 25,000 and 6,250 per station for the urban, suburban and rural stations,
respectively.

Figure 4b clearly shows that under idealized conditions and with the application of identi-
cal rules to all stations, an intuitively correct and clear urban-suburban-rural price divide is
produced (urban stations are located in the top right of the diagram). The prices between the

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

10

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Figure 3 Diagrammatic representation of the model execution procedure

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

11

(a)

(b)

Figure 4 (a) Representation of the spatial distribution of the density and distribution of “urban-
suburban-rural” gasoline stations, and (b) Map showing the price of the gasoline stations on day 100
illustrating differences in pricing at different geographical locations

highly populated urban areas are found to be much cheaper than those found within the less
populated suburban and rural areas.

5 Experimental Set-up

The following experiments use real station gasoline data from July 1999. The area chosen for
testing the model was the country of Scotland (Figure 5). There are several advantages to this
selection; Scotland is a large area with mixed rural and urban sectors. There is only one shared
border (with England, unrestricted travel is available between the two countries and there are
no economic differences) which is in a relatively sparsely populated part of the country, while
the remainder of the boundaries are natural coast line. This should reduce the inﬂuence of the
“edge effect” i.e. artiﬁcially inﬂated prices at stations near the edge of the model domain due
to the failure to represent the effect of stations outside the domain.

Unless stated, all the stations operate the same rule set. The rules have been designed to
ensure that each gasoline station never under- or over-prices compared to other stations within
their neighborhood (see Appendix 1 and 2 for rule details and default parameter values). Each
gasoline station is assigned the same initial price of 68p (the average price within the real data
set) and all simulations are run for 100 days or until a steady state is reached (the point at
which prices stop changing).

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

12

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Figure 5 Map of study area (the main centres of population are indicated by place names)

The ﬁrst experiment recreates spatial pricing trends using real data while the second
experiment tests the ability of the model to predict the proﬁtability of stations over a 10-year
period. The ﬁnal experiment simulates the effect of an increase in crude oil prices on stations.

5.1 Experiment One: Re-creation of Spatial Trends Using Real Data

This model has been shown to recreate spatial trends using idealized data. However, is the
model capable of recreating spatial pricing trends in the more complex real system? Each gaso-
line station is assigned the same gasoline price (68p) and default rule set and run to equilib-
rium. Figure 6a shows that the lowest prices are found in the areas with the highest population
densities (urban areas indicated by place name in Figure 5) whilst the highest prices are found
in the less populated rural areas. The variation within the resulting prices (69.4p – 80.5p) is
similar to that observed in the real data (67.9p – 83.3p). Comparison with Figure 6b shows
that the spatial pricing patterns produced by the model broadly follows those found in the real
data. However, there are differences between the real and model output, in particular, the
model has not replicated inﬂated prices in several of the more remote coastal stations. This is
due to the rules driving the stations pricing mechanism being powered by the spatial inﬂuence
of competitors’ location and consumer population. In addition, the model does not incorpo-
rate the attractiveness of each individual station, other than price of fuel. Different station

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

13

(a)

(b)

Figure 6 Maps showing (a) the interpolated price surface of the model output, and (b) the interpo-
lated price surface of the real data (July 27th)

layouts (number of gasoline pumps) and accessibility will inﬂuence the number of consumers
the forecourt will service. In addition, none of the natural variations that are existent in the
real pricing data were passed onto the gasoline station agents – for example, higher prices are
found in sparsely populated areas.

Analysis showed that there were 15 Stations in isolated rural locations that the model was
failing to recreate pricing trends for. In reality, due to their remote location, costs will be sig-
niﬁcantly higher at these stations. To reﬂect this, the costToProduce parameter (the amount
per litre that it costs the station to produce and sell the gasoline) was increased by 5p in these
stations. This had the effect of increasing gasoline prices to enable these stations to make a
proﬁt. Figure 7 show that accounting for spatial differences in costs has allowed a more realis-
tic re-creation of the pricing patterns found in the real data (this is particularly evidenced by
the higher prices at stations located on the coast). However, the results are not perfect suggest-
ing that further research is required into implementing other rule sets and a realistic transpor-
tation network to distribute consumers. Both of these factors are the focus of ongoing
research. There is evidence of an edge effect at the border with England. This is a result of
English border stations and consumers not being accounted for within the model simulation.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

14

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Figure 7 Map showing the results of assigning separate rule sets to stations located at a distance
from reﬁneries

An edge effect is not present around the coast line as obviously in reality there are no gasoline
stations or consumers located at sea.

5.2 Experiment Two: The Role of Price Competition on Long Term Retail Proﬁtability

As highlighted earlier, the default rule set was generated through a combination of literature and
experimentation with the real data set. The experiments presented above suggest that these rules
are capable of producing spatial pricing trends found in the real system. However, a further test
of the suitability of the model rules can be achieved by testing the ability of the model to make
long-term predictions using the real data. The SI component of the model calculates the proﬁt
made at each station, and on the basis of this, the pricing strategy (whether to increase, decrease
or maintain price) at a station is determined. A test of how well the model is predicting these
proﬁt levels, and thus if the model rules are suitable, is to assess whether stations that are pre-
dicted by the model as having low proﬁt levels are still operating in 2009.

Between 1999 and 2009 UK gasoline prices have steadily increased, culminating in a peak
price of 119p per litre in June 2008. It is hypothesized that stations with low or negative proﬁt
levels in 1999 are most likely, due to the increase in crude oil and thus pump price, to have
been driven out of business by 2009.

A survey of stations was taken in January 2009 for the town of Stirling, Scotland (see
Figure 5 for location). Stirling was chosen as it is a large town with 21 stations (in 1999) – a
large enough sample to test out the hypothesis. This survey provides a list of stations closed
since the original data was collected in 1999. These stations are overlaid on a proﬁtability map
generated by the model initialized with the real data from July 27th, 1999 (Figure 8).

In 1999, there were 21 gasoline stations within Stirling and four stations on the A-Road
to the west of the city centre. These comprised internationals (ESSO, BP and Shell), nationals
(Texaco, Thames) and an assortment of independent (privately owned) and supermarket sta-
tions. By 2009, seven of these stations had closed. Four of these closed stations were predicted
to have low proﬁt by the model, a factor of 10 smaller than those stations remaining open. Of
the stations that had closed, three were categorized as nationals (two Thames and one

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

15

Figure 8 Map showing the sales/proﬁtability of stations in Stirling in 1999. Also shown for compari-
son are the status (open or closed) of the stations in 2009

Table 1 Table showing the numbers of stations in Stirling which have closed / are still open in 2009,
compared to those which are predicted to close / remain open by the ABM

Model
Station Closed

Station Open

Totals

Observations

Station Closed
Station Open
Totals

4
0
4

3
14
17

7
14
21

Texaco), one was an international (Esso) and the remaining three stations were independent.
Anecdotal evidence shows that independent stations, due to their very tight proﬁt margins, are
often the ﬁrst to close in times of higher oil, and thus gasoline prices. Table 1 summarises these
results in a contingency table, with Table 2 presenting a number of statistics for assessing the
quality of the model. The hit rate of the model in terms of predicting station closure is about
57%, which is good considering the other non-local factors which might inﬂuence station
closure (e.g. overall performance of a company with multiple outlets). Even more encourag-
ingly, the false alarm rate is 0%, i.e. the model does not predict the closure of any stations
which actually remain open. One might expect that stations which are not proﬁtable will deﬁ-
nitely close, while there may be additional proﬁtable stations which close for other reasons.
Although the sample is small, the bias of the model supports the conclusions, suggesting that
the model under-predicts closures and hence over-predicts the number remaining open.

A possible factor that catalysed some of the gasoline stations closing is the inﬂuence of
supermarkets and their aggressive pricing strategies. In 2005 the supermarket chain Morri-
son’s took over an independent gasoline station. This would have created a ﬁerce pricing war

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

16

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Table 2 Statistics on the quality of the model predictions of station closures in Sterling (1999–2009)
compared to the observed closures

Hit rate
False alarm rate
Percentage correct
Bias (closed | open)
Critical success index (open | close)

57.1%
0%
85.7%
0.57
0.57

1.21
0.82

with the nearby supermarket of Tesco (supermarkets are the most aggressive gasoline pricing
retailers in the UK, Mintel 2007). Interestingly, the three stations that closed in the centre of
Stirling were all predicted as making reasonable proﬁt; station 3 (£8,199), station 1 (£7,720)
and station 2 (£7,631). These proﬁt levels were comparable to those of the stations that
remained open. These three stations were all independents, thus operating with higher costs
than multinationals. This difference is not accounted for in this model simulation. Assigning
individual rule sets to different types of stations and accounting for differences in conﬁguration
(e.g. the number of pumps, opening hours, etc.) to account for different company behavior is
an area for future investigation. As evident from Figure 8, a high proportion of stations
located near the supermarkets have remained open. These gasoline stations are operated by
large multinational companies. It can be hypothesized that these companies, unlike the inde-
pendents, can sustain low proﬁts over a period of time.

5.3 Experiment Three: Simulating the Impacts of Rising Crude Oil Prices

Experiment One shows that the model can replicate spatial pricing trends in the complicated
real system, whilst Experiment Two demonstrates the ability of the model to make realistic
predictions about proﬁtability over a long period. Despite these successes, the question
remains as to whether the model is capable of replicating one of the well observed price proc-
esses, that of “rockets and feathers” (Bacon 1991). This phenomenon occurs in reaction to
increases in crude oil price. First, prices rapidly increase and are then followed by a slow fall
back to the original price following a decrease in oil price. An increase and decrease in crude
oil prices will be simulated in this ﬁnal experiment, and the reaction of the system examined.
The costToProduce model parameter incorporates transportation costs, fuel duty and
crude oil prices. Forcing an increase (“rockets”) in this parameter will mimic a rise in one or
all of these factors. This will have the effect of reducing the proﬁt that each station is making,
precipitating price adjustments in order to maintain proﬁts. Decreasing the costToProduce
(“feathers”) will allow the stations to begin to act more competitively, i.e. undercutting each
other to maximize their proﬁt levels. This is expected to be accompanied by a slow decrease in
price. Eight gasoline stations within Stirling were chosen at random from the original 1999
data set to perform the experiment on. After 40 days, when the model reaches a dynamic equi-
librium (prices ﬂuctuate around a ﬁxed level), the costToProduce parameter was increased
from 66p to 68p. This was then decreased after 110 days from 68p to 66p.

Figure 9 presents the price and proﬁt for the eight Stirling stations over the course of a simu-
lation. At day 40, the costToProduce parameter was increased; this resulted in a rise in gasoline
prices over the next 20 days (Figure 9a) At this point, the majority of stations ﬁnd themselves
instantly making less proﬁt and take action via a price increase to regain proﬁt (Figure 9b). Once

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

17

Figure 9 Mean price (a) and proﬁt (b) of selected stations against time for the simulation of the
“rockets and feathers” effect using the Stirling data

this course of action has been taken by all stations and proﬁtability is regained, alternative strat-
egies (decreasing the price) are implemented to maximize this amount. This behavior is seen in
all the stations and continues until equilibrium is reached (days 60–100). On day 110, the cost-
ToProduce parameter is decreased by 2p to 66p. This produces a sharp increase in proﬁt
(Figure 9b) followed by a decrease in price (days 110–130). This decrease in price is a result of
the stations employing competitive measures to attract more consumers, i.e. undercutting each
other. The proﬁt levels slowly decrease with the price, but the price remains above the costTo-
Produce value and so the stations remain in proﬁt. The price ﬁnally settles at 67p–69p, which is
approximately the same variation in price that the system showed before the increase in costTo-
Produce; on day 39 the price varied between 67–69p.

6 Discussion and Conclusions

Past approaches to modeling the retail gasoline market have used empirically-based method-
ologies to examine effects of variations in price, pricing asymmetries, and impact of competi-

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

18

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

tion strategies. These approaches, and those commonly applied to the modeling of retail
markets (for example, spatial interaction models) are unable to account for important factors
such as individual retailer behavior. One of the central aims of this article has been to advance
methodological understanding of retail markets; an area that Grewel and Levy (2007) call for
more research to be directed at. Through the development and application of an agent-based
model (ABM) to a spatially inﬂuenced retail market, we have demonstrated its potential both
to uncover new knowledge about the system and to deepen our understanding of existing
knowledge by testing theories in a “risk free” simulation environment.

In the work presented here, individual gasoline stations have been allowed to evolve their
pricing strategies over time in reaction to a combination of factors, including spatial competi-
tion and the impact of crude oil prices. Experiments have demonstrated that the model is able
to replicate spatial pricing trends on both idealized and more complicated real data. We have
also shown the ability of the ABM to successfully predict whether stations are still viable over
a long-term period of ten years. This experiment also served as a useful way to independently
evaluate the performance of the model.

ABMs represent an alternative approach to simulating retail markets. As highlighted in the
opening of this article, applications are largely directed at modeling consumer behavior; mod-
eling the supply side is an area that is currently vastly under-researched. Available applications of
ABM hint at the potential that this approach has to offer. The ability of ABMs to further our
understanding of the retail system is due, in part, to their ﬂexibility. ABM can be linked to
models of known behavior; in this work both a spatial interaction and network model were
incorporated to simulate movement and behavior of consumers. Related work by Heppenstall
et al. (2006) successfully demonstrates how an optimization method (in this case a genetic algo-
rithm) can be used to produce optimal parameters for the model. ABMs can also use both quan-
titative and qualitative datasets; the latter of these can be particularly useful for deriving
behavioral rules of both the supply and demand components of the model. A further advantage
of ABM demonstrated through the work in this article is the ability to simulate retailer behavior
at several different spatial scales. The inﬂuence of space in retail markets is an under-researched
area (with some notable exceptions; for example, Allaway et al. 2003 and Gonzalez-Benito et al.
2005). There are many opportunities for further development; for example, extending this work
to simulate the gasoline market over several countries with different pricing and taxation
schemes.

As Hamill and Gilbert (2009, 2010) investigate, ﬁxed radii around agents can be theorized
as network connections formed by sets of who is inside those circles. Gasoline retailers using
rules that involve mimicking neighbors within a given distance form such networks, but it is
not immediately apparent that, thus formed, they are an important determinant of price-
setting outcomes in the ways investigated by Wilhite (2006). However, the issue certainly war-
rants more investigation. For example, might those network properties help explain certain
price-surface outcomes?

On the consumer side of the models presented, networks were limited to routes through
ward centroids, to achieve an effective but straightforward redistribution of population over
intervening wards. There is scope to test whether additional network modeling can bring large
marginal gains in predictive power, such as using road transport networks. Further potentially
value-increasing changes could examine multi-purpose trips in more depth (rather than averag-
ing over a journey to work path) as well as modeling the effect of other store formats on those
choices.

One of the drawbacks of the work presented within this article is the aggregate level at
which consumers were modeled. Recent studies have shown that as a result of changes in con-

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

19

sumer lifestyles and choices, the behavior of consumers has become increasingly complex
(Clarke et al. 2006). Changing patterns of consumption and consumer culture (Belk 1995,
Miller 1995), coupled with changes in daily lifestyles (for example, multi-purpose trips) have
had signiﬁcant impacts on the behavior and thus patterns and movements of individual con-
sumers, and on services. Current expansion of the model is being undertaken to allow the
incorporation of this type of consumer behavior at the individual level.

The work presented within this article has demonstrated the potential of agent-based
modeling for creating a more realistic and risk free environment within which the researcher
(or planner) can both deepen their understanding of system processes and dynamics, and test
out possible future scenarios such as new pricing strategies or determining optimal locations
for new gasoline stations.

References

Allaway A W, Berkowitz D, and D’Souza G 2003 Spatial diffusion of a new loyalty program through a retail

market. Journal of Retailing 79: 137–52

Arentze T and Timmermans H 2005 Impact of institutional change on shopping patterns: Application of a
multi-agent model of activity-travel. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Recent Advances in Retailing and Serv-
ices Science Conference, Orlando, Florida

Axtell R 2000 Why agents? On the varied motivations for agent computing in the social science. Washington,
D.C., CSED Working Paper No. 17 (available at http://www.brookings.edu/es/dynamics/papers/agents/
agents.htm)

Bacon R W 1991 Rockets and feathers: The asymmetrical speed of adjustment of UK retail gasoline prices to

Batty M 2005 Agents, cells, and cities: New representational models for simulating multiscale urban dynamics.

costs changes. Energy Economics 1: 211–18

Environment and Planning A 37: 1373–94

Baumol W J 1976. Economic Theory and Operations Analysis (Third Edition). London, Prentice Hall
Belk R W 1995 Studies in the new consumer behaviour. In Miller D (ed) Acknowledging Consumption: A

Review of New Studies. London, Routledge: 58–95

Birkin M, Clarke G, and Clarke M 2002 Retail Geography and Intelligent Network Planning (First Edition).

Oxford, John Wiley and Sons

Bonabeau E 2002 Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human systems. Proceedings

of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 99: 7280–87

Bonanno A and Lopez R A 2012 Wal-Mart’s monopsony power in metro and non-metro labor markets.

Regional Science and Urban Economics 42: 569–79

Borenstein S and Cameron AC 1997 Do gasoline prices respond asymmetrically to crude oil price changes?

Castiglione F 2000 Diffusion and aggregation in an agent based model of stock market ﬂuctuations. Interna-

Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 305–39

tional Journal of Modern Physics C 11: 865–79

Chan T Y, Padmanabhan V, and Seetharaman P B 2007 An econometric model of location and pricing in the

gasoline market. Journal of Marketing Research 44: 622–35

Clarke I, Hollsworth A, Jackson P, de Kervenoael R, Perez del Aguila R, and Kirkup M 2006 Retail restructur-
ing and consumer choice: 1, Long-term local changes in consumer behavior, Portsmouth, 1980–2002. Envi-
ronment and Planning A 38: 25–46

Claycamp H J 1966 Dynamic effect of short duration price differentials on retail gasoline sales. Journal of Mar-

keting Research 3: 175–78

Clemenz G and Gugler K 2006 Locational choice and price competition: Some empirical results for the Austrian

gasoline market. Empirical Economics 31: 291–312

Craig C S, Ghosh A, and McLafferty S 1984 Models of the retail location process: A review. Journal of Retailing

Deck C A and Wilson B J 2008 Experimental gasoline markets. Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organisa-

60: 5–36

tion 67: 134–49

Dijkstra E 1959 Two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik 1: 269–71
Dudley M 1990 Competition by choice: The effect of the consumer search on ﬁrm location decisions. American

Economic Review 80: 1092–104

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

20

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Eaton B C and Lipsey R G 1975 The principle of minimum differentiation reconsidered: Some new develop-

ments in the theory of spatial competition. Review of Economic Studies 42: 27–49

Economides N 1986 Minimal and maximal product differentiation in Hotelling’ Duopoly. Economic Letters 21:

Eisel H A, Laporte G, and Thisse J F 1993 Competitive location models: A framework and bibliography. Trans-

67–71

portation Science 27: 44

Fik T J 1988 Spatial competition and price reporting in retail food markets. Economic Geography 64: 29–44
Fik T J 1991 Price patterns in competitively clustered markets. Environment and Planning A 23: 1545–60
Galoetti M, Lanza A, and Manera M 2003 Rockets and feathers revisited: An international comparison on

European gasoline markets. Energy Economics 25: 175–90

Garcia-Flores R, Wang X Z, and Gitz G E 2000 Agent-based information ﬂow for process industries’ supply

chain modeling. Computers and Chemical Engineering 24: 1135–41

Gilbert H and Terna P 2000 How to build and use agent-based models in social science. Mind and Society 1:

57–72

Gonzalez-Benito O, Munoz-Gallego P A, and Kopalle P K 2005 A symmetric competition in retail store formats:

Evaluating inter- and intra-format spatial effects. Journal of Retailing 81: 59–73

Grewal D and Levy M 2009 Emerging issues in retailing research. Journal of Retailing 85: 522–26
Haining R P 1983 Anatomy of a price war. Nature 304: 679–81
Hamill L and Gilbert N 2009 Social circles: A simple structure for agent-based social network models. Journal

of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 12(2): 1

Hamill L and Gilbert N 2010 Simulating large social networks in agent-based models: A social circle model.

Emergence: Complexity and Organization 12(4): 78–94

Heppenstall A J, Evans A, and Birkin M H 2005 A hybrid multi-agent/spatial interaction model system for

petrol price setting. Transactions in GIS 9: 35–51

Heppenstall A J, Evans A J, and Birkin M H 2006 Application of multi-agent systems to modeling: A dynamic,

locally interacting retail market. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 9(3): 2

Izquierdo S S and Izquierdo L R 2007 The impact of quality uncertainty without asymmetric information on

market efﬁciency. Journal of Business Research 60: 858–67

Julka N, Srinivasen R, and Karimi I 2002 Agent-based supply chain management framework. Computers and

Chemical Engineering 26: 1755–69

Karamychev V and van Reeven P 2009 Retail sprawl and multi-store ﬁrms: An analysis of location choice by

retail chains. Regional Science and Urban Economics 39: 277–86

Kopalle P K 2010 Modeling retail phenomena. Journal of Retailing 86: 117–24
Leszczyc P, Peter T L, Sinha A, and Sahgal A 2004 The effect of multi-purpose shopping on pricing and location

strategy for grocery stores. Journal of Retailing 80: 85–99

Levy D, Bergen M, Dutta S, and Venable R 1997 The magnitude of menu costs: Direct evidence from large U.S.

supermarket chains. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 791–824

Levy M, Grewal D, Kopalle P K, and Hess J D 2004 Emerging trends in retail pricing practice: Implications for

research. Journal of Retailing 80(3): xiii–xxi

Lombardo S, Petri M, and Zotta D 2004 Intelligent GIS and retail location dynamics: A multi agent system inte-
grated with ArcGIS. In Laganà A, Gavrilova M L, Kumar V, Mun Y, Tan C J K, and Gervasi O (eds) Com-
putational Science and Its Applications: ICCSA 2004. Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science
Vol. 3044: 1046–56

Louviere J J and Gaeth G J 1987.Decomposing the determinants of retail facility choice using the method of

hierarchical information integration: A supermarket illustration. Journal of Retailing 63: 25–48

Malleson N, Heppenstall A, and See L 2010. Crime reduction through simulation: An agent-based model of bur-

glary. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 31: 236–50

Manning D N 1991 Petrol prices, oil price rises and oil price falls: Evidence for the UK since 1972. Applied Eco-

nomics 23:1535–41

Miller D (ed) 1995 Acknowledging consumption: A review of new studies. London, Routledge
Mintel 2007 Clothing Retailing. London, Mintel Intelligence
Monopolies and Mergers Commission 1990 Petrol: Report on the Supply of Petrol in the United Kingdom by

Wholesale. London, Stationery Ofﬁce Books

Moss S and Edmonds B 2005 Towards good social science. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation

8(4): 13

Ning X and Haining R 2003 Spatial pricing in interdependent markets: A case study of petrol retailing in Shef-

ﬁeld. Environment and Planning A 35: 2131–59

Ofﬁce of Fair Trading 1998 Competition in the Supply of Petrol in the UK. London, Ofﬁce of Fair Trading
Pan Y and Zinkhan G M 2006 Determinants of retail patronage: A meta-analytical perspective. Journal of

Retailing 82: 229–43

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

Simulating Spatial Dynamics and Processes in a Retail Gasoline Market

21

Paruchuri S, Baum J A C, and Potere D 2009 The Wal-Mart effect: Wave of destruction or creative destruction?

Economic Geography 85: 209–36

Parry H and Evans A J 2008 A comparative analysis of parallel processing and super-individual methods for
improving the computational performance of a large individual-based model. Ecological Modelling 214:
141–52

Plummer P S, Sheppard E, and Haining R P 1998 Modeling spatial price competition: Marxian versus Neoclas-

sical approaches. Annals of the American Association of Geographers 88: 575–94

Plummer P S, Sheppard E, and Haining R P 2012 Rationality, stability, and endogenous price formation in spa-

tially interdependent markets. Environment and. Planning A 44: 538–59

Reilly B and Witt R 1998 Petrol price asymmetries revisited. Energy Economics 20: 297–308
Schendel D E and Balestra P 1969 Rational behavior and gasoline price wars. Applied Economics 1: 89–

101

Schenk T A, Lofﬂer G, and Rauh J 2007 Agent-based simulation of consumer behaviour in grocery shopping on

a regional level. Journal of Business Research 60: 894–903

Sheppard E, Haining R P, and Plummer P 1998 Proﬁt rate maximisation in interdependent markets. Journal of

Regional Science 38: 675–76

Signorile R 2002 Simulation of a multi-agent system for retail inventory control: A case-study. Simulation:

Transactions of the Society for Modelling and Simulation International 78: 304–11

Slade M E 1992 Vancouver’s gasoline price-wars: An empirical exercise in uncovering super-game strategies.

Takayama T and Judge G 1964 Equilibrium among spatially separated markets: A reformulation. Econometrica

Review of Economic Studies 59: 257–76

32: 510–24

Weber P and Chapman D 2011 Location Intelligence: An innovative approach to business location decision-

Wilhite A 2006 Economic activity on ﬁxed networks. In Tesfatsion L and Judd K L (eds) Handbook of Compu-

making. Transactions in GIS 15: 309–28

tational Economics. Amsterdam, Elsevier: 1013–45

Wooldridge M and Jennings N R 1995 Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The Knowledge Engineering

Review 10: 115–52

Wrigley N and Dolega L 2011 Resilience, fragility, and adaptation: new evidence on the performance of UK high
streets during global economic crisis and its policy implications. Environment and Planning A 43: 2337–63
Wrigley N, Branson J, Murdock A, and Clarke G 2009 Extending the Competition Commission’s ﬁndings on
entry and exit of small stores in British high streets: Implications for competition and planning policy.
Environment and Planning A 41: 2063–85

Zhang J, Timmermans H, and Borgers A 2005 Modeling reactive agents: Analysis of household synchronized
shopping decisions. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Recent Advances in Retailing and Services Science Con-
ference, Orlando, Florida

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

22

A J Heppenstall, K Harland, A N Ross and D Olner

Appendices

Appendix 1: Deﬁnition of Parameters Used

Parameter

Deﬁnition

b
l
ﬁxedCosts (GBP£)
costToProduce (pence)

Coefﬁcient controlling the impact of distance.
Coefﬁcient controlling the impact of price.
The amount the gasoline station has to pay per day to keep running.
The amount per litre that it costs the station to produce and sell the

changeInProﬁt (pence)

The level of proﬁt under which the station will not change its

Overprice (pence)

The amount by which gasoline stations can be more expensive than

their neighbors without becoming uncompetitive and being forced
to cut their price.

Undercut (pence)

The amount by which gasoline stations can undercut competitors,

gasoline.

strategy.

e.g. 1p, 2p.

Neighborhood (km)

The distance that the gasoline stations will treat as their

neighborhood e.g. 2km, 3km.

Appendix 2: Default parameter values

Parameter

b
l
ﬁxedCosts (GBP£)
costToProduce (pence)
changeInProﬁt (pence)
Overprice (pence)
Undercut (pence)
Neighborhood (km)

Value

0.0003
0.7
80.00
66.00
40.00
5
1
5.0

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))

