The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

‘I’ve got my Sat Nav, it’s alright’: Users’ Attitudes
towards, and Engagements with, Technologies of
Navigation

Janet Speake

To cite this article: Janet Speake (2015) ‘I’ve got my Sat Nav, it’s alright’: Users’ Attitudes
towards, and Engagements with, Technologies of Navigation, The Cartographic Journal, 52:4,
345-355, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1108663

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1108663

Published online: 30 Jan 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 56

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [37.187.7.74]

Date: 02 April 2016, At: 07:12

The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2015

Vol. 52 No. 4

pp. 345–355 November 2015

O B S E R V A T I O N  S

‘I’ve got my Sat Nav, it’s alright’: Users’ Attitudes towards,
and Engagements with, Technologies of Navigation

Janet Speake

Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, UK
Email: speakej@hope.ac.uk

 explore users’ engagements with 

The use of qualitative research techniques in a largely quantitative cartographic domain is opening up a  myriad of  ways
to 
and  life  experiences as they engage with Satellite Navigation and other wayfinding technologies during first-time visits
to new 

 places to reflect on the nature of the changing relationships between self, navigational object, space and place.

 technologies of navigation. This study draws on young UK-based students’ real words

Keywords: Sat Nav, GPS, technologies of navigation, affective engagement, attitudes

INTRODUCTION

et al., 2007; Ockwell

To be told quite unequivocally that ‘I’ve got my Sat Nav,
it’s alright’ is a forthright statement made a point in time
in which the preferred means of wayﬁnding is tipping in
favour of satellite navigation (Sat Nav) technologies. In
the use of the phrase, ‘it’s alright’, evocations of familiarity
and reassurance are conveyed. The use of these words
opens up some intriguing, unexplored research questions
about, not only people’s attitudes to, but also the nature
of their engagements with, Sat Nav technologies, particu-
larly when in completely new places to them. Emphasis is
placed on the nature of these engagements, especially
related to emotion and feeling
affective dimensions
(Lorenzoni
et al., 2009;
Whitmarsh and O’Neil, 2011; Speake and Axon, 2012).
There is an increasing body  of  literature on the affective
nature  of  spaces (Dodge et al., 2011), but few research
output  on  the affective nature of using navigational tech-
spatial
implications
nologies  and 
awareness   and    interactions with places (O’ Brien and
Toms,  2008;  Jung,  2012; Axon et   al.,  2012; Speake
and  Axon,  2012).  Here  this study starts to unpack these
issues  through  the  use  of  a  mixed methods, ethno-
methodlogically    informed    study  of   young   United
Kingdom (UK)-based students as they tackle wayﬁnding in 
completely  unfamilier  locations  in  the  UK  and  inter-    
nationally.  This  paper 
is  predicated  on  a  distinctive 
conceptual  and  methodological  approach,  or  ‘thought 
world’, 
the  affective  engage-ments 
with  technologies  of  navigation,  particularly  Sat  Nav.

to  understanding 

for people’s

their

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1108663

TRANSITIONS IN THE USE OF TECHNOLOGIES OF
NAVIGATION

technologies

One of the key motivations for looking into these issues
now, is that navigational techniques are changing rapidly.
Objects used for journey planning and navigation such as
Sat Nav-enabled mobile phones and paper-based maps, can
be deﬁned as navigational
(Livingstone,
1991). The role of navigational technologies principally
aims to generate navigational capacity and knowledge about
(Crampton, 2001; Perkins, 2003; Kitchin and
places
Dodge, 2007) and their progressive development over time
is reﬂected in changing patterns of use. In the last 20 years,
there has been a shift from paper-based maps such as
Ordnance Survey maps to online maps such as Google
Maps (Goodchild, 2007). Online mapping services such as
Google Maps have signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced navigation and
wayﬁnding. Goodchild (2007) states that the Google Earth
phenomenon can be deﬁned as the ‘democratization of
GIS’ (Butler, 2006) because it has opened up some of
the most straightforward capabilities of Geographical Infor-
mation Systems ( _GIS) _ with an immediate appeal to millions of
actual and potential users. The Global Positioning System
(GPS) is arguably the ﬁrst system in human history to
surface
allow direct measurement
(Goodchild, 2007). GPS receivers are easy to use and
provide virtually instantaneous and accurate estimates of
location (Goodchild, 2007).

the Earth’s

of

Sat Nav-enabled phones and smartphones are designed to
allow users access to cartographic information in any
geographic location. The accessibility of spatial data allows

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016  
 
 
346

The Cartographic Journal

for  a  convenient  replacement  for  speciﬁc  paper  maps.  The
extensive  distribution  of  Sat  Nav  technology  such  as  Sat
Nav-enabled  mobile  phones  and  smartphones  represents  a
diversiﬁcation 
in  the  uses  and  users  of  cartographic
information  (Perkins,  2004;  Leshed  et  al.,  2007;  Girardin
and  Blat,  2010;  Perkins,  2008).  This  diversiﬁcation  also 
demonstrates  a  major  technological  shift  from  more
specialist  software  with  their  relatively  narrow  user  bases
(Axon  et  al.,  2012).  The  combination  of  the  widespread
distribution  of  Sat  Nav  technology,  popularization  and
accessibility  of  use  (Perkins,  2008)  has  led  to  an  almost
inexorable  rise  in  the  use  of  these  wayﬁnding  artefacts.
Dodge  et  al.  (2011)  argued  that  research  should  focus  on
the  use  of  digital  mapping  tools  by  people,  rather  than  on
how  systems  have  been  designed  to  work.  Axon  et  al.
(2012),  Speake  and  Axon  (2012),  Maggi  and  Fabrikant
(2013)  and  Fabrikant  and  Rouiller  (2014)  have  started  to
do just this.

used while

navigation
tools

This paper considers navigational technologies such as
Sat Nav-enabled phones and smartphones, rather than on
in-vehicle
driving.
systems
Navigational
such as downloaded online maps,
guidebook maps, tourist maps and Sat Nav-enabled mobile
phones are used for journey planning and navigation by
pedestrians. In a world in which cartographic information is
increasingly available electronically, this study highlights the
impacts on, and implications of, the shift towards more
electronic devices being used for wayﬁnding and navigation.
At  the  moment,  we  are  in  one  such  transitional  phase  in 
which there is increasing use of Sat Nav, and while it is not 
yet  ubiquitous,  it  is  increasingly  widespread.  Since  2010, 
there  has  been  a  clear  move  towards  satellite  navigation, 
especially  portable  Sat  Nav  devices,  and  Sat  Nav-enabled 
smartphones, as the preferred means for people to ﬁnd their 
way  around  (Mintel,  2012).  This  emphasises  earlier 
observations  by  Mu¨nzer  et  al.  (2006)  that  people  are 
relying  more  on  Sat  Nav  technologies  than  traditional 
paper-based maps to navigate in new environments. Axon et 
al.  (2012)  and  Speake  and  Axon  (2012)  have  shown  that, 
among  young  geography  students,  there 
is  a  clear 
preference  for  using  Sat  Nav  technologies  and  the  balance 
of use has shifted towards Sat Nav-enabled smartphones and 
other mobile phones. Of students surveyed in 2010, 36.4% 
owned  a  Sat  Nav-enabled  smartphone.  In  2011,  the 
equivalent  ﬁgure  was  39.3%,  with  71.4%  using  Sat  Nav-
enabled  mobile  phones  and  smart-phones  most  frequently 
for wayﬁnding.

ENGAGEMENT BEHAVIOURS WITH TECHNOLOGIES OF
NAVIGATION

In  recent  years,  numerous  practical  studies  have  explored 
wayﬁnding behaviours and the acquisition of spatial knowl-
edge,  for  example,  in  exploring  impacts  of  automatic 
navigation  systems  (Parush  et  al.,  2010),  enriching  spatial 
knowledge  through  a  multi-attribute  locational  system 
(Hirtle  and  Srinivas,  2010),  differences  between  maps  and 
mobile maps (e.g. Ishikawa et al., 2008; Willis et al., 2009), 
paper maps and GPS (e.g. Field et al., 2011; O’Brien et al., 
2012),  how  navigation  aids 
impair  spatial  memory 
(Cardony et al., 2013), geospatial images in the acquisition

of spatial  knowledge (Kettunen  et al., 2012) and cognition
of  scale  (Pingel  and  Schinazi,  2014).  Several  other  cognate
dimensions  have  been  explored 
in  The  Cartographic 
Journal    2012  (Volume  49.4)    pecial  Issue  on  the  theme  
of  Cognition,  Behaviour  and  Representation.

’s

S

However,  so  far,  very  few  studies  have  addressed  issues
speciﬁcally  relating  to  engagement  with  navigation  tools
(Todman and Monaghan, 1994; O’Brien and Toms, 2008;
Wu et al., 2008; Jung, 2012; Speake and Axon, 2012; Jung
and  Bell,  2013;  Jung  and  Bell,  2014).  Nevertheless,  there
are  many  opportunities  to  further  explore  engagement
theories  in  order  to  ﬁnd  out  more  about  our  under-
standings of how people respond to, and react to, different 
technologies  of  navigation.  Engagement  theories,  derived
from  a  range  of  subject  areas  (Krause  and  Coates,  2008;
Whitmarsh  et  al.,  2011),  have  provided  a  useful  starting
point  for  the  exploration  of  behaviours  associated  with  the
use  of  wayﬁnding  technologies  (Speake  and  Axon,  2012).
In line with earlier studies (Lorenzoni et al., 2007; Ockwell
et  al.,  2009;  Whitmarsh  and  O’Neil,  2011),  Speake  and
Axon  (2012)  used  the  cognitive  (knowledge  and  under-
standing),  behavioural  (action)  and  affective  (emotion,
interest  and  feeling)  framework  to  explore  how  young
geography  students  engaged  with  technologies  of  naviga-
tion.  In  employing  this  approach,  the  discourse  on  how
people  use  Sat  Nav  technologies  (Dodge  et  al.,  2011)  and
people’s  attitudes  and  behaviours  with  regard  to  contem-
porary wayﬁnding technologies, including GPS-based ones,
is  continuing  (e.g.  Field  et  al.,  2011;  O’Brien  et  al.,  2012;
Axon  et  al.,  2012;  Speake  and  Axon,  2012;  Fabrikant  and
Rouiller, 2014).

It is evident that young geographers consider that ‘a map 
is a map’ and a ‘Sat Nav is a Sat Nav’ (despite Sat Nav being 
a  form  of  digital  mapping).  They  also  consider  that  using 
satellite technologies rather than traditional mapping forms, 
can  create  (dis)connections  with  place  (Speake  and  Axon, 
2012).  Also  emerging  very  strongly  as  themes,  are  that 
young geographers’ positive and negative engagements with 
Sat  Nav  is  cognitive  (accuracy  and  ease  of  use)  and 
behavioural (taking short-cuts and getting lost), rather than 
affective  (reﬂected  in  emotional  responses)  (Speake  and 
Axon,  2012).  Yet,  there  is  a  depth  of  feeling  contained  in 
the  students’  conversations  and  reﬂective  comments  that 
suggest that affective engagements are worth more detailed 
exploration, which is in part what this paper seeks to do.

During the past decade, there has been evolving interest in
affect in the wider geographical academy (Anderson and
Smith, 2001; Davidson and Milligan, 2004; Thrift, 2004;
Davidson et al., 2005; Thien, 2005; Tolia-Kelly, 2006;
Thrift, 2008; Woodward and Lea, 2010). In the carto-
graphic sphere, research has recently been undertaken on
affecting geospatial technologies (Kwan, 2007), the affective
nature of spaces (Dodge et al., 2011), affective maps (Craine
and Aitken, 2011), emotional response to map design
aesthetics (Fabrikant et al., 2012) and user interactions with
a 3D geo-browser (Wilkening and Fabrikant, 2013). While
the reliance on, and ability to use, navigation technologies
have a profound inﬂuence on how people experience and
respond to places around them (Axon et al., 2012; Speake
and Axon, 2012), to date there has been limited empirical
investigation of the affective engagements associated with

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 ’
‘
'I’ve got my Sat Nav, it s alright

’

347

using navigational technologies, speciﬁcally Sat Nav, although
this is now beginning to change (e.g. Maggi and Fabrikant,
2013; Fabrikant and Rouiller, 2014). Furthermore, Caquard
(2014) has presented incisive post-representational perspec-
tives on cognitive cartography which signiﬁcantly extend
current inter/intra disciplinary discourses.

Speake and Axon (2012) and Fabrikant and Rouiller
(2014) have shown that people’s reactions and responses
to technologies of navigation are complex and varied. With
it  is frequently
respect to Sat Nav,   engagements  with 
described in strong linguistic terms, such as ‘love’ or ‘hate’,
with little use of words of indifference (Axon et al. 2012).
As such, Sat Nav technologies are engaged with actively
(rather more than passively) and tend to evoke emotionally-
charged responses from users. Given that the use of objects
of navigation (both Sat Nav and more traditional wayﬁnd-
ing technologies) engender emotive responses, it is valuable
to explore them further, in terms of both the articulation of
affective engagements and attempts to express and/or make
‘sense’ of them. The fascination lies in the nexus between
the hard science of technologies of navigation and the very
human dimension of affective responses as people engage
with navigation tools in places that are new to them.

their dynamic contributions

Technologies of navigation are one of the many everyday
objects people encounter and engage with (Ishikawa et al.,
2008; Girardin and Blat, 2010). As Thrift (2010, p. 292)
has observed, ‘[o]bjects must be understood as involved in
multiple overlapping negotiations with human being and
not just as sets of passive and inanimate properties’. Gatens
(2004, p. 115) stated something very similar in saying that a
body is always ‘wholly implicated in its milieu’. Woodward
and Lea (2010, p. 156) report that the current theoretical
interest in body affects, sensations and knowledge asserts
‘the centrality of
to the
(re)production of everyday life’. It also may be taken to
include ‘bodies-in-moving-relation’ that incorporates the
including inhuman
human and the ‘more-than-human’
forces and non-human objects (Woodward and Lea, 2010).
Such explicit reference to the non-human, reﬂects move-
ment beyond earlier largely human-focused interpretations,
for example, Deleuze and Guattari (1987), Deleuze (1988)
and Spinoza (2000). As argued by Seigworth and Gregg
(2010, p. 1), ‘[A]ffect arises in the midst of in-between-ness
[sic]: in the capacities to act and be acted upon’. Here, these
issues are reﬂected upon in the context of the interactive
interface between the human and the non-human objects of
Sat Nav technologies and space.

Evaluation of affective engagements is expressed in the
vocabulary used to describe them, and reﬂects the latter
phase of responsiveness in the triad of the initial awareness
of a situation or object, the modiﬁcation of the body in
response (affect), and the emotion of the consciousness or
the mind (Deleuze, 1997). Alternatively, Nathanson (1992,
p. 50) has suggested that ‘affect is biology whereas emotion
is biography’. Feelings have been likened to ‘complex
strings of ideas traversing emotions as they remap them’
[emphasis  added] 
(Damasio,  2004,   p. 28). With a
speciﬁc interest in listening to, and interpreting the words
of, users of different navigational technologies, this study
will focus on conversational and written narratives about
affective engagements.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

time visits, was

Curiosity about how young people’s attitudes and engage-
ment with technologies of navigation, when wayﬁnding in
new places during ﬁrst
triggered as
outcomes of earlier work by Axon et al. (2012) and
Speake and Axon (2012). It was apparent that student use
of navigational technologies had changed in line with
national trends (Mintel, 2012), with more and more use of
Sat Nav-enabled smartphones and mobile phones (Mintel,
2012). Hence it became intriguing to ﬁnd out more about
student wayﬁnding behaviour in places new to them, and
the characteristics of their engagements (particularly the
affective dimension) with their chosen wayﬁnding tools and
their location. It seemed as though there were some
differences between attitudes towards, and engagements
with, Sat Nav technologies according to whether attempt-
ing to wayﬁnd in new places in familiar environments (in
this case, the UK) or in unfamiliar environments. Hence,
our interest in exploring wayﬁnding during ﬁrst-time visits
to places in the UK and further aﬁeld. Thirty-six Level 4
(ﬁrst year) undergraduate students,studied in the Geography
Department at Liverpool Hope University in December
2012. The students were surveyed by a  questionnaire
comprising closed and open-ended questions. In terms of
demographics, the students were in the following age
categories: 18–20 (n532), 21–29 (n54) and 30 and over
(n50); 19 were female and 17 male. The questionnaire was
analysed using descriptive statistics (Bryman, 2008) and the
narrated experiences were analysed using thematic analysis
(Aronson, 1994; Braun and Clarke, 2006). It is this study
of students’ ‘real words’, obtained through social survey
techniques and narrated experiences related through vign-
ettes, which are reported here.

It

is acknowledged that

the sample has distinctive
speciﬁcities, composed, as it is, of young adults who  are
technologically competent, spatially aware and able to
express their engagements, responses and reactions during
wayﬁnding in a clearly-articulated fashion. On the one hand,
this tight, clearly-bounded cohort provides useful consis-
tency for analysis and commentary; on the other hand, it
may also be considered to be a  narrow sample of the wider
population. As it stands, the strength of the chosen sample
is its comparability to those used in earlier work by Axon
et al. (2012) and Speake and Axon (2012) and, as in the case
of these two studies, this study creates a methodological
framework  which   could  usefully  be  applied  to  explore
findings    derived 
demographic,  and  other, diversity.

from  a   sample  of   greater  socio-

Trying to ﬁnd ways of linking physical and social sciences
to create new areas to research is both intriguing and
challenging. As reported by Donovan and Oppenheimer
(2012), the new is often found at the interdisciplinary
interface, both in terms of content and methodologies.
Recent work on technologies of navigation unleashes some
of this potential to extend our newly developing knowledge
and understanding of attitudes and engagements with GPS-
based technologies (Axon et al., 2012; Speake and Axon,
2012; Fabrikant and Rouiller, 2014).

Traditionally, the worlds of navigation technologies and
cartography have been positioned ﬁrmly in the quantitative
domain (Speake and Axon, 2012). With the exception of

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 "
'
'
348

The Cartographic Journal

work by, for example, Brown and Laurier (2005) and Speake
and Axon (2012), studies of Sat Nav technologies too have
been clearly situated in this quantitative world. A mixed-
methods (Tashakkori and Teddlie, 2003; Creswell, 2009;
Teddlie and Tashakkori, 2009; Denscombe, 2010) palette
using social survey and people’s narrations is used to better
understand people’s behaviour in the context of their
intentions and settings (Schu¨tz, 1973). This methodologi-
cal approach also seeks to break down the traditional
polarised perspectives on quantitative and qualitative
research (Bryman, 2008; Newing, 2011). As observed by
Elliott (2005, p. 187), the concept of narrative ‘provides a
kind of reﬂexive bridge between the traditions of quanti-
tative and qualitative methods’. Analysed quantitative data
can generate narratives associated with outcomes and
implications as interpreted by researchers, but they lack
other people’s voices, conversations and direct self-articula-
tions about life, experience and behaviour (MacIntyre,
1988).

The work of Brown and Laurier (2005) paved the way for
the use of ethno-methodology and conversation analysis in
exploring map use. The strength of qualitative ethno-
methodological approaches (Scott Jones, 2010) is that they
enable people to speak for themselves, tell their own
narratives, i.e. their stories of their lived experiences. These
narratives can be interpreted in multiple ways by the
researcher. Listen carefully to the storytellers and they direct
the thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006; Scott Jones,
2010), albeit predicated by the positionality and selective
interpretation of the researchers (Silverman, 2001). Despite
the often cited ideal of researchers aiming to silence the self,
or at least decouple it, reﬂection and reﬂexivity on the part
of the researcher is an important dimension of ethno-
methodological approaches in presenting the outcomes of
other people’s stories (Watt, 2010). Conversation and
written narratives in the form of vignettes readily convey
polyvocality. They are also indicative of norms and practices
(Czarniawska, 2004). Nevertheless, the interpretation of
the narrative is not just a question of what it says, how it
says it but also, for the critical interpreter, as suggested by
Eco (1990), why does it say what it says?

USING NAVIGATION TECHNOLOGIES IN NEW PLACES

The starting point was to obtain insights and under-
standings of the engagement behaviours and attitudes
towards technologies of navigation when predominantly
younger people attempt to ﬁnd their way as pedestrians on
ﬁrst visits to places that are new to them. It is striking that
35 of the 36 (97%) students surveyed stated that they used a
smartphone or Sat Nav enabled mobile phone for naviga-
tion purposes. In comparison to previous surveys (Speake
and Axon, 2012), in which 54% (in 2010) and 71.4% (in
2011) of students used smartphones or Sat Nav-enabled
mobile phones, this represents a signiﬁcant transformation
to almost universal use (97% in 2012) of these wayﬁnding
technologies; the speed of this adoption has been fast. By
implication, it suggests that use of other navigation tools
may have been supplanted, almost totally, by Sat Nav
technologies. To better understand how and where the

survey participants were using Sat Nav technology to
navigate, 
they   were asked to reﬂect on, and relate how,
they navigate as a pedestrian on their ﬁrst visit to a place
new to them (as UK-based students) in the UK and then in
an international (i.e. not in the UK) place new to them. In
the case of the UK locations chosen, all were urban
locations, with 83% of them being large cities such as
London, Edinburgh and Newcastle. Liverpool was also
named by 18 students (50%) for whom it was a new city and
whose ﬁrst visit to the city centre had taken place just a few
weeks earlier when they had started their university studies.
The international
follows:
European Union beyond the UK (23), North America
(2), North Africa (1) and Asia (2). Of the other participants,
three had not been abroad and the remaining ﬁve did not
name speciﬁc places, but said that they had not used Sat
Nav technology abroad.

chosen were as

locations

As Table 1 shows, there were marked differences between
the  UK   and   international settings to the
responses  in 
question ‘how do you navigate around somewhere new?’. In
the UK context, 32 of the 36 (89%) used geovisual GPS on
their smartphones or Sat Nav-enabled mobile phones (of
which 21 speciﬁcally named Google Maps). Descriptions were
detailed, for example, Participant 4, UK context (P4UK)
referred to using the ‘navigation app or Google Maps app on
my Android phone’. Another was quite precise with: ‘Google
Maps on my Samsung Galaxy Ace 2’ (P12UK) and there was
even more detailed description in terms of process with:
‘
[I] go into my map, type in Place A where you’re starting
from and the Place B where you’re going to and click ‘‘go’’.
Map comes up highlighting the route’ (P10UK).

The  remaining  four  participants  also  used  Google  Maps 
but  printed  them  off  before  visiting  the  place,  for  example, 
‘Printed  out  Google  Earth  Map’  (P25UK).  Interestingly,  
22  (61%)  referred  to  using  Google  Maps  by  name,  for 
example,  one,  when 
to 
reporting 
Copenhagen,  said  ‘Google  Maps,  always  Google  Maps’ 
P28I (where I refers to an international location). Only two 
mentioned using Apple Maps.

their  ﬁrst  visit 

The dominant use of hand-held digital technology for
wayﬁnding in the UK home context is overwhelmingly
apparent. While this should not be taken to indicate
dependency on these technologies, it is clear that students
are using them in the UK context as their chosen method of
navigation. However, for wayﬁnding in international places
new to them, the pattern is in marked contrast to that in the
UK. Given that all except one student indicated that they
used a smartphone or Sat Nav-enabled mobile phone for
navigation in an international setting, 14 (39%) used the

Table 1. Navigation on ﬁrst visit to a new place

Navigation

International

Sat Nav/map apps on phone
Downloaded online map
Paper-based map
Ask for directions
Direction signs
Walk and look around
Not stated
Not been abroad

n536.

UK

32
4

14
1
4
6
5
1
2
3

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 ’
‘
'I’ve got my Sat Nav, it s alright

’

349

GPS/mapping apps on their phones (and only one down-
loaded an online map). In some cases, descriptions were the
same as for the UK. On a visit to Madrid, P21I said that
they navigated by ‘using my phone same as UK’. Beyond
the use of Sat Nav-enabled mobile phones cited in the UK
context, other wayﬁnding tools were used in international
settings. Following direction signs and asking for directions
were commonly commented upon: ‘ask estate agents, use
direction signs’ (P35I) and walking and looking around: ‘I
navigate myself around somewhere new international [sic]
by simply walking around the new area and ﬁnding the
places for myself’ (P4I). The prevailing explanations in this
survey invariably related to charging levels for downloading
data from the internet for example: ‘I don’t [use Sat Nav],
[it] costs too much to use internet abroad’ (P23I). Another
explanation was much more explicit: they did not use Sat
Nav technology ‘cos [sic] my internet provider on my
phone costs
in the
£ 3 per MB [megabyte]’
Netherlands) and instead chose to follow navigation signs
because ‘I learnt my lesson after a £ 365 phone bill’. In
December 2012, exemplar data roaming charges for a UK
pay-as-you-go user were £ 0.59 per MB in Europe and
£ 8.00 per MB in for example, the USA and Australia
(Orange, 2012). Students considered these cost levels
prohibitive to internet use abroad.

(P29I,

Additionally, it was observed that, if not using Sat Nav,
students used wayﬁnding tools such as direction and tourist
information signs or asking people for directions, rather than
maps such as street maps or maps in guidebooks. It is revealing
that just ﬁve used paper-based maps such as street maps and
that they also used other means of navigation as well. For
example, with reference to their ﬁrst visit to New York: ‘I use
maps and street maps where available and if still unsure ask
people for directions’ (P11I). Those who used direction signs
and notices were largely conﬁdent and assured in their use. It
is perhaps too early in the trajectory of a transition towards a
more ubiquitous use of Sat Nav, to make more than tentative
statements about what fall-back ways of navigation people are
choosing and why. However, the observation that tools other
than maps are being used in preference to maps perhaps sheds
illumination on what might be starting to occur, i.e. that
people are not automatically thinking of traditional paper-
based maps as ﬁrst line back-up. There is no evidence in this
survey to suggest that students are choosing Sat Nav because
they are unable to read traditional paper-based maps.
However, they are using other technologies of navigation
because they are perceived to be more convenient (and free to
use, in fact only two students reported buying paper maps,
one in France and the other in Turkey).

Moreover,

linguistic barriers to conﬁdent navigation,
particularly when not using Sat Nav, are identiﬁed. There
seems to be a general set of barriers (or perceived individual
barriers) such as competency at map reading, levels of spatial
awareness, which may be compounded by working in a place
with an unfamiliar or unknown language and culture, for
example, ‘especially where there is a language barrier, you feel
less isolated in a country where you cannot just ask a member
of the public for directions’ (P3I, Belgium) and ‘[I] feel a lot
more unsure because [I’m] in a different country’ (P27I
Paris, France). When navigating with Sat Nav it is not an
obvious concern; signposts and directions in the ‘real world’
landscape may also be used by the pedestrian navigating with
Sat Nav, but the user is not dependent on them. However,
they are more critical when navigating without Sat Nav and
there is greater reliance placed on linguistic signs and symbols
in the environment. A lack of ability to interpret them may
trigger speciﬁc affective responses of
fear and anxiety,
including when Sat Nav is not available.

The next section reports on these affective engagements
with technologies of navigation and the resultant impacts
and implications.

AFFECTIVE ENGAGEMENTS WITH NAVIGATION
TECHNOLOGIES

’

‘
I’ve got my Sat Nav, it’s alright  . Affective engagements when able to
use navigation technologies
It has been demonstrated that Sat Nav was by far and away
the predominant wayﬁnding tool, used by 89% when
visiting new places in the UK for the ﬁrst time, and by
39% of ﬁrst time visitors to international places new to
them. Table 2 shows type of navigation technology and
feelings expressed when using it on a ﬁrst visit to a place.

When using Sat Nav technologies in a UK setting, the
adjectives used to describe feelings were largely positive,
including: conﬁdent (mentioned 7 times), happy (7), in
control (5), safe (3), relaxed (2), trusting, independent,
reassured, pleased and ‘easy-peasy’. To a large extent, they
express notions of control, conﬁdence and happiness, which
are eloquently narrated by the participants:

‘I place a lot of trust onto the app, its uses GPS and
location technology and aided by Wi-Fi where available.
It does rely marginally on my instincts but I believe it
P5UK
will correctly take me to my destination’
(wayfinding  in  London). 

Table 2. Types of navigation technology and feelings expressed when using it on the ﬁrst visit to a place

Type of navigation technology

Feeling (UK)

Feeling (international)

Sat Nav

Other map (including
paper-based maps)
Non-cartographic methods of navigation
(e.g. asking for directions)

NA

Confident (7), happy (7), in control (5), safe (3),
relaxed (2), indifferent, trusting, independent, reassured,
‘easy-peasy’, pleased, chuffed, insecure, don’t like them
In control, comfortable, don’t trust it

Less isolated, trusting, confident,
empowered, worried, not reliable,
unsure
NA

Calm, safe, happy, confident,
unsure, confused

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 "
'
'
350

The Cartographic Journal

‘Feel at ease knowing I’m getting exactly where I need
to be’ P24UK (London).
‘Feel confident that you know where you’re going’
P9UK (Manchester).
‘Happy, pleased, chuffed, joy, safe.’ P20UK (Liverpool).

This vocabulary was mirrored by some participants in
connection with their experiences of navigating using Sat
Nav during ﬁrst-time visits to international locations:

‘[I] Feel empowered’ P32I (Italy).
‘It was very relaxing and convenient to use because of
how accurate it was’ P12I (Dubrovnik, Croatia).
‘I feel confident and assured that I will not get lost’
P28I (Copenhagen, Denmark).

In both the UK and international contexts, there were
very few feelings expressed which suggested concern or
worry, but there were a handful such as ‘[Sat Nav] is not
always reliable, feel happy when I ﬁnd the place’(P20UK) or
‘very worried don’t trust it [Sat Nav] (P18I, in Spain).

Virtually, all students used Sat Nav as their wayﬁnding
object of choice and the large majority of them felt conﬁdent
and ‘in control’ while using Sat Nav technologies. The
ﬁndings so far also show that the comment, ‘I’ve got my Sat
Nav, it’s alright’, was not that of a lone voice but indicative of
the voices of many. Moreover, all but one student surveyed
used Sat Nav as a pedestrian, and that for those who did so in
the UK context, it was a case of ‘[W]e’ve got our Sat Nav, it’s
alright too’. The 39% using it in an international setting
considered ‘it’s alright’ there as well. Sat Nav technologies
(including smartphones) were used to navigate as a matter of
course and the students’
feelings revealed the positive
engagement with them.
character of
Emphasis was placed on the creation of feelings of safety.
Conﬁdence while wayﬁnding using Sat Nav was distinctive
and strong. However, narratives of
for the
navigational tool were not told, reinforcing earlier ﬁndings
that reported experiences with using Sat Nav technologies
rarely revealed these senses of ‘affection’ for, and afﬁnity
with, them (Speake and Axon, 2012).

‘affection’

affective

their

In contrast, to these feelings associated with the use of
Sat Nav, the emotional outcomes of using other navigation
tools and having to rely on their own spatial cognition
abilities, were verbalised using words such as ‘enjoyment’,
‘accomplishment’, ‘achievement’ and ‘pride’ when naviga-
tion had been successfully completed. For example [It’s]
‘exciting… I prefer to explore the area by myself by chance’
(P8I, asking people for directions in Turkey).

Students felt conﬁdent, happy and ‘in control’ while
using Sat Nav technology. In essence, when using their Sat
Nav they felt conﬁdent; however, they did not articulate the
senses of achievement and pride expressed during the use of
other wayﬁnding tools. The next phase of this research was
then to try to establish how students felt when they were
unable to use Sat Nav.

unable to use their navigational technology of choice.
Within the survey cohort, a new situation was observed in
which virtually every student used Sat Nav to ﬁnd their way
and felt conﬁdent, happy and ‘in control’. Participants were
asked to provide a vignette about what happens at the point
at which they realise the technology is not available (i.e.
how does it make them feel). In addition, they were asked
to try to encapsulate their feelings in three words. The
compilation of these three words reveals the wide range of
the expressed affective engagements. Narrated feelings
when not able to use Sat Nav on a ﬁrst visit to a UK place
new to participants were: afraid (7 participants) angry (6),
lost
frustrated (5), confused (4), and perturbed,
stressed, unhappy, vulnerable, unconﬁdent, independent,
regretful and unsure. When unable to use Sat Nav on a ﬁrst
visit to an international place new to participant, feelings
were similar including: afraid (8), angry (4), confused (4),
lost
impatient,
isolated, vulnerable, unsupported,
upset, okay, wary, unsure and greatly screwed-up. In
comparison, there were a greater variety of words used by
participants when not able to use navigation tools other
that Sat Nav, but they showed no difference between
responses relating to the UK or international settings.
Anger and upset,
featured as did unbothered, calm,
unphased and relaxed. No responses related to fear.

(5),

(3),

The words used by students when they were unable to
use Sat Nav were strongly resonant of affect and the ‘gut’
reactions which occur. Dominant among the affective
responses evoked are the elemental anger and fear.
Although sometimes couched in more measured, culturally
conditioned expressions of emotion such as ‘vulnerable’
and ‘unconﬁdent’, the basic instinctive responses come
through strongly and resolutely. There is no mistaking
them; they are deep and evocative:

it

signal or can’t

‘If I use a smartphone to navigate and it stops working
I get very stressed and angry’ P15UK (Newcastle).
‘Angry, annoyed, then worried that it isn’t working
and that I’ll get lost and won’t be able to get there’
P1UK (Liverpool).
‘If
find the road I feel
loses
uncomfortable and nervous especially if I have to get
somewhere quickly. If it causes me to actually get lost I
then feel angry and awkward’ P21UK (Liverpool).
‘Frantic – not a good feeling’ P14UK (Liverpool).
‘Despair – loss of control – unsure of whether I’ll be able
to navigate around well’ P8UK (London).
What also is also conveyed incontrovertibly is the
heightened intensity of reaction when severance of the
navigation technology happens in an international
setting:
[I feel] ‘Really bad – lost due to language barrier.
Pretty screwed up’ P7I (France).
‘Panicked, concerned, worried. More worried if it’s in a
foreign setting’ P18I (Spain).
‘Scared, lost, foreigner’ P30I (California, USA).

I’ve not got my Sat Nav, it’s not alright. Affective engagements when
not able to use navigation technologies
In reversing ‘I’ve got my Sat Nav, it’s alright’ to ‘I’ve not
got my Sat Nav, it’s not alright’, a scenario is provided in
which to look at how people respond and react when

The voices of the students are direct and powerful. Anger
at the navigation object not being available, anger at the fact
that they now have to deal without their preferred choice of
navigation technology as well as anger directed towards the
need for greater self-reliance and having to ﬁnd alternative

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 ’
‘
'I’ve got my Sat Nav, it s alright

’

351

wayﬁnding approaches. Fear was prevalent, resulting from
Sat Nav unavailability, having to navigate in new places and
spaces in new ways and feeling vulnerable. The narratives
were at the same time self-evident, multifaceted and self-
evaluative (Ahmed, 2010).

It is potent then, to reﬂect that these forceful affective
responses occur at the point of realization that the previous
connections with Sat Nav have been severed. It is not just
breakdown of the earlier relationships with the object itself
and the ‘safe’ virtual world of geovisualization, but also
disconnection from the ascribed associations with, and
feelings of, safety (see also Wu et al., 2008), control/
direction and happiness. Along with the disconnection with
the wayﬁnding object, comes the disconnection of the
former relationship between self and encompassing ‘real’
place and space and the creation of a new connection with
them. P3UK reported that when using Sat Nav they were
‘conﬁdent in how to pinpoint a certain place and navigate
yourself there’; without Sat Nav, the consequence was to
‘feel unaware of my surroundings and unsure how to get to
a certain place with conﬁdence that I won’t get lost’.
Control too of the navigation function switches from
electronic object to human. An individual may have felt ‘in
control’ when using a Sat Nav device, but will feel a
different dimension to ‘in control’ as the form of this
control switches from the object to self and from one form
of wayﬁnding artefact to another. With such fundamental
shifts taking place in the relationship between a person,
wayﬁnding object and space, it is not surprising that such
ardent reactions were generated.

How these reactions are manifested in emotional and
behavioural responses can also provide an indication of the
strength of feeling when the Sat Nav is no longer available
(Table 3). These narrated reactions are forceful and direct,
both in terms of emotion and behaviour. The vulnerability
felt by many students is exposed, and the strength of their
emotional reactions, particularly in international locations,
is powerful (and for some, seemingly overwhelming).

Next, six students’ more detailed vignettes are presented,
which show a range of indicative verbalised narratives about
affective responses at the point of realization that the Sat
Nav technology is not available, particularly anger and fear
but with some additional comments about other reactions,
such as confusion and shaken conﬁdence. In most cases, the
responses show a complex of multiple affective reactions
and behavioural responses. Vignettes four, ﬁve and six also
convey some of the differences between responses in UK
and international settings and allude to some of the causal
factors behind the heightened responses experienced when

abroad such as senses of otherness and vulnerability when in
an unfamiliar cultural and linguistic environment.

Vignette 1 UK: [If I am unable to use the technology I
feel] ‘ANGRY, ANNOYED, LET DOWN, AGGRESSIVE
TOWARDS IT [participant’s own emphasis] feeling of being
lost. Feeling of wanting to scream and launch it. When it
works it makes me feel happy and pleased as this thing, being
my iPhone which I personally see as one of the most amazing
things I could own, has done its job and one what I wanted.
However, when it lets me down I feel disappointed and let
down as how can it do such a thing to me? This usually results
in me being angry and aggressive towards
it’ P20UK
(wayﬁnding in Liverpool).

Vignette 2 UK: [If I am unable to use the technology I
feel] ‘Confused, annoyed as it will cause me trouble to try and
navigate myself to the place I need to get to, also it’ll give me a
sense of threat in case I get lost. My responses depend on what
the outcome is. If I was able to get to the place without trouble
by using these apps I get a sense of achievement and feel happy,
but if the app causes me trouble I start to panic and worry
myself’ P2UK (wayﬁnding in Liverpool).

Vignette 3 UK: ‘If I am unable to use the technology] it
makes me feel signiﬁcantly less conﬁdent about ﬁnding my
destination and convert to trying to remember street names,
also looking for recognisable buildings and areas that may
look similar to the area I’m heading to. If the navigation
technology fails on me I tend to curse at my phone even though
it may be futile. It is my way of relieving the stress!’ P5UK
(wayﬁnding in London).

Vignette 4 UK: [If I am unable to use the technology I
feel] ‘unaware of my surroundings and unsure how to get to a
certain place with conﬁdence that I won’t get lost. Feels old
fashioned and outdated if you can’t use this [Sat Nav]. I feel
more vulnerable and frustrated if I don’t know where I was
and didn’t know how to get to a place without hesitation’
P3UK (wayﬁnding in Birmingham). International: ‘[If I
am unable to use the technology I feel] more like a stereotypical
tourist feeling lost and unaware of surroundings and the
place as a whole. You feel uncomfortable if you can’t use this
in an international setting because you may not be able to
approach a local for direction. Not being conﬁdent with your
location and ﬁnding places may be more stressful and
therefore less enjoyable to explore and ﬁnd new places’ P3I
(wayﬁnding in Greece).

Vignette 5 UK: ‘If it loses signal or can’t ﬁnd the road I
feel uncomfortable and nervous especially if I have to get
somewhere quickly. If it causes me to actually get lost I then
feel angry and awkward’ P21UK (wayﬁnding in Liverpool).
International: ‘If it breaks I then act more confused and

Table 3. Exemplar emotional and behavioural responses when unable to use Sat Nav technology

Emotional

Behavioural

‘Worried in an unknown area’ (P19I)

‘Hating the Sat Nav – why is it so useless? (P7I)
[I get] ‘In a state of panic or distress due to totally alien experience
and place because the language is different’ (P13I)
[I become] almost hysterical quite quickly as I was in a strange place with
very little idea of where I was, where I was going or
how to get back (P12I)
I cried, a little (P30I)

‘I start swearing and become more
aggressive towards people’ (P15UK)
‘Walk faster’ (P14UK)
‘I walk around in an annoyed fashion, hating the Sat Nav and
questioning the app’ (P1UK)
‘Normally leads to irrational responses due to hot
headedness’ (P25UK)

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 "
'
'
352

The Cartographic Journal

could become upset. If there is nothing available for me to use
or I don’t understand the information I then get frustrated
that I don’t know the language or have an electronic GPS
which could guide me easier’ P21I (wayﬁnding in Spain).

‘I felt

Vignette 6 UK:

lost and confused. Really
frustrated. Got angry at my phone because it hasn’t worked.
[I]Press all the buttons in frustration. Ask other people where
to go’. P10UK (wayﬁnding in Liverpool). International: ‘In
an international country I get more worried than in the UK.
scared and really frustrated because I’m in an
I get
unfamiliar place and country in which a different language
is spoken. I cry if I am on my own. Be really annoyed and hit
the buttons on my phone repetitively and ask people where to
go’ P10I (wayﬁnding in Spain).

What

reinforces

is narrated in these vignettes

the
perspective obtained from the entire student cohort
studied, of the singularly direct expression of the force of
affect and emotion experienced. The removal of access to
Sat Nav technologies has profound impacts on students and
their reactions reﬂect anger and frustration. In terms of
their behavioural responses, anger seems be mostly ‘taken
out’ (expended) on the phone itself, for example, by hitting
buttons or venting aggression verbally at it. Fear and/or
panic is not far away either (particularly in the international
setting) and for most students tends to be reﬂected in the
use of the word ‘lost’. ‘Lost’ is verbalised in ﬁve of the six
vignettes (as well as 26 times overall by the full cohort of
students), all references to it are associated with fear,
nervousness and threat; none of them with the challenge
and excitement of exploring a new place that being ‘lost’
might also create.

The intensity of

the emotional response is perhaps
indicative of a prevailing dependency on the object which
is only really recognized when access to navigation systems
is curtailed, hence  the strength of expressed feelings. While
it might be assumed that lack of ability or conﬁdence in the
use of alternative wayﬁnding tools related to fears of getting
lost could contribute to feelings of vulnerability, none of
the students surveyed actually said so.

This work supports the observation by Ahmed (2010,
p. 35) that ‘the association between objects and affects is
preserved through habit’ in that students are comfortable
and conﬁdent in using their Sat Nav. In this case, it is the
shift from conﬁdence and control while using the Sat Nav,
to fear, anger and feeling less in control when not using it
(although in reality having to be more self-controlling and
‘in control’ of the navigation process itself). For some, this
change in relationships between self, navigation object and
surrounding places and spaces is disempowering, scary and
panic-inducing, as exempliﬁed in Vignette 2: ‘it’ll give me a
sense of threat in case I get lost’ and in Vignette 4 in being
‘more like a stereotypical tourist feeling lost and unaware of
surroundings and the place as a whole’. None of the six
students’ vignettes provided any evidence that this renego-
tiation of self, navigation object and space was empowering
or conﬁdence-building.

In exploring affective responses to navigation technolo-
gies, it has been shown that within this cohort of ﬁrst year
students almost all used Sat Nav to wayﬁnd. They expressed
conﬁdence, felt in control and were happy to use it. Not
being able to use it, because of various barriers to usage,

affective

and behavioural

responses.
fostered strong,
Largely, these responses were triggered by realizations of
changed relationships between navigation object, self and
space and the need to wayﬁnd using alternative methods.
Widespread anxiety at the prospect of being lost was
articulated, particularly in new international
locations.
Together, these ﬁndings suggest that affective engagements
with Sat Nav are strong and that not being able to use it,
especially when used to doing so, generates powerful affects
and effects on individuals and their relationships with
navigation objects, spaces and places.

CONCLUSIONS

In this study, a novel approach has been adopted to engage
with the real words and narratives of young UK-based
students, as they interact with technologies of navigation
during ﬁrst-time visits to new places in the UK and abroad.
The essence of their attitudes and engagements a time of
rapid and widespread adoption of Sat Nav has been
explored. The study has examined students’ verbalised
affective and behavioural engagements with navigational
tools, (dis)connections with place and barriers to the use of
Sat Nav technologies. It paves a way for potential future
studies about how a wider socio-demographic sample
population may be similar or different in their reactions,
responses and engagements with technologies of naviga-
tion, especially when their wayﬁnding tool of choice for
some reason is/becomes unavailable.

Previous studies (Kitchin and Dodge, 2007; Laurier and
Brown, 2008; Axon et al., 2012) have indicated that Sat
Nav was becoming the wayﬁnding tool of choice. Here, this
project demonstrates that Sat Nav enabled phones or
smartphones are now the deﬁnitive navigation technology,
with 97% of the survey cohort using them. While there was
almost universal usage of this technology in a UK context,
in an international setting usage was just over one-third. Of
interest too is that more students chose to navigate using
information signs and asking for directions than to use
traditional paper-based maps. Although it is too soon to
make any assumptions that people are now not choosing
traditional maps as back-up for Sat Nav. It is, perhaps, a sign
of things to come. Students are opting to use other
navigational tools as they are free of charge rather than
because of their under-conﬁdence in using paper-based
maps. In line with earlier work (Axon et al., 2012), these
ﬁndings here lend further credence to the observation that
Sat Nav is ‘subsuming’ traditional maps.

This survey of students accustomed to using Sat Nav
showed demonstrably that when they were navigating with
it they felt conﬁdent, happy and ‘in control’, i.e. positive
affective engagement. However, when not able to access the
technology, the dominant affective responses were deep and
elemental: anger and fear. Even though they were some-
times framed in more culturally-conditioned expressions of
the basic
emotions,
responses,
came
through strongly. The intensity of reactions was heightened
when the disconnection with the Sat Nav technology
occurred in an international setting. It is not only the

such as
indicative of negative

‘worried’ and ‘anxious’,

engagement,

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 ‘

’
'I’ve got my Sat Nav, it s alright

’

353

breakdown of the earlier relationship with the navigation
technology that can be disconcerting, but also the
disconnection from those earlier feelings of safety, control
and happiness. Along too, comes a break with the previous
relationship with the surrounding space/place and the need
to create a new connection. The nature of feeling ‘in
control’ shifts too as control moves from electronic device
to human, although contrarily, the narrated fears of losing
control without Sat Nav actually occur when more direct
human control is assumed.

The need to feel/take/have control when navigating is
apparent (regardless of the wayﬁnding tool used). It is when
this sense of control
is lost that conﬁdence wanes and
feelings of anger and panic set in. Associated with Sat Nav
use seems to be the sense that engagements with it reﬂect
feelings of safety and control, even though the individual is
not actually doing the navigation. As Wu et al. (2008)
remarked, when GPS devices malfunction or go wrong,
people may not be prepared. Perhaps it is the character of
multi-modal me maps
(Meng, 2004) and egocentric
mapping that encourages an individual to feel at the centre
of things: in control and in tandem (or even at one) with
the technology. So, when there is no access to Sat Nav for
various reasons (for example, technical such as loss of signal
or ﬁnancial for example, running out of credit), individuals
are actually put in control and plunged into another reality.
At this point, there is a shift from the ‘safe’, virtual world of
geovisualization which for some has become hyper-real, i.e.
more real than reality itself (Soja, 1996) and feeling secure
and directed, to having to locate self in ‘real’ space. For, as
Dodge and Kitchin (2005) have intimated, when the
engagement with the navigation object changes, so too
does the user’s relationship with space. Inherently, at the
point of disconnect with the navigation technology, a user’s
relationship with space changes and becomes something to
be negotiated safely, but differently. When the object of
navigation ‘goes down’ and the ‘safety bubble’ of perceived
control, security and direction ‘bursts’,
there is clear
disconnection with the former relationship with space and
an enforced consequential (re)connection. This is demon-
strated by the observations by Ishikawa et al. (2008) that
local focus on the technology interferes with the ‘global’
processing of spatial
information required for becoming
orientated in space in space through the interrelating of
surrounding space, self and map. For some, this severance is
disempowering, scary and panic-generating; for others, it is
empowering and conﬁdence-building. Having to wayﬁnd
using an alternative navigational
to some
degree, imposes greater self-responsibility and self-reliance.
It appears to be the case that this study’s cohort of young
students, although conﬁdent in using Sat Nav, has not had
sufﬁcient experience with other, more traditional technol-
ogies of navigation to be able to handle severance from Sat
Nav conﬁdently. These ﬁndings also support the work of
Field et al. (2011) and O’Brien et al. (2012) that using
GPS-based navigation results in poorer spatial understand-
ing in comparison to using conventional maps in unfamiliar
environments. For many, their reactions to their changed
relationship with space is narrated in terms of feeling ‘lost’.
There is a dichotomy of the association with feeling or
being ‘lost’ as a ‘bad’ thing, or as a positive challenge – the

technology,

opportunity to discover about place and therefore a ‘good’
thing; it is, more often than not, the former.

In using more traditional forms of navigation like paper-
based maps, where there is an inherent responsibility and
self-ownership of the process of wayﬁnding, responses to
severance, for example loss of a map, tend to be greeted as a
positive challenge. There seemed to be more conﬁdence
about ﬁnding and using alternative means of navigation
(usually talking to someone to ask for directions) than is the
case when geovisual, GPS-based technologies ‘go down’.
Interestingly, using navigation objects other than Sat Nav
seems to evoke a greater sense of pride, achievement and
understanding of the relationship between space and self.

In exploring affective responses

to technologies of
navigation, this study has been able to demonstrate that
97% students used Sat Nav as their navigation technology of
choice and that they were conﬁdent and happy using it, i.e.
‘I’ve got my Sat Nav, it’s alright’. Conversely, not being
able to use Sat Nav generated strong affects and emotional
responses which indicate that it was then not ‘alright’.
Deconstructed, the narrated feelings of anger and fear
revealed themselves emphatically in emotional and beha-
vioural responses. Particular discomfort was widely experi-
enced with changed relationships between self, navigation
object and space, and the requisite need to wayﬁnd in a
different way. Fear of not being able to do this and of being
or becoming lost, were general and encompassing. Barriers
to Sat Nav use, such as prohibitive costs of data roaming when
abroad and other limitations, mean that regular users of Sat
Nav need to adopt different ways of wayﬁnding, contrary to
habit, and many are discomforted and angered by the necessity
to do so. The results also indicate that traditional paper-based
maps, suchas street maps and maps in guidebooks ,were far less
used than other methods of navigation such as information
signs and asking people for directions. Together, these
ﬁndings offer a contemporary insight into Sat Nav technology
adoption, when it is being used, how people feel when able or
unable to use it and the repercussions in terms of their
responses to changing relationships between self, navigational
object, space and place.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Janet Speake is Associate
Dean of Postgraduate Research
and Senior Lecturer in Human
Geography at Liverpool Hope
University. Her most recent
research explores the impacts
on cartographic literacy and
spatial awareness as result of
Sat Nav use. Her other
research interests centre on
the contemporary transfor-
mation of urban areas and
the nature and consequences
varied transitions
of
affecting cities. Of speciﬁc interest are issues relating to urban
renaissance and the effects of culture-led revitalization
particularly within a city centre/inner city context.

the

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 "
'
'
354

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

My thanks are extended to the undergraduate students at
Liverpool Hope University for their participation in this
research and to Mary Mills and Stephen Axon for their
helpful observations and comments on the article.

REFERENCES

Ahmed, S. (2010). ‘Happy objects’, in The Affect Theory Reader, ed.
by Gregg, M. and Seigworth, G. J. pp. 29–51, Duke University
Press, Durham, NC.

Anderson, K. and Smith, S. (2001). ‘Editorial: emotional geographies’,
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 26, pp. 7–
10.

Aronson, J. (1994). ‘A pragmatic view of thematic analysis’, http://
www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/BackIssues/QR2-1/aronson.html (acce-
ssed 17 April 2014).

Axon, S., Speake, J. and Crawford, K. (2012). ‘At the next junction,
turn left’: attitudes towards Sat Nav use’, Area, 44, pp. 170–177.
‘Using thematic analysis in
psychology’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3, pp. 77–101.
Brown, B. and Laurier, E. (2005). ‘Maps and journeys: an ethno-

Braun, V. and Clarke, V. (2006).

methodological approach’, Cartographica, 40, pp. 17–33.

Bryman, A. (2008). Social Research Methods, Oxford University

Butler, D. (2006). ‘Virtual globes: the web-wide world’, Nature, 439,

Press, Oxford.

pp. 776–778.

Caquard, S. (2014). ‘Cartography III: a post-representational perspec-
tive on cognitive cartography’, Progress in Human Geography,
online version 15 April 2014 (accessed 17 April 2014).

Cardony, A. L., Brunye´, T. T. and Mahoney, C. R. (2013). ‘How
navigation aids impair spatial memory: evidence for divided
attention’, Spatial Cognition and Computation, 13 pp. 319–
350.

Craine, J. and Aitken, S. C. (2011). ‘The emotional life of maps and
other visual geographies’, in Rethinking Maps, ed. by Dodge, M.,
Kitchin, R. and Perkins, C., pp. 149–166, Routledge, London.

Crampton, J. W. (2001).

communication
Geography, 25, pp. 235–252.

and

‘Maps as social constructions: power,
visualisation’, Progress
in Human

Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research Design, Qualitative, Quantitative
and Mixed Methods Approaches, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Czarniawska, B. (2004). Narratives in Social Science Research, Sage,

London.

Damasio, A. (2004). Looking for Spinoza, Vintage, New York.
Davidson, J. and Milligan, C. (2004). ‘Embodying emotion, sensing
space: introducing emotional geographies’, Social and Cultural
Geography, 5, pp. 523–532.

Davidson,

J., Bondi, L. and Smith, M.

(2005). Emotional

Geographies, Ashgate, Aldershot.

Deleuze, G. (1988). Spinoza: Practical Philosophy, City Lights

Books, San Francisco, CA (Translation: Hurley, R.).

Deleuze, G. (1997). Essays: Critical and Clinical, University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN (Translation: Smith, D. and
Greco, M.).

Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F.

(1987). A Thousand Plateaus,
University of Minneapolis Press, Minneapolis, MN (Translation:
Massumi, B.).

Denscombe, M. (2010). The Good Research Guide for Small-scale

Social Research Projects, OUP, Maidenhead.

Dodge, M. and Kitchin, R. (2005). ‘Code and the transduction of
space’, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 95,
pp. 162–180.

Dodge, M., Perkins, C. and Kitchin, R. (2011). ‘Mapping modes,
methods and moments’, in Rethinking Maps, ed. by Dodge, M.,
Kitchin, R. and Perkins, C. pp. 220–143, Routledge, London.
Donovan, A. R. and Oppenheimer, C. (2012). ‘The aviation sagas:
geographies of volcanic risk’, The Geographical Journal, 178,
pp. 98–103.

The Cartographic Journal

Eco, U. (1990). The Limits of Interpretation, Indiana University

Press, Bloomington, IN.

Elliott, J. (2005). Using Narrative in Social Research: Qualitative

and Quantitative Approaches, Sage, London.

Fabrikant, S. I., Christophe, S., Papastefanou, G. and Maggi, S.
(2012). ‘Emotional Response to Map Design Aesthetics’, in 7th
International Conference on Geographic Information Science,
Columbus, OH, Sep 18–21.

Fabrikant, S. I. and Rouiller, F. (2014). ‘E-motive Map Displays’,
Cognition, Behavior and Representation IV, Association of
American Geographers Annual Meeting, Tampa, FL, Apr 11.
Field, K., O’Brien, J. and Beale, L. (2011). ‘Paper Maps or GPS?
in Wayfinding Behaviour and Spatial
International Cartographic

Exploring Differences
Knowledge Acquisition’,
Conference, Paris, Jul 3–8, pp. 1–8.

in

Gatens, M. (2004). ‘Privacy and the body: the publicity of affect’, in
Privacies: Philosophical Evaluations, ed. by Rossler, B. pp. 113–
132, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

Girardin, F. and Blat, J. (2010). ‘The co-evolution of taxi drivers and
and Mobile

in-car navigation systems’, Pervasive

their
Computing, 6, pp. 424–434.

Goodchild, M. F.

(2007).

‘Citizens as

sensors:

the world of

volunteered geography’, GeoJournal, 69, pp. 211–221.

Hirtle, S.C. and Srinivas, S. (2010). ‘Enriching spatial knowledge
through a multiattribute locational system’, Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence, 6222 pp. 279–288.

Ishikawa, T., Fujiwara, H., Imai, O. and Okabe, A.

(2008).
‘Wayfinding with a GPS-based mobile navigation system: a
comparison with maps and direct experience’, Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 28, pp. 74–82.

Jung, W. R. (2012). ‘Impact of the Availability of a Navigation System
on Human Wayfinding Behaviour’, Cognition, Behavior and
Representation VI, Association of American Geographers Annual
Meeting, New York, Feb 27.

Jung, W. R. and Bell, S. (2013). ‘Modifications in Human Wayfinding
Behavior Based on the Availability of GPS-based Navigation
Support’, Navigation, GPS and Fieldwork, Association of
American Geographers Annual Meeting, Los Angeles, CA, Apr 10.
Jung, W. R. and Bell, S. (2014). Reforms in human wayfinding
behavior based on the availability of GPS-based navigation systems,
http://rose.geog.mcgill.ca/ski/(accessed 17 April 2014).

Kettunen, P., Irvankoski, K., Krause, C. M., Sarjakoski, T. and
Sarjakoski, T. (2012). ‘Geospatial
images in the acquisition of
spatial knowledge for wayfinding’, Journal of Spatial Information
Science, 5, pp. 75–106.

Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2007). ‘Rethinking maps’, Progress in

Human Geography, 31, pp. 331–344.

Krause, K.-L. and Coates, H. (2008). ‘Students’ engagement in first-
and Evaluation in Higher

year university’, Assessment
Education, 33, pp. 493–505.

Kwan, M. P. (2007). ‘Affecting geospatial technologies: toward a
feminist politics of emotion’, The Professional Geographer, 5,
pp. 22–34.

Laurier, E. and Brown, B. (2008). ‘Rotatings maps and readers:
praxiological aspects of alignment and orientation’, Transactions
of the Institute of British Geographers, 33, pp. 201–221.

Leshed, G., Velden, T., Rieger, O., Kot, B. and Sengers, P. (2008).
‘In-car GPS Navigation: Engagement with and Disengagement
from the Environment’,
in CHI 2008, Florence, Apr 5–10,
pp. 1675–1684.

Livingston, D. N. (1991). The Geographical Tradition, Blackwell,

Oxford.

Lorenzoni, I., Nicholson-Cole, S. and Whitmarsh, L. (2007). ‘Barriers
perceived to engaging with climate change among the UK public
and their policy implications’, Global Environmental Change, 17,
pp. 445–459.

MacIntyre, A.

(1988). Whose

Justice? Which Rationality?,

Duckworth, London.

Maggi, S. and Fabrikant, S. I. (2013). ‘Animated displays of moving
objects and spatiotemporal coordinated events’, in GeoViz 2013,
Hamburg, Mar 6–8.

Meng, L. (2004).

‘About Egocentric Geovisualisation’,

in 12th
International Conference on Geoinformatics – Geospatial
Information Research: Bridging the Pacific and Atlantic,
Gavle, Jun 7–9, pp. 7–14.

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 ’
‘
'I’ve got my Sat Nav, it s alright

’

355

Mintel (2012). Digital

trends spring UK April 2012, http://
oxygen.mintel.com/display/590111 (accessed 21 January 2013).
Mu¨nzer, S., Zimmer, H. D., Schwalm, M., Baus, J. and Aslan, I.
(2006). ‘Computer-assisted navigation and the acquisition of route
and survey knowledge’, Journal of Environmental Psychology,
26, pp. 300–308.

Nathanson, D. L. (1992). Shame and Pride: Affect, Sex and the

Birth of the Self, Fordham University Press, New York.

Newing, H. (2011). Conducting Research in Conservation: A

Social Science Perspective, Routledge, Abingdon.

O’Brien, H. L. and Toms, E. G. (2008). What is user engagement? A
conceptual framework for defining user engagement with technol-
ogy’, Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 59, pp. 938–955.

O’Brien, J., Field, K. and Beale, L. (2012). ‘Paper maps or GPS? An
examination of different wayfinding behaviour and spatial knowl-
edge
and
Representation VI, Association of American Geographers Annual
Meeting, New York, NY, Feb 27.

techniques’, Cognition, Behavior

acquisition

Ockwell, D., Whitmarsh, L. and O’Neill, S. (2009). ‘Reorienting
climate change communication for effective mitigation: forcing
people to be green or fostering grassroots engagement’, Science
Communication, 30, pp. 305–327.

Orange (2012). Roaming, http://www.orange.co.uk/roaming/

(accessed 31 December 2012).

Parush, A., Ahuvia, S., Erev, I. (2007). ‘Degradation in spatial knowledge
acquisition when using automatic navigation systems’, in Spatial
Information Theory, LNCS, 4736, ed. by Winter, S., Duckham,
M. Kulik, L. pp. 238–254, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Perkins, C. (2003). ‘Cartography and graphicacy’, in Key Methods in
Geography, ed. by Clifford, N. and Valentine, G. pp. 343–368,
Sage Publications, London.

Pingel, T. J. and Schinazi, V. R. (2014). ‘The Cognition of Scale in
Human Search Problems and Wayfinding Strategy’, Cognition,
Behavior and Representation I, Association of American
Geographers Annual Meeting, Tampa, FL, Apr 11.

Perkins, C. (2004). ‘Cartography – cultures of mapping: power in
practice’, Progress in Human Geography, 28, pp. 381–391.
Perkins, C. (2008). ‘Cultures of map use’, The Cartographic Journal,

45, pp. 150–158.

Schu¨tz, A. (1973). Collected Papers 1: The Problem of Social

Reality, Marinus Nijhoff, The Hague.

Scott Jones, J. (2010). ‘Making sense of it all: analysing ethnographic
data’, in Ethnography in Social Science Practice, ed. by Scott
Jones, J. and Watt, S. pp. 157–172, Routledge, London.

Seigworth, G. J. and Gregg, M. (2010). ‘An inventory of shimmers’, in
The Affect Theory Reader, ed. by Gregg, M. and Seigworth, G. J.
pp. 1–25, Duke University Press, Durham, NC.

Silverman, D. (2001). Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for

Analysing Talk, Text and Interaction, Sage, London.

Soja, E. W. (1996). Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other

Real-and-Imagined Places. Blackwell, Oxford.

Speake, J. and Axon, S. (2012). ‘I never use ‘maps’ anymore’: engaging
with Sat Nav technologies and the implications for cartographic
literacy and spatial awareness’, The Cartographic Journal, 49,
pp. 326–336.

Spinoza, B. (2000). Ethics, Oxford University Press, New York, NY

(Translation: Parkinson, G.).

Tashakkori, A. and Teddlie, C. (2003). Handbook of Mixed
Methods in Social and Behavioral Research, Sage, London.
Teddlie, C. and Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of Mixed
Methods in Social and Behavioral Research, Sage, Thousand
Oaks, CA.

Thien, D. (2005). ‘After or beyond feeling? A consideration of affect

and emotion in geography’, Area, 37, pp. 450–454.

Todman, J. and Monaghan, E. (1994). ‘Qualitative differences in
computer experience, computer anxiety and students’ use of
computers: a path model’, Computers in Human Behavior, 4,
pp. 529–539.

Thrift, N. (2004). ‘Intensities of feeling: towards a spatial politics of

affect’, Geografiska Annaler, 86, pp. 57–78.

Thrift, N. (2008). Non-Representational Theory: Space, Politics

and Affect, Routledge, London.

Thrift, N. (2010). ‘Understanding the material practices of glamour’,
in The Affect Theory Reader, ed. by Gregg, M. and Seigworth, G.
J., pp. 289–308, Duke University Press, Durham, NC.

Tolia-Kelly, D. P. (2006).

exploring the ‘universalist’
geographies’, Area, 38, pp. 213–217.

‘Affect: an ethnocentric encounter?
imperative of emotional/affectual

Watt, S.

(2010).

in
Ethnography and Social Science Practice, ed. by Scott Jones, J.
and Watt, S. pp. 187–196, Routledge, London.

‘Leaving the field: a reflexive journey’,

Whitmarsh, L. and O’Neill, S. (2011). ‘Introduction: opportunities for
and barriers to engaging individuals with climate change’,
in
Engaging the Public with Climate Change, ed. by Whitmarsh,
L., O’Neill, S. and Lorenzoni, I., pp. 1–14, Earthscan, London.
Whitmarsh, L., Seyfang, G. and O’Neill, S. (2011). ‘Public engage-
ment with carbon and climate change: to what extent is the public
‘‘carbon capable’’?’, Global Environmental Change, 21, pp. 56–
65.

Willis, K. S., Ho¨lsher, C., Wilbertz, C. and Chao, L. (2009). ‘A
comparison of spatial knowledge acquisition with maps and mobile
maps’, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 33,
pp. 100–110.

Wilkening, J. and Fabrikant, S. I. (2013). ‘How users interact with a
time pressure’, Cartography and

3D geo-browser under
Geographic Information Science, 40, pp. 40–52.

Woodward, K. and Lea, J. (2010) ‘Geographies of affect’, in The Sage
Handbook of Social Geographies ed. by Smith, S. J., Pain, R.,
Marston, S. A. and Jones, J. P. pp. 154–175. Sage, London.
Wu, A., Zhang, X. and Zhang, W. (2008). ‘GPS secure against getting
in International Conference on

lost, or more danger?’,
Cyberworlds 2008, Hangzhou, Sep 22–24, pp. 501–505.

Downloaded by [37.187.7.74] at 07:12 02 April 2016 "
'
'
