International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 10, October 2008, 1039–1044

Introduction to digital gazetteer research

M. F. GOODCHILD* and L. L. HILL
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, and Department of
Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060, USA

Digital gazetteers provide information on named features, linking the feature’s
name with its location and its type. They have been growing in importance
recently as the basis of a range of services, including way-finding, georeferencing,
and intelligence. This introduction to the following collection of five research
papers expands on contemporary applications of digital gazetteers, explores the
issues associated with each of the three types of information, and defines three
broad areas of research: the components of gazetteers; the process by which
places are named and evolve; and the issues of interoperability between digital
gazetteers. Each area is represented by at least one paper in the collection. Digital
gazetteers increasingly form the interface between the informal discourse of
humans and the formal world of geographic information science.

Keywords: Digital gazetteer; Place names; Interoperability; Conflation

1. Background

The building and application of digital gazetteers, which organize knowledge and
details about named places, is a growing area of research that necessarily involves
cross-domain issues from fields such as spatial cognition, geographic information
science, social history, computer science, and geographic information retrieval.
Gazetteer-based services are being developed and deployed in such specific fields as
public health, natural history data management, cultural history, and automated
georeferencing of text (geoparsing). Gazetteers started out as reference books that
documented the names and accepted spellings of places (toponyms)—for example,
standardized place name lists for newspaper articles. In these gazetteers, contextual
and descriptive information about the places was included as needed. Some of these
developed into sources of authoritative names which were used widely, and the
organizations that prepared them, mostly for governmental purposes, were and are
known as toponymic authorities. Such authorities exist for many countries, as well
as for constituent states, provinces, and even local areas. In the US, for example, the
Board on Geographic Names was established in 1890 with the objective of
standardizing the use of place names. Thus, the emphasis in all of these efforts was
on the naming of places.

When computerized mapping software emerged, place names were treated as a
names layer, often structured as a table containing place names that was linked to
named features for the purposes of labelling. In this case, the emphasis is on
representing the geographic location rather than on the naming. In the 1990s,
research projects such as the Alexandria Digital Library (ADL) project at the

*Corresponding author. Email: good@geog.ucsb.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701850497

1040

M. F. Goodchild and L. L. Hill

University of California, Santa Barbara demonstrated the key role that gazetteers
play in geographically enabled information management and retrieval systems. It
became clear that gazetteers play a vital role in information systems because they
encode relationships not only between place names and geographic locations but
also between these elements of place description and the type of place (e.g. river). As
the importance of digital gazetteers in information systems grew, it became apparent
that the element of time and the relationships between named places are also and
perhaps equally important for some applications.

In the past few years the naming and description of places have taken on new
meaning and importance with the growth of user-generated content on the Web.
Sites such as Wikipedia, Wikimapia, and Flickr allow private citizens to create and
integrate descriptions of interesting places and to build links between them using
standard codes known as geo-tags. The number of places described in Wikimapia
already matches the number of authoritatively named places in gazetteers, and the
number of georeferenced photographs in Flickr exceeds that number by at least an
order of magnitude. This populist approach to geographic information creation has
been termed neo-geography (Turner 2006), and it offers an interesting alternative to
the more traditional system of naming authority. Proponents would argue that the
elements of collective intelligence or crowd-sourcing that are present in these
activities, in which contributors are able to challenge or edit the earlier contributions
of others, is the modern equivalent of the process of consensus that the naming
authorities have traditionally relied on and managed.

2. Components of digital gazetteers

Digital gazetteers contain structured information about named places, where place is
defined simply as a geographic location and more expansively as a geographic
location that has been identified and referenced as a social construct. It is useful to
distinguish how place differs from feature in usage, even though the terms are often
used interchangeably. Features are distinct physical elements or objects in the
landscape, such as mountains, rivers, and buildings, for which definite geographic
locations and boundaries can be given. Administrative areas are often considered to
be features because they also have clearly identifiable locations and boundaries that
are established by fiat (Smith and Varzi (2000) distinguish between fiat and bona fide
boundaries). The meaning of place includes features and also locations with vague
positions and boundaries (Burrough and Frank 1996), for example the Rocky
Mountains and southern France. A place can also be described as something like
‘down by the river’ that has meaning related to experience, e.g. memories of riverside
picnics and lyrics of a song, and ‘I’m going downtown’. These are examples of
references to generic places of certain types (rivers and downtowns); they are
references to particular locations only when they are identified as being the river or
downtown within a particular spatial context.

Gazetteers hold structured information about named places that have a particular
geographic location; that is, the subset of places that have acquired proper or
authoritative names (e.g. London) or sections of places with proper names (e.g. east
London). The characteristics of these names are undefined. They do not have to
designate a particular place uniquely (i.e. the same name can denote several different
places); nor do they have to be officially sanctioned. They may be ‘cute’; for example,
the ‘Study Hall’, which is a bar in a student neighbourhood. There may be several
names for the same place, varying by date, language, spelling, and official versus

Introduction to digital gazetteer research

1041

colloquial. They may be assigned for special purposes (e.g. Deep Sea Drilling, Leg 42,
Hole 378) and be understood and used only in specialized domains.

Because of developments in the past ten years, including research into georeferenced
digital libraries by the Alexandria Digital Library (ADL) project at the University of
California, Santa Barbara, standards development by the TC 211 committee of the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and protocol development by
the Open Geospatial Consortium, there is general agreement on the structure of digital
gazetteers, the attributes of place descriptions in gazetteers, and protocols to support
distributed searching of gazetteers created for different purposes. The minimum
required elements of a place description are represented by the tuple N,F,T where N is
at least one name, F is at least one representation of geographic location according to a
mathematical framework (i.e. a footprint), and T is a least one type (category, class)
drawn from a typing scheme (i.e. a system of feature classification). Since places
themselves come and go with the passage of time as well as the elements of place
description, gazetteers must also incorporate date ranges in multiple ways in any model
of named place description.

A further gazetteer characteristic is the degree to which spatial and temporal
representations can be generalized and still meet application requirements. When the
purpose of the footprint is to disambiguate one river from another within a gazetteer,
then point locations in the mouths of the rivers are sufficient; this is often the case with
toponymic authority files. Simple point locations also suffice for orienting map
displays—for moving the map view over to that location and zooming in. For
geographic information retrieval (GIR), using minimum bounding rectangles (MBRs)
to represent geographic coverage of a place is both computationally easy for overlap
analysis and sufficiently effective with sophisticated matching methods to result in
satisfactory performance. For places with naturally vague boundaries (e.g. the Rocky
Mountains and Southern France),
footprint generalization provides coverage
information without forcing an arbitrary boundary line.

3. Towards a research agenda

Digital gazetteers are an increasingly important form of geographic information,
representing in effect the interface between the informal world of human discourse
(people mostly use names to refer to parts of the world) and the formal world of
geospatial technology, with its scientifically rigorous systems of georeferencing. Yet
the names layer has occupied a somewhat uncertain position, and does not appear
for example in the seven framework themes of the US Federal Geographic Data
Committee, though certain types of features may appear in the administrative,
hydrographic, and transportation themes. Toponymy, the study of place names, is a
recognized area of scholarship but hardly ranks among the geographic information
sciences. Nevertheless there are very substantial problems in digital gazetteers that
deserve scientific study.

In late 2006, we organized a 3-day specialist meeting in Santa Barbara on the
topic of Digital Gazetteer Research and Practice, to bring together a wide range of
researchers and practitioners who were working with the definition, modelling, and
application of gazetteers and gazetteer services, to present and discuss current
activities and short- and long-term research and development directions. The 43
participants, from seven countries in addition to the US and representing academia,
industry, and government, were selected by invitation and from responses to an
open call. Our final report of the meeting (Goodchild and Hill 2007) is available

1042

M. F. Goodchild and L. L. Hill

online, along with the presentations, position papers of participants, and much
related material, at the meeting website http://ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/nga/. At the
meeting, there was strong interest in a special journal issue that would showcase
examples of gazetteer research; this issue is the result of a process of submission and
peer review that began at that time.

4.

Introduction to the papers

We structured the specialist meeting under three headings:

4.1 Components of gazetteer services

The three core elements of gazetteers—place names, place categories, and geospatial
locations—support the translation between informal georeferencing using place
names (‘Santa Barbara’) and place categories (‘city’) and the formal georeferencing
of mathematical schemes (e.g. longitude and latitude coordinate systems). These
elements plus explicit relationships between named geographic places and the
identification of time frames for places and their characteristics are the fundamental
components of digital gazetteers. Within the context of gazetteer services, such as
support for enterprise georeferencing systems, geoparsing of text to derive spatial
locations, navigation services, and support for geographic information retrieval
(GIR), the complexities of each of these components challenge the collection and use
of gazetteer data.

4.2 Georeferencing as a process

Georeferencing by naming and categorizing natural and human-made geographic
features is universal. The practice is highly influenced by individual strategies, local
conventions, and requirements of particular applications. This topic explores studies
that ferret out the nature of the motivations and practices of place naming and
categorizing in individual, cultural, historical, information management, scientific,
and business contexts, and how they inform the construction and use of gazetteers
and gazetteer services.

4.3

Interoperable gazetteer services

Gazetteer data exist in many independent sources that are often dissimilar in
construction and content, including:

N gazetteers of official toponymic authorities;
N local, formally published, or special-purpose gazetteers;
N indexes accompanying atlases;
N place identifier tables accompanying GIS datasets;
N place-name authority files used for cataloguing and indexing;
N historical printed gazetteers and encyclopedias;
N online sources such as Wikipedia.

This topic explores the requirements of gazetteer protocols and services to support
interoperable access to and use of these distributed sources.

The five papers in this special issue straddle the three topics and have been
organized in corresponding sequence. The following paragraphs introduce the
papers, and explain their relationship to the larger gazetteer research agenda.

Introduction to digital gazetteer research

1043

Most gazetteer services to date have been built on existing digital files provided by
naming authorities, and thus cannot recognize vernacular names that refer to
features without official name recognition. Moreover, gazetteers that represent
features using a single point, MBR, or other highly generalized boundary are clearly
less useful for certain types of information retrieval. Thus, there is substantial
interest in the development of methods that can readily provide detailed geographic
footprints, when existing footprints are either non-existent or highly generalized.
The paper by Jones, Purves, Clough, and Joho describes a novel and elegant
approach to this problem that mines the use of a place name in Web pages, and
returns a probabilistic estimate of its footprint.

The second paper in the gazetteer services area also adopts a probabilistic approach,
developing methods to model uncertainties in vague geographic referents. The spatial
interpretation of textual georeferencing involves the use of gazetteers to recognize place
names in text strings. Once a possible place name is identified, surrounding text is used
to confirm that the name is a place reference (e.g. Clinton, Arkansas rather than Bill or
Hillary Clinton), to identify which ‘Springfield’ is referenced, and to find phrases
indicating an offset from the place (e.g. five miles south of Bakersfield). The paper by
Guo, Liu, and Wieczorek presents methods developed to estimate the geospatial
location based on such references found in the descriptions of natural history museum
collections. This research illustrates the great potential of, and challenges to, the spatial
analysis of the wealth of historical specimen data held by the world’s natural history
museums. The paper builds on previous work on modelling uncertainties in geographic
information, applying it to the specific needs of place name references. A powerful
software package is described that implements the techniques under a straightforward
user interface.

The second topic, the process of georeferencing, is clearly best studied from a
temporal perspective. While several participants at the specialist meeting found this
topic to be of great interest, it is represented in this collection by just one paper, by
Mostern and Johnson. In it, the authors reorient our thinking about gazetteers by
introducing a more time-centric gazetteer model based on spatio-temporal events. They
argue for an approach that recognizes that the concept of events extends to the places
themselves, which, as human constructs, have starting and ending times and associated
events that create and change them through time. From the perspective of cultural
history, they see such an event model as mirroring the methodology of historians as
they piece together the multiple sources of evidence for past events and locations.

The final two papers represent the third topic, of gazetteer interoperability.
Gazetteers are collections of gazetteer entries, each of which contains information
about a particular named place. Ideally, a particular gazetteer will contain only one
entry per place and this goal raises issues of how and with what certainty it is
possible to tell when two pieces of information are about the same place. The
difficulties arise because the same place can have names that differ to some degree,
and can have footprints that vary by type (e.g. point, MBR, or polygon), date,
accuracy, and specificity, and which probably are assigned to different categories
depending on the typing practices applied. The paper by Hastings addresses this
conflation issue, presenting a detailed strategy and associated evaluation metrics
that can be used to achieve conflation between multiple, conflicting gazetteer entries.
The final paper by Janowicz and Kessler focuses on the type element of a
gazetteer tuple, and discusses the issue of interoperability with respect to this
element. The topic of semantic interoperability, or the sharing of meaning across

1044

Introduction to digital gazetteer research

disparate systems and data sets, is particularly challenging and has been the subject
of much recent research. The paper argues for a more rigorous, theoretically
grounded approach to defining type classifications that is as a result more readily
compatible with the ontological systems that have been constructed in recent years
to facilitate semantic interoperability. Much work remains to be done in this area,
which is one of the most important challenges of 21st-century computing.

5. Closing comments

This issue of the International Journal of Geographic Information Science (IJGIS)
appears as the scientific community begins to grapple with the fundamental and
applied issues raised by digital gazetteers and the gazetteer models and standards
developed in the 1990s, and to respond to the very rapid recent developments in
user-generated Web content and gazetteer-based services. At some point in the
future, it may be possible to submit a query such as ‘find an orange grove five miles
north of Bakersfield’ to a portal and to obtain a probability density function that
has been informed by all of the many sources of relevant information distributed
over the Web. Before that can happen, a number of
issues of semantic
interoperability, uncertainty, and conflation must be resolved by research, and the
results implemented. On a global level, a related query such as ‘what is the name of
the large river that flows north out of Mongolia’ will require solutions to additional
problems, including interoperability between place names in different scripts and
languages. Phonic representations of place names is another interesting area of
potential research that may help in achieving interoperability at the global level.

In closing this introduction, we return to two earlier themes. First, despite the
general lack of scientific interest in place names, it is evident to us that the names
layer is of vital and increasing significance in GIScience, because of its role in
supporting the general user’s interaction with geographic information technologies.
Second, and related to the first, is the essential role that gazetteers play in facilitating
communication between the informal, idiosyncratic, and often vernacular world of
human discourse and the formal, scientific, and hopefully interoperable world of
GIS. In that sense, gazetteers offer one of the keys to a more human-oriented
paradigm of user interaction. We hope that the papers of this special issue, and the
results of the specialist meeting, will stimulate further research and development in
this increasingly important area.

Acknowledgements
We thank the 43 participants at the specialist meeting for stimulating discussion,
doctoral student Jordan Hastings and staff member Guylene Gadal for their assistance,
the 37 reviewers who provided helpful comments on the papers submitted for this
special issue, and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency for financial support.

References
BURROUGH, P.A., and FRANK, A.U. (Eds), 1996, Geographic Objects with Indeterminate

Boundaries (Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis).

GOODCHILD, M.F. and HILL, L.L., 2007, Summary Report: Digital Gazetteer Research and
Practice Workshop (Santa Barbara, CA: National Center for Geographic Information
and Analysis).

SMITH, B. and VARZI, A.C., 2000, Fiat and bona fide boundaries. Philosophy and

Phenomenological Research, 60, pp. 401–420.

TURNER, A., 2006, Introduction to Neogeography (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly).

