International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Using interactions and dynamics for mining
groups of moving objects from trajectory data

Corrado Loglisci

To cite this article: Corrado Loglisci (2017): Using interactions and dynamics for mining groups
of moving objects from trajectory data, International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2017.1416473

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2017.1416473

Published online: 21 Dec 2017.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 16

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [University of Florida]

Date: 25 December 2017, At: 03:34

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE, 2017
https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2017.1416473

RESEARCH

Corrado Logliscia,b

Using interactions and dynamics for mining groups of
moving objects from trajectory data

aDepartment of Computer Science, University of Bari, Bari, Italy; bCINI - Consorzio Interuniversitario
Nazionale per Informatica, Roma, Italy

ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 21 March 2017
Accepted 9 December 2017

KEYWORDS
Trajectories; moving objects;
crews; interactions;
dynamics

ABSTRACT
Advances in tracking technology enable the gathering of spatio-
temporal data in the form of trajectories, which when analysed
can convey useful knowledge. In particular, discovering groups of
moving objects is a valuable means for a wide class of problems
related to mobility. The task of group mining has been investi-
gated by considering mostly the spatial closeness and similarity of
the trajectories, while little attention has been paid to the relation-
ships between the trajectories and time-changing nature of the
trajectories. The relationships may provide evidence of interac-
tions between the moving objects. The time-changing nature
may provide evidence of dynamics of the movements. Therefore,
interactions and dynamics can be sources of information to be
considered in order to discover new forms of groups. Motivated
by this, we introduce the concept of crews and propose a method
to discover crews. A crew gathers moving objects with similar
interactions and similar dynamics. The proposed method relies
on i) new movement parameters, which explicitly consider inter-
actions and dynamics, and ii) a distance-free clustering algorithm,
which groups objects based on the similarity of the movement
parameters. We conduct extensive experiments, which include a
quantitative evaluation of the quality of the crews and comparison
with alternative solutions.

1. Introduction

The adoption of position-aware technologies, such as telemetry and Global Positioning
System (GPS) devices, has stimulated the development of solutions to collect movement
data and opened up a category of challenges regarding moving objects. Movement data
thus constitute a very precious resource for the study of computational models, the
design of data analysis techniques and the development of advanced solutions for real-
world scenarios, such as crowd dynamics monitoring, human mobility understanding
and public security emergency management (Dodge et al. 2008, Laube 2014). A recur-
ring problem is ﬁnding out collective movements that represent ‘common’ behaviors of
diﬀerent objects and,
it is faced with trajectory data analysis
techniques aiming at discovering groups of objects that move close to each other for

in most approaches,

CONTACT Corrado Loglisci
© 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

corrado.loglisci@uniba.it

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 2

C. LOGLISCI

a time duration Dodge et al. (2008), Long and Nelson (2013b), Mazimpaka and Timpf
(2016).

Benkert et al. (2006) and Gudmundsson and Van Kreveld (2006) introduced the
seminal notion of ﬂock. It refers to a collection of objects moving together over a time
interval of pre-ﬁxed duration, such that for every time-stamp of the time interval there is
a disk of pre-ﬁxed radius that contains the objects. Ong et al. (2011) embed the duration
into the ﬂock notion to capture traﬃc jams. Jeung et al. (2008) extended the concept of
ﬂocks by relaxing the constraints on the shape and size. They formalized the notion of
convoy and proposed an algorithm to grouping objects that are density connected to
each other within a generic-geometric shape. However, the convoy has a practical
brittleness due to the requirement on the temporal contiguity (Mazimpaka and Timpf
2016), that is, the objects are put together only when they move close to one another
over an uninterrupted time interval.

Motivated by this, Li et al. (2010) relax the temporal constraints and propose the
notion of swarm intended as group of objects that move together on disjointed time
instants, while Zheng et al. (2014) introduce the notion of gathering, which is character-
ized by core members, which stick to the group, and objects can enter and leave.
Temporal discontinuity has also been studied by Wood (2013) by gathering individuals
that move with continuous or intermittent spatial coherence. Three deﬁnitions of spatial
coherence have been proposed: the ﬁrst two types maintain the classical connotation of
closeness (shared location), while the third type works on the reciprocal behavior of the
individuals.

In the above-mentioned works, the trajectories are analyzed as sequences, considered
independent of each other, composed of positions and considered unrelated to each
other. This is a restrictive perspective because (i) limits the potential we can extract from
the movement of individual objects and from the movement of a collection of objects,
and (ii) overlooks two sources of information, that is, the presence of relationships
between trajectories and time-changing nature of the movements. Indeed, the presence
of relationships between the trajectories may provide evidence of the interactions
between objects (Doncaster 1990). In fact, the objects can interact not only when they
stay in the same place, but also when they are far apart and move toward a common
location to meet. To account for the interactions, we should take the trajectories as
correlated processes and consider forms of relationships diﬀerent from the one due to
the sole co-presence. The time-changing nature is intrinsic in movements and expresses
the dynamics of physical properties of the motion (Laube et al. 2007). The objects can
slow down, speed up and change direction. Dynamics characterizes not only individual
objects, but also the movement of a collection of objects. For instance, when two
objects travel together, the inter-distance can change. To account for dynamics, we
should consider the variations of physical properties, even between two consecutive
positions, and analyze the positions as correlated observations of an evolving process.
There is a growing interest in interactions and dynamics in the recent research (Long
and Nelson 2013a, Dodge et al. 2016, Konzack et al. 2017), while, in the past, very few
attempts have been done. Andersson et al. (2008) deﬁne the concept of leadership in
order to model the interaction between an individual (leader), who is moving ahead,
and other individuals, who follow the leader for an uninterrupted time interval.
Interactions are studied jointly with dynamics in the pioneer research of Laube et al.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

3

(2005), in which the notion of interaction is interpreted as a relative motion. Relative
motion is based on the comparison of motion attributes of individual objects. The
motion attributes denote the dynamics of motion and correspond to quantitative move-
ment parameters (e.g. azimuth), which are computed over consecutive time instants
relatively to a conventional reference system. Groups of objects that move in spatial
proximity and have the same motion attributes represent the so-called Relative Motion
(Remo) patterns.

However, the method of extraction of the Remo patterns relies on a pattern-matching
approach, which requires domain knowledge and expert intervention to deﬁne a
‘template-pattern’. This means that only the groups which satisfy the (pre-deﬁned)
templates will be extracted, while others will be discarded, regardless1 of the collective
movements they represent. Another drawback of the Remo patterns is that they
recognize only the interaction due to spatial proximity and model only the dynamics
of individual objects. This way, the analysis is limited to discover groups with objects
staying the same location or objects moving in a relatable space (Long and Nelson
2013b), which becomes restrictive because, in practical situations, objects can be mem-
bers of a group without necessarily moving close or traveling similar paths (Konzack
et al. 2017).

In this paper, we study how to discover groups of moving objects by leveraging upon
interactions and dynamics. Our main contributions are the formalization of the concept
of crew and a computational solution to discover crews from raw trajectory data. A crew
gathers moving objects that have similar interactions and similar dynamics. These two
characteristics cannot be directly obtained from the raw trajectory data for the reasons
discussed above. Thus, we deﬁne new movement parameters that represent interactions
of pairs of objects and changes of motion of pairs of objects. These parameters
correspond to spatio-temporal primitives able to describe (i) the movement of an object
relatively to the movement of another object (interactions), and (ii) the variations of the
physical properties of motion of an object relatively to the movement of another object
(dynamics). Using interactions and dynamics to group moving objects allows us to track
the dynamics of a collective.

However, while the changes can be captured by analyzing the objects in a conven-
tional reference system, we cannot do the same with the interactions, because they
should be modeled as perceived by a moving observer involved in the interaction. The
approach we follow is to deﬁning new trajectory primitives able to represent the
movement of an object relative to another one (Noyon et al. 2007). This idea has been
also explored by Andrienko et al. (2013), who propose to transform the physical space
into an abstract space deﬁned by the position of the group center and direction of the
group’s movements.
In such an abstract space, the authors represent the relative
positions and movements of the individuals with respect to a reference entity, which,
contrarily to the current paper, is the rest of the group.

The computational solution we propose is structured in two main steps. In the ﬁrst
step, we transform the original descriptive space based on raw trajectory data into a
feature space based on new movement parameters. This results in a representation
based on vectors, where a vector represents the movement of a pair of objects over
consecutive time instants. The second step is incharge of discovering valid crews. It
performs an ad-hoc clustering algorithm in order to group vectors characterized by

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 4

C. LOGLISCI

similar movement parameters. The members of a crew are pairs of objects whose
movements are similar in terms of the new parameters.

Through experiments on real trajectory data (speciﬁcally, GPS data) of diﬀerent
categories of moving objects (speciﬁcally, pedestrians and wild animals), we investigate
the applicability of the computational solution to real-world case studies. Moreover, we
perform (i) a qualitative evaluation by discussing interactions and dynamics expressed
by the crews, (ii) a quantitative assessment of the quality of the discovered groups and
(iii) comparative experiments with the swarms (Li et al. 2010), which are the kind of
groups closer to the crews. The Remo patterns, seemingly the groups closest to the
crews, were not considered for the experimental comparison because they require pre-
deﬁned templates, which are not necessary in our work.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the basic concepts of
this work. Section 3 illustrates the proposed computational solution as a framework
structured in two main components. Section 4 reports the details of the extensive
experiments we performed on two real-world trajectory data. Finally, some conclusions
are drawn in Section 5 to close the paper.

2. Basics

Before illustrating the computational solution in detail, in this section we ﬁrst explain the
crews through an example and then provide the fundamental notions and formulation
of the trajectory data-mining problem studied.

2.1. Motivating example

To give a concrete idea of the crews, we report an example in public security and safety
(Mazimpaka and Timpf 2016), where interactions and dynamics can be used to identify
places and moving objects (individuals or pedestrians) that have a high potential to
cause threats or be targeted by threats. In that scenario, we need to monitor individuals
even when they do not stay in the same location or are distant from any target place. In
this example, we also discuss the diﬀerences between the crews and some existing
notions of groups.

f

τ1; τ2; τ3; τ4; τ5
f

g observed over the sequence of time instants

In Figure 1, six individuals are tracked over seven time instants. If we rely on spatial
closeness only, we may capture, as a ﬂock, a convoy and a swarm, the movement of the
individuals o1; o2; o3
g.
Those groups may denote the behavior of suspect individuals that move close to each
other uninterruptedly. On the other hand, by combining spatial closeness and temporal
discontinuities (Li et al. (2010)), we may capture, as a swarm, the movement of the
individuals o4; o5; o6
g,
f
while no ﬂock or convoy would be detected (Figure 1(a)). This group would denote the
behavior of suspect individuals that move close to each other with some interruptions.
Considering the azimuth as a motion attribute, we discover also Remo patterns (Laube
et al. 2005). In particular, there are two trend-settings, one composed of the individuals
g, respectively. The ﬁrst
o1; o2; o3
f
pattern covers the time instants τ1; τ2
g and has the individual o2 as a trendsetter, while
g and has the individual o4 as a
the second pattern covers the time instants

g, the other composed of the individuals o2; o3; o4; o5

g over the sequence of (non-consecutive) time instants

τ0; τ1; τ5
f

τ2; τ3
f

f

f

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

5

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between ﬂocks, convoys, swarms, Remo patterns and crews. (a) Examples of
ﬂocks, convoys, swarms (left side) and Remo patterns (right side). (b) Examples of crews.

trendsetter. We can also ﬁnd a composite pattern deﬁned by concurrence and constancy
with the individuals o2; o3; o4; o5
g. This pattern may
denote the behavior of suspect individuals that move close to each other and follow the
direction of 338(cid:2) north (Figure 1(a)). It should be noted that without proximity, no Remo
pattern is retrieved.

g over the time instants

τ5; τ6
f

f

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 6

C. LOGLISCI

Table 1. Summary of the characteristics of diﬀerent notions of groups of moving objects.

No spatial
constraint

Shape
relaxation

Temporal
discontinuity

Interaction

Motion
changes

Flock
Convoy
Swarm
Gathering
Remo
Leadership
Crew

X

X

X
X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

No pre-deﬁned
templates
X
X
X
X

X
X

f

f

g) until they leave ( τ5; τ6

However, by observing the individuals o1; o2; o3

g over the entire sequence T, we see
they are far apart at the beginning (τ0), then they come close and follow similar paths
( τ1; τ2; τ3; τ4
g). This may reveal the movement of suspects
f
coming from distant locations (for instance, airport or train station). They move close
toward a target place and ﬁnally go toward separate locations (Figure 1(b)). We should
note that this movement also models the above-mentioned groups (Figure 1(a)), but
those groups do not model that movement. In fact, the algorithms for detecting ﬂocks,
convoys and swarms cannot discover that movement because they rely on only the
spatial closeness. Even the Remo patterns cannot do it because they consider neither
the changes within a collective (e.g. the distance between two individuals decreases) nor
the interactions (e.g. the individuals which are apart and come close may be related to
each other). To capture that movement, we need to (i) relax the constraint of the
proximity, (ii) account for the interactions and motion changes and (iii) use the similarity
of interactions and motion changes when building the groups. This can be done by
considering ad-hoc movement parameters able to characterize the movement of several
individuals simultaneously rather than describing their movements independently on
each other. Examples of these parameters are azimuth-shortest distance and inter-dis-
tance ratio (Figure 1(b)), which describe pairs of individuals. The former accounts for the
shortest distance between the azimuths formed by the two individuals over two time
instants, the latter denotes the change of the spatial distance between the positions of
the individuals over the same time instants. In this context, we can build a crew with the
pairs o1; o2
g, based on the similarity of azimuth-shortest distance and
f
inter-distance ratio on consecutive time instants. In particular, there is similarity on the
values of azimuth-shortest distance and inter-distance ratio, respectively, for the pairs
g: they fall in [22,45) and [1,2), respectively, over hτ0; τ1i. We see that
o1; o2
f
also in the time instants hτ1; τ2i, hτ2; τ3i and hτ3; τ4i, the values of azimuth-shortest
distance are similar and fall in [0;22) as well as the values of inter-distance ratio that fall
in [0,1). For the same reason, the crew also covers the movements in hτ4; τ5iand hτ5; τ6i.
Using the same principle, we can build a crew with the pairs o4; o5
g. It also
models the swarm fo4; o5; o6} (Figure 1(a)). A concise representation of the diﬀerences
between crews and other groups is reported in Table 1.

g and o2; o3
f

g and o2; o3
f

g and o5; o6
f

f

2.2. Problem formulation

Here we provide fundamental notions and formulate the problem studied in this work.
Frequently-used symbols are reported in Table 2. Let O= o1; o2; . . . ; on
g be the set of all

f

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

7

Explanation

Table 2. List of symbols frequently used.
Symbol
O
T
trðouÞ
F
Fl
hτi; τji
G
or
os
zl

The set of moving objects
The time domain
The trajectory of the object ou
The set of the movement parameters
The lth movement parameter describing the movement of a pair of objects
A sequence of two time instants of T
A pair group
A reference object of a pair group
A participant object of a pair group
The value associated with the pairs of a similarity based pair group (SPG) for the movement parameter

Fl

[zllower ,zlupper ] A range of values of a movement parameter Fl
(cid:2)
PG
PC
SPG
μ
γ

A timeline (a series of sequences of time instants)
A pair group
A cluster of pairs of objects
a similarity-based pair group
The minimum number of objects that a valid crew has to contain
The maximum temporal gap in the timeline of a valid crew

moving objects and T = fτ1, τ2, . . . ,τmg be the time domain. The trajectory of an object
o is represented by a poly-line that is given as a ﬁnite sequence of positions (ﬁxes), each
associated with a time instant of T. The trajectory is denoted with trðoÞ : hðp1; τ1Þ,
ðp2; τ2Þ, . . . , ðpm; τmÞi, where pi 2 R 2 is the geospatial position sampled at τi 2 T. The
time instants of a trajectory may not be equally distanced. Two diﬀerent trajectories may
have diﬀerent time instants and therefore they may have diﬀerent lengths. We call a
sequence
as
two-by-two
hτi; τiþ1; . . . ; τj; τjþ1; . . . ; τh; τhþ1i (i < j < h) a timeline.

consecutive

arranged

instants

time

of

f

In this work, the raw trajectory data are projected into a feature space built with the
movement parameters F= F1; . . . ; Fl; . . . ; Ff
g. A movement parameter is represented by
a function Fl, which maps the positions of two objects ou and ov sampled at the time
instants hτi; τiþ1i to a numeric value zl. This is abbreviated as Fljhτi;τiþ1iðtrðouÞ; trðovÞÞ ! zl.
Intuitively, the movement parameters characterize the movement of two objects and
speciﬁcally account for the interactions of the objects and dynamics of their motion. We
determine their values on two consecutive time instants in order to capture the shorter
variations of the interactions and motion, that is, the variation from one time instant to
the next one. This choice allows us to characterize the trajectories at ﬁner resolutions
(Dodge et al. 2009).

Now, we formalize notions useful to state the concept of crews and design the
algorithm to discover crews. For each notion, we provide a formal statement and an
informal explanation.
Deﬁnition 2.1: [Pair Group] Let

(i) O be the set of moving objects
; RÞjor 2 O; R (cid:3) Onforgg
(ii) G ¼ fðr

then G is a pair group.

A pair group (PG) consists of Rj j pairs that have one object in common. Its purpose is
to model the movements of the pairs of objects formed with the object or. We build the
pair groups by taking one object at a time as the reference object and combining it with

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 8

C. LOGLISCI

all the others (participants), so the pair groups are used to model the movements of all
the pairs. For simplicity, we will denote the pair ðor; osÞ by specifying always the
reference as the ﬁrst element. For instance, given the objects o1; o2; o3; o4
g, the set
ðo2; o1Þ; ðo2; o3Þ; ðo2; o4Þ
f
Deﬁnition 2.2: [Pair Cluster] Let

g is a pair group.

f

(i) O be the set of moving objects
(ii) G ¼ fðor; RÞjor 2 O; R (cid:3) Onforgg
(iii) [zllower ,zlupper ] be a range of values of the movement parameter Fl
(iv) 1ð(cid:4)Þ be an indicator function that, given the value zl of the movement parameter

Fl, returns true if zl 2 ½zllower

; zlupper (cid:5), otherwise it is false,

then G is a Pair Cluster iﬀ "ðor; osÞ 2 G, "Fl 2 F0ðF0 (cid:3) F), 9 τi 2 T s.t. the indicator

function 1ðFljhτi;τiþ1iðtrðorÞ; trðosÞÞÞ returns true.

Intuitively, a pair cluster (PC) comprises pairs whose values of a movement parameter,

computed on consecutive time instants, fall in the same range.
Deﬁnition 2.3: [similarity-based pair group] Let

(i) G be a pair group
(ii) (cid:2) ¼ hτi; τiþ1; . . . ; τh; τhþ1i be a timeline
(iii) [zllower ,zlupper ] be a range of values of the movement parameter Fl
(iv) 1ð(cid:4); (cid:4)Þ be an indicator function that, given two values of a movement parameter Fl,

returns true if they fall in [zllower ,zlupper ], otherwise it is false,
ðor; otÞ 2 G,
(cid:3)

then
SPG
(cid:1)
Fljhτj;τjþ1iðtrðorÞ; trðosÞÞ; Fljhτj;τjþ1iðtrðorÞ; trðotÞÞ

iﬀ "ðor; osÞ,

G

is

a

function
return strue; "1 (cid:6) j (cid:6) m : τj 2 (cid:2); τjþ1 2

indicator

the

1
(cid:2):

Intuitively, a SPG refers to a pair group in which the values of the movement

parameters, computed on the timeline (cid:2), fall in the same range.

An example of an SPG built with two movement parameters is illustrated in
Figure 1(b), where we use the azimuth distance and distance-ratio deﬁned as in
Section 2.1. We can compute the values of the movement parameters on the ﬁxes
sampled at time instants hτ0, τ1i. For instance, the azimuth distance between the
azimuths of o1 and o2 (300(cid:2) and 260(cid:2)) is 40, the azimuth distance between the
azimuths of o2 and o3 (260(cid:2) and 290(cid:2)) is 30, the azimuth distance between the
azimuths of o2 and o4 (290(cid:2) and 50(cid:2))
is 240. By supposing the ranges [0,21),
[22,45), [46,359] for azimuth distance and [0,1), [1,2), [2,10] for distance ratio, we
can build an SPG with the pairs ðo2; o1Þ and ðo2; o3Þ on the timeline hτ0, τ1i. Indeed,
the values of the azimuth distance fall
in the same range, that is [22,45), and the
values of the distance ratio fall in the same range, that is [1,2), respectively. The pair
ðo2; o4Þ is not a member because the value of the azimuth distance is not included in
[22,45) but in [46,359) and the value of the distance ratio is not included in [1,2) but
in [0,1), therefore it cannot be considered similar to the others two.

Having deﬁned the concepts of pair group, pair cluster and SPG, we can deﬁne the

crews formally.
Deﬁnition 2.4: [Crew] Let C ¼ S1; . . . ; Ss

f

(i) Gu ¼ Gv,

g be a set of SPG. It is a crew iﬀ "Su; Sv 2 C

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

9

(ii) hτi; τji \h τh; τki ¼ (cid:7), "1 (cid:6) i<j (cid:6) h<k : τi; τj time instants of the timeline of Su and

τh; τk time instants of the timeline of Sv, respectively.

A crew is characterized by (i) one pair group, (ii) the timelines of the SPGs of C (iii) the
ranges of values associated with the movement parameters, for each timeline. The union
of the timelines of the SPGs S1; . . . ; Sn

g results in the timeline of the crew.

f

Intuitively, Deﬁnition 2.4 states that a crew is a moving group composed of one
reference object and a set of participant objects, where the members (pairs) have
similarities in terms of movement parameters along a sequence of time instants. For
instance, in Figure 1(b), the pairs ðo2; o1Þ and ðo2; o3Þ have similar movement parameters
along the timeline hτ0, τ1; τ4, τ5; τ5 τ6i (azimuth distance in [22,45), distance ratio in [1,2))
and along the timeline hτ1; τ2; τ2; τ3; τ3; τ4i (azimuth distance in [0,22), distance ratio
in [0,1)).

To formulate the problem of discovery of crews, we consider some constraints to
guide the analysis toward the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant groups. The constraints are
user-deﬁned requirements expressed as input thresholds. In particular, we have (i) γ, the
maximum temporal gap (in terms of time instants) between two consecutive SPG; (ii) μ,
the minimum number of objects required to build a crew.

Now, we can formally state the problem:
Assume we are given:

trðo1Þ; . . . ; trðonÞ

f

g, maximum temporal gap γ and minimum number of objects μ.

Discover the crews compliant to Deﬁnition 2.4 and satisfying the input-thresholds γ

the set of moving objects O,

set of

trajectories

and μ.

3. The framework

The framework implements the computational solution for the problem formulated
above. It is structured in two main components. The ﬁrst component (Raw trajectory
data pre-processing in Figure 2) processes the raw trajectory data and uses a vector-
based representation in order to capture the interactions and dynamics of pairs of
objects. A vector describes the movement of a pair, in terms of the movement para-
meters F, on two consecutive time instants τi; τiþ1. We distinguish the movement
parameters in two diﬀerent categories. The second component of the framework
(Discovery of crews in Figure 2) performs a hierarchical clustering algorithm on the
vectors and discovers valid crews. The clustering algorithm outputs SPG, which are
combining together to discover valid crews.

3.1. Trajectory data preparation

The trajectory of a moving object in the real world is always a continuous line, but for
storage and analysis purposes, it is represented in a discrete form, which corresponds to
a sequence of ﬁxes. These may contain noise, outliers and gaps due to the instrumental
factors of the tracking devices (e.g. the precision of the device) and physical factors (e.g.
the existence of obstacles), which lead to an irregular timing of the trajectories and an
unfair analysis whether the ﬁxes are processed as recorded. To overcome this problem,
we propose a data preparation step, which includes techniques typically used to make
the trajectories more reliable (Dodge et al. 2009). In particular, we ﬁlter out outliers by

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 10

C. LOGLISCI

Figure 2. The proposed framework is structured in two main components. The ﬁrst component
performs projects the raw trajectory data into a feature space deﬁned with the parameters F. The
second component generates SPG and combines them to discover valid crews.

removing the positions whose inter-distance from the previous position is greater than a
predeﬁned experimentally set threshold. Then, the missing points (caused by the ﬁlter-
ing) are ﬁlled by means of a linear interpolation operation, which generates new ﬁxes at
the same rate of the sampling of the raw data. Finally, for each object, we generate
regular trajectories by transforming the original temporal axis in the time domain T. In
particular, this operation maps one equal-width time interval (of the original time axis)
to one time instant τi of T, to which we associate the weighted moving average of the
original ﬁxes. This way, the ﬁxes sampled at the beginning of the time interval will have
less weight, while those collocated at the end will have more weight.

We clarify that the construction of the time-domain T from the original time axis is
not ﬁnalized to deﬁne two temporal granularities, but to prepare trajectory data for one
level of temporal granularity. This may overlook crews that can be evident at higher
level of analysis, but the cross-granularity discovery is beyond this work.

3.2. Movement parameters for interactions and dynamics

To capture interactions and dynamics, we introduce new movement parameters, which,
more precisely, are deﬁned to characterize the reciprocal behavior of an object relative
to another object and changes of motion of interacting objects. Deﬁning new para-
meters becomes necessary why most existing movement parameters have two main
limitations: they represent the movement of an object regardless of the behavior of the
others and model the motion change of only individual objects (Dodge et al. 2008).
However, for this step, we use some existing primitive and derivative parameters. In this
work, we identify two categories of movement parameters: the ﬁrst category (Pairwise
Dynamics Parameters, PDP) is deﬁned to represent the variations of geospatial primitives
that describe the pair as a sole moving entity, while the second category (Interactions-
is deﬁned to represent the variations of physical
wise Dynamics Parameters,

IDP)

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

11

derivatives and geospatial primitives that describe the movement of an object relative to
another object. All the movement parameters F are computed in the time domain T,
except two parameters, which are deﬁned on original time axis. In the following sections
(3.2.1 and 3.2.2), we provide a detailed description.

3.2.1. Pairwise dynamics parameters

● Azimuth. This denotes the direction in which the pair ðor; osÞ is going over two
consecutive time instants hτi; τiþ1i. An example is reported in Figure 3(a). We
compute it as the angle measured clockwise between the line passing through
two middle points and north. The two middle points are associated with the two
time instants separately and located at half the distance between the ﬁxes of the
objects, respectively. The contribution of the parameter Azimuth is to ﬁnding pairs
of objects that move in similar directions and have similar changes of direction over
two time instants.

● Displacement. This denotes the distance between the ﬁxes of the pair ðor; osÞ
recorded in the two time instants hτi; τiþ1i. An example is reported in Figure 3(b).
We compute it as the Euclidean distance between the two middle points, which are
determined as in the case of the parameter azimuth. The contribution of the
parameter displacement is to identifying pairs of objects that keep similar distances
over two time instants. Another concept of displacement has been proposed by
Long and Nelson (2013a), but, equally to the ours, it can re-formulated in terms of
Euclidean distance.

● Position. This is a primitive parameter and denotes the position of the pair ðor; osÞ at
the end of the two time instants hτi; τiþ1i. An example is reported in Figure 3(c). It
has two components, latitude and longitude. We compute it as the middle point of
the two ﬁxes at the second time instant. The parameter position allows us to
identify pairs that move around a shared location over two time instants.

3.2.2.

Interaction-wise dynamics parameters

● Azimuth Distance. This denotes the diﬀerence between the directions in which the
two objects or and os move, respectively. We compute it as the distance between
the angles that correspond to the two azimuths. The azimuth of an object is
measured clockwise between the line passing through the two ﬁxes of the object
and north. For instance, in Figure 4(a), the azimuth of o1 and o2 is 315(cid:2) and 290,(cid:2)
respectively, whereas the angular distance is 25(cid:2). The parameter azimuth distance
complements the parameter azimuth, in that, it quantiﬁes how far the directions of
the two azimuths are. This parameter is used to group pairs whose changes of
direction are similar. A typical situation is when the pairs are moving from diﬀerent
directions and proceed in the same direction.

● Distance Ratio. This denotes the variation of the inter-distance between the two
objects or and os over two time instants hτi; τiþ1i. We compute it as the ratio
between two inter-distances, that is, the Euclidean distance between the two
ﬁxes at the second time instant τiþ1, divided by the Euclidean distance between

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 12

C. LOGLISCI

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3. The movement parameters of the category Pairwise Dynamics Parameters account for the
variation of the geospatial primitives describing the pair of objects as a sole moving entity ((a)
Azimuth, (b) Displacement, (c) Position).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4. The movement parameters of the category Interactions-wise Dynamics Parameters
account for the variation of the physical derivatives and geospatial primitives describing the move-
ment of an object relative to another object ((a) Azimuth Distance, (b) Distance Ratio, (c) Tortuosity
Ratio, (d) Speed Ratio).

the two ﬁxes at the ﬁrst time instant τi. The result is a positive real number, which
exceeds 1 when the inter-distance increases by a factor higher than 1. For instance,
in Figure 4(b), the ratio is 70=100. This parameter is used to group pairs that are
coming close (or moving away) by keeping similar distances. Moreover, it allows us
to model the cases in which one of the two objects moves away from (or comes
close to) the other one at a relatively high speed, which may be a reasonable
motivation for longer distances from a time instant to the next one. For instance,
when a pedestrian catches a vehicle to move away from another pedestrian. It
should be noted that this parameter provides a quantiﬁcation of the distance
between the objects when one changes direction (see azimuth distance).

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

13

● Tortuosity Ratio. This denotes how the tortuosity of the trajectory trðorÞ of an object
changes, compared to the tortuosity of another trajectory trðosÞ. An example is
reported in Figure 4(c). The tortuosity refers to the degree of windingness or
bending of the trajectory within a time interval (Laube et al. 2007). To compute
the tortuosity ratio, we use the pre-processed raw trajectories as returned by the
linear interpolation. In particular, given (i) Yτ1;o1 and Yτ1;o2 the tortuosity values of
two objects o1 and o2 computed on the ﬁxes included in the time interval
associated with τ1, and (ii) Yτ2;o1 and Yτ2;o2, the tortuosity values of the two objects
computed on the ﬁxes included in the time interval associated with τ2, the

tortuosity ratio is equal to

j
1þ Yτ
j
1þ Yτ

;o1 (cid:8)Yτ
;o1 (cid:8)Yτ

2

1

2

1

;o2
;o2

j
j

.

A tortuosity value is determined as the ratio between the sum of the distances of
consecutive ﬁxes of the trajectory included in the time interval and the length of
the path. It has normalized to the range [0,1], as proposed by Dutton (1999). The
range of tortuosity ratio is [0.5,2], thus values close to 0.5 indicate that the
tortuosities of the trajectories become identical in the second time interval, while
values close to 2 indicate that the tortuosities are completely diﬀerent in the
second time interval and eventually value 1 indicates that the tortuosities have
not been changed. The rationale behind this parameter is that of grouping pairs
based on the similar changes in terms of windingness of the trajectories. Clearly,
this does not mean that only the pairs with similar tortuosities may be members of
a crew, but also pairs with diﬀerent tortuosities but similar variations relative to two
time intervals.

● Speed Ratio. This denotes how the speed of an object or changes compared to the
speed of another object os. In particular, we account for the absolute variation of
the respective speeds. To compute it, we use the pre-processed raw trajectories as
returned by the linear interpolation, and ﬁrst determine the average speeds of the
two objects separately and then the ﬁnal ratio. An example is reported in Figure 4
(d). In particular, given (i) Vτ1;o1 and Vτ1;o2 the speed values of the two objects o1 and
o2 computed on the ﬁxes included in the time interval associated with τ1, and (ii)
Vτ2;o1 and Vτ2;o2 the speed values of the two objects computed on the ﬁxes included
in the time interval associated with τ2, the speed ratio is equal to
The average speed is calculated on consecutive ﬁxes and has normalized to the
range [0,1]. The range of the speed ratio is [0.5,2], thus values close to 0.5 indicate
that the objects; on the second time interval, travel with similar speeds, values
close to 2 indicate that the speeds diﬀer greatly as time goes by, while when the
speeds do not change the value of speed ratio is 1.
As a result of the ﬁrst component of the framework (Figure 2), we have vectors
built for all the sequences of consecutive time instants hτi; τiþ1i of the time domain
T. A vector is the result of the transformation of the ﬁxes of two objects ðor; osÞ
sampled at two consecutive time instants hτi; τiþ1i;
it has Fj j dimensions and
contains the values Fljhτi;τiþ1iðtrðorÞ; trðosÞÞ of each movement parameter Fl.

;o1 (cid:8)Vτ
;o1 (cid:8)Vτ

j
1þ Vτ
j
1þ Vτ

;o2
;o2

j
j

.

1

2

2

1

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 14

C. LOGLISCI

3.3. Discovery of crews

The second component of the framework is incharge of discovering crews from the
vectors previously extracted. It should be noted that the vectors depict the smallest
interactions and shortest changes. Indeed, they capture the interactions of the smallest
set of objects, that is, a pair of objects, over the shortest time interval, that is, two
consecutive time instants. This gives us some hints on how designing the method for
the second component. Starting from the consideration that a crew involves more than
two objects and may cover more than two time instants, the key idea is to consider the
vectors as building blocks and build valid crews by combining the vectors properly. To do
this, the second component ﬁrst ﬁnds out pair clusters (PCs), then generates SPGs and
ﬁnally builds the crews from SPGs.

The algorithmic choice of combining together vectors to generate SPGs reminds the
multi-scale analysis, whose purpose is recognizing groups of diﬀerent sizes that have the
same collective movements (e.g. Wood and Galton (2009)). However, compared to the
current work, there is a substantial diﬀerence: according to Deﬁnition 2.4, the crews
have well-distinct behaviors and cannot share the same collective movement, which
instead is permitted in the multi-scale analysis.

3.4. Clustering pairs of moving objects

To ﬁnd out PCs, we propose a hierarchical clustering algorithm that groups vectors
based on the similarity of the parameters F. It does not rely on costly functions of
distance, as instead many clustering algorithms do, and decides the membership of an
element (pair) to a cluster by means of a test performed on the values of the parameters
F, which requires less computation.

The algorithm follows the principle of the conventional decision trees, traditionally
used for predictive tasks (Frank et al. 1998, Loglisci and Malerba 2017), and induces a
tree-like structure from the vectors returned by the ﬁrst component. The nodes of the
tree are associated to subsets of vectors: the vectors contained in the root are similar
with respect to one movement parameter, while the vectors contained in the leaves are
similar with respect to all the parameters. In particular, an internal node of the tree is
characterized by (i) a movement parameter Fl (Section 3.2), (ii) a pair cluster L (Deﬁnition
2.2), (iii) a threshold value c (whose range is that of the parameter Fl), and it is connected
to other nodes by means of two-way branches. A branch goes from a ‘starting node’ to
an ‘ending node’ and encodes the clustering function by testing the threshold value c
against the values of the parameter Fl of the vectors contained in the starting node.
More precisely, a branch guides a subset of the pairs of the PC of the starting node
toward the ending node, that is, the set of the vectors that satisfy the test. Thus, the
vectors of an ending node represent the pair of objects ðor; osÞ, for which the indicator
function 1ð(cid:4); (cid:4)Þ is true for the parameter Fl. The parameter Fl we assign to a node is
selected with a criteria based on the (dis)similarity of the vectors reaching the node.
More precisely, we select the parameter Fl that maximizes the reduction between the
dissimilarity computed on the vectors of the node and dissimilarity2 of two subsets. This
operation uses the formula

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

15

DissReduction ¼ σ2ðLÞFl

(cid:8)

σ2ðleftÞFl

(cid:9) left
j

j þ σ2ðrightÞFl

(cid:9) right

j

j

;

Lj j

where σ2ðLÞFl
parameter Fl for the vectors of L (left; right), which is deﬁned as follows:

; σ2ðrightÞFl

(σ2ðleftÞFl

) is the dissimilarity computed on the values of the

(1)

(2)

σ2ðLÞ ¼

pi (cid:9) ðvi (cid:8) (cid:3)vÞ2;

Xn

i¼1

where, viði ¼ 1 . . . nÞ are the values of the parameter Fl in the set L, pi is the probability
of observing vi in L and (cid:3)v is the mean of the values v1; . . . ; vn.

Procedurally, the tree is built by means of an algorithm that recursively splits the
initial set of the vectors into subsets of decreasing size. The algorithm starts from the
root (which contains the complete set of the vectors) and, moving downwards, creates
new (ending) nodes, to which assigns subsets of the vectors of the previously created
(starting) node. The ending nodes of an execution of the algorithm become the starting
nodes of next execution. More precisely, after having appended new nodes to the tree,
the algorithm examines one node at a time. It builds two-by-two subsets of vectors for
each movement parameter Fl, but takes only those that maximize the dissimilarity
reduction DissReduction (Equation 1). The selected subsets are identiﬁed by a threshold
value, which splits the values of the movement parameter Fl into two ranges. Thus, one
subset covers one range and comprises the vectors whose values of the parameter fall in
that range (Deﬁnitions 2.2 and 2.3). The recursive procedure terminates when the initial
dissimilarity (computed on the root) has been been reduced for all the parameters by a
factor ﬁxed by the user (required reduction 2 ½0; 1(cid:5)) or when all the leaves have a number
of pairs of objects smaller than μ2. In the latter case, the tree might not have all the
movement parameters. An illustration of the algorithm of tree induction is reported as
Appendix.

3.5. Building crews from SPGs

To discover crews with similar interactions and similar dynamics, we should generate
SPGs with the highest number of similar movement parameters. The organization of the
tree built above suggests to considering the PGs collocated at the leaves. Indeed, by the
eﬀect of the dissimilarity reduction (Equation 1), the vectors contained in the leaves
have the highest number of similar movement parameters, compared to the vectors of
the internal nodes. To generate SPGs, we need two types of information (Deﬁnition 2.3);
one has a spatial connotation and is related to the ranges of values [zllower ,zlupper ], the other
one has temporal connotation and is related to the timeline (cid:2). The spatial information
can be obtained from the tree; indeed, the path from the root to a leaf directly provides
the list of the movement parameters and relative ranges of values. To determine the
timelines, we have to perform a further step of analysis on the pairs contained in the
leaves. More precisely, for each leaf, we ﬁrst gather the vectors by pair group (that is,
pairs having an object in common) and then generate the timeline of each pair of
objects ðor; osÞ by using their time instants hτi; τiþ1i. Finally, we generate the timeline
with the time instants which are common to all the pairs. To do this, we adapt the

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 16

C. LOGLISCI

technique of computation of intersections among sets proposed in Layer et al. (2013),
which returns the intervals common to sequences of disjointed time intervals. Our
adaptation ﬁrst matches a primary timeline against remaining timelines and then
evaluates the intersection between the time instants of the primary timeline and time
instants of the other timelines by means of two binary search operations. These opera-
tions work on two sorted lists of time instants, one is composed of the time instants τi,
the other is composed of the time instants τiþ1. The intersecting time instants are thus
sorted by chronological order and combined to form the candidates. Finally, we select
the timeline that satisﬁes a user-preference criterion. The preference criterion selects the
ﬁnal timeline and consequently the pair group of the SPG. There are two alternative
preference criteria, one criterion, denoted as maxDuration, chooses the pair group
having the longest timeline, while the second criterion, denoted as maxObjects, chooses
the pair group with more objects. The criterion choosen holds also for the selection of
the primary timeline used when searching intersections. Indeed, the option maxDuration
picks the longest timeline present in the pair groups, while the option maxObjects picks
the shortest timeline. Finally, we analyze all the SPGs built from the leaves, but consider
only those that satisfy the threshold of the minimum number of objects μ.

An illustration is reported in Figure 5, where there are the timelines of the pairs
ðo5; o6Þ, ðo5; o7Þ and ðo5; o8Þ of a leaf. We can extract two candidates, one is obtained
from the intersection of the time instants of the pairs ðo5; o6Þ and ðo5; o7Þ and covers the
timeline hτ3; τ4; τ6; τ7i, the other one is obtained from the time instants of the pairs
ðo5; o6Þ, ðo5; o7Þ and ðo5; o8Þ and covers the timeline hτ3; τ4i. Thus, by applying the
criterion maxDuration to this example, we obtain the timeline at the top of Figure 5.

The construction of the crews is completed by an algorithm that ﬁrst selects the SPGs
with same reference object or and same participant objects or and then joins their
timelines in chronological order. Procedurally, the algorithm considers one reference
object or at a time and works on the timelines in which or is present. It builds one crew
at a time by extending incrementally its timeline. A crew is not built from scratch, but it
is obtained by extending the timelines of the crews, which have been previously built,

Figure 5. The timelines of candidate SPGs are generated from the time instants of the vectors on the
leaves. The resulting timeline is selected with an user preference criterion.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

17

with other admissible time instants. This strategy guarantees the construction of max-
imal crews, so there are no crews contained in each other. In the following, we ﬁrst
describe how algorithm operates when builds the crews with same reference object or
and then provide an explanatory example.

The algorithm starts with the early time instants of the reference object or and
proceeds by selecting the time instants that have not been considered before.
It
appends newly selected time instants to the timeline of the current crew. Once the
time instants have been used, they are marked so that we will not have duplicated
crews. The current crew is extended only if two conditions are satisﬁed, (i) the new time
instants are distant from those already appended at most γ, and (ii) the new SPG
contains the same participants. When there are no time instants for the current crew,
the timeline is completed. Then, the algorithm continues with the time instants that
have not been considered before and with those that have been considered before but
that have not been marked yet. Thus, the algorithm seeks other crews by evaluating
(sub)timelines of previously built crews. More precisely, it removes the time instants in
the same order with which they have been inserted and performs new joins with other
admissible time instants. The construction of the crews having or as the reference stops
when all the time instants have been marked and there are no time instants that can be
used for new crews. The algorithm terminates when all the reference objects have been
scanned. Finally, the crews that have less than μ objects are ﬁltered out.

An illustration is reported in Figure 6 with the timelines of three SPGs (hA; D; Ii,
hB; C; Ei, and hG; H; Fi2). Suppose or=o2, γ=3. The algorithm starts with the early time
instants, that is, A and evaluates the closer time instants, that is G, which cannot be used
because there are not the same participants. Thus, the algorithm evaluates B and joins it
with the current crew hAi because B has the same participants and is distant from A less
than γ. For the same reason, also C, D and E are joined, so the algorithm builds the crew
hA; B; C; D; Ei and marks A,B,C,D and E. The time instants F are not considered because
there are not participants in common, so the algorithm restarts by removing E from the
crew hA; B; C; D; Ei and seeking new joins with other admissible time instants. It picks I,
which is not marked, and uses it to build the crew hA; B; C; D; Ii, then marks I. Next, the
algorithm removes I and recovers the crew hA; B; C; Di, which cannot be further extended

Figure 6. The crews are built by joining SPGs under the constraints imposed by the maximum
temporal gap γ and equality of the participants.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 18

C. LOGLISCI

because there are no admissible time instants after D. The same analysis is done also
with hA; B; Ci, hA; Bi and hAi. After that, the procedure creates a crew with G, which
cannot be further extended because its distance from H exceeds γ.

The algorithm accounts also for the cases in which two SPGs have exactly not the
same pairs of objects, but they have pairs in common. For instance, given the sets
ðo5; o6Þ; ðo5; o7Þ
pairs
f
ðo5; o6Þ; ðo5; o7Þ
f

g
g, which are present in both sets.

ðo5; o6Þ; ðo5; o7Þ; ðo5; o8Þ

g, we may

and

use

the

f

4. Experiments

The proposed framework has been implemented in Java and applied to trajectory data
of real-world moving objects. In particular, we considered the data of two diﬀerent kinds
of moving objects: humans moving in the urban space and animals observed in the
natural environment of a forest. The trajectories of these two types of objects have
evident diﬀerences. Humans move in spaces constrained by physical restrictions due to
buildings and road networks, have diﬀerent travel modes and may move together or
travel/walk alone. The trajectories can refer to daily life routines (such as, going at home,
going at work), paths which are periodically traveled (going at soccer stadium on
weekends) or exceptional routes (alternative paths in case of emergency situations).
On the contrary, wild animals move in a space that is characterized by the morphology
of the territory; their movements are often related to changes of natural phenomena
and the ecosystem and, therefore, have an intrinsic seasonal component. Animal move-
ments do not raise privacy concerns, which are instead frequent when analyzing human
trajectories.

In the scenario of human mobility, there is a category of tasks in which we need to
determine social ties between individuals. This type of information can be used, for
instance, in social media to suggest potential friendships on the basis of similar trajec-
tories with other social proﬁles, or in transportation, recommend trajectories that friends
may know. For the experiments, we used the Geolife dataset (Zheng et al. 2009) which
collects the trajectories of outdoor movements of humans in a period of over three years
(from April 2007 to August 2012). These trajectories were recorded by diﬀerent GPS
loggers and GPS phones, and are sampled mostly every 1–5 s. The application of our
framework to the Geolife dataset aims at (i) discovering3 social ties between individuals
who do not know each other and (ii) following social ties when the individuals do not
stay in the same location.

In the scenario of animal movements, often ecologists are interested in under-
standing how individuals or groups behave within their environment. The normal
activities, such as grazing, migration and mating, are related to factors dependent of
the environment (e.g. habitat preferences, water sources and vegetation availability)
and factors dependent of the relationships within or between the species. These
activities could not take place if there are no interactions. For the experiments, we
used the Starkey dataset (Rapp 2006), which contains the radio-telemetry locations,
tracked in north-eastern Oregon, of three species of animals (elks, deer, cattle)
monitored over the period May 1993–August 1996. The sample rate of recording
ranges from 20 min to 2 h. In Starkey, our contribution is addressed to two categories
of use cases. First, the understanding of the possible factors that may cause unnatural

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

19

Table 3. Summary of the characteristics of the trajectory datasets.

Oj
j
182
128

Tj j
17,656,921
166,826

Geolifea
Starkeyb
ahttps://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=52367
bwww.fs.fed.us/pnw/starkey/data/tables

Avg ﬁxes per object
166,633
1304

Types of objects

Pedestrians
Wild animals

behavior exhibited both by individuals and groups, for instance, elks move away
because of hunting, herds fast graze because of human presence. Second, the
characterization of several activities (e.g. walking, grazing) through diﬀerent conﬁg-
urations of movement parameters.

The characteristics of the datasets are summarized in Table 3.

4.1. Experimental setup

The experiments have been performed along to several perspectives. We used several
variants of the framework distinguished by user preference criterion (maxDuration,
maxObjects). We tested the inﬂuence of the input thresholds (μ and γ) on the
resulting crews and time consumption. To estimate the quality of the crews with an
objective evaluation, we deﬁned two quantitative measures by following the principle
of some measures of internal clustering validation (e.g. Modiﬁed Hubert statistic
(Hubert and Arabie 1985) and Davies-Bouldin index (Davies and Bouldin 1979)).
These measures give us an indication of how speciﬁc and distinct the movement
behavior modeled by a crew is, so the higher the measure the better the quality. In
particular, the ﬁrst measure (QM) denotes the distance between two crews in terms of
the spatio-temporal information associated with the movement parameters, regard-
less of the pair groups involved, while the second measure QP specializes QM by
considering also the pair groups.

In the following, we report the formulation of the two measures:

QM ¼

(cid:4)
(cid:4)

1
Γ0 (cid:10)j

(cid:4)
(cid:4)

jΓ00

X

X

τi2Γ0

τj2Γ0 0

ΘT ðτi; τjÞ þ ΘSðτi; τjÞ
2

;

where, Γ0 and Γ00 are the timelines of the two crews, Γ0j
the time instants of the two timelines, respectively.

(cid:4)
(cid:4)

(cid:4)
(cid:4) refer to the number of

j and Γ00

The term ΘT ðτi; τjÞ accounts for the dissimilarity of the timelines and is computed as
the distance between the time instants hτi; τhi and the time instants hτj; τki as follows:

(

ΘT ðτi; τjÞ ¼

0
maxðτh;τkÞ(cid:8)minðτi;τjÞ
maxðT Þ(cid:8)minðT Þ

if hτi; τhi \ hτj; τki(cid:1)(cid:7)
otherwise:

Intuitively, the closer the time instants, the smaller the dissimilarity, the worse the
quality.

The term ΘSðτi; τjÞ instead denotes the dissimilarity of the movement behaviors of the
two crews, and more precisely, accounts for the distance between the ranges of values
[zllower ,zlupper ] of the movement parameters. To compute this, we resort to dissimilarity

(3)

(4)

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 20

C. LOGLISCI

functions for interval-valued data deﬁned in Symbolic Data Analysis3 (Diday and
Esposito 2003):

P

δð½zllower

Fl2F

ΘSðτi; τjÞ ¼

; zlupper (cid:5)jτi
Fj
j

; ½zllower

; zlupper (cid:5)jτj Þ

;

; zlupper (cid:5)jτj

; zlupper (cid:5)jτi

and ½zllower

are the ranges of the parameter Fl

in the time
where ½zllower
instants hτi; τhi and hτj; τki. The dissimilarity function δð(cid:4); (cid:4)Þ is in its turn the combination
of three measures, δπð(cid:4); (cid:4)Þ, δsð(cid:4); (cid:4)Þ, δcð(cid:4); (cid:4)Þ. In particular, δπ indicates the relative position
of the two ranges in their entire interval of values, δs indicates the relative sizes of one
range with respect to the other without considering the common sub-ranges (intersec-
tions) and δc is a measure of the non-common sub-ranges. Intuitively, when there is high
similarity between the ranges of the parameters, the value of ΘSðτi; τjÞ is small and
consequently the quality is small.

The formulation of the second measure (QP) is reported in the following:

with

P

P

p2G0

q2G0 0 ΘGðp; qÞ
(cid:4)
(cid:4)

;

G0 (cid:10)j

jG00

(cid:4)
(cid:4)

QP ¼

ΘGðp; qÞ ¼

(cid:5)

1 if p (cid:1) q
QM if p ¼ q

:

(5)

(6)

(7)

where, G0 and G00 are the pair groups of the two crews. Intuitively, the quality is higher
when the pair groups and movements associated with a crew are well separated from
those of other crews. Both quality measures, QM and QP range in [0,1].

4.2. Comparative experiments

We performed comparative experiments between the proposed framework and two
algorithms, namely swarm and DISCRETIZATION. The ﬁrst competitor is the algorithm
proposed in Li et al. (2010) and discovers4 dense groups of objects (swarms) character-
ized by temporal discontinuity, which is also a characteristic of the crews. The second
competitor is a baseline and diﬀers from the proposed framework in the algorithm of
In particular, the choice of the movement parameter to
construction of the tree.
associate with an internal node is not based on the dissimilarity reduction of the vectors
of the previously created node, but it is determined a-priori on the basis of the standard
deviation of the movement parameters computed on the complete set of vectors
(Loglisci et al. 2014). More precisely, the movement parameters are arranged from the
root downward to the leaves by decreasing standard deviation. The respective nodes are
connected by means of n-way branches. A branch is associated with one of n bins
obtained by applying an equal-width discretization technique to the movement para-
meter Fl, associated with the node. We performed several trials and identiﬁed the best
tradeoﬀ between the size of the internal nodes and minimum number of the objects in
the leaves with a discretization to ﬁve bins, that is, with ﬁve-way branches. The trees of
DISCRETIZATION are balanced (contrarily to those built by our framework) and have a
depth equal to the number of the movement parameters plus one (leaves), that is, Fj j+1.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

21

The reason behind the use of DISCRETIZATION is to compare our framework with a
solution which adopts the same feature space (F), but implements a diﬀerent notion of
similarity of the movement parameters. This aﬀects the construction of the crews and
thus the quality.

4.3. Results and discussion

We now present and discuss the results on the number of valid crews (#crews), running
times (times) and quality measures that were obtained by manually tuning one of the
two input thresholds (μ and γ) at a time and leaving the other one ﬁxed. For both
datasets, we ﬁx the value of required_reduction to 0.2 (Section 3.4) and the threshold
used for the ﬁltering technique (Section 3.1) to three times the standard deviation of the
distances between consecutive ﬁxes, as suggested by Dodge et al. (2009). The width of
the time interval (Section 3.1) is 30 min for Geolife and 45 min for Starkey.

We organize the discussion in four perspectives: plots of the statistics, visualization of
interpretation of some crews of the two

the distribution of the crews over space,
datasets and contribution of speciﬁc movement parameters in discovering crews.

Inﬂuence of the input thresholds

4.3.1.
Figure 7 illustrates the number of crews discovered at diﬀerent values of μ and γ. More
precisely, the results are averages computed on the numbers of crews generated by
running the framework with maxObjects and maxDuration. In Figure 7(a), we see that
when the minimum number of the objects required to form the groups is higher, the
number of crews is relatively smaller. This is expected because at high values of μ, we
should seek a higher number of participants with the same movements, which is more
diﬃcult to obtain compared to few participants (e.g. μ=3). Contrary to μ, the threshold γ
weakly inﬂuences #crews (Figure 7(b)) because it has no immediate impact on the
number of SPGs, but it has inﬂuence on the length of the timeline. Indeed, when γ is
large, we have few crews but with longer duration.

Figure 8 illustrates the time consumption required at diﬀerent values of μ and γ,
respectively. More precisely, the results are averages computed on the running times
obtained by running the framework with maxObjects and maxDuration. We see that high
values of μ lead to a lower time consumption. The reason behind this is two-fold: (i) the
algorithm of tree induction requires less running time (it terminates with larger leaves),
and (ii) the algorithm for the discovery of the crews works on a smaller set of SPGs. The
low number of SPGs, generated when increasing the threshold γ, explains the decreas-
ing tendency of Figure 8(b).

Figure 9 illustrates the quality of the crews at diﬀerent values of μ and γ. The results
are averages computed on the values (ranging in [0,1]) obtained by running the frame-
work with maxObjects and maxDuration. We see that the quality generally decreases at
high values of μ. This can be attributed to the increase of the number of objects that
SPGs have in common, which causes the decrease of the dissimilarity of the movement
parameters of the crews. Trivially, the highest quality is reached when there is only one
crew (Figure 9(a), Starkey). Another observation can be drawn on the eﬀect of the
threshold μ on the number of crews and on the quality. We see that the greater the
set of discovered crews, the higher the quality. Although this may seem contradictory,

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 22

C. LOGLISCI

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. (a) Number of discovered crews at diﬀerent values of the minimum required number of
objects μ, while γ is ﬁxed to 2. (b) Number of discovered crews at diﬀerent values of the maximum
temporal gap γ, while μ is ﬁxed to 3. The results are averages computed on the values obtained by
running the framework with maxObjects and maxDuration.

(a)

(b)

Figure 8. (a) Time consumption at diﬀerent values of the minimum required number of objects μ,
while γ is ﬁxed to 2. (b) Time consumption at diﬀerent values of the maximum temporal gap γ, while
μ is ﬁxed to 3. The results are averages computed on the values by running the framework with
maxObjects and maxDuration.

we should note that at low values of μ, the search space is greater; therefore, we can
nimbly ﬁnd out crews with very diﬀerent movements (high quality), while, at high values
of μ, the (few) resulting crews appear to be located in a limited subspace of search,
where the movements may be very similar (low quality).

On the contrary, when increasing the threshold γ (Figure 9(b)), the quality remains
substantially unaltered because the smaller number of the crews counterbalances the
higher duration, in the sense that, at high values of γ, there is a small set of crews
characterized by relatively high duration. Consequently, the dissimilarity of the move-
ments of the SPGs remains unchanged, also because γ has no immediate impact on the
SPGs.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

23

(a)

(b)

Figure 9. (a) Quality measures QM and QG computed on the crews discovered at diﬀerent values of
the minimum required number of objects μ, while γ is ﬁxed to 2. (b) Quality measures QM and QG
computed on the crews discovered at diﬀerent values of the maximum temporal gap γ, while μ is
ﬁxed to 3. The results are averages computed on the values by running the framework with
maxObjects and maxDuration.

Figure 10 gives a visual and geographic perspective of the crews at two higher values of
the thresholds used in the experiments, that is, μ=5,6 and γ=4,5. The map in Figure 10(a)
reports the localization of the areas of Geolife that contain at least 10 crews. The map in
Figure 10(b) reports the localization of the areas of Starkey with at least ﬁve crews. As to
Geolife, there are three main areas for μ (red circles) and ﬁve main areas for γ (blue polygons).
For Starkey, the distribution of the crews, when we operate on μ, is concentrated in three
areas, while there are four areas of crews when tuning γ. As we see, the crews discovered at
diﬀerent values of μ are concentrated in a subset of the areas of the crews discovered at
diﬀerent values of γ. This indicates that the crews with more objects are concentrated in the
same areas, while the crews with less objects preserve the similarity for a longer.

4.3.2. Comparisons
We now discuss the results of the number of discovered groups and quality values
obtained from the comparison with DISCRETIZATION and swarm. For the competitor
DISCRETIZATION, as in our framework, there are two variants deﬁned on the criterion of
preference maxDuration and maxObjects. Thus, the results we show here are the
averages obtained from the two settings. The experiments of swarm were performed
by deﬁning the time-domain with two alternative widths of the time intervals, 60 min
(swarm 60) and 150 min (swarm 150).

Figure 11 reports the counts of the discovered groups. As expected, the increase of
the minimum required number of objects (μ) is the strong determinant in the reduction
of the number of groups discovered by the three algorithms. Contrarily, the value of γ
inﬂuences the results of our framework and DISCRETIZATION, but it has no eﬀect on
swarm. This is why swarm has no threshold corresponding to γ to ﬁlter the groups with
respect to the temporal discontinuities.

Figure 12 shows that the quality of the crews determined by our framework is
better in general, compared to that of DISCRETIZATION. This is due to the diﬀerent
strategy of tree induction. Indeed, in our framework, the creation of the nodes follows
the principle of maximization of the similarity of the properties of the current set of

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 24

C. LOGLISCI

(a)

(b)

Figure 10. (a) Distribution of the crews of Geolife over the Bejing area (China) (b) Distribution of the
crews of Starkey over the Starkey Forest area (Oregon, US). The red circles denote the distribution of
the crews obtained when tuning threshold μ. The blue polygons denote the distribution of the crews
obtained when tuning threshold γ.

objects, which leads to assign smaller sets of vectors to the nodes. This generally
makes the ‘intra-crews’ similarity higher and the ‘inter-crews’ similarity lower.
Contrarily, the algorithm DISCRETIZATION follows the principle of minimization of
the dissimilarity over the complete set of objects and thus does not account for the
local similarities, with the result of making the aim of maximization of the similarity
arduous.

As to swarm, we cannot use neither QM nor QG to estimate the quality because they
are based on the similarity of the movement parameters and similarity of the timelines,
while swarms rely on the spatial proximity, do not use similarity notions and do not
consider movement parameters to describe the groups.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

25

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 11. Comparisons between the proposed framework and the competitors DISCRETIZATION
and swarm on the number of groups when tuning μ and γ ((a) and (c) Geolife with μ and γ,
respectively, (b) and (d) Starkey with μ and γ, respectively).

Interpretation of the crews

4.3.3.
In this section we report the crews with larger dissimilarity, which is computed as the
average of the values of the terms ΘT and ΘG between the crews discovered from the
two datasets, respectively. We also explain the information the crews depict. For each
crew, the movement parameters and timeline are reported.

The following has been discovered from Geolife with μ=3, γ=2, width of time inter-

val = 60 mins, maxDuration. It involves three objects (two pairs).

C1:2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 05 : 00 : 00; 2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 06 : 00 : 00hazimuth distance 2 ½0(cid:2); 47(cid:2)Þ, azimuth 2 ½187:5(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5),

displacement 2 ½129; þ1Þ,
distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:5Þi2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 06 : 00 : 00; 2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 07 : 00 : 00hazimuth distance 2 ½0; 47(cid:2)Þ,
azimuth 2 ½187:5(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5), distance ratio 2 ½0; 1(cid:5), displacement 2 ½0; 85Þ, tortuosity ratio 2 ½0:5; 0:9Þ,
azimuth distance 2 ½0; 13(cid:2)Þ,
speed ratio 2 ½1:2; 1:6Þi2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 07 : 00 : 00; 2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 08 : 00 : 00hazimuth distance 2 ½0; 47(cid:2)Þ,
azimuth 2 ½0; 187:5(cid:2)Þ, speed ratio 2 ½0:5; 1:9Þ, distance ratio 2 ½1; þ1Þi

The crew C1 covers three hours and for each hour (τi; τiþ1) the movement
parameters change. For instance, for the time instants h2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 05 : 00 : 00,
2009 (cid:8) 07 (cid:8) 05 06 : 00 : 00i,
close
(distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:5Þ),
47

of
distance

two
angular

objects
is

come

pairs

their

than

less

the

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 26

C. LOGLISCI

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 12. Comparisons between our framework and the competitor DISCRETIZATION on the quality
measures when tuning μ and γ (a) and (c) Geolife with μ and γ, respectively, (b) and (d) Starkey with
μ and γ, respectively).

(azimuth distance 2 ½0; 47(cid:2)Þ), they travel at least 129 m (displacement 2 ½129; þ1Þ)
and move westwards (azimuth 2 ½187:5(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5)).

The following crew has been discovered from Geolife at μ=5, γ=2, width of time

interval = 60 mins, maxObjects. It involves ﬁve objects (four pairs).

C2:2009 (cid:8) 04 (cid:8) 13 13 : 00 : 00; 2009 (cid:8) 04 (cid:8) 13 14 : 00 : 00hazimuth distance 2 ½0(cid:2); 80(cid:2)Þ, azimuth 2 ½0(cid:2); 190(cid:2)(cid:5),

displacement 2 ½129; þ1Þ, distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:5Þ, tortuosity ratio 2 ½0:5; 0:9Þ,
speed ratio 2 ½1:1; 2:5(cid:5)i2009 (cid:8) 04 (cid:8) 13 14 : 00 : 00; 2009 (cid:8) 04 (cid:8) 13 15 : 00 : 00hazimuth distance 2 ½0; 80(cid:2)Þ,
azimuth 2 ð190(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5), distance ratio 2 ½1; 1:5Þ, displacement 2 ½0; 134Þ, speed ratio 2 ½0:5; 1:1Þ,
tortuosity ratio 2 ½0:5; 0:9Þi

Here, the pairs maintain their angular distance under 80(cid:2) (azimuth distance 2 ½0; 80(cid:2)),
they come close (distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:5Þ), move eastwards (azimuth 2 ½0(cid:2); 190(cid:2)(cid:5)), travel
more than 190 m, with increasing speed, on paths with almost identical tortuosity. The
movement is diﬀerent in the second part of the timeline. They move westwards
(azimuth 2 ð190(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5)), move away (distance ratio 2 ½1; 1:5Þ), travel less than 134 m,
(speed ratio 2 ½0:5; 1:1Þ) and with similar
speeds
at
the
paths (tortuosity ratio 2 ½0:5; 0:9Þ).

tortuosity of

similar

The crews we report below have been discovered on Starkey. The following crew has
been discovered at μ=3, γ=2, width of time interval = 120 mins, maxInterval. It involves
two pairs of elks.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

27

C3:1993 (cid:8) 06 (cid:8) 16 04 : 00 : 00; 1993 (cid:8) 06 (cid:8) 16 06 : 00 : 00hazimuth distance 2 ½180(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5),

azimuth 2 ½177(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5), distance ratio 2 ½0:5; 1Þ, displacement 2 ½3:5; þ1Þi 1993 (cid:8) 06 (cid:8) 16 06 : 00 : 00; 1993 (cid:8)
06 (cid:8) 16 07 : 00 : 00 hazimuth distance 2 ½0(cid:2); 180(cid:2)Þ, azimuth 2 ½0(cid:2); 177(cid:2)Þ, distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:5Þ,
displacement 2 ½6:1; þ1Þi

The crew C3 has a timeline of four hours. In the ﬁrst part, the pairs are separated by a
relatively large distance (azimuth distance 2 ½180(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5)), but they tend to come close
(distance ratio 2 ½0:5; 1Þ), proceed north-westwards (azimuth 2 ½177(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5)) and travel
at least 3.5 km (displacement 2 ½3:5; þ1Þ). In the second part, we see that they are
separated by an angular distance of at most 180(cid:2) (azimuth distance 2 ½0(cid:2); 180(cid:2)Þ), their
close
come
direction
(distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:5Þ) and travel at least 6.1 km (displacement 2 ½6:1; þ1Þ).

(azimuth 2 ½177(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5)),

unaltered

remains

they

still

The following crew has been discovered on Starkey at μ = 3, γ = 4, width of time

interval = 60 mins, maxInterval. It involves four pairs of deer.

C4: 1993 (cid:8) 05 (cid:8) 10 01 : 00 : 00; 1993 (cid:8) 05 (cid:8) 10 02 : 00 : 00 hazimuth distance 2 ½180(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5),

azimuth 2 ½141(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5), displacement 2 ð(cid:8)1; 3:7Þ, speed ratio 2 ½1:1; 2:5(cid:5), distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:8Þi 1993 (cid:8) 05 (cid:8)
10 05 : 00 : 00; 1993 (cid:8) 05 (cid:8) 10 06 : 00 : 00 hazimuth distance 2 ½180(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5), azimuth 2 ½141(cid:2); 359(cid:2)(cid:5),
displacement 2 ½3:7; þ1Þ, distance ratio 2 ð0; 0:2Þ, speed ratio 2 ½0:5; 1:4(cid:5)i

The crew C4 covers two hours separated by a temporal gap of three time instants
(three hours). We see the pairs travel less than 3.7 km in the ﬁrst part, while in the
second part
inter-distance decreases (from
distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:8Þ to distance ratio 2 ½0; 0:2Þ). The speeds tend to be similar (from
speed ratio 2 ½1:1; 2:5(cid:5) to speed ratio 2 ½0:5; 1:4(cid:5)).

they do more than 3.7 km. Their

Insights from crews

4.3.4.
We examine the crews visualized in the maps of Figure 10 to draw some qualitative
consideration. In particular, our analysis focuses on the identiﬁcation of the movement
parameters that better contribute to the discovery of high-quality crews, where the
desiderata is large similarity among the pairs of the same crew and little similarity
among pairs of diﬀerent crews. Since the number of ranges produced for a parameter
is an indication of the dissimilarity of the values (Section 3.4), the movement parameters
relevant for the determination of high-quality crews are those with a few ranges. The
results of our analysis are illustrated in Table 4, which speciﬁcally reports the parameters
with the smallest and largest number of ranges used in the crews. We see that the

Table 4. The movement parameters used in the discovery of crews.

Geolife

Starkey (elks)

Starkey (deer)

Starkey (cattle)

+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–

μ

Distance ratio
Displacement
Displacement
Speed ratio
Azimuth distance
Tortuosity ratio
Azimuth
Speed ratio

γ

Speed ratio
Azimuth distance
Displacement
Tortuosity ratio
Azimuth distance
Tortuosity ratio
Azimuth
Speed ratio

The parameters which appear in the crews with the smallest number of ranges (more relevant parameters) are denoted
with ‘+’, while those which appear with the highest number of ranges (less relevant parameters) are denoted as ‘–’.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 28

C. LOGLISCI

parameters distance ratio and speed ratio are determinant for the crews discovered from
Geolife. This means that the movements have large similarity in terms of inter-distance
and relative speed, which is a behavior typical of individuals who know each other. On
the contrary, the parameters determinant for the crews discovered from Starkey are
generally of the category pairwise dynamics. In particular, we see large similarity on
displacement and azimuth for elks and cattle, respectively. This indicates that the elks
travel by regular displacements and cattle move at the same direction, which are typical
features of migrating animals. We can also note that, for all the three types of animals,
the less relevant parameters are of the category interaction-wise dynamics and, speci-
ﬁcally, are speed ratio and tortuosity ratio. This denotes a large irregularity of speed ratio
and tortuosity ratio, which is due probably to the presence of threats (e.g. hunting), in
the case of cattle, and the presence of paths within the forest, in the case of elk and
deer. The ﬁnal consideration is deserved to the input thresholds μ and γ. In Starkey, the
movement parameters with large similarity remain the same regardless of the threshold
we use.

5. Conclusions

In this paper, we have investigated the problem of mining groups of moving objects by
accounting for interactions between the objects and dynamics of the movements.
Interactions are extracted by capturing relationships between the trajectories.
Dynamics is extracted by capturing the time-changing nature of the trajectories. These
are two new sources of information that a few works have exploited, although with the
limitations that we discussed. Most part of the existing algorithms instead focuses on
spatial proximity and path similarity, which lead to mining groups of objects that move
together or stay close from each other. The current work opens to a new type of
collective movement, which is based on similar interactions and similar dynamics and
which does not require spatial constraints on the objects.

The proposed framework addresses some critical points of the problem at the hand.
First, we have deﬁned new movement parameters in order extract interactions and
dynamics from raw trajectory. The movement parameters model pair-wise interactions
and changes of physical properties of motion. Second, we have designed an eﬃcient
clustering algorithm, which does not rely on costly measures of distance and avoids re-
scanning all the data. The clustering algorithm gathers pairs of objects based on similar
interactions and similar dynamics.

To provide arguments on the applicability of the framework to a potentially large
class of trajectories, we have performed experiments on diﬀerent types of moving
objects. The experiments have been organized in order to (i) test the inﬂuence of the
input thresholds on the discovery process and on the quality of the crews, (ii) perform a
quantitative comparison with alternative solutions, (iii) argue the usefulness of the
information conveyed by the crews in real case studies, and (iv) distinguish the con-
tribute given by each movement parameter in the construction of high quality crews.
Some considerations can be drawn. First, the quality of the crews strongly depends on
the trajectory data preparation. Indeed, if we use a coarse sampling to deﬁne the time
instants, then the movement parameters poorly describe interactions and dynamics. This
result is not surprising. Second, the experiments on the temporal maximum gap

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

29

highlight a characteristic of the framework, that is, the property to discover crews that
may be developed over time without temporal continuity. This is demonstrated by the
quality of the crews. Third, the meaningfulness of the crews and number of the relative
members are always not related to each other, so groups of interest are not necessarily
those more numerous. This is evident for both datasets.

The emerging Big Data technologies will stimulate us to upgrade the proposed
framework in order to deal with Big mobility data problems. Recent studies focus on
solutions of parallel computation for the analysis of large volumes (Altomare et al.
2017), while we plan to investigate the other two challenges of Big data, that is,
velocity and variety. A future direction for the velocity will be re-designing the
proposed framework in order to mine trajectory data streams. Techniques of data
stream mining based on time-windows could be considered for this task (Loglisci and
Malerba 2014). The ﬁnal purpose will be that of providing a prompt an real-time
response on the formation of crews. A future direction for the variety will be
exploiting unstructured data (for instance, geographic documents (Loglisci et al.
2012a,b)) and crowd-sourced information (e.g. OpenStreetMap, GeoNames) in order
to extend the feature space and movement parameters. This can be done with
techniques of geo-tagging able to annotate punctual trajectory data with contextual
information. The ﬁnal purpose will be that of enriching the information expressed by
discovered crews. Several works have already investigated, for instance, the integra-
tion of geo-tagging with social media data (Comito et al. 2016).

Notes

north direction.

1. The azimuth is the horizontal angle of an observer’s bearing, measured clockwise from the

2. See note 1
3. For simplicity, we replace the notation of the time instants hτi; τiþ1i with capital letters.
4. The operators max(,) and min(,) work on the time domain T as on the set of the integers.

Acknowledgments

This work fulﬁlls the research objectives of the FutureInResearch 8GPS5R0 project ‘Computer-
mediated collaboration in creative projects’ funded by Apulia Regional Government for Intervento
coﬁnanziato dal Fondo di Sviluppo e Coesione 2007–2013 APQ Ricerca Regione Puglia
‘Programma regionale a sostegno della specializzazione intelligente e della sostenibilita’ sociale
ed ambientale - FutureInResearch’.

Disclosure statement

No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.

Funding

‘Computer-mediated collaboration in creative projects’ funded by Apulia Regional Government for
Intervento coﬁnanziato dal Fondo di Sviluppo e Coesione 2007–2013 APQ Ricerca Regione Puglia

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 ‘Programma regionale a sostegno della specializzazione intelligente e della sostenibilita’ sociale ed
ambientale - FutureInResearch’.

30

C. LOGLISCI

References

Altomare, A., et al., 2017. Trajectory pattern mining for urban computing in the cloud.

IEEE

Transactions Parallel Distrib Systems, 28 (2), 586–599.

Andersson, M., et al., 2008. Reporting leaders and followers among trajectories of moving point

objects. GeoInformatica, 12 (4), 497–528. doi:10.1007/s10707-007-0037-9

Andrienko, N.V., et al., 2013. Space transformation for understanding group movement.
Transactions Vision Computation Graph, 19 (12), 2169–2178. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2013.193

IEEE

Benkert, M., et al., 2006. Reporting ﬂock patterns. In: Algorithms - ESA 2006, 14th Annual European

Symposium, Zurich, Switzerland, 11–13 September 2006, Proceedings, 660–671.

Comito, C., Falcone, D., and Talia, D., 2016. Mining human mobility patterns from social geo-

tagged data. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 33, 91–107. doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2016.06.005

Davies, D.L. and Bouldin, D.W., 1979. A cluster separation measure.

IEEE Transactions Pattern

Analysis Mach Intelligent, PAMI-1 (2), 224–227. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909

Diday, E. and Esposito, F., 2003. An introduction to symbolic data analysis and the SODAS software.

Intelligent Data Analysis, 7 (6), 583–601.

Dodge, S., et al., 2016. Analysis of movement data.

International Journal of Geographical

Information Science, 30 (5), 825–834. doi:10.1080/13658816.2015.1132424

Dodge, S., Weibel, R., and Forootan, E., 2009. Revealing the physics of movement: comparing the
similarity of movement characteristics of diﬀerent types of moving objects. Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems, 33 (6), 419–434. doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2009.07.008
Dodge, S., Weibel, R., and Lautenschütz, A., 2008. Towards a taxonomy of movement patterns.

Information Visualization, 7 (3–4), 240–252. doi:10.1057/PALGRAVE.IVS.9500182

Doncaster, C.P., 1990. Non-parametric estimates of interaction from radio-tracking data. Journal of

Theoretical Biology, 143 (4), 431–443. doi:10.1016/S0022-5193(05)80020-7

Dutton, G., 1999. Scale, sinuosity, and point selection in digital line generalization. Cartography and

Geographic Information Science, 26 (1), 33–54. doi:10.1559/152304099782424929

Frank, E., et al., 1998. Using model trees for classiﬁcation. Machine Learning, 32 (1), 63–76.

doi:10.1023/A:1007421302149

Gudmundsson, J. and Van Kreveld, M.J., 2006. Computing longest duration ﬂocks in trajectory
data. In: 14th ACM International Symposium on Geographic Information Systems, ACM-GIS 2006,
10–11 November 2006, Arlington, Virginia, USA, Proceedings, 35–42.

Hubert, L. and Arabie, P., 1985. Comparing partitions. Journal of Classiﬁcation, 2 (1), 193–218.

doi:10.1007/BF01908075

Jeung, H., et al., 2008. Discovery of convoys in trajectory databases. Pvldb, 1 (1), 1068–1080.
Konzack, M., et al., 2017. Visual analytics of delays and interaction in movement data. International
doi:10.1080/

Geographical

Information

320–345.

Science,

(2),

31

Journal
of
13658816.2016.1199806

Computers,
compenvurbsys.2007.08.002

Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.

Laube, P., et al., 2007. Movement beyond the snapshot - dynamic analysis of geospatial lifelines.
doi:10.1016/j.

Environment

481–501.

Systems,

Urban

and

(5),

31

Laube, P., 2014. Computational movement analysis. Springer Briefs in Computer Science.

Laube, P.,

Imfeld, S., and Weibel, R., 2005. Discovering relative motion patterns in groups of
moving point objects. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 19 (6), 639–
668. doi:10.1080/13658810500105572

Layer, R.M., et al., 2013. Binary interval search: a scalable algorithm for counting interval intersec-

tions. Bioinformatics, 29 (1), 1–7. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts652

Li, Z., et al., 2010. Swarm: mining relaxed temporal moving object clusters. Pvldb, 3 (1), 723–734.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

31

Loglisci, C., et al., 2012a. Toward geographic information harvesting: extraction of spatial relational
facts from web documents. In: J. Vreeken, et al., eds. 12th IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining Workshops,
ICDM Workshops, Brussels, Belgium, December 10, 2012 IEEE Computer
Society, 789–796.

Loglisci, C., et al., 2012b. An unsupervised framework for topological relations extraction from
geographic documents. In: S.W. Liddle, et al., eds. Database and Expert Systems Applications -
23rd International Conference, DEXA 2012, Vienna, Austria, 3–6 September 2012. Proceedings, Part
II, Vol. 7447 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science Springer, 48–55.

Loglisci, C. and Malerba, D., 2014. Mining dense regions from vehicular mobility in streaming
setting. In: Foundations of Intelligent Systems - 21st International Symposium, ISMIS 2014, Roskilde,
Denmark, 25–27 June 2014. Proceedings, 40–49.

Loglisci, C. and Malerba, D., 2017. Leveraging temporal autocorrelation of historical data for
improving accuracy in network regression. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, 10 (1), 40–53.
doi:10.1002/sam.11336

Loglisci, C., Malerba, D., and Papadopoulos, A.N., 2014. Mining trajectory data for discovering
communities of moving objects. In: K.S. Candan, et al., eds. Proceedings of the Workshops of the
EDBT/ICDT 2014 Joint Conference (EDBT/ICDT 2014), Athens, Greece, 28 March 2014., Vol. 1133
CEUR-WS.org, 301–308.

Long, J.A. and Nelson, T.A., 2013a. Measuring dynamic interaction in movement data. Transactions

in GIS, 17 (1), 62–77. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01353.x

Long, J.A. and Nelson, T.A., 2013b. A review of quantitative methods for movement data.
Information Science, 27 (2), 292–318. doi:10.1080/

Journal of Geographical

International
13658816.2012.682578

Mazimpaka, J.D. and Timpf, S., 2016. Trajectory data mining: a review of methods and applications.

Journal of Spatial Information Science, 2016 (13), 61–99.

Noyon, V., Claramunt, C., and Devogele, T., 2007. A relative representation of trajectories in

geogaphical spaces. GeoInformatica, 11 (4), 479–496. doi:10.1007/s10707-007-0023-2

Ong, R., et al., 2011. Traﬃc jams detection using ﬂock mining. In: Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases - European Conference, ECML PKDD 2011, Athens, Greece, 5–9 September
2011, Proceedings, Part III, 650–653.

Rapp, V., and Paciﬁc Northwest Research Station, P.O., 2006. Elk, deer, and cattle: the starkey project.
Science update. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc Northwest
Research Station.

Wood, Z., 2013. Proﬁling Spatial Collectives. In: Research and Development in Intelligent Systems
XXX, Incorporating Applications and Innovations in Intelligent Systems XXI Proceedings of AI-2013,
Cambridge, England, UK, 10–12 December 2013, 95–108.

Wood, Z. and Galton, A., 2009. A taxonomy of collective phenomena. Applied Ontology, 4 (3–4),

267–292.

Zheng, K., et al., 2014. Online discovery of gathering patterns over trajectories. IEEE Transactions

Knowl Data Engineering, 26 (8), 1974–1988. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2013.160

Zheng, Y., et al., 2009. Mining interesting locations and travel sequences from GPS trajectories. In:
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW 2009, Madrid, Spain,
20–24 April 2009, 791–800.

Appendix

A tree-induction algorithm for clustering pairs of moving objects

Here we explain the algorithm for clustering pairs of moving objects through an example
(Figure 13). Consider μ=2 and required reduction=0.2. The newly created nodes are stored in
a queue structure and will be processed one by one. At the beginning, the algorithm stores
the root in the queue (Figure 13- root.vectors), then it proceeds with the generation of the
splitting values for each movement parameter and, for each splitting value, it creates two

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 32

C. LOGLISCI

Figure 13. Illustration of the tree-induction algorithm.

subsets from the set of vectors of the node. The splitting values are taken from the values
existing in the node. Subsequently, the algorithm computes the reduction of the dissimilarity
between the vectors of the node and the vectors of the two subsets. By supposing that the
parameter that guarantees greater dissimilarity reduction is ‘Azimuth Distance’ and the
threshold value is 22 (Figure 13-1), the algorithm inserts two branches and two new nodes
into the tree. The node on the left contains the vectors, whose values of ‘Azimuth Distance’
are lower than 22, while the node on the right takes the values greater than or equal to 22
(Figure 13-2). By assuming that the dissimilarity of ‘Azimuth Distance’ has been reduced by a
factor of 0.1, it is removed from the list of the parameters. The new nodes are stored in the
queue. Hence, the algorithm examines the node on the left and, by assuming that the next
parameter with maximum dissimilarity reduction is ‘Tortuosity Ratio’ and the threshold value
it expands the tree with two new nodes (Figure 13-3), which will not be stored
is 1.2,
because the number of the contained pairs does not exceed μ2. The algorithm continues
with the node on the right of ‘Azimuth Distance’. The maximum dissimilarity reduction is
obtained with the parameter ‘Displacement’ and with the threshold 150 (Figure 13-4). Finally,
the new nodes are added to the tree, but are not stored because the conditions of
termination are satisﬁed.

Time complexity

We conducted the complexity analysis of the three main procedures of the framework, that is,
(i) transformation of the raw trajectory data into vectors, (ii) clustering pairs of moving objects,
(iii) building crews from SPGs. The notation of the input data and thresholds is reported in
Table 2. (i) Let n be the number of objects O and t be the length of the time-domain T. The
vectors are generated for all the pairs of objects n2 at each sequence of consecutive time-

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE

33

instants hτi; τiþ1i, where a number of computations equal to Fj j (movement parameters) is
performed for each pair of objects. Thus, the number of operations is n2 Fj j at each sequence,
while the time cost is O(tn2) for all the non-overlapping sequences of time instants, consider-
ing that Fj j (cid:11) n; t. (ii) The order of the input data of the algorithm of tree induction is tn2. By
assuming that the tree remains ‘bushy’, the depth is O(log (tn2)). At each node, not all the
pairs are considered, but all the pairs are considered at the diﬀerent depths of the tree, so the
amount of work is O(tn2log (tn2)). Considering that at each node all the parameters are
evaluated, the time cost is O( Fj jtn2log (tn2)). Also here, Fj j (cid:11) n; t. (iii) Let μ be the minimum
required number of objects. The cost of the third procedure is due to the operations of
generation and joining of the SPGs. More precisely, the counting of the intersections has time
complexity equal to O(t logt) (Layer et al. (2013)) and is performed for all the leaves, which are
tn2
in the worst case, therefore O( t2n2
logt). The number of the operations of join is related to
μ2
μ2
the number of pairs μ2 at each leaf and the total number of leaves tn2
of work is O(tn2+ t2n2
μ2

μ2 . Therefore, the amount

logt).

The total time cost of the framework is:

tn2
|{z}
raw data transformation

tn2logðtn2Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
pair clustering

t2n2
tn2 þ
μ2 logt
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
building crews

that is, Oðtn2ð2 þ logðtn2ÞÞ þ t2n2

μ2 logtÞ.

Downloaded by [University of Florida] at 03:34 25 December 2017 