Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2): 161–176

Research Article

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar
Irradiation on North Carolina Aquatic
Habitats with Canopy Data

Doug Newcomb
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Department of Interior
Raleigh, North Carolina

Abstract
Sunlight can have a signiﬁcant impact on freshwater aquatic communities. Using 64-
bit GRASS, a previously generated 18.2 m resolution forest canopy height grid for
the State of North Carolina was used as a base elevation layer for calculation of
18.2 m resolution total irradiance (Watt-hours/square meter/day) grids for 365 days
of the year. Daily calculations were aggregated annually and overlaid on rasterized
1:24,000-scale USGS hydrology with canopy type and seasonal ﬁlters to quantify
annual solar irradiation input to streams and rivers in North Carolina. Bare earth
calculations of solar irradiation for the aquatic habitats were compared to the
canopy ﬁltered calculations. There was substantially less solar irradiation in aquatic
habitats under the canopy ﬁltered model. Total solar irradiation for subbasins
created from point locations of occurrences of Dwarf wedgemussel (Alasmidonta
heterodon) were compared with total solar irradiation for watersheds created from
locations with no mussels for the full subbasin, 1 km, and 500 m upstream from the
sampling point. There was no signiﬁcant difference in the amount of total solar
irradiation modeled for the subbasins with Dwarf wedgemussel and watersheds with
no mussels.

1 Introduction

The sensitivity of aquatic communities to temperature has been well documented. The
body weight and timing of emergence of aquatic insects and ranges of occurrence of
aquatic insects can be strongly inﬂuenced by water temperature (Vannote and Sweeney
1980). Elevated temperatures can lead to differences in predator/prey relationships

Address for correspondence: Doug Newcomb, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of
Interior, 551 F Pylon Drive, Raleigh, NC 00000, USA. E-mail: doug_newcomb@fws.gov

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01313.x

162 D Newcomb

(Peckarsky 1982) and mortality in relatively non-mobile classes of species such as
mussels (Zimmerman and Neves 2002, Pandolfo et al. 2010, McMahon et al. 1995).
Speciﬁc ﬁsh species have differing requirements for water temperature. Temperatures
minimally above or below the species-speciﬁc requirements can cause sublethal stress
inhibiting growth and reproduction (Nelson and Palmer 2007). Water temperature is
such an important constituent of water quality for mussel habitat that it is embedded in
the regulatory framework for certain mussel species (Lyder 2010). Effects on water
temperature by solar radiation is a major component of the thermal environment for
aquatic habitats (Moore et al. 2005).

Many of the species of concern for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) are
aquatic (USFWS 2011). To facilitate the recovery of these species, the USFWS has
initiated Strategic Habitat Conservation (SHC) (National Ecological Assessment Team
2006) as a methodology for advancing species recovery and habitat conservation by: (1)
adopting goals that emphasize biological outcomes; (2) creating models that tie species
populations to the landscape; and (3) using scientiﬁc ﬁndings to inform management. For
successful implementation of SHC, it is necessary to model species-population habitat
relationships at a landscape scale prior to planning, delivering, and monitoring site-
speciﬁc management actions (USFWS 2008). Modeling solar irradiation over a landscape
scale can help to characterize aquatic habitats for species suitability and could be used as
a planning tool for species habitat restoration or impacts from habitat disturbance.

The most effective species-habitat modeling would require processing geospatial
habitat data at a ﬁne enough resolution that is relevant to the needs of individual
members of the species. Processing ﬁne-resolution geospatial data at a large geographic
extent can be a challenge in both data collection and data processing. These challenges
are currently being addressed, in part, by ﬁne-scale landscape data collection using
LiDAR and with recent advances
in 64-bit hardware and software computer
technologies.

LiDAR (Light Intensity and Data Ranging) data collection (Lohani 2011) technolo-
gies have been applied in large scale elevation mapping efforts such as the North Carolina
Floodplain mapping program (North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program 2011) to
collect LiDAR data on a statewide basis for the purpose of mapping ﬂood hazards, in the
process generating 704 GB of ASCII x,y,z coordinate data of ground surface and above
ground structures (Newcomb and Mitasova 2009).

The introduction of the 64 bit x86 compatible Opteron CPU in 2003 and subsequent
release of SUSE Linux Enterprise 8tm native 64-bit Linux (Baxter 2003) brought 64 bit
computing to the x86 platform with the ability to support processes requiring over 4 GB
of RAM memory. GRASS 6.0 was among the ﬁrst GIS software to support native 64-bit
computing on the x86 platform in 2005 (GRASS Development Team 2006). This
combination of hardware and software has allowed for the geo-processing of large,
contiguous landscape data sets (Newcomb and Mitasova 2009).

The work described in this article is a proof of concept modeling exercise which
takes advantage of the native 64-bit solar irradiation modeling tool in GRASS GIS to
model daily totals for solar irradiation at an 18.2 m (60 foot) resolution grid for the State
of North Carolina, USA, (Figure 1) using a previously generated 18.2 m resolution forest
canopy height grid (17,237 Rows and 45,102 columns, or 777,423,174 cells) as a base
elevation layer for calculation. The results of the model output were masked by a
rasterized version of the USGS 1:24,000-scale hydrology line and polygon features with
ﬁltering effects applied for canopy cover over the water surfaces.

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

163

Figure 1 Location of the State of North Carolina in the southeastern U.S.

Dwarf wedgemussel (Alasmidonta heterodon) is a federally endangered mussel
species found in streams and rivers in the Tar and Neuse River basins in North Carolina
(USFWS 2003). Output from the modelling exercise was aggregated for subbasins
generated from known Dwarf wedgemussel locations and locations surveyed for mussels
where none were found to illustrate the potential utility of the modelled solar irradiation
data.

2 Data and Methods

For the solar irradiation modeling portion of the exercise, the r.sun module of GRASS
GIS 6.5 (Hoﬁerka et al. 2011) was executed with the following 18.2 m resolution raster
layers as input: base elevation, slope, aspect, and horizon steps. Three python scripts
were written to simultaneously process daily model runs for January-April, May-August,
and September-December.

The base layer for modeling was an 18.2 m resolution maximum elevation layer
created as part of the process of generating the canopy height layer for the State of North
Carolina using r.in.xyz in GRASS 6.5 on the 704 GB ASCII xyz LiDAR point data layer
from the North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program (Newcomb and Mitasova 2009).
This layer had null areas which were areas where the vendors had removed LiDAR data
for water surfaces. These null areas were ﬁlled by taking the seamless 6.096 m (20 foot)
resolution layer generated for the canopy height creation exercise (Newcomb and Mita-
sova 2009) and generating an averaged 18.2 m resolution elevation layer for the missing
data.

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

164 D Newcomb

Figure 2 Vector 1 : 24,000 scale hydrology converted to 18.2 m resolution raster layer

The averaged elevation layer was created by performing a 3 ¥ 3 neighborhood
calculation using r.neighbor to ﬁnd the average value for each 3 ¥ 3 block. The resolution
of the workspaces was then set to 18.2 m and a new raster layer was created using
r.mapcalculator by multiplying the output raster from the 3 ¥ 3 neighborhood operation
by 1 (In GRASS GIS, when a calculation is performed on a ﬁner resolution layer when
the workspace resolution is coarser, the value of the center cell of the ﬁner resolution
layer within the coarse resolution cell will be used as the value for the calculation; Neteler
and Mitasova 2008). The resulting layer was masked by the null cells in the maximum
elevation layer to create a layer of elevations representing the null areas. The maximum
elevation layer and the masked base elevation layer were then merged using r.patch to
create a patched layer.

For the remaining input variables; the slope and aspect layers were created by
running r.slope.aspect with the maximum elevation layer as the input layer, the r.horizon
command was used to create 24 raster layers of horizon angle at 15 degree increments
starting at due east as 0 and proceeding counterclockwise, and the Linke atmospheric
turbidity coefﬁcient was left at the default of 3.0. The default time step of 0.5 hours was
used to calculate the daily raster sums in Watt-hours/square meter/day.

The abovementioned 18.2 m averaged elevation grid was used as a base elevation
grid, with associated slope and aspect layers generated with r.slope.aspect as with the
maximum elevation grid. Daily model runs for 12 days were made using a series of
horizon models at 45 degree increments and compared with 12 days of earlier model runs
of canopy maximum height without the patched elevations.

Aquatic habitat rasters for the state of North Carolina were created by rasterizing
the 1:24,000-scale USGS quadrangles distributed by the State of North Carolina as line
and polygon shape ﬁles (North Carolina Center for Geographic Information and Analy-
sis 2008) to 18.2 m resolution raster layers using the Esri ArcMap 10 Arctoolbox Feature
to Raster tool by basin. The basin rasters were then imported into GRASS using r.in.gdal.
The basin line rasters were merged using r.patch into a statewide line grid. The polygon
rasters were merged into a statewide polygon water body grid. The line and polygon
rasters were merged using r.patch to form a single raster layer representing aquatic
habitat in North Carolina (Figure 2).

The aquatic layer was then used as a raster mask with r.mapcalculator with the
canopy height layer to create a stream-canopy coverage raster layer. Since the canopy
height layer was directly derived from the LiDAR data using r.in.xyz, there were null

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

165

Figure 3 Map showing 18.2 m stream canopy heights (in feet)

values where LiDAR data from water bodies were removed by the vendor. The null
values in the stream-canopy layer (while masked to the aquatic layer) were set to zero for
the canopy height (Figure 3).

To estimate the amount of solar irradiation striking the water surface, it is necessary
to estimate the ﬁltering effects of canopy on solar irradiation transmission. There have
been several studies documenting solar irradiation transmission through a canopy to the
ﬂoor of a forest (Hardy et al. 2004, Hutchison and Matt 1977, Ni et al. 1997) or to a
stream (Neeham and Jones 1959, DeNicola et al. 1992). Unfortunately, most of these
studies require detailed structural information about the forest canopy, including gap
distribution and canopy closure that would be difﬁcult to obtain from the available
18.2 m resolution canopy height layer.

For this reason, it was determined that an approximation of the transmission of solar
irradiance through a canopy would be used. After reviewing the data in Hardy et al.
(2004), it was determined that for coniferous vegetation the transmitted irradiation
would be 20–30% of the incoming solar irradiation. It was decided to use an approxi-
mation of 25% for the purpose of this exercise.

For deciduous vegetation, the transmission is more complex, varying with the
seasonal sun angle and the extent of leaf cover. Hutchison and Matt (1977) found that
in a Tulip poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera) forest the maximum percentage of solar
irradiation translated to the forest ﬂoor (approximately 26%) occurred during the spring
leaﬂess period and the minimum transmission (approximately 2%); during the autumn
full leaf period. It was decided to try to ﬁlter the solar irradiation striking the top of the
canopy according to monthly approximations of seasonal values from graphs provided
in Hutchison and Matt (1977) (Table 1).

Canopy Coniferous/Deciduous land cover data were drawn from the Southeast GAP
Landcover Database (Biodiversity and Spatial Information Center (BASIC) 2011)

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

166 D Newcomb

Table 1 Approximations by month of percent of solar
irradiation reaching water through deciduous canopy

January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

15%
21%
26%
19%
4%
3%
3%
3%
2%
5%
8%
10%

Figure 4 SEGAP forest ﬁlter classiﬁcations

(Figure 4). Raster layers were created for each month, with the coniferous classes
reclassiﬁed to values of 0.25 and the deciduous forest areas reclassiﬁed to match the
percentages in Table 1. (i.e. 10% = 0.10).

Since the methodology of the canopy height calculation (Newcomb and Mitasova
2009) might see the difference in stream channel morphology (channel bed vs. top of
bank) as canopy height, it was decided that canopy heights less than 2 m would be
considered non-ﬁltering of solar irradiation for the analysis. Raster values less than 2 m
in height were reclassiﬁed to a value of 1, with values over 2 m reclassiﬁed to a value of

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

167

2. Canopy heights of class 1 had the solar irradiation applied unﬁltered, while canopy
heights of class 2 had canopy shading ﬁlters applied as indicated above.

To clarify, the canopy ﬁltering calculations were performed in two steps. The ﬁrst

with a mask of 1 (no ﬁltering for heights < 2 m):

_
r mapcalculator amap monthly solar irradiation aggregate f
.
_
A  outfile monthly solar irradiation aggregate no

1

=

=

∗

_

_

_

_

_

__canopy

oormula

and the second step with a mask of 2 (apply ﬁlter to canopy heights > 2 m):

.
r mapcalculator amap monthly solar irradiation aggregate b

_
monthly vegetation filter formula A B outfile
monthly

solar irradiation aggregate canopy
_

_
= ∗

=
=

_
__

_

_

_

_

mmap

=

=

[1]

[2]

The two datasets were then merged using r.patch to a single monthly aggregate ﬁltered
dataset. The 12 monthly datasets were then summed to an annual total aquatic ﬁltered
irradiation grid using GRASS r.series.

Solar irradiation calculations were performed on the 18.2 m resolution bare earth
elevation grid with 15 degree horizon steps for the ﬁrst day of every month of the year
and summed to a single raster. The corresponding days for the top of canopy solar
irradiation modeling were ﬁltered for vegetation as described above and summed to a
single layer. The difference between the two summed layers was determined for the
aquatic areas using r.mapcalculator.

The GRASS r.watershed command was used to create ﬂow direction grids from the
derived 18.2 m resolution elevation grid in sections corresponding to the USGS 6 digit
Hydrologic Unit Code (Seaber et al. 1994) basins for North Carolina. Basin sizes up to
24,149 km2 in area (the Cape Fear River basin) were processed as single units. The
separate basins were then aggregated into a single seamless statewide ﬂow direction layer.
Point locations of known locations of Dwarf wedgemussel (Alasmidonta heterodon)
in the Tar River basin and the Neuse River basin (North Carolina Natural Heritage
Program 2011) and locations for which mussels were surveyed and not found in both
basins (North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission 2010) were used as starting
points for subbasin delineation using the GRASS r.water.out command. Sums and means
of the solar irradiation data for the waters upstream of the sampling points were
computed. One kilometer and 500 m masks were generated from the sampling point
locations to obtain the sum and mean of the immediate upstream solar irradiation data
at 1 km and 500 m distances.

The resultant data was exported from GRASS to mussel and no-mussel text ﬁles that

were imported into R (R Development Core Team 2011) for statistical analysis.

3 Results and Discussion

Although the author had access to ArcGIS software, the GRASS software running on the
64-bit Linux platform was chosen to perform the modeling exercise because of the size
of the dataset. The GRASS software has proven to be robust in processing large statewide
datasets and able to exploit memory availability above 4 GB for a single process on
64 bit Linux while allowing for multiple simultaneous analyses from a single input layer
(Newcomb and Mitasova 2009). The GRASS r.sun command was used because of the

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

168 D Newcomb

Figure 5 Small stream solar irradiation ﬁltered by canopy. Units are watt-hours/square
meter/year

capability to model the entire statewide data set seamlessly and relatively quickly. The use
of ArcGIS software for this modeling exercise would mean chopping the input data set
up into multiple blocks to accommodate the 32-bit memory space limitation (4 GB) in
the ESRI software and stitching the results together for each day modeled, increasing the
processing time and complicating the analysis.

The r.sun calculation is currently single-threaded (although there are efforts under-
way to enable multi-threading with processor cores and using the processing elements in
video cards) and can be memory intensive. Running the module with the default number
of partitions (n = 1) for the statewide dataset resulted in a 4 hour processing time on the
computer, with a peak memory usage of 16 GB. Increasing the number of partitions to
nine lowered the peak memory consumption to 5.7 GB per process, allowing for multiple
model runs to be simultaneously processed within the 20 GB RAM memory space of the
computer.

The use of the hydrologic mask left a total of 28,943,177 non-null cells representing
the aquatic habitats in North Carolina (Figure 4). Of the non-null cells, the minimum
value was 14,485.4 watts/square meter/year and the maximum value was 2.81796e+06
watt-hours/square meter/year. The mean value was 1.48064e+06 watt-hours/square
meter/year, the standard deviation was 920,670 watt-hours/square meter/year, and the
variance was 8.47633e+11 (Figure 5).

The mean solar irradiation per raster cell for the sum of the 12 days of bare earth
analysis was 74,601.6 watt-hours/square meter for the aquatic habitat areas (Figure 6).
The mean solar irradiation to the top of the canopy (using the maximum height grid for
the base elevation layer) was 73,040.9 watt-hours/square meter for the same days. The
mean solar irradiation per raster cell when the canopy ﬁlters are applied to the top of

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

169

Figure 6 Solar irradiation difference in watt-hours/square meter for the 12 days mod-
elled between the bare earth model and the canopy ﬁltered model for aquatic habitats

canopy data was 26,272.3 watt-hours/square meter. For the bare earth and ﬁltered top
of canopy methods there is a difference in the means of 48,329.3 watt-hours/square
meter over the twelve days modeled.

In the mussel analysis, there were 27 sub basins generated from mussel locations for
Dwarf wedgemussel and 30 subbasins generated from the nomussel points in the Tar
River and Neuse River basins (Figures 7–9). The process was scripted in python to pass
command arguments to the GRASS software, as well as parsing the command outputs
for further processing. A standard process of subbasin delineation and layer analysis ran
in approximately 9 minutes.

The strongest difference in the solar irradiation data between the subbasins with
Dwarf wedgemussel at the drainage outlet and subbasins with no mussels at the drainage
outlet came with the mean solar irradiation measure for the entire subbasin (Figure 7).
While this difference in the means looks initially promising, the Student’s t test revealed
a p value of 0.6645, not considered a signiﬁcant difference.

The mean solar irradiation data from buffers generated 1,000 and 500 m upstream
from the outlet point of each basin did not show any signiﬁcant differences (Figures 10
and 11).

4 Conclusions

As expected, there was a difference between the solar irradiation in the bare earth
processed model and the solar irradiation in the canopy ﬁltered model for the aquatic
habitats. What was unexpected was the size of the difference in solar irradiation reaching

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

170 D Newcomb

Figure 7 Location of Tar and Neuse Basins in North Carolina

the streams in that the amount modeled from the bare earth DEM was 180% more than
the amount modeled with canopy ﬁltering.

With the canopy ﬁltered solar irradiation data, there can be signiﬁcant variability in
the solar irradiation along many of the streams in the area modeled (Figure 5). How the
extent and placement of the shading impacts aquatic habitat will need to be examined on
an individual species basis.

The analysis of the subbasin data for the point locations of Dwarf wedgemussel
against nomussel location was an example of how the solar irradiation data could be
applied on an individual species basis. Automation of the analysis with python scripts
was attempted to determine how readily habitat measures could be aggregated by species
across a signiﬁcant portion of a species range.

In the mussel/nomussel subbasin analysis, the automation of the process was ham-
pered by the requirement to manually move the sampling locations over the elevation–
derived stream channels for the 18.2 m resolution average elevation grid. The sampling
locations in the database were either GPS coordinates (North Carolina Wildlife
Resources Commission 2010) or had been located to a paper map or digital represen-
tation of the stream channel from USGS 1:24,000-scale topographic quadrangle maps
(North Carolina Natural Heritage Program 2011). The accuracy of these location
methods did not always place the sampling point in the stream as determined by the
LiDAR-derived stream channel location. If the r.watershed program was given a point on
the bank rather than in the stream (according to the elevation raster), the subbasin would
be delineated up the bank rather than up the stream. Sample points in this study for
which sub basins were inaccurately calculated were dropped from the analysis.

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

171

Figure 8 Subbasin generated from 60 ft derived elevation grid in yellow. The 1,000 m
buffer is red and 500 m buffer is green

This sampling point mismatch to the elevation-derived stream locations could pos-
sibly be resolved by taking the stream segment output from r.watershed, converting it to
a vector data set and using a method of snapping points to a line to obtain new
coordinates for the sampling sites and then running the r.water.outlet command with the
modiﬁed coordinates. An open source example of this snapping technique would be the
ST_ClosestPoint() function in PostGIS 1.5 and above (Obe and Hsu 2011).

Despite the manual intervention, some subbasin delineations still went up the bank
rather than upstream. This was possibly due to the averaging method used to create the
18.2 m resolution grid from the higher resolution 6.096 m elevation grid. Performing this
analysis on the original elevation gird might allow sufﬁciently consistent behavior of the
process to automate the procedure and add to the statistical population of both Dwarf
wedgemussel and nomussel subbasins analyzed.

It is not surprising that there was no strong correlation exhibited in the data between
solar irradiation and presence or absence of Dwarf wedgemussel. There are, of course,
many factors besides water temperature, such as chemical water quality, stream bed
constituents, and current strength, which determine the location of Dwarf wedgemussel
in North Carolina streams (USFWS 2003). Some of these habitat factors may individu-
ally or in combination overwhelm water temperature elevation from solar irradiation as
a selection factor for Dwarf wedgemussel presence. Also to be considered is the fact that
it is difﬁcult to prove a negative. The nomussel sites analyzed may contain mussels that
were not observed.

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

172 D Newcomb

Figure 9 Mean solar irradiation for subbasins with Dwarf wedgemussel vs. subbasins
without mussels

The aforementioned work demonstrates that solar irradiation modeling can be
extended to a landscape scale and that the results can be applied to a large portion of an
individual species range. The processing demands are well within the current desktop
hardware and software technology envelope. While 64-bit GRASS is robust enough to
process large datasets, but there are several things that can be done to improve the solar
irradiation modeling procedure for aquatic habitats and watershed delineation and
analysis.

The ﬁrst is to improve the canopy model. The current canopy model is 18.2 m in
resolution due to the method used to generate the model (Newcomb and Mitasova
2009). It should be possible to create a hybrid model to generate a canopy height model
at approximately 10 m resolution. The canopy layer also suffers from errors propagated
from errors in the raw LiDAR data. These “bad data” areas need to be mapped and
removed from subsequent calculations.

The second is to improve the aquatic habitat modeling. The State of North Carolina
Stream Mapping Program (2011) is using the LiDAR data to map the location of streams
to a much higher resolution than the 1:24,000-scale USGS topographic map quadrangles
(USGS 1947) used to delineate the aquatic habitat in this study. This would increase the
accuracy of the aquatic habitat footprint.

The third is to temporally ﬁlter the data sets: The LiDAR data ranges from 2001 to
2005 (North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program 2011) in collection dates. The
mussel data has historic to present-day entries, while the no-mussel data is from 2000 to
the present. The SEGAP data used is from 2001. There is a 2006 NLCD data set. There

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

173

Figure 10 Mean solar irradiation using 1,000 m buffer from outlet of subbasins with
Dwarf wedgemussel vs. subbasins without mussels

might be some beneﬁt to using the 2006 land cover data with the LiDAR data collection
made in 2005 in the western part of North Carolina and more closely temporally aligning
available mussel data where possible.

Fourth, the solar irradiation modeling process can be improved. The radiation
modeling on a statewide basis takes approximately 5.7 GB of RAM and 6 hours to
process per model on the current hardware (2.0 GHz Xeon with 20 GB RAM , CentOS
Linux 5.6). After e-mail discussions with Hamish Bowman (Bowman 2011), it was
decided to not use the horizon layers in the next round of modeling and to try to
incorporate some method of landscape Linke atmospheric turbidity adjustment into the
modeling process. An input landscape level Linke atmospheric turbidity layer would
incorporate land cover data, elevation data, and seasonal variations (Hoﬁerka et al.
2011). Generating such a seasonally variable input layer for all of North Carolina with
seacoast, mountains, urban areas, farms, and forests will require careful preparation.

Fifth, the solar modeling software could be improved by working with the GRASS
developers to improve the speed of the solar irradiation modeling. Bowman (2011) refers
to ongoing work in improving the solar irradiation modeling software to incorporate
advances in multithreading with multicore CPUs and GPUs with the OpenCL GPU
processing library to achieve up to 20 times faster processing. This could, in theory,
reduce the time to process each modeled day from 6 hours to 20 minutes.

With the above improvements in the methodology, the GRASS r.sun command can
be used to quickly model large raster grids for solar irradiation at a landscape scale.
Combining the solar irradiation output with canopy type and seasonal ﬁlter gives a

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

174 D Newcomb

Figure 11 Mean solar irradiation 500 m buffer from outlet of subbasins with Dwarf
wedgemussel versus subbasins without mussels

distinct difference in the amount of solar irradiation modeled to reach the water surface.
Other GRASS components (in conjunction with other open source programs) can be
readily scripted to automate the spatial analysis of the ﬁltered solar irradiation in
combination with the known locations of species of interest to provide conservation
planners with a potential base data set as input for multivariate analysis of aquatic
species habitat preferences.

The above work would not have been possible without the efforts of those involved in the
GRASS, GDAL, QGIS, Python, Linux, CentOS and R open source software projects. I
would also like to thank the North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program, especially
John Lay and Hope Morgan, for coordination on LiDAR data and the South Atlantic
Landscape Conservation Cooperative (SALCC) for their support.

Acknowledgments

References

Baxter M 2003 AMD64 Opteron: First
www.linuxjournal.com/article/6711)

look. Linux Journal, 111 (available at http://

Biodiversity and Spatial Information Center 2011 Southeast GAP Analysis Project. WWW docu-

ment, http://www.basic.ncsu.edu/segap/index.html

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

Using GRASS GIS to Model Solar Irradiation

175

Bowman H 2011 r.sun at the Landscape Scale. WWW document, http://lists.osgeo.org/pipermail/

grass-dev/2011-July/055172.html

DeNicola D M, Hoagland K D, and Roemer S C 1992 Inﬂuence of canopy cover on spectral
irradiance and periphyton assemblages in a prairie stream. Journal of the North American
Benthological Society 11: 391–404

Grass Development Team 2006 GRASS GIS 6.0. WWW document, http://grass.fbk.eu/announces/

announce_grass600.html

Hardy J P, Melloh R, Koenig G, Marks D, Winstral A, Pomeroy J W, and Link T 2004 Solar
transmission through conifer canopies. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 126: 257–70
Hoﬁerka J, Suri M, and Huld T 2011 GRASS GIS Manual: r.sun. WWW document, http://

grass.fbk.eu/grass65/manuals/html65_user/r.sun.html

Hutchison B A and Matt D R 1977 The distribution of solar radiation within a deciduous forest.

Ecological Monographs 47: 185–207

Lyder J 2010 Federal Register | Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Endangered Status
for the Altamaha Spinymussel and Designation of Critical Habitat. Washington, D.C., U.S.
Department of Interior (available at http://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2010/10/06/2010-
25026/endangered-and-threatened-wildlife-and-plants-endangered-status-for-the-altamaha-
spinymussel-and#h-35)

Lohani B 2011 Airborne Alitmetric LiDAR: Principle, Data Collection, Processing and Applica-
http://home.iitk.ac.in/~blohani/LiDAR_Tutorial/Airborne_

tions. WWW document,
AltimetricLidar_Tutorial.htm

McMahon R F, Matthews M A, Ussery T A, Chase R, and Clarke M 1995 Further Studies of Heat
Tolerance of Zebra Mussels: Effects of Temperature Accumulation and Chronic Exposure to
Lethal Temperatures. Vicksburg, MS, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station
Technical Report No EL-95-09

Moore R D, Spittlehouse D L, and Story A 2005 Riparian microclimate and stream temperature
response to forest harvesting: A review. Journal of the American Water Resources Association
41: 813–34

National Ecological Assessment Team 2006 Strategic Habitat Conservation: A Report from the
National Ecological Assessment Team, WWW document, http://www.fws.gov/science/shc/
shc_ﬁnalrpt.pdf

Neeham P R and Jones A C 1959 Flow, temperature, solar radiation, and ice in relation to activities

of ﬁshes in Sagehen Creek, California. Ecology 40: 465–74

Nelson K C and Palmer M A 2007 Stream temperature surges under urbanization and climate
change: Data, models, and responses, Journal of the American Water resources Association 43:
440–52

Neteler M and Mitasova H 2008 Open Source GIS: A GRASS GIS Approach (Third Edition). New

York, Springer

Newcomb D J and Mitasova H 2009 Processing Large LiDAR Data Sets for Forest Canopy
/Landscape Metrics Using 64-bit GRASS GIS, Oral Presentation, 2009 AGU Fall Meeting
Ni W, Li X, and Woodcock C E 1997 Transmission of solar radiation in boreal conifer forests:

Measurements and models. Journal of Geophysical Research 102: 29555–66

North Carolina Center for Geographic Information and Analysis 2008 BasinPro 8. Raleigh, NC,

North Carolina Center for Geographic Information and Analysis

North Carolina Natural Heritage Program 2011 Biotics Database. Raleigh, NC, Department of

Environment and Natural Resources

North Carolina Stream Mapping Program 2011 North Carolina Stream Mapping Program. WWW

document, http://www.ncstreams.org/Background.aspx

North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission 2010 WRC Listed Species Project Database.

Raleigh, NC, North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission

North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program 2011 About the NCFPM, North Carolina Depart-
ment of Emergency Management. WWW document, http://www.ncﬂoodmaps.com/
top_about.htm

Obe R O and Hsu L S 2011 PostGIS In Action, Stamford, CT, Manning
Pandolfo T J, Cope W G, Arellano C, Bringolf R B, Barnhart M C, and Hammer E 2010 Upper
thermal tolerances of early life stages of freshwater mussels. Journal of North American
Benthological Society 29: 959–69

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

176 D Newcomb

Peckarsky B L 1982 Aquatic insect predator-prey relations. BioScience 32: 261–66
R Development Core Team 2011 R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing,

Reference Index Version 2.13.0. WWW document, http://www.R-project.org

Seaber P R, Kapinos F P, and Knapp G L 1994 Hydrologic Unit Maps Washington, D.C., U.S.

Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 2294

US Fish and Wildlife Service 2003 Dwarf Wedge Mussel in North Carolina. WWW document,

http://www.fws.gov/nc-es/mussel/dwmussel.html.

US Fish and Wildlife Service 2008 Strategic Habitat Conservation Handbook: A Guide to Imple-
menting the Technical Elements of Strategic Habitat Conservation (Version 1.0), WWW
document, http://www.fws.gov/science/shc/SHCTechnicalHandbook-1.pdf

US Fish and Wildlife Service 2011 Species Reports. WWW document, http://ecos.fws.gov/

tess_public/

US Geological Survey 1947 USGS National Geospatial Data Standards, WWW document http://

nationalmap.gov/standards/nmas647.html

Vannote R L and Sweeney B W 1980 Geographic analysis of thermal equalibria: A conceptual
model for evaluating the effect of natural and modiﬁed thermal regimes on aquatic insect
communities. The American Naturalist 115: 667–95

Zimmerman L L and Neves R J 2002 Effects of temperature on duration of viability for glochidia
of freshwater mussels (Bivalvia: Unioinidae). American Malacological Bulletin 17: 31–35

Published 2012. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

