International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Optimizing census geography: the separation of
collection and output geographies

DAVID MARTIN

To cite this article: DAVID MARTIN (1998) Optimizing census geography: the separation of
collection and output geographies, International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
12:7, 673-685, DOI: 10.1080/136588198241590

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241590

Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 198

View related articles 

Citing articles: 27 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [Florida Atlantic University]

Date: 06 November 2015, At: 00:06

int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 7, 673± 685

Research Article

Optimizing census geography: the separation of collection and output
geographies

DAVID MARTIN
Department of Geography, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17
1BJ, England, UK
e-mail D.J.Martin@soton.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper reviews the changing way in which census geography has
been treated with the increasing automation of census data processing. A four-
stage model of modern census geography development is presented. In the context
of this model, current practice is reviewed, and new opportunities for automated
census geography design presented, culminating in a current prototype for the
separation of purpose-designed data collection and output geographies. The nar-
rative is presented primarily from a British perspective, but focuses on internation-
ally relevant issues such as the implementation of census geography design, and
the in¯ uence of census output geography on data analysis.

1.

Introduction
Rhind ( 1991) points out that there are only really three ways to undertake the
large-scale collection of information about population, namely censuses, population
registers, and attempts to estimate population size by remote sensing. Population
registers are widespread in Europe, but frequently exist alongside census-type
information. In many parts of the world, the census is the primary or only source
of detailed socioeconomic information. Census-taking has a very long history,
although early censuses were generally carried out speci® cally for military or taxation
purposes, and it is only in modern times that the results of censuses have been widely
published, a period which can be conveniently dated from the ® rst US Census of
Population in 1790 ( Dewdney 1983 ). This paper is concerned with the design and
use of census geography, which is here taken to encompass the geographical boundar-
ies which are used for the collection, publication and analysis of data derived from
censuses, and their cartographic representation. The paper presents a four-stage
model of the development of modern census geographies, in which the ® rst stage
represents the period before widespread computerization ( pre-1960), and the last
represents the present and near future. Socio-economic applications have been an
important sub-® eld in geographical information system (GIS) applications, and it
has been previously noted that the censuses of the early 1990s have in many countries
provided an important impetus to further GIS development, particularly fuelled by
the increasing commercial use of census data, and the emergence of the geodemo-
graphic industry ( Martin 1995, 1996 a). The linkage between GIS development and
census geography is seen to be of great importance in this period of rapid change.

We are now entering an era in which it is possible to take advantage of the
explosion of digital geographical information and GIS technology in order to auto-
matically generate census geographies as required. This represents a very important
departure from the manual design of census geographies which were used both for

1365-8816 /98 $12.00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 674

D. Martin

data collection and output, by o(cid:128) ering the potential for the cost-e(cid:128) ective creation of
separate geographies for these very separate purposes. This will not, however, solve
all census data handling needs, and there will still remain a need for the remodelling
of census data after the event. This is particularly important if we wish to relate the
census to other geographies, to model real settlement patterns and social geography,
or to make comparisons across international boundaries. The advent of digital
encoding and design of output geography may potentially be further extended to
the development of ¯ exible output systems in which output geography is user-de® ned
after data collection and encoding are complete. This paper explores these themes,
with examples drawn primarily from the UK census, but with international
application.

The remainder of the paper is divided into four sections. The following section
sets the context by introducing a four-stage model of the successive automation of
census geography management, and each of the stages is brie¯ y discussed. Stages 3
and 4, representing the present and immediate future are then addressed in more
detail. As with the development of digital cartography ( Robinson et al. 1995 ), these
stages represent a number of very important changes which have occurred relatively
quickly following the advent of computerization. The paper concludes with a discus-
sion of the implications of these developments, and some tentative predictions about
the census output geographies of the early 2000s.

2. Four stages in the history of modern census geography

Table 1 presents a four-stage model of modern census geography development.
Tracing the impact of computerization on the production of census output in this
way is helpful to understanding the present role of GIS, and likely trends in the near
future. It is of course recognized that the census-taking process represents much
more than the three simple stages of data encoding, geography encoding and geo-
graphy design, but these represent three important groups of processing operations
which in¯ uence subsequent use and analysis of the census data in a geographical
context. The table indicates the gradual spread of digital procedures beginning with
the encoding of individual census returns to permit data storage and tabulation,
followed by the digital encoding of census boundaries initially designed manually. It
is suggested that the fourth stage, which we are only just entering, represents the
introduction of digital procedures to the entire process, including the actual design
of the geographies themselves. The approximate dates relate to Britain, although
none of the stages can be precisely dated, as computerization has been adopted
progressively, with tentative applications at one census being taken up more fully in
the next. It would be reasonable to argue that in the US, most of these developments
have taken place ahead of the British dates, while in many other countries there has

Table 1. A four-stage model of census geography development.

Approximate
Date (in UK)

Data encoding

Geography
encoding

Geography
design

pre 1960
1960s
1980s
2000s

Manual
Digital
Digital
Digital

Manual
Manual
Digital
Digital

Manual
Manual
Manual
Digital

Stage

1
2
3
4

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 Optimizing census geography

675

been a lag. Nevertheless, it is suggested that the same stages can be observed in
many di(cid:128) erent national situations, and that they are helpful in understanding the
implications of the successive automation of census geography processing. The
United Nations ( 1992 ) notes that during the long interval between censuses, there
have been enormous advances in computing technology which make very great
di(cid:128) erences to the most cost-e(cid:128) ective and versatile ways of conducting the census,
and that in all countries, `the adoption of computerization for processing of census
data will be increasing at a rapid pace’ ( p. 117).

The ® rst stage indicated by the table represents all early modern censuses, dating
from the late eighteenth century until the advent of computerization. The historical
account of this period is detailed in Redfern ( 1981), Dewdney ( 1983) and Mills
( 1987). Taking the British example, the basic enumeration area was the parish before
1841, and data were published at the level of the ancient county, thus making use
of areas originally de® ned for ecclesiastical and administrative purposes. From 1841
census-speci® c enumeration districts ( EDs) were used, and the size of the areas for
which data were published was reduced to the local authority level. Output geography
has in almost all countries been driven by the need to report statistics for principal
administrative divisions, and changes in output areas can generally be traced to
changes in administrative requirements. Even in this pre-digital era, data encoding
and sorting were assisted by the use of punched cards from 1890 in the US and 1911
in Britain. There was e(cid:128) ectively one set of geographical areas for enumeration, and
the main published output represented simple aggregations of the enumeration areas.
EDs were themselves designed manually by drawing boundaries onto paper maps,
and enumerators used these maps to determine the actual addresses to be enumerated.
The US census o(cid:129) ce was heavily involved in the development of the UNIVAC-1
computer used for processing of results in 1950 and, particularly from the 1960s, the
computer-encoding of census records permitted massive increases in the ¯ exibility
of data aggregation and publication, represented by stage two in the table. The
creation of substantial data outputs for di(cid:128) erent levels of geography became a viable
and attractive option. The development of computer-readable small area statistics
(SAS) began in Britain in 1961, when data were made available for the ® rst time for
individual EDs. Denham ( 1980) estimated a 40± 50 fold increase in the volume of
statistics produced on the introduction of the SAS. In 1971 a peak in the quantity
of printed pages was reached, while computer-readable published census output was
produced for more than one geography. Since then, the volume of tabulated data
has continued to increase, but only in digital form. In a development well ahead of
its time, individual records were geographically referenced, permitting the production
of data for both ED geography and for a regular geographical grid (CRU/
OPCS/GRO (S), 1980 ). The debate about the number of separate geographies which
should be produced, and the possible violation of census con® dentiality by di(cid:128) erenc-
ing of
incompatible geographies is still under way ( Rees 1997). This period is
characterized by the availability of published census statistics in digital form, but
without an accompanying digital geography. Early computer-produced census atlases
were reliant either on local digitizing from paper source maps or massively simpli® ed
polygons with few points (see, for example Shepherd et al. 1974 ).

The next important advance, identi® ed by stage three in the model, is the advent
of digital census geographies. In the US, the DIME system provided partial coverage
in 1971, initially covering only metropolitan areas ( Barr 1993 ). In Britain, the 1971
grid square SAS required no boundaries, but approximate `population-weighted’

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 676

D. Martin

centroid locations were produced for each ED. The grid square data permitted
further ¯ exibility in the mapping and analysis of the data by computer. Rhind ( 1975)
noted that `o(cid:129) cial’ mapping of census results had been virtually nonexistent from
1851 to 1961. By 1981 DIME coverage was extended, and digital ward boundaries
were available in the UK; by 1991 national digital coverage of the smallest areas for
which data were published was available in both countries, in the form of ED-Line
and ED91 in the UK, and TIGER in the US ( Barr 1996). These data have continued
to be very widely used in the rapidly broadening range of GIS applications to which
census data are an important input.

Stage three is characterized not only by the advent of digital census boundaries,
but by a growth of techniques for remodelling census data after publication, using
digital representations of manually designed geographies. The growth of both data
and techniques in this area is intimately bound up with the widespread use of GIS
from the late 1980s, although many approaches to problems such as surface genera-
tion and areal interpolation actually pre-date the data and computing environments
which ensured their widespread applicability (e.g. Schmid and MacCannell 1955 ). In
addition, increasing linkage has occurred between census and postal geographies, as
postal geographies have emerged as the dominant georeferencing system for socioe-
conomic data, although the details of postal geographies vary between countries
( Raper et al. 1992). 1991 UK Census forms were postcoded, allowing the creation
of a set of postcode-sector SAS, quite separate from the data collection geography,
although the output units were much larger than EDs.

The ® nal stage in the table describes a situation in which it is possible to create
custom census geographies in advance of the census, and most importantly to
separate collection and output geography. The TIGER database can be used for the
construction of many di(cid:128) erent geographies in the US, but this has not included the
automated creation of census output geography, which has continued to use an
essentially conventional approach, although output area boundaries are constructed
from the components of the digital database. The presence of comprehensive address
registers, such as that created directly for census use in the US, and as a general
purpose georeferencing system in the UK, are important components in the imple-
mentation of such and approach. Automated zone design and districting algorithms
have a long history (see Openshaw 1977), but have not previously been used by the
census o(cid:129) ces in geography design. Openshaw and Rao ( 1995) present a series of
zone design techniques for the `re-engineering’ of 1991 geography by the recombina-
tion of EDs into new regions standardized by population size or some other statistical
measure. Here,
it is suggested that given comprehensively georeferenced census
databases, such techniques can and should be used for the engineering of census
output geographies, and that collection and output geographies may now be entirely
separated.

3. Remodelling census geography

Stage 3 of the model presented above represents the complete digital recording
of census geography, but not the direct automation of the geography design process.
The process is summarized in ® gure 1(a). The principal inputs to this system are
paper mapping of the previous census, and a series of working practices concerning
factors such as enumerator workload and boundary placement. The census geo-
graphy planner attempts to resolve these issues and record changes either manually
or by on-screen digitizing, to create output geography for the next census. Trainor

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 Optimizing census geography

677

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Census geography design procedures (a) at stage three, and (b) stage four.

( 1990) describes the move to `fully automated cartography’ at the US Bureau of the
Census. He notes the limited role which cartography had played in previous censuses,
and emphasizes the importance of automated map production in the TIGER system.
Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that the automation referred to by Trainor
concerns the map production systems for enumerator guidance, data aggregation
and presentation, but not the design of the output areas themselves, which forms
stage 4 of our model.

The widespread availability of digital census geographies and spatial data hand-
ling tools has fostered the growth of many simple census mapping packages, and
has also permitted signi® cant advances in the remodelling of census data from one
geography to another. This work is reviewed most helpfully by Goodchild et al.
( 1993), who particularly recognize that the interpolation of census information
frameworks may be helpfully viewed as one of
between two incompatible areal
estimating the characteristics of an underlying density surface. Flowerdew and Green
( 1991) describe the areal interpolation problem in terms of `source’ areas, for which
data are available, `target’ areas, for which data are required, and `intermediate’ areas

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 678

D. Martin

representing the overlap of source and target areal units. Their approach to the areal
interpolation problem concerns the best methods for estimation of the intermediate
units. The availability of GIS tools has permitted many di(cid:128) erent approaches to this
family of problems, including the creation of surface representations of census data
from population-weighted ED centroids ( Bracken and Martin 1995, Martin 1996 b),
and by dasymetric mapping using ancillary data sources ( Langford and Unwin
1994 ). Within this area, we might also include the re-presentation of census geography
using cartographic techniques such as cartogram construction demonstrated by
Dorling ( 1993, 1995), designed to overcome the misleading e(cid:128) ects of variable popula-
tion and areal extent in the presentation of census data by collection geography. In
each of these examples, the objective has been to create census output for a geography
di(cid:128) erent to that for which the data were collected and published, due to the failure
of a collection-based geography to meet output needs in some particular context.

Bracken and Martin ( 1995 ) describe the remodelling of small area census data,
in order to provide a set of remodelled grid-based statistics for England, Wales and
Scotland. Such a dataset was created directly from the small area statistics and
centroid locations, in advance of the availability of digital boundary data, and the
two approaches are compared by Martin ( 1996 b). Grid square geographies are
often of utility when relating the census to environmental information, but can only
be viewed as a set of general purpose intermediate zones in the areal interpolation
context. The advent of fully georeferenced census returns in a GIS environment
should force an assessment as to whether census output could be made better, not
by some form of post-publication areal interpolation, but by pre-publication design.
Despite the utility of the remodelling approaches in specialist applications, the
majority of census users require geographies which they can easily understand, and
which can be readily related to other geographies in common usage, hence pressure
for the closer integration of census and postal geographies ( Dugmore 1996 ). In other
words, the use of enumeration geographies for data output is a sub-optimal solution,
but a fully digital environment suggests the possibility of automatically controlling
certain characteristics of output geography. It is to the implementation of such an
approach that we now turn.

4. Automated census geography design

The creation of any census output geography is fundamentally limited by the
nature of the building blocks for which data may be aggregated and which can
therefore be combined by the census o(cid:129) ces to create output areas. Denham ( 1980)
notes `OPCS ( The Census O(cid:129) ce for England and Wales) has recognized that EDs
were a compromise between the requirements of census ® eld and processing opera-
tions and the requirements of users’ ( p. 10). Enumeration areas should be designed
in such a way as to standardize workload between enumerators and to ensure
complete coverage. For many applications, output areas should be standardized by
population size, geographical shape and perhaps social composition. In the past (in
stages 1 to 3 of the model presented above), where only one small area geography
has been created, the needs of enumeration have predominated, and the compromise
has been made largely at the expense of output geography. The di(cid:129) culties caused
by the use of arbitrary geographical areas and the failure of even small enumeration
districts to re¯ ect underlying social geographies are well documented (Openshaw
1984; Morphet 1993 ), and these pose particular problems for the statistical analysis
of such data (e.g. Green and Flowerdew 1996). Users have attempted to overcome

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 Optimizing census geography

679

aspects of these problems by interpolation or remodelling, but no such approach
can o(cid:128) er the same authority as a re-aggregation of the raw data into a more
appropriate output geography. Alternatives made possible by the georeferencing of
every census return are the creation of an optimal general purpose geography, for
the production of standard output (for which there will almost certainly always be
demand ); and the direct aggregation of data for user-de® ned geography, which would
require sophisticated implementation of thresholding and data protection measures.
The ® rst of these is illustrated here, and the second considered more brie¯ y.

A prototype system has been developed by the author for the automatic creation
of output areas for the 2001 Census in England and Wales, which is independent of
the collection geography to be used. This approach is summarized in ® gure 1 (b) and
explained more fully in Martin ( 1997). The ® gure contrasts the stage 4 and stage 3
approaches to geography design, highlighting the way in which a fully digital base
permits the construction of multiple geographies. The geographical base can be used
in GIS-assisted manual design to create collection geography, e(cid:128) ectively automating
the earlier way of working. More importantly, the digital geographical base can be
used to construct a set of building blocks, to which automated procedures are applied
to create a separate output geography, optimized according to particular design
criteria. This has been made possible by the advent of address-level georeferencing
with the completion of Ordnance Survey’s ADDRESS-POINT product early in
1996, giving a 0.1 m resolution grid reference for every postal address ( Elliott et al.
1993). The prototype output geography design system has been assembled using
components of the geographical area planning system (GAPS) being used by the
O(cid:129) ce for National Statistics (ONS, formerly OPCS) to handle the 1997 Census Test,
together with some custom programs. GAPS is an application built using Arc/Info
and Oracle, containing individual address locations, statutory boundaries, previous
census geography and scanned raster background mapping. GAPS has been designed
to replicate the ED planning process previously undertaken manually, permitting
planners to reallocate addresses and digitize boundaries interactively, with on-screen
display of ED design constraints such as numbers of addresses, ED size, estimated
enumeration di(cid:129) culty etc., as illustrated by the upper ¯ ow in ® gure 1(b). The system
facilitates the production of address lists and maps for enumerators without the need
for the large paper map base used in the past, and o(cid:128) ers the potential
for the
development of a number of new digital products.

Output geography design is represented by the lower ¯ ow in ® gure 1( b), and has
been undertaken by the adoption of unit postcodes as building blocks, although
there is no conceptual reason why individual properties might not be the elemental
units, given adequate digital geographical data. Unit postcodes typically contain
around 15 addresses, although in England and Wales they have no formally de® ned
boundaries, and (as in the US), they do not neatly aggregate to administrative
boundaries. Postcode boundaries have been created by generating Thiessen polygons
around each address location, clipped to ED boundaries in the prototype application,
and adjacent address polygons have then been merged if they share the same
postcode, but split across any statutory boundaries which must be retained in the
published output. This creates a set of postcode polygons from which an output
geography may be created. The contiguity matrix and boundary lengths for these
building blocks are then extracted from the GIS and used in an automated zoning
program, based on the AZP described by Openshaw and Rao ( 1995), with some
modi® cations for the speci® c requirements of census output. AZP provides an iterat-

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 680

D. Martin

ive approach to output area design in which possible modi® cations to an initial
random aggregation of building blocks into output areas are evaluated, and those
changes adopted which improve the value of an overall objective function.
Components of the objective function used here are the squared di(cid:128) erence from a
target output area population, squared boundary length and the squared di(cid:128) erence
from a completely uniform social composition (measured here in terms of the propor-
tion of households falling into various tenure classes).

Figures 2 (a)±

(c) illustrate the application of this approach to a small study area
in the Sandwell area of Birmingham, a suburban area on the edge of a major
conurbation in the West Midlands of the UK. Sandwell was one of the areas chosen
for the 1997 Census test in England and Wales. In these examples, a target output
area population of 250 has been used, together with a minimum threshold of 100.
The 1991 enumeration-based geography in this area produced a mean ED population
of 509, with a standard deviation of 160 and maximum of 862, while some EDs fell
below the population threshold of 50, below which published data were restricted.
Two levels of geography are illustrated in each map. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show the
unit postcode building block boundaries (thin lines), together with two automatically
generated output geographies ( bold lines). In (a), the output areas have been designed
with the sole objective of standardizing population size, while in (b) equal weight
has been given to population size, boundary length and tenure homogeneity con-
straints. Solution (a) gives a mean population of 224, with a standard deviation of
60, while (b) has a mean of 246 and standard deviation of 78. Output areas are
aggregations of whole unit postcodes, providing these do not cross higher level
statutory boundaries. Figure 2(c) shows the same output geography as (b) as thin
lines, with the actual 1991 enumeration geography superimposed in bold. This ® gure
serves to illustrate the much smaller output areas which may be achieved while still
preserving con® dentiality thresholds. The greatest di(cid:128) erences between 1991 geo-
graphy and the approach proposed here are seen in urban areas, such as that
illustrated, where stage 3 geography design tends to produce both extremely high
and low ED populations. The relationship between these synthetic boundaries and
the underlying urban geography are illustrated by ® gure 3, which shows, for a small
part of Sandwell, the output area boundaries superimposed on the background
Ordnance Survey mapping.

Standardization of output area population alone results in more output areas,
and greater internal homogeneity, but this is further improved by using the explicit
homogeneity constraint. In practice, output geography design using homogeneity
constraints could probably only be undertaken after the tabulation of census output,
whereas a system using basic population estimates and boundary constraints could
be produced in advance of the census. Such automated zoning procedures could be
incorporated into the GAPS application being used by ONS, and might present a
similar appearance to the ZDES system described by Openshaw and Rao ( 1995),
but in the current example, this has not been possible due the need to keep the sub-
publication census data used in zone design on a standalone computer to meet 1991
Census con® dentiality requirements. Closer integration between the GIS and auto-
mated zoning algorithm would permit more sophisticated controls over output area
shape to be used.

The implementation of any new approach is not without its challenges. One of
the major obstacles to the widespread acceptance of such an approach is likely to
be resistance to `arti® cial’ automatically created boundaries, which may not always

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 Optimizing census geography

681

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2.

(a). Output geography optimized on population size ( bold lines) superimposed on
unit postcode boundaries for Sandwell study area. (b). Output geography optimized on
population size, social homogeneity and boundary length ( bold lines), superimposed on
unit postcode boundaries for Sandwell study area. (c). 1991 ED boundaries ( bold lines)
superimposed on output geography optimized on population size, social homogeneity
and boundary length for Sandwell study area.

follow clearly identi® able features on the ground, despite enclosing more standardized
populations. In reality, all census small areas are arti® cial areal aggregations imposed
on complex underlying socioeconomic distributions, and the automated output
geography proposed here is in many ways better controlled than traditional small
area geographies. Others may argue against the creation of another new geography
as a matter of principle: although there are strong arguments for the retention of
ED boundaries from the previous census, 1991 experience suggests that this is very

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 682

D. Martin

Figure 3. Window on Sandwell study area, showing relationship between output area bound-
aries and underlying Ordnance Survey mapping. Background mapping reproduced by
permission of the Ordnance Survey Ñ Crown copyright.

di(cid:129) cult to achieve, with 68% of 1981 EDs requiring some rede® nition. A further fear
may relate to census con® dentiality, but while the combination of address georefer-
encing with census data theoretically makes record linkage between the census and
other administrative datasets more readily achievable, the entire system still sits
within the existing census con® dentiality and security constraints, and does not raise
new con® dentiality issues in its own right. The maintenance of a fully address-
referenced census database paves the way for in® nitely ¯ exible direct linkage between
census data and future administrative geographies, and is quite independent of the
postcode system as a means of georeferencing small areas.

5. Discussion and conclusions

A four-stage historical model has been presented, illustrating the way in which
the handling of census geographies has been transformed since the 1960s by the
successive implementation of digital methods for the encoding of census returns and
collection geography. Nevertheless, the continued publication of census data by

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 Optimizing census geography

683

collection geography imposes the organizational constraints of enumeration on
subsequent analysis and impairs the use of the data, which are collected at consider-
able expense. Various GIS-based attempts have been made to provide general-
purpose data remodelling tools by areal interpolation and surface construction, but
these are fundamentally limited by the basic building blocks available, and cannot
fully overcome the primacy of enumeration constraints in geography design. The
paper has shown how a fully georeferenced census database permits the separation
of collection and output geographies from their conception, and supports the creation
of an output geography optimized according to speci® c criteria which achieves a
good degree of statistical standardization, while maintaining a strong relationship
with the most important address and postcode based end-user geographies. Such an
approach can also free enumeration geography from arti® cial constraints imposed
by the need to follow output constraints such as observance of administrative
boundaries. Automated output geography design requires an association between
each census return and a digital geographic base, but address-level georeferencing is
not essential, providing digital boundaries can be created (manually or automatically)
for an appropriate set of small building blocks. Constraints associated with comput-
ing power for such a task are fast disappearing, and many aspects of the task may
be undertaken in advance of the census.

A fully georeferenced census database o(cid:128) ers enormous potential for subsequent
updating, and for reaggregation to future administrative geographies which can be
expected to come into e(cid:128) ect during the intercensal period. The feasibility of such
approaches will be to a large degree dependent on the cost recovery demands placed
on national census agencies, and the ownership and cost of the digital geographical
base which must be built into the census database. It seems likely that there will
always be a need for geographical data remodelling tools for some applications,
although it has been suggested in recent discussion of the 2001 UK Census ( Rees
1997) that much of the requirement for remodelling might be overcome by a totally
¯ exible output system. Such a system, which might be provided online, would access
the main census database in order to provide user-speci® ed cross-tabulations for
user-speci® ed geographical areas. Aspects of this approach have been investigated
by Rhind et al. ( 1990 ), and there appear to be no well-founded reasons why such a
system could not be made to work. The key outstanding issues concern the imple-
mentation of a su(cid:129) ciently secure access model, which would be able to assess each
user-speci® ed geography and tabulation in order to prevent the release of census
data for sub-threshold areas or groups by di(cid:128) erencing with a previously requested
output. It has already been observed that innovations discussed in the run-up to
one decade’s censuses have frequently been adopted in the next, but census o(cid:129) ces
are faced with the very real di(cid:129) culty in 1998 of anticipating the user computing
environments of 2006, in order to develop the most appropriate access models.

It has already been suggested here that most census users really require output
geographies which are easily understood, and closely related to other geographies
in common usage. For this reason, it is anticipated that there will always be a need
for standard output geographies, which aggregate neatly into the most important
administrative and political units. A future stage of the census geography model may
indeed be the provision of user-de® ned output from a totally ¯ exible geographical
base, but it would appear that a most important development for the stage 4 censuses
of the early 2000s might be the ® nal separation of collection and standard output
geographies, in such a way that each may be optimal for their own clearly de® ned
purpose.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 684

D. Martin

Acknowledgments

Part of the work described in this paper was undertaken while on study leave
from the University of Southampton at the O(cid:129) ce for National Statistics in Titch® eld,
UK. Grateful thanks are extended to ONS sta(cid:128) for their assistance, but all views in
this paper remain the responsibility of the author.

References
Barr, R., 1993, Census geography II: a review. In T he 1991 Census user’s guide, edited by A.

Dale and C. Marsh ( London: HMSO), pp. 70± 83.

Barr, R., 1996, A comparison of aspects of the US and UK censuses of population.

T ransactions in Geographical Information Systems, 1, 49± 60.

CRU/OPCS/GRO (S), 1980, People in Britain: a census atlas (London: HMSO).
Denham, C., 1980, The geography of the Census: 1971 and 1981. Population T rends, 19, 6± 12.
Dewdney, J. C., 1983, Censuses past and present. In A Census user’s handbook , edited by D.

Rhind (London: Methuen), pp. 1± 16.

Dorling, D., 1993, Map design for census mapping. T he Cartographi c Journal, 30, 167± 183.
Dorling, D., 1995, A new social atlas of Britain (Chichester: Wiley).
Dugmore, K., 1996, What do users want from the 2001 Census? In L ooking towards the 2001

Census. OPCS Occasional Paper 46 (London: OPCS), pp. 21± 23.

Elliott, L., McCallum, D. and Pretty, S., 1993, ADDRESS-POINT: fusion of OS mapping
precision and Royal Mail postal addresses. In Proceedings AGI 93 (London: AGI ),
pp. PRIVATE

Flowerdew, R. and Green, M., 1991, Data integration: statistical methods for transferring
data between zonal systems. In Handling Geographical Information: Methodology and
Potential Applications, edited by I. Masser and M. Blakemore ( Harlow: Longman),
pp. 38± 54.

Green, M. and Flowerdew, R., 1996, New evidence on the modi® able areal unit problem In
Spatial Analysis: Modelling in a GIS Environment, edited by P. Longley and M. Batty
(Cambridge: GeoInformation International ), pp. 41± 54.

Goodchild, M. F., Anselin, L. and Deichmann, U., 1993, A framework for the areal
interpolation of socioeconomic data. Environment and Planning A, 25, 383± 397
Langford, M. and Unwin, D., 1994, Generating and mapping population density surfaces
with a geographical information system. T he Cartographi c Journal, 31, 21± 26.
Martin, D., 1995, Censuses and the modelling of population in GIS. In GIS for Business and
Service Planning, edited by P. Longley and G. Clarke (Cambridge: GeoInformation
International ), pp. 48± 72.

Martin, D., 1996 a, Geographic information systems: socioeconomic applications. 2nd edition

( London: Routledge).

Martin, D., 1996 b, An assessment of surface and zonal models of population. International

Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 10, 973± 989.

Martin, D., 1997, From enumeration districts to output areas: experiments in the automated

creation of a census output geography. Population T rends, 88, 36± 42.

Mills, I., 1987, Developments in Census-taking since 1841. Population T rends, 48, 37± 44.
Morphet, C., 1993, The mapping of small-area census dataÐ

a consideration of the e(cid:128) ects of

enumeration district boundaries. Environment and Planning A, 25, 1267± 1277.
Openshaw, S., 1977, A geographical solution to scale and aggregation problems in region-
building, partitioning and spatial modelling. T ransactions of the Institute of British
Geographers, NS 2, 459± 72.

Openshaw, S., 1984, T he modi® able areal unit problem. Concepts and Techniques in Modern

Openshaw, S. and Rao, L., 1995, Algorithms for reengineering 1991 Census geography.

Geography 38 (Norwich: Geo Books).

Environment and Planning A, 27, 425± 446.

Raper, J., Rhind, D. and Shepherd, J., 1992, Postcodes: the new geography . (Longman:

Harlow) .

Redfern, P., 1981, Census 1981Ð

an historical and international perspective 2: methods and

technology. Population T rends, 23, 11± 15.

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 Optimizing census geography

685

Rees, P. (editor), 1997 T he Debate about the Geography of the 2001 Census: Collected Papers
f rom 1995± 6 Working paper 91/1 (Leeds: School of Geography, University of Leeds).

Rhind, D. W., 1975, Mapping the 1971 Census by computer. Population T rends, 2, 9± 12.
Rhind, D. W., 1991, Counting the people. In Geographical Information Systems: Principles and
Applications, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild and D. W. Rhind (London:
Longman), pp. 127± 137.

Rhind, D. W., Cole, K., Armstrong, M., Chow, L. and Openshaw, S., 1990, An online,
secure and in® nitely ¯ exible database system for the national census of population.
Working paper 14 (London: South East Regional Research Laboratory, Birkbeck
College).

Robinson, A. H., Morrison, J. L., Muehrcke, P. C., Kimerling, A. J. and Guptill, S. C.,

1995, Elements of Cartography, 6th edition (Chichester: Wiley).

Schmid, C. F. and Maccannell, E. H., 1955, Basic problems, techniques and theory of
isopleth mapping. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 50, 220± 239.
Shepherd, J., Westaway, J. and Lee, T., 1974, A social atlas of L ondon (Oxford: Clarendon

Trainor, T. F., 1990, Fully automated cartography: a major transition at the Census Bureau.

Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 17, 27± 38.

United Nations, 1992, Handbook of population and housing censuses: Part 1 (New York:

Press).

United Nations).

Downloaded by [Florida Atlantic University] at 00:06 06 November 2015 