The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2013

Vol. 50 No. 1

pp. 33–42

February 2013

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

From LiDAR Data to Forest Representation on Multi-Scale
Maps

Friederike Schwarzbach1,2, Juha Oksanen1, L. Tiina Sarjakoski1 and
Tapani Sarjakoski1

1 Department of Geoinformatics and Cartography, Finnish Geodetic Institute, PO Box 15, FIN-02431 Masala,
Finland. 2Institute for Cartography, Technical University Dresden, Dresden 01069, Germany
Email: friederike.schwarzbach@gmail.com

The paper describes processing methods for portraying forest areas on maps utilizing point symbols. The forest map design
is based on the use of individual tree data, which is detected from airborne laser scanning data and colour-infrared
orthophotos. Several generalisation and symbolisation approaches have been tested in order to use the tree data set for
cartographic purposes. Our generalisation method differentiates between trees in dense forests and tree structures in open
areas, such as isolated trees, tree groups, tree rows and sparsely scattered trees. The tree symbols are integrated visually
with the other map content. The results show that the production of attractive and useful maps requires an advanced
generalisation method due to the massive amount of tree objects extracted from the laser scanning data as well as a
generalisation level and a symbol type for the trees that are carefully chosen according to the map scale. Furthermore,
sophisticated visualisation methods are needed for composing the maps. The created maps are part of a project that aims
at supporting outdoor activities using multi-scale maps as part of a multi-publishing service.

Keywords: tree detection, cartographic generalisation, point symbols, map design, multi-publishing

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

The most commonly used representation of forest areas in
topographic maps are green ﬁlled polygons, together with
geometric or simpliﬁed pictorial tree symbols that are usually
differentiated according to the predominant forest type
(Collier et al., 1998). Pictorial forest representations can be
found on several kinds of maps throughout history. The
representations range from artistic elements in hand-drawn
maps to more or less pictographic point symbols that are
utilized to ﬁll in the forested areas with a symbol pattern
(Figure 1). Use of pictorial symbols supports an under-
standing of maps, especially when maps are read by
inexperienced map users or in cases where the option to
use a map legend is limited or impossible (van den Worm,
2001). Thus, they are well suited to presenting the map
content in a simple, pleasant and intuitive manner, as is
recommended in guidelines for user-centred map design
(Nivala et al., 2008). Considering these facts, there is a user-
driven motivation for suggesting a new map design that is
different from the currently available Finnish outdoor maps
for leisure-time hikers. On these maps, forests in Finland are
usually represented based on the topographic database of the
National Land Survey of Finland. Since there is no geometry
information stored in the database for boundaries of forest

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000015

areas, they are shown with white background colour and
sparse geometric symbols for coniferous, deciduous or mixed
forests (Figure 1g). Especially for the tourists in the Finnish
National Parks, representing forested areas using a white
colour might be distracting and different from what people
from many other countries are used to see.

The design of visually attractive maps is further motivated
by technological advancements, such as the availability of
appropriate data sources like aerial laser scanning data and
digital orthophotos, and the possibilities for data processing
offered by modern hardware and software. Patterson
(2002) describes a design workﬂow for the United States
that utilizes
small-scale maps
National Park Service’s
drawing and image-processing techniques,
for example,
texture substitution and shadow effects for forest areas.
He found out that a sophisticated, ‘natural-looking’ map
design attracts the attention of visitors to the national park
and motivates them to use the maps. An alternative method
is the creation of a synthetic point pattern inside existing
polygons representing, for instance, forest stands (Punt
et al., 2006; Jenny et al., 2010). This approach includes a
random point pattern to symbolize natural forests and, in
contrast, a grid-like regular point distribution for artiﬁcial
plantations, like orchards.

34

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. Examples of forest representation in maps throughout history. Printed maps: (a) ‘Saxoniae superioris’, Gerhard Mercator, 1595;
(b) Maps of Finnish cities, Helsinki – northern downtown area, Finland, 1902; (c) Topographical map (‘Messtischblatt’), Saxony, Germany,
1908; (d) Hiking map ‘Schrammsteingebiet’, Germany, 2005. Web maps: (e) OSMC Hiking and Riding map, Germany; (f) eGoTrek hiking
map ‘Reisefu¨hrer Wandern & Radfahren’, Germany; (g) ‘Map Site’, web service of the National Land Survey of Finland. The copyrights of
the images are listed in the section on ‘Note’1

The present paper describes the process for creating
outdoor maps (further referred to as ‘Forest maps’), in
which the forests detected from airborne laser scanning
(ALS) data and colour-infrared (CIR) orthophotos are
represented cartographically at multiple levels of scale. The
maps are produced within the context of the research
project MenoMaps (2008–2010) and its follow-up project,
MenoMaps II (2010–2013), led by the Finnish Geodetic
Institute (FGI) (Sarjakoski et al., 2010a; Oksanen et al.,
2011). The primary aim of the Forest maps is to suggest a
visualizing method that differs from the current map design
of Finnish hiking maps and, thus, to attract larger user
groups, such as inexperienced map users. Another goal is to
carry out experiments in order to ﬁnd new ways of
cartographic visualisation.

Our ALS- and CIR-based approach has several advantages
compared with other forest mapping methods, such as the
ability to extract from historical maps (Leyk and Boesch,
2008), forest stand databases (Wang et al., 2004) or the
above-mentioned image-processing and point pattern-gen-
eration techniques. Our tree detection results in a three-
dimensional data set that includes the location as well as the
type, approximate height and crown diameter of individual
trees. It considers not only forested areas, but also special
structures, like scattered trees, tree rows and isolated trees,
which could serve as landmarks for hikers in open areas. These
structures can be represented on the maps at their real
location, which may be critical for a real-world navigation
situation. Additionally, the method does not need predeﬁned
forest boundaries, as it is required for the creation of
point patterns within polygons. Finally, the detection process
from ALS- and CIR-based data provides a large amount
of individual tree locations. Thus, the resulting data set is
ﬂexible concerning visualisations at various scales. In order to
use the tree data set for cartographic purposes, generalisation

and symbolisation methods must be applied. Furthermore,
the tree symbols must be integrated with the other map
content.

The data and methods that we used and investigated in
the cause of the Forest map creation process are described
in the next sections, followed by a discussion of the results,
our conclusions and suggestions for future work.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data sets used for the map creation are part of the FGI’s
Nuuksio test environment for ubiquitous geospatial services
(Sarjakoski et al., 2007). The test environment covers an
area of about 250 km2 around Nuuksio National Park,
which is near the city of Helsinki in southern Finland. The
area is a landscape mosaic of
lakes, bogs and densely
forested valleys and gorges, as well as dry hilly outcrops of
bedrock (Metsa¨hallitus, 2011a). While sparse pine forests
dominate the outcrops, more wet and nutrient-rich areas
are mostly covered by mixed forests consisting spruce,
birch, aspen and alder (Metsa¨hallitus, 2011b). The ALS
point clouds were produced in May 2006 and June 2007,
ﬂown at an altitude of 1000–1100 m. The point density
varies from between 4.5 (ﬂight 2006) and 8.9 (ﬂight 2007)
points/m2. The laser points are stored as TerraScan binary
ﬁles and ﬁltered into classes for ground, vegetation and
building roof points. The CIR orthophotos were produced
to 0.2 m ground resolution from the digital aerial images
taken in June 2007 and the digital elevation model derived
from the ALS data. The ﬁnal tree symbols are integrated
with maps that utilize topographical data sets from the
National Land Survey in Finland and FGI’s Nuuksio test
environment.

Forest Representation on Multi-Scale Maps

35

Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the tree detection process from ALS data and false-colour orthophotos. The trees are detected in iterative
ﬁltering and detection steps. The resulting geometric models are converted into a GIS point data set that stores the location and attributes for
each tree

The tree detection process from ALS point clouds and CIR
orthophotos
Several methods for tree detection from ALS point clouds,
mainly for forest inventory purposes, have been discussed
recently in many scientiﬁc publications (for an overview of
different approaches, see Hyyppa¨ et al., 2004). Kao et al.
(2005) present algorithms for estimating the density and
characteristics of forest canopy structures based on multi-
return ALS data for visual analysis purposes. The additional
use of CIR images for tree extraction is described, for
example, by Stelzl et al. (2006) and Straub et al. (2009). The
tools for processing ALS data and assigning colour values
from aerial images to laser points, as well as a method for tree
detection, are implemented in the software TerraScanTM and
TerraPhotoTM (Terrasolid, Helsinki, Finland), which run on
top of the program MicroStationTM (Bentley Systems,
Exton, PA, USA). We used these programs for detecting
the tree locations automatically in order to get a data set that
stores the coordinates for each tree and the type of tree, as
well as the approximate height and crown diameter of each
tree.

TerraScan utilizes tree shape deﬁnitions for detecting trees
in the point cloud. Tree shape deﬁnitions are simpliﬁed
geometric descriptions (including a cross-section, minimum
and maximum height values and the width variation) of tree
crowns that are typical for a speciﬁc tree type or species
(Soininen, 2011). However, the capability of the program to
differentiate between the coniferous and deciduous trees in
our test area was not reliable based on the geometric tree
shape deﬁnitions due to the similarity of tree crown cross
sections for both tree types in our test environment.
Furthermore, in dense forest areas, it was not possible for
the detection tool to accurately distinguish between indivi-
dual trees. Therefore, in the ﬁrst step, we assigned the colour
values of the CIR orthophotos to the laser points in the
vegetation class on a pixel-to-point basis. We then used the
colour attributes to ﬁlter the laser points into separate classes
of points representing reﬂections from coniferous and
deciduous trees. Next, we created three different shape
deﬁnitions, one for each coniferous and deciduous tree-type
as well as an additional shape for the small trees. Finally, we
applied the shape-based tree detection tool separately for the
point classes. The ﬁltering of the laser points into tree-type
classes and the detection tool were performed iteratively in
order to get a close-to-reality amount and distribution of
detected trees from our point cloud. The laser points from
which a tree has been detected were ﬁltered into a separate
class and thus excluded from further iterations.

Our detection process resulted in a geometric tree model
for each tree, from which the tree location (xy coordinates),
its approximate height and its crown diameter could be
derived. We exported all of the tree models for each tree
type into a text ﬁle. Finally, we converted the text ﬁles into
point shapeﬁles, with each point representing the location
of one detected tree and storing the attributes for that
particular tree. The whole process is illustrated in Figure 2.
Due to the functionality of the tree detection tool
in
TerraScan and our detection workﬂow, there were some
places where two trees were detected at a location in which
there was only one tree. We removed one of these incorrect
‘double trees’ if the distance between the trees was smaller
than half of the radius of the tree crowns. The trees were
weighted according to their type, with deciduous trees
having the highest weight and small trees having the lowest,
in order to decide which tree will be removed. This ranking
order led to the best result according to a visual comparison
of the tree type distribution in the ﬁnal tree data set and the
orthophotos.

Cartographic generalisation and symbolisation of the tree data
Due to the close-to-reality amount of trees detected from
the ALS data, the number of trees being displayed on the
maps must be reduced by generalisation methods. Con-
ceptual generalisation models and operators are frequently
discussed in the cartographic literature (for example,
Slocum et al., 2004; Regnauld and McMaster, 2007;
Sarjakoski, 2007). The point generalisation operators
suitable for our tree generalisation are reﬁnement and
typiﬁcation (Shea and McMaster, 1989; McMaster and
Shea, 1992). Both operators involve a selective display of
the points, while preserving the overall density pattern. The
reﬁnement operator keeps the original point locations, while
the typiﬁcation operator maintains only the approximate
location of the points. The aim for our Forest maps is to still
make it possible for
to perceive tree density
variations and the distribution of tree types in spite of the
removal of trees due to generalisation. At the same time,
isolated trees and noticeable tree groups and tree rows need
to be preserved.

readers

We investigated two approaches and their combination to
generalize the tree data set: random selection and an
iterative distance-based method (Table 1). The input for
the generalisation was the point shapeﬁle created after the
detection process. We utilized tools provided by the
software program ArcGISH for the generalisation process.

36

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Schematic illustration of the iterative distance-based generalisation method: (a) ﬁrst iteration, (b) third iteration, (c) tenth and last
step for replacing two nearby trees. Symbols: grey circles5original tree locations, polygons5aggregation polygons (a, b) or buffer areas (c),
and black crosses5tree locations that replace one or more original tree locations

The simplest way to perform a generalisation was by
using a random selection of displayed points, which
corresponds to the reﬁnement operator mentioned above.
We calculated a pseudo-random number for each tree using
the Mersenne Twister pseudo-random number generator,
which has a very large period (Matsumoto and Nishimura,
1998) and thus guarantees that sequences of pseudo-
random numbers are not repeated for large data sets. We
then applied a Structured Query Language expression for
the random selection of tree points at a speciﬁc general-
isation level; for example:

SELECT(cid:2) FROM trees random WHERE 0random0 w~0:80

where trees_random was the point data set, random was the
name of the ﬁeld in the attribute table that stores the
pseudo-random numbers and 0.80 was the generalisation
level. In this case, 80% of the points were removed and 20%
the random
lower generalisation levels,
displayed. At
method preserved the distribution of
the
perceptibility of density variation and partly the display of
linear structures, but it did not guarantee that prominent

tree types,

single trees were displayed or that small tree groups or tree
rows were represented in a suitable way. At higher
generalisation levels, differences in structures and density
variations were no longer distinguishable (Table 1,
left
column).

A more advanced generalisation method based on the
typiﬁcation operator has been tested using an iterative
distance-based approach (Figure 3). First, we connected
groups of at least three points that were clustered within a
distance d to form a polygon and placed a point at the
centroid of the polygon (Figure 3a). These new points and
the unaffected points from this iteration were combined
and went to the next iteration, for which d was increased
(Figure 3b). Since the distance-based clustering method
considered only point groups of more than three points, the
process did not affect groups of two points that are close to
one another. Therefore, as a last step in the process, we
deﬁned a buffer area around each tree and merged
overlapping areas into one polygon. We chose the radius
of the buffer in such a way that buffer areas around two
nearby tree points were merged. Then, we placed a point at
the centroid of each buffer area (Figure 3c) and the

Table 1. A comparison of the random and distance-based generalisation approaches related to different structures. The black crosses show

the location of trees in the generalized data set and the grey circles indicate the original tree locations without generalisation

Structure

Random

Distance-based

Generalisation method, generalisation level approximately 80%

Single trees/compact tree group

Tree row

Sparse trees

Dense trees

Forest Representation on Multi-Scale Maps

37

Figure 4. A comparison of different tree symbolisation methods: (a) pictorial tree symbols using different image textures for tree types, design
scale 1 : 3000, (b) pictorial tree symbols differentiated by symbol shape and colour according to the tree type, design scale 1 : 6000, (c) simple
point symbols using different colours for tree types, design scale 1 : 12 000. Tree symbol colours: dark green5coniferous trees, light green5
deciduous trees

resulting points formed the eligible generalized tree data
set. The parameters that inﬂuenced the generalisation were
the starting and ﬁnal distances for deﬁning the point
clusters. We found a value close to the mean value of the
minimum distances between the points in the original tree
data set to be a reasonable starting distance. The ﬁnal
distance for where to stop the generalisation process
appeared to be dependent on the intended map scale and
symbolisation method.

On the one hand, the advantage of the distance-based
generalisation method was that the isolated trees were
preserved. In contrast to the random method, tree groups
were replaced by one tree if the trees were close to each
other and formed a compact group. Furthermore, linear
structures like tree rows were represented after the general-
isation as well. On the other hand, it became more and
more difﬁcult to perceive the overall density of trees in the
forests with higher generalisation levels. In general, the
point distribution became more homogeneous between
areas of originally dense and sparse tree points (Table 1,
right column). Also,
the tree type attribute was not
considered during the generalisation process and so it had
to be newly derived for the trees in the generalized data set.
We used an operation that assigned the attributes of the
closest tree in the original tree data set to each tree in the
generalized data set. Another disadvantage of this approach
was the comparatively high computational effort for large
point data sets, which made the method inﬂexible and less
suited to large mapping areas.

To overcome the drawbacks of both the random and the
distance-based approach, we tested a combined method as
well. In it, we applied the distance-based method to areas
with single or sparse trees, while we generalized forest areas
with dense trees using the random method. We deﬁned the
threshold between sparse and dense areas by counting the
tree points within the neighbourhood around each point.
We put points with a low number of neighbours into the
sparse class, while we assigned all other points to the dense
class. For our test area, we found out by visually analysing
the data that a neighbourhood deﬁned by a circle with a
radius of 20 m and a threshold of 14 neighbouring points
was a suitable combination for the separation. Compared
with the random generalisation approach, the combined
method preserved isolated single trees and small compact
tree groups were represented by at least one tree. In areas of
low tree density, the overall distribution of trees was still
visible after generalisation. In contrast to the distance-based

approach, the combined method required less computa-
tional effort because the iterative process was applied only
to a small subset of the complete tree data set. However, the
impression of dense trees still got lost in areas of random
generalisation at higher generalisation levels.

The size and type of cartographic point symbols are
dependent upon the dedicated map scale. They are also
related to the minimum perceivable symbol size on different
map output devices. Guidelines for the symbolisation of
point features and investigations of the perceptibility of
symbols as a function of the resolution of map output
devices can be found in the cartographic literature (for
example, Imhof, 1972; Jenny et al., 2008).

During the creation process for our Forest maps, we
investigated several symbolisation methods scale-depen-
dently. The symbol types included simple point symbols
using different colours for tree types at smaller design scales
and pictorial tree symbols that distinguish tree types by
colour, size and shape, as well as more detailed pictorial tree
symbols utilizing textures for the different tree types at
larger design scales (Figure 4). In general, smaller symbols
and the lowest possible generalisation level supported the
perception of varying tree densities better than did larger
symbols with fewer trees displayed. Therefore, we used a
symbol size close to the minimal perceivable size suggested
in the literature and changed the type dependent on the
map scale in order to be able to display as many trees as
possible. Furthermore, with a larger symbol size,
the
appearance and design of the symbols as well as their
integration with the map was of increasing importance. This
is further discussed in the following section.

Map composition
For the design process of the Forest maps, we utilized the
programs ArcGIS (Esri, Redlands, CA, USA) for the creation
the data sets used in the maps and the general
of
the map elements, and PhotoshopH
symbolisation of
(Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA) for reﬁning the
symbolisation and composing the ﬁnal maps. The back-
ground map contained topographic elements, for example,
lakes, swamps, ﬁelds, sport areas, buildings, roads, hiking
paths and power lines, as well as several types of labels. We
adjusted the representation of the map elements to the map
design of the MenoMaps service. We integrated the tree data
with the other map content using a three-step process: (1)
changing the map background colour and using a shaded

38

The Cartographic Journal

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 6 shows examples of the Forest maps at design scales
1 : 6000 and 1 : 12 000, which are two out of six ﬁxed scales
deﬁned for the MenoMaps project. The maps have been
produced to be displayed on screens with a resolution of
about 96 dpi. It is intended to use them within the
MenoMaps map service as experimental background maps,
on top of which dynamic information such as hiking routes
and point-of-interest information are integrated (Oksanen
et al., 2011). The parameters used in the cause of the
creation process are listed in Table 2. The paragraphs of this
section discuss the results following the order of the Forest
map creation process.

The tree detection method results in tree data sets that
form a well-suited source for visualisation purposes in our
Forest maps. The large number of detected trees and their
storage in GIS point data sets provide a great deal of
ﬂexibility regarding their usage in maps at multiple scales
with several symbol types and support the application of
point generalisation methods. The separation of coniferous
and deciduous trees enables us to display forest areas by
visualizing different tree types, which follows the common
cartographic practice. Compared with the results from
artiﬁcial point pattern generation approaches, our results
better reﬂect reality due to the preservation of real-world
tree-type distribution and density patterns. In addition,
isolated trees and noticeable tree structures in open areas
are detected as well and may serve as an aid for users to
orientate themselves, for example, for hikers using the ﬁnal
maps. A shortcoming of the detection process that affects
our work is the need for a sophisticated and complex
workﬂow to get a reasonable result. The success of the tree-
type recognition depends on the spectral consistency of the
false-colour values and the precision of registration between
orthophotos and laser data over the entire detection area.
Varying point densities within the laser point cloud further
inﬂuence the tree detection results. A higher point density
enables a more conﬁdent detection of smaller trees and a
better tree type recognition based on the tree shape
deﬁnitions, at least for isolated and sparsely scattered trees.
A comparison between the amount of automatically
detected trees from our laser data with manually identiﬁed
trees from aerial images reveals that about 73% of the trees
over sample areas of about 5 ha have been detected. The
sample areas represent different tree densities and tree type
distributions. In dense forests, the detection method does
not recognize each single tree but the general distribution
of tree types is preserved. With a laser point density between
about 4.5 and 8.9 points/m2, the recognition of small or
thin trees fails in some cases. In spite of these limitations,
the detection process from our source data leads to
satisfying results for our visualisation purposes.

Of the generalisation methods that we investigated, we
consider the combination of random and distance-based
methods to be the best applicable approach, especially for
larger areas and in situations where the computational effort
begins to play a role. It preserves noticeable tree structures
in open areas, which is an advantage compared with a
completely random generalisation method, and it reduces
the processing time and effort signiﬁcantly in comparison
with the distance-based approach applied to all trees.

Figure 5. Drawing order of the pictorial tree symbols: (a) random,
(b) from north to south

relief that was created from the ALS-based digital elevation
model; (2) reﬁning the appearance of tree symbols; and (3)
applying additional settings for the order of symbol drawing
and map layers. The most signiﬁcant change compared with
many traditional Finnish outdoor maps was the use of a
green background for forested areas, because the display of
individual tree symbols on a white background let to a
graphical overweight for the trees. This was intensiﬁed by the
use of pictorial symbols which show a tree shape in a front-
view perspective on top of a common two-dimensional map.
the coloured background reduced the graphical
Thus,
the darker green tree symbols signiﬁcantly.
weight of
Furthermore,
the terrain forms were visualized by a
transparent shaded relief instead of contours, which also
helped to reduce the graphical overloading problem
introduced by the tree symbols and added the impression
of three-dimensionality to the map. We created a pixel-based
light-and-shadow effect for the tree symbols as well in order
to create visual coherence between the symbols and the
background. By using the same light source direction and
azimuth settings as for the shaded relief, the tree symbols
appeared to be well
integrated with the subjacent map
background. Additionally, we forced the drawing order of
the pictorial tree symbols from north to south on the map in
order to further improve the impression of spatial depth on
the maps (Figure 5). As a result, the tree symbols closer to
the southern boundary of the map overlapped only with trees
closer to the northern boundary.

Finally, we set the order of the map layers. Since the trees
were represented by point symbols, we displayed them on
top of other areal and linear elements. The use of light
colours for areas and comparable dark colours for the tree
symbols ensured the readability of the overlaid features. In
addition, we had to choose the generalisation level in such a
way that the trees did not completely cover a subjacent area.
To enable a good perceptibility of linear elements like roads
and paths and other small features like buildings, we removed
trees inside a buffer area around those elements. The size of
the buffer area depended on the map scale. Furthermore, we
applied an offset to the pictorial tree symbols to set the base
point to the lower centre of the symbol in order to avoid
trees ‘standing’ inside lakes or on roads. This also supported
the impression of depth on the map, because the tree
symbols overlapped with other elements only when the tree
was located south of the other element. Labels were the top-
most features on the maps and we used them as masks to
remove trees and other point-like elements below the texts.

Forest Representation on Multi-Scale Maps

39

Figure 6. Samples of the Forest maps for an on-screen display: (a) pictorial tree symbols at design scale 1 : 6000; (b) simple point symbols at
design scale 1 : 12 000

However, the automation of the generalisation process is an
essential precondition for its applicability to large mapping
areas. With all of the generalisation methods that we
investigated it becomes more and more difﬁcult
to
represent dense forests and differentiate between dense
and sparse trees, as well as between tree types, at increasing
generalisation levels. A random approach leads to a non-
uniform tree distribution that can be distinguished from
sparsely-scattered trees, but which looks unaesthetic to the
user. On the other hand, the distance-based method results
in a homogeneous tree distribution that may look more
pleasant to the observer, but which eliminates the ability to
distinguish between different tree densities. Our experi-
ments show that at the design scale of 1 : 6000, a fairly high
generalisation level (80% in Figure 6a) is required for maps
using pictorial symbols and aimed for an on-screen display.
The symbols with a size of 8 pixel (small trees), 11 pixel

(deciduous trees) and 12 pixel (coniferous trees) are at the
lower limit of the recommended symbol sizes for point-like
but complex symbols (for example, Jenny et al., 2008). It
can be concluded that the symbol type for the trees must be
chosen in such a way that a preferable low generalisation
level can be used at a speciﬁc scale. The representation of
trees by simple point symbols, as shown in Figure 6b, at a
design scale of 1 : 12 000, results in a texture-like visualisa-
tion similar to Patterson’s approach (Patterson, 2002),
which is well-suited to smaller scales. Due to the change of
the symbol type from pictorial symbols to simple point
symbols, the generalisation level can be comparatively low,
even when the scale is smaller (20% in Figure 6b). A
methodical solution for better preserving varying tree
densities also at higher generalisation levels could be
achieved by introducing a weight factor based on the local
number of trees to the distance-based generalisation process

Table 2. The parameters used for the creation of the Forest maps as shown in Figure 6

Point symbol type
Symbol size
Tree type differentiation
Generalisation method

Generalisation level
Start distance for distance-based generalisation method
End distance for distance-based generalisation method
Distance between trees replaced by buffering

Design scale 1 : 6000

Design scale 1 : 12 000

Pictorial
8–12 pixel
Symbol shape, colour, size
Combined (iterative distance-based
methodzrandom selection)
80%
5.5 m (3.5 pixel)
13.5 m (8.5 pixel)
8.0 m

Simple points
3 pixel
Symbol colour
Combined (iterative distance-based
methodzrandom selection)
20%
5.5 m (1.7 pixel)
9.5 m (3.0 pixel)
4.0 m

40

The Cartographic Journal

as suggested by Burghardt and Cecconi (2007) for a
typiﬁcation process of buildings.

In the ﬁnal map composition, the addition of a pixel-
based light-and-shadow effect on the tree symbols, the
drawing order of the pictorial symbols from north to south
and the use of shaded relief as the map background create
an impression of three-dimensionality for the maps. The
main shortcoming of the light-and-shadow effect is that the
overlapping symbols are treated as a graphical group and,
thus, the effect is applied to the group and not to the
individual symbols. This can be avoided by either utilizing a
shading method for individual tree symbols or by applying
an advanced generalisation method that considers the ﬁnal
symbol shape and size and reduces the overlap of the
symbols to a minimum. The removal of trees close to roads
and buildings inside a buffer area can cause the loss of
signiﬁcant individual trees. In such cases, a method that
replaces tree symbols instead of removing them would lead
to better results. Methods for resolving conﬂicts between
overlapping symbols or symbols that are too close to one
another are discussed by Jenny et al. (2010). However, we
consider a controlled overlap of pictorial tree symbols that is
independent of the tree type, but based instead on spatial
distribution to be advantageous for the representation of
dense trees in forests. Isolated trees that are not affected by
the generalisation could be represented by a different
in order to distinguish them from symbols that
symbol
represent tree groups after generalisation.

Our map creation process resulted in the Forest maps
that attracted the participants of a usability evaluation
carried out as part of the MenoMaps projects at the FGI.
The study is described in detail by Flink et al. (2011). One
part of the usability evaluation was the distribution of a
questionnaire among 166 persons at Nuuksio National Park
in order to gain information regarding the usability of four
different types of maps for hiking purposes. The maps
presented to the test participants were the Forest map using
pictorial tree symbols, two other maps of the MenoMaps
project, namely the Topographic map and the Relief map
(Oksanen et al., 2011), as well as an Outdoor map available
on the Finnish market. A major difference between the
maps was that the Forest map and the Relief map offered a
new and unfamiliar map design to the users (only 3% rated
each of the maps as familiar), while the design of the
Topographic map and the Outdoor map was rather familiar
to the users (41% and 54%). The results of the test show
that the users considered the Forest map as the most
beautiful (45%), most surprising (63%) and second most
interesting (27%) map compared with the other maps. On
the other hand, the Forest map was rated as the least useful
map (60%) and accordingly, it provided the least informa-
tion to 61% of the test participants. Due to the graphical
load caused by the tree symbols and the green background
colour, it seemed that the test users had more difﬁculty
accessing the information. Although most of the partici-
pants prefer to use familiar maps such as the Topographic
map (39%) and the Outdoor map (38%) for outdoor
activities, there appears to be interest in a new unpreju-
diced map design. Thus, the Forest map could be installed
for example at the entrance to the national park, where it
could act as the eye-catching feature of the information

board and give a general view of
landscape.

the surrounding

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The results of the Forest map design process described in
this paper conﬁrm that the tree data set extracted from the
ALS point cloud and CIR orthophotos serves as a suitable
data source for representing forest areas as well as isolated
trees, tree rows and tree groups in open areas on multi-scale
maps. However, an advanced generalisation approach and
adequate symbolisation adjusted to the map scale and
display device are necessary in order to preserve the
advantages offered by the real-world tree data set for the
ﬁnal maps. Additionally, sophisticated visualisation methods
need to be applied for the production of visually attractive
and useful maps. Our initial experiences with the Forest
maps in usability tests proved that the aim of attracting
attention with the new map design has been achieved.

The Forest maps have been implemented in the
MenoMaps multi-publishing service and will be presented
on several output devices, such as smartphones, printed maps
et al., 2010b).
and a multi-touch screen (Sarjakoski
Furthermore, the Forest maps are also used in an iPhone
application for hikers in the HaptiMap project (Magnusson
et al., 2009). One challenge for future work is to reﬁne the
design of the Forest maps regarding the different resolutions
and usage conditions of the output devices. Furthermore,
the map design could be revised based on the results of
additional usability tests in order to improve the usability of
the maps for supporting outdoor activities such as hiking.
Another topic for future investigations is the integration of
the tree data sets into three-dimensional applications such as
oblique views (Kettunen et al., 2009). Due to the availability
of tree attributes, such as the tree type, the approximate tree
height and the crown diameter, the full potential of the data
may only be utilized in three-dimensional visualisations.
Improving and automating the distance-based generalisation
approach and possibly implementing it as a dynamic, scale-
independent generalisation tool as part of the MenoMaps
service functionality are subjects for further investigations.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Friederike Schwarzbach is
working as
an Assistant
Researcher in the Depart-
ment of Geoinformatics and
Cartography at the Finnish
Geodetic Institute. She is a
PhD student in the Institute
the
for Cartography
Technical University Dres-
den. Her research work is
related to cartography, visua-
lisation methods and applica-
tions of airborne and mobile
laser scanning data.

at

Forest Representation on Multi-Scale Maps

41

(‘Messtischbla¨tter’)

NOTES
1 References and copyrights for the map examples in Figure 1: (a)
Gerhard Mercator. (1595). ‘Saxoniae superioris’, in: ‘Atlas sive
cosmographicae meditationes de fabrica mundi et fabricati ﬁgura’,
licenced under public domain. http://commons. wikime-
dia.org/wiki/File: Atlas_Cosmographicae_%28Mercator%
29_211.jpg?uselang5de; (b) ‘Maps of Finnish cities 1902’,
‘Helsinki – Northern downtown area’, 1 : 11 000, in Atlas of
Finland’ published by the Finnish Tourist Association, #
Pauli Kruhse. http://www.histdoc.net/history/kartat.html;
(c) Topographical map
‘Section
Ko¨nigsstein’, Saxony (1908), 1 : 25 000, Image number:
df_dk_0000395, # SLUB/Deutsche Fotothek, K.-D.
(2006). http://www.deutschefotothek.de/
Schumacher
obj70302466.html;
(Hiking map)
‘Schrammsteingebiet’ 1 : 10 000 # Staatsbetrieb Geoba-
sisinformation und Vermessung Sachsen 2011. http://
www.landesvermessung.sachsen.de/inhalt/produkte/karten/
sonder/wk10/wk10sg.html; (e) OSMC Hiking and Riding
map ‘Nop’s Reit- und Wanderkarte’, approx. 1 : 27 000, #
CC-BY-SA 2.0 OpenStreetMap.org. http://www.wanderreit
karte.de/; (f) Hiking map, eGoTrek ‘Reisefu¨hrer Wandern &
Radfahren: Sachsen’, # CC-BY-SA 2.0 OpenStreetMap.org.
http://www.egotrek.com/wanderkarten/sachsen/weinweg-
sachsen.html; (g) ‘Map Site’, web service of the National Land
Survey of Finland, approx. 1 : 5000, # National Land Survey
of Finland, license 684/MML/11. http://kansalaisen.kartta
paikka.ﬁ/asetukset/asetukset.html?map.x5515&map.y5321&e5
358656&n56687721&scale54000&tool5&styles5normal&la
ng5en&showSRS5NLSFI%3Aykj&width51000&height5
1000&tool5siirra&lang5en

(d) Wanderkarte

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

for Technology

‘Multi-publishing in supporting leisure
The projects of
outdoor activities’ (MenoMaps, 2008–2010) and ‘Map
services for outdoor leisure activities supported by social
networks’ (MenoMaps II, 2010–2013) are funded by Tekes
(the Finnish Funding Agency
and
the Finnish
Innovation). They are joint ventures of
Geodetic Institute, Department of Geoinformatics and
Cartography and Aalto University Helsinki, School of Art
and Design. The research was further promoted by the
European Commission-supported project ‘Haptic, Audio
and Visual Interfaces for Maps and Location Based Services’
(HaptiMap, 2008–2012, FPT-ICT-224675) that is coor-
dinated by the Rehabilitation Engineering Research Group
of Lund University’s Department of Design Sciences.

REFERENCES

Burghardt, D. and Cecconi, A. (2007).

‘Mesh simplification for
building typification’, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 21, pp. 283–298.

Collier, P., Pearson, A. and Forrest, D. (1998). ‘The representation of
topographic information on maps – vegetation and rural land use’,
The Cartographic Journal, 35, pp. 191–197.

Flink, H.-M., Oksanen, J., Pyysalo, U., Ro¨nneberg, M. and Sarjakoski,
L. T. (2011). ‘Usability evaluation of a map-based multi-publishing
service’, in Advances in Cartography and GIScience. Volume 1.

Selection from ICC 2011, Paris, ed. by Ruas, A., pp. 239–257,
Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg.

Hyyppa¨, J., Hyyppa¨, H., Litkey, P., Yu, X., Haggre´n, H., Ro¨nnholm,
P., Pyysalo, U., Pitka¨nen, J. and Maltamo, M. (2004). ‘Algorithms
and methods of airborne laser scanning for forest measurements’,
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing
and Spatial Information Science, 36 (Part 8/W2), pp. 82–88.
Imhof, E. (1972). Thematische Kartographie, Vol. 10, Lehrbuch
der Allgemeinen Geographie, Walter de Gruyter and Co., Berlin.
Jenny, B., Hutzler, E. and Hurni, L. (2010). ‘Point pattern synthesis’,

The Cartographic Journal, 47, pp. 257–261.

Jenny, B., Jenny, H. and Ra¨ber, S. (2008). ‘Map design for the
in International Perspectives on Maps and the

Internet’,
Internet, ed. by Peterson, M. P., pp. 31–48, Springer, Berlin.
Kao, D. L., Kramer, M. G., Love, A. L., Dungan, J. L. and Pang, A. T.
(2005). ‘Visualizing distributions from multi-return lidar data to
understand forest structure’, The Cartographic Journal, 42, pp.
35–47.

Kettunen, P., Sarjakoski, T., Sarjakoski, L. T. and Oksanen, J. (2009).
‘Cartographic Portrayal of Terrain in Oblique Parallel Projection’,
in 24th International Cartographic Conference, Santiago, Nov
15–21. http://icaci.org/documents/ICC_proceedings/ICC2009/
html/refer/20_10.pdf (accessed 6 July 2011).

Leyk, S. and Boesch, R. (2008). ‘Improving Feature Extraction of
Composite Cartographic Information in Low-Quality Maps’, in
17th International Research Symposium on Computer-based
Cartography (AutoCarto 2008), Shepherdstown, WV, Sep 8–11.
http://www.cartogis.org/docs/proceedings/2008/leyk_boesch.
pdf (accessed 6 July 2011).

Magnusson, C., Brewster, S., Sarjakoski, T., Roselier, S., Sarjakoski,
L. T. and Tollmar, K. (2009). ‘Exploring Future Challenges for
Haptic, Audio and Visual Interfaces for Mobile Maps and Location
Based Services’, in 2nd International Workshop on Location and
the Web (LOCWEB ’09), pp. 1–4, Boston, MA, Apr 4–9.

Matsumoto, M. and Nishimura, T. (1998). ‘Mersenne twister: a 623-
dimensionally equidistributed uniform pseudo-random number
generator’, ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer
Simulation, 8, pp. 3–30.

McMaster, R. B. and Shea, K. S. (1992). Generalization in Digital
Cartography, Association of American Geographers, Washington,
DC.

Metsa¨hallitus. (2011a). Natural Features of Nuuksio National Park,
Metsa¨hallitus (Finnish National Board of Forestry), Vantaa. http://
www.outdoors.fi/destinations/nationalparks/nuuksio/nature/
Pages/Default.aspx (accessed 5 August 2011).

Metsa¨hallitus. (2011b). The Flying Squirrel in Nuuksio National
Park, Metsa¨hallitus (Finnish National Board of Forestry), Vantaa.
http://www.outdoors.fi/Destinations/nationalparks/nuuksio/
nature/theflyingsquirrelinnuuksionational park/Pages/Default.
aspx (accessed 5 August 2011).

Nivala, A.-M., Brewster, S. A. and Sarjakoski, L. T. (2008). ‘Usability
evaluation of web mapping sites’, The Cartographic Journal, 45,
pp. 129–138.

Oksanen, J., Schwarzbach, F., Sarjakoski, L. T. and Sarjakoski, T.
(2011). ‘Map design for a multi-publishing framework – case
MenoMaps in the Nuuksio National Park’, The Cartographic
Journal, 48, pp. 116–123.

Patterson, T. (2002). ‘Getting real: reflecting on the new look of National
Land Service Maps’, in 3rd ICA Mountain Cartography Workshop,
Mt Hood, OR, May 15–19. http://www.mountaincartography.org/
mt_hood/pdfs/patterson2.pdf (accessed 7 July 2011).

Punt, E. M., Jensen, R., Hardy, P. and Daly, T. (2006). ‘Cartography:
From Drawing to Database’,
in AutoCarto 2006 Research
Symposium, Vancouver, WA, Jun 25–26. http://www.cartogis.
org/docs/proceedings/2006/punt_jensen_hardy_daly.pdf (accessed
7 July 2011).

Regnauld, N. and McMaster, R. B. (2007). ‘A synoptic view of
generalisation operators’,
in Generalisation of Geographic
Information: Cartographic Modelling and Applications, ed.
by Mackaness, W. A., Ruas, A. and Sarjakoski L. T., pp. 37–66,
Elsevier, Oxford.

Sarjakoski, L. T. (2007). ‘Conceptual models of generalisation and
multiple representation’,
in Generalisation of Geographic
Information: Cartographic Modelling and Applications, ed.

42

The Cartographic Journal

by Mackaness, W. A., Ruas, A. and Sarjakoski L. T., pp. 11–35,
Elsevier, Oxford.

Sarjakoski, T., Sarjakoski, L. T. and Kuittinen, R. (2007). ‘Establishing
a Test Environment for Ubiquitous Geospatial Applications’, in
23rd International Cartographic Conference, Moscow, Aug 4–
10. http://icaci.org/documents/ICC_proceedings/ICC2007/
documents/doc/THEME%2013/Oral%201/Establishing%20a%
20Test%20Environment%20for%20Ubiquitous%20Geospatial%20Ap.
doc (accessed 7 June 2011).

Sarjakoski, T., Sarjakoski, L. T. and Oksanen, J. (2010a).

‘Map
Generalization in the Cartographic Process of Hiking Maps for
Web and Mobile Use – Practical Examples Based on a Case Study’,
in GDI 2010 Workshop: Generalization and Data Integration,
pp. 58–69, Boulder, CO, Jun 20–22.

Sarjakoski, T., Kovanen, J., Ro¨nneberg, M., Ka¨hko¨nen, J. and
Sarjakoski, L. T. (2010b). ‘Data Matrix Technology for Linking
Mobile Maps in a Web-based Multi-Channel Service’, in Ubiquitous
Positioning, Indoor Navigation and Location-Based Service
2010 (UPINLBS 2010), pp. 1–5, Kirkkonummi, Oct 14–15.
Shea, K. S. and McMaster, R. B. (1989). ‘Cartographic Generalization
in a Digital Environment: When and How to Generalize’,
in International Symposium on Computer-Assisted Car-
tography (Auto-Carto 9), pp. 56–67, Baltimore, MD, Apr 2–7.

Slocum, T. A., McMaster, R. B., Kessler, F. C. and Howard, H. H.
(2004).
in Thematic
Cartography and Geographic Visualization, 2nd ed., pp. 103–
120, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

‘Scale and cartographic generalization’,

Soininen, A. (2011). TerraScan User’s Guide, http://www.terrasolid.

fi/system/files/tscan_1.pdf (accessed 7 June 2011).

Stelzl, H., Wack, R., Sacherer, O.

Einzelbaum-Visualisierung

(2006).
basierend
auf
‘Automatisierte
Flugzeug-Laserscanner- und optischen Daten’,
in Angewandte
Geoinformatik 2006, Beitra¨ge zum 18. AGIT-Symposium
Salzburg, ed. by Strobl, J., Blaschke, T. and Griesebner, G., pp.
639–644, Wichmann, Heidelberg.

and Almer, A.

Straub, C., Dees, M., Weinacker, H. and Koch, B. (2009). ‘Using
airborne laser scanner data and CIR orthophotos to estimate the
stem volume
forest
-
Fernerkundung - Geoinformation, 3, pp. 277–287.

Photogrammetrie

stands’,

of

van den Worm, J. (2001).

in
Web Cartography. Developments and Prospects, ed. by
Kraak, M. J. and Brown, A., pp. 87–107, Taylor & Francis,
London.

‘Web map design in practice’,

Wang, X., Song, B., Chen, J., Zheng, D. and Crow, T. R. (2004).
‘Visualizing forest landscapes using public data sources’, Landscape
and Urban Planning, 75, pp. 111–124.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

