Transactions in GIS, 1999, 3(2): 187–197

Technical Note

Using Network Analysis for Emergency
Planning in Case of an Earthquake

Konstantinos Tarabanis
University of Macedonia,
Thessaloniki, Greece

Ioannis Tsionas
Municipality of Kalamaria,
Thessaloniki, Greece

Abstract
Populations in several countries including Greece face a continuous earthquake
hazard. Planning to explore how the authorities will conduct their actions when
such incidents occur is very important. People have to move to safe areas called
refuge areas. GIS network analysis tools can help predict how many and which
people these refuge areas can host depending on the location of their residence. A
network allocation model is used.

1

Introduction

When a large scale earthquake is anticipated within a few hours or a couple of days
(usually following other earthquakes) the population may be advised or decide on its
own that it is safer not to stay in their homes for this time period. In order to protect
themselves and their families they will have to stay in the open or travel to cities and
villages outside the area in danger. The people that remain in the city must be
accommodated in the available open spaces that offer safety according to standards set
by the Greek Organization for the Protection from Earthquakes (1994a). When the area
in danger is a densely built urban area then the available open spaces may not suffice
for the population.

OASP is the Greek Organization for the Protection from Earthquakes. It is
responsible for the operational planning of preparations against earthquakes as well as
for the restoration of the human environment to its previous state, prior to the
earthquake. The role of collaborating authorities is very important as they will
contribute personnel and equipment when an action plan «Xenokratis» is implemented
in case of natural disaster. The municipalities are in the process of accepting more and
more responsibilities and resources. One of them is the responsibility for the definition

Address for correspondence: Konstantinos Tarabanis, School of Management, University of
Macedonia, Egnatia Blvd, Thessaloniki, Greece. Email: cat@macedonia.uom.gr

(cid:223) 1999 Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

188

Konstantinos Tarabanis and Ioannis Tsionas

of land use. The defined land uses determine the availability of open spaces that can be
used as refuge areas.

The open spaces that can be used as refuge areas are a special resource for such
emergencies (Tryfona et al 1996) and the authorities must survey (assess) them,
analyze them and plan their use (OASP 1994b). The survey stage includes the
registration of every space and its characteristics. This registration has been
completed with regard to location, capacity, and utilities (e.g. existence of water).
The present paper presents the analysis stage conducted in collaboration by the
municipality of Kalamaria and the University of Macedonia. Planning follows and at
this stage the procedure ceases to be solely a technical or scientific one as political
implications are involved. The carrying capacity for the specific use that we are
examining is known or easily estimated. What is not easily assessed is its spatial
pattern; the region that each refuge area will serve.

The present work contributes to the planning process before the earthquake
occurs. It will assist the rational planning of the utilization of the refuge areas as well as
the identification of the regions that need more open spaces. Local authorities have the
power to expropriate land parcels for public use. This is a valuable tool for controlling
the spatial distribution of refuge areas. Urban land is very expensive so these areas
must by no means be reserved solely for use in an emergency as refuge areas. Green
areas can be spatially distributed in such a way that they serve as both refuge and
recreation areas.

2 Description of the model

2.1 Data Structure

The aim of the model is to determine whether the open areas that can be used as refuge
areas in a dense urban area are adequate for the population at hand. For a yes/no type
answer a simple comparison of the population with the total number of people that
may be accommodated in the refuge areas would suffice. Geographical analysis is
needed to identify the areas that have easy access to these areas and those that do not.
The technique describes the spatial pattern but does not attempt to optimize the use of
resources as in the case of Ferri et al (1996).

The attempt here is not to simulate the actual behaviour of the people in the
first minutes of an earthquake as in the work of Pidd et al (1995) where they
addressed emergencies that required the complete evacuation of cities (e.g. nuclear
accidents). The actual behaviour at that hour is governed by panic; especially if
there has not been a priori planning, an information campaign as to where they
should be heading, and appropriate training. It is mainly an analysis and planning
tool which identifies the regions from which people have quick access to specific
refuge areas and the regions of the study area from which people do not. The
approach is similar to others that assign people to specific areas according to
predefined criteria (e.g. Slongle 1995).

People who must spend a night or more in an open area for the fear of an
earthquake will want to be as safe as possible. But at the same time they will want to be
as close as possible to their homes. So, the main parameters that govern the allocation
of the residents to a refuge area are:

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Network Analysis for Emergency Planning

189

the proximity of the open space to one’s home,
the degree of safety that the open space offers, and

1.
2.
3. whether the area is already full or not.

These parameters were incorporated in a model to allocate the population to open
spaces. The last parameter, in particular, makes the model dynamic. A part of the city
of Thessaloniki within the administrative boundaries of the municipality of Kalamaria
with an area of approximately 1,000 m2 was selected as the case study area. The
specific area was selected because it is densely populated and it has few open areas. The
data and the equipment of the municipality GIS were used.

The basic data that are required and were therefore created are summarized in
Table 1. Since reliable population data at the level of individual building blocks or even
sets of building blocks were not available, it was necessary to estimate the number of
residents at each building block using the built space and a coefficient. The population
was estimated assuming full occupation of the lots available for building activities by
buildings in order to assess performance for maximum population density. The total
allowable building area for each building block, Eb, is:

Eb (cid:136) (cid:133)Et (cid:255) Ex(cid:134)(cid:3)BF

(cid:133)1(cid:134)

Table 1 Data required and their respective sources.

Parameters

Digital Data

Source

Spatial distribution of
population

Numerical value in the Arc
Attribute Table for each road

Estimated from the building
coefficient at the block level1

Routes along which
people travel to get to
safe areas

Arcs that represent the
centerlines of existing roads
and access paths to open
spaces

Constructed with CAD from
lines representing building
blocks

Safety of open spaces

Character item (Safety Level)
in Point Attribute Table of
open spaces

Subjective classification of the
safety of an open space based
on personal visits

Capacity of open
spaces

Numerical value (Capacity) in
Point Attribute Table of open
spaces

Calculated as the total free area
of each open space

Preference to select
safer areas

Numerical value in the Point
Attribute Table (Delay)

Indicates increased preference
for high safety areas; initially set
to 0 for all spaces

Maximum distance
from their homes

Numerical value specific to
each run (Limit)

Based on standards

1 Building coefficients were used to calculate the allowable (by law) building area within a land
parcel by multiplying it with the area of the land parcel. For the study area, the coefficient varied
from 1.6 to 2.4.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

190

Konstantinos Tarabanis and Ioannis Tsionas

where Et is the total area of each building block, Ex is the area that cannot be used for
buildings (e.g. parks, green areas, etc), and BF is the building coefficient. The
population of each building block (P) was calculated as follows:

P=Eb=15

(cid:133)2(cid:134)

where Eb is the total built area (equation 1) and 15 represents the estimated number of
square metres per person (it is less than the standard urban planning value but closer to
the real situation).

Each building block is surrounded by streets. The model uses the centerlines of
these streets for the allocation of people to refuge areas. Therefore the population had
to be an attribute of the arcs that represent these centerlines. Using the topology files it
is easy to identify (by their codes) which arcs surround which building block. The
population was distributed to arcs, based on their length because longer arcs will have
more building entrances. The formula is as follows:

Pi=(Li/Lat)(cid:3)Pa+(Li/Lbt)(cid:3)Pb

where Pi is the population that arc i carries, Li is its length, Lat and Lbt are the total
length of all the arcs around building blocks a and b respectively, Pa and Pb are the
total population of building blocks a and b on the left and on the right of an arc (Figure
1a). The equivalent formula for each building block is (Figure 1b):

(cid:133)3(cid:134)

(cid:133)4(cid:134)

Pa (cid:136)

Pi

X4

i(cid:136)1

The total population that was found with this method was greater than the official
census count; nevertheless, it was closer to the generally accepted population estimate
for this area.

The safety of the areas was estimated by the height and proximity of the
neighboring buildings, and the existence of power lines. Other factors (such as danger
from tsunamis, proximity to large structures, etc) are also included in the standards,
but were not applicable in this instance.

Figure 1
individual street centerlines.

Schematic diagrams showing two views of how population was assigned to

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Network Analysis for Emergency Planning

191

Safety was considered as the primary factor of attractiveness for the case of this
model and other factors (such as the existence of water) were ignored in this pilot
project. The spaces were classified into three categories representing High, Medium,
and Low levels of safety.

The capacity of the open spaces was calculated by their total free area. It was
roughly calculated that each person will require 2m2 according to the standards (OASP
1994a). So the capacity (C) is calculated by the formula:

C (cid:136) (cid:133)Et (cid:255) Eu(cid:134)=2

(cid:133)5(cid:134)

where Et is the total area of open space and Eu is the area that is covered by trees,
shrubs or human structures and thus is not available to set up tents.

2.2

Simulation

The software technique used is the allocation method. The algorithm assigns the
capacity of each refuge area (i.e. the maximum number of people that can stay at an
open space) by allocating demand from the arcs (people living in houses with an
entrance on each of these arcs). This allocation is achieved while minimizing the
distance that one has to travel from his/her house to find an open space. As distance we
use the actual distance of traveling along the streets and not the Euclidean distance
between the location of the house and the location of the open space. This means that
although the people will try to stay at a safe open space, they are not willing to go too
far from their homes and leave them unattended. Even more, they may think that the
more well-known refuge spaces will be fully occupied by people that live near them
when they arrive. For this reason the model includes a bias in favor of safer areas by
setting a maximum distance within which they are preferred before people start to head
for less safe areas. At the original run of the simulation no space was given such
priority.

The allocation of an arc i with population (demand) Pi to a centre j with capacity

Cj is decided if all the following conditions are true:

P

Pk

Pi (cid:20) Cj (cid:255)
P

Li +

Lm (cid:20) Limit

P

Li +

Lm < Li + Ln

where k refers to all the arcs that have already been
allocated to centre j (Cj)
where Lm refers to the length of the arcs that connect
arc i to Cj and have already been allocated to Cj and
Limit is the maximum allowed distance from people’s
houses
where Ln refers to the length of the arcs that have
been allocated to another centre l for which Pi < Cl
is valid, where p refers to the arcs
(cid:255)
allocated to centre l

Pp,

P

The preference to allocate an arc i to centre j over another arc k is decided if:

P

P

Li +

Lm < Lk +

Ln

where m refers to the arcs connecting arc i to centre j
already allocated to centre j and n refers to the arcs
connecting arc k to centre j already allocated to
centre j

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

192

Konstantinos Tarabanis and Ioannis Tsionas

The arcs are allocated as follows:
1,4,5,13 (cid:255) > C1,
2,3,8,9,10,11 (cid:255) > C2,
6,7,12 (cid:255) > C3,
14,15 (cid:255) > (none)

Figure 2

Schematic showing arc allocation to centres C1, C2, and C3.

In case Li +

Lm = Lk +

P

P

Ln which is the case when the simulation starts and no
arcs have been assigned to centres then arc i is
preferred if: Pi > Pk

The allocation ‘grows’ around all centres simultaneously (except in the case that we
define it otherwise) and allocates the arcs to centres (as shown in Figure 2).

Alternative «what-if» scenarios may be evaluated by changing the model

parameters and a list of scenarios is presented in Table 2.

3 Results and Discussion

The 17 simulation runs listed in Table 2 showed that there are regions from which the
residents have easy access to many refuge areas, and others that do not. The patterns
changed as the basic assumptions changed but the main picture remained quite the
same. Clearly, this analysis (or perhaps some additional scenarios) can offer a solid
basis upon which decisions can be made and planning may be conducted regarding the
availability of spaces for all residents and the readiness of the authorities. The most
important aspect of the above analysis is that the planning may be based on a clear
picture of the service that the refuge areas offer to the public.

Maps are used to convey the results of the simulation. They show which regions
have enough open areas to accommodate the majority of the people and which areas do
not. The circles, squares and triangles represent high, medium and low safety areas
respectively. The highlighted arcs represent arcs allocated to an open area. The thin
broken lines indicate unserviced (unallocated) arcs and so the people residing there (the
polygons are building blocks) will need the intervention of the authorities to find safe
areas in the event of an earthquake.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Network Analysis for Emergency Planning

193

Table 2 Alternative scenarios that were evaluated and the parameters that were affected
in each case.

Simulation

Simulation Scenarios

0
1, 2, 3

– Initial
– What if people move farther from their homes in order to

Limit

4, 5, 6

– What if people rush to areas of ‘high safety’ before they

– What if we discourage people from going to areas that do

find a refuge area?

resort to others?

not offer high safety?

– What if some open areas do not exist in the future (e.g.

Capacity

10, 11, 12
13, 14, 15

they are built on) and become unavailable?
– What if the population increases in the future?
– What if a part of the population moves outside of the city

to seek refuge?

– What if we have underestimated the capacity of the open areas? Capacity
– What if 50% of the population leaves town and the remaining

population decided to go farther to find refuge areas?

7, 8

9

16
17

Factor
Affected

Maximum
distance
Capacity

Population
Population

Limit
Population

Figure 3 shows the results of a run of the model where we assume a maximum
travel distance from houses to safe areas of 500 m (according to the standards). Three
out of every four people are allocated to open spaces with this parameter model run.
This population is not the result of the subtraction Total capacity minus Total demand
because there is not a 100% satisfaction of the total capacity of the centres. This is due
to the fact that we take into account spatial restrictions and that there are people who
are farther than 500 m from centers with vacancies.

This means that an authority may plan to allocate more people to these spaces
from areas with poor service. The areas with poor service are easily recognized as they
are the areas with many broken lines. It is easy to see that the center and north part of
the study area have spaces large enough (although less in number) to allocate many
more people while the east and west do not. An intermediate situation exists at the
south and the south-east, where there is a limited capacity to allocate people to safe
areas. So the model offers a rough picture of the availability of open spaces based on
the capacity of the open areas to host people. The map also shows which people will be
accommodated. Notice also that the safe areas of the south-west are classified as low
and medium safety. This means that not only there are few open spaces in the area, and
that they also offer inferior safety.

Figure 4 (simulation #4) shows the pattern if we include delays for the low safety
and medium safety areas. This means that no one is allocated to a medium safety area
unless all people living within 100 m of high safety areas are first allocated. The same
applies for low safety areas using a distance threshold of 200 m. The obvious result is
that more people prefer the open spaces that offer high safety and fewer people attempt
to reach those that offer less safety. The spatial ramifications of this result are visible at
the north where people have the opportunity to make choices. There is practically no

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

194

Konstantinos Tarabanis and Ioannis Tsionas

Figure 3 Map showing the streets that are allocated to refuge areas.

change where this opportunity does not exist. At least three areas of medium safety in
the north (such as building block 363 at the northeast corner) remain unutilized
because the surrounding arcs are all allocated to nearby high safety areas.

Figure 5 (simulation #8) shows the pattern which occurs when we totally exclude
the medium and low safety areas. The difficulty of reaching a safe area is increased
for people living in the south and southeast. Some arcs leading to excluded safe areas
still have a color that indicates that they are allocated to these areas though these
areas carry zero population (an artefact of the modelling tool). The other ‘what-if’

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Network Analysis for Emergency Planning

195

Figure 4 Map showing the spatial pattern when a preference is assigned to areas offering
high safety.

scenarios that were simulated generated similar patterns because all but one of these
simulations (#9) incorporated changes in parameters that were uniform in space.

There are several issues that should be addressed in future applications of this type.
One of the most important is the boundary problem. An area is never detached from its
surroundings and there is always interaction in cases that concern patterns of human
behaviour. Their actions will not be restricted within the administrative boundaries of
the municipality under examination. Future enhancements of the model will surely
need to take this effect into account.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

196

Konstantinos Tarabanis and Ioannis Tsionas

Figure 5 Map showing the spatial pattern if only the high safety areas are available or the
authorities promote only the utilization of these areas.

References

Ferri F, Pourabbas E, Rafanelli M, and Sindoni G 1996 Planning health resource allocation using
a GIS. In Sellis T and Georgoulis D (eds) Procedings of the First International Conference in
Urban Regional and Environmental Planning: 11–29

Organisation for the Protection from Earthquakes (OASP) 1994a, Standards for the population

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

Network Analysis for Emergency Planning

197

gathering in case of earthquake. Athens, Regional Planning and Public Works, Ministry of
Environment

Organisation for the Protection from Earthquakes (OASP) 1994b Planning of critical emergency
operations against earthquakes. Athens, Regional Planning and Public Works, Ministry of
Environment

Pidd M, de Silva FN, and Eglese 1995 A simulation model for emergency evacuation planning.

European Journal of Operations Research 9: 413–9

Slangle M 1995 A model-based spatial decision support system for school district planning.
Information Systems Association Annual

the Urban and Regional

Proceedings of
Conference: 1–9

Tryfona N, Soulakellis N, and Delladetsimas P 1996 Designing a DS tool for an emergency
management application. In Sellis T and Georgoulis D (eds) Procedings of the First
International Conference in Urban Regional and Environmental Planning: 113–20

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

