The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 2
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 141–146

ICA Special Issue 2003

141

S E C T I O N 1

Cartographic Education and Research in the UK

David Forrest

Department of Geography & Geomatics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK

The aim of this review is to summarize the current status
and recent history of cartographic education and research
the UK. While neither research nor education are the
exclusive preserve of higher education establishments, there
is logic in linking these two topics together as the majority
of cartographic education and research is focused on a
relatively small number of university departments. While
maps have always been extensively available in the UK and
there is a strong and signi(cid:142)cant cartographic industry,
there are no university Departments of Cartography or
cartographic research institutes. On the research side, Geo-
graphic Information Science fairs better with a network of
Regional Research Laboratories (RRLs) distributed around
the country, typically involving collaboration between local
universities with interests in GIS research. The boundary
between cartographic and GIS education and research is
very blurred and it is often not possible to separate the two.
Cartography also often overlaps with other subjects with
the overall area of mapping sciences, but generally the aim
has been to exclude consideration of other mapping sciences
and in GIS research to focus on more cartographically
relevant issues such as visualization.

HIGHER EDUCATION

Higher Education in the UK has suffered from signi(cid:142)cant
under funding in recent years. Financial allocations to
universities have generally not kept pace with in(cid:143)ation and
even where there have been modest increases in allocations
to universities themselves,
these rarely seem to (cid:142)lter
through to departments and, indeed, many departments
have seen real cuts in their budgets. Administrative burdens
on academic staff have generally increased due the intro-
duction of more stringent quality assurance procedures
driven by the funding bodies and the higher education
Quality Assurance Agency (some of which are welcome,
but others less so).

It has long the case that there are few courses in the UK
which have a speci(cid:142)c or signi(cid:142)cant focus on Cartography
and the last four years has seen this situation deteriorate
signi(cid:142)cantly. One of the very few specialist taught post-
graduate courses, the Diploma/MSc in Cartography and
Geoinformation Technology at the University of Glasgow,
the most recent
is currently not admitting students,

DOI: 10.1179/000870403235001494

intake being in 2000. More recently, early in 2002 it was
announced that the only undergraduate degree programme
in Cartography, the course at Oxford Brookes University,
was to close. Together these programmes have dominated
the production of academically prepared graduates in carto-
graphy since the 1960s and it is likely that any signi(cid:142)cant
cartographic business in the UK employs at least one pro-
duct of these courses. Indeed several cartographic businesses
have been created by graduates of these courses, or are very
much dominated by them at all levels of the organization
from directors down.

In the Oxford Brookes Brookes case the British Carto-
graphic Society mounted a campaign with the University
management, arguing for the retention of a programme
seen as vital to the continuing success of what must be
described as a very healthy industry in the UK, as the rest
of this special issue of The Cartographic Journal illustrates.
Unfortunately in a period of increasing under-funding of
higher education in the UK, relatively small courses with
higher than average requirements for staff and resources
are likely to be targeted for cost savings. The overall impact
nationally on what is a relatively small sector of industry is
not, and probably never will be seen, as a valid argument
to an institution trying to balance its books.

To take something positive out of the Oxford Brookes
cartography programme closure,
recently a degree in
Geographic Information Systems was introduced to run
parallel to the Cartography degree. For the moment this
new programme is to continue and it is to be hoped that
the long heritage of cartography will remain a signi(cid:142)cant
aspect of that programme, although that is not secure as
several key staff will be retiring or taking up offers of
redundancy. Also, the postgraduate Diploma in Cartography
will continue to be offered, but again the long-term future
of this must be questionable.

For nearly thirty years the University of Glasgow has
offered taught postgraduate courses in cartography and an
undergraduate degree with a signi(cid:142)cant emphasis in carto-
graphy, the latter being through the degree in Topographic
Science which includes balanced coverage of surveying,
photogrammetry and cartography along with the math-
ematics, IT and ancillary subjects necessary for advanced
study in the subject. The reduction in funding to universities
in the 1990s saw a major scheme of early retirement and
voluntary redundancy being promoted within the University,

142

The Cartographic Journal

with promises of ‘new blood’ appointments being made to
replace retiring senior staff. Three of the (cid:142)ve academics in
the Topographic Science section took advantage of this
offer. As it was unlikely that all three would be replaced,
serious discussion took place on the relative merits of the
undergraduate and postgraduate courses and a decision
was taken that the focus should be on the undergraduate
degree and that admission to the postgraduate courses
should be suspended.

Unfortunately a re-evaluation of the University’s (cid:142)nances
led to all ‘new blood’ appointments being withdrawn. So,
having approved an updated version of the Topographic
Science degree in January 2000, in June of that year the
University suspended admission to it from October 2001,
it being considered impractical (quite reasonably) to run
a degree course with only two specialist academic staff.
As this is the only degree of its type in Scotland, and one
of only a handful
in the UK to focus on mapping, a
campaign to save the degree was launched which received
strong support from the industry in Scotland and the UK
generally, to the extent the University decided that the
teaching of Geomatics should continue. In 2002 a degree
in Geographic Information and Mapping Sciences was
approved to replace Topographic Science and a new lecturer
post advertised to support this. Re(cid:143)ecting the reduction in
staf(cid:142)ng, the new degree is three quarters Geomatics in the
(cid:142)nal two years, rather than focusing totally on geomatics
like the Topographic Science degree. While the reduction
in coverage in some mapping subjects is regrettable (such
as the loss of one cartography module), requiring students to
study a small amount of either Geography or Earth Science
at an advanced level will give them broader perspective
and will prove useful in many of the types of employment
they tend follow.

Although admission to the postgraduate course is still
currently suspended, with recent changes in University
policy towards taught postgraduate courses, emphasizing
their contribution to continuous professional development

(CPD), there are hopes within the Department that the
course will be resurrected. It is likely that the course will
need to be quite different from the most recent version
which relied on quite intensive teaching that was seen to
detract from staff research effort. Increased (cid:143)exibility in
funding and staff deployment will help counteract such
problems.

If the situation for specialist cartography and mapping
courses at university level is worrying in many respects,
it is even more so for technical training in cartography at
colleges. Many colleges across the country are registered
to offer Ordinary and Higher National Certi(cid:142)cates and
Diplomas in cartographically related subjects, but anecdotal
evidence suggests that many of these courses have not run
in recent years, or have had very modest enrolments,
putting their continuation in question as colleges also face
severe (cid:142)nancial restrictions.

specialist courses

Despite the outlook for

in carto-
graphy being rather bleak, there is at least satisfaction in
the high standard of cartographic attainment of students
in recent years as evidenced by the standard of entries and
ward winners in the annual British Cartographic Society
student awards sponsored by Readers’ Digest and National
Geographic Society.

It is also important to recognize that several other courses
with a signi(cid:142)cant cartographic content, such as those
at University of Newcastle, University of Portsmouth
and University of Wales at Swansea continue to produce
graduates suitable for employment
in the cartographic
industry, although few departments seem to have been left
untouched by some form of reorganization in recent years.
The most positive note in higher education is the
increased number of Geographic Information Systems or
Geographic Information Science courses now available at
undergraduate level (see Table 1). There are now probably
more degree courses in GIS than there ever have been in
the mapping sciences. (Similarly there is now a large number
of degrees or combined degrees in Remote Sensing.)

Table 1. Undergraduate programmes in Cartography, Geographic Information Science, Mapping and related topics (excluding specialist
programmes engineering, land, or hydrographic surveying and Remote Sensing).

University

Course title

Major subject

Combined subject

Aston University
Bath Spa University College
University College London
University of East London

University of Hertfordshire
University of Glamorgan
University of Glasgow

University of Greenwich
Kingston University
Manchester Metropolitan University
University of Newcastle Upon Tyne

Oxford Brookes University

University of Portsmouth
University of Wales Swansea

Geographical Information Systems
Remote Sensing and Geographical Information Systems
Geomatic Engineering
Geogrpahical Information Sciences
Surveying Sciences
Geogrpahical Info Sciences
Computing Geospatial Information Systems
Topographic Science*
Geographic Information and Mapping Sciences
Geographical Information Systems
Geographical Information Systems
Geographical Information Science
Geographic Information Science
Surveying and Mapping Science
Cartography*
Geographic Information Systems
Geographical Information Science
Topographic Science

£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£

£
£
£
£
£

£

* course being withdrawn
Based on UCCAS programme listing November 2002 with modi(cid:142)cations

£
£

£
£

£
£

£
£
£
£

£

Section 1: Cartographic Education and Research

143

Some of these GIS degrees are based in Computing or
Information Science departments; some are offered by
departments with a long history of Geomatics teach-
ing; some are in Geography departments; and a few are
associated with other disciplines, such as planning or land
management. Like the more traditional mapping sciences
degrees where the balance between surveying, photo-
grammetry and cartography varied in courses at different
institutions, there is a considerable variation in the emphasis
of the GIS degrees, some emphasizing the information
system elements, others more focused on applications in
the human or physical environments. Several of these
undergraduate GIS degrees are relatively new and it will be
interesting to see how they develop in the years to come
and if enrolments make them sustainable in the longer
term.
At

the portfolio of GIS courses
now appears to be fairly stable, with courses available at
universities spread across the country. The most signi(cid:142)-
cant recent development
is the programme offered by
City University (London), which has assembled one of
the strongest academic teams in GIS in the UK. Their
new course is available full time, part time or by distance
learning and will no doubt have an impact on existing
postgraduate courses.

the Masters

level

In addition to degrees or major sub-programmes in
GIS, many degree programmes in other subjects include
compulsory or optional modules in GIS. Generally there
has been a trend in recent years within geography pro-
grammes to replace modules in ‘cartography’ or ‘surveying
and mapping’ with GIS modules. This is not surprising as
a basic grounding in GIS is a reasonable expectation for
any modern geography graduate, but there is some concern
that the basic principles of mapping, such as co-ordinate
systems, map projections and map design have been lost in
this move to higher technology.

In the UK neither cartography nor GIScience have a
speci(cid:142)c professional body accrediting courses or assuring
standards. The Geomatics faculty (formerly Land and
Hydrographic Surveying division) of the Royal Institution
of Chartered Surveyors has done much to open the pre-
vious content restrictions of the courses they approve and
now several GIScience courses, particularly at postgraduate
level, have been validated, joining a range of the surveying
and mapping undergraduate degrees that have traditionally
had their stamp of approval. The Association for Geo-
graphic Information, the body that represents the GIS
industry, has done much in recent years to promote the
continual professional development of
its members and
does make annual student awards, but there little evidence
of promotion or co-ordination of formal education in the
(cid:142)eld.

Given the relatively small sector of UK industry involved
in Geographic Information and mapping, there is a need
for a co-ordinated approach to promoting both education
and careers in the variety of cognate disciplines scattered
across a relatively small number of universities and colleges.
An RICS funded initiative to promote Geomatics education
is to be applauded. It has achieved this largely through the
creation of a web site (www.geomatics.org.uk) and stands
at science and technology exhibitions, but cartography and
GIScience are under represented in this initiative. The lack

of a co-ordinating body since the demise some years ago of
the Surveying and Mapping Alliance — a loose association
of geographic information and mapping related societies —
must in part be to blame for this. Obviously universities
have a vested interest in promoting their own courses and
individual societies are concerned with their own specialist
area, be it cartography, hydrography or remote sensing,
but the dif(cid:142)culties faced by several specialist courses in the
geographic information and mapping sciences does high-
light the need for some co-ordinated action to be taken if
the industry is to have a continuing supply of well quali(cid:142)ed
graduates.

OTHER EDUCATIONAL ISSUES

The author has been aware of an increasing number of
comments made by senior (cid:142)gures at GIS events in the last
few years about the number of poorly designed maps
being produced by users of GIS and that there is a need to
include more cartographic design instruction within GIS
courses and training. Cartographers have long complained
about the poor quality of the output from GIS, which
generally today is not due to limitation of the GIS itself,
but to lack of understanding of cartographic principles by
their users. It is dif(cid:142)cult, however, to see how this can
easily be resolved because many of those currently teach-
ing or offering training in GIS have no background in
cartographic design and most organizations using GIS are
unlikely to explicitly hire a cartographic designer to oversee
the output from their GIS. Oxford Brookes University and
one or two commercial training organizations have run
short courses on cartographic design for GIS, but clearly
these are not having a signi(cid:142)cant impact.

Mapping, or at

Several organizations do run their own training courses
and one initiative by the British Cartographic Society is to
establish a register of such courses. While this does not
involve validation of the course, it is seen as a cost effective
method of increasing awareness of both the courses and
the existence of a specialized organization for cartography.
least map use, has always (cid:142)gured
prominently in schools in the UK. Basic concepts are
introduced relatively early in primary schools, and generally
there is some element of mapping in the curriculum up
to the age of about fourteen. There has been some intro-
duction of GIS in secondary schools, but anecdotal
evidence suggests this is rather patchy, depending largely
on an interested teacher taking the initiative to learn about
GIS and introduce it in their teaching. Publicly funded
schools have an advantage in this respect because under
the Service Level Agreement between the OS and the local
councils, OS digital datasets are available to these schools
at no cost. This does of course require some co-operation
between the council department holding the data and the
individual school, but such issues should be surmountable.
The OS continues to devote signi(cid:142)cant effort to pro-
moting mapping in schools. In addition to producing
special map extracts for teaching and examinations and
publishing Mapping News which is sent to the head of
Geography in every school twice a year, they have run
several workshops for teachers on the use of maps and
map data within the curriculum. A major initiative in 2002

144

The Cartographic Journal

was the supply of a free map of their local area to every
eleven-year-old (provided the school registered). These
were standard published editions of the current 1:25 000
or 1:50 000 map, not a cheaply produced substitute. The
take-up of this offer was signi(cid:142)cant and one hopes this, or
a similar initiative, can be repeated on a regular basis.

RESEARCH

If obtaining accurate information about the current state
of cartographic education is dif(cid:142)cult, it is even more so
for research due to the way research with cartographic
implications is spread widely across a diverse range of
university departments, research institutes and government
and commercial organisations. Also, there are relatively few
in the UK who would label themselves explicitly as carto-
graphic researchers, even if they work on projects or
publish on topics with a signi(cid:142)cant cartographic content.
It is also dif(cid:142)cult to de(cid:142)ne the bounds of cartographic
research, the main interest of the researchers often being
with geographic information or computing science at one
extreme and Geomatics (surveying, photogrammetry and
remote sensing) at the other. There are also valuable contri-
butions to cartographic issues by historians, educationalists,
psychologists and many others.

In de(cid:142)ning ‘cartographic’ research for this review, the
search focused on the development of technical advances
in systems for making maps, users interacting with these
systems and use of the products, be they hard or soft copy.
Simply making or using a map as part of a geographical or
other research project does not necessarily advance carto-
graphy and therefore such projects are generally excluded.
Remote sensing projects are also generally excluded unless
there is an obvious emphasis on map making or visualization.
One traditionally strong aspect of cartographic research in
the UK is in the history of cartography and this continues
to be the case with several major projects being active in
recent years.

One key indicator of cartographic research activity is
involvement in ICA Commissions. As the majority of
ICA Commission essentially focus on cartographic research
topics, participation in the work of commissions indicates
active cartographic research interest. A review of
the
available information on websites of ICA Commissions
in mid-2002 showed that of the 17 commissions (three
of which gave no membership information and others
limited information), UK representatives chair or co-chair
the Commissions on the History Of Cartography, Map
Generalization and Maps And Graphics For Blind And
Visually Impaired People. Further full members of com-
missions or their organizing committee totals 15 and there
are 14 af(cid:142)liate or corresponding members listed. Of the 14
commissions listing membership, only those on Census
Cartography and Gender and Cartography have no current
UK involvement.

In terms of the UK contribution to International Carto-
graphic Conferences, over the last three meetings in 1997,
1999 and 2001, 37 papers have been presented, written
by a total of 40 different authors. This does not include
poster presentations or contributions to commission meet-
ings or workshops. The majority of the papers are by staff

or postgraduates in higher education institutions although
at least two papers at each conference have represent the
research and development of cartographic systems at Laser-
Scan Limited of Cambridge. The topics cover the full
gamut of cartographic research from the historical role of
maps, maps for disabled people, numerous papers on auto-
mated generalization, national topographic databases, to
the latest developments in interactive visualization of spatial
information.

The main English language journals with a broad carto-
graphic remit published over the last four years show a
healthy level of academic publishing by British researchers.
Totals of research based papers for these outlets are:
Cartographica — 3; Cartography & Geographic Information
Science — 8; The Cartographic Journal — 23; Society of
Cartographers Bulletin — 13 (some 2002 volumes were
incomplete at
the time of survey). The International
Journal of Geographic Information Science, the leading GIS
journal, carried nine papers of a cartographic or visualization
nature by British authors in the same period. Without
doubt many more cartographic research papers have been
published in a wide range of journals devoted primarily to
other (cid:142)elds.

The British scienti(cid:142)c journal of cartography, The Carto-
graphic Journal, has published 45 academic papers in its
last four volumes as well as many shorter contributions.
About half of these papers are by British authors. This is
perhaps not surprising given the origin of the journal, but
many well-known researchers from all parts of the globe
have also chosen the Journal as outlet for their work. The
ratio of British authors is probably higher in the period
examined than the norm due to two special issues being
dominated by British authors. Excluding these two issues
about two thirds of the papers are by overseas authors
giving a truer impression of the Journal’s international
status.

The Society of Cartographers Bulletin is also published in
the UK. While articles are not refereed, there are many
which would stand such scrutiny and which make a useful
contribution to the research literature.

A further indication of research activity is the completion
of PhD theses. The dif(cid:142)culty in de(cid:142)ning cartography
again emerged in a search of the UK Index to Theses
(www.theses.com) in December 2002 (note that data
for 2002 will be incomplete). A search for ‘cartography’
revealed only one thesis in the last four years. However, in
the ‘Geography (cartography)’ class 14; 5; 3 and 0 theses
are reported for the same period. Based on their titles,
seven of these would appear to be on clearly cartographic/
visualization topics. The majority of the remaining 15 use
maps in some way for analysing some phenomena, thus
cartography, although a key to the success of the research,
is not what is being studied. The ‘Survey, photogrammetry
and remote sensing’ class revealed 23 theses, a few of
which are of cartographic relevance. A search for ‘mapping’
produced almost 100 theses between 1999 and 2001, but
none for 2002. Of these, six are clearly on cartographic
topics and a further ten appear to have some relevance to
map making, but the majority use the term ‘mapping’ in the
mathematical sense of a relationship between phenomena,
rather than in the geographical sense. Although not found
in the Index to Theses, another source indicates that at

Section 1: Cartographic Education and Research

145

least (cid:142)ve theses on the history of cartography have been
completed during the review period.

Various aspects of cartographic research are reported at
the British Cartographic Society Annual Symposium and at
the Society of Cartographer’s Summer School, but neither
of these meetings focus speci(cid:142)cally on research. There are
several general GIS conferences held each year, the main
one being organized by the Association for Geographic
Information and this normally includes sessions on research
topics. More speci(cid:142)cally research oriented, GIS Research
UK (GISRUK) is held annually around Easter time and
attracts mainly academic and other research personnel in
GIS from both Britain and internationally. An important
element of GISRUK is the Young Researchers Forum
which brings together PhD students, creating valuable
interchange of ideas at this level.

SOME RESEARCH PROJECTS

It is not possible to list all research projects that have
taken place during recent years, but a brief indication of
some major areas of work and key projects is given below.
Without doubt one of the most active areas of carto-
graphic research in the UK is the history of cartography. A
signi(cid:142)cant focus in recent years has been converting paper
records into digital form. This varies from several projects
which aim to scan historical maps and make to images
available for research, to those which create vector (cid:142)les of
historical boundaries for use in GIS. Example projects
include ‘Charting the Nation 1590–1740’ which will scan
and catalogue about 3600 images of maps and related
texts on the mapping of Scotland and the ‘Great Britain
Historical GIS Project’ which is creating a computerised
record of the administrative boundaries of Britain from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth century.

A recent major national research initiative, the Research
Support Libraries Programme (RSLP) includes several carto-
graphic projects such as ‘Mapping the World’ which will
produce an on-line catalogue of post-1850 overseas mapping
held by seven research libraries. The overall aim of RSLP is
to make it easier for researchers to locate and access
information for their research.

A major focus of cartographic research in recent years
has been map generalization. There has been signi(cid:142)-
cant work on this in the UK by academic, commercial
and government organizations. The OS Landline plot on
demand service introduced in 1996 to replace 1:10 000
published mapping relies heavily on automated general-
ization of larger scale Land-Line data. Building on this
success, the OS are currently experimenting with auto-
mated generalization of their 1:25 000 scale maps (pers
com., 2003). Researchers at the Universities of Edinburgh,
Glamorgan and Hull continue to research and publish
on various approaches generalization and the University
of Edinburgh together with Laser-Scan Ltd, were been
partners in the AGENT (Automated Generalisation New
Technology) project, a major European collaborative pro-
ject on map generalization. The AGENT project, which
also included the IGN (France), the University of Zurich
and the Grenoble National Polytechnic Institute, aimed
to de(cid:142)ne and model the behaviours of geographical agents

and structures. One novel concept of AGENT is the idea
of the ‘happiness’ of map features (Laser-Scan, 2001; Haire,
2001). Based on multiple criteria,
features assess their
‘happiness’ and decide what they should do to improve
level of happiness, which may
their own or the overall
involve a change of size, position or even removal. The
end result is a happy map!

Linking the two themes of this review, the e-MapScholar
research project has the aim of enhancing the use of spatial
data in learning and teaching (EDINA, 2002). The project
is lead by EDINA, part of the Data Library of the University
of Edinburgh. EDINA is the organization responsible for
running the Digmap service which provides OS and other
spatial datasets to the academic community. In addition
to EDINA, partners in the project include cartographers,
geographers, psychologists and educational
technology
specialists.

There are three elements to e-MapScholar. The core
of e-MapScholar is the Learning Resource Centre, a set of
customizable on-line learning materials on maps, spatial
data, cartography, visualization and GIS. Key elements of
the Resource Centre are a set of tools and learning units
that can be customized by teaching staff to produce their
own on-line learning environment. The production of
the learning units (short, interactive, on-line lessons) has
probably involved the collaboration of more cartographers,
geographers and specialist in spatial visualization than any
other project in the UK! E-MapScholar is not just a simple
straightforward computer assisted learning project. A great
deal of development work has gone into the production of
many specialist tools for handling spatial data. In particular,
the ability to create a live link with Digimap allows teachers
to customize the lessons to include map of locations relevant
to their students to be included, rather than just accepting
the standard maps. There has also been considerable
research into how students respond to the learning materials
and the Content Management System represents a signi-
(cid:142)cant piece of development work in creating tools for
e-learning.

is

A second element of e-MapScholar

the Virtual
Placement in which a student carries out an on-line project
as if they were working on a placement with a commercial
company. Clever use of
timed e-mails and release of
information as the project progresses helps to create the
impression of a ‘live’ company. Teachers will also be able
to ‘plant ‘‘bombshells’’ to mimic real-life work problems
through which the students must work’ (EDINA, 2003).
The third element is a series of Teaching Case Studies on a
wide variety of topics, which consist of the data used by
learners and descriptions of how they have been used
(http://edina.ac.uk/projects/mapscholar/casestudies/).

Individual

reports from university departments else-
where in this special
issue of The Cartographic Journal
highlight additional research projects being carried out
within these institutions.

CONCLUSION

The last four years has been a dif(cid:142)cult period for carto-
graphic education in the UK, with admissions suspended
to of one of the leading postgraduate courses and the
decision to close the only dedicated undergraduate course.

146

The Cartographic Journal

In contrast to this, there has been a signi(cid:142)cant expansion
of courses in Geographic Information Systems or Science.
Although there are dif(cid:142)culties in identifying all carto-
graphically related research, there is ample evidence of a
strong research culture in the history of cartography,
numerous aspects of map design and visualization, and in
map use and cartographic education, with many examples
of international involvement in research.

REFERENCES

index.html.

EDINA. (2003). e-MapScholar, www.edina.ac.uk/projects/mapscholar/

Haire, K. (2001). ‘Road network generalisation — a multi agent
International Cartographic

system approach’, Proceedings,
Conference, Ottawa.

Laser-Scan (2001). ‘Laser-Scan for map generalisation’, Laser-Scan

Lines, Spring, pp. 4–5.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

