This article was downloaded by: [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona]
On: 04 November 2014, At: 08:04
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Object-based classification of
landforms based on their local
geometry and geomorphometric
context
Deniz Gerçek a , Vedat Toprak b & Josef Strobl c d
a Geodetic and Geographic Information Technologies , Middle East
Technical University , Ankara, Turkey
b Geological Engineering, Middle East Technical University ,
Ankara, Turkey
c Z_GIS Centre for Geoinformatics, University of Salzburg ,
Schillerstraβe 30, Salzburg, 5020, Austria
d Austrian Academy of Sciences , Schillerstraβe 30, Salzburg,
5020, Austria
Published online: 19 Jul 2011.

To cite this article: Deniz Gerçek , Vedat Toprak & Josef Strobl (2011) Object-based classification
of landforms based on their local geometry and geomorphometric context, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 25:6, 1011-1023, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2011.558845

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.558845

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 25, No. 6, June 2011, 1011–1023

Object-based classiﬁcation of landforms based on their local geometry
and geomorphometric context

Deniz Gerçeka*, Vedat Toprakb and Josef Stroblc,d

aGeodetic and Geographic Information Technologies, Middle East Technical University, Ankara,
Turkey; bGeological Engineering, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey; cZ_GIS
Centre for Geoinformatics, University of Salzburg, Schillerstraβe 30, Salzburg 5020, Austria;
dAustrian Academy of Sciences, Schillerstraβe 30, Salzburg 5020, Austria

(Received 7 August 2009; ﬁnal version received 24 January 2011)

Terrain as a continuum can be categorized into landform units that exhibit common
physical and morphological characteristics of land surface which may serve as a bound-
ary condition for a wide range of application domains. However, heterogeneous views,
deﬁnitions, and applications on landforms yield incompatible nomenclature that lacks
interoperability. Yet, there is still room for developing methods for classiﬁcation of land
surface into landforms that can provide different disciplines with a basis of landscape
description that is also commonsense to human insight.

This study proposes a method of landform classiﬁcation that reveals general geo-
morphometry of the landscape. A set of landform classes that are commonsense to
human insight and relevant to various disciplines is adopted to generate landforms at the
landscape scale. The proposed classiﬁcation method is based on local geometry of the
surface and the geomorphometric context in a higher level framework. A set of digital
terrain models (DTMs) at relevant scale is utilized where local geometry is represented
with morphometric DTMs, and the geomorphometric context is incorporated through
‘relative terrain position’ and ‘terrain network.’ ‘Object-based image analysis’ tools
that have the ability to segment and classify DTMs into representative terrain objects
and connect those objects in a multi-level hierarchy is utilized. Ambiguities in land-
forms both in attribute and geographical space are represented via fuzzy classiﬁcation.
The proposed method is applied to two different case areas to evaluate the efﬁciency
and stability of the outcomes. Results reveal a reasonable amount of consistency where
landform classes can be utilized as general or multi-purpose regarding some ambiguity
that is already inherent in landforms.

Keywords: terrain; general geomorphometry; landforms; DTMs; OBIA; fuzzy classi-
ﬁcation

1.

Introduction

Landscapes can be categorized into landform units that exhibit common physical and mor-
phological characteristics which may serve as a boundary condition for various studies
in earth sciences and related disciplines. The variability of land characteristics is largely
controlled by changes in the form and position of the terrain which produce gradients in
moisture, energy, and nutrients across the landscape (Moore et al. 1993, Skidmore et al.

*Corresponding author. Email: denizger@gmail.com

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2011.558845
http://www.informaworld.com

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 1012

D. Gerçek et al.

1996). Therefore, the ability to discriminate landforms that functionally and morpholog-
ically represent the earth’s surface is key to understanding landscapes (MacMillan et al.
2007).

Landform classiﬁcation is one of the basic research domains in digital terrain analysis
(Pike 2002). Increasing availability of high-resolution digital elevation models (DEMs),
adaptation of methods and techniques of geographic information systems and image pro-
cessing into terrain analysis have all led to a growing body of research on landform
classiﬁcation. Digital terrain models (DTMs) are land surface parameters derived from
DEMs (Pike et al. 2009) and provide a basis for quantitative analysis and the classiﬁcation
of landforms.

There are various notations about and deﬁnitions of landforms. Some of these notations
relate to general geomorphometry of the landscape and some relate to speciﬁc geomor-
phometry. As described by Evans (1972), general geomorphometry involves the analysis of
characteristics of terrain applicable to any continuous uneven terrain surface, even outside
geomorphology, and speciﬁc geomorphometry involves arbitrary decisions, it is inten-
tionally subjective regarding the quantiﬁcation of concepts. Research and applications of
landform classiﬁcation are usually oriented to solve a speciﬁc problem or implement the
needs of an application domain. Therefore, classiﬁcation schemes based on general geo-
morphometry are less common compared to vast amounts of classiﬁcation schemes based
on speciﬁc geomorphometry. As a result, classiﬁcation attempts often end up with products
that have restricted use and lack interoperability.

This study aims to produce landforms that reveal general geomorphometry of the
landscape given a set of DTMs. A semi-automated object-based classiﬁcation method is
implemented which produces landform classes that are appropriate or transferable for use
for various disciplines. Object-based image analysis (OBIA) tools have the ability to pro-
duce homogeneous objects and associate them at a higher level framework of contextual
information. Therefore OBIA, recently referred to as GEOBIA, is adopted in this study
for its strengths in utilizing functional and topological information inherent in terrain data
(Dr˘agu¸t and Blaschke 2006, Van Asselen and Seijmonsbergen 2006).

Classiﬁcation based on general geomorphometry has a high degree of uncertainty in the
semantic descriptions of landforms which makes a unique and unambiguous classiﬁcation
hardly possible (Schmidt and Hewitt 2004). A landform is ‘vague’ in the philosophical
sense (Williamson 1994) and its description may vary according to perception. Another
uncertainty comes from the indeterminate boundaries of landforms; terrain as a spatially
continuous surface artiﬁcially delimited into units produces boundary conditions that are
not distinct (Dehn et al. 2001, Fisher et al. 2004). Therefore, incorporating fuzzy clas-
siﬁcation methods is highly recommended in handling the aforementioned ambiguities in
landform classiﬁcation. Between the similarity relation model and the semantic import (SI)
model, which are the two implementations of fuzzy classiﬁcation, the SI model is utilized
for this study. The SI model permits deﬁnition of conceptual landform elements using
imprecise semantics (MacMillan et al. 2000, Dehn et al. 2001) and there is a progress
toward more stable semantics-oriented deﬁnitions of terrain units (Strobl 2008). The SI
model utilizes morphometric DTMs as input into a multivariate fuzzy classiﬁcation.

‘Local geometry’ of the landscape constitutes the basis of the proposed landform clas-
siﬁcation; however, landforms are not random, but rather structured as a result of the
history of geologic and geomorphic processes which have been acting on the earth’s sur-
face. Land surface is therefore characterized by a collection of geomorphologically related
landforms. A higher level ‘geomorphometric context’ is incorporated to reorganize form
elements as landform classes such as ridge, peak, and spur. The geomorphometric context

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1013

information for this study is comprised of ‘relative terrain position,’ for example, relatively
low, high, and ‘terrain network,’ that is, streams and ridges. Together they determine the
contextual information particular to landscapes, for example, connectivity and proximity.
Incorporation of the geomorphometric context requires representing terrain as interrelated
entities and building relationships structured in a multi-level hierarchy to aid in contextual
classiﬁcation. Therefore, the multi-level classiﬁcation capabilities of OBIA are utilized.

For the derivation of DTMs, a ﬁxed window size that represents characteristics scale
(Wood 2009) within the range of ‘landscape scale’ is proposed for this study. A ﬁxed
window size successfully represents features at a particular scale deﬁned by the window of
perception, however, poorly represents features that are smaller or larger than the window
size. Therefore, it is intended that the window size represents the scale of the analysis and
is capable of capturing the characteristic scale.

2. Materials and methods
DTMs are derived in the initial stage of the proposed method. Size of the window for cal-
culating the derivatives is strongly related with the scale of the resultant product; therefore,
a series of DTMs calculated with a range of window sizes were evaluated to determine the
appropriate scale. Subsequently, OBIA was implemented to produce homogeneous form
objects based on local geometry; those objects were then reorganized using contextual
information to produce geomorphometric classes. Method was tested on two case areas:
‘case 1’ and ‘case 2,’ which both portray proposed landform classes but each have dif-
ferent topographic characteristics (Figure 1). For both of the cases, the same procedures
for data production, the same set of classiﬁcation rules, and the same parameters were
employed to verify model validity. Case areas both have extents of 15 × 15 km. ‘Case 1’
has high relief, dissected valleys, and steep hill slopes that dominate the landscape such
that the region can be dated to a young stage geomorphology. The topography of ‘case 2’
is smoother when compared to ‘case 1’; there are hills that dominate the landscape, and the
remaining part is comprised of gently sloping regions. ‘Case 1’ is in the Kaçkar Mountains
close to Artvin at northeast of Turkey. ‘Case 2’ is in Amasya, Turkey.

2.1. Landform classes

In a classiﬁcation based on general geomorphometry where classes are not described
by speciﬁc form and process, there are well-known schemes proposed by Peucker and
Douglas (1974) including six classes, namely ridge, peak, pass, channel, pit, and plane
and that proposed by Dikau (1989) after Ruhe (1975) with 15 classes, which was also
adopted by Schmidt and Hewitt (2004) and Dr˘agu¸t and Blaschke (2006) either fully or
partially. Dikau’s (1989) scheme, which exhaustively covers all possible combinations of
form, described with morphometric DTMs (Figure 2) is adopted for this study.

Local geometry, also used interchangeably with form/morphometry, is represented by
the slope and curvature of a surface. Dikau (1989) proposes the use of slope and four
directional curvature parameters to categorize terrain into landform classes. Four direc-
tional curvatures, namely proﬁle curvature, plan curvature, maximum curvature, minimum
curvature, efﬁciently represent curvedness at all directions.

2.2. Terrain modeling and quantiﬁcation

A DEM of 15 m grid size was generated using Topogrid submodule of ArcGIS 9.3 adapted
from the ANUDEM (Australian National University Digital Elevation Model) procedure

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 1014

D. Gerçek et al.

.
)
b
(

’
2
e
s
a
c
‘

,
)
a
(

’
1

e
s
a
c
‘

:
s
a
e
r
a

e
s
a
c

f
o

f
e
i
l
e
r

d
e
d
a
h
s
d
n
a

p
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
L

.
1

e
r
u
g
i
F

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1015

Figure 2. Fifteen ‘form elements’ based on local geometry of a surface.

(Hutchinson 1989). This algorithm creates hydrologically correct DEMs out of elevation
contours (Reuter et al. 2006).

Elevation contours are widely available and are standardized for most of the countries
including Turkey. Therefore, 1/25,000 scale topographic map contours of 10 m vertical
space were used as source elevation data in this study. A full set of DTMs that describe
form (Dikau 1989) is employed; they are slope and four directional curvatures, namely
plan, proﬁle, minimum, and maximum curvature.

A ﬁxed window size was used to derive DTMs for this study. Accordingly, the window
for calculations should represent landscape scale and be at a proper size to characterize
the majority of the features dominating the terrain. Landscape scale, although not strictly
described, covers a broad range of scales (Blaschke et al. 2001). It is coarser than hill
slope scale or ‘microrelief,’ hence can be associated with ‘mesorelief A’ according to the
hierarchical levels of landform units as described by Dikau (1989). ‘Mesorelief A’ covers
landform classes that range broadly between 104 and 106 m2 in areal extents. Examinations
on case areas show that average class size fall within this range.

Quadratic approximation of a surface as speciﬁed by Evans (1972) and customized
by Wood (1996) is employed to calculate slope and curvature for a range of successively
increasing window sizes: 5 × 5, 15 × 15, 25 × 25, 35 × 35, 45 × 45, 55 × 55, 65 × 65,
and 75 × 75 that correspond to 75 × 75 m, 225 × 225 m, 375 × 375 m, 525 × 525 m,
675 × 675 m, 825 × 825 m, 975 × 975 m, 1125 × 1125 m, respectively. However, DTMs
derived using a window size of 5 × 5 were found to be extremely ﬁne with negligible
spatial detail, and therefore removed from the remaining analysis. A series of ‘maximum
curvature’ for ‘case 1’ at successively increasing window sizes is illustrated in Figure 3.

It is possible to detect characteristic scales of landforms by locally analyzing surface
parameters at different scales (Schmidt and Andrew 2005). Local curvature is particularly
evaluated to detect characteristic scale because pattern of surface curvature varies accord-
ing to scale (Wood 1996, Schmidt and Andrew 2005). The curvature is calculated for a
speciﬁc location using a series of window sizes. Window size which calculates the highest
curvature value represents the characteristic scale (Wood 1996). This idea is implemented

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 1016

D. Gerçek et al.

Figure 3. Shaded relief of case 1 (a) and maximum curvature of ‘case 1’ for a range of window
sizes: (b) 15 × 15, (c) 25 × 25, (d) 35 × 35, (e) 45 × 45, (f) 55 × 55, (g) 65 × 65, (h) 75 × 75 that
correspond to 225 × 225 m, 375 × 375 m, 525 × 525 m, 675 × 675 m, 825 × 825 m, 975 × 975,
1125 × 1125 m, respectively.

in Wood’s (2009) script ‘Characteristic scale’ designed for Landserf. Accordingly, given
a range of window sizes incrementing regularly, window size where curvature reaches its
maximum value is recorded as cell values into a single output raster. This raster can be
utilized for multi-scale characterization (Wood 1996), or peak on the frequency histogram
of the raster can be considered to reveal characteristic scale. However, this method, when
applied to case studies, produced unstable results for different window size ranges, that is,
for window size range 3 × 3 to 25 × 25, characteristic scale was detected at 9 × 9, whereas
for window size range 3 × 3 to 75 × 75, characteristic scale was detected at 13 × 13 in
‘case 1.’ Moreover, this method tends to recognize larger features as dominant as stated
also by Barringer (2008). It produces highest convexity for the maximum allowed window
size and may obscure other details to an unpredictable extent.

Characteristic scale evaluation for this study relies on a basis similar to Wood’s (2009)
approach. A series of ‘maximum curvature’ is produced for a range of window sizes from
5 × 5 to 75 × 75 with an increment of 10. Window size which produces the highest global
mean of convexity is assumed to capture the majority of the features that pertain to the
characteristic scale.

Regions pertaining to concavities were removed prior to calculations, as values for
‘maximum curvature’ with both negative and positive signs tend to shift the mean value
toward zero which may yield improper results. Figure 4 illustrates the plot of the global
mean of convexity calculated for a series of window sizes for ‘case 1’ and ‘case 2.’

Accordingly, window sizes of 25 × 25, 45 × 45, and 65 × 65 produced relatively
higher global mean of convexity for ‘case 1.’ ‘Case 2,’ however, portrays different scale
characteristics which is mainly due to lacking mountainous features in the landscape and
large windows can only capture low convexities. Window sizes of 25 × 25 and 45 × 45
are more representative of the characteristic scale for ‘case 2.’ The scale represented by
window size of 45 × 45 (675 × 675 m on the ground) has the highest global mean of
convexity for ‘case 1’; for ‘case 2’ it is the second highest; however, it efﬁciently captures

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1017

Figure 4. Graph for global mean for maximum curvature convexity calculated for a range of
window sizes for ‘case 1’ (a) and ‘case 2’ (b).

a characteristic scale within a broader range of landscape scale. Moreover, using same scale
will produce consistent and comparable results for the evaluations. Therefore, window size
of 45 × 45 is accepted as the ﬁxed window size for deriving all DTMs including slope and
four curvatures for both of the cases.

Surface parameters, slope, and curvature calculated for window size of 45 × 45 were
then used as input in morphometric classiﬁcation. However, to describe semantics for the
proposed landform classes, threshold criteria for slope and curvature values are required.
Unfortunately, there are no explicit and satisfactory threshold criteria deﬁned for classiﬁ-
cation based on general geomorphometry. Threshold criteria cannot be accepted as global,
because of the multi-scalar nature of landforms and case speciﬁcity. Therefore, normalized
values of DTMs are suggested as an alternative for a consistent classiﬁcation in this study.
Normalization of the DTMs enables the use of same set of classiﬁcation criteria for all of
the cases at different data ranges and bears out model validity. Accordingly, slope is linearly
normalized within the range 0–1, and curvature parameters are linearly normalized within
the range −1+1 so that they represent the general steepness or general curvedness of a
surface. Curvature values were normalized subsequent to removal of outliers exceeding
5th percentile at the two ends of the bell-shaped histograms. Slope values were normal-
ized between lowest slope and mean slope within the range 0–1. Some topography may
have both rugged and ﬂat regions as in ‘case 2,’ which can shift mean steepness toward
lower values. Topography is assumed ﬂat if it has a slope lower than 5◦ (Giles 1998), 4◦
(MacMillan and Shary 2009), or 3◦ (Reuter et al. 2006). For this study, regarding smooth-
ing effect of large window size, slope under 3◦ was taken as a threshold to remove areas
prior to calculating mean slope.

2.3. Object-based image classiﬁcation
2.3.1. Segmentation

A multi-resolution segmentation based on the fractal net evaluation algorithm by Baatz
and Schäpe (2000) embedded in eCognition software was employed to obtain form objects
from slope and four curvature parameters. Scale, weight of input layers, and weight of
spectral information versus shape are the main parameters of segmentation. Scale param-
eter determines the maximum allowed heterogeneity and has a direct inﬂuence on the
size of the objects. The best combination of segmentation parameters is usually deter-
mined through a trial and error sequence (Walker and Blaschke 2008). To determine an
optimum segmentation scale for this study, a novel method that is introduced by Dr˘agu¸t

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 1018

D. Gerçek et al.

Figure 5. Rate of change (ROC) of local variance (LV) of slope calculated over a range of scales
(1–20) via ESP tool for (a) case 1 and (b) case 2.

et al. (2010) as ‘estimation of scale parameter (ESP),’ is employed. ESP builds on the idea
of ‘local variance’ (LV) ﬁrst introduced by Woodcock and Strahler (1987). LV increases as
the objects enlarge; however, it tends to increase relatively less at particular scales which
means, although new pixels are added within the object borders, variation in pixel values
only increases slightly. Accordingly, particular scale or scales where the rate of change of
LV ﬂattens out or drops indicates the optimum scale. Figure 5 illustrates rate of change of
LV for successively increasing segmentation scales for ‘case 1’ and ‘case 2.’ Arrows denote
the unitless scale 8 where there is an initial ﬂattening out or drop in both of the cases.

Scale is set as 8 for both ‘case 1’ and ‘case 2.’ All input layers are weighted the same;
shape criterion is set to 0.1, which automatically gives the weight of 0.9 to morphometric
DTMs. An increased weight of shape is observed as posing misrepresentative objects of
terrain features, as 2D representations of terrain features do not usually have particular
shapes.

2.3.2. Morphometric classiﬁcation: fuzzy classiﬁcation of landforms based on their
local geometry

A fuzzy classiﬁcation is implemented for classiﬁcation of landforms based on local geom-
etry. SI model is employed to describe morphometric classes. SI models that utilize fuzzy
membership functions require two parameters to be deﬁned: (1) type of curves (e.g., linear,
bell-shaped), and (2) threshold values: a, b. Threshold values ‘a’ and ‘b’ are the values for
particular criteria describing an attribute of a class where membership of belonging to it
reaches 1 at ‘a’ and decreases to 0 at ‘b.’ A ‘cross-over’ point located between ‘a’ and ‘b’
is of critical importance as it corresponds to data value where membership is 0.5.

Surface parameters, slope and curvature, are descriptors of form. Slope quantiﬁes
whether topography is ﬂat or sloping. Sloping areas are then assigned to nine classes
according to plan and proﬁle curvature, and ﬂat areas are assigned to six classes according
to minimum and maximum curvature (Figure 2). Morphometric DTMs with normalized
values were used as input into fuzzy classiﬁcation. Linear functions were used for import-
ing semantics for ﬂatness versus steepness in slope (Figure 6a). Curvedness for curvatures
was also represented by a linear function. Frequency distribution of curvature parameters
are bell-shaped with most of the values clustered around 0, therefore represented with a
simple Gaussian curve (Figure 6b). A narrow version is employed to describe straightness
in planar forms: ‘plain’ and ‘planar slope.’

All of the 15 landforms are described with membership functions. Parameters and
membership functions for one of the morphometric forms ‘peak’ is given in Figure 7.

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1019

Figure 6. Membership functions used for
Membership function for steepness or ﬂatness (a) and curvedness or straightness (b).

fuzzy classiﬁcation of morphometric classes.

Figure 7. Fuzzy membership functions used for morphometric classiﬁcation of ‘peak.’

2.3.3. Geomorphometric classiﬁcation: incorporating geomorphometric context
Classiﬁcation based on local geometry produces classes that are ‘morphometric’ rather
than geomorphometric (Wood 1996). Landforms, although not always very uniform, have
speciﬁc organization, where, for instance, peaks and ridges are at the crests of hills and
mountains; hence, they are positioned at highest points and/or correspond to the divides.
Ridges on a vertical plane are followed by shoulders and side slopes. The foot slope
constitutes the lower parts of a sloping terrain and it is adjacent to channels or plains.
Slopes on the horizontal plane have hollows and spurs in sequential order. Relative position
across the landscape is incorporated to construct this organization. Contextual informa-
tion that reveals the relative position of features across the landscape is gathered from
a local elevation-based model ‘terrain position index’ categorized into three as ‘upper,’
‘mid,’ and ‘low.’ Major streams and ridges that represent the ‘terrain network’ are obtained
through surface ﬂow model to provide guidance in allocating objects into surface-speciﬁc
landforms like ‘ridge,’ ‘peak,’ and ‘channel.’

Three levels of classiﬁcation hierarchy were generated. A sub-level/super-level infor-
mation is utilized for geomorphometric classiﬁcation that is implemented at a basic level
labeled as ‘Level 0.’ Same segmentation at ‘Level 0’ is cloned to an upper and a lower level
in the framework. The level that carries information on morphometric classes is settled at
the lowest level of the hierarchy and labeled as ‘Level −1.’ The level that carries informa-
tion on positional classes is set as the highest level of the hierarchy and labeled as ‘Level
1.’ The terrain network is incorporated as independent thematic layers: ridges and streams.
A set of logical rules that utilize information from the sub-level, super-level, and thematic
layers is processed in ‘Level 0.’ The rule set for geomorphometric classiﬁcation of one of
the classes ‘peak’ is given in Figure 8.

Accordingly, ‘peak’ is described with its form; an object should be most similar to a
‘peak’ as described by membership functions. At this level (Level −1), where morphome-
tric landform information is stored, this feature is better described as a ‘peak like feature’
and one should understand that ‘peak’ here only pertains to form. On the other hand, a

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 1020

D. Gerçek et al.

Object either has a ‘peak’ form or it is an object
overlapping with three on more ridge sections,
at the upper positions

Peak

and

or

Existence of  sub-object ‘peak’ = ‘true’

Number of  overlap ‘ridge’ >= 3

Figure 8. Logical rule set for geomorphometric classiﬁcation of ‘peak.’

Existence of  sub-object ‘upper’ = ‘true’

peak is a surface-speciﬁc feature that is characterized by intersecting ridge lines. If an
object coincides with three or more sections of ridge line, then it should be referred to
as ‘peak’ regarding the terrain topology context (Wolf 1988). A peak is moreover a local
maximum that is characterized by relative terrain position. Therefore, it should be located
in the upper positions across the landscape.

3. Results and discussion
The geomorphometric classiﬁcation of two case areas, ‘case 1’ and ‘case 2,’ depicts well-
discriminated classes (Figure 9). Ridges are continuous and connected via peaks and a few
saddles. Channels are typically elongated and connected. Foot slopes accompany channels
at the lower positions. Hollows and spurs show sequences across the hill slopes on the
horizontal plane.

Classiﬁcation for the study is mainly comprised of two parts; initially, objects are
classiﬁed based on local geometry, and fuzzy ‘morphometric classes’ are obtained.

Figure 9. Classiﬁcation results for ‘case 1’ (a) and ‘case 2’ (b).

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1021

Geomorphometric classes are rather crisp as a result of logical rules employed to reorganize
morphometric classes using existence data, that is, ridges and streams.

Fuzzy morphometric classiﬁcation is evaluated for its stability and efﬁciency of rules
described using SI models. ‘Classiﬁcation stability’ and ‘best classiﬁcation result’ tech-
niques applicable to fuzzy classes were employed. Accordingly, several classes, namely
‘planar slope,’ ‘channel,’ ‘foot slope,’ ‘ridge,’ and ‘plain’ pose better results compared to
remainder of the classes, which means these classes are more separable from other classes
given their characteristics and class deﬁnitions. On the other hand, ‘hollow foot,’ ‘hol-
low shoulder,’ ‘spur foot,’ and ‘saddle’ pose unsatisfactory classiﬁcation statistics and they
could be barely identiﬁed across the case areas. These classes can be reconsidered for
improved consistency with additional information, or they can be embedded into a similar
class, for example, class ‘hollow foot’ into ‘hollow’ or ‘foot slope.’

A ﬁxed window size that is considered to represent the characteristic scale for the case
areas is used to derive DTMs. Although scale is not constant across a landscape and there
are features clustered around particular scales, it is practically not efﬁcient to handle and
represent multi-scaled characterizations in real time.

Geomorphometric classiﬁcation makes a reorganization of morphometric classes
through incorporation of contextual information. Some of the landforms are reclassiﬁed
according to logical rules that represent class descriptions. Consequently, there is approxi-
mately 10% change in class type of the objects; this change occurs more between some of
the classes: there are shifts from, for example, ‘plain’ to ‘channel’ and ‘shoulder’ and ‘spur’
to ‘ridge’ due to geomorphometric context information. Geomorphometric classiﬁcation
results were compared for a set of random locations by four geographers/geomorphologists
who are experienced in landform classiﬁcation. Volunteer scientists were provided with a
dataset of two case areas and an explanatory document describing the method, classes,
and the scale of the study. Results show that 15% and 17% of the points for ‘case 1’ and
‘case 2,’ respectively, were agreed upon by all interpreters as an exact match, and about
50% of the points were agreed upon as an exact match by half of the interpreters. There is
about 5% mismatch where all scientists agree on a particular landform different than the
resultant landform. Evaluations portray a reasonable amount of consistency which is even
higher than reported in the study of Westen (1993) who made a similar assessment on his
landform classiﬁcation.

4. Conclusions

An object-based classiﬁcation of landforms based on general geomorphometry was
performed. The results show that landforms that reveal general geomorphometry of a land-
scape can be effectively gathered based on local geometry and geomorphometric context.
The model emphasizes the use of normalized versions of surface parameters, for example,
slope and curvature in a standardized classiﬁcation procedure with same set of criteria.
Normalization of the DTMs enabled the use of the same set of criteria for cases with
different characteristics and at different data ranges. As a result, consistent classiﬁcation
outputs were obtained. Landform classes can be utilized as general or multi-purpose; they
can be utilized in land resource management including, for example, vegetation mapping.
OBIA proved to be an efﬁcient tool in obtaining representative terrain objects rather
than scattered pixels. It is conﬁrmed to be powerful in utilizing information from different
levels within the framework of geomorphometric context. However, this method employed
a loose coupling of form, position, and terrain network and it can be improved into a more
sophisticated and structured system that represents the particular organization of terrain.

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 1022

D. Gerçek et al.

It should also be considered that terrain may not always ﬁt into particular organizations
and may present an irregular nature, for example, high roughness. OBIA provides multi-
level segmentation that helps represent scale. However, the multi-level framework provided
by OBIA is rather utilized for classiﬁcation purposes in this study; it enabled gathering
information content from different levels.

The accuracy assessment procedure employed for evaluating classiﬁcation results
originates from the classiﬁcation of satellite imagery. The rate of match between the obser-
vations and the results depicts the accuracy of the classiﬁcation. However, landforms are
quite different in characteristic compared to land use or land cover, because (1) landforms
are different compared to features that are ‘real’ or of ‘natural kinds’; landforms that reveal
general geomorphometry are rather described based on semantics; (2) terrain is continu-
ous in nature and landforms has indeterminate boundaries; (3) landform classiﬁcation is
strongly related with the window of perception, hence, is scale dependent.

Regarding the particular nature of landforms, accuracy assessment constitutes a spe-
cial case in image classiﬁcation. Standard accuracy assessment procedures widely applied
on image classiﬁcation results were not favorable to be adopted for landform classiﬁca-
tion. A weighted similarity between classes for accuracy assessment is considered to be an
alternative solution for evaluations by external sources.

Acknowledgements
Trimble (formerly Deﬁniens) is thanked for providing a short term academic license of the profes-
sional version of ‘eCognition’ for the partial fullﬁllment of this study. Dr. Jochen Schmidt, Dr. Bora
Rojay, Dr. Lucian Dr˘agu¸t and Clemens Eisank are gratefully thanked for their evaluations on the
classiﬁcation results.

References
Baatz, M. and Schäpe, A., 2000. Multiresolution segmentation – an optimization approach for
high quality multiscale image segmentation. In: J. Strobl, T. Blaschke, and G. Griesebner, eds.
Angewandte Geographische Informationsverarbeitung XII. Heidelberg: Wichmann, 12–23.
Barringer, J.R.F., et al., 2008. National mapping of landform elements in support of S-map, a
New Zealand soils database. In: Q. Zhou, B. Lees, and G. Tang, eds. Advances in digital terrain
analysis. Berlin: Springer, 443–458.

Blaschke, T., Conradi, M., and Lang, S., 2001. Multi-scale image analysis for ecological monitoring
of heterogeneous, small structured landscapes. In: Proceedings of SPIE, Toulouse, 35–44.
Dehn, M., Gartner, H., and Dikau, R., 2001. Principles of semantic modeling of landform structures.

Computers and Geosciences, 27, 1005–1010.

Dikau, R., 1989. The application of a digital relief model to landform analysis. In: J.F. Raper, ed.
Three dimensional applications in geographic information systems. London: Taylor and Francis,
51–77.

Dr˘agu¸t, L. and Blaschke, T., 2006. Automated classiﬁcation of landform elements using object-based

image analysis. Geomorphology, 81, 330–344.

Dr˘agu¸t, L., Tiede, D., and Levick, S.L., 2010. ESP: a tool for estimating the scale parameter for mul-
tiresolution image segmentation of remotely sensed data. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 24 (6), 859–871.

Evans, I.S., 1972. General geomorphometry, derivatives of altitude and descriptive statistics. In: R.J.

Chorley, ed. Spatial analysis in geomorphology. London: Harper & Row, 17–90.

Fisher, P., Wood, J., and Cheng, T., 2004. Where is Helvellyn? Fuzziness of multi-scale landscape

morphometry, Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 29, 106–128.

Giles, P.T., 1998. Geomorphological signatures: classiﬁcation of aggregated slope unit objects from
digital elevation and remote sensing data. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 23, 581–594.

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1023

Hutchinson, M.F., 1989. A new procedure for gridding elevation and stream line data with automatic

removal of spurious pits. Journal of Hydrology, 106, 211–232.

Macmillan, R., et al., 2000. A generic procedure automatically segmenting landforms into landform
elements using DEMs, heuristic rules and fuzzy logic. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 113, 81–109.
MacMillan, R.A., Moon, D.E., and Coupé, R.A., 2007. Automated predictive ecological mapping in

a Forest Region of B.C., Canada. Geoderma, 140, 353–373.

MacMillan, R.A. and Shary, P.A., 2009. Landforms and landform elements in geomorphometry. In:
T. Hengl and H.I. Reuter, eds. Geomorphometry–concepts, software, applications. Developments
in soil science. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 33, 227–254.

Moore, I.D., et al., 1993. Soil attribute prediction using terrain analysis. Soil Science Society of

America Journal, 57, 443–452.

Peucker, T.K. and Douglas, D.H., 1974. Detection of surface speciﬁc points by local parallel
processing of discrete terrain elevation data. Computer Graphics and Image Processing, 4,
375–387.

Pike, R.J., 2002. A bibliography of terrain modelling (geomorphometry), the quantitative represen-
tation of topography – supplement 4.0. Denver: U.S. Geological Survey, Open-File Report no.
02–465, 116.

Pike, R.J., Evans, I.S., and Hengl, T., 2009. Geomorphometry: a brief guide. In: T. Hengl and H.I.
Reuter, eds. Geomorphometry–concepts, software, applications. Developments in soil science.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 33, 3–30.

Reuter, H.I., Wendroth, O., and Kersebaum, K.C., 2006. Optimisation of relief classiﬁcation for

different levels of generalisation. Geomorphology, 77, 79–89.

Ruhe, R.V., 1975. Geomorphology–geomorphic processes and surﬁcial geology. Boston, MA:

Houghton-Miﬂin, 246.

Schmidt, J. and Andrew, R., 2005. Multi-scale landform characterization. Area, 37, 341–350.
Schmidt, J. and Hewitt, A., 2004. Fuzzy land element classiﬁcation from DTMs based on geometry

and terrain position. Geoderma, 121, 243–256.

Skidmore, A.K., et al., 1996. An operational GIS expert system for mapping forest soils.

Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 62, 501–511.

Strobl, J., 2008. Segmentation-based terrain classiﬁcation. In: Q. Zhou, B. Lees, and G. Tang, eds.

Advances in digital terrain analysis. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 125–141.

Van Asselen, S. and Seijmonsbergen, A.C., 2006. Expert-driven semi-automated geomorphological

mapping for a mountainous area using a laser DTM. Geomorphology, 78, 309–320.

Van Westen, C., 1993. Gissiz, Training Package for Geographic Information Systems in Slope

Instability Zonation. Enschede, The Netherlands: ITC, ITC Publication No. 15, 245.

Walker, J. and Blaschke, T., 2008. Object-based landcover classiﬁcation for the Phoenix metropolitan
area: optimization vs. transportability. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 29, 2021–2040.

Williamson, T., 1994. Vagueness. Routledge: London.
Wolf, G.W., 1988. Weighted surface networks and their application to cartographic generalisation.
In: W. Barth, ed. Visualisierungstechniken und Algorithmen. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 199–212.
Wood, J.D., 1996. The geomorphological characterization of digital elevation models. Thesis (PhD).

University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Wood,

J.D., 2009. Geomorphometry in LandSerf.

In: T. Hengl and H.I. Reuter, eds.
Geomorphometry–concepts, software, applications. Developments in soil science. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 33, 333–349.

Woodcock, C. and Strahler, A., 1987. The factor of scale in remote sensing. Remote Sensing of

Environment, 21, 311–332.

Downloaded by [Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona] at 08:04 04 November 2014 