bs_bs_banner

Short Technical Note

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00): 00–00

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice: A Capacity
Building Resource on Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI)

Gregory Giuliani,(cid:2) Pierre Lacroix,(cid:2) Yaniss Guigoz,(cid:2) Roberto Roncella,†
Lorenzo Bigagli,† Mattia Santoro,† Paolo Mazzetti,† Stefano Nativi,†
Nicolas Ray(cid:2) and Anthony Lehmann(cid:2)
(cid:2)University of Geneva, Institute for Environmental Sciences, EnviroSPACE and GRID-Geneva
†CNR, Institute of Atmospheric Pollution Research

Abstract
Data discoverability, accessibility, and integration are frequent barriers for scientists and a major obstacle
for favorable results on environmental research. To tackle this issue, the Group on Earth Observations
(GEO) is leading the development of the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS), a volun-
tary effort that connects Earth Observation resources world-wide, acting as a gateway between producers
and users of environmental data. GEO recognizes the importance of capacity building and education to
reach large adoption, acceptance and commitment on data sharing principles to increase the capacity to
access and use Earth Observations data. This article presents “Bringing GEOSS services into practice”
(BGSIP), an integrated set of teaching material and software to facilitate the publication and use of envi-
ronmental data through standardized discovery, view, download, and processing services, further facilitat-
ing the registration of data into GEOSS. So far, 520 participants in 10 countries have been trained using
this material, leading to numerous Spatial Data Infrastructure implementations and 1,000 tutorial down-
loads. This workshop lowers the entry barriers for both data providers and users, facilitates the develop-
ment of technical skills, and empowers people.

1 Introduction

Research in environmental sciences is currently hindered by various barriers that impede efﬁ-
cient data discovery and access (Giuliani et al. 2011; Craglia et al. 2012). Earth Observation
(EO) data are an essential prerequisite to analyze past, current, and future environmental
trends (Beniston et al. 2012; Nativi et al. 2013a). EO can be considered as the collection of nec-
essary data to measure and monitor Earth’s physical, chemical and biological systems. They are
usually acquired through remote sensing techniques (e.g. satellite, airborne systems) or ﬁeld
sensors (e.g. thermometer, wind gauge, ocean buoy, seismometer). The difﬁculties in efﬁciently
accessing data are a major obstacle for success in research themes like climate change, biodiver-
sity, or disasters management (Lehmann et al. 2014). To tackle this issue and facilitate environ-
mental data discovery and access, it is essential to convince data holders to make their data

Address for correspondence: Gregory Giuliani, University of Geneva – Institute for Environmental Sciences, EnviroSPACE, 66 Boulevard
Carl-Vogt, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. E-mail: gregory.giuliani@unige.ch
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge the European Commission ‘‘Seventh Framework Program’’ that funded the
EOPOWER (Grant Agreement no. 603500), IASON (Grant Agreement no. 603534), enviroGRIDS (Grant Agreement no. 227640) and
MEDINA (Grant Agreement no. 282977) projects. A special thank to all testers of the material: Mick Wilson (United Nations Environ-
ment Program), Julie Binder (Federal Geographic Data Committee), Mark Noort (HCP International), Omer Nadin and Pablo de Roulet
(University of Geneva). We thank Martin Lacayo for reviewing an earlier draft. The views expressed in the article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the institutions they belong to.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12209

2 G Giuliani et al.

available to a larger audience and to understand the beneﬁts of data sharing (Charvat et al.
2013; Myroshnychenko et al. 2013). Currently, one of the main challenges that authorities are
facing worldwide is the coordination and effective use of the vast amount of environmental
data that is generated (Giuliani et al. 2013). To address this challenge, the concept of the Spa-
tial Data Infrastructure (SDI) has emerged (Masser 2005; Nebert 2005; Craglia et al. 2010).
This framework aims at integrating data sources, systems, network linkages, standards and
institutional issues to efﬁciently deliver environmental data from heterogeneous sources to the
widest possible audience (Nebert 2005; Giuliani et al. 2011; Giuliani and Gorgan 2013; Leh-
mann et al. 2014). According to the Global SDI Association (GSDI), SDIs are “an umbrella of
policies, standards, and procedures under which organizations and technologies interact to fos-
ter more efﬁcient use, management, and production of environmental data” (Nebert 2005) and
have the ultimate objective to support easy access to and utilization of environmental data (e.g.
discovery, visualization, evaluation, access).

SDIs depend on interoperability to signiﬁcantly enhance data discovery and accessibility.
Interoperability can be deﬁned as the ability to exchange and make use of data and information
between two or more components. The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) is leading the
international effort to develop open interoperability standards for geospatial data and informa-
tion, to enable data discovery (e.g. Catalog Service for the Web – CSW), data visualization (e.g.
Web Map Service –WMS), data download (e.g. Web Feature Service – WFS and Web Coverage
Service – WCS), and data processing (e.g. Web Processing Service – WPS). Indeed, there are
many other ways of sharing environmental data (e.g. download of static ﬁles, physical support
like DVD or USB keys); the preferred option depends on various factors such as Internet con-
nectivity or computer performance (Giuliani et al. 2014). However, the BGSIP approach
focuses on data sharing through web services as this is an emerging technology supporting the
major data sharing initiatives at national/regional/global scales, ensures access to up-to-date
data sets, enables interoperability, and is well adapted in a environment with good Internet
connectivity.

At the global scale, the leading effort to enhance coordination and provisioning of
environmental data is represented by the Group on Earth Observations (GEO) that is
developing the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) (GEO Secretariat
2005). The aim of GEOSS is to enhance the relevance of EO for addressing environmental
problems, and to offer full and open access to comprehensive information on and analyses
of the environment. GEO adopted Data Sharing Principles (https://www.earthobservations.
org/dswg.php) to expend data reuse through GEOSS and promote open data access to
answer broad societal challenges (GEO 2009). To achieve GEOSS vision and objectives,
anyone who wishes to participate in GEO should endorse the Data Sharing Principles: “(1)
there will be full and open exchange of data, metadata and products shared within
GEOSS, recognizing relevant international
instruments and national policies and legisla-
tion; (2) all shared data, metadata and products will be made available with minimum
time delay and at minimum cost; and (3) all shared data, metadata, and products being
free of charge or no more than cost of reproduction will be encouraged for research and
education”. GEO recognizes the importance of Capacity Building and education to reach
large acceptance, adoption, and commitment on Data Sharing Principles to increase the
capacity to access and use EO data (Giuliani et al. 2013; Donert 2015). GEO’s capacity
building deﬁnition follows the United Nations Conference on Environment and Develop-
ment (UNCED) deﬁnition of including “human, scientiﬁc, technological, organizational,
and institutional resources and capabilities” to “enhance the abilities of stakeholders to
evaluate and address crucial questions related to policy choices and different options for

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice

3

development” (GEO Secretariat 2006). Within its current work plan, GEO has a dedicated
task on Capacity Building (ID-02 Developing Institutional and Individual Capacity) that
aims at implementing the vision stated in its strategy (GEO Secretariat 2006; European
Commission 2014).

(1) existing observation systems;

In its strategy, GEO deﬁnes three levels of capacity building: (1) human (e.g. education
and training of individuals); (2) institutional (e.g. enhancing the understanding within orga-
nization and governments of the value of geospatial data to support decision-making); and
(3) infrastructure (e.g. installing/conﬁguring/managing of the needed technology). GEO also
recommends demonstrating the beneﬁts of data sharing through appropriate examples, best
practices, and guidelines in order to strengthen:
(2)
capacities of decision-makers to use it; and (3) capacities of the general public to under-
stand important environmental, social and economical issues at stake. Such initiatives can
also give data providers the opportunity to become more visible and trustworthy nationally
and internationally by participating in the effort of building GEOSS. The GEO capacity-
issues that represent at the same time as many
building strategy also identiﬁes several
opportunities to improve the situation such as (Noort 2010, 2012, 2013): (1) limited
access to capacity building resources; (2) lack of e-science infrastructure for EO education
and training;
(4) gaps
between EO research and operational application; (5) inefﬁcient connectivity between pro-
viders and users of EO systems; (6) need for cooperation within and between developed
and developing countries and regions; (7) lack of awareness about the value of EO among
decision makers; and (8) duplication of EO capacity building efforts.

(3) need for criteria and standards for EO capacity building;

Currently, there are many tutorials, for example OpenLayers (http://openlayers.org/en/
v3.9.0/doc/tutorials/), GeoServer
(http://docs.geoserver.org/2.7.1/user/tutorials/index.html),
PostGIS (http://postgis.net/documentation/), QGIS (http://www.qgistutorials.com/en/) and
workshop materials (Boundlessgeo Workshops; http://workshops.boundlessgeo.com)
that
are available on the Internet explaining how to use OGC and ISO standards to publish,
document, visualize, and process data. However, one of the major issues is that they focus
on one or two topics or tools, but to our knowledge none of them gives a clear vision of
both the data provider and the consumer perspectives. It becomes therefore more difﬁcult
for stakeholders to understand the beneﬁts of concepts like data sharing and interoperabil-
ity. This can potentially lead to a lack of interest and commitment, and ﬁnally act as a
barrier to participation to initiatives such as GEOSS. The GEOSS tutorials are probably
the best attempt to integrate these resources and are available from http://wiki.ieee-earth.
org/Documents/GEOSS_Tutorials. However, these tutorials tend to be outdated (i.e. not
maintained and using old versions of software) and they do not cover all the aspects of
providing and consuming data. Furthermore,
learners are required to identify and go
through several tutorials before being able to share and use interoperable services.

the “Bringing GEOSS services

Recognizing these issues and opportunities,

into
practice” (BGSIP) workshop (Giuliani et al. 2014) has been initiated in the framework of
the European research project enviroGRIDS (Lehmann et al. 2015) as an integrated set of
teaching material and software to give the necessary knowledge to efﬁciently share and
use environmental data through web-based services. This material is simple to use and
easy to deploy, and facilitates the publication and use of data and metadata through dis-
covery, view, download, and processing services, as well as the registration of data into
GEO/GEOSS. This article discusses the strategy put in place to achieve a coherent set of
teaching material and its effective delivery speciﬁcally addressing the needs of GEO/
GEOSS.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

4 G Giuliani et al.

2 Objectives

The main objective of the BGSIP workshop is to promote the GEO Data Sharing Principles by
teaching how to conﬁgure, deploy, and use a set of open source software to set up a spatial
data infrastructure. This general goal is supported by three speciﬁc objectives to assist trainees
to learn: (1) how to publish and share data and metadata using OGC and ISO standards; (2)
how to register services into GEOSS; and (3) how to use services discovered through GEOSS in
desktop and web-based GIS clients. The main requirements in designing the course are the
following:

1. Alternate theory and hands-on exercises;
2. Simple start and intuitive user interface;
3. Platform independent (e.g. Windows, Mac, Linux);
4. Geospatial standards explained, taught, and used;
5. Scalable infrastructure for both learning and production environments;
6. Open to modiﬁcation of all teaching material;
7. Multilingual instructions; and
8. Ease of deployment in case participants want to rapidly set up a SDI in a production

environment.

This workshop concentrates mostly on the human and infrastructure levels of the GEO
Capacity Building Strategy. The ultimate strategy behind this workshop is to train the trainer
by enabling the participants to train other colleagues within their own institutions and to
spread the word about data sharing. The institutional level is therefore also tackled by raising
awareness internally on the beneﬁts of data sharing.

This workshop cannot cover all topics related to data sharing. The primary objective is to
give data providers and users the necessary knowledge to share and consume data through
widely used interoperable standards. Once the necessary knowledge is acquired, it becomes
possible for them to tackle other issues like data quality or to handle other types of data sources
(e.g. sensors or crowd-sourced data). In the long-term, this will enable their participation not
only in GEO/GEOSS but also in other data sharing initiatives like the Infrastructure for Spatial
Information in the European Community (INSPIRE) (European Commission 2007).

3 Workshop Material

Based on the requirements presented in the previous section, the following teaching material
has been produced and developed: (1) a tutorial documentation available as a PDF document
and eBook (available on iTunes and Google Play); (2) introductory PowerPoint presentations
on essential SDI concepts; and (3) a virtual machine (VM) with all software, documentation
and data already installed. The following open source software (Table 1) and standards (Table
2) are used in the workshop.

The choice has been made to use open source software and open standards because they
are valuable resources to develop freely available education and teaching material. This will
help to freely disseminate this material to the widest audience possible, allowing trainees to
become trainers. Finally, they are efﬁcient solutions to share data and to ensure a sustainable
technology transfer by making accessible cost-effective and user-friendly solutions.

The approach taken is that each chapter starts with a question that is addressed and

answered by interweaving theory and step-by-step practical exercises (Table 3).

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice

5

Table 1

Software used in “Bringing GEOSS services into practice”

Name

Version

Website

Table 2

Standards used in “Bringing GEOSS services into practice”

Name

Abbreviation

Reference

9.3.1
2.1
2.6.1
2.10.4
3.2.2
10.0.2
2.0.3

3.3.0
2.8

WMS
WFS
WCS
KML

SLD
CSW

WPS

Provider/Server-side
PostgreSQL
PostGIS
GeoServer
GeoNetwork
PyWPS
GI-cat
GI-axe
Consumer/Client-side
OpenLayers
QGIS

OGC Web Map Service
OGC Web Feature Service
OGC Web Coverage Service
OGC Keyhole Markup

Language

OGC Styled Layer Descriptor
OGC Catalog Service for the

Web

OGC Web Processing Service
ISO 19115
ISO 19139 - Geographic

information – Metadata –
XML schema
implementation

ISO 19119 – Geographic
information – Services

http://www.postgresql.org
http://postgis.refractions.net
http://geoserver.org
http://geonetwork-opensource.org
http://pywps.wald.intevation.org
http://essi-lab.eu/do/view/GIcat
http://essi-lab.eu/do/view/GIaxe/

http://openlayers.org
http://www.qgis.org

(de la Beaujardiere 2006)
(Vretanos 2005)
(Whiteside and Evans 2006)
(Wilson 2008)

(Lupp 2007)
(Nebert et al. 2007)

(Schut 2007)
(ISO 2003)
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.

htm?csnumber532557

http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.

htm?csnumber539890

The material follows a structured order reﬂecting a general path from service providers
to consumers (Figure 1). After an introduction on concepts of SDI, Chapters 2 to 5 concen-
trate on the provider side explaining how to create a PostgreSQL/PostGIS geospatial data-
base and load vector data; how to publish vector and raster data as OGC services with
GeoServer; how to document data with ISO-compliant metadata and store it in a metadata
catalog; and ﬁnally how to create a geoprocessing script to analyze geospatial data. Chapters
6 to 8 focus on the consumer side, illustrating how to visualize data with WMS in various cli-
ents (e.g. OpenLayers, QGIS, Google Earth); how to download data with WFS and edit a

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

6 G Giuliani et al.

Table 3

Structure of the workshop, with related tools and standards

Chapter

Title

Software

Standards

1
2
3

4

5
6
7
8
9

Concepts on SDI
How to store geospatial data?
How to publish geospatial data?

N/A
PostgreSQL/PostGIS
GeoServer

N/A
N/A
WMS, WFS,

How to document and search

GeoNetwork

CSW, ISO

geospatial data?

How to process geospatial data?
How to view geospatial data?
How to download geospatial data?
How to analyze geospatial data?
How to share geospatial data?

PyWPS
OpenLayers, QGIS
QGIS
QGIS
GI-cat, GI-axe

WCS, KML, SLD

WPS
WMS, KML
WFS, WCS
WPS
WMS, WFS, WCS,

CSW, WPS

vector layer; and how to consume a WPS service in a GIS client for geospatial analysis. The
ﬁnal chapter discusses how to share these services and participate in GEOSS by registering
resources in the GEO Discovery and Access Broker (Nativi and Bigagli 2009; Nativi et al.
2013a, b; Nativi et al. 2015).

In the same spirit, the data used in this workshop are based on international environmental
data platforms, such as the Global Risk Data Platform (Giuliani and Peduzzi 2011), the Trans-
boundary Water Assessment Program, regional environmental data platforms (e.g. ECOW-
REX, project on renewable energy in West Africa) and project-related environmental data
platforms (e.g. enviroGRIDS; Giuliani and Gorgan 2013; Lehmann et al. 2014), IASON and
EOPOWER on the use of EO for environmental applications). These datasets cover the follow-
ing themes: risk to natural hazards, water, renewable energy, hydrology, and climate. All these
datasets are openly and freely available (i.e. no copyright issues) and are used in several chap-
ters to create continuity within the workshop. The data used are neither voluminous nor spa-
tially complex so can be easily handled by beginners. The same reasons for using open source
software apply to use the open data sets and in particular their rights to redistribute. Commer-
cial datasets were not an option in our case because we wanted to freely redistribute datasets
together with the software to handle them. This is in line with the free and open sharing spirit
promoted by GEO/GEOSS and supported by the workshop.

All the material (i.e. software, data, and tutorials) is integrated and provided in a dedicated
and tailored Linux VM based on Oracle VirtualBox. This VM can be executed on Windows,
MacOS, or Linux and requires a minimum of 4 GB of memory and at least 20 GB of disk space.
Once the VM is installed, users can start the tutorial directly. Furthermore, having a VM that is
already preconﬁgured allows users to ﬁrst train with SDI concepts and technologies; once they
are familiarized they can deploy it as a production server. By using the VM users are able to
save time on setup, focus on open standards, and later deploy it as a production environment
and make adjustments if necessary. This is an important incentive for the users. This material
comes with a 200-slide PowerPoint presentation of the theoretical content of the workshop.
This teaching material of the workshop is already available in seven languages: Arabic, Cro-
atian, English, French, Russian, Serbian, Spanish and soon in Czech.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice

7

Figure 1 The general structure of the workshop

4 Dissemination

The material of the workshop can be downloaded on a dedicated website: http://www.geossin-
topractice.org and the tutorial is available as an interactive ebook on both iTunes/iBooks Store
(https://itunes.apple.com/us/book/bringing-geoss-services-into/id806182409) and Google Play
Books
(https://play.google.com/store/books/details/Gregory_Giuliani_Bringing_GEOSS_serv-
ices_into_prac?id5Nv6nAgAAQBAJ). The material is completely free-of-charge and is licensed
under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.
This type of license allows any user to freely share (e.g. copy and redistribute in any medium or
format) and adapt (e.g. remix, transform and build upon) the material. However, users are
obliged to give appropriate credit (e.g. Attribution), are not allowed to use this material for
commercial purposes (e.g. NonCommercial) and if users remix, transform or build upon the
material, they must distribute their contributions under the same license (i.e. ShareAlike).

The workshop itself can take various formats by teaching one, some, or all chapters, with
an estimated maximum of 12 hours. This is complemented by videos presenting each chapter
of the tutorial on a dedicated “Bringing GEOSS services into practice” YouTube channel

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

8 G Giuliani et al.

(https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfBVYFBQw1aEU7M1j9zbW7A). In terms of dissemi-
nation, the workshop has been taught 15 times between 2010 and 2015 to about 520 partici-
pants in Bulgaria, Georgia, Morocco, the Netherlands, Romania, Serbia, Switzerland, Tunisia
and Turkey (the up-to-date agenda is available at: http://goo.gl/lWBz8M). At the University of
Geneva, the workshop has been included as a course that lasted two days and students were
then asked to put their knowledge into practice by developing and publishing a web applica-
tion. In two other cases the last half-day of the workshop was dedicated to the integration of
geospatial data into the SDI of the hosting institution. The workshop was also presented at
international events, e.g. as a side event during the GEO-X Plenary (http://www.earthobserva-
tions.org/me_sevent.php?id5147) and followed by discussions on how to assess its impact.
The workshops have addressed diverse audiences ranging from students to teachers, scientists
to policymakers, NGOs and public employees to private companies. However, the workshop
remains quite technical and is ideally suited to environmental scientists with technical back-
ground. In order to reach a broader audience, other formats of the workshop are planned, less
technical and/or more thematic (e.g. in the ﬁeld of water resources, climate change or mineral
exploitation). In addition, more than 1,000 downloads of the workshop material have been
recorded since March 2014. The tutorial is registered in GEOSS and in GEOCAB (http://www.
geocab.org), and is promoted by the GEO Secretariat.

A questionnaire was also sent to 450 past attendees to help measure the impact of the
workshop (Figure S1). While the number of respondents is low (e.g. only 50 people have replied
so far), 32 of them stated they have taught others what they learned at the workshop. Even if
this does not mean they have reproduced the exact workshop, it shows that the workshop’s
principles can be reproduced. Seventy-ﬁve percent of the respondents say they are in a position
to teach this workshop in their organization; 65% say they have / are planning to share data
through GEOSS; and ﬁnally, one-third of the respondents set up an SDI in their organization.

These results show that the objectives of being simple, interoperable, ﬂexible, scalable, and
multilingual have been successfully achieved. In particular this can be also helpful for users of a
speciﬁc scientiﬁc community to participate in an initiative like GEOSS and use what is in
GEOSS to develop a tailored application targeting the needs of a speciﬁc community, e.g. Com-
munity portals (Cau et al. 2013; Gorgan et al. 2013).

5 Lessons Learned and Recommendations

Since 2010, the experience gained and the lessons learned in developing, implementing, and
assessing the workshop to develop capacities of different user groups allow us to draw some
recommendations for creating a capacity building resource on SDI, but also to highlight some
limitations.

5.1 Beneﬁts and Impacts

The workshop had an impact on research project partners, countries and institutions where the
Bringing GEOSS services into practice workshop was taught (Giuliani et al. 2013). At the
human level, several partners of EU/FP7 projects decided to implement their own SDI. They
have all stated that having participated in the workshop convinced them about the necessity to
share data and the beneﬁts of using web-based interoperable services. The many positive com-
ments in the impact survey echo this sentiment, e.g. “I want to use GEOSS services in my PhD
works”; “We hope to be able to collaborate with you in other research and education / training
projects related to web-based data sharing”. At the institutional level, institutions like the

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice

9

these workshops helped to raise awareness about GEO/GEOSS:

Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea Against Pollution (whose International Secre-
tariat has been accepted as an Observer in GEO in November 2015) and the International
Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR) found that sharing data using
OGC and ISO standards could bring several beneﬁts for their assessment and reporting proc-
esses and prompted the effort to implement and/or upgrade their infrastructures. At the country
level,
three countries
(Armenia, Bulgaria, Georgia) where workshops were given became GEO members. Finally, the
wide adoption of OGC standards among project partners facilitated the development and
implementation of different software solutions and enabled communication between different
computing infrastructures (Charvat et al. 2013; Giuliani and Gorgan 2013; Giuliani et al.
2013). This allowed large amounts of environmental data to be processed on distributed com-
puting infrastructures to analyze high-resolution satellite images or execute large hydrological
models (Gorgan et al. 2011; Gorgan et al. 2012a, b; Bacu et al. 2013; Balcik et al. 2013; Mihon
et al. 2013a, b).

Besides these general impacts, several other beneﬁts measurable both directly (e.g. ques-
tionnaire sent to participants) and indirectly (e.g. following the work of some participants/
institutions) can be mentioned. At the technological level, participants have registered several
services into GEO/GEOSS. This demonstrated the increase of awareness and use of open stand-
ards and will ultimately facilitate discovery and access to hundreds of datasets. The use of Free
and Open Source Software (FOSS) was really instrumental in building capacities and imple-
menting data sharing solutions. In particular, these solutions are attractive for students, profes-
sionals, enterprises, and institutions that do not have the means to afford expensive
commercial solutions. More importantly the open source software solutions used in the work-
shop have proven to be very reliable and efﬁcient (Giuliani et al. 2014). The fact that all the
teaching material can be freely disseminated helps trainees to become trainers. This helps to
lower entry barriers for both data providers and users, strengthens the development of technical
skills, and empowers people. This can potentially have a scientiﬁc and societal impact by
increasing the number of data sets available; facilitating discovery and access to data; enabling
decision-makers and the general public to access relevant, up-to-date, and scientiﬁcally sound
environmental information; giving a sense of belonging to an active community; and possibly
taking better political decisions. Finally, this workshop may have an impact on GIS educators
and curricula because sharing and documenting data is part of the elementary scientiﬁc
approach enhancing accountability, credibility, and reproducibility. It gives them access to a
complete teaching resource presenting cutting-edge web-based technology and helping them to
educate students on the beneﬁts of data sharing.

5.2 Limitations

During this workshop several challenges have been identiﬁed. In addition to technological
aspects (e.g. computer languages, computer performances) the main issues are related to insti-
tutional (e.g. political/cultural context, policies, organization, resources) and human (e.g. skills,
knowledge) aspects.

Based on our own experience in giving the workshop together with collected feedback
from participants, other limitations have been identiﬁed. Our experience shows that a one-day
session with no more than 10 participants per instructor is ideal for both teaching and learning.
Alternating between talks, hands-on and videos proved to be a good way to capture and keep
the attention of the audience. However, the heterogeneity of participant’s skills, the balance
between the number of participants and instructors, and the fact that the workshops depends

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

10 G Giuliani et al.

greatly on a fast (>2 Mbps) Internet connectivity, are important factors to take into considera-
tion to ensure a good user experience. This is illustrated by a comment in the user survey feed-
back stating, “Less demanding data would be easier, loading and processing the current data is
quite slow”. Based on user feedback, it seems that the chapter on storing data is too technical,
and this is a notable barrier for some participants since it includes the ﬁrst hands-on exercise.
Furthermore, in terms of assessment of the workshop, the number of respondents was limited.
Increasing the number of answers can help to improve feedback and draw more robust conclu-
sions based on participants’ comments. Finally the question of sustainability of the workshop is
critical. We could evaluate that upgrading the full material (virtual machine with latest soft-
ware versions, tutorial, presentations in one language) requires between two and three weeks
of work. The recent integration of the workshop in courses at the University of Geneva (2014)
is positive but a successful dissemination beyond the academic sphere will require identifying
key mechanisms (e.g. GEO processes), projects, and people. A possible solution is to integrate
capacity building workshops into future projects, as was done in IASON, EOPOWER and
ClimVar (http://www.globalclimateforum.org/index.php?id5127).

5.3 Recommendations

Based on the experience acquired and the identiﬁed beneﬁts, impacts, and limitations, there are
several recommendations for developing a capacity building resource on SDI such as the BGSIP
workshop:

1. Promote the use of FOSS software and the development of freely available education
and teaching material. This will facilitate reaching and disseminating teaching resources
to the widest audience possible. This will also ensure a sustainable technology transfer
by making available cost effective and user-friendly solutions.

2. Massive learning solutions like MOOC are promising teaching solutions to better pro-
mote data sharing needs and solutions to a large audience. However, MOOC might not
be appropriate for some technical hand-on exercises that would require heavy live inter-
action with the teacher.

3. Capacity-building activities should let users experience the beneﬁts of data sharing
through appropriate examples, by communicating best practices and developing guide-
lines and policies. Altogether this will facilitate reaching agreement and endorsement on
the use of new standards and enhance an “open and sharing spirit”.

4. Speciﬁc measurable goals must be deﬁned during the planning phase of a workshop
development. Such a strategy should consider various indicators (e.g. web material
download statistics, user surveys, agreement with some users for a long-term impact
follow-up, etc.). This will help to assess impact, get feedback, and better understand
how the workshop has inﬂuenced their work.

5. The targeted audience of such a Capacity Building resource must be well deﬁned from
the beginning, and tailored material ready depending on the audience (e.g. be prepared
for technical issues such as connectivity, hardware or language issues that might require
translators). The audience is usually heterogeneous and therefore the materials should
not be too technical or too conceptual, as participants may not be able to follow.
In order to maximize the impact, it is essential to target and include key high-level insti-
tutional individuals when delivering such a capacity-building workshop. We found that
having a pre-workshop high-level presentation on the beneﬁts of data sharing would
often facilitate the adoption of the technical choices later on.

6.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice

11

7. A long-term maintenance and upgrade mechanism must be also planned from the begin-
ning in order to ensure the quality and cutting-edge sustainability of the Capacity Build-
ing resource.

8. A ﬁnal recommendation is to clearly highlight the anticipated beneﬁts of the workshop,
such as: increased awareness of data sharing issues and solutions; complete technical
understanding of the chain from data collection to data publication; improved technical
skills; increased regional and national capacities with the potential increased develop-
ment; enabling institutions and people to cooperate closely and share a common vision.

6 Conclusions and Future Perspectives

In order to encourage data providers to be more “open” and facilitate access to their data,
a long-term commitment to education, capacity building, and research is essential. The
“Bringing GEOSS services into practice” teaching material is probably the ﬁrst attempt to
build capacity simultaneously for both data providers and data users. It facilitates the con-
ﬁguration, use, and deployment of a set of open source software to implement an SDI. It
also explains how to publish and share data and metadata using OGC and ISO standards
and how to register published services into GEOSS. Finally, it explains how to use services
that are discoverable in GEOSS to develop tailored applications for speciﬁc purposes and/
or a community of users. This material has been developed in the train-the-trainer spirit
enabling the reuse and exchange of knowledge and new capacities that have been acquired.
The main features of the workshop are simplicity, data interoperability, interoperability of
material, ﬂexibility, multilingual, and scalability. As a result, 520 participants in 10 coun-
tries have been trained using this material, leading to dozens of on going SDI implementa-
tions (Astsatryan et al. 2012; Asmaryan et al. 2014), and more than 1,000 downloads.
The introduction material (PowerPoint presentations) is translated into several languages
(Arabic, Croatian, English, French, Russian, Serbian, Spanish, Czech). This workshop low-
ers entry barriers for both resource users and providers, facilitates the development of tech-
nical skills, and empowers people.

Experience has shown that this material is useful, but some chapters are probably too tech-
nical for beginner users. The authors are planning to develop a lighter and shorter version of
this training material with less technology and simpler tools (e.g. GeoNode). Another option
for further user targeting is to develop training material based on “Bringing GEOSS services
into practice” but focusing on thematic issues such as the GEO/GEOSS Societal Beneﬁts Areas
(SBAs: Agriculture, Biodiversity, Climate, Disasters, Ecosystems, Energy, Health, Water,
Weather). Finally, to complement the workshop other chapters can be added to take into
account subjects that are not yet discussed in detail such as the use of sensors, the management
of crowdsourced data, or the assessment and control of data quality. The latter is of particular
importance and has been explored by several EU-funded projects that deﬁne data quality indi-
cators (e.g. GeoViQua, QA4EO) (Diaz et al. 2012) or deal with managing uncertainty (e.g.
UncertWeb) (Bastin et al. 2013). With such substantive additional material, the development of
a dedicated Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) would be possible, and greatly increase the
EO capacity building range in line with the GEO CB strategy.

Beyond overall capacity building of the technical aspects of SDI implementation, in some
countries the workshop had a direct inﬂuence on national policies on Earth Observation and
data sharing. For example, Georgia and Armenia recently became GEO members (in 2013 and
the technical and institutional
2014, respectively). Armenia was an early adopter of

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

12 G Giuliani et al.

recommendations of the workshop, notably with the creation of a Master-level course in SDI
and computational technology. In 2014, the country also adopted its national resolution N136
aiming at building a national Spatial Data Infrastructure. The recent nomination (in November
2015) of Armenia as a member of the GEO Executive Committee is yet another success that
can be, in part, attributed to the positive outcomes of the BGSIP workshop.

Although a few preliminary success stories have been discussed, such as with Armenia, the
impacts and beneﬁts of such a workshop typically continue to accrue over a longer period of
time. These insights will be part of future articles in which the impacts of SDI capacity building
activities will be studied in more detail, including sharing the lessons learned in each country,
with the goal of ultimately empowering others to follow their lead.

The sustainability of the workshop material itself is also at stake. Indeed, the SDI commu-
nity is dynamic and changes over time, so there is the risk that the workshop could become out-
dated. Therefore, it is important to maintain and regularly upgrade the workshop material
with new software versions that would come out or with new standards that will emerge in the
future. To this end, advantage will be taken of this workshop also being taught at the Univer-
sity of Geneva, as part of the Certiﬁcate of Geomatics (http://www.unige.ch/sig/enseignements/
cgeom.html). This will provide the necessary resources for maintaining it.

Besides, it is planned to enrich the course with practical exercises based on thematic data,

in ﬁelds such as climate change, water resource and mineral exploration.

Some characteristics of BGSIP facilitate its sustainability. First of all, the tutorial has a
modular structure, making it easy to update speciﬁc sections or even to add entirely new ones
where required. Moreover, the tools for the hands-on part of the course are provided in a vir-
tual machine that can be easily updated during the preparatory phases. These characteristics
allow quite a fast update and tailoring of courses. Upgrading the VM and the tutorial requires
a few person-weeks, a limited time and effort that can be easily allocated on most initiatives
and project budgets. Since its creation in 2010 the workshop has been upgraded each year, uti-
lizing various project funding sources.

The “Bringing GEOSS Services into practice” course has been proposed by the EU-
FP7 IASON project (http://iason-fp7.eu) as a best practice for actions aiming to reduce
technical barriers to data sharing. The integration of the workshop as a guideline in the
revised version of the EGIDA Methodology (Nativi et al. 2014; Bigagli and Lipiarski
2015), a general methodological approach for the re-engineering of Earth Observation
infrastructures, itself integrated in the EOPOWER Methodological Framework for Impact
Assessment of Earth Observation for Environmental Applications (http://www.eopower.eu/
?q5node/118), will give an increased visibility of the workshop. This might provide new
further developing or updating the workshop, contributing to its
opportunities
sustainability.

for

References

Asmaryan S, Saghatelyan A, Astsatryan H, Bigagli L, Mazzetti P, Nativi S, Guigoz Y, Lacroix P, Giuliani G, and
Ray N 2014 Leading the way toward an environmental National Spatial Data Infrastructure in Armenia.
South-Eastern European Journal of Earth Observation and Geomatics 3: 52–62

Astsatryan H, Narsisian W, Ghazaryan V, Saribekyan A, Asmaryan S, Guigoz Y, Giuliani G, and Ray N 2012
Toward to the development of an Integrated Spatial Data Infrastructure in Armenia. In Proceedings of the
Fourth ICT Innovations Conference, Ohrid, Macedonia

Bacu V, Mihon D, Stefanut T, Rodila D, and Gorgan D 2013 Calibration of SWAT hydrological models in a dis-
tributed environment using the gSWAT application. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science
and Applications 3(3): 66–74

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice

13

Balcik F B, Mihon D, Colceriu V, Allenbach K, Goskel C, Dogru O, Giuliani G, and Gorgan D 2013 Remotely
sensed data processing on grids by using GreenLand web-based platform. International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications 3: 58–65

Bastin L, Cornford D, Jones R, Heuvelink G B M, Pebesma E, Stasch C, Nativi S, Mazzetti P, and Williams M
2013 Managing uncertainty in integrated environmental modelling: The UncertWeb framework. Environ-
mental Modelling and Software 39: 116–34

Beniston M, Stoffel M, Harding R, Kernan M, Ludwig R, Moors E, Samuels P, and Tockner K 2012 Obstacles to
data access for research related to climate and water: Implications for science and EU policy-making. Envi-
ronmental Science and Policy 17: 41–8

Bigagli L, and Lipiarski D 2015 EOPOWER WorkPackage 4 – Science Valorisation. WWW document, http://

www.eopower.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/D4.01.pdf.

Cau P, Manca S, Soru C, Muroni D, Gorgan D, Bacu V, Lehmann A, Ray N, and Giuliani G 2013 An interoper-
able, GIS-oriented, information and support system for water resources management. International Journal
of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3: 75–82

Charvat K, Vohnout P, Sredl M, Kafka S, Mildorf T, De Bono A, and Giuliani G 2013 Enabling efﬁcient discovery of
and access to spatial data services. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3: 28–31
Craglia M, de Bie K, Jackson D, Pesaresi M, Remetey-Fulop G, Wang C, Annoni A, Bian L, Campbell F, Ehlers
M, van Genderen J, Goodchild M, Guo H, Lewis A, Simpson R, Skidmore A, and Woodgate P 2012 Digital
Earth 2020: Towards the vision for the next decade. International Journal of Digital Earth 5: 4–21

Craglia M, Pavanello L, and Smith R S 2010 The Use of Spatial Data for the Preparation of Environmental Reports in

Europe. Ispra, Italy, Institute for Environment and Sustainability Joint Research Centre, European Commission

de la Beaujardiere J (ed) 2006 OpenGIS Web Map Server Implementation Speciﬁcation (Version 1.3.0). Wayland,

MA, Open Geospatial Consortium Document No. 06-042

Diaz P, Maso J, Sevillano E, Ninyerola M, Zabala A, Serral I, and Pons X 2012 Analysis of quality metadata in

the GEOSS Clearinghouse. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research 7: 352–77

Donert K 2015 Digital Earth – Digital World: Strategies for geospatial technologies in 21st century education. In
Mu~niz Solari O, Demirci A, and van der Schee J (eds) Geospatial Technologies and Geography Education in
a Changing World: Geospatial Practices and Lessons Learned. Berlin, Springer: 195–204

European Commission 2007 Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 14 March
2007 Establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community (INSPIRE). Brus-
sels, Belgium, European Commission

European Commission 2014 Capacity Building for GEOSS: European Contributions to Capacity Building Activ-

ities in GEO. Brussels, Belgium, European Commission

GEO 2009 Implementation Guidelines for the GEOSS Data Sharing Principles (Document 7; Rev2). WWW docu-
ment, https://www.earthobservations.org/documents/geo_vi/07_Implementation%20Guidelines%20for%20
the%20GEOSS%20Data%20Sharing%20Principles%20Rev2.pdf

GEO Secretariat 2005 Global Earth Observation System of Systems 10-Year Implementation Plan. Brussels, Bel-

gium, GEO Secretariat Reference Document No. 209

Giuliani G, Dubois A, and Lacroix P 2014 Testing OGC web feature and coverage service performance: Towards

efﬁcient delivery of geospatial data. Journal of Spatial Information Science 7: 1–23

Giuliani G and Gorgan D 2013 Editorial: EnviroGRIDS special issue on “Building a Regional Observation System in

the Black Sea catchment”. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3: 4–8

Giuliani G, Lacroix P, Guigoz Y, Bigagli L, Ray N, and Lehmann A 2014 Bringing GEOSS Services into Practice.

Geneva, United Nations Environment Programme

Giuliani G and Peduzzi P 2011 The PREVIEW Global Risk Data Platform: A geoportal to serve and share global

data on risk to natural hazards. Natural Hazards and Earth Systems Science 11: 53–66

Giuliani G, Rahman K, Ray N, and Lehmann A 2013 OWS4SWAT: Publishing and sharing SWAT outputs with

OGC standards. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3: 90–8

Giuliani G, Ray N, and Lehmann A 2013 Building regional capacities for GEOSS and INSPIRE: A journey in the
Black Sea catchment. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3: 19–27
Giuliani G, Ray N, Schwarzer S, De Bono A, Peduzzi P, Dao H, van Woerden J, Witt R, Beniston M, and Lehmann A
2011 Sharing environmental data through GEOSS. International Journal of Applied Geospatial Research 2: 1–17
Gorgan D, Abbaspour K, Cau P, Bacu V, Mihon D, Giuliani G, Ray N, and Lehmann A 2011 Grid based data proc-
essing tools and applications for Black Sea catchment basin. In Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International
Conference on. Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced Computing Systems, Prague, Czech Republic
Gorgan D, Bacu V, Mihon D, Rodila D, Abbaspour K, and Rouholahnejad E 2012a Grid-based calibration of

SWAT hydrological models. Natural Hazards and Earth System Science 12: 2411–23

Gorgan D, Bacu V, Mihon D, Rodila D, Stefanut T, Abbaspour K, Cau P, Giuliani G, Ray N, and Lehmann A
2012b Spatial data processing tools and applications for Black Sea catchment region. International Journal
of Computing 11: 327–35

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

14 G Giuliani et al.

Gorgan D, Giuliani G, Ray N, Lehmann A, Cau P, Abbaspour K, Charvat K, and Jonoski A 2013 Black Sea
catchment observation system as a portal for GEOSS community. International Journal of Advanced Com-
puter Science and Applications 3: 9–18

ISO 2003 ISO19115: Geographic Information – Metadata. Geneva, Switzerland,

International Standards

Organization

Lehmann A, Giuliani G, Mancuso E, Abbaspour K, S€ozen S, Gorgan D, Beel A, and Ray N 2015 Filling the gap
between Earth observation and policy making in the Black Sea catchment with enviroGRIDS. Environmen-
tal Science and Policy 46: 1–12

Lehmann A, Giuliani G, Ray N, Rahman K, Abbaspour K C, Nativi S, Craglia M, Cripe D, Quevauviller P, and
Beniston M 2014 Reviewing innovative Earth observation solutions for ﬁlling science-policy gaps in hydrol-
ogy. Journal of Hydrology 518B: 267–77

Lupp M (ed) 2007 Styled Layer Descriptor Proﬁle of the Web Map Service Implementation Speciﬁcation (Version

1.1.0; Revision 4). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium Document No. 05-078r4

Masser I 2005 GIS Worlds: Creating Spatial Data Infrastructures. Redlands, CA, Esri Press
Mihon D, Colceriu V, Bacu V, and Gorgan D 2013a Grid-based processing of satellite images in GreenLand plat-

form. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 3: 41–9

Mihon D, Colceriu V, Bacu V, Rodila D, Gorgan D, Allenbach K, and Giuliani G 2013b OGC compliant services
for remote sensing processing over the grid infrastructure. International Journal of Advanced Computer Sci-
ence and Applications 3: 32–40

Myroshnychenko V, Ray N, Lehmann A, Giuliani G, Kideys A, Weller P, and Teodor D 2013 Environmental
data gaps in Black Sea catchment countries: INSPIRE and GEOSS state of play. Environmental Science and
Policy 46: 13–25

Nativi S and Bigagli L 2009 Discovery, mediation, and access services for earth observation data. IEEE Journal

of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 2: 233–40

Nativi S, Craglia M, and Pearlman J 2013a Earth science infrastructures interoperability: The brokering

approach. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 6: 1118–29

Nativi S, Mazzetti P, Craglia M, and Pirrone N 2013b The GEOSS solution for enabling data interoperability

and integrative research. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 21: 4177–92

Nativi S, Mazzetti P, Santoro M, Papeschi F, Craglia M, and Ochiai O 2015 Big Data challenges in building the

Global Earth Observation System of Systems. Environmental Modelling and Software 6: 1–26

Nebert D (ed) 2005 Developing Spatial Data Infrastructures: The SDI Cookbook. Orono, ME, Global Spatial

Data Infrastructure Association

Nebert D, Whiteside A, and Vretanos P (eds) 2007 OpenGIS Catalogue Services Implementation Speciﬁcation (Ver-
sion 2.0.2, Corrigendum 2 Release). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium Document No. 07-006r1
Noort M 2010 GeoNetCab: Capacity Building Strategy. Enschede, the Netherlands, Faculty of Geo-Information

Science and Earth Observation, University of Twente

Noort M 2012 The GEONetCab approach to capacity building. In Proceedings of the GEO European Projects

Workshop, Rome, Italy

Noort M 2013 GeoNetCab: Marketing Earth Observation Products and Services, Part #2. Enschede, the Nether-

lands, Faculty of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation, University of Twente

Schut P (ed) 2007 OpenGIS Web Processing Service (Version 1.0.0). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consor-

Vretanos P A (ed) 2005 Web Feature Service Implementation Speciﬁcation (Version 1.1.0). Wayland, MA, Open

tium Document No. 05-007r7

Geospatial Consortium Document No. 04-094

Whiteside A and Evans J D (eds) 2006 Web Coverage Service (WCS) Implementation Speciﬁcation (Version

1.1.0). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium Document No. 06-083r8

Wilson T (ed) 2008 OGC KML (Version 2.2.0). Wayland, MA, Open Geospatial Consortium Document No. 07-147r2

Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article
at the publisher’s website:

Figure S1: Online questionnaire used to assess the Bringing GEOSS Services into
Practice workshop since 2010.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

