This article was downloaded by: [UQ Library]
On: 11 November 2014, At: 15:18
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Responding to the
consequences of uncertainty
in geographical data
Aggrey Agumya a & Gary J. Hunter a
a Department of Geomatics, The University of
Melbourne, VIC 3010 Australia
Published online: 10 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Aggrey Agumya & Gary J. Hunter (2002) Responding
to the consequences of uncertainty in geographical data, International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16:5, 405-417, DOI:
10.1080/13658810210137031

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810210137031

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever

or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 5, 405± 417

Research Article

Responding to the consequences of uncertainty in geographical data

AGGREY AGUMYA and GARY J. HUNTER
Department of Geomatics, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010 Australia;
e-mail: garyh@unimelb.edu.au

(Received 13 February 2000; accepted 2 September 2001)

Abstract. The presence of uncertainty in geographical data has the potential to
expose users to undesirable consequences in their decision making. Accordingly,
our eVorts to understand uncertainty seek to (a) avoid the use of data that are
not suitable for their intended purpose (that is, data whose consequences are
unacceptable), (b) to reduce any undesirable consequences to an acceptable level,
and (c) to devise ways of living with undesirable data when the adverse con-
sequences caused by poor data do not alter our ultimate decision choice. To assist
this task, we propose an approach where the adverse consequences of uncertainty
caused by the use of unsuitable geographical data are expressed in terms of risk.
In this paper we (cid:142) rst show that risk management oVers geographical data users
a range of options for responding to the adverse consequences of data uncertainty,
and secondly we present and discuss the various risk response options.

1.

Introduction
Uncertainty in geographical data may sometimes be associated with adverse
consequences or outcomes in the decisions to be taken using the data. The possibility
of these consequences occurring arises because the data cannot unambiguously show
or predict the results of analyses. In turn, this exposes information users to the
possibility of undesirable outcomes they do not expect to occur. To date much of
the research in geographical data uncertainty has focussed on the development of
models for describing, propagating and portraying uncertainty. In addition, promo-
tion of the ‘truth in labelling’ concept and the introduction of standards for describing
data quality have increased the availability of relevant metadata. While this informa-
tion is essential for the appropriate use of data, anecdotal evidence to date however
suggests that many users still do not understand how it might best be applied for
its intended purpose.

Furthermore, a legacy of the cartographi c roots of geographical information
systems (GIS) is that the issue of data quality is often judged according to quality
control standards based more upon the acceptability of uncertainty in the data,
rather than on any possible adverse consequences of uncertainty in a decision task
for which the data may be used. According to this approach, acceptable uncertainty
is de(cid:142) ned by a threshold or standard, and data are regarded as (cid:142) t for use if their
uncertainty is less than or equal to the accepted measure. However as Frank (1998)
points out, (cid:142) tness for use is ultimately dependent on the acceptability of a decision

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Informatio n Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810210137031

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 406

A. Agumya and G. J. Hunter

supported by particular data. In turn, the quality of a decision can be described by
its utility or usefulness, which may ultimately be de(cid:142) ned as a function of risk (Covello
1987) or more broadly as a function of risk, costs and bene(cid:142) ts (Kaplan 1997).
Accordingly, for the decision quality to be acceptable the risk associated with that
decision must also be acceptable.

The shortcomings of the quality control approach have been previously discussed
in Agumya and Hunter (1999a) . They note the key (cid:143) aw in this technique is the
failure to consider the potential impact of uncertainty in the data upon the decision
to be taken. Furthermore, this method provides only two principal responses for
dealing with uncertainty after the (cid:142) tness status of the data has been established—to
either reject the data in favour of better data, or else accept the data and absorb
any residual uncertainty it may contain (Bedard 1987). An alternative approach that
considers the consequences of uncertainty in terms of risk was (cid:142) rst introduced in
Agumya and Hunter (1997), and it oVers a greater range of (cid:142) tness for use assessment
responses. In addition, it is recognized there are users of geographical data who do
not assess the (cid:142) tness of their data because they have no other choice but to use
particular datasets (for example, with census data where it is not feasible to collect
alternative data). So the overriding issue faced by these users is not whether their
data are suitable, but rather what should they do about any uncertainty in it and
how should they minimize its impact on their decisions. To help solve these issues,
we (cid:142) rst overview the risk-based approach to managing the impact of geographical
data uncertainty, and then discuss the range of risk response options available.

2. The risk management approach

The risk management approach entails the initial propagation of data uncertainty
into decision uncertainty (discussed in Agumya and Hunter 1999b) , which is followed
by formal risk scenario identi(cid:142) cation and analysis to quantify the risk in the decision
traceable to uncertainty in the data ((cid:142) gure 1). The de(cid:142) nition of risk adopted here
depicts it as comprising (a) one or more scenarios of adverse events associated with
unexpected decision outcomes; (b) the likelihood of these scenarios occurring; and
(c) their consequences.

A (cid:142) tness for use assessment is essentially a test for the signi(cid:142) cance of the estimated
risk. In risk management terms this is called risk evaluation (Gratt 1987) and requires
an estimate of the acceptable risk. In this context, the interpretation of ‘acceptable’
is contrary to the ‘As Low as Reasonably Practicable’ (ALARP) principle described
by Melchers (1993), in which acceptable risk denotes the minimum limit below
which any risk can be ignored. Instead, we take acceptable risk here to be the limit
beyond which further reduction of risk cannot be justi(cid:142) ed. Alternatively, the circum-
stances of the data and its use may mean that a (cid:142) tness for use assessment is neither
necessary nor possible. This happens either when there are no alternatives to the
data (as mentioned above); when uncertainty reduction is not technically or econom-
ically feasible; when decisions tasks cannot wait for a (cid:142) tness assessment to be made;
or when contractual obligations dictate the choice of data. In these cases the key
issue is not whether the data is (cid:142) t for use, but rather what should be done about
the risk exposure caused by uncertainty in the data.

The most likely response for dealing with un(cid:142) t data is risk reduction, which
entails reducing either the data uncertainty or its consequences or both. For data
that are judged (cid:142) t for use, risk management oVers two primary responses: risk
retention and risk transfer —which tends to be mainly contractual transfer by

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 Responding to uncertainty in geographical data

407

Figure 1. Risk-management of the impact of data uncertainty.

insurance. On the other hand, when an assessment of (cid:142) tness is not undertaken, any
combination of the listed responses in (cid:142) gure 1 can be employed except for risk
avoidance, in which no decision is taken using the data.

3. Risk responses for data that are not (cid:142) t for use

There are four options for dealing with data that are un(cid:142) t for use: reduction of
the likelihood of a risk scenario occurring; reduction of the consequences of a risk

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 408

A. Agumya and G. J. Hunter

scenario; reduction of the degree of data utilisation; and risk avoidance. The (cid:142) rst
three comprise forms of risk reduction and may be applied singly or jointly, while
the fourth is essentially the ‘do nothing’ option in which the data are deliberately
not used for the decision to be taken, and as such it will not be discussed further in
this paper.

Risk reduction is justi(cid:142) able and achievable if (a) the reduction in the likelihood
and/or consequences of the risk scenarios are possible and practical; (b) the decision
can wait for the necessary risk reduction to be carried out; and (c) the reduction
exceeds the cost of achieving it by a margin that depends on the characteristics of
the risk, the risk attitude of users and their capacity to aVord the reduction. When
any one of these conditions cannot be satis(cid:142) ed, we must investigate other risk
response options (that is, risk retention or transfer) or acknowledge that the accept-
able risk on which the (cid:142) tness assessment is based was under-estimated and needs to
be relaxed. Given that risk is de(cid:142) ned as a three-part function of the likelihood of a
risk scenario, the consequences of the scenario and the degree of data utilization,
risk reduction can be achieved by minimizing the eVect of any one or more of these
three elements.

3.1. Reduction of the likelihood of a risk scenario occurring

The likelihood of a risk scenario occurring depends in part on the amount of
uncertainty in the information product used for the decision task, which in turn is
a consequence of uncertainty in the data, the algorithms applied and the decision
model used to create the product. Therefore, reduction of the likelihood of a risk
scenario can be achieved by decreasing uncertainty in at least one of the three
sources. It is well known that geographical data uncertainty comprises several
elements (that is, positional accuracy, attribute accuracy, logical consistency and
completeness). However, for practical reasons the estimation of risk exposure due to
uncertainty should consider only the elements to which a particular decision is most
sensitive. Likewise, when an information product is created from several datasets,
the uncertainty reduction should initially be directed to the datasets that contribute
most to the uncertainty in that product. Furthermore, if metadata about the spatial
variability of data uncertainty exists, then the reduction eVorts should target regions
where the uncertainty is greatest and/or where vulnerability to the consequences of
uncertainty is highest. In other words, the reduction should target areas where the
maximum risk reduction can be achieved. In this regard, Veregin and Lanter (1995)
describe how inverse error propagation can be applied as a tool for enhancing data
quality by facilitating the identi(cid:142) cation of datasets that yield the greatest uncertainty
reduction at the lowest cost.

There are numerous procedures available for reducing uncertainty in geographical
data and hence the likelihood of risk scenarios. These mainly involve collection of
additional information and are generally technical in nature. Clearly, the potential
for reducing uncertainty is greatest at the data collection and pre-processing stages
(Lemmens 1991), rather than when dealing with pre-package d information products.
For instance, with regard to data captured by digitisation, the majority of the
uncertainty can be attributed to the original material—a source over which users
may have little control. Thus, the control exercisable by users over reduction of
uncertainty in their data is mainly limited to that introduced during their own
processing and analysis. Yet, in most cases the contribution of these processes to
the total uncertainty is small compared to the uncertainty in the original data.

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 Responding to uncertainty in geographical data

409

Furthermore, there are many instances where practical means of reducing uncertainty
introduced by these processes do not exist because options such as using alternative
spatial operations or models are unavailable. Nevertheless, there are numerous
examples in the literature of how the accuracy of geographical datasets can be
achieved in practice.

3.2. Reduction of the consequences of a risk scenario

In addition to reducing the uncertainty in the geographical data, and hence the
likelihood of a risk scenario occurring, we can also consider reducing the con-
sequences of a risk scenario should it occur. We know that the value of the con-
sequences of a risk scenario is a combined function of (a) the vulnerability to loss or
damage suVered by the objects or people exposed to the risk, (b) the magnitude of
the risk, and (c) its cost or value (Dobran 1995). In order to examine the factors
that aVect consequence values, consider a risk scenario of overestimation of a resource
output by a given margin, such as a timber volume. The consequence value of this
scenario depends on (a) factors that compound the impact of overestimation as well
as contingencies and other arrangements purposely put in place to mitigate this
impact—that is, any measures to control vulnerability; and (b) the unit value of the
resource—that is, the greater the unit value, the higher the consequences (the value
of the exposed entities).

Clearly the reduction in the consequence value is achieved by a corresponding
reduction in vulnerability to the risk scenario and/or a reduction in the cost, value
or magnitude of the objects or people exposed to damage or harm. However, in
most cases the party responsible for risk reduction does not have control over the
values of the exposed objects. Moreover, it is usually not in the interest of those
responsible for risk reduction to diminish the economic value of the objects exposed
to risk merely for the sake of reducing their exposure. For example, it would not be
prudent to cultivate low-grade timber for the sole purpose of reducing risk exposure
due to overestimation. Consider also the example of damage to an organisation’s
reputation—the cost to a corporate entity is likely to be greater when its reputation
is high and vice versa. It would be absurd, however, for such an entity to sacri(cid:142) ce
its reputation as a way of limiting its exposure to this kind of loss, and it is likely
that the damage to its reputation will bring about greater losses than the savings it
would achieve in reducing its risk exposure.

What these examples highlight is that reductions in the values of consequences
are mainly achieved by reducing vulnerability or the number of exposed entities, but
not their value. Nonetheless, it is essential to understand the cost and value of the
objects exposed to harm since these parameters indicate where eVorts to reduce
vulnerability should be concentrated. For instance in the timber example, arrange-
ments to reduce vulnerability would best be focussed on areas where the value of
timber is the highest. It should be pointed out at this stage that consequences are
the outcome of a sequential chain of risk-initiating events, and therefore breaking
the sequence of events is a plausible strategy for reducing vulnerability. The higher
in the chain that the break is made, the more eVective is the reduction in consequence
value. For example, in the timber volume illustration, overestimation of the volume
may fail to honour supply contracts, which may in turn lead to legal liability and/
or loss of reputation ( leading to loss of future contracts) . In this case, it is more
eVective to institute measures that limit the progression of the consequences from
failure to meet contract obligations. A legal remedy for this might be achieved by

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 410

A. Agumya and G. J. Hunter

inserting appropriate provisions in the contract rather than hiring lawyers at a later
date to defend the supplier in court. This demonstrates that besides estimating risk
exposure, risk analysis provides information and understanding about how the
exposure arises. This knowledge is essential for devising eVective means of reducing
and controlling the exposure, and it has been argued that such knowledge is more
instructive than risk estimate values—in other words,
‘a risk identi(cid:142) ed is a risk
controlled’. With regard to reducing vulnerability to risk scenarios, the discipline of
risk management has developed a suite of formal intervention mechanisms (Standards
Australia/Standards New Zealand 1995). The methods that are relevant for risk due
to geographical data uncertainty include contingency planning, recovery plans and
public relations.

Contingency planning involves anticipating that an outcome other than that
expected will occur and then making provisions for this possibility. In the timber
harvesting example, the provisions for overestimating the volume may include con-
tracting to supply an amount that
is less than the entire estimated volume.
Contingency planning may also include earmarking funds for settling claims,
responding to complaints, public relations damage control or community education,
in response to a risk scenario happening. These eVorts primarily serve to halt the
progression of the risk initiating events. Alternatively, recovery plans are interven-
tions that seek not only to halt the progression of the risk initiating sequence, but
inaction based on
to reverse it. For example, a forest management decision of
erroneous information which indicates there is no deforestation occurring in a
particular area, is likely to result in further and perhaps accelerated deforestation.
The event of further deforestation can however be reversed by aforestation. However,
before a recovery plan can be carried out it is necessary to (cid:142) rst establish that the
relevant risk scenario has in fact occurred. Therefore, regular monitoring and compar-
ison of actual and predicted outcomes is an essential component of this form of
intervention, and the need for such monitoring is an acknowledgment that there is
doubt about the predictions. Stated diVerently, doubt about predictions should
necessitate their regular monitoring.

Finally, public relations is a strategy employed to protect reputations and limit
adverse publicity to the party responsible for creating the risk. In this context, the
objective of the public relations exercise is to limit perceptions that the risk creating
entity is responsible for the exposure due to negligence or ineptitude, as well as to
educate and reassure the public about the inevitable but small likelihood of risk
scenarios occurring. This may be achieved by demonstrating that due diligence has
been observed and explaining the events that led to the risk scenario occurring,
pointing out that detecting and halting their occurrence was not economically or
practically feasible. Furthermore, the occurrence of an adverse event may compel
the entity responsible for creating the risk to demonstrate its concern, and to check
the potential hostility directed at it by contributing towards eVorts to relieve some
of the risk burden from the recipients.

3.3. Reduction of the degree of data utilisation

The third risk reduction option is to reduce the degree of utilisation made of the
data concerned in the decision making process—in other words we continue to use
a given dataset but place less reliance upon it. The degree of utilisation is depicted
as a continuum ranging from the situation in which the information is not consulted
at all, through to when its presence has a direct impact upon decision outcomes

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 Responding to uncertainty in geographical data

411

(Zwart 1991). Clearly, the less a decision relies on an information product the less
it is aVected by its uncertainty. Foresman et al. (1990) and Laws et al. (1989) present
two examples where specifying and limiting the degrees of utilisation for individual
geographical datasets was adopted as a mechanism for reducing exposure to legal
liability brought about by uncertainty in the data. Their examples demonstrate that
rather than rejecting the data or reducing its uncertainty because it was unacceptabl y
high and would in turn lead to high-risk exposure (in terms of legal liability), the
degree of data utilisation was instead lowered. For example, rather than rely com-
pletely on a GIS to identify suitable land parcels for government purchase based on
nominated criteria (and to then proceed with their purchase), the GIS would be used
in the lesser (but nevertheless time-saving ) role of simply acting as a (cid:142) lter to identify
potential parcels to be purchased—which would then be subject to (cid:142) nal (cid:142) eld inspec-
tion and veri(cid:142) cation (Laws et al. 1989). In this way the geographical data and
software has still served a valuable and bene(cid:142) cial role, yet the risk associated with
mistakenly purchasing ineligible properties is minimised by reducing the reliance on
the information outputs.

4. Risk responses to data that are (cid:142) t for use

Data judged (cid:142) t for use can nonetheless contain uncertainty and users may still
require mechanisms for coping with its impact. The risk management approach
provides two techniques for this purpose—risk retention and risk transfer.

4.1. Risk retention

Risk retention is the most commonly used approach (Rejda 1992) and involves
bearing the consequences of risk scenarios—that is, making no arrangements to
avoid or transfer the risk—but instead paying for the consequences out of a party’s
own resources. This requires either involuntary or voluntary retention. Involuntary
retention occurs when the risk creator assumes the risk unaware of its existence or
consequences. The authors believe this is what happens in many cases associated
with geographical data uncertainty, such that even though data users may be aware
that some exposure to adverse consequences exists they seldom appreciate the
magnitude involved. Clearly, this form of risk retention is not viable.

Alternatively, voluntary retention occurs when a risk creator makes a conscious
decision to assume the consequences of any exposure to risk and can take several
forms including: assumption; full self-insurance; partial self-insurance and captive
insurance. Assumption is where the risk is accepted (assumed ) without any prior
plans to deal with the possible consequences. This is only appropriate for minor
risks where the costs of alternative responses far outweigh the possible exposure.
Alternatively, full self-insurance involves the conscious decision to accept signi(cid:142) cant
risk and it is essential that suYcient resources are set aside to cover the expected
risk. An advantag e of this response is that the pooling of risks improves their
funding to cover for any adverse events that
predictability and the amount of
may occur.

Partial self-insurance comprises two forms of cover, namely deductibles and
retrospective rating (Hampton 1993). A deductible requires the risk creator to pay
for losses up to a certain limit and transfers the exposure beyond that limit, but
often less than a given upper limit, to another designated party. Deductibles may be
an attractive retention option for risk due to geographic data uncertainty since
assessment of insurance premiums for covering this type of risk is biased against the

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 412

A. Agumya and G. J. Hunter

policyholders. Retrospective rating is where the insurance premium is determined
after expiration of the policy and depends on the loss suVered during the policy
period. This allows the risk creator and the insurer to share losses up to a speci(cid:142) ed
limit. The advantag e of this option is that policyholders who do not suVer losses are
rewarded by paying a smaller premium, and it encourages policyholders to be vigilant
about their exposure to risk, especially if they have control over the sources of
the risk. Finally, captive insurance is where an organization sets up an insurance
company primarily to provide coverage for itself and its subsidiaries.

4.2. Risk transfer

As its name suggests, risk transfer shifts risk from one entity to another and there
are two mechanisms for this transfer—non-insurance and insurance contractual
transfers. Non-insurance contractual transfer involves an agreement where one party
accepts the risks that would normally be borne by the other party—the one respons-
ible for the risk. Insurance not only eVects the transfer of risk, but also the reduction
of risk through improved predictability provided by the law of
large numbers.
However, not all risks are transferable such as when the risk consequence and the
activity responsible for creating it are separable, and when the consequences can be
borne by another party (Athearn et al. 1989). For example, damage to property and
lost earnings can be transferred by having another party bear the loss. Conversely,
pain, injury and death cannot be borne by other entities and are therefore not
transferable, however the losses associated with these physical consequences such as
foregone earnings are transferable. There are several types of non-insurance contrac-
tual arrangements for transferring risk including guarantees, warranties and contracts
of suretyship.

Guarantees are written agreements that one party will be responsible for the
consequences of risk scenarios associated with an activity or use of a product in
accordance with speci(cid:142) ed conditions. Besides conveying the message that a product
is of high quality, the vendor oVers a guarante e as an incentive to buyers of the
product with the understanding that the chances of the risk scenarios occurring are
small. Guarantees are therefore mainly employed to achieve competitive advantag e
with the expectation that the cost of oVering the guarantees will be oVset by the
bene(cid:142) ts of greater revenue. It is interesting to note that the conditions which must
be observed for buyers to be covered by a guarante e are indicative of the safe
practices associated with the product. Concerning geographical data, vendors seldom
oVer guarantees covering the impact of uncertainty in their data. This could be an
indication that the market does not need to employ guarantees as a means to achieve
competitive advantage , however we believe their absence is more likely due to the
diYculties in establishing the cost of (cid:142) nancing the guarantees. What is clear though
is that data providers cannot necessarily oVer a uniform guarante e to all users since
the range of applications for which a dataset may be employed cannot be anticipated
in advance.

Warranties are endorsements about the quality of a product, which also transfer
to the product provider the responsibilities for damages and losses traceable to
discrepancies between the stated and actual quality of the product. A common
example of a warranty for geographical data is when a government land title registry
certi(cid:142) es the accuracy of its data and oVers to take responsibility for any errors in its
land title records. Bedard (1987) refers to this form of risk response as ‘institutional
uncertainty absorption’. Ironically, it is more common for vendors of geographical

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 Responding to uncertainty in geographical data

413

data to issue disclaimers about the correctness of their reported data as a way of
protecting themselves from liability. While such a strategy may be convenient for
data producers, we suggest it is contrary to the spirit of ‘truth in labelling’ and
undermines the ability of users to establish their exposure to risk due to uncertainty,
and ultimately to protect themselves and respond to that risk. Therefore, while the
move to make data quality reporting mandatory in many data transfer standards is
welcome (Hunter and Goodchild 1993), the need for certi(cid:142) cation of reported data
quality still remains.

Finally, contracts of suretyship are agreements that a third party (the surety) will
be responsible for consequences of an activity if the obligated party is unable to bear
those consequences. A risk-managemen t plan that employs this response must specify
a threshold beyond which the third party assumes the risk. A contract of suretyship
is entered when statutory provisions stipulate that if a public agency faces major
liability claims which it cannot aVord, it will be covered by the government of which
it is part.

Alternatively, insurance by contractual transfer is by far the most widely used
mechanism for transferring risk in modern communities in which an insurance
contract (or policy) de(cid:142) nes the transfer of risks from a party that is unable or
unwilling to bear the full exposure, to an insurance company that receives a premium
in return for undertaking to bear the possible loss.

Insurance is by far the most common mechanism for transferring risks. The
transfer is eVected by bringing together many individual exposures and combining
them into a group whose funds, derived from premiums, are available to pay for
individual losses. Besides making available the resources to cover insured losses, and
hence providing a measure of security to policyholders, insurance also promotes
consciousness about factors that increase the likelihood and consequences of risk
scenarios—parameters that determine the insurability of scenarios and the cost of
the insurance. Accordingly, policyholders seek to limit their insurance costs by
voluntarily adopting measures that limit the likelihood and consequences of their
risk scenarios. In addition, an insurance policy stipulates obligations for both parties
which include procedures and practices for controlling or minimising the risk expo-
sure to the policyholder and ultimately to the insurer. Policyholders are therefore
compelled to follow practices that limit their exposure occurs (for example, a spatial
data collection agency may be obliged to have ISO 9000 accreditation and to keep
its certi(cid:142) cation up to date), since failure to do so may lead to rejection of their claims
for payment to cover losses suVered when an insured scenario occurs. In this way,
insurance serves as a mechanism for controlling risk. Indeed, Dorfman (1991) argues
that in some cases the compliance services provided/required by insurers can be as
valuable or even more valuable to the insured than the promise to pay for losses.

However, not all transferable risk scenarios are necessarily insurable. For a
scenario to be insurable, its losses must be neither trivial to the policyholder (the
cost of insurance must not exceed the loss) nor catastrophic to the insurer (payment
for the loss should be within the (cid:142) nancial ability of the insurer—that is, the loss
should not exceed the value of assets held by the insurance pool). Additional
requirements for insurability of risk scenarios include the following (Hampton 1993):

A reasonably low chance of loss so that premiums are aVordable;
Reliable or calculable knowledge about the likelihood of occurrence and the
value of losses is essential for fair assessment of premiums—the more doubt
an insurer has about the risk estimate, the higher the premium;

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 414

A. Agumya and G. J. Hunter

Losses should be de(cid:142) nite as to the cause, time, location, extent and cost of the
damage—scenarios not well de(cid:142) ned in these respects, such as psychological
depression, are not readily insurable;
Accidental losses—the occurrence of the risk scenarios should be uncertain
and not deliberately initiated by the policyholder; and
Large number of exposures—a large number of similar exposures allows the
insurer to better predict losses and accordingly estimate the premium.

As a widely employed risk response mechanism, insurance is therefore a poten-
tially important means of dealing with the consequences of uncertainty in geograph-
ical data. Since insurance is a mechanism for the transfer of risk, the (cid:142) rst condition
for insurability of a risk concerns its transferability. Possible consequences of geo-
graphical data uncertainty include direct economic loss, damage to reputations, loss
of life, physical injury, damage to the environment and social dislocation. The last
four consequences are ordinarily not borne by data users but instead by the commun-
ity aVected by decisions reliant on that data. Nevertheless, these consequences will
adversely aVect users through various types of liability claims (Onsrud 1999) and
damage to the data user’s reputation. The liability claims are transferable, and while
damage to reputation is not transferable, its associated losses are. Also transferable
are the various types of direct economic loss. So, in general, the consequences of
geographical data uncertainty are transferable, but their insurability depends on how
well they satisfy the (cid:142) ve requirements listed above. In this paper, comment will be
limited to the two most important requirements —calculable losses and a large
number of exposures.

The accuracy of risk estimates depends on the accuracy of the likelihood and
consequence values of the risk scenarios. With regard to insurance, the uncertainty
in risk estimates itself complicates the determination of premiums by diminishing
con(cid:142) dence in the pro(cid:142) tability of the assessed premium. In order to protect themselves
from charging premiums that are unpro(cid:142) table, insurers are compelled to raise pre-
miums, thus making the insurance cover less aVordable. Alternatively, they may opt
not to oVer coverage about which the risk exposure is signi(cid:142) cantly uncertain, such
as coverage for liability due to environmental pollution (Kunreuther 1989).
Ordinarily, a large number of exposures and their observed losses are required for
a statistical determination of the likelihood of exposures to speci(cid:142) c consequences,
which is then used to estimate the premium. However, the determination of insurance
premiums to cover risk due to geographical data uncertainty is carried out diVerently.
The likelihoods of scenarios of such risks are not based on observations of frequency;
instead they are based on propensity or subjectivist interpretations of probability.
Therefore, the role of the law of large numbers towards increasing the accuracy of
predicting scenario likelihoods is in this case diminished. Nevertheless, having large
numbers of exposures does improve the knowledge base for predicting outcomes of
decision actions and subsequently enhances estimation of the likelihoods and values
of scenario consequences. Furthermore, it facilitates collection of the data necessary
for testing the accuracy of the predictions and increases the risk bearing capacity of
the insurer, thus allowing for coverage of diverse exposures (Smith and Kane 1994).
insurable risk scenarios is desirable even for the
Therefore, a large number of
insurability of risk due to geographical data uncertainty.

The widespread use of GIS and the inherent uncertainty in geographical data
suggest there are potentially large numbers of exposures due to the consequences of

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 Responding to uncertainty in geographical data

415

such uncertainty. However a formal mechanism for gathering information about the
losses suVered due to uncertainty in this type of data is lacking. In fact, there is the
reverse tendency to conceal such losses presumably in order to protect the reputations
of those people or agencies responsible for them. Furthermore, the contexts in which
geographical data are used are varied, such that determination of premiums based
on the frequency and magnitude of the few observed losses may not be reliable
enough to guarante e a pro(cid:142) t for the insurer. Consequently, insurers of the con-
sequences of geographical data uncertainty are compelled to demand high premiums
and costly requirements such as certi(cid:142) cation of the quality of the data.

Epstein et al. (1998) comment that for commercial-in-con(cid:142) dence reasons, it is
not possible to obtain the details of existing policies and premiums relating to
geographical data. However, they do report that informal discussions with insurers
working in the information technology industry reveal that at present insurance
protection against liability is generally being taken for datasets which are likely to
expose users to litigation involving large settlements, such as in the area of emergency
management and dispatch. As noted earlier, taking out an insurance policy entails
obligations and associated administrative requirements, as well as information about
the background and products of policyholders. For users who also produce data,
the insurer may demand quality control procedures or quality assurance accredita-
tion. Furthermore, the insurer will often require that data quality documentation be
kept up to date, and that a copy of the data to be insured (as well as any updates
made) must be held in escrow (that is, an independent, secure environment arranged
by the insurer which enables original copies of datasets to be brought forward as
evidence in any future court proceedings) . These requirements add to the cost of
insurance borne by the insured, which is clearly not limited solely to the premium.
Moreover, the premiums for taking insurance against risk posed by geographical
data uncertainty are likely to be in(cid:143) ated in favour of the insurer due to the high
level of uncertainty in the initial risk estimates. Also, the relatively small number of
policies being written for this type of risk means that its insurance pool has a weak
risk-bearing capacity. Meanwhile, high insurance costs make the various forms of
voluntary risk retention more attractive. The type of voluntary retention that is
perhaps most often adopted in situations where exposure to risk is signi(cid:142) cantly high
is full self-insurance, whereby funds are set aside to settle claims traceable to uncer-
tainty in geographical data. For example, until 1994 the United States government
was prepared to pay from general revenues for any adverse consequences of decisions
based on negligently prepared nautical charts.

Although there is little evidence to show that captive insurance is currently
employed as a mechanism for coverage against consequences of geographical data
uncertainty, the scope for its use by associations of large producers and users of
geographical data is clear. Association captives are established in response to a lack
of accessibility and/or aVordability of cover for speci(cid:142) c lines of business, and to a
large extent this is the prevailing situation regarding coverage for risk due to
geographical data uncertainty. Besides providing cost-eVective coverage, which has
the bene(cid:142) cial eVect of attracting many policyholders, captive insurance arrangements
also create an environment that furthers understanding about risk exposure to
geographical data uncertainty, and in particular the valuation of scenario con-
sequences. For example, the captive collects and is a custodian of empirical data
that is essential for this understanding . This mechanism also has the capacity to
mobilise the (cid:142) nancial resources required to support the relevant research.

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 416

A. Agumya and G. J. Hunter

Alternatively, rather than forming captives, associations of geographical data
producers and users could opt to use their collective bargaining power to secure
insurance coverage at a more aVordable cost. The mobilisation of users into associ-
ations dedicated to insuring themselves against consequences of uncertainty in their
data, or the reliance on existing associations such as the North American and the
Australian Urban and Regional Information Systems Associations (URISA and
AURISA respectively) to initiate equivalent arrangements, is recognised as a chal-
lenge but one that is certainly worth pursuing. In this regard, it is noted that many
professional bodies about the world already oVer specialised professional indemnity
and liability insurance mechanisms to their members, and this approach might well
be applied within the geographical information industry.

5. Conclusion

In this paper we argue that risk management is a valuable mechanism for dealing
with the impact of geographical data uncertainty upon the decisions that we take
with that data. By providing data users with a broad range of responses for
dealing with this impact, risk management oVers them greater (cid:143) exibility in containing
and responding to the consequences of any adverse scenarios that might occur. In
this paper we provide a risk management context for the various possible ‘uncertainty
absorption’ options, notably the diVerent forms of risk retention and risk transfer
available, and in particular contractual transfer by insurance. It is considered that
the context of insurance is one with which data users are more familiar (since risk
management and insurance pervade our everyday lives), and can positively change
the attitudes of users who have remained indiVerent to the problem of geographical
data uncertainty because they have found the options for dealing with it diYcult to
understand and/or implement.

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge funding support for this research received under
Australian Research Council Large Grant No. A49601183, ‘Modeling Uncertainty
in Spatial Databases’, and Australian Research Council Large Grant No. A10020402,
‘Using Risk Management Techniques to Quantify Uncertainty in Geographic
Information-Based Decision Making’.

References
Agumya, A., and Hunter, G. J., 1997, Determining (cid:142) tness for use of geographic information.

Agumya, A., and Hunter, G. J., 1999a, A risk-based approach to assessing the (cid:142) tness for use

IT C Journal, vol. 1997-2, pp. 109–113.

of spatial data. URISA Journal, 11, 33–44.

Agumya, A., and Hunter, G. J., 1999b, Translating uncertainty in geographical data into risk
in decisions. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Spatial Data Quality
(Hong Kong: Hong Kong Polytechnic University), pp. 574–584.

Athearn, J. L., Pritchett, S. T., and Schmit, J. T., 1989, Risk and Insurance (New York: West

Publishing Company).

Bedard, Y., 1987, Uncertainties in land information systems databases. In Proceedings of
the ACSM-ASPRS Auto-Carto 8 Conference (Bethesda, MD: American Congress on
Surveying and Mapping), pp. 175–184.

Covello, V. T. 1987, Decision analysis and risk management decision making: Issues and

methods. Risk Analysis, 7, 131–139.

Dobran, F., 1995, A risk assessment methodology at Vesuvius based on the global volcanic
simulation. In Natural Risk and Civil Protection, edited by T. Horlick-Jones,
A. Amendola and R. Casale (London: E. & F. N. Spon), pp. 131–136.

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 Responding to uncertainty in geographical data

417

Dorfman, M. S. 1991, Introduction to Risk Management and Insurance (Englewood CliVs:

Prentice Hall ).

Epstein, E. F., Hunter, G. J., and Agumya, A., 1998, Liability insurance and the use of
geographical information. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
12, 203–214.

Foresman, T., Garaza, G., Edwards, D., Kelly, R., Burgeson, Z., and Shalit, H., 1990,
GIS insurance: the accuracy question. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
Urban and Regional Information Systems Association (URISA), Edmonton, Alberta,
4, 129–142.

Frank, A. U., 1998, Metamodels for data quality description. In Data Quality in Geographic
Information: From Error to Uncertainty, edited by M. F. Goodchild and R. Jeansoulin
(Paris: Hermes), pp. 15–29.

Gratt, L. B., 1987, Risk analysis or risk assessment: a proposal for consistent de(cid:142) nitions.
In Uncertainty in risk Assessment, Risk Management and Decision Making, editors
V. T. Covello, L. B. Lave, A. Moghissi and V. R. R. Uppuluri (New York: Plenum
Press), pp. 241–249.

Hampton, J. J. 1993, Essentials of Risk Management and Insurance (New York: Amacom).
Hunter, G. J., and Goodchild, M., 1993, Managing uncertainty in spatial databases: putting

theory into practice. URISA Journal, 5, 55–62.

Kaplan, S., 1997, The words of risk analysis. Risk Analysis, 17, 407–417.
Kunreuther, H., 1989, The role of actuaries and underwriters in insuring ambigous risks.

Risk Analysis, 9, 319–328.

Laws, D., Gross, M., and Fabos, J., 1989, Information resources and public decision making.
In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Urban and Regional Information Systems
Association (Boston MA: URISA), pp. 160–174.

Lemmens, J. P. M., 1991, GIS: the data problem. In Proceedings of European Conference on
Geographical Information Systems, Brussels (Utrecht: EGIS Foundation), pp. 626–635.
Melchers, R. E. 1993, Society, tolerable risk and the ALARP principle. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Probabilistic Risk and Hazard Assessment, edited by R. E. Melchers and
M. G. Stewart (Rotterdam: A. A. Balkema), pp. 243–252.

Onsrud, H. J., 1999, Liability in the use of GIS and geographical datasets. In Geographical
Information Systems, edited by P. A. Longley, M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire and
D. W. Rhind (New York: Longman and John Wiley and Sons), pp. 643–652.
Rejda, G. E., 1992, Principles of Risk Management and Insurance (New York: Harper Collins).
Smith, M. L., and Kane, S. A., 1994, The Law of Large Numbers and the strength of insurance.
In Insurance, Risk Management, and Public Policy, edited by S. G. Gustavson and
S. E. Harrington (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 1–27.

Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand, 1995, Risk Management, Australian/New
Zealand Standard (Homebush, NSW, Wellington, NZ: Standards Australia/Standards
New Zealand).

Veregin, H., and Lanter, D. P., 1995, Data quality enhancement techniques in layer-based
geographic information systems. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 19,
23–36.

Zwart, P., 1991, Some indicators to measure the impact of land information systems in
decision making. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association (URISA), San Francisco, CA (Washington: URISA),
4, pp. 77–89.

Downloaded by [UQ Library] at 15:18 11 November 2014 