bs_bs_banner

Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3): 353–368

Modeling and Communicating the Conceptual Intent of
Geo-Analytical Tasks for Human-GIS Interaction

Guoray Cai, Bo Yu and Dong Chen

College of Information Sciences and Technology, Penn State University

Abstract
One of the fundamental issues of geographical information science is to design GIS interfaces and func-
tionalities in a way that is easy to understand, teach, and use. Unfortunately, current geographical infor-
mation systems (including ArcGIS) remains very difﬁcult to use as spatial analysis tools, because they
organize and expose functionalities according to GIS data structures and processing algorithms. As a
result, GIS interfaces are conceptually confusing, cognitively complex, and semantically disconnected
from the way human reason about spatial analytical activities. In this article, we propose an approach
that structures GIS analytical functions based on the notion of “analytical intent”. We describe an experi-
ment that replaces ArcGIS desktop interface with a conversational interface, to enable mixed-initiative
user-system interactions at the level of analytical intentions. We initially focus on the subset of GIS func-
tions that are relevant to “ﬁnding what’s inside” as described by Mitchell, but the general principles apply
to other types of spatial analysis. This work demonstrates the feasibility of delegating some spatial think-
ing tasks to computational agents, and also raises future research questions that are key to building a
better theory of spatial thinking with GIS.

1 Introduction

GIS user interfaces remain hard to use by people other than trained experts. Goodchild
(2011) pointed out that the GIS functionality chosen by major commercial systems (such as
Esri ArcGIS) is still confusing, even after 40 some years of development. Many GIS func-
tions are named and characterized by computational techniques or algorithmic terminologies
rather than reﬂecting the intended analytical goals and outcomes. Typical examples are
“overlay” and “buffer” operations in ArcGIS. In order to use these functions properly, one
has to take serious training to understand the speciﬁc language of GIS software. Due to lack
of well-deﬁned conceptual structures for organizing GIS functionalities, developers make
their own ad hoc choices on how a function is named, described (in manuals), categorized,
and exposed (through interface objects such as menus and toolbars). As a consequence,
using GIS requires invocation of concepts that are native to system designers, but are foreign
to end-users.

In this article, we propose an approach that structures GIS interfaces based on the notion
of “analytical intent”. Analytical intent refers to the intentional structure of human analytical
reasoning with geographical data, independent from the actual tools and algorithms used. The
premise is that people perform GIS analysis for a reason which leads to a plan of action
involving the use of GIS data and tools. On the other hand, every tool in a GIS was designed

Address for correspondence: Guoray Cai, College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802, USA. E-mail: cai@ist.psu.edu. Tel.: +1-814-865-4448; Fax: +1-814-865-6426
Acknowledgements: This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant IIS-1211059. The authors appre-
ciate the valuable comments from two anonymous reviewers.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12040

354 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

with some intended purpose in the mind of the designers, although the tool itself does not have
any intent (only capabilities). Computer systems ought to react to human intentions (rather
than requests for using tools) (Suchman 1987). On the basis of this idea, we focus on the
“intentions and plans” of human-GIS analytical discourse, and describe a framework to repre-
sent, recognize, and reason on the intentional structure of spatial analysis.

In order to establish the intentional structure for GIS spatial analysis activities, we draw
heavily upon spatial analysis literature and textbooks (Clarke and Stillwell 2004, De Smith
et al. 2007, Fotheringham and Rogerson 1994, Maguire et al. 2005, Mitchell 1999, Mitchell
2005). In particular, Mitchell’s book Esri Guide to GIS Analysis (1999) is chosen as a primary
source of knowledge in our attempt to establish the intentional structure of GIS analysis,
because the book is the only one so far that characterizes logical connections between the
expected outcomes of common geospatial analytical tasks and the tools in GIS with great
clarity. Other more recent spatial analysis textbooks (such as De Smith et al. 2007) have elabo-
rated Mitchell’s framework with much more detail, but the constructs remain the same.

The long-term goal of this research is to enable human-GIS communication at the inten-
tion level. Users communicate their analytical intentions instead of issuing requests for execut-
ing GIS functions. The system recognizes
intention and reasons on the
implementation details of a spatial analysis at the operations and data level to form a plan of
analysis, and subsequently execute the plan on the user’s behalf. Such an interaction method is
further enhanced by incorporating mixed-initiative interactions (Allen et al. 1999) and dia-
logue grounding strategies (Brennan 1998). This work is built on our prior research in human-
GIS conversational dialogue systems (Cai et al. 2005) and context modeling of spatial data
semantics (Cai 2007).

the user’s

As the ﬁrst step of validating our method, we present a proof-of-concept implementation
of an intention-based GIS system, named CAGA (Conversational Agent for GIS Analysis).
CAGA requires the integration of the GeoDialogue subsystem (Cai et al. 2005) with ArcGIS in
Microsoft DOT NET framework. Users communicate their analytical intents to the system
through multimodal (speech and gesture) messages that are captured by a Microsoft Kinect
sensor. The system is capable of recognizing the intent and working out a strategy to structure
analysis with GIS functions. It also adopts various dialogue strategies (clariﬁcation, visual
feedback, choice-by preview) to ease the difﬁculties of making choices and weighing up alter-
natives. Using a working scenario adopted from Spatial Analysis Workbook 2 (Allen 2010),
we demonstrate that a user can accomplish an analysis of “what’s inside” without invoking
the knowledge about how GIS operations work (such as “select by location” and “overlay”),
therefore lowering the technical barriers for GIS use in spatial analysis.

2 Conceptualizing GIS Functions

The search for a well-formed conceptual basis of GIS functions has been underway for decades
(Albrecht 1997, 2007, Chrisman 1999, Goodchild 2011). This is considered a fundamental
theme of GIScience for three reasons: (1) substantial reduction in the cost of training of GIS
analytical skills; (2) improving the usability of GIS interfaces (Haklay 2010); and (3) integrat-
ing GIS services into the broader service-oriented architecture (SOA) in the emerging service
computing paradigm.

A typical full-strength GIS system today utilizes a layer-based geographic information
model for characterizing and describing our world, and is commonly packaged with hundreds
of data processing tools and analytical functions. However, due to the incremental develop-

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

355

ment of GIS from a diversity of application domains (management of census, landuse plan-
ning, transportation analysis), the terminologies and metaphors used for exposing GIS
functions to users are conceptually confusing and cognitively complex.

Taking Esri’s ArcGIS 10 for an example, there are several hundreds of processing func-
tions that deal with input, output, database management, transformation, and analysis.
Among spatial analysis functionalities are selections, buffers, neighborhoods, overlay, spatial
join, and map algebra. These tools are commonly described in reference to either the ways
spatial data are structured in databases (Raper and Maguire 1992) or the algorithms used for
transforming data. In order to understand the ways GIS functions are constructed, we must
ﬁrst understand the way GIS data are organized.

There are multiple organizing structures of GIS functionalities, and no consensus exists in
the GIScience community (Maguire and Dangermond 1991). One perspective is to categorize
GIS functions based on what spatial data models and representations they operate on (Raper
and Maguire 1992). GIS data models recognize four primitive types of spatial objects: points,
lines, areas, and rasters. Spatial objects are grouped into feature classes in geodatabases, and
are organized into themes on maps. Each feature class has a deﬁned set of attributes. In addi-
tion, a full range of spatial relationships (distance, connectivity, ﬂow, etc.) can happen between
pairs of objects of the same class, or pairs of objects from different classes. Based on the above
model of geographic data, Goodchild (1987) proposed a taxonomy of GIS analytical functions
into six categories: (1) analyzing the statistical properties of attributes of one class of objects;
(2) analyzing both geometric and attribute information of one class of objects for spatial
descriptive statistics; (3) analyzing relationships between pairs of objects from one or more
classes; (4) measuring the degrees of associations between object pairs; (5) analyzing both geo-
metric and attribute information of more than one class of objects; and (6) creating a new
class of objects from one or more existing classes of objects. This framework was used to iden-
tify gaps of analytical functions in GIS implementations, and was later extended by Burrough
(1992) into nine categories of GIS analysis.

Others have taken a transformative perspective that characterizes GIS functions according
to how they transform map data and variables from one form to another. For example, Tomlin
(1990) sees GIS functions as part of the cartographic modeling language, known as map
algebra, that allows more sophisticated analytical models to be constructed by combining
elementary GIS functions. Map algebra is composed of variables, expressions, and functions.
Variables are map layers or themes, represented by symbolic names. Expressions and functions
apply to one or more variables and generate new analytical results, which in turn can be a
variable in subsequent map algebra statements. Map algebra can also operate on raster repre-
sentations of geographical data (Berry 1987, Mennis 2010, Wesseling et al. 1996). Possible
operations are: reclassiﬁcation, map overlay, spatial measurement and association, and neigh-
borhood operations. Neighborhood operations on raster maps are further categorized into
four distinct types: local, focal, zonal, and global. Local operations are performed on each
raster cell independently. Focal operations compare each cell with its immediate neighbors.
Zonal operations compute on continuous cells sharing a common attribute. Global operations
perform calculations on all the cells. Raster-based spatial modeling languages are sufﬁciently
general and have been adopted by most GIS implementations. Esri’s ArcGIS packaged raster-
based analytical functions and map algebra language into its Spatial Analysis Extension, which
provides 170 geoprocessing tools (Esri 2010).

In summary, existing efforts to theorize GIS functions have been less fruitful than
expected. Although several taxonomies of GIS functions were proposed (Goodchild 1987,
Maguire and Dangermond 1991, Raper and Maguire 1992), none of them are satisfactory in

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

356 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

serving as a coherent basis for structuring GIS analysis. Both Goodchild (1988) and Burrough
(1992) admitted that their frameworks do little in helping users to decide when to use these
functions individually or in combination for certain applications. Critics of these proposed
schemes have been raised from a number of aspects:

1. They still place emphasis on the spatial data models and algorithmic operations of each
GIS function. Such computational concepts are strange to most analysts (who are likely to
be only occasional users of GIS).

2. They provide little information about how GIS functions should be used and how to
achieve the optimum results (Burrough 1992). Instead, users are cognitively overloaded
with the challenge of choosing the right GIS functions through invocation of related com-
putational concepts (buffer, overlay, kernel density, etc.).

Making effective use of GIS functions requires a tremendous amount of expertise about
how to use such systems, but it has rarely been formalized in such a way that can be captured
as part of the system’s intelligence. Therefore, explicit invocation of GIS functions is still the
norm when using GIS analytical tools. Recently, Goodchild (2011) demonstrated that explicit
invocation of GIS concepts such as “overlay” or “spatial join” is not absolutely necessary and
can be made redundant if GIS interfaces are capable of reasoning about people’s analytical
goals. This opens a new direction of investigation on what it takes to build an intelligent
system that can automatically invoke the correct GIS functions on behalf of the users. The
solution we explore next is to recognize and capture the user’s conceptual intent and subse-
quently use it to determine the sequence of actions that invoke, execute and assess the effect of
GIS functions.

3 Analytical Reasoning and GIS Analysis

Spatial analysis with GIS is a process of looking for geographic patterns and relationships
between geographic features. The ultimate goal of an analysis is to make a judgment about an
issue. For example,

The city of Oleander proposes to implement a beautiﬁcation project in the gateway to
the city. The city council will meet tonight to hear a brieﬁng on the project. If the
council vote is favorable, the city’s park department will plant ﬂowers and trees in
the area. Figure 1 shows the spatial situation of this scenario. (adopted from Allen
2010)

This scenario exempliﬁes a decision-making context from which geospatial analysis is
developed. Rational decision-making requires making judgments from evidence and assump-
tions using reasoning. Human analytical reasoning is the process of seeking, sythesizing, and
assessing a set of information, ideally from multiple sources; asserting and testing key assump-
tions, and forming chains of reasoning that articulate and defend judgments on the issue
(Thomas and Cook 2005). Spatial analysis with GIS can be considered as the evidence collec-
tion component of this analytical reasoning process.

Earlier conception of geospatial analysis process explicitly recognized that there is a
natural sequence of activities, from framing a question, understanding your data, choosing a
method, deciding the GIS processing functions and parameters, and result generation and
interpretation (Mitchell 1999). In reality, spatial analysis is a process far more complex and
iterative, where the process of reaching judgment about one question creates the need to

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

357

Figure 1 City of Oleander beautiﬁcation project

answer several more questions, leading to additional data collection and analyses about the
situation. When an analyst forms the intention of achieving an analytical goal, he or she initi-
ates a planning process that determines how to address the issue in question, what resources to
use, and how to allocate time to various parts of the process to accomplish the goal. If a
hypothesis is to be tested, the analyst must gather information containing the relevant evidence
and become familiar with it, and incorporate it into the knowledge he or she already has. If
multiple candidate explanations are possible, they need to be evaluated in light of evidence and
assumptions. The structure of this analytical reasoning process forms the basis for understand-
ing the ongoing dialogue between analysts and their information. This planning process during
an analysis deﬁnes the intentional structure of the analytic discourse while the analysts interact
with the computational tools (such as a GIS).

An analytic discourse is mixed-initiative (Allen et al. 1999, Horvitz 1999), where planning
and execution of spatial analysis is accomplished by a joint human-machine effort. A spatial
analytical process can harness the strengths of both the computer system and the human. The
computer ﬁnds patterns in information and organizes information in ways that make the pat-
terns explicit to the analyst. The analyst uses his or her knowledge to guide the computer in
processing and organizing information more appropriately. Therefore, we need to understand
the two sides and their relationships: one side is human intuition about their analytical goals
and the knowledge about the phenomena under study. The other side is the formal/digital
world of data models and geoprocessing functions in computational systems. People use a
ﬁnite set of concepts to organize their perception of space and analytical reasoning, and these
concepts mirror those used by human to understand, navigate, and exploit the world (De
Smith et al. 2007). Thus, an analytical discourse must manage to bridge the differences
between human spatial concepts and the formal spatial concepts in a computer program

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

358 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

(Frank and Mark 1991). Interactive spatial analysis using GIS serves as the mechanism to
couple human reasoning and analytic processes with computer-based processes (Ribarsky et al.
2009).

With the above understanding of the relationship between GIS analysis and human ana-
lytical reasoning, we now focus on the planning process, that is, the task of coming up with a
sequence of actions that will achieve a goal. Planning is one of the core problems in the study
of artiﬁcial intelligence (Pollack 1992, Suchman 1987). The use of plans for problem solving is
a common feature of intelligent behavior. Plans are useful not just for an agent to guide future
action, but also for constraining reasoning and coordinating actions with other agents. To
serve such roles, a plan is more than a sequence of actions, or a recipe for accomplishing a
goal. Instead, we model a plan as a structured collection of beliefs, intentions, and commit-
ments (Pollack 1990). Following Bratman (1987), plans are means and products of human’s
deliberation on future actions. “Having a plan” for a goal A means not only that I have a
recipe of actions to achieve A, but more importantly, I have a commitment on achieving A and
have adopted a strategy (a recipe of actions) to achieve A.

In the scenario of City of Oleander, the city has a pot of money that can be spent in mul-
tiple ways. The city council’s deliberation on choices (i.e. potential goals) results in commit-
ment to spending money on the beautiﬁcation project, and becomes an intention of the city
(this is consistent with the notion of intention in Cohen and Levesque 1990). As soon as the
intention is formed, it will constrain the city council’s subsequent deliberation on strategies to
achieve the intended goal. Again, there may potentially be many possible strategies that lead to
different resources and outcomes. To help the city council in weighing alternative strategies
and deciding on one, additional evidence must be gathered on each of the strategies to assist
further deliberation. This leads to more concrete analytical questions that could be answered
by common GIS analysis tasks such as those presented in Mitchell (1999, 2005). For example,
suppose that the city council is considering three strategies:

(S1)

(S2)

(S3)

Install plants uniformly on all the parcels across the gateway area. In this case, we
would like to know the total number of parcels affected (Np), the total number of dwell-
ing units (Nd), and the total areas (FA). These measures can be used as evidence for costs
and impact.
Install plants differently according to the landuse type of each parcel, so that the beauti-
ﬁcation effect is compatible with type of use (commercial, single-family residence, multi-
family residential, etc.). For this strategy, we would like to know the landuse types of
those parcels in the gateway area, how many parcels (Np), the number of dwelling units
(Nd), and acres of land (FA) for each landuse type.
Install plants differently depending on a parcel’s landuse type, but only for the part of
parcels that is inside a ﬂood zone. This creates additional needs for analysis, since ﬂood
zone boundaries cut across parcels, making area calculation more difﬁcult.

An analyst may adopt one of the above strategies depending on what analytical questions
are pursued. As an analyst commits on one of the three strategies, he/she will need to deliber-
ate on three questions: (1) can these questions be answered by GIS analysis? If yes, (2) how to
assemble a plan of GIS analysis for answering the questions? (3) how to invoke and execute
the right analytical tools among all the available ones? Answering these questions traditionally
need deep understanding of the processing capability of GIS and the knowledge of GIS func-
tions in algorithmic level (an excellent source is De Smith et al. 2007). Such knowledge and
skills are rarely available to people other than well-trained GIS experts. Our approach is to
delegate the tasks of choosing and evoking GIS functions to a computational agent so that the

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

359

analyst is relieved from burden of operating GIS tools but focuses on assessing the outcomes of
GIS analysis. Here we present an agent-based approach to recognizing and modeling the inten-
tional structures of analytical reasoning. These analytical intents allow the system to deliberate
on possible strategies for further analysis and proactively provide assistance in choosing and
invoking GIS functions.

4 Formalizing Analytical Intent of GIS Analysis

An analytical intent is deﬁned as an analyst’s goals, commitment to achieve these goals, and
the plan of actions leading toward these goals (Santos et al. 2009). This is consistent with
the mental state view of human actions that was developed in the ﬁeld of language and dis-
course (Cohen et al. 1990). We are developing a computational agent, CAGA (Conversa-
tional Agent for Geographical Analysis), that is capable of generating cooperative and
helpful behavior through intentional communication with the human analyst on one side,
and directing GIS operations on the other side. CAGA maintains a “mental state” of the
analytical reasoning process, meaning that it can recognize the intentions of the analyst,
adopt intentions, reason about its own intentions, deliberate on plans of actions, and
commit on executing the plan.

CAGA is responsive to the intentions and plans of the analyst, and has commitment to
joint problem-solving activity. CAGA is currently capable of recognizing ﬁve top-level analyti-
cal intents that are discussed in Mitchell (1999): (I1) mapping where things are; (I2) mapping
the most and least; (I3) mapping density; (I4) ﬁnding what’s inside; and (I5) ﬁnding what’s
nearby. The discussion in this article will be limited to I4 for illustration purposes.

We model “Finding What’s Inside” as an activity that involves multiple, hierarchically
organized goals and strategies that determines the implementation steps and GIS operations.
When a human analyst expresses an analytical intent, CAGA can potentially adopt such intent
(following the principles of cooperation), and deliberate on strategies for achieving related
analytical goals. We say that CAGA has a potential intention I if the following conditions
hold: (1) CAGA can recognize I expressed by other agents; (2) CAGA believes that it has the
ability to help in achieving I; and (3) CAGA can adopt and commit to I if needed. When
CAGA is engaging an analytical discourse with a human analyst (HA), CAGA will actively
monitor the intentions and plans of HA. When CAGA detects that HA has commitment to a
goal that matches one of the CAGA’s potential intentions, it will form a real intention on that
goal, which in turn will trigger subsequent deliberation on a plan of GIS actions.

As an example, assuming that the human analyst has adopted the ﬁrst strategy (S1) in the
City of Oleander scenario, which triggers the need to count the number of parcels in the
gateway area. This is recognized by CAGA as an intent that matches CAGA’s potential inten-
tion I4 (ﬁnding what’s inside). CAGA adopts I4 and forms its own intention to achieve I4. This
intention guides CAGA to deliberate on a plan to achieve I4. CAGA knows several methods
(from chapter 5 of Mitchell (1999)) for achieving I4. When deciding on which method to
apply, several factors are relevant (see Figure 2). Here, CAGA reasons on the goal of I4 in three
elements: “features,” “region”, and their relationship “inside.”

Features. What are the features and do they represent discrete or continuous phenomena?
The features in the collection may come from one feature class, but they could also be a
selected subset of a feature class. For example, one may be interested in all crime incidents or
only in “burglaries”. If the features represent discrete phenomena (such as parcels, roads,

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

360 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

I4: Finding What’s inside

Features

Inside

Region

F1

Feature 
collection

F2

Discrete
or
continuous?

O1

O2

Fully inside
Or
Partially inside ?

Count
Or
Summaries ?

R1

Shape of 
the region

R2

Single area
or
multiple area?

Figure 2 Factors that determine GIS methods of “Finding what’s inside”

crimes), then we can count them or summarize them by a numeric attribute. If the features
represent continuous geographic phenomena (such as precipitation, temperature, or elevation),
we cannot count them, but we can ﬁnd out how much inside the region of interest.

Region. What is the location and geometric shape of the region, and should the region be
considered as single area or multiple areas? The geometric shape that represents the region
could be made of one area (such as a city) or several areas. When the region has multiple areas
(such as ZIP codes), we can choose to treat the region in two ways: either considering multiple
areas as one conceptual region, or treating them as separate areas (in the region) that can be
compared in the analysis.

Inside. When dealing with linear features and discrete areas, some of the features may be
partially inside and partially outside the region. If this is the case, we may choose to do one of
the three options: (1) include features that fall completely inside the region; (2) include features
that are either completely inside or partially inside; and (3) include features that are completely
inside, plus the portion of any (partially inside) features that fall inside the region boundary.
Option (2) is appropriate if the outcome of the analysis is to generate a list or count of fea-
tures. The same can be said for option (1) except the count is more conservative. Option (3) is
needed when we want to know the amount of something. More details of such decision rules
can be found in Mitchell (1999, p. 95).

When the factors mentioned above are not clear, CAGA consider the intention I4 as under-
speciﬁed, and will form its intention to ﬁnd out the unknown pieces of the plan. For example,
CAGA could initiate subdialogues with the analyst to ﬁnd out the feature collection and the
region of interest if they are missing. As soon as these two parameters are known, CAGA can
automatically reason (using its spatial query functions) to ﬁgure out if there are any features
that are partially inside the region. Assuming that CAGA has the ability to collect answers on
the factors in Figure 2, it will settle on one of the three methods for GIS analysis (following
Mitchell 1999):

Method 1: Visual overlay. This creates a map showing the boundary of the region and the fea-
tures. It allows you to see which features are inside and outside the region. This
method does not give you any summary or count, but is good for exploring the
gross pattern.

Method 2: Selecting features inside the region. This selects a subset of the features inside the
region. The selected features become a collection that can be counted or summa-

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

361

rized by one or more numerical attributes. This approach is good for getting a list
or summary of features inside a single area, or a group of areas you are treating as
one.

Method 3: Overlaying the region and the features. This combines the area and the features
through geometric overlay to create a new layer with the attributes of both, or
compares the two layers to calculate summary statistics for each area on the ﬂy.
This approach is good for ﬁnding which features are in each of several areas, either
completely or partially, or ﬁnding out how much of something is in one or more
areas.

The above methods can be directly implemented using a GIS. For example, method 1
(visual overlay) can be implemented using ArcGIS cartographic design functions such as sym-
bolization, reclassiﬁcation, and labeling. Method 2 can be implemented in ArcGIS using
“Select by Location” or “Select by Graphics” functions and summarization tools. Method 3
has corresponding ArcGIS overlay analysis functions (such as Union or Intersect).

Unlike GIS analysis textbooks, which treat the above methods as mutually exclusive strat-
egies, CAGA considers them as complementary and a continuum of methods in support of
analytical reasoning from qualitative to quantitative, from single area summary to comparison
of multiple areas and attributes. The logic for CAGA to assemble GIS analysis processes is as
follows:

Algorithm 1: Reasoning Strategies for Planning the Analysis of “What’s Inside”

Step 1: Identify features. This could involve simply selecting a feature class, or ﬁltering to
choose a subset through “selection by attributes” or “select by location” functions.
The result is recorded into two variables: F1 holds the feature collection, and F2 indi-
cates whether the features represent “discrete” phenomena (such as parcels) or “con-
tinuous” phenomena (such as precipitation).

Step 2: Identify the region. This could be accomplished by one of three methods: (1) ask the
user to draw the region on a map; (2) choose from administrative boundaries; or (3)
deﬁne a proximal zone around a feature of interest. The result is recorded in two vari-
ables: R1 holds the geometric description of the region, and R2 indicates whether the
region is treated as “single” or “multiple” areas.

Step 3: Visual overlay. Use method 1 to visualize the features and the region on a map, with
proper symbolization and a background map for interpretation. If there is a need to
count or summarize, move on to the next step. Otherwise the analysis is complete.

Step 4: If there are features in F1 that are partially within R1, and there is a need to summarize
numerical attributes of features based on partiality of “inside,” then use method 3.
Otherwise, use method 2.

5 CAGA Architecture and Implementation Framework

CAGA is an extension of GeoDialogue (Cai et al. 2005) which is a conversational dialogue
agent for information access and visualization tasks when interacting with GIS tools. As a dia-
logue agent, CAGA is capable of perceiving the analytical intentions of a human analyst
through conversational interactions. Moreover, CAGA is a planning agent that can elaborate
on the person’s analytical intent, assemble a plan of analysis and invoke the correct GIS
functions.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

362 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

Analytical intents

Knowledge Base
Actions and 
recipes

Database Entities & 
Analytical capability

User Input

Intention 
recognition

Choosing analytical 
strategies

Plan 
Elaboration 

Plan 
execution

Geographical 
Information 
System

Discourse Context 
(PlanGraph)

Human 
analyst

Response 
Generation

Response 
Planning

Figure 3 Architecture of CAGA

CAGA is composed of several processing modules (see Figure 3). These modules have a
close correspondence to the reasoning process as described in Section 4. First, the “Intention
Recognition” module recognizes key phrases in user’s input to infer the analytical intent as
part of the analytical reasoning. This stage of processing requires accessing grammatical and
semantic knowledge available from the system’s Knowledge Base, and the result feeds into
discourse context that represents the state of the analysis. The “Choosing Analytical Strate-
gies” module and the “Plan Elaboration” module deliberate on the strategies and plans of
achieving the analytical intent, using knowledge described in Sections 3 and 4. The plan is
elaborated when the system adopts recipes (which are formal representation of analytical
strategies) and new subgoals. Both modules consult the knowledge-base when recipes for
complex actions are needed. The “Plan Execution” module coordinates the execution of the
analytical plan and invokes GIS functions. Finally, the “Response Planning” and “Response
Generation” modules take care of communicating analytical results (maps, summary statis-
tics, texts) and conversation grounding to the user. These modules in CAGA architecture
support a complete processing ﬂow necessary for human-GIS analytical discourse at the level
of analytical intents.

Before any interaction sessions, CAGA represents analytical intents as “potential inten-
tions” in its knowledge base. It also captures linguistic phrases that correspond to the ways
analysts communicate their analytical intents. During any interactive session, we assume that
analysts will make their intentions explicit in the spirit of cooperative activity (Bratman 1992).
This is for the ease of intention recognition. To accommodate the ﬂexibility of natural lan-
guage expressions, CAGA uses a relational schema in its knowledge-base to allow many-to
many relationships between intentions and linguistic phrases (i.e. one intent can be associated
with multiple linguistic phrases, and one linguistic phrase can be associated with more than
one intent, differentiated by contexts) (Cai 2007).

Each potential intention may be associated with one or more recipes that represent a
system’s knowledge about how a goal can be achieved. A recipe speciﬁes the necessary
resource and knowledge pre-conditions (in the form of parameters) and the set of actions to
be taken (see Figure 4a). These actions may be either basic actions or complex actions. A
basic action is directly executable by the system, such as “making a buffer around a known
point.” A complex action, on the other hand, is not directly executable because certain
knowledge pre-conditions or details about performing the action are subject to elaboration

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

363

goal (α)

…

Para2

Para1

Constraints
…
Subact b1

Subact bn

(a) Structure of a recipe

Commitment (Agents, α)

Exec_Status (α)

Plan α

goal (α)

Intention (Agents, α)

Beliefs (Agents, α)

Constraints

…

…

Para1

Param

Subact b1

Subact bn

(b) Structure of a plan

Figure 4 Schematic structures of a recipe (a) and a plan (b)

and instantiation. For each complex action a, CAGA knows one or more possible ways
(called recipes) to implement it. CAGA’s recipe deﬁnition language also supports constraints,
which specify any pre- or post-conditions and partial orders of the subactions. GIS analytical
functions are modeled as basic actions that can be invoked by the system if they are part of
an analytical plan.

CAGA represents analytical discourse by a schema called “plan” (see Figure 4b). A plan
records the state of the analysis at any moment of a discourse, and includes both the com-
mented goals and actions so far as well as agendas to advance the analysis. The plan is rooted
at the top-level analytical goal that is expressed and committed by the human analyst. Such an
intention is normally underspeciﬁed initially, and is further elaborated jointly by one or more
persons (analysts) and the system. The system represents and reasons on the plan following the
principles of SharedPlan theories (Grosz and Kraus 1996, Lochbaum 1998, Rich et al. 2001).
Using the plan-based representation of discourse context, CAGA models the progression
of the analytical discourse as the process of evolving the plan from a Partial SharedPlan (PSP)
towards a Full SharedPlan (FSP). A plan is considered a Full SharedPlan (FSP) when: (1) par-
ticipating agents have the shared beliefs and commitment to the whole plan; (2) all actions on
the leaf-nodes are basic actions; and (3) for each of the parameters, either it is already instan-
tiated, or agents have a Full SharedPlan (FSP) for identifying the parameter. If the above con-
ditions are not met, we say that the plan is only a Partial SharedPlan (PSP). A PSP represents
an ongoing analytical discourse, while a FSP represents a completed one.

6 Finding What’s Inside: A Working Scenario

We use a working scenario of “ﬁnding what’s inside” to demonstrate behaviors of CAGA. The
scenario was adopted from Chapter 4 of an ArcGIS tutorial (Allen 2010), and has been par-
tially used in Sections 3 and 4. The need for spatial analysis arises from planning a downtown
beautiﬁcation project at the gateway region of the City of Oleander (see Figure 1 for the
spatial situation). The following sample dialogue explains the behavior of CAGA by each dia-
logue move in the analytical discourse.

Next is a sample analytical dialogue between the system (A) and an analyst (B). Dialogue
moves are described on the left side of the table. Based on the intentional structure of the dis-
course, we have marked the dialogue by segments, and provided an explanation for each
segment on the right side of the table.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

364 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

Step Dialogue

Explanations

What can I do for you?
I want to generate a map within a region

What features are you working on?
They are parcels.

What is the general area you are working on?
(cid:129) City of Oleander
(cid:129) City of Rochester
(cid:129) City of Baltimore
It is city of Oleander.

This dialogue segment (A0 – B0) communicates the overall
intention of the analysis. The system recognizes that the
analyst has committed to an analytical intent of “ﬁnding
what’s inside” (I4) based on the phrase “within a region.”

The system adopts the intent (I4) and deliberates on a
strategy using a recipe of knowledge described in
Figure 2. This recipe is incorporated into the plan, and
guides the system to further elaborate on the features to
be analyzed. This explains why the system asks for
information about features in (A1).

This dialogue segment (A2 – A6) identiﬁes the region for
mapping inside. The system initiates this process by
consulting its data store looking for datasets that have
features of parcels. Among the three datasets, the system
needs user’s guide on which one to focus on. They
narrow into the City of Oleander.

The system searched the dataset for City of Oleander and
found a number of other feature classes. It initiates a
dialogue (A3 – B3) that allows the users to request adding
more background layers.

The dialogue segment (A4 – B7) is driven by the intention to

ﬁnd out the region for the analysis (according to the
intentional structure described in Figure 2). The system
knows that the user may choose one of the three
different strategies (or recipes) to identify the region, but
do not know which one that the user has committed.
Therefore, step A4 asks the user to offer input.

The map of Oleander is loaded.
You may want to consider adding the following layers to

the map as background.

Add the lot boundaries
Please describe exactly the region you are interested in.

You may choose one of the three methods:

(1) delineate the region from selection of area features
(2) draw the region manually on the map
(3) deﬁne region by a proximal zone to a location
The region is a proximal zone around a location
What is your location of interest?
It is the town center here [gesture pointing to the general

area where the town center is located]

Town center location found.
Thanks. Make a 0.5-mile buffer around it.
Here is the region.

A0
B0

A1
B1

A2

B2
A3

B3
A4

B4
A5
B5

A6
B6
A7

Would you like to proceed?

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

365

Yes, the region looks good.

To help the user make a choice, CAGA uses graphical

You may refer to this region as Region 1. This region

contains 137 parcels. Some of these parcels are partially
inside region 1.

B7

A8

B8
A9
B9
A10

B10
A11

Thanks!
Do you need a summary of any quantity inside parcels?
Yes. Show me the statistics of dwelling units.
How would you like to treat those parcels that are partially

inside region 1?

Include the whole
Include only inside portion

(1)
(2)
Include the whole parcel
There are total of 290 parcels selected

illustrations together with texts to explain the
implications of the three choices. After receiving user’s
input (B4), subsequent dialogues follow a recipe of
deﬁning a “proximity to a location.” The steps A5, B5, and
A6 identify the center of the proximal region. The
[pointing gesture] in step B5 helps the system to narrow
down the search for the town center in neighborhood
being pointed at.

By the end of B7, the system has knowledge about the

features and the region, and starts reasoning about how
they relate by “inside” relationship (as discussed in
Section 4). Instead of waiting for further instructions, the
system proceeds on two things: it reports a count of
parcels (137) inside region 1, and reports on its ﬁnding on
whether there is any parcels that are partially inside
region 1. This is a proactive move, as the system assumes
that the user is interested at these answers no matter
what they will do next. It is also a useful piece of
knowledge for deciding which method to be used to
generate summary statistics next

In this dialogue segment (A9 – A11), the system deliberates
on appropriate operations for mapping inside based on
the logic in Algorithm 1 and the factors discussed in
Figure 1: (1) whether the region is multiple or single; (2)
whether the user needs a summary of inside features; (3)
whether the user wants to treat the inside features as a
whole or only the parts inside. The system can ﬁnd out
the answer to factor (1) automatically, but the last two
factors are user’s decision. Therefore, the system asks the
user directly whether a summary of feature is needed
and if the summary should be done for the features as
whole or only for the inside portion. Based on the user’s
response in B9 and B10, the system decides to invoke
“Select by Location” method of ArcGIS (method 2 in
Section 3).

Besides intention recognition and communication, this scenario also showed that CAGA
implemented various dialogue strategies to ease the difﬁculties of making choices and weighing
on alternatives. For example, step A4 used a strategy called choice-by preview to help users
understand the consequence of each choice by presenting a visual preview of the result. One
important feature of CAGA is its ability to take initiatives in clarifying the user’s choices-
,grounding communication through visual feedback, and keeping track of the discourse con-
texts in complex analysis.

7 Discussions and Conclusions

We have presented a framework for modeling the analytical intent of GIS functions with the
broader goal of simplifying the interaction between the human analysts and GIS tools. From
the perspective of advancing GIScience, this advocates the use of analytical intents as an
organizing structure to formalize the semantics of GIS functions. It extends the work of
Goodchild (2011) and provides concrete evidence that human-GIS interactions in analytical
discourses can be possible without invoking algorithmic knowledge about GIS functions.
Our experimental system, CAGA, demonstrated one possible way of formalizing the inten-
tional structure of GIS analytical
functions using the spatial analysis framework of
Mitchell (1999).

The scenario in Section 6 demonstrated that a relatively simple analytical task of
“Finding What’s Inside” could involve complex decisions on what GIS functions to be used

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

366 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

and how to structure them in support of human analytical reasoning. The use of analytical
intent to bridge the conceptual gap between human reasoning of geospatial analysis and
abstract concepts of GIS operations is a viable approach to simplify human-GIS interactions.
The current implementation of CAGA is a proof-of-concept of the overall idea in a limited
subset of GIS utilities. It does not yet cover many other analytical features that are available
in ArcGIS. This is not the limitation of the framework. The complex logic and the knowl-
edge required to select, structure and operate GIS tools justify the use of computational
agents for human-GIS communication, intention recognition, discourse representation, and
automated decision-making. Subsequent work should establish a more systematic and formal
language for characterizing and representing analytical
intents in major spatial analysis
tasks. On the computational side, intention recognition and planning (Cohen et al. 1990)
remain a big challenge if we are to build natural language interfaces for GIS. The rich appli-
cation domains of geospatial analysis and the complexity of human conceptions of space
mean that understanding the intentional structure of spatial analysis is likely to be challeng-
ing and involve interdisciplinary efforts.

Human-computer interaction research in GISscience has been far behind the development
of GIS data management, spatial analysis tools, and spatial data infrastructure and services
(Haklay 2010). The existing GIS interfaces are cumbersome when used by information ana-
lysts, and this challenge is even more pressing now that spatial data and tools are used so
much in citizen science (Connors et al. 2012, Haklay 2013) and in data-driven decisions
(Farmer and Pozdnoukhov 2012, Goodchild et al. 2012). If further development of CAGA is
successful, it will pave a path to eventually shield the user from the need to learn and use tech-
nical terminologies of GIS. It will result in signiﬁcant savings in terms of cognitive resources of
human analysts and the cost of training for GIS skills. Towards that goal, much more work is
needed to answer the theoretical questions raised by the CAGA experiment. For example, it
remains unclear whether users can reliably communicate analytical intents to the system
without being trained in GIS terminologies. We also know very little about individual varia-
tions in people’s ability to mesh human analytical reasoning with GIS analysis. We are plan-
ning a series of lab experiments to test the design concepts used in CAGA and assess the
usability of intention-driven GIS interfaces.

References

Albrecht J 1997 Universal analytical GIS operations: A task-oriented systematization of data-structure-
independent GIS functionality. In Craglia M and Onsrud H (eds) Geographic Information Research: Trans-
atlantic Perspectives. London, Taylor and Francis: 577–91
Albrecht J 2007 Key Concepts and Techniques in GIS. London, Sage
Allen D W 2010 GIS Tutorial 2, Spatial Analysis Workbook: Second Edition for ArcGIS 10 Edition. Redlands,

CA, Esri Press

Allen J E, Guinn C I, and Horvtz E 1999 Mixed-initiative interaction. IEEE Intelligent Systems 14(5): 14–23
Berry J K 1987 Fundamental operations in computer-assisted map analysis. International Journal of Geographi-

cal Information Systems 1: 119–36

Bratman M E 1987 Intentions, Plans, and Practical Reason. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press
Bratman M E 1992 Shared cooperative activity. Philosophical Review 101: 327–41
Brennan S E 1998 The grounding problem in conversation with and through computers. In Fussell S R and
Kreuz R J (eds) Social and Cognitive Psychological Approaches to Interpersonal Communication. Hills-
dale, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum: 201–25

Burrough P A 1992 Development of intelligent geographical information systems. International Journal of Geo-

Cai G 2007 Contextualization of geospatial data base semantics for mediating human-GIS dialogues. Geoinfor-

graphical Information Systems 6: 1–11

matica 11: 217–37

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

Modeling Analytical Intents for GIS Tasks

367

Cai G, Wang H, MacEachren A M, and Fuhrmann S 2005 Natural conversational interfaces to geospatial data-

Chrisman N 1999 A transformational approach to GIS operations. International Journal of Geographical Infor-

bases. Transactions in GIS 9: 199–221

mation Science 13: 617–37

Clarke G and Stillwell J C H 2004 Applied GIS and Spatial Analysis. Chichester, John Wiley and Sons
Cohen P, Morgan J, and Pollack M E 1990 Intention in Communication. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press
Cohen P R and Levesque H J 1990 Intention is choice with commitment. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 42: 213–61
Connors J P, Lei S, and Kelly M 2012 Citizen science in the age of neogeography: Utilizing volunteered geo-
graphic information for environmental monitoring. Annals of the Association of American Geographers
102: 1267–89

De Smith M J, Goodchild M F, and Longley P A 2007 Geospatial Analysis: A Comprehensive Guide to Princi-

ples, Techniques and Software Tools (Third Edition). Winchelsea, UK, Winchelsea Press

Esri 2010 A Quick Tour of

the ArcGIS Spatial Analyst Extension. WWW document, http://resources.

Arcgis.Com/

Farmer C J Q and Pozdnoukhov A 2012 Building streaming GIScience from context, theory, and intelligence. In

Proceedings of the Workshop on GIScience in the Big Data Age. Columbus, Ohio

Fotheringham A S and Rogerson P 1994 Spatial Analysis and GIS. Bristol, PA, Taylor and Francis
Frank A U and Mark D M 1991 Language issues for GIS. In Maguire D J, Goodchild M F, and Rhind D W

(eds) Geographical Information Systems: Principles and Applications. London, Longmans: 147–63

Goodchild M F 1987 A spatial analytic perspective on geographical information systems. International Journal

of Geographical Information Systems 1: 327–34

Goodchild M F 1988 Towards an enumeration and classiﬁcation of GIS functions. In Aangeenbrug R T and
Schiffman Y M (eds) Proceedings of the International Geographic Information Systems (IGIS) Symposium:
The Research Agenda. Washington, DC, National Aeronautics and Space Administration: 67–77

Goodchild M F 2011 Spatial thinking and the GIS user interface. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences 21:

Goodchild M F, Guo H, Annoni A, Bian L, DeBie K, Campbell F, Craglia M, Ehlers M, Van Genderen J,
Jackson D, Lewis A J, Pesaresi M, Remetey-Fülöpp G, Simpson R, Skidmore A, Wang C, and Woodgate P
2012 Next-generation Digital Earth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 109:
11088–94

Grosz B J and Kraus S 1996 Collaborative plans for complex group action. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 86: 269–357
Haklay M (ed) 2010 Interacting with Geospatial Technologies. Oxford, UK, John Wiley and Sons
Haklay M 2013 Citizen science and volunteered geographic information: Overview and typology of participa-
tion. In Sui D, Elwood S, and Goodchild M F (eds) Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge. Berlin,
Springer: 105–22

Horvitz E 1999 Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on

Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI (cid:2)99). Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: 159–66

Lochbaum K E 1998 A collaborative planning mode of intentional structure. Computational Linguistics 24:

Maguire D J and Dangermond J 1991 The functionality of GIS. In Maguire D J, Goodchild M F, and Rhind D
W (eds) Geographical Information Systems: Principles and Applications. London, Longman: 319–35
Maguire D J, Batty M, and Goodchild M F 2005 GIS, Spatial Analysis, and Modeling. Redlands, CA, Esri Press
Mennis J 2010 Multidimensional map algebra: Design and implementation of a spatio-temporal GIS processing

language. Transactions in GIS 14: 1–21

Mitchell A 1999 Esri Guide to GIS Analysis: I, Geographic Patterns and Relationships. Redlands, CA, Esri

Mitchell A 2005 The Esri Guide to GIS Analysis: II, Spatial Measurements and Statistics. Redlands, CA, Esri

Pollack M E 1990 Plans as complex mental attitude. In Cohen P R and Morgan J L (eds) Intentions in Commu-

nication. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press: 77–103

Pollack M E 1992 The uses of plans. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 57: 43–68
Raper J F and Maguire D J 1992 Design models and functionality in GIS. Computers and Geosciences 18:

Ribarsky W, Fisher B, and Pottenger W M 2009 Science of analytical reasoning. Information Visualization 8:

Rich C, Sidner C L, and Lesh N 2001 Collagen: Applying collaborative discourse theory to human-computer

collaboration. AI Magazine 22(4): 15–25

Santos E, Jr, Nguyen H, Wilkinson J, Yu F, Li D, Kim K, Russell J, and Olson A 2009 Capturing user intent for
analytic process. In Houben G-J, Mccalla G, Pianesi F, and Zancanaro M (eds) User Modeling, Adapta-
tion, and Personalization. Berlin, Springer: 349–54

3–9

525–72

Press

Press

387–94

254–62

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

368 G Cai, B Yu and D Chen

Suchman L 1987 Plan’s and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication. New York,

Cambridge University Press

Thomas J J and Cook K A 2005 The science of analytical reasoning. In Thomas J J and Cook K A (eds) Illumi-
nating the Path: The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. New York, IEEE Computer
Society Press: 33–68

Tomlin C D 1990 Geographic Information Systems and Cartographic Modeling. Englewood CLiffs, NJ, Prentice

Hall

Wesseling C G, Karssenberg D J, Burrough P A, and Deursen W P A 1996 Integrating dynamic environmental

models in GIS: The development of a dynamic modeling language. Transactions in GIS 1: 40–8

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2013, 17(3)

