This article was downloaded by: [University of Memphis]
On: 09 June 2012, At: 07:47
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Mapping transit‐based access:
integrating GIS, routes and schedules
T. L. Lei a & R. L. Church a
a Department of Geography, University of California, Santa
Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA

Available online: 01 Mar 2010

To cite this article: T. L. Lei & R. L. Church (2010): Mapping transit‐based access: integrating GIS,
routes and schedules, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24:2, 283-304

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810902835404

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 24, No. 2, February 2010, 283–304

Research Article

Mapping transit-based access: integrating GIS, routes and schedules

T. L. LEI and R. L. CHURCH*
Department of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA,
USA

(Received 15 November 2008; final version recived 19 February 2009 )

Accessibility is a concept that is not entirely easy to define. Gould (1969) once
stated that it is a ‘slippery notion … one of those common terms that everyone
uses until faced with the problem of defining and measuring it’. Considerable
research over the last 40 years has been devoted to defining and measuring
accessibility, ranging from access to jobs within an hour’s travel time to the ease
at which given places can be reached. This article is concerned with the
measurement of access provided by transit. It includes a review of past work on
to transit services in
measuring accessibility in general and with respect
particular. From this overview of the literature, it can be seen that current
methods fall short in measuring transit service access in several meaningful
aspects. Based on this review and critique, we propose new refinements that can
be used to help overcome some of these shortcomings. As a part of this, we define
an extended GIS data structure to handle temporal elements of transit service. To
demonstrate the value of these new measures, examples are presented with
respect to mapping accessibility of transit services in Santa Barbara, California.
Finally, we show how these measures can be used to develop a framework for
supporting transit service analysis and planning.

Keywords: Public transit; accessibility; schedule and route information;
geographic information systems; urban applications

1.

Introduction

Accessibility is one of the most important concepts in the study of transportation
systems, and providing access is without a doubt a major function of an urban
system. Historically, access to jobs and city cores in the older cities of the United
States was largely provided by public transit, and transit systems played a central
role in shaping the form and scale of the urban landscape during the late 1800s to
1920s. Even after the advent of automobiles and highway expansion, public transit
has remained an important alternative means of transportation to private cars. This
is especially true in urban environments such as big cities and university towns
where there are high concentrations of people. Furthermore, transit is widely
deemed as a means for providing equal access, reducing congestion and alleviating
environmental problems caused by the use of the automobile. However, transit
ridership will remain small if the level of accessibility provided by public transit is
low relative to that of the automobile. Improving public transit is linked to a
number of factors such as improving service, increasing access and promoting

*Corresponding author. Email: church@geog.ucsb.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2010 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810902835404

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 284

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

greater safety while keeping costs to a reasonable level. Therefore, it is important to
measure the level of accessibility provided by transit alternatives in order to help
transit planning and decision making. For example,
support the process of
improvements to the level of service and access can be used as a basis for justifying
and making choices in public transit investment. This article addresses the issue of
measuring access provided by a public transit system.

Conceptually, accessibility is a measure of the ease with which people can reach
their destinations or activity sites (Dalvi 1978). Although accessibility is a key
concept in transportation, there is no consensus on how to operationally measure it.
Researchers have investigated the measurement of accessibility from various
perspectives such as access for those with disabilities (Church and Marston 2002),
gender differences in access (Kwan 1999), access to jobs (Hanson and Schwab 1987,
Kawabata 2003), access to city centres (O’Sullivan et al. 2000) and access to
shopping and health facilities (Lou and Wang 2003). Compared with other modes of
transportation, public transit influences accessibility in unique ways. In addition to
important factors such as a user’s time budget and socioeconomic characteristics,
travel by transit depends significantly on the routes (e.g. a direct route vs. a so called
milk-run route), schedule (frequent vs. infrequent), the location of the user as well as
the time of day the trip is made. Some of the past work (see, e.g., Hillman and Pool
1997, Murray et al. 1998, O’Sullivan et al. 2000, Gan et al. 2005) has focused on
access provided by public transit. In the next section, we provide a review of access
metrics in general and make specific comments associated with the use of these
metrics within the context of public transit. Following this, we discuss shortcomings
in existing metrics as well as how these metrics can be improved for use in modelling
transit access. The metrics developed in this article represent an improvement over
previous work in that they capture certain essential aspects of transit access such as
the variation of access associated with time of day as well as travel direction. In
particular, time tables are explicitly used and some of the commonly made
simplifying assumptions are relaxed. In section 3, we discuss how such metrics can
be used to enhance a GIS environment in terms of modelling access using routes and
schedules. We also provide examples that have been developed in analyzing transit
services in Santa Barbara, CA. In section 4, we provide details on how these
techniques can be used to develop a framework for supporting transit service
analysis and planning that can measure the impact on access associated with
proposed system changes in meaningful ways. Finally, we conclude with a short
summary and recommendations for future work.

2. Literature review

Accessibility can be generally defined as the ease with which people can reach their
opportunities or services (Wachs and Kumagai 1973). It embraces three main
elements – people,
linkages and activities (Moseley 1979). A large number of
measures of accessibility have been proposed. This can be attributed to a variety of
reasons, ranging from the level of aggregation (Handy and Niemeier 1997) to the
underlying behavioural model (Morris et al. 1979). In the following discussion, we
have grouped accessibility metrics into six categories. This classification scheme
helps to understand past work and how it relates to measuring transit access as well
as the role GIS has played in transit service access.

The first category of access metrics is called system accessibility. This class of
metrics deals with physical access to a system, based on the distance, time or effort

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

285

to reach a system network or a set of access points associated with that system. For
example, Nyerges (1995) used GIS to analyze transit coverage in the Queen Anne
Community of Seattle. He generated quarter-mile buffers around transit routes
using GIS in order to identify the streets served by the current system. If a street
intersects with one of the buffers, then people along that street were considered
having good access to the transit system. Using this map, Nyerges proposed adding
additional routes to serve ‘unserved’ streets. Similarly, Azar et al. (1994) assumed
that employees who lived within a quarter-mile buffer of any transit line had good
accessibility to medical
institutions in Boston. For measuring access to point
facilities, Aultman-Hall et al. (1997) measured the average and maximum walking
distance for residents to local destinations such as school and transit stops with a
distance standard of 400 m to evaluate pedestrian accessibility of local neighbour-
hoods. Hillman and Pool (1997) have discussed a software system for measuring
accessibility for local transit operators in London. The authors calculated a local
accessibility measure widely used in the United Kingdom, which measures the
proximity of users to transit stops. Gan et al. (2005) developed a program called the
Florida Transit Geographic Information System, which is designed to determine
those areas that are transit accessible, as well as to calculate the proportion of a
service region served by transit. Using demographic data, their system can identify
areas that are underserved by transit but meet minimum levels of housing and
employment density. Polzin et al. (2002) have developed a tool to calculate access to
a transit system based on calculating the differences between the spatial and
temporal dimensions of demand and the spatial positions of stops along with route
headway times. Thus, they have expanded the definition of physical access by time
of day. They assume that if headway times are large, then a certain proportion of
people will be unwilling to wait for service, thus reducing access. Murray et al.
(1998) and Murray (2001) proposed reconfiguring a transit system based on a
physical access metric, by relocating bus stops in order to maximize the number of
people who lived within a given distance of a stop. In further work, Matisziw et al.
(2006) develop a model to extend routes and maximize access with the location of
stops along the route extensions. While proximity to transit stops or routes may
have an important impact on travel cost and choice, system accessibility measures
do not consider the travel cost incurred in using the transit system to travel to a
desired destination (Murray et al. 1998). Thus, such an analysis may significantly
underestimate the travel cost as well as exaggerate the level of access provided.

The second accessibility metric is called system facilitated accessibility. As
compared to system accessibility, system facilitated accessibility measures a user’s
ability to get to their destination and takes into account the travel time or cost spent
in the transportation network or the associated effort in making the trip. How the
travel cost is determined depends on the availability of data and the application
context. For example, Liu and Zhu (2004) calculated transit time by dividing
distance with average speed(s). More complicated models take into account factors
such as transfer time, wait time and schedule information. Hillman and Pool (1997)
used realistic travel times from origins to destinations in order to calculate system
facilitated access. They described the procedure for calculating the travel time as
summing up the walk time from the origin to a stop, the waiting time at the stop, the
onboard travelling time and waiting time at any interchanges. They reported using
detailed information about the public transport network, including timing points
along a route to figure out the cumulative times for stops. Wu and Murray (2005)

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 286

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

have developed a model to optimize an existing route structure in order to optimize
system access and system facilitated access by determining which existing stops can
be dropped. Thus, their model tries to streamline an existing system to improve
transit times while reducing system coverage as little as possible.

O’Sullivan et al. (2000) developed a shortest path model based on the Dijkstra
algorithm that identifies the least cost path in terms of travel time from any origin to
a desired destination. They used a multimodal network of bus and rail. It was
assumed that transfer times between different bus routes or between bus and rail
equalled one-half of the headway time (i.e. this assumes that people on the average
arrive at a stop or make a transfer halfway between the previous bus/train and the
next bus/train). Travel times along a given transit route were based on published
schedules. They used their shortest path model to estimate the time to travel to a
central business district and mapped travel time isochrones.

Using a similar method for calculating travel time, Gent and Symonds (2004)
proposed identifying areas that are within a 60-minute catchment area of a city
centre. The work of Liu and Zhu (2004), O’Sullivan et al. (2000), Hillman and Pool
(1997) and Gent and Symonds (2004) are important as they focus on the ability of
the system to take the individual to a specific destination (such as the central
business district). Unfortunately, most of this previous work is based on the
assumption that travel and service times are the same regardless of time of day and
day of week. To address this issue, Peng (1997) developed a trip planner, which uses
schedules and routes, so that a user can find the quickest route to get to a desired
destination when leaving at a specific starting time. Trip planners are now available
on the Internet for many cities, allowing people to calculate the best transit route
from a starting point to a designated destination. Although trip planers have been
developed for many transit agencies,
they have not been used to generate
isochrones-based maps for a region, as they are principally designed to depict the
best way to use a system to accomplish a specific trip.

The third measure of access is called integral accessibility. Whereas the first
two types of metrics involve access to a network or access provided by a facility
to travel to a destination, this third category is associated with calculating a
measure of overall access associated with a number of possible destinations. The
simplest integral measure is a count of the number of opportunities of some type
of activity within a reasonable travel distance or time of a particular location
(Wachs and Kumagai 1973, Talen and Anselin 1998). We can define this
mathematically as

Aik~ X

Ojk:

j [ Mik

where

i,j5indices used to represent locations
k5index used to represent activity type
Aik5measure of overall access for location i with respect to activity type k
dij5the distance between location i and location j
sk5the maximum distance or time in which a user is likely to consider activity

type

Mik5{j | dij(sk}
Ojk5the number of activities of type k available at location j.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

287

Counting available activities within a maximum travel distance or time does not
depict relative closeness. However, one can extend the concept by depicting the
aggregate accessibility for a series of cut-off distance values. Such a plot of total
number of opportunities as a function of sk is called a location profile. Gertman and
Ritsema van Eck (1995) and de Jong and Ritsema van Eck (1996) developed a GIS
application to compute location profiles for selected areas. Ingram (1971) defined
relative accessibility as the degree to which two places are connected and integral
accessibility as the degree of interconnection of one place to all other places. Using
distance as a surrogate for relative accessibility, Ingram defined this mathematically
as

For this measure, the larger the value, the less accessible activity k is to location i. If
the above equation were divided by the sum P
Ojk, then access would be
j [ Mik

measured as the average distance to a given opportunity type k.

A more common way of describing integral accessibility is related to the trip
generation concept and represented by the classic gravity model. Hansen (1959) was
the first to propose discounting activities using a gravity-based model:

Aik~ X

dijOjk

j [ Mik

Aik~ X

d

{b
ij Ojk

j [ Mik

where b is an empirical constant representing the inhibiting effects of distance or
time in making a trip. Numerous modifications to the model have been proposed,
whereby each activity is discounted by some function of distance (Wachs and
Kumagai 1973, Hanson and Schwab 1987, Casas 2003). A mathematical
formalization of gravity-like measures has also been proposed by Weibull (1976).
Shen (1998) has made a further refinement of the gravity model by taking into
account the demand side in modelling the competition between job seekers who are
attracted to the same employment centre. This modified gravity model has been
used by a number of researchers to measure job accessibility for low-income
workers (Kawabata and Shen 2006), to evaluate access to local parks (Omer 2006)
and to evaluate the accessibility impact of a proposed new rapid transit line (Liu
and Zhu 2004). In terms of model specification, Lee and Goulias (1997) have
presented an interesting approach to calibrate the parameters of a gravity model
using data from a travel survey and evaluated the importance of accessibility in
determining home-based shopping trip frequency. Thompson (1998), as another
example, estimated each component of the gravity model, i.e. attraction, friction as
well as the demand for transit based on a range of socioeconomic variables at the
census tract level.

The fourth category of accessibility measurement is based on the notion of space–
time geography (Ha¨ gerstrand 1970). This approach is based on the recognition that
a person’s movement over space and the choice of activities is dependent on one’s
mobility and limited by one’s time budget. Miller (1991), Miller and Wu (2000) and
Kwan and Hong (1998) have derived space–time accessibility measures by using
network distance/time derived from GIS network data.

Kwan (1998) compared space–time accessibility measures and integral accessibility
measures (gravity and cumulative opportunity type) and showed that space–time

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 288

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

accessibility measures are statistically distinct from integral accessibility measures
while integral accessibility measures are similar within its group. Kim and Kwan
(2003) presented a space–time accessibility model that accounted for facility
operating hours and transport network properties such as one-way streets and turn
restrictions. Accessibility was calculated as the sum of accessible opportunities
weighted by available service time. Kwan (1999) has also evaluated differential
access by gender due to factors other than distance friction (e.g. time constraints).
For a further overview of the space–time accessibility literature, the reader is
referred to Kwan et al. (2003).

The fifth category of accessibility metrics involves the use of utility theory. Such
metrics are based on viewing transport users as consumers and alternatives of travel
as the choice set. The consumer is assumed to be rational and chooses the alternative
with the maximum utility, which is dependent on the characteristics of the user,
attributes of the transport options such as travel time, monetary cost and comfort,
and the properties of the activity site. Koenig (1980) defined utility of an individual t
for visiting activity site j from an origin i as

U t
ij

~V t{Ct
ij

where Vt is the gross random utility for visiting the activity site and Ct
is the
ij
generalized travel cost. Assuming non-random generalized travel cost and using
logit-like models, Koenig showed that the maximum utility on the average is
Ui5logAi, where Ai is a gravity-type accessibility measure with exponential distance
decay. Generally speaking, all approaches could be viewed from a utility theory
perspective when accessibility is treated as a proxy of the potential for spatial
interaction. The previous categories of accessibility metrics emphasize the influence
of distance, time or space–time conditions on travel. Utility-based methods,
however, typically consider a wider range of variables. For example, Rastogi and
Rao (2002, 2003) developed an accessibility index to measure access to transit
stations in India using a logit-based utility model. They considered random
generalized travel costs and estimated them using socioeconomic variables such as
household income and mode availability (e.g. walk, bicycle and bus) and other
variables such as distance to transit stations and environmental impacts of each
mode. They also collected modal split data as well as stated preference for modal
shift under hypothetical policy changes. Based on these data, they were able to
derive an accessibility index reflecting the perceived utility of reaching the transit
stations as a function of the input variables.

The final category of accessibility measures, relative accessibility, is based on
comparing access between modes or types of users (Church and Marston 2002). If a
consumer has a choice between using a personal vehicle and using public transit in
travelling to a destination, the choice is often made as a function of cost, time,
convenience and safety. When parking costs are high and transit times are
competitive to the time needed to drive a personal vehicle, many will choose to use
transit. That is, the choice to use transit for many people is based on the relative
value of transit as compared to another mode. Thus, it makes sense to calculate
transit accessibility in a form that considers cost or time relative to other modes. A
classic example of such a measure is the travel time ratio used in constructing
diversion curves for modal split (see for example, Sheppard 1995).
Each of the six types of access metrics can provide useful
system. For

designing, analyzing, and managing a transit

information in
the

example,

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

289

Transportation Research Board report on Bus Routing and Coverage (Pratt and
Evans 2004) lists walk time and transfer times as having the highest relative
importance in terms of transit travel time components. There is also a distance limit
beyond which most people will not walk to a bus stop. Thus, physical access to a
system is an important metric for assessing transit system performance. In fact,
virtually all of the types of metrics discussed above have been used in analyzing
transit services. It also makes a great deal of sense to make transit system
measurements within a GIS, as this allows for better demographic and geographic
analysis. Because of this, GIS has been used in a number of instances to analyze
transit access and service since the late 1990s. There are four good examples which
should be mentioned here. The work of Liu and Zhu (2004) is a good example of this
trend. They developed a GIS application tool called the Accessibility Analyst for
transit analysis which was designed to measure system accessibility, system
facilitated access, integral accessibility, system utility and time-constrained access
but not relative accessibility. O’Sullivan et al. (2000) also provides a very good
example of integrating a shortest travel time algorithm with geographic data on bus
and rail to determine transit facilitated access to a downtown area. Their application
presented travel time data in terms of time isochrones, representing the time it takes
to travel to the city centre. Gan et al. (2005) have also developed a special GIS
application to analyze transit systems in Florida. This system is designed to identify
those areas that have physical access to transit services, calculate the proportion of
people who have such services, as well as identify whether any demographic strata is
not well served. Finally, Peng (1997) devised a GIS-based system to give route
planning advice to system users. Even though the past research is quite substantial,
there still exist shortcomings, especially in measuring system facilitated access.
In order to analyze many of the metrics, besides physical accessibility,

it is
necessary to estimate the time it takes to make a trip using transit. Many projects
involving GIS to estimate access use distance as a proxy for access time or use
distance divided by average travel speed (Ritsema van Eck and de Jong 1999, Liu
and Zhu 2004). This is not surprising as many of the metrics were originally specified
in distance rather than time. The reason why this is often done is that many GIS
applications provide a shortest distance algorithm that can be applied to find
shortest network distances without needing to develop specialized codes or requiring
speed or velocity data. Unfortunately, transit times can vary considerably over a
network depending upon schedules, transfer times, etc., so using network distance as
a proxy for time may introduce considerable error. There are notable exceptions
from ignoring time altogether. For example, Liu and Zhu (2004) use a shortest path
algorithm to generate the length of the shortest path from an origin point to a
destination. This path length is comprised of three elements: the travel distance to
the network, the travel distance along the network and the travel distance from the
network to the destination. Distances are converted to travel time by dividing each
distance component by an average travel speed for that component. This approach
does not explicitly handle waiting times at stops, transfer times between bus routes
or varying headway times along routes depending on time of day, etc. To do so
would require integrating timetable information on the network and handling
transfers explicitly. O’Sullivan et al. (2000) recognized this problem and used
timetables explicitly in their work. They solved a series of shortest paths, which
involved the walking time to bus or rail stations, estimated route times, possible
transfer times, and then the final walk time to the destination. For their defined

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 290

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

network, they found shortest travel times, involving either bus or rail or both in
travelling to the downtown area. Their application then presented travel time results
as a set of isochrones representing the time to get to the city centre. Unfortunately,
they did simplify the task of finding the quickest routes. For example, they took the
time taken for an entire route from the bus schedule and divided it by the length of
the route to derive a route speed. Then the time taken along a portion of a route was
calculated as the distance for that part of the route divided by the average speed of
the whole route. Note that this is an accurate method only when a bus travels at a
constant speed throughout an entire route, which is often not the case. Another issue
of possible error is that the waiting time in making a transfer was assumed to be
equal to one half of the headway time associated with the next boarded route. Such
simplifications help to ease the burden of making an application but may
underestimate the time needed to make a trip. This type of model also neglects
the time of day a trip may be made or the day in which a trip is made.

The simplifications used in previous applications of GIS and accessibility analysis
are unacceptable if such a system is to be used as a route guidance tool. Peng (1997)
discusses how a GIS-T application can be developed to provide route guidance.
Peng’s objective was to identify the optimal trip itinerary for a traveller leaving the
origin at a specific time and reaching the destination. To do this requires knowing
when the traveller plans to depart, using all route tables explicitly, etc. This is the
basis for most route guidance systems that are available today, including some web-
based applications made available by transit districts. However, it is interesting to
note that route guidance models have not been used as a basis for building an
accessibility analyst tool. The main reason for this is that many have thought that it
is not necessary to address the nuances of daily schedules when estimating access.
Unfortunately, such explicit detail is necessary in modelling facilitated access or
integral access in transit planning. Since many transit trips are made in order to get
to work or to school in a timely fashion, the times in which a route is available may
significantly impact use and utility. Thus, it makes sense to build an accessibility
analysis tool that is based on a traveller route guidance system approach. In fact,
this was one of the main objectives of this study. In the next section, we describe how
this was accomplished as well as how specific types of accessibility metrics can be
modelled.

3. Modelling transit services and access: the Transit Accessibility Planning Analyst

From the outset, it should be stated that many of the GIS-based tools that have been
developed to analyze accessibility address important issues. Many of the past efforts
have been concentrated at analyzing system access or average facilitated access. In
many circumstances, such tools address the problems of concern. However,
ridership decisions are based on the individual, and thus it is important to also
view transit services from the perspective of the potential rider.

Each potential user of a transit system makes a decision on whether to use transit
based on a number of criteria, including cost, access and service (Pratt and Evans
2004). We can often divide transit ridership into two groups: those who do not have
a choice (often called captive users) and those who do have a choice as to whether to
use the system or not (Beimborn et al. 2003). In either case, it is desirable to keep
levels of service as high as possible. This includes two main features, geographic
access to services or what is referred to as service area coverage and level of service
(travel time, safety, frequency, etc.). Designing a public transit system is often based

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

291

on striking a balance between system access (geographic coverage) and system
facilitated access (travel times). Both types of access may vary over time of day and
day of week depending on the design of a system (which is often budget
constrained). Without addressing time in an explicit manner, it is impossible to
model variations in service access as well as facilitated access.

Developing an explicit time model requires the use of transit schedules, a
geographic road network and geographic locations of route stops/stations at the
very least. Routing a specific trip on a transit system requires the use of a shortest
path algorithm. For our work, we employed the Dijkstra algorithm as this is known
to be one of the better performing algorithms in the literature (Zahn and Noon
1998; Zeng and Church in press). Given X,Y coordinates for both the origin and
destination of a trip as well as a departure time, the goal is to identify the most
efficient path (i.e. path of least time in using transit). First, an entry point to the
road network/street network is identified. This is the point on an arc that is closest
to the X,Y coordinate of the origin. The exit point from the network is defined as the
point on an arc that is closest to the destination point. It is assumed that the traveller
will walk directly to the network, enter at the network entry point and eventually
leave the network at the exit point. The shortest path algorithm is used to identify
the least elapsed time path from the network entry point to the network exit point,
assuming that the traveller has arrived at the network entry point at a time based on
the departure time plus the time to walk to the network entry point. Using the
transit system requires the traveller to walk to a transit stop from the entry point.
The traveller can then use any transit vehicle leaving that stop after the traveller
arrives at the stop. This means if it takes 7 minutes to walk to a transit stop after
leaving at 7 am and the transit vehicles depart every 10 minutes (7 am, 7:10 am, 7:20
am, etc.), then the traveller will need to wait 3 minutes for the next transit vehicle.
Thus, waiting times are inherently built into the route. It should be noted that the
closest transit stop may not be the timeliest, and the search for the least time path is
not constrained to go to the closest stop. That is, the transit stop choice is made
based on the one that yields the quickest feasible journey to the destination,
including the walk times to arrive at the appropriate transit stop. Transfer times
involve the elapsed time from when one arrives at a stop on one transit vehicle and
the departure time of the transit vehicle associated with the desired transfer. Thus,
the algorithm identifies the route with the shortest elapsed travel time possible when
leaving an origin at a given starting time. This process represents the first type of
shortest path algorithm that was developed for the Transit Accessibility Planning
Analyst. We will call this shortest path routine A.

The implementation of routine A is not entirely straightforward within the
context of integration with a GIS. The basic difficulty is that shortest path routines
are designed to solve for the optimal path along a network without time constraints
or timing issues. The fact is that a street segment that is served by a bus does not
have a continuous operating tram service but intermittent service. That is, arriving
at a link whose endpoint represents a bus stop does not guarantee immediate service.
To account for scheduled service, access times for a route segment are stored as link
attributes. Thus, the algorithm must check the arrival time at an arc to detect if a
‘wait’ for the next bus is needed. This approach is a bit novel. An alternative
approach would be to develop a network of transitions and times (called time-
expanded network) (Choi et al. 1988) and apply a shortest path routine to find the
path taking the least time. But this network itself contains a temporal dimension

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 292

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

that would be many times larger than the original network. Modifying the algorithm
instead and storing time attributes along links allows the original network in GIS to
be used rather than a temporally structured network of considerably higher
dimensionality. Further,
integrating bus times can be easily accomplished by
developing an automated process to add attributes to each link, based on a
published transit schedule.

The Dijkstra algorithm is designed to find the optimal path from a given origin to
all possible destination points. Thus, the procedure described above could be used to
calculate the time to travel from a point of origin, starting at a specific time, to all
possible destinations. This type of model is useful in analyzing the difficulty in
travelling from a major activity site, like an employment centre, to areas of a city or
region. This information can then be used to generate an isochrone-based map of
elapsed travel times in leaving the centre at a given time (say 5 pm) and arriving at
locations away from the centre. For example, suppose that an employer wants to
encourage employees to use transit. Employees could then use the map to identify
the approximate time it would take to get to their home using a combination of
transit and walking when leaving their job at 5 pm. This type of result could also be
useful
individual employees take
for setting flexible work schedules so that
advantage of the times when they are best served by transit.

TM

As an example of using routine A, we have developed a GIS-based application
using elements of ArcGIS
and the specialized shortest path algorithm described
above. Using geographic data for the Santa Barbara area of California and the
routing and timetables of
the Santa Barbara Metropolitan Transit District
(SBMTD), we generated a map depicting the time it would take to leave the
University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) campus,1 and arrive at virtually
any destination along the south coast of Santa Barbara County. Figure 1 depicts the
map that was generated when the specific departure time was set at 5 pm. The origin
for all trips (UCSB) is marked by a triangle on the map and thicker lines represent
routes of the current transit system. The value of each point on the map is the time

Figure 1. Travel time for leaving UCSB at 5 pm and traveling to each location on the map.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

293

that it takes to travel to this location by transit, and travel times are capped by 120
minutes assuming that longer trips are not practical for frequent users. Note that the
downtown area in the middle part of the map are rather well served by bus as there
exists an express bus connecting the downtown area to the university campus that
has a limited number of stops and makes most of the trip on two highway segments.
Also, note that there are many areas of the south coast region served by SBMTD
that cannot be reached in 45 minutes from the university using public transit, while
most if not all of the region can be driven to in less than 30 minutes.

The above shortest path routine addresses only part of determining transit
facilitated access times. The fact is that many users need to arrive at a given time and
therefore need to adjust their departure time in order to get to a destination at or
before that given fixed time. In analyzing transit facilitated access, it is necessary to
be able to calculate when a person must leave a given location so that they can arrive
at a destination by a desired arrival time. This type of analysis is becoming more
common in on-line transit route guidance systems for individual trip planning but
has not been developed for regional accessibility modelling and mapping. To do this
requires a different type of shortest path routine. This can be approached by
modifying the Dijkstra by starting at the destination. The objective for the routine is
to label the network backwards in terms of decreasing latest arrival time (LAT) until
the origin or starting location is reached, thereby identifying the path which can take
the smallest amount of elapsed time and reach the desired destination by the fixed
arrival time. For example, if the desired arrival time is 8 am and it takes 7 minutes to
walk from a nearby transit stop to the destination, then in retrospection the latest
time by which the user should arrive at this stop is 7:53 am. Therefore, this stop can
be labeled with a LAT of 7:53 am assuming it is the fastest to walk from this stop to
the destination. Again, if a transit vehicle arrives every 10 minutes (7:40 am, 7:50
am, etc), then the latest time the user could have got off the bus is 7:50 am.
Subtracting the transit time that it took the user to arrive at this stop, one can then
propagate the label for required arrival times backwards to the previous stop. A best
(latest) temporary label can be made permanent at each step as is in Dijkstra’s
algorithm and in Routine A, and the routine terminates when the origin of the trip is
permanently labeled. Therefore, transfers and wait times are handled in a manner
similar to routine A, except they represent delays based in terms of pushing back the
LAT. This second shortest path algorithm is called routine B.

Routine B can be used to develop another version of a travel time isochrone-based
map. Here, points along an isochrone would represent locations that share the same
level of closeness to the destination, in terms of the time that one would need to
leave a given point of origin in order to arrive at the destination at a desired time.
Such a map would be useful in that it would allow employers as well as transit
planners to identify those areas that the transit service provides good access for
employees in order to get to work at a specific time. Figure 2 depicts a map of
accessibility to the university based on arriving at 8 am2. Travel times represent the
amount of time before 8 am an individual would have to leave an origin, walk to a
transit stop and take the most efficient trip to the university and arrive by 8 am.
Note that there is also a large area of the south coast region that would require a trip
of 45 minutes or longer in order to travel to the campus and arrive at or before 8 am.
It can also be noted that travel times in Figure 2 are different from those of Figure 1
in certain areas as the direction of the trip as well as the transfer and waiting times,
etc. are different.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 294

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

Figure 2. Travel time for leaving each location and arriving at UCSB no later than 8 am.

Using ‘elapsed-time’ maps generated by routine A and ‘latest-departure’ time
maps generated by routine B, one can begin to analyze the ability of a transit service
in providing access in travelling to a given destination and then returning to the
starting location, in terms of both trips (going to and arriving from the desired
location) for specific time periods (e.g. arrive by 8 am and leave at 5 pm). For
example, we define accessibility to destination j from an origin point i as follows:

tij arrivaltime

ð

Þztji departuretime

ð

Þ

¯Aij~

2

where

tij(?)5the travel time from i to j for a desired arrival time at j using transit
tji(?)5the travel time form j to i with specified departure time at j using transit
A¯ ij5the average time in travelling to a given destination j by a given arrival time
in the first trip and returning at a given departure time in a second trip.

This type of accessibility measure is an extended form of that used in O’Sullivan et
al. (2000) in that it takes into account travel time variances associated with both
direction of travel and times of day (within the context of the time that one needs to
arrive by and is available for departure at). For a large employer or business park, a
map based on this metric depicts the attractiveness of using public transit in terms of
a set time to arrive at work and a set time to leave work. If one were to consider
flexible arrival and departure times, then one may want to consider what the best
average trip time would be over a number of possible arrival and departure times.
For instance, let us say that we identify several alternative travel time windows, e.g.
in by 8 am and leave at 5 pm, in by 7:30 am and leave at 4:30 pm, in by 8:30 am and
leave at 5:30 pm, etc. Then we can identify for each home location which time
window yields the lowest average travel time in going to and from work. This can be

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

295

expressed as follows:

where

(cid:1)

Min
r

tij WAr

ð

Þztji WDr
ð

Þ

(cid:2)

A’ij~

2

r5an index representing a given pair of departure and arrival times
WAr5the arrival time associated with the rth pair of arrival and departure
times
WDr5the departure time associated with the rth pair of arrival and departure

A9ij5the best combined average trip time over a number of possible arrival and

times

departure time windows.

Figure 3 depicts a map of the best average travel times associated with the
University as the destination, involving three possible pairs of arrival and departure
times [(7:30 am, 4:30 pm), (8:00 am, 5:00 pm), and (8:30 am, 5:30 pm)] at each origin
location on the map. Compared with Figure 1 and 2, Figure 3 shows a larger area
one can reach within a fixed amount of time indicating that flexible time windows
offer shorter travel times for transit users. Thus, it is important to develop maps
using sets of departure and arrival times, so that employees may identify those times
that transit may best serve them and attempt to negotiate flexible work hours. It can
also be noted that in major areas of the region, travel from home to the university
still cannot be made using transit in a timely manner.

The types of accessibility maps given in Figures 1–3 represent an improvement
over past work. They are sensitive to both travel direction and time of day in
addition to the fact that timetables are used explicitly rather than assuming an

Figure 3. Best average round-trip time for possible travel time windows: 7:30–4:30, 8–5 and
8:30–5:30.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 296

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

average speed and assuming that wait times and transfer times are equal to half of
the average headway time.

In large urban areas, headway times can be quite small and average 3 to 5
minutes, but in suburban communities headways might be as high as an hour. Given
this range of possible times, it is necessary to ensure that this assumption is not made
unless all headway times are always small. Eliminating such errors in estimating
travel times is an important need in transit planning and analysis. There is also the
need to understand the role of transit in supporting a wide variety of trips. For
example, for the Santa Barbara area, we developed a list of eight major areas of the
city, classified in terms of specific needs. This list included the Camino Real Market
Place (a big box retail centre, Point 8 in Figure 4), Calle Real Market centre (a
popular suburban strip retail centre, Point 6), La Cumbre Plaza (a shopping mall
with major tenants, Point 3), the University (a major employment centre, Point 1),
Castilion drive (a central location for a number of high-tech companies, Point 5),
Cottage Hospital (a major centre for medical services, Point 7), the Santa Barbara
courthouse (a point which represents the location of a number of public services as
well as the courts themselves, Point 4), and the transit centre of SBMTD (a point
close to a variety of stores, restaurants, etc., Point 2). We can develop a composite
map of access by expanding the definition given above as

tij Xð

Þztji Yð

Þ

P
j [ M

A’’i~

2n

where

X,Y5a pair of arrival and departure times
A0i5the composite average accessibility in travelling to and from a variety of

popular locations

n5the number of destinations considered
M5the set of destinations j that are considered in the analysis.

Figure 4. Composite access time for eight destinations in the south coast of Santa Barbara.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

297

Given arrival and departure times (X,Y), this calculation would represent the
average time needed in travelling and returning from each of these destinations.
The composite average travel time is representative of the average time to travel
to popular destinations. This reflects the ability of the transit service in supplying
many possible trip purposes as well as an average geographic access to a number
of areas of the Santa Barbara area. Figure 4 gives a map of the average travel
time (to and from) for the eight destinations for any point in the south coast
region. Here, it can be seen that many of areas of the region are more than 45
minutes travel time away. Since the driving times to many of these locations in a
personal automobile are less than 15 minutes, it can be seen that transit may
provide a reasonable level of service coverage but not necessarily good levels of
system facilitated access.

Back of the envelope comparisons of service (transit vs. auto) may be useful
but should not necessarily be relied upon in making good estimates of the level of
transit service. What is more helpful is to compare accessibility values. That is, to
calculate accessibility values for transit and personal automobile and then
compare the two. This suggests the use of a relative access measure (the last
category of accessibility measures that were defined in the previous section of this
article). Relative accessibility measures are not commonly used in transit
they may form an important component of
accessibility analysis; however,
modelling mode choice for travellers. In previous work, Church and Marston
(2002) have demonstrated the value of measuring access on a relative basis where
they focused on people with disabilities. It seems somewhat obvious that transit
service times relative to other forms of travel will in part dictate whether non-
captive riders will choose to use transit. Past work (Barber 1995) has shown that
the faster transit is relative to personal vehicles, the higher the percentage of
people choosing to use transit. Thus, accessibility analysis should involve making
relative measurements.

In a recent survey of those travelling to and from the university using a personal
car, we obtained estimates of their commuting times. Although we did not ask for a
specific household address (to keep their identity secret), we did ask that they give
their addresses with the number rounded off to the nearest 100. Thus, we had
approximate locations for each of the commuters using their car along with the time
that it took to make the trip. The survey also entailed collecting detailed information
in terms of the time of day for each day of the week that the commuting trip was
made. In order to keep the survey to a manageable size, we asked for their average
commute time. We geocoded virtually all addresses from the survey and created a
map of self-reported commute times for those people who used their automobile.
From this map of car driving times, we were able to compute a relative accessibility
map of bus versus automobile by dividing estimated transit commuting times by
auto travel times. The map of relative travel time ratios is given in Figure 5 for areas
that the survey covers. Note that in most areas, automobile travel is quite fast in
comparison to using transit. In fact, there are many areas in which the time to ride
transit is four times or longer than what it would take to drive a personal
automobile. This means that transit facilitated access is too slow to be a meaningful
alternative for these areas. However, in a densely populated student residential area
two miles to the west of the University which is served by several transit routes and
in a small area near MTD transit centre in downtown Santa Barbara, the transit to
automobile travel time ratio is actually below 1.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 298

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

Figure 5. Ratio of bus and car travel times.

4. A framework for using accessibility maps in transit planning

Mapping accessibility based on time of day and trip destination allows one to create
a virtual view of changing accessibility over the day. But this can be viewed as a
major drawback as well, as one may be overwhelmed by a wide variety of maps and
possible destinations. The real value is in how this information once generated can
be used to estimate the impacts on changing transit services. Transit systems in the
past have adjusted routes and times sparingly as there is a major concern for
disrupting current users. The main objective of many transit managers is to protect
the current user as they are the ones who use and benefit from the system. This
means that changes are often made on an incremental basis, so as to keep the
majority of the system operating without change, thereby disrupting as few of the
existing users as possible. In times of increasing costs and flat revenues, transit
officials have to either increase fares or cut back on service. Striking an optimal
balance on adjusting fares and planning route changes can be a difficult task to say
the least. In times of revenue growth, system planners often add new routes or
increase frequency of service along routes. Increasing frequency of service along a
route will not adversely impact existing ridership, and adding new routes can attract
more riders or increase service coverage. But these changes can be incremental as
well in that they often do not represent major changes in system operations. For
example, in the SBMTD, recent changes have involved the addition of a morning
and afternoon express commuter bus for an area that is about 40 miles away
(representing adding service coverage for journey to work trips to core employment
areas on the Santa Barbara south coast) and small changes to existing routes. Such
tactics are typical of system planners.

The greatest concern is the problem of tracking levels of service for trip making
across the service area. For all but a simple system of a few routes, this task can get
somewhat complicated to do. It is difficult to track service levels for a large number
of trip origin and destination pairs over a number of time periods throughout the
day without the aid of a computerized model. The accessibility maps that were

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

299

described in the previous section provide a basis for performing such analyses, as
well as the basis for mapping those areas that are affected, either negatively or
positively, by changing routes and service times and frequencies. To explain this in
some detail, consider the following notation:

tk
ij5the travel time between origin i and destination j at time of day k with

existing service system
t’k
ij5the travel time between origin i and destination j at time of day k associated
with a modified service system plan.

We can define the changes in service time for a given origin destination pair (i, j) at
time of day k as

Thus, total cumulative system change (CSC) can be calculated as

hk
ij

~t’k
ij

{tk
ij

CSC~ X

X

hk
ij

i,jð

Þ [ OD

k

where OD is the set of origin and destination pairs (i, j) that are used in service
system planning.

The CSC represents the total sum of net changes in service times throughout the
service region. If the sum is negative, then system changes have resulted in overall
system improvement. If the sum is positive, then the net sum of net changes reflects
that the system performance is degraded. It may also be important to relate the net
changes in time based on a percentage change of current service times. This can be
calculated as follows:

RCC~

P

i,jð

Þ [ OD
P

i,jð

Þ [ OD

hk
ij

tk
ij

P
k
P
k

Relative cumulative change (RCC) is a fraction that represents change as a ratio of
the CSC to times associated with existing system operations. If we multiply the
value, RCC, by 100 we can then express system changes as a percentage of existing
system times. Negative RCC values represent improvement, and positive RCC
values represent deteriorating levels of service.

To reflect the impact on users, it may be appropriate to weigh the travel between a
given (i, j) pair by the demand for travel along that route in the following manner:

WCC~ X

X

qijhk
ij

i,jð

Þ [ OD

k

where qij the travel demand between origin i and destination j. This now reflects a
weighted cumulative change (WCC) on schedule and routing changes based on
travel demands. Although we have not defined demand by time of day, that can be
done as well in the above equation. Unfortunately, demand data for transit travel
between specific origins and destinations is somewhat difficult to obtain and many
systems lack origin–destination travel demand by time of day. Using the path
routines A and B, one can generate the travel times necessary to calculate CSC,
RCC and WCC values. These three measures can help a system planner as well as a
transit board of directors in understanding the total and/or relative impact of any

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 300

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

proposed system changes. It may also be helpful to calculate a relative weighted
cumulative change value (RWCC) which can be calculated in a manner that is
analogous to that of calculating RCC.

We can also measure the impact on a specific area in terms of service changes.

This can be calculated as

CNCi~ X

X

i,jð

Þ [ OD

k

hk
ij

z X
j,ið

Þ [ OD

X

hk
ji

k

where CNCi is the cumulative net change in travelling to and from location i. Such
changes may net out positive or negative. If we calculate this value for all areas i in
the region, we can then map these cumulative values to show which areas will have
service improvements, which areas will experience poorer service, as well as which
areas will experience no net change in service. Again the above formula can be
weighted to reflect travel demand between a given origin and destination, so that it
reflects existing travel patterns.

Suppose that a standard is set by a transit board that states that any given trip
should not be lengthened by more than X minutes without specific board approval
and discussion. This type of standard can be easily supported by identifying those
trips (i, j), where

t’k
ij

{tk

ij§X

Any trip between a given origin i and destination j that satisfies the above inequality
takes more than X minutes longer (during time period k) to make than it did before
making changes to the system. We can then identify areas that are origins or
destinations where trip times are lengthened beyond the standard. These areas can
then be mapped so that transit planners can focus on those areas to mitigate impacts
by making further changes to the system or by acknowledging that these areas have
the greatest impacts when making the planned system changes. Easily calculating
such information and mapping, it can be useful in planning sessions, board meetings
and public presentations.

The basic idea is that the shortest path routines, integrated with a GIS database of
roads, transit routes and route time tables can be used to provide high-quality
accessibility analyses beyond what has been accomplished to date. The framework
discussed here can be used to map system facilitated access, calculate system impact
metrics such as cumulative net change and WCC, as well as map those areas that
experience impacts beyond some specified threshold.

5. Summary and conclusions

The subject of this article deals with the process of accessibility mapping within the
context of transit services. Many researchers have struggled with the task of defining
and measuring accessibility. Our short review classified past work into six main
categories. These were (1) system access, (2) system facilitated access, (3) integral
access, (4) time-constrained access, (5) access based on utility and value, and (6)
relative access. We have shown that although there are numerous papers that deal
with measuring access, many are concentrated on the physical access of a system
(e.g. being close to a bus stop or transit station) and not on the time in which it takes
to travel between a desired origin and a destination. Those who have modelled
system travel times have usually made simplifying assumptions in a variety of

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

301

categories, e.g. transfer and waiting times, average travel speed to estimate times
along routes or ignored scheduled arrival or departure times altogether. Most of the
past work involving GIS has been devoted to the mapping access to an urban core,
but not by time of day or by direction of trip, or with detailed schedule information.
Although these details may not be necessary from a macro-level perspective, they
can be particularly useful for transit users and transit planners. Route planners for
transit users are now available on the Internet to help support trip planning with the
type of detail necessary for the transit user. Although computer-based route
planners have been developed with or integrated into GIS-based applications, they
have not typically been used beyond identifying single routes. In this article, we
proposed a system for accessibility modelling that uses a detailed route planning-
based approach and presented results generated for an analysis of the services
provided by the SBMTD. This approach is based on a novel method in integrating
bus service times as arc attributes in a GIS. The results show that in many areas,
service levels are low enough that users would not be encouraged to abandon their
private vehicles, as routes take 2–5 times longer to accomplish using transit as
compared to the personal car. Accessibility maps do show several areas in which
competitive routes do exist (i.e. transit service times being competitive to trip times
made by a personal car) for certain times of the day. We also describe how nuances
of trip times by time of day can be used to help employers focus on developing
flexible hour work schedules for their employees. Finally, we define a family of
metrics for transit system performance (e.g. cumulative net change) that can be used
to model the impact of proposed changes in routes and schedules. This forms the
basis of a modelling framework, which can aid transit planners and directors in
planning system improvements and evaluating changes.

Travel accessibility analysis for public transit has focused on average service-
provided access. However, to track the impacts of system changes on users, it is
important to track changes in access over different times of the day. Kwan (1999)
and others have discussed the notion that people’s activities are limited by time
space constraints. The framework described above can be expanded to model
accessibility within time constraints, especially with respect to the ability to make
several trips and return within a given time frame (Arentze et al. 1994). Another
area of needed research involves the development of GIS-based tools that can be
used to redefine existing routes, search for possible productive new routes, or fine
tune time tables and departure times so that service levels can be improved. The
overall objective would be to identify those changes that yield the best gains in
efficiency with the least amount of expended cost or identify those changes which
produce a desired level of savings without negatively impacting users beyond a
standard.

Notes
1. The reason why we focus on the university in our examples is that the university is one of
the largest employers in the county. It also has an enrolment in excess of 20,000 students.
Although some of the students live relatively close to campus, many students and
employees tend to live in surrounding areas concentrated along those routes that provide
relatively good transit access (e.g. by the downtown express bus).

2. In an informal presentation of these maps to the SBMTD board of directors, directors
expressed some surprise that service to the campus was not better, leading one to comment
that the maps depicted valuable information.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 302

T.L. Lei and R.L. Church

References
ARENTZE, T.A., BORGERS, A.W.J. and TIMMERMANS, H.J.P., 1994, Multistop-based
measurements of accessibility in a GIS environment. International Journal of
Geographical Systems, 8, pp. 343–356.

AULTMAN-HALL, L., ROORDA, M. and BAETZ, B.W., 1997, Using GIS for evaluation of
neighborhood pedestrian accessibility. Journal of Urban Planning and Development,
123(1), pp. 10–17.

AZAR, K.T., FERREIRA, J.J.R. and WIGGINS, L., 1994, Using GIS tools to improve transit
ridership on routes serving large employment centers – the Boston south end medical
area case-study. Computers Environment and Urban Systems, 18(3), pp. 205–231.

BARBER, G., 1995, Aggregate characteristics of urban travel. In S. Hanson (Ed.), The

geography of urban transportation (New York: The Guilford Press), pp. 240–265.

BEIMBORN, E.A., GREENWALD, M.J. and JIN, X., 2003, Accessibility, connectivity, and
captivity: impacts on transit choice. Transportation Research record. 1835, 1–9, paper
number 03-2336.

CASAS, I., 2003, Evaluating the importance of accessibility to congestion response using a

GIS-based travel simulator. Journal of Geographical Systems, 5(1), pp. 109–127.

CHOI, W., HMACHER, H.W. and TUFEKCI, S., 1988, Modeling of building evacuation
problems by network flows with side constraints. European Journal of Operations
Research, 35, pp. 98–110.

CHURCH, R.L. and MARSTON, J.R., 2002, Measuring accessibility for people with a disability.

Geographical Analysis, 35, pp. 8–96.

DALVI, M.Q., 1978, Behavioural modelling accessibility, mobility and need: concepts and
measurement. In D.A. Hensher and P.R. Stopher (Eds), Behavioural travel modelling
(London: Croom Helm), pp. 639–653.

DE JONG, T. and RITSEMA VAN ECK, J., 1996, Location profile-based measures as an
improvement on accessibility modelling in GIS. Computers. Environment. and Urban
Systems, 20, pp. 181–190.

GAN, A., LIU, K. and UBAKA, I., 2005, Florida Transit Geographic Information System
(FTGIS). GIS-in-Transit Conference, Centre for Urban Transportation Research.
Tampa, FL.

GENT, C. and SYMONDS, G., 2004, Advances in public transport accessibility assessments
for development control – a proposed methodology. Available from: http://www.
capitasymonds.co.uk/uploaded_files/documents/56_1083_DIJPTRCpaper.pdf
[Accessed 11 October 2008].

GERTMAN, S.C.M. and RITSEMA VAN ECK, J.R., 1995, GIS models of accessibility potential:
an application. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 9, pp.
67–80.

GOULD, P.R., 1969, Spatial diffusion. Resource paper no. 4, Commission on College

Geography, Association of American Geographers, Washington, DC.

HA¨ GERSTRAND, T., 1970, What about people in regional science? Papers of the Regional

Science Association, 24, pp. 7–21.

HANDY, S. and NIEMEIER, D.A., 1997, Measuring accessibility, an exploration of issues and

alternatives. Environment and Planning A, 29, pp. 1175–1194.

HANSEN, W.G., 1959, How accessibility shapes land use. Journal of the American Institute of

HANSON, S. and SCHWAB, M., 1987, Accessibility and intraurban travel. Environment and

Planners, 25, pp. 73–76.

Planning A, 19(6), pp. 735–748.

HILLMAN, R. and POOL, G., 1997, GIS-based innovations for modelling public transport

accessibility. Traffic Engineering and Control, 38(10), pp. 554–556.

INGRAM, D.R., 1971, The concept of accessibility, a search for an operational form. Regional

Studies, 5, pp. 101–117.

KAWABATA, M., 2003, Job access and employment among low-skilled autoless workers in US

metropolitan areas. Environment and Planning A, 35, pp. 1651–1668.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 Mapping transit-based access

303

KAWABATA, M. and SHEN, Q., 2006, Job accessibility as an indicator of auto-oriented urban
structure: a comparison of Boston and Los Angeles with Tokyo. Environment and
Planning B: Planning and Design, 33(1), pp. 115–130.

KIM, H.M. and KWAN, M.P., 2003, Space-time accessibility measures: a geocomputational
algorithm with a focus on the feasible opportunity set and possible activity duration.
Journal of Geographical Systems, 5(1), pp. 71–91.

KOENIG, J.G., 1980, Indicators of urban accessibility: theory and application. Transportation,

9(2), pp. 145–172.

KWAN, M.P., 1998, Space-time and integrated measures of individual accessibility, a
comprehensive analysis using a point-based framework. Geographical Analysis, 30,
pp. 191–216.

KWAN, M.P., 1999, Gender and individual access to urban opportunities: a study using space-

time measures. The Professional Geographer, 51(2), pp. 211–227.

KWAN, M.P. and HONG, X.D., 1998, Network-based constraints-oriented choice set

formation using GIS. Geographical Systems, 5(1), pp. 139–162.

KWAN, M.P., et al., 2003, Recent advances in accessibility research: representation,
methodology, an applications. Journal Geographical Systems, 5, pp. 129–138.
LEE, M. and GOULIAS, K., 1997, Accessibility indicators for transportation planning using GIS.
Paper presented at the 76th Annual Transportation Research Board Meeting,
Washington, DC.

LIU, S. and ZHU, X., 2004, Accessibility analyst: an integrated GIS tool for accessibility
analysis in urban transportation planning, Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design, 31, pp. 105–124.

LOU, W. and WANG, F., 2003, Measures of spatial accessibility to health care in a GIS
environment: synthesis and a case study in the Chicago region, Environment and
Planning B: Planning and Design, 30, pp. 865–884.

MATISZIW, T.C., MURRAY, A.T. and KIM, C., 2006, Strategic route extension in transit

networks. European Journal of Operational Research, 171, pp. 661–673.

MILLER, H.J., 1991, Modelling accessibility using space-time prism concepts within
geographical information systems. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 5(3), pp. 287–301.

MILLER, H.J. and WU, Y.-H., 2000, GIS software for measuring space-time accessibility in

transportation planning and analysis. Geolnformatica, 4(2), pp. 141–159.

MORRIS, J.M., DUMBLE, P.L. and WIGAN, M.R., 1979, Accessibility indicators for transport

planning. Transportation Research Part A: General, 13(2), pp. 91–109.

MOSELEY, M.J., 1979, Rural accessibility – role of the motor car. Highway Engineer, 26(6), pp.

MURRAY, A.T., 2001, Strategic analysis of public transport coverage. Socio-Economic

Planning Sciences, 35, pp. 175–188.

MURRAY, A.T., et al., 1998, Public transportation access. Transportation Research D, 3, pp.

18–19.

319–328.

NYERGES, T., 1995, Geographic information system support for urban/regional transporta-
tion analysis. In S. Hanson (Ed.), The geography of urban transportation (New York:
The Guilford Press), pp. 240–265.

OMER, I., 2006, Evaluating accessibility using house-level data: a spatial equity perspective.

Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 30(3), pp. 254–274.

O’SULLIVAN, D., MORRISON, A. and SHEARER, J., 2000, Using desktop GIS for the
transport: an isochrones approach.

investigation of accessibility by public
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14, pp. 85–104.

PENG, Z.-R., 1997, A methodology for design of a GIS-based automatic transit traveller

information system. Computers, Environment, and Urban Systems, 21, pp. 359–372.

POLZIN, S.E., PENDYALA, R.M. and NAVARI, S., 2002, Development of time-of-day-based
transit accessibility analysis tool. Journal of Transportation Research Board, 1799, pp.
35–41.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 304

Mapping transit-based access

PRATT, R.H. and EVANS, J.E., 2004, Bus routing and coverage. TCRP report 95: traveler
to transportation system changes. Transportation Research Board,

response
Washington, DC.

RASTOGI, R. and RAO, K., 2002, Survey Design for Studying Transit Access Behavior in
Mumbai City, India. Journal of Transportation Engineering, 128(1), pp. 68–79.
RASTOGI, R. and RAO, K.V.K., 2003, Defining transit accessibility with environmental inputs.

Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 8(5), pp. 383–396.

RITSEMA VAN ECK, J.R. and DE JONG, T., 1999, Accessibility analysis and spatial competition
effects in the context of GIS-supported service location planning. Computers,
Environment, and Urban Systems, 23, pp. 75–89.

SHEN, Q., 1998, Location characteristics of inner-city neighborhoods and employment
accessibility of low-wage workers. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design,
25(3), pp. 345–365.

SHEPPARD, E., 1995, Modeling and predicting aggregate flows. In S. Hanson (Ed.), The

geography of urban transportation (New York: The Guilford Press), pp. 100–128.

TALEN, E. and ANSELIN, L., 1998, Assessing spatial equity, an evaluation of measures of

accessibility to public playgrounds. Environment and Planning A, 30, pp. 595–613.

THOMPSON, G.L., 1998, Identifying gainers and losers from transit service change: a method
applied to Sacramento. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 18, pp. 125–136.
WACHS, M. and KUMAGAI, T.G., 1973, Physical accessibility as a social indicator, Socio-

Economic Planning Sciences, 7, pp. 437–456.

WEIBULL, J.W., 1976, An axiomatic approach to the measurement of accessibility. Regional

Science and Urban Economics, 6(4), pp. 357–379.

WU, C. and MURRAY, A.T., 2005, Optimizing public transit quality and system access: the
multiple-route, maximal covering/shortest-path problem. Environment and Planning
B: Planning and Design, 32, pp. 163–178.

ZAHN, F.B. and NOON, C.E., 1998, Shortest path algorithms: an evaluation using real road

networks. Transportation Science, 32, pp. 65–73.

ZENG, W. and CHURCH, R.L., 2009, Finding shortest paths on real road networks: the case
for A*, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23(4), pp. 531–543.

Downloaded by [University of Memphis] at 07:47 09 June 2012 