This article was downloaded by: [Australian National University]
On: 13 January 2015, At: 19:30
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Cross‐agency coordination in the
shadow of hierarchy: ‘joining up’
government geospatial information
systems
K. T. Lance a , Y. Georgiadou a & A. K. Bregt b
a International Institute for Geo‐Information Science and Earth
Observation , PO Box 6, 7500 AA, Enschede, The Netherlands
b Centre for Geo‐Information , Wageningen University and
Research Centre , PO Box 47, 6700 AA, Wageningen, The
Netherlands
Published online: 04 Mar 2009.

To cite this article: K. T. Lance , Y. Georgiadou & A. K. Bregt (2009) Cross‐agency coordination in
the shadow of hierarchy: ‘joining up’ government geospatial information systems, International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23:2, 249-269, DOI: 10.1080/13658810801909615

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810801909615

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 23, No. 2, February 2009, 249–269

Research Article

Cross-agency coordination in the shadow of hierarchy: ‘joining up’
government geospatial information systems

K. T. LANCE*{, Y. GEORGIADOU{ and A. K. BREGT{
{International Institute for Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation, PO Box 6,
7500 AA, Enschede, The Netherlands
{Centre for Geo-Information, Wageningen University and Research Centre, PO Box 47,
6700 AA, Wageningen, The Netherlands

(Received 3 October 2007; in final form 21 December 2007 )

Government agencies striving to make geospatial information systems inter-
operable and cost-effective often appear to function as a self-regulating network
shaped only by internal trust and reciprocity. However, recent public manage-
ment research suggests that external steering of a network, exercised by
authoritative bodies through hierarchical means, may invigorate cross-agency
coordination. The two case studies of federal geospatial coordination in Canada
and the USA confirm this emerging theory of network–hierarchy dynamics. In
these countries, the central budget agency (CBA) is influencing resource flows
and accountabilities within a federal geospatial network of government agencies,
which in turn affects how these agencies deliver ‘joined up’ services. The CBA
relies upon three types of tools: the shaping of network governing structures,
promotion of uptake of new management information systems, and the use of
evaluation (scrutiny) to solidify accountabilities of the network. Since these tools
cast a shadow of hierarchy upon the network, they may be viewed as counter to
the voluntary ethos of networks. However, the case studies suggest that the
CBA’s actions appear to confer legitimacy to the network—resulting in a seeming
contradiction—greater central control, more vigorous, distributed geospatial
coordination.

Keywords: Cross-agency coordination; SDI implementation; Joined-up
government; Metagovernance

1.

Introduction

Government agencies§ are increasingly obliged to ‘join up’,# to establish common
web portals (one-stop shops) and common databases, making their information
systems accessible, interoperable, and cost-effective. However, the ‘joining up’ of
geospatial
‘practical and
operational implementation appears unruly’ (de Man 2006, p. 331), and ‘institu-
tional inertia’ has overridden most well-intentioned efforts (Craig 1995).

information systems has been deeply problematic;

*Corresponding author. Email: lance@itc.nl

§ In this paper, the term ‘agency’ refers to an administrative organization of a government, such as ministry, department,
bureau, or authority.
# The expression ‘joined up government’
is interchangeable with terms such as whole-of-government, horizontal
management, managing for shared outcomes, and collaborative public management, which are used by different
countries for the same concept.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2009 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810801909615

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 250

K.T. Lance et al.

The ‘joining up’ of geospatial information systems can be viewed as synonymous
with spatial data infrastructure (SDI). SDI encompasses the standards and
information technologies, decision-making processes, human and financial manage-
ment systems, and social structures that govern the acquisition, processing,
distribution, use, and maintenance of geospatial information. SDI extends beyond
government information systems, but for the purpose of this paper, we are focusing
on government efforts, and in particular central (national or federal government)
efforts. Central government is a primary provider of geographic information and
exerts a profound influence on national SDI development (Rhind 1996, Masser
1999). One of the tenets of SDI discourse is that geospatial information should not
be managed centrally; rather, each producer or custodian agency should manage its
own data, while a variety of online tools and services should permit users to access
and seamlessly integrate government information sources. Agencies should also
coordinate geospatial information and service investments, delivery, and main-
tenance.

To achieve SDI coordination, a commonly held view is that ‘individual agencies
become a component of a new network organization’ (van Loenen 2006, p. 44), one
that is ‘optimally described as a web’ (Harvey 2001, p. 36). Interdependent agencies
retain their autonomy, but they consciously agree to operate as a collective
information needs, develop demand-
government enterprise to address societal
driven services, and acquire the resources necessary to do so. This network
organization, either officially recognized or de facto,
is considered a key SDI
building block and an indicator for evaluating SDI (Vandenbrouke 2005). When
SDI is at its most mature stage, the network is said to consist of ‘equal players, with
a clear vision and operating proactively’ (van Loenen 2006, p. 51). The implication is
that the network is self-organizing or self-regulating (Grus et al. 2006), that parties
in the network spontaneously interact, communicate, and collaborate to create new
solutions.

This network vision for SDI is consistent with the stream of public management
literature that draws upon network theory and focuses on governance (Kickert et al.
1997, Kooiman 2000, Keast et al. 2004). The literature emphasizes that network
structures, largely built on interaction among peers and fortified by increasing trust
over time, are flexible and inclusive. Network structures are distinguished from
hierarchical structures in that unilateral power and authority are not present or
exercised (Kickert et al. 1997, Keast et al. 2004, Kooiman 2000). Increasingly,
networks are viewed as a more effective form of coordination—more effective than
traditional hierarchy, for which government is known. The study of networks has
‘exploded’ in recent years; networks are discussed as new and positive, revealing a
veritable ‘network euphoria’ (Kenis and Provan 2006, p. 2).

The network literature commonly contrasts networks and hierarchies, almost in a
black and white way (i.e. with networks seen as good, and hierarchy as bad). A more
nuanced view of coordination is needed, recognizing that a blending of hierarchical
and network forms of coordination occurs in practice (McGuire 2006, Meuleman
2006). Considine (2002, p. 6) emphasizes that ‘[w]hile it may be fashionable to
assume a high level of non-hierarchical coordination, the reality is probably very
different. Many of these networks retain strong forms of centralisation, and power is
asymmetric. What this may tell us is that the inter-organizational network is really
just a new form of complexity within the older hierarchical mode’. Thus far, there
have been few empirical data on the topic.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

251

In this paper, we explore the dynamics between hierarchical and network
coordination in the geospatial realm. Our overall aim is to understand how external
institutions affect public geospatial network elements, such as strategy and
operations, resource distribution, routines, and accountabilities, and how these
elements influence geospatial network behaviour. In this paper, we focus on the
involvement of a specific external institution, the central budget agency (CBA), in
geospatial cross-agency coordination in Canada and the USA. Canada and the
USA, two nations with compelling cases in geospatial coordination, are often cited
as leaders in national SDI development (Masser 2003) and as a source of inspiration
for e-government (World Bank 2005). In the Anglo-American politico-administrative
systems of these two countries, the central budget agency has a unique position of
authority to induce agencies to operate less autonomously. In other countries, with
different politico-administrative systems, hierarchical
influences may stem from
other entities. Nevertheless, the hierarchical–network dynamic still may be a
significant factor in inducing cross-agency geospatial coordination.

The SDI domain was considered for two reasons: familiarity of the authors with
the domain since the early 1990s and the domain’s unique appropriateness for
understanding complex issues of whole-of-government coordination. Geospatial
information systems span all government policy sectors, so the ‘joining up’ of these
systems cannot be limited to a set of government agencies working in a particular
policy area.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we outline the
conceptual framework of this research. In section 3, we present the case studies and
the CBA’s evolving interventions and public managers’
provide details of
perceptions in Canada and the USA. In the fourth section, we highlight the
similarities and differences between the Canadian and the USA situations and
discuss the empirical evidence in relation to theory. We then conclude with
suggestions for further research.

2. Conceptual framework

Cross-agency coordination has been a long-standing preoccupation of public
management (Gulick 1937, Seidman 1999, Pollitt 2003, Hood 2005). Policy issues
such as public health, national security, and natural resources management require
that multiple agencies work across vertical and horizontal administrative lines. The
public management literature identifies three forms of coordination: hierarchy,
network, and market (Powell 1990). Each form of coordination has its unique
orientation, goals, decision process mode, means of communication, and theoretical
basis. Each coordination form draws upon factors that motivate parties both
positively and negatively. We focus on hierarchy and network coordination, not
because the market form of coordination is not present or influential; rather, we are
using a network–hierarchy lens to understand how network coordination functions
in a hierarchical environment. As summarized in table 1, the network form relies
primarily on moral, social, and professional inducements or constraints, while the
hierarchical form relies on the coercive authority of rules and regulations supported
by budgetary control.

Much of the public management discourse of the early 20th century centred on
the hierarchy form of coordination. Hierarchy was seen as positive, as a rational
form of organization that emphasized efficiency through the division of tasks,
establishment of rules and regulations, and supervision (Weber 1947). By the

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 252

K.T. Lance et al.

1980s, hierarchy was considered defective, synonymous with bureaucratic red-tape
and government’s inability to adequately deliver services to citizens. Over the
next 20 years, researchers and practitioners explored reforms to address the
limitations of hierarchy. One stream of reforms, encapsulated under the term New
Public Management (NPM), was oriented towards markets. NPM espoused
the adoption of practices from the private sector by the public sector in order to
bring about leaner and entrepreneurial government (Osborne and Gaebler 1992).
The other stream of reforms, encapsulated under the term governance, was
oriented towards networks, exploring greater interaction with non-governmental
organizations to address the needs of citizens and communities (Kickert et al.
1997).

2.1 Trajectories of coordination forms

Both network- and market-orientated reforms have exhibited similar trajectories.
Governments turned to contracts or third-party partnerships as a response to the
defects of hierarchy. In effect, government ‘off-loaded’ functions either to markets
or networks involving non-governmental parties (Bell and Park 2006). However, by
the late 1990s/early 2000s, this agenda of devolution, away from central authority,
began to show cracks. It is now thought that NPM reforms fragmented the public
sector, provided incentives for individual organizations to focus on their own
missions, and created pressures for competition rather than collaboration (Ling
2002, James 2004). A new wave of second-generation NPM reforms is focused on
‘joining up’ government agencies for the delivery of public services, and central
agencies are having a significant role in this agenda (James 2004, Halligan 2005,
Verhoest et al. 2005). Stronger central coordination does not necessarily mean a
return to traditional hierarchy; rather,
it implies a blending of coordination
approaches and a ‘softer’ form of oversight or steering. Instead of policies, rules,
and prescribed processes, the modus operandi tends to be incentives, guidance, and
training.

The importance of central agencies in network coordination also has become
clearer. Researchers have noted that political authorities are regulating self-
regulating networks (an apparent paradox), and the term metagovernance has been
used for this idea (Whitehead 2003, Bell and Park 2006, Kelly 2006). The Prime
Minister or President’s Office, the Cabinet Office, or the CBA, for instance, are said
to be providing the ground rules for networks, deploying a relative monopoly of
organizational
intelligence and information with which to shape the cognitive
expectations of network members and modifying the strategic capacities and tactics
of agencies in the interest of system integration (Jessop 1997, p. 575).

In other words, although public networks may self-regulate in some respects, they
still are embedded in hierarchical structures and are affected by hierarchical controls
that are meant to shape and strengthen the network. In this way, they operate ‘in the
shadow of hierarchy’ (Scharpf 1994). As much as the network form of coordination
is ‘refreshing’, constitutional authority, manifested in hierarchy, and the ‘fiscal
spine’ of appropriated funds remain the structures within which relational and
networked forms are enabled to flourish (Hill and Lynn 2005, p. 189). Thus, ‘[i]t is
not so much that the horizontal relationships have supplanted the vertical ones, but
rather that the horizontal links have been added to the vertical ones’ (Kettl 2002,
p. 128).

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Table 1. Fundamental forms of coordination (derived from Verhoest et al. 2006, p. 5, Herranz 2006, p. 40, Meuleman 2006, p. 4).

Characteristics

Hierarchy

Network

Basis of interaction (or control)
General orientation
Motivation of parties involved

Authority, oversight
Bureaucratic
Rules and regulations, supported by budgetary controls

(top-down norms and standards, inspection, intervention)

Goals, preferences
Decision process mode
Means of communication
Theoretical basis

Accountability, equitable treatment
Procedural, rational, top-down
Rules, routines
Weberian bureaucracy

Mutuality, solidarity, self-regulation
Community
Moral, social, and professional inducements or

constraints (shared values, consensus,
loyalty, reciprocity, trust)

Social balance, equitable outcomes
Participatory, bottom-up
Relational
Network theory; Resource-dependency theory

Tool

Shaping governing

structures

Promoting the uptake
of new management
information systems

Table 2. Conceptual framework: tools of hierarchical influence and coordination.

Whitehead (2003, p. 12)

6 (2004, p. 126)

Ling (2002, p. 626)

Strategic frameworks and guidance Mandated or incentivized

New type of organization joined by culture and

partnerships

values; information; training

Discipline

Budget/financial management

New ways of delivering services joined by joint

New ways of working across agencies joined by
shared leadership, pooled budgets, merged
structures, joint teams

consultation/ involvement; shared
client/citizen focus

Using evaluation (scrutiny)

Monitoring and assessment

Plans, targets, and performance

New accountabilities and incentives joined by

to solidify accountabilities

management

shared outcome targets, performance measures

C
r
o
s
s
-
a
g
e
n
c
y

c
o
o
r
d
i
n
a
t
i
o
n

2
5
3

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 254

K.T. Lance et al.

2.2 Tools of hierarchical influence and coordination

While NPM and network researchers articulate the trend in central coordination,
the actual tools to ‘join up’ government or metagovern are poorly explained in the
literature. The specifics are difficult to unravel, but a body of work is developing
(Ling 2002, Pollitt 2003, Whitehead 2003, 6 2004, Christiensen and Laegreid 2006).
Whitehead (2003) categorized three broad tools: (a) strategic frameworks and
guidance, (b) discipline, and (c) monitoring and assessment. 6 (2004) distinguished
tools as well: (a) mandated or incentivized partnerships, (b) budgeting, (c) plans,
targets, and performance management. These do not correspond precisely to those
of Whitehead, but they reinforce the basic framework. The work of Ling (2002) can
also be matched to the simple framework, again not precisely, but with a degree of
concurrence. In order to meld all three groupings, the tools can be related under the
broader categories of: shaping governing structures, promoting the uptake of new
management information systems, and using evaluation (scrutiny) to solidify
accountabilities (see table 2). Together, these broader categories constitute the
conceptual framework of this research.

The use of hierarchical tools, as mentioned above, denotes a degree of political or
central authority. A CBA, given its function of assembling and controlling resources
for a government, may be an influential organization in this regard (Morin 1994,
Tomkin 1998). Research conducted in the USA found that public managers
considered CBA scrutiny and budget changes among the most effective means to
influence agency policies (Furlong 1998). Government agencies may defer to the
CBA because they perceive the CBA as objective, or they may find it difficult to
oppose the CBA’s direction, if the CBA has strong central power and legitimacy
(Wanna 2003, p. 254). Thus, the CBA may enjoy a ‘privileged position among its
peers as a ‘‘power house’’’ (Hou et al. 2005, p. 5), in which case, the CBA could be in
a unique and pivotal position to assume the role of metagovernor and facilitator of
‘joined up’ government. The influence of the CBA will vary from country to
country, depending on the country’s politico-administrative system.

3. Methods

Our objective is to enrich the literature on SDI implementation in a grounded and
inductive fashion, drawing upon public management theory on metagovernance and
‘joined up government’. In our selection of the two case studies (Canada and the
USA), we followed a theory-based case sampling strategy (Pare´ 2004). In both
countries, the CBA was found to be influential in guiding the practices of a network
of government agencies focused on SDI development (Lance et al. 2006). Also,
logistically, offices in Canada and the USA were easy to access for the lead author,
but this factor was secondary in the case selection process.

We used qualitative methods for both data collection and analysis. Semi-
structured interviews were conducted with questions covering five broad areas: (1)
control and accountability, (2) cross-agency planning, (3) investment tracking and
transparency, (4) relationship between IT and geospatial governance, and (5)
evolution/history of change. The semi-structured format allowed both the
interviewer and the interviewee the flexibility to probe for details or discuss issues
as they came up. The average interview length was one hour, and interviews
were recorded with notes or with a digital recorder. Two interviews spanned
several hours, interspersed with the interviewees’ busy work schedule. Informal

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

255

conversations during workshops or ad hoc encounters also contributed additional,
supporting data. In most cases, the researcher who conducted the interviews had a
pre-existing professional relationship with the interviewee or was known to the
interviewee through a trusted third party. We mention this familiarity, since it likely
influenced the tone and content of the dialogue.

We focused the interviews on senior individuals responsible for execution of
programme activities, five Canadian and eight from the USA. This resulted in a
small sample size. Yet these individuals, as key decision-makers, can be assumed to
have an accurate understanding of their organization’s position, and the perceptions
of these decision-makers do indicate the organization’s behaviour (Elliott et al.
1995). Staw (1991) suggested that studying key organizational decision-makers is a
more fruitful means to understanding organizational action than examining in detail
all individual behaviour within an organization.

We offered to protect the interviewees’ anonymity in order to generate more
candour from the interviewees. This practice is common in qualitative research and
used to increase the reliability of the data (Walsham 2006). In sections 3.1 and 3.2
data from the interviews is referred to as ‘‘([Country code] [x])’’, where CA or US
denotes Canada or USA, while x marks the number of the interview.

The data collected through interviews were triangulated with documentary
evidence in the form of minutes of meetings, agency reports and assessments, and
academic work dealing with the cases involved. We also reinforced the results with
analysis from public media sources. When specific details were missing in the case
descriptions or to update our data, we contacted interviewees by phone or email.
For verification of the findings, a draft version of paper with our interpretation of
the data was shared with interviewees for their comments.

3.1 Case descriptions

Each case starts with a section that describes the evolving relationship between the
central budget agency and line agencies in the geospatial sector. Then, different
programmes or activities are described, providing further details on the interaction
between the CBA and line agencies.

In Canada,

In both the Canadian and USA cases, there is a designated federal geospatial
coordinating body, with a staffed secretariat, and a cooperation incentive
programme.
the coordination body is called the Inter-Agency
Committee on Geomatics (IACG), and the cooperation incentive programme is
called GeoConnections. In the USA, the Federal Geographic Data Committee
(FGDC) is the coordinating body, and it manages a Cooperative Agreements
Programme. In both countries, the central budget agency—the Treasury Board
Secretariat (TBS) in Canada and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in
the USA—is a member of the federal geospatial coordinating body. However, from
an operational standpoint, the central budget agency is not involved in geospatial
service delivery or use and thus can be viewed as external to the geospatial network.
Federal geospatial investments of both countries are comparable with respect to
percent of total national expenditures, and both countries have a sizable geospatial
industry that relies upon public sector geospatial information. These characteristics
are summarized in table 3.

3.1.1 Canada—evolving IACG and TBS interaction. For more than a decade, the
IACG did not figure prominently in TBS’s horizon. IACG was established in the

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Table 3. Summary characteristics of case studies.

Description

Canada

USA

Federal geospatial coordinating body

Inter-Agency Committee on Geomatics

Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC)

Central budget agency
Federal staffing for geospatial coordination
Federal budget for geospatial coordination

(IACG) (15 agencies)

Treasury Board Secretariat (TBS)
2.5 (IACG Secretariat)
CA$300 000

(19 agencies)

Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
14 (FGDC Secretariat)
US$4 million (FGDC budget, i.e. this figure does not
include The National Map or other related federal
SDI efforts)

Estimated annual federal geospatial investment
Estimated annual federal geospatial investment
per capita (based on 2006 population est.*)

Estimated percent of overall national

expenditures on geospatial investments
(based on 2005 budget expenditure est.{)
Estimated annual geospatial industry revenue

CA$240 million
CA$7.59 per citizen

US$4 billion
US$13.36 per citizen

0.11% of expenditures

0.16% of expenditures

CA$2.8 billion (2004), based on a

US$21 billion, based on 2004 global industry

formal census{

growth projection"

* Canada 2006 population est., http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census06/analysis/popdwell/highlights.cfm; US 2006 population est., http://www.census.gov/
popest/states/tables/NST-EST2006-01.xls
{ Canada 2005 budget expenditures est. https://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/ca.html (converted to Canadian dollars); US 2005 budget
expenditures est., http://www.theodora.com/wfb2006/united_states/united_states_economy.html
{ 2004 Statistics Canada Census Survey of the Geomatics Industry, http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/statistics/geomatics/default.html (This figure included geophysical
surveying and mapping for petroleum and mineral exploration along with more traditional land surveying, mapping, remote sensing and GIS activities).
" OECD, 2006, Digital broadband content: public sector information and content, p.23, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/10/22/36481524.pdf

2
5
6

K
T

.

.

L
a
n
c
e

e
t

a
l
.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

257

late 1980s to coordinate Canadian government geospatial investments and activities
and thus enable the broader Canadian SDI. IACG was seen as a mechanism to deal
with Canada’s geospatial institutions and programmes, which were overlapping and
competing with one another,
interfering with the negotiation of appropriate
cooperative arrangements (Coleman and Cooper 2004). Cooperative arrangements
also were hindered by agencies having different data production schedules and by
government programme funding cycles that were out-of-phase with one another,
making it difficult to cost-share expensive, multi-year projects (Coleman 1999, p. 6).
Even though TBS was a member of IACG from the committee’s onset and
potentially could have been constructive in discussions on cost-sharing and funding
cycles, for many years, TBS remained a passive observer [CA1]. A representative
from TBS, from the Chief Information Officer Branch, attended IACG steering
committee meetings, but the Branch had only minimal recognition of geospatial
matters [CA1]. Although it was responsible for government-wide information
management and information technology activities,
its information technology
efforts centred on hardware, and its information management efforts on how to
manage email archives, access to information requests, and documents. Geospatial
data and content activities were not taken into consideration.

By June 2005, TBS’s interaction with IACG was quite different. The Canadian
government had announced the creation of Service Canada, a programme focusing
on collaboration across federal agencies. In this political climate, the Treasury
Board was on the lookout for success stories demonstrating horizontal account-
ability. The President of the Treasury Board, a Cabinet member and hence someone
of high political stature, made a special call on the IACG to hear first hand how
IACG was enabling the joint development and maintenance of key national
datasets. Once IACG was in TBS’s spotlight, IACG meetings became more
formalized and its members more engaged [CA1].

3.1.2 Canada—Federal Geomatics Strategy and Policy Framework. IACG took
advantage of TBS’s attention and proposed to TBS the development a Treasury
Board Directive on a Federal Geomatics Strategy and Policy Framework (in short,
the Strategy). The Strategy would serve to align geospatial investments and prevent
duplication and overlap (see Inter-Agency Committee on Geomatics 2006). IACG
had been contemplating such a strategy, but the idea had not gained sufficient
traction. This is because, ‘[n]o agency will contribute to another agency. Nobody
voluntarily contributes to common good […] sticks have to be there [CA1]’. So,
TBS’s endorsement of the Strategy was instrumental to the Strategy’s formulation.
Part of the reason TBS endorsed the Strategy is that it recognized that its existing
investment control mechanisms did not adequately capture geospatial activities. In
early 2004, by coincidence, four multi-million dollar proposals, each strongly based
on geospatial technologies, were simultaneously under review by TBS. Such large
proposals of a geospatial nature at the same time were not common. To a TBS
analyst, unfamiliar with geospatial technologies, these proposals, submitted by three
separate agencies, set off a red flag of possible duplication. TBS summoned the three
big players, Ministry of Agriculture, Environment Canada, and Natural Resources
Canada, and asked them for advice. In effect, they said, ‘Ministry of Agriculture,
you’ve got a proposal, your two colleagues from the other two ministries are going
to look over your shoulder and make sure you’re not taking us to the cleaners
[CA1]’. Natural Resources Canada and Environment Canada then had the task of
reviewing the Ministry of Agriculture’s proposal, a 3-inch thick document, analysing

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 258

K.T. Lance et al.

its delivery options and assessing whether the proposal was rational given existing
work underway in the agencies. According to one of those involved, ‘This was
unheard of; TBS asking colleague agencies to review proposals and provide advice;
it was uncharted water [CA1]’.

In the future, TBS will routinely rely upon IACG to play an advisory role,
although investment decision-making will still rest with TBS. The Strategy
formalizes the procedures for cross-agency review of funding proposals. The
Strategy defines when TBS should refer proposals to IACG for review, and it
establishes accepted criteria for reviewing the proposals. It also spells out that IACG
will report annually to TBS and that TBS will ensure that agencies are consistently
complying with the Strategy.

Even though the review of funding submissions is an added and unfunded
activity, IACG members saw that it was far more favourable to craft a voluntary
investment oversight approach that the Treasury Board would endorse, than to
leave investment decisions to TBS officers who potentially could take drastic or ill-
informed measures such as cutting resources or centralizing geospatial activities
[CA1]. Initially, proposal review will be on a select basis and will not concern all
geospatial activity, but in time, a more comprehensive review of all proposed
geospatial expenditures could be possible. As explained by an interviewee, ‘I expect
the next shoe to drop will be exactly that, exactly how much money is being spent,
and can we set up a profile to manage which investments are being made by whom
and in what horizon? I expect that to be next […] Very much so. And then setting
things like consequences for not delivering [CA1]’.

3.1.3 Canada—Value Management Office. In order to improve analysis of
geospatial activity, TBS has provided support and guidance to line agencies. TBS
funded a general study on value management (Trailstone Value Management
Consulting 2006) and another study specifically on outcomes management for
IACG (Fujitsu Consulting (Canada) Ltd. 2005). Both studies recommended a more
rigorous handling and linkage of accounting information and results. When TBS
evaluated the first phase of GeoConnections—the Canadian cooperation incentive
programme—TBS pointed out the limitations caused by dual accountability,
meaning vertical fiduciary accountability and horizontal performance account-
ability to the broader community (Treasury Board Secretariat 2005). It advised that
greater management information discipline could rectify the situation. Similarly
problematic was that each of GeoConnections’ seven components was being
evaluated separately without connection to each other, while cost-sharing activities
were not adequately tracked [CA2].

These various analyses led to the GeoConnections Secretariat’s decision to
establish a Value Management Office (VMO) [CA3]. Value management since has
become one of the core tracks of GeoConnections, on par with the original tracks
dealing with user capacity, content, standards and technology, and policy and
communications. The VMO is responsible for the coordination of
internal
government
financial, accountability, and parliamentary reporting (vertical);
coordination of evaluation and reporting to stakeholders (horizontal); establishment
of criteria for project selection, tracking, and evaluation; and handling project
contracting and contribution agreements (Last 2006).

3.1.4 Canada—Sunset programme and results-based management. TBS established
GeoConnections as a sunset programme, which is a budgeting mechanism that gives

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

259

an automatic termination date unless the programme is expressly reauthorized.
From the onset, GeoConnections managers knew that they must achieve the
outcomes proposed or risk having the programme abolished. They had to undergo a
rigorous review. For example, the TBS evaluation of the GeoBase component of the
first phase of GeoConnections was performed using evidence gathered from
programme documents, project reports, and more than 70 interviews with those
responsible for and dependent upon the component activities.

sunset

comprehensive,

In addition to the

evaluation requirement

for
continued programmatic funding, TBS also introduced in 2001 a Results-based
Management Accountability Framework. Every Government of Canada pro-
gramme is required to submit a blueprint to ensure results-based management.
The blueprint must contain a programme logic model
that maps out how
programme activities relate to business processes (for example, public health,
public safety, Aboriginal matters, environment and sustainable development). The
blueprint also must contain a performance measurement framework and timetable.
This sets performance targets, both quantitative, to be measured annually, and
qualitative, to be measured in the mid-term and tail end of the programme (Stewart
2006).

3.2.1 US—evolving FGDC and OMB interaction. Although FGDC was formally
established through an OMB Circular in 1990, more than a decade later, the federal
government’s many geospatial programmes were described as ‘unfocused, duplica-
tive, underfunded, overpromised, poorly defined, and not easily accessed’ (Sietzen
2003). At issue was that the FGDC Chairman ‘has no formal authority over his
fellow committee members’ (National Academy of Public Administration 1998,
p. 63). Butler et al. (2005) reflected, ‘Frankly, you can’t put a committee in charge
and expect much to happen. Committees dilute accountability and have limited
direct access to funding. The federal government has been trying the committee
approach through executive orders since 1906 […] The country needs a real
organizational entity with budget authority to be responsible for building the
NSDI.’

A June 2004 Government Accountability Office report reverberated the issue of
poor SDI coordination (Government Accountability Office 2004), pointing out that
a complete and up-to-date strategic plan [to coordinate geospatial investments] was
not in place, federal agencies were not consistently complying with Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) guidance to coordinate their investments, and
OMB’s oversight methods were not effective in identifying or eliminating instances
of duplication (Government Accountability Office 2004, p. 2).

It was not until 2001 that OMB began to have close interaction with federal
geospatial managers. When the Bush administration took office,
it made e-
government one of the administration’s five management priorities. FGDC strongly
courted the opportunity to be selected for one of the pilot e-government projects.
The result was Geospatial One-Stop, a catalogue service meant to reduce duplicative
mapping investments by improving the discovery and sharing of existing geospatial
information resources. Since OMB was responsible for implementing the President’s
e-government projects,
it became aware of
including Geospatial One-Stop,
geospatial information coordination issues, and it increasingly established a tighter
coupling with line agencies. According to one manager, ‘OMB is getting smarter at
this […] Layers of the onion are being peeled off,’ or from a slightly more uneasy
perspective, now ‘OMB is definitely in our shorts [US1]’.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 260

K.T. Lance et al.

3.2.2 US—Geospatial One-Stop and geospatial
line-of-business. OMB did not
allocate ‘extra’ funds for Geospatial One-Stop; rather, it required line agencies to
dedicate resources and staff time from their own budgets. Funding was pooled into a
Geospatial One-Stop account used to support activities. This funding mechanism
potentially fits into the category of coercion or ‘strong-arming’ by OMB. Some even
referred to it as extortion [US1]. However, OMB’s ‘heavy hand’ potentially was a
necessary ingredient to change agencies’ behaviour in support of a joined up
approach; as one interviewee indicated: ‘I don’t think things will change unless
someone is forcing change [US3]’.

investment. OMB’s

As the Geospatial One-Stop pilot was ending, OMB’s extended its geospatial
sphere of influence. It initiated the Geospatial Line of Business initiative in order to
align and consolidate agency budgets to support all joint geospatial government
services. In March 2006, OMB asked agencies to designate a senior official who has
agency-wide responsibility, accountability, and authority for geospatial information
issues. OMB will coordinate through these officials and optimize the government’s
to formalize the roles,
overall geospatial
responsibilities, and performance metrics for geospatial
information stewards.
Accountability and compliance mechanisms are being explored, and OMB is likely
to develop geospatial budget coding structure for tracking all government geospatial
expenditures. OMB already prepared and released guidelines for agencies to report
all major and non-major geospatial
investments back to OMB. Karen Evans,
OMB’s administrator for IT and e-government, said ‘With the E-Government
initiatives deployed and operational, and the [Line-of-Business] initiatives under-
way, we are currently realizing the goals of improved citizen services, and increased
efficiency and effectiveness. … We must now concentrate on identifying and
realizing the cost savings these initiatives are providing on a government-wide basis’
(Miller 2006).

intention is

3.2.3 US—Federal Enterprise Architecture. Since February 2002, the Office of
Management and Budget has been developing the Federal Enterprise Architecture
(FEA), a business-based framework to improve and transform the federal
government’s use of information technologies, including geospatial technologies.
In due time, all geospatial capabilities should be documented and implemented in a
systematic way, leading to cross-agency interoperability and potential cost savings.
OMB has required agencies to conform to the FEA as a condition for budget
approval. The FEA covers a variety of key areas such as: budget allocation,
information sharing, performance measurement, budget/performance integration,
cross-agency collaboration, e-government, and component-based architectures.
Agencies are meant to identify opportunities to simplify processes and unify work
across agencies and within business areas. Ultimately, OMB wants agencies to ask
and answer what effect their architecture is having on their mission (Miller 2007).
OMB’s chief architect, Richard Burk, suggests that agencies ‘must integrate the
FEA with the budget and find and show value’ (Miller 2007).

With FEA underway, there now is regular interaction between OMB and line
the
agencies, with OMB trying to push transformation solutions. In 2005,
Department of the Interior, which hosts the FGDC Secretariat, began meeting
with OMB weekly. One of
the E-
Government Portfolio Manager at OMB ‘asks very pointed questions. This is not
just a ‘jumping through the hoop’ exercise [US4]’. At one point, OMB had asked for
background material, and it was clear they actually were looking at it, because the

the FEA specialists involved explained,

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

261

Department of Interior inadvertently had sent in a draft version, and OMB quickly
noted this and asked for the final version [US4].

Although the FEA is meant to maximize technology investments to better achieve
policy outcomes, the management information systems currently available are not
yet adequate to address the particular budgetary characteristics of geospatial
activities. A USA interviewee pointed out, ‘We’re slowly evolving to having better
accounting, but it’s another 5–10 years away… It’s not that nobody is willing to
report on [geospatial investments]; I’m not sure they can. They’re not capturing the
information, because the information is an orthogonal slice across the enterprise
[US5]’. Few agencies identify their investments in a geospatial context.

3.2.4 US—Circular No. A-11 Exhibit 300 business case. OMB uses Circular No.
A-11 as an evaluation tool, although originally it was established for Capital
Planning and Investment Control and is still a stronger tool for planning than
evaluation. OMB revised Circular No. A-11 in 2002, and the revisions were much
more comprehensive in scope than previous versions (Office of Management and
Budget 2002). The revised Circular merged together budget formulation and
execution, thus integrating agencies’ budget planning, accounting, and evaluation
functions. As part of the Circular No. A-11 requirement, agencies must submit an
Exhibit 300 business case in which they demonstrate that a project is in the overall
best interest of the Government and will achieve government-wide and agency
objectives at the lowest risk cost. They must also address performance goals and
how the goals relate to the agency’s annual performance plan. Projects, once funded,
are then evaluated against the Exhibit 300 business case. In this way, project
proposals, performance measurement, and evaluation are all linked through the
same tool.

A management consultant who works closely with government agencies noted,
‘There’s a lot OMB now wants to see—life cycle costs, NPV, benefits, risks. To have
OMB bless you and give you money, it’s not a trivial process’ … ‘OMB intensely
pursued the Exhibit 300 process, and each year, OMB gets more serious. You get
scored lower if you don’t do what is required [US6]’.

4. Analysis

Looking simultaneously at the cases, we see that the central budget agencies in
Canada and the USA have become involved in cross-agency geospatial coordination
in recent years and are casting a shadow of hierarchy on the public-sector geospatial
networks in these countries. Furthermore, TBS and OMB tool-based efforts are
consistent with the conceptual framework in table 2, thus validating the emergent
consensus that network behaviour may be steered in part by hierarchical means.
With respect to shaping governing structures, the Canadian Federal Geomatics
Strategy and Policy Framework and the US Geospatial Line of Business articulate,
respectively, a new relationship between IACG and TBS, and FGDC and OMB, a
relationship that brings cross-agency geospatial
investment planning to the
forefront. On the management information systems front, the GeoConnections’
Value Management Office (VMO) and the USA Federal Enterprise Architecture
(FEA) are meant to improve implementation by providing clarity in the links
between financial resources, geospatial services, and citizen needs, as well as by
tightening up accounting practices. The evaluation of GeoConnections Phase I and
OMB’s Circular A-11 annual requirement for business cases and performance

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 262

K.T. Lance et al.

measurement reinforce shared accountability and ensure that agencies achieve
intended results. Table 4 provides a summary of the tools that TBS and OMB are
using to influence network elements, and the subsequent changes that have taken or
are taking place.

Below, we discuss further the hierarchical

influence of TBS and OMB and
highlight how Canada and the United States compare. For the most part, the cases
have more in common than differences. The patterns of innovation in public sector
reform in these two wealthy countries tend to be very similar (Borins 2000, p. 47).
Even so, the countries still diverge in consistent ways across a spectrum of
institutions/structures, behaviours, and values. Canada tends to have greater
orientation to innovating for society as a whole or in large groups, resulting in fewer,
larger programmes, whereas the USA has a more targeted approach, resulting in a
great number of smaller programmes (Borins 2007). Inevitably, this affects the size,
membership, and behaviour of the public-sector geospatial networks.

4.1 Shaping governing structures

By working with agencies in shaping a new governance regime, TBS and OMB are
attempting to provide more coherent direction to the federal geospatial networks of
Canada and the USA. These efforts stem from broader public sector policy reform
agendas focusing on efficient and effective delivery of services to citizens. Prior to
CBA intervention, line agencies had not successfully ‘joined up’ their efforts. In the
USA, OMB’s pooling of
to the establishment of
funding was instrumental
Geospatial One Stop. In Canada, the potential threat of TBS stepping in and
deciding what to do mobilized IACG to become more proactive and propose a plan
that TBS would find acceptable. As Thomas (2006, p. 262) explained, ‘Though
agencies seek autonomy, they may pool their resources when external forces
threaten an even greater loss of autonomy should they attempt to operate
independently. Under these circumstances, cooperation provides more stability for

Table 4. Hierarchical tools and their influence on SDI network behaviour.

Tool

Shaping

governing
structures

Promoting the

uptake of new
management
information
systems

Canada

Network change

US

Federal Geomatics
Strategy and
Policy Framework

Value Management
Office (VMO)

review of and

consensus on
investment;
alignment of
investment

Geospatial
Line of
Business

financial

Federal

transparency;
clarity between
inputs, outputs,
and outcomes

enterprise
architecture
(FEA)

Using evaluation
(scrutiny) to
solidify
accountabilities

Sunset evaluation of
Geo-Connections
Phase I; Results-
based Management
Accountability
Framework

orientation to
managing
for results

Circular A-11

annual
business case
& performance
measurement

Network
change

dialogue on

investment
management;
joint budget
planning
diagnostic

discipline;
clarity of
linkage btw
business,
services, and
performance
communication
of benefits in
relationship
to costs;
tracking
of outputs

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

263

managers than does autonomy’. Even when the CBA is shaping governing structures
through informal communication or guidance, rather than central planning and
regulation, this can take on greater weight precisely because it is coming from the
CBA.

Despite TBS and OMB’s authority, their interaction with line agencies for cross-
agency coordination cannot be characterized as coercive. Both IACG and
FGDC courted CBA involvement. IACG and FGDC recognized the limits to
self-regulation of the federal geospatial network and reasoned that the CBA’s
influence could be constructive. A new governance regime involving the CBA
and geospatial investment management would elevate the geospatial arena from an
obscure technical initiative comprised of agency professionals and technicians to a
primary management objective with line manager involvement. The interviewees
emphasized that
is no ‘grand scheme’, no planned and carefully
executed sequence of steps; instead, in both countries, the unfolding relationships
are more in the tradition of incrementalism or ‘muddling through’. The CBAs are
taking a shepherding approach for activities characterized by uncooperative
behaviour. They do not appear
responsibility or
authority than necessary. IACG and FGDC still maintain responsibility for overall
management.

to be assuming more

there

4.2 Promoting uptake of new management information systems

While new governance regimes in Canada and the USA address the first
hierarchical tool, the second tool, management information systems, amounts to
increasing institutional capacity and fiscal discipline through technical means. In
Canada, TBS guidance contributed to the formation of the GeoConnections’
VMO. The VMO enables the classification of programme inputs horizontally,
according to projects, provinces, and sector, and vertically, according to cost
centres. In the USA, OMB has been championing the adoption of the FEA.
Agency managers recognize that the FEA ultimately will serve cross-agency
objectives,
just merely complying with OMB’s FEA
requirements; rather, they are working in partnership with OMB to improve
information systems put
available systems and analysis. Both management
emphasis on making post-budgetary financial information more readily accessible,
one of the tools discussed by 6 (2004). They also provide clarity between
investments, development of services, and business functions, a tool that Ling
(2002) highlighted. However, further improvements are needed to be able to
identify and track geospatial investments more comprehensively.

so agencies are not

Where Canada and the USA differ is in the use of management information
systems. At the moment, OMB appears to be more preoccupied with what broadly
could be called ‘managerial’ issues—improving efficiency and reducing duplica-
tion, whereas TBS is more concerned with improved systems for managing
accountability. It is likely that the sheer size of the government drives the USA
approach. The more numerous the organizations within government, the greater
the number of interests articulated within government, and the greater the number
of potential conflicts between government organizations (Rose 1984, p. 174). The
USA is grappling with ‘getting a handle’ on an enormous array of activity,
whereas the Canadian aggregate of activity is more manageable, thus Canada can
focus more on ensuring agencies perform well with the resources they are
allocated.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 264

K.T. Lance et al.

4.3 Using evaluation to solidify accountabilities

TBS appears to be putting more emphasis on the third coordination tool than OMB,
particularly when it comes to outcomes, as opposed to outputs. OMB’s Circular No.
A-11 still is evolving as an evaluation tool; it currently lacks the refinement that
GeoConnections Results-based Management Accountability Framework has. Also,
GeoConnections underwent a thorough review by TBS in order to secure funding
for its second phase. As a sunset programme, procedures were in place to make sure
that once launched, the programme stayed on track. By specifying a discrete period
of time, TBS was able to motivate federal agencies to achieve specified outcomes or
risk having their programme abolished. In contrast, the budget for FGDC and its
cooperative agreements programme remains nearly the same, year after year. This
implies that there are no consequences for good or bad performance.

Some research has indicated that performance measurement is not effective in
advancing coordination among agencies or reducing duplicative services (Willoughby
2004). Such activities are ‘fraught with politics and other factors that will not change
immediately with the introduction of new processes’ (Melkers and Willoughby 2004,
p. 19). However, in spite of the cynicism about performance measurement or lack of
effects, ‘administrators today have acknowledged that developing and implementing
performance measurement have resulted in some ‘‘spillover effects’’ on communication
during the budgeting process’ (Melkers and Willoughby 2004). Improved commu-
nication between agency personnel and budget officers is an ‘interim’ or ‘initial’
(positive) outcome in itself (Melkers and Willoughby 2004).

4.4 Relevance beyond the case studies

TBS and OMB are not alone in their use of hierarchical tools to influence network
elements. Australia has strengthened central bodies like the Australia Public Service
Commission and New Zealand, the State Service Commission, to provide leadership
across government organizations and set standards for administrative policy and
behaviour (Christensen and Lægreid 2006, p. 19). The Treasury in the UK has
promoted joined up working through the Public Service Agreements, the Public
Services Productivity Panel (advising on the way of improving productivity in the
public sector), and in improving an accounting and budgetary framework within
which joined up work can take place (Ling 2002, p. 623). Saxby (2006) suggests that
better results would be likely in the UK if a geographic information strategy group
were established within HM Treasury to evaluate and respond to input from a
government advisory panel on resource issues; ‘this would be particularly helpful in
evaluating potential
[geographic information] efficiency gains when assessing
departmental bids during the annual spending review (ibid: 184) […] At a time
when the government wants to build the tools and define regulation to make better
use of all its information resources, it must now assess the merits of investing in and
developing the means to exploit spatial information as a sub-set of its broader
information portfolio’ (Saxby 2006, p. 191).

In most countries, SDI still remains at the periphery of budgetary decision-
making. However, as governments increasingly invest in the development of
geospatial services, they may put more emphasis on accountability for the use of
these funds. This form of external steering appears to strengthen the focus of
geospatial network members on delivering results, as well as bolster the overall
legitimacy of the SDI initiative. Longitudinal research over a number of years can

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

265

lead to firmer conclusions regarding conferring legitimacy. Additional case studies,
including non Anglo-American (or Saxon) countries with different politico-
administrative systems, would enrich the empirical base on the interplay between
hierarchical controls and ‘joining up’ government geospatial information systems.
Research should also extend to the coordination dynamics between central and local
government. Our initial findings seem to be in line with a recent report looking at
that
coordination for
organizational and financial issues are not trivial and that an expanded federal
role in providing funding and coordination for geospatial data under the Geospatial
Line of Business holds promise (National Research Council 2007, p. 136). In order
to do so, it is essential to establish clear and unambiguous authority within the
federal bureaucracy (National Research Council 2007, p. 140).

land parcel data in the USA. The report

stresses

While this paper is not meant as a blueprint of ‘how to coordinate’, we do hope
that it offers useful areas for reflection. Hierarchical controls may facilitate
coordination to an extent
that autonomy-seeking public managers need not
automatically disparage such intervention; in fact, they may seek it. SDI managers
at all levels (national, regional, state, local) conceivably could benefit from exploring
earlier on accountability arrangements, evaluation procedures, and means for
attaining greater transparency of geospatial investments. However, the dynamics
between agencies and external institutions such as the CBA depend on the politico-
administrative regime, making it difficult to generalize across all contexts.

5. Conclusion

This paper enriches our understanding of how cross-agency geospatial coordination
is unfolding in practice. It confirms the emerging consensus in public management
scholarship that external steering of a network, exercised by authoritative bodies
through hierarchical means, may invigorate cross-agency coordination. The
evolving relationship between the CBA and line agencies in Canada and the USA
can partly be attributed to each country’s national public service reform agenda, but
it may also reflect a maturation of each country’s SDI initiatives. Further research is
needed in countries with different politico-administrative systems to broaden the
empirical base of the theory on network–hierarchy dynamics.

At first glance, the presence of hierarchical controls may seem contrary to SDI
conventional wisdom, which has emphasized the voluntary nature of SDI. The use of
hierarchical controls also runs contrary to the public management discourse on
network governance, which purports that informal, horizontal networks are replacing
formal, vertical/hierarchical organization. However, a shadow of hierarchy may
actually facilitate the ‘joining up’ of government geospatial information systems. Lazer
and Binz-Scharf (2004, p. 19) came to a similar conclusion, remarking, ‘[i]t is the
ultimate irony that the transformation of government into a networked form requires
the support of ‘‘old-fashioned’’ hierarchic structure of the state’.

Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge and thank the public managers from Canada and
USA who participated in interviews and reviewed draft versions of the paper. We
are especially grateful to Dr Vincent Homburg, Associate Professor of Public
Administration at Erasmus University Rotterdam, for reviewing an earlier draft of
this paper at a critical juncture; his suggestions led us to refine our assumptions and
fine-tune our conceptual framework.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 266

K.T. Lance et al.

References
6, P., 2004, Joined-up government in the western world in comparative perspective: a
preliminary literature review and exploration. Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, 14, pp. 103–138.

BELL, S. and PARK, A., 2006, The problematic metagovernance of networks: water reform in

New South Wales. Journal of Public Policy, 26, pp. 63–83.

BORINS, S., 2000, What border? Public management innovation in the United States and

Canada. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 19, pp. 46–74.

BUTLER, A., VOSS, A., GOREHAM, D. and MOELLER, J., 2005, The national geospatial
coordinating council: a dramatic new approach to build the NSDI. GeoWorld,
October
http://www.military-geospatial-technology.com/
article.cfm?DocID5558 (accessed 1 October 2007).

2005. Available

at:

CHRISTENSEN, T. and LAEGREID, P., 2006, The Whole-of-Government approach—regulation,
performance, and public-sector reform. In A Performing Public Sector: The Second
Transatlantic Dialogue Conference, Workshop 2—Performance of Regulation and
Regulation of Performance, 1–3 June 2006, Leuven, Belgium.

COLEMAN, D.J., 1999, Collaborative approaches to building a Canadian spatial data
In Cambridge Conference, 19–24 July 1999, Cambridge, UK

infrastructure.
(Southampton, UK: Ordnance Survey of Great Britain).

COLEMAN, D.J. and COOPER, J., 2004, Examining the role of partnerships in building a
Canadian geospatial data infrastructure. In UN, FIG, PC IDEA Inter-regional Special
Forum on The Building of Land Information Policies in the Americas, 26–27 October
2004, Aguascalientes, Mexico.

CONSIDINE, M., 2002, Joined at the lip? What does network research tell us about governance?
In Knowledge Networks and Joined-Up Government: Conference Proceedings, M.
Considine (Ed.) (Melbourne, Australia: Centre for Public Policy, University of
Melbourne).

CRAIG, W.J., 1995, Why can’t we share data: institutional inertia. In Sharing Geographic
Information, H.J. Onsrud and G. Rushton (Eds), pp. 107–118 (New Brunswick, NJ:
Centre for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University).

DE MAN, E.W.H., 2006, Understanding SDI:

complexity and institutionalization.

International Journal of Geographic Information Science, 20, pp. 329–343.

ELLIOTT, R., JOBBER, D. and SHARP, J., 1995, Using the theory of reasoned action to
understand organizational behaviour: the role of belief salience. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 34, pp. 161–172.

FEDERAL GEOGRAPHIC DATA COMMITTEE, 2005, Final Draft Report of the NSDI Future

Directions Governance Action Team, 31 May 2005.

FUJITSU CONSULTING (CANADA) LTD, 2005, The IACG Benefits Case, Version 1.1, Outcomes

Management Project (Ottawa, Canada: CIO Branch, Treasury Board Secretariat).

FURLONG, S.R., 1998, Political Influence on the bureaucracy: the bureaucracy speaks. Journal

of Public Administration Research and Theory: J-PART, 8, pp. 39–65.

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, 2004, Geospatial Information: Better Coordination

Needed to Identify Reduce Duplicative Investments, Report GAO-04-703.

GRUS, L., CROMPVOETS, J. and BREGT, A., 2006, Defining national

spatial data
infrastructures as complex adaptive systems. In GSDI-9 Conference Proceedings, 6–
10 November 2006, Santiago, Chile.

GULICK, L., 1937, Notes on the theory on organizations, with special reference to
government. In Papers on the Science of Administration, L. Gulick and L. Urwin
(Eds) (New York, NY: A. M. Kelley).

HALLIGAN, J., 2005, The reassertion of the centre in a first generation reforming system. In
SCANCOR Workshop, Autonomisation of the State: from integrated administrative
models to single purpose organizations, 1–2 April 2005, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

267

HARVEY, F., 2001, Constructing GIS: actor networks of collaboration. URISA Journal, 13,

pp. 29–37.

HERRANZ, J., Jr., 2006, Network Management Strategies, Working Paper No.2006-01 (Seattle,
WA: Daniel J. Evans School of Public Affairs, University of Washington).
HILL, C.J. and LYNN, L.E., Jr., 2005, Is hierarchical governance in decline? Evidence from
empirical research. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 15, pp.
173–195.

HOOD, C., 2005, The idea of joined-up governance: a historical perspective. In Joined-up

Government, V. Bogdanor (Ed.) (Oxford: British Academy/OUP).

HOU, Y., MA, J. and WU, J., 2005, Changing roles of the central budget agency in the Chinese
context of performance-based budgeting. In Seminar on Public Budgeting and Finance
Reforms in Transitional China, 15–17 June 2005, Guangzhou, China.

INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON GEOMATICS, 2006, Coordinating Geomatics in the Government
of Canada, Federal Geomatics Strategy and Policy Framework, approved Version 1.0.
JAMES, O., 2004, Executive agencies and joined up government in the UK. In Unbundled
Government: A Critical Analysis of the Global Trend to Agencies, Quangos and
Contractualization, C. Pollitt and C. Talbot (Eds) (London: Routledge Studies in
Public Management).

JESSOP, B., 1997, Capitalism and its future: remarks on regulation, government and

governance. Review of International Political Economy, 4, pp. 561–581.

KEAST, R., MANDELL, M.P., BROWN, K. and WOOLBOCK, G., 2004, Network structures:
working differently and changing expectations. Public Administration Review, 64, pp.
363–371.

KELLY, J., 2006, Central regulation of English local authorities: an example of meta-

governance? Public Administration, 84, pp. 603–621.

KENIS, P. and PROVAN, K.G., 2006, Towards an exogenous theory of network performance.
In Conference on the Determinants of Performance in Public Organizations II, 7–10
December, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

KETTL, D.F., 2002, The Transformation of Governance: Public Administration for Twenty First

Century America (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press).

KICKERT, W.J.M., KLIJN, E.H. and KOPPENJAN, J.F.M., 1997, Introduction: a management
perspective on policy networks. In Managing Complex Networks: Strategies for the
Public Sector, W.J.M. Kickert, E.H. Klijn and J.F.M. Koppenjan (Eds), pp. 1–13
(London: Sage Publications Ltd).

KOOIMAN, J., 2000, Societal governance: levels, models and orders of social-political action.
In Debating Governance: Authority, Steering, Democracy, J. Pierre (Ed.) (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).

LANCE, K.T., GEORGIADOU, P.Y. and BREGT, A., 2006, Understanding how and why
practitioners evaluate SDI performance. International Journal of Spatial Data
Infrastructures Research, 1, pp. 65–104.

LAST, R., 2006, The renewed GeoConnections: focus, major programme tracks & governance.
In GeoConnections’ CGDI Technical Workshop, 23 June 2006, Ottawa, Ontario. Avail-
able at: http://www.geoconnections.org/developersCorner/devCorner_devNetwork/
meetings/2006.06.23/cgdiDevNetGeoConnectionsRenewed.ppt (accessed 1 October
2007).

LAZER, D. and BINZ-SCHARF, M.C., 2004, Information Sharing in E-Government Projects:
Managing Novelty and Cross-Agency Cooperation (Washington, DC:
IBM
Endowment for the Business of Government).

LING, T., 2002, Delivering joined up government in the UK: dimensions, issues and problems.

Public Administration, 80, pp. 615–642.

MASSER, I., 1999, All shapes and sizes: the first generation of national spatial data
infrastructures. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13, pp.
67–84.

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 268

K.T. Lance et al.

MASSER, I., 2003, International comparison. GI in the Wider Europe, GINIE: Geographic
Information Network in Europe GINIE Project. Available online at: http://www.
ec-gis.org/document.cfm?id5477&db5document (accessed 1 October 2007).
MCGUIRE, M., 2006, Collaborative public management: assessing what we know and how we

know it. Public Administration Review, 66, pp. 33–43.

MELKERS, J. and WILLOUGHBY, K., 2004, Staying the Course: The Use of Performance
Measurement in State Governments, Managing for Performance and Results Series
(Washington, DC: IBM Centre for the Business of Government).

MEULEMAN, L., 2006, Internal metagovernance as a new challenge for management
In 2006 EFMD Conference on Post
development
Bureaucratic Management: A New Age for Public Services?, 14–16 June 2006, Aix-
en-Provence, France.

in public administration.

MILLER, J., 2006, OMB to agencies: measure IT costs, savings from e-gov. Government
Computer News (GCN) online, 9 August 2006. Available at: http://www.gcn.com/
online/vol1_no1/41595-1.html (accessed 20 December 2006).

MILLER, J., 2007, OMB to ask agencies for metrics on EA effectiveness. FCW.com, 20
March 2007. Available at: http://www.gcn.com/online/vol1_no1/43353-1.html?topic5
enterprise-architecture (accessed 1 October 2007).

MORIN, A.L., 1994, Regulating the flow of data: OMB and the control of government

information. Public Administration Review, 54, pp. 434–443.

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF PUBLIC ADMINISRATION, 1998, Geographic Information for the 21st
Century: Building a Strategy for the Nation (Washington, DC: National Academy of
Public Administration).

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL, 2007, National Land Parcel Data: A Vision for the Future

(Washington, DC: National Academies Press).

OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, 2002, Circular No. A-11 Revised, Transmittal

Memorandum No. 75. Executive Office of the President. 27 June 2002.

OSBORNE, D. and GAEBLER, T., 1992, Reinventing Government: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit

is Transforming the Public Sector (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley).

PARE´ , G., 2004, Investigating information systems with positivist case study research.

Communications of the AIS, 13, pp. 233–264.

POLLITT, C., 2003, Joined-up government. Political Studies Review, 1, pp. 34–49.
POWELL, W.W., 1990, Neither market nor hierarchy: network forms of organization. Research

in Organizational Behaviour, 12, pp. 295–336.

RHIND, D., 1996, Economic,

legal and public policy issues influencing the creation,

accessibility and use of GIS databases. Transactions in GIS, 1, pp. 3–12.

ROSE, R., 1984, Understanding Big Government—The Programme Approach (London: Sage

Publications).

SAXBY, S.J., 2006, Public policy and the development of a UK national geographic
information strategy. International Journal of Law and Information Technology, 14,
pp. 147–194.

SCHARPF, F., 1994, Games real actors play: positive and negative coordination in embedded

negotiations. Journal of Theoretical Politics, 6, pp. 27–53.

SEIDMAN, H., 1999, Politics, Power and Position, 5th edn (New York, NY: Oxford University

Press).

SIETZEN, F., Jr., 2003, Federal GIS: a weapon of mass dysfunction? Geospatial Solutions, 1
October 2003. Available at: http://www.geospatial-online.com/geospatialsolutions/
article/articleDetail.jsp?id570780 (accessed 1 October 2007).

STAW, B.M., 1991, Dressing up like an organization: when psychological theories can explain

organizational action. Journal of Management, 17, pp. 805–819.

STEWART, C., 2006, Results-based Management Accountability Framework (RMAF). In

GeoConnections Management Board Summer Workshop.

THOMAS, C.W., 2006, Bureaucratic Landscapes: Interagency Cooperation and the Preservation

of Biodiversity (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 Cross-agency coordination

269

TOMKIN, S.L., 1998, Inside OMB: Politics and Process in the President’s Budget Office

TRAILSTONE VALUE MANAGEMENT CONSULTING, 2005, Value Management Overview,

(Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.).

January.

TREASURY BOARD SECRETARIAT, 2005, Framework Data/Geobase Component of

the
GeoConnections Programme—Evaluation (E04012), October 2005. Available at:
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/dmo/aeb/aeb-rpts-2005-E04012-e.htm (accessed 1 October
2007).

VAN LOENEN, B., 2006, Developing geographic information infrastructures: the role of

information policies. PhD thesis, Delft University of Technology.

VANDENBROUKE, D., 2005, Spatial Data Infrastructures in Europe: State of Play, Spring 2005

(Leuven, Belgium: Catholic University).

VERHOEST, K., PETERS, G.B., BEUSELINCK, E., MEYERS, F. and BOUCKAERT, G., 2005, How
coordination and control of public organizations by government interrelate: an
analytical and empirical exploration. In Scandinavian Consortium for Organizational
Research (SCANCOR)/Structure and Organisation of Government (SOG) Workshop,
Autonomization of the State: From Integrated Administrative Models to Single Purpose
Organizations, 1–2 April 2005, Stanford, CA.

WALSHAM, G., 2006, Doing interpretive research. European Journal of Information Systems,

15, pp. 320–330.

WANNA, J., 2003, Introduction: the changing role of central budget agencies. In Controlling
Public Expenditure: The Changing Roles of Central Budget Agencies—Better
Guardians? J.L. Wanna and J. de Vries (Eds) (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).
WEBER, M., 1947, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, A.M. Henderson and T.

Parsons (Transl.) (New York, NY: Free Press).

WHITEHEAD, M., 2003, In the shadow of hierarchy: metagovernance, policy reform and urban

regeneration in the West Midlands. Area, 35, pp. 6–14.

WILLOUGHBY, K.G., 2004, Performance measurement and budget balancing: state govern-

ment perspective. Public Budgeting and Finance, 24, pp. 21–39.

WORLD BANK, 2005, E-Government Experience in the US and Canada: How Relevant
is it to Developing Countries? 15 June 2005, Washington, DC. Available at:
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTINFORMATION
ANDCOMMUNICATIONANDTECHNOLOGIES/EXTEDEVELOPMENT/0,,content-
MDK:20483017,pagePK:148956,piPK:216618,theSitePK:559460,00.html
(accessed 1
October 2007).

Downloaded by [Australian National University] at 19:30 13 January 2015 