This article was downloaded by: [University of Nebraska, Lincoln]
On: 18 October 2014, At: 00:35
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Reply to Comment on ‘Marine GIS:
Identification of mesoscale oceanic
thermal fronts’
V. Valavanis a , I. Katara a & A. Palialexis a
a Hellenic Centre for Marine Research , Institute of Marine
Biological Resources , Marine GIS Lab , Iraklion, Crete, Greece
Published online: 07 Oct 2010.

To cite this article: V. Valavanis , I. Katara & A. Palialexis (2009) Reply to Comment on ‘Marine
GIS: Identification of mesoscale oceanic thermal fronts’, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 23:3, 375-378, DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851446

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701851446

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 23, No. 3, March 2009, 375–378

Technical Communication

Reply to Comment on ‘Marine GIS: Identification of mesoscale oceanic
thermal fronts’

V. VALAVANIS*, I. KATARA and A. PALIALEXIS
Hellenic Centre for Marine Research, Institute of Marine Biological Resources, Marine
GIS Lab, Iraklion, Crete, Greece

(Received 25 November 2007; in final form 26 November 2007 )

Keywords: Marine GIS; Identification; Mesoscale; Oceanic; Thermal fronts

1.

Introduction

We reply to the comment on Valavanis et al. (2005) (Marine GIS: Identification of
mesoscale oceanic thermal fronts), which appeared in volume 19(10) of the
International Journal of Geographical Information Science (IJGIS). Critiquing
authors argue that Valavanis et al. (2005) proposed ‘sink’ method for front
detection is flawed because it is based on an erroneous definition of an oceanic
thermal front at the mesoscale level. We welcome their arguments, and we try to
clarify them, aiming towards an instructive interchange for IJGIS readership, as well
as all authors involved.

2. General discussion

A front is usually a vertically inclined interface between water masses of different
properties (mainly salinity, temperature, and chlorophyll-a), where nutrient-rich
waters are moved up or trapped in the interface (Largier 1993, Acha et al. 2004).
Fronts are caused by diverse forcing such as tides, continental runoff, currents
convergence, wind, solar heating, bathymetry, etc. There is no agreement about the
classification of fronts, but a partial
listing would include shelf-break fronts,
upwelling fronts, estuarine fronts, plume fronts, and fronts associated with
geomorphic features such as headlands, islands, canyons, and seamounts (Mann
and Lazier 1996). Under this definition, a front is identified if the along-track
gradient exceeds a predefined threshold, and it is significantly greater than the
average gradient magnitude in the surrounding region. The observed complicated
internal structure of a front, which might comprise several frontal features with
enhanced properties gradients, implies that it should be considered a ‘frontal zone’
rather than ‘front’ (Fedorov 1986). These points are illustrated in figure 1.

On the other hand, the definition of the term ‘mesoscale’ is a matter of spatial and
temporal scales. For example, if we consider the North Adriatic Sea as the study
area, then a front that occupies most of the North Adriatic basin and appears for
several months is not a mesoscale within the study area, but it may be well

*Corresponding author. Email: vasilis@her.hcmr.gr

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2009 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851446

Downloaded by [University of Nebraska, Lincoln] at 00:35 18 October 2014 376

V. Valavanis et al.

Figure 1. Simple schematic diagram of the frontal zone (as treated by the ‘sink’ method) is
shown. Water circulation patterns result in moved up and/or trapped nutrient-rich waters in
the frontal zone.

considered mesoscale within the Central Mediterranean area or the whole
Mediterranean basin in a timescale of a year. If the whole of an oceanic process
describes the synoptic picture of the oceanography of a study area, smaller oceanic
features (associated with the main oceanic process) describe the sub-synoptic, or
mesoscale oceanography of the area.

Regarding the proposed ‘sink’ method, it is mainly based on two ESRI’s ArcGIS
macro routines, named ‘flowdirection’ and ‘sink’ (ESRI, 1994). The ‘flowdirection’
macro includes the concept of gradient in cell values (change in z value) because the
direction of flow is determined by finding the direction of steepest descent from each
cell. This is calculated as ‘drop5change in z value/distance6100’ on a 363 cell
window and there are eight discrete and valid flow angles (Jenson and Domingue
1988). Then, the ‘sink’ macro identifies sink cells based on ‘direction of flow’ or
‘drop’ values. A sink is a cell or set of spatially connected cells whose flow direction
cannot be assigned one of the eight valid values in a flow direction grid. This can
occur when all neighbouring cells have higher values than that of the processing cell,
or when two cells flow into each other, creating a two-cell loop (Mark 1988).

When this concept is applied to an AVHRR SST satellite image for the
identification of fronts, the sink method identifies those areas that are characterized
by the attribute of front where the temperature is lower exactly on the frontal
interface, while SST is more homogeneously distributed around the frontal
interface. This is true in fronts as oceanic process when two different water masses
meet. The whole concept functions on a 363 cell window, and this is the reason why
the sink method targets transient, small, thermal, and productivity-enhancing fronts
that occur in scales of a few kilometres and sufficient to be depicted in monthly
averaged SST satellite images. In addition, the measurement of chlorophyll-a levels
in the frontal interface (through the use of SeaWiFS or MODISA Chl-a images)
depicts the characteristic of front where nutrient rich waters are moved up or
trapped in the frontal interface between two water masses.

3. Application of ‘sink’ method to Istrian Front (North Adriatic Sea)

The Istrian front is a basin-wide front with extensive presence throughout winter
months in North Adriatic Sea (Cushman-Roisin and Korotenko 2005). It is a
salinity–temperature front between cold freshwater of Po River outflow into the
North Adriatic and the warm saline waters of the East Adriatic Current that brings

Downloaded by [University of Nebraska, Lincoln] at 00:35 18 October 2014 Reply to Comment

377

Levantine Intermediate Water and Ionian Surface Water into the Adriatic. In cases
of clear Bora events
(strong winter north-easterly winds), North Adriatic
oceanography is characterized by the intensification of Istrian front and a number
of gyres, fronts, meanders, etc. (e.g. Book et al. 2005). The productivity levels of
North Adriatic Sea depend on the riverine water discharge of Po River (Vilicic et al.
2007) and during winter they do not provide strong signature signal in colour
satellite imagery (Lee 2003).

The ‘sink’ method in the case of Istrian front identifies only the adjacent, smaller
(named ‘mesoscale’), productive thermal fronts associated with adjacent eddies and
small gyre formations resulting from the Istrian front’s circulation patterns and
other smaller-scale oceanic processes (figure 2). Additionally, the Istrian front is a
salinity–temperature front with no high productivity signal. The sink method
requires high productivity levels in the frontal interface due to accumulation of
phytoplankton to the convergence zone of two different water masses. It does this by
calculating Chl-a values from SeaWiFS or MODISA satellite images inside and
outside the frontal interface.

If the whole of Istrian Front and associated gyres describe the synoptic picture of
the oceanography of the Northern Adriatic, smaller oceanic features describe the

Figure 2. Monthly averaged AVHRR SST of February 2003 for North Adriatic Sea.
Although the Istrian Front is well depicted at the centre of the image (narrow region in
yellow), the ‘sink’ method identifies smaller-scale, thermal and productivity-enhancing fronts
only (black lines).

Downloaded by [University of Nebraska, Lincoln] at 00:35 18 October 2014 378

Reply to Comment

sub-synoptic, or mesoscale oceanography of the area. In our initial contribution, we
use the term ‘mesoscale’ exactly with this sense targeting thermal and productivity-
enhancing small fronts that are depicted in monthly satellite images.

4. Concluding remarks

Suffice it to say, the ‘sink’ method identifies the attribute of the frontal zone in
which phytoplankton-rich cold waters are trapped in the frontal zone. It cannot
identify large-scale fronts where the frontal zone of different water masses occupies
areas of tenths of kilometres. In such cases, gradient methods are preferred due
mainly to the input of a threshold in rate of change in SST values as well as the
larger analytical window (Ullman and Cornillon 2000) or threshold input using the
ArcGIS ‘slope’ function (ESRI, 1994).

In addition, results of the ‘sink’ method depend on the spatial resolution of the
input SST and Chl-a satellite images (e.g. AVHRR SST of 1.2 km, MODISA Chl-a of
4 km and SeaWiFS Chl-a of 9 km) due to its small analytical window (363 pixels).

Finally, Valavanis et al. (2005) use wind data to explain the identification of
fronts, and we would agree that the use of detailed CTD-like data could be the
ultimate ground-truth procedure for the validation of the ‘sink’ method results.

References
ACHA, E.M., MIANZAN, H.W., GUERRERO, R.I.A., FAVERO, M. and BAVA, J., 2004, Marine
fronts at the continental shelves of austral South America: Physical and ecological
processes. Journal of Marine Systems, 44, pp. 83–105.

BOOK, J.W., PERKINS, H.T., CAVALERI, L., DOYLE, J.D. and PULLEN, J.D., 2005, ADCP
observations of the western Adriatic slope current during winter of 2001. Progress In
Oceanography, 66, pp. 270–286.

CUSHMAN-ROISIN, B. and KOROTENKO, K.A., 2005, Mesoscale-resolving simulations of
summer and winter bora events in the Adriatic. Geophysical Research Abstracts, 7,
pp. 05862.

ESRI, 1994, ARC Macro Language (Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research

Institute).

FEDOROV, K.N., 1986, The Physical Nature and Structure of Oceanic Fronts (Berlin: Springer).
JENSON, S.K. and DOMINGUE, J.O., 1988, Extracting topographic structure from digital
elevation data for geographic information system analysis. Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing, 54, pp. 1593–1600.

LARGIER, J.L., 1993, Estuarine fronts: how important are they? Estuaries, 16, pp. 1–11.
LEE, C., 2003, Dolce Vita 1—Feb 2003 Field Report. Available online: http://iop.apl.
washington.edu/projects/adriatic/html/report1.html (accessed 4 March 2008).
MANN, K.H. and LAZIER, J.R.N., 1996, Dynamics of Marine Ecosystems. Biological–Physical

Interactions in the Oceans, 2nd edition (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell).

MARK, D.M., 1988, Network Models in Geomorphology, Modelling in Geomorphological

Systems (New York: Wiley).

ULLMAN, D.S. and CORNILLON, P.C., 2000, Evaluation of front detection methods for
satellite-derived, SST data using in situ observations. Journal of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Technology, 17, pp. 1667–1675.

VALAVANIS, V.D., KATARA, I. and PALIALEXIS, A., 2005, Marine, GIS: Identification of
mesoscale oceanic thermal fronts. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 19, pp. 1131–1147.

VILICIC, D., BOSAK, S., BURIC, Z. and CAPUT-MIHALIC, K., 2007, Phytoplankton seasonality
and composition along the coastal, NE Adriatic Sea during the extremely low Po
River discharge in 2006. Acta Botanica Croatica, 66, pp. 101–115.

Downloaded by [University of Nebraska, Lincoln] at 00:35 18 October 2014 