This article was downloaded by: [Gazi University]
On: 19 August 2014, At: 07:24
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Conforming (to) the
opposition: the social
construction of geographical
information systems in
social movements
R. E. Sieber a
a Department of Geography and School of the
Environment, McGill University, 805 Sherbrooke
St. W., Montreal, QC H3A 2K6, Canada
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: R. E. Sieber (2000) Conforming (to) the opposition: the
social construction of geographical information systems in social movements,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14:8, 775-793, DOI:
10.1080/136588100750022787

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588100750022787

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be

independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 8, 775± 793

Research Article

Conforming (to) the opposition: the social construction of geographical
information systems in social movements

R. E. SIEBER
Department of Geography and School of the Environment, McGill University, 805
Sherbrooke St. W., Montreal, QC H3A 2K6, Canada; e-mail: sieber@geog.mcgill.ca

Abstract. This paper proposes a new framework to understand the use and
value of GIS by social movement groups and to transcend the contested debate
over how and whether GIS should be adopted. It frames the debate in terms of
the conforming properties of GIS. The proposal is that conservation GROs must
conform to GIS to ensure eŒective usage; however, in the process of that use,
they mould the GIS to their own objectives. Various examples from the North
American conservation movement illustrate the properties of GIS conformity and
likely outcomes of research. This paper asks the reader to rethink PPGIS and
GIS diŒusion. It also poses questions for further research that frames adoption
as an issue of conformity.

‘conformable 1. similar. 2. consistent. 3. adapted. 4. tractable, submissive. 5. Geol.
(of strata in contact) lying in the same direction’. Oxford Encyclopedic English
Dictionary, 1991

‘The reasonable man adapts himself to the world; the unreasonable one persists
in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore, all progress depends on the
unreasonable man’.
George Bernard Shaw (Man and Superman, ‘Maxims for Revolutionists: Reason’,
1903)

1.

Introduction
This paper responds to external calls by agencies and others to bring spatial
technology and information to the grassroots. Funding agencies such as the National
Science Foundation (NSF) in the United States have directed its programs to sponsor
research that ‘contribute(s) to universal, transparent and aŒordable participation in
an information-base d society’,
(http://www.cise.nsf.gov/index.html). The National
Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, the NSF-sponsored center for GIS
research and its Project Varenius, has identi(cid:142) ed Public Participation in Geographic
Information Systems (PPGIS) as an important direction in GIS research and a
potential tool for empowerment of social movement groups (PPGIS report available
at http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/varenius/ppgis/PPGIS98_rpt.html). Numerous confer-
ences (e.g. Friday Harbor in 1993, Geographic Information and Society in 1995 ) and
special journal issues (Cartography and GIS, 22, 1, 25, 2, Cultural Survival Quarterly,
18, 4) call for a critical understanding of that potential.

These calls recognize the signi(cid:142) cant levels of GIS adoption by grassroots organ-
izations (GROs), de(cid:142) ned as nonpro(cid:142) t membership organizations interested in social

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 776

R. E. Sieber

transformation (Edwards and Hulme 1995). Research in the US environmental and
conservation movement (Sieber 1997) revealed that GIS diŒusion has occurred at a
rate of 20%. US Housing and Urban Development (HUD) disseminates its own
GIS, called Community 2020, to participating community development corporations
and community-base d organizations. The increasing diŒusion of GIS through other
mechanisms such as community university partnerships suggests that many social
movement groups receive a broad exposure to the technology.

Considerable pressures propel GROs, such as environmentalists and community
organizations, to adopt GIS. Rycroft (1991, p. 166) warns that the environmental
movement may risk ‘losing what in(cid:143) uence it has on the debate unless it can
formulate strategies that can encompass...[the most current] scienti(cid:142) c knowledge’.
Employing the same technical tools and fashioning organizationa l positions in known
scienti(cid:142) c and technical terms may provide entre´e into the debate. Goldman (1991)
argues that the ability to conform to the practices of bureaucrati c decision making
through IT use allows GROs and nonpro(cid:142) ts to gain a competitive political advant-
age. Klosterman (1987) suggests that the use of computers is altering permissible
standards of evidence. Thus, GIS may become the currency in any political discussion
of spatial issues, emphatically so as increasing numbers of government agencies and
industry acquire GIS. Computing technology may supply a key asset to informational
issues, and, according to researchers
and political access, to comprehension of
legitimacy. Whether
(Feldman and March 1981, Innes 1988), to organizationa l
groups are ready or not, GIS may become essential to obtain grants and data, to
create competing models, to ‘talk the talk’ of the bureaucrats, and to appear more
scienti(cid:142) c.

Counter-pressures exist alongside pressures. GIS adoption may be hindered or
constrained by the precarious nature of the GRO. Considerable diversity exists in
resources and missions among GROs such as conservationists (Gottlieb 1993 ).
Nonetheless, GROs can be characterized as precarious both in their ability to attract
and retain resources and their capacity to hold together a many-times loosely-knit
assemblage of individuals with diverse goals and varying strategies to accomplish
them. GROs often exist hand-to-mouth: relying on one-time grants and experiencing
high turnovers in their staŒand volunteers (Snow 1992 ). Whereas a technology such
as GIS may oŒer a way for groups to maximize their resource base, the resource
demands may stress that base or even preclude adoption (Rubinyi 1989). More
symbolic to social movements are ideological diŒerences over a social movement’s
potential surrender to a capital-induced innovation that, of necessity, quanti(cid:142) es
social values, homogenizes culture, and depreciates place (Castells 1989, Evans
and Boyte 1992, Pickles 1995). Much of the landscape of conservation activists,
for instance, draws upon a culture of opposition and diŒerence (Fox 1985, Manes
1990 ). Moreover, social movements’ legitimacy may derive from not resembling the
for-pro(cid:142) t or public sector (Wolch 1990). How then does a GRO understand the
impacts and accommodate an innovation that is simultaneously indispensable and
hazardous?

In this paper I argue that the success of GIS ultimately rests upon a group’s
ability to ‘conform’ to the rules and procedures of GIS adoption. Conformity can
be essential and even bene(cid:142) cial; for instance, some of GIS’s promoted e(cid:141) ciencies
derive from standardizing spatial data sets (French and Wiggins 1990, Budic 1995 ).
However as will be discussed, several reasons, including social context and ideological
diŒerences, the potential for co-optation, and the lack of resources, make conforming

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

777

for activists problematic. Whether positive or negative (or both), conformity need
not be unidirectional in impact, that is, GIS conforming GROs. In the process of its
use, GROs may be able to mould—to ‘conform’—GIS to their own objectives.
Conformity is not a matter of GROs simply surrendering to the ‘opposition’—GIS
technology.

Whereas the use of GIS in the public sector has been well-documented and
codi(cid:142) ed, systematic research on the use of GIS by GROs is just emerging. Research
is complicated by a history of adversarial literatures, some of which, I argue, are
asking the wrong questions. This discussion begins by describing the context of GIS
in the grassroots. It then de(cid:142) nes GIS conformity, its dimensions, and its properties.
It seeks to integrate these by examining the properties of conformity. These properties
cover such subjects as the extent and processes of GIS diŒusion and implementation,
spatial data use and sharing, and application of GIS to goals in environmental/
conservation organizations. The paper draws upon a wide range of literatures, from
GIS implementation and spatial data sharing, to social movement theory and conser-
vation biology, to the literatures of GIS and Society and PPGIS. It concludes with
observations on and speculations about conformity, nonconformity, and the new
social practice of GIS in the grassroots.

2. De(cid:142) ning GIS conformity
2.1. Framing GIS conformity

Conducting empirical work in the area of GIS in the grassroots has been a
di(cid:141) cult proposition. Research historically has been hampered by an animated
polemic (Openshaw 1991, Aberley 1993, Pickles 1995, Curry 1998). Either GIS oŒers
a political savior to a participatory democracy or GIS furnishes an electronic gilded
knife in the heart of social activism. Both ends of the polemic could be said to suŒer
from an immutable and reactive view of information technology (IT): organizations
and individuals must react to a static technology, either positively or negatively
(Webster and Robins 1986). However, GIS and its impacts are far more plastic and
contextual. Chrisman (1997) calls GIS a ‘social practice’, a culmination of technology,
policies, standards, and people. This is far diŒerent from conceptualizing GIS as a
box with a CD that is installed by a passive user community.

The idea that GIS represents a social practice undergirds the PPGIS literature
(Obermeyer 1998a, also see PPGIS papers at http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/varenius/
ppgis/papers/index.html). GIS re(cid:143) ects the choices made by GIS developers and their
institutions, existing spatial technologies, software languages, and accepted spatial
theories (Obermeyer 1998a). PPGIS reaches a middle ground in the polemic by
richly exploring what Harris and Weiner (1998, p. 69) call a ‘contradictory technology
that can simultaneously empower and marginalize’ GROs. GIS has the potential to
enhance democracy, but enhancement is tempered by the need for broadened access
to spatial data and technology and the non-GIS need for greater participation in
policymaking. Further, GROs must beware the transformative potential of GIS: to
stress their already-strappe d resources, divert their attention, and adversely represent
them (Aitken and Michel 1995, Pickles 1995, Sheppard 1995, Harris and Weiner
1998 ).

Acknowledging the transformative power of GIS, researchers in PPGIS and the
GIS and Society literatures (this second literature is best identi(cid:142) ed by Lake 1993,
Pickles 1995, Sheppard 1995, Curry 1998) generally miss two critical elements, which
produces an incorrect framing of the issue. First, transformation s are invariably

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 778

R. E. Sieber

negative. The use may be positive (e.g. Craig and Elwood (1998) have found that
GROs eŒectively used GIS maps to attract new members to the organization; GIS
analysis identi(cid:142) ed problem areas in the community), but the transformative potential
is not. Harris and Weiner (1998, p. 69) echo the concern of many over the ‘power
relations associated with spatial decision making [that] are being transformed
through diŒerential access to GIS and data’. Curry (1998 ) claims that GIS achieves
this shift in numerous ways: by commodifying everyday practices (e.g. what one
values about home and country), enabling greater surveillance and allowing geode-
if GIS can transform organizations in one-
mographic stereotyping. However,
direction, surely it can in the other direction. Large and small organizations, in the
public and private sector are adopting GIS based, in part, on the promise that GIS
can positively transform their operations,
for example, through better decision
making made possible by the combination of diverse data sets. Why then, can GIS
not positively transform nonpro(cid:142) ts? This paper will suggest mechanisms by which
GROs can be enhanced by GIS.

Second, and more important, the PPGIS literature largely implies that GROs
cannot transform GIS. Groups, as Harris and Weiner (1998) recommend, can
enhance GIS output with multi-media and data sets of their own creation. They can
apply it in the hopes that GIS use may transform the public participation process.
Although both are important goals, they circumscribe the technology itself and place
GIS external to the social practice of GROs. Haraway (1985) contends that if the
marginalized are going to have any in(cid:143) uence on the future, they need to stop (cid:142) ghting
existing systems/structures and be involved in ‘writing the cyborg’. They must parti-
cipate in changing the intrinsic nature of GIS and impact the individuals who make
decisions about the design, development, and modelling of the technology.

When technology becomes appropriated, it becomes the community’s own. Aitken
and Michel (1995, p. 17) charge GROs and their supporters to move beyond the
calls for participation and access to ownership of GIS development: ‘Participation
in the creation of GIS knowledge does not necessarily give power to those involved
in, and aŒected by decision-making’. By transforming the GIS groups can change
the technology that is used by the power elites. This is perhaps easier in the
conservation movement, where conservation scientists, activists, and GIS developers
move regularly between roles (Convis 1998 ). As will be seen in the subsequent
examples, ownership of GIS is considered to be essential to successful adoption.

If GIS is viewed as a social practice, then there is no reason why GIS-using
GROs cannot be able to interact with GIS as much as users in the public and private
sectors. Chrisman builds on Latour (1987 ) who asserts that users of a particular
technology participate in the co-production of that technology. Latour (1987, p. 140)
adds:
‘We are all multi-conductors and can either drop, transfer, de(cid:143) ect, modify,
ignore, corrupt, or appropriate the claims that need our help if they are to spread
or last’. This view holds that GIS diŒusion in speci(cid:142) c social movements depend as
much as upon its perceived utility as its ability to be reformed by the movement.
Indeed, these might be one and the same. It also suggests that GROs must be
predisposed to the
sets and ideological
approaches —in order to eŒectively adopt GIS. Prior research found that GIS-using
conservation GROs are very active in mutating the technology to their goals and
transforming its use in conservation in general (Laituri and Harvey 1995, Sieber
1997 ). More importantly, this formulation implies that GIS is transformed by GROs
and presented afresh to the larger community.

technology—possess

certain skill

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

779

It should be noted that the following examples are from North America. They
do not re(cid:143) ect the enormous diŒerences that exist in GIS diŒusion between the (cid:142) rst
and third world, and native and non-native peoples (Poole 1995, Rundstrom 1995).
Resource disparities and epistemological diŒerences are brought into high relief when
comparing GIS usage and transformative potential within third world and native
GROs. Even in these cases, the need for ownership still holds. Transforming the
technology into a Nepalese GIS or a Navajo GIS, re(cid:143) ecting culture and capacity,
becomes essential.

2.2. De(cid:142) ning conformity

GIS may be a social practice and groups may be able to make the technology
their own; nevertheless, the ability to mutate that practice presumes technical know-
ledge and the power to in(cid:143) uence. The learning process alone intertwines the user in
an existing code of rules and procedures of GIS adoption. Thus impacts can vary in
scope and scale. This paper frames the impacts of GIS in the conservation movement
in terms of their conforming properties. Conforming properties are de(cid:142) ned as accom-
modation (in organizationa l practices of GIS implementation and data sharing),
centralization (in organizationa l resources), formalization (in organizationa l structure
and relations), standardizatio n (in data de(cid:142) nitions and models), and acquiescence
(in ideology, values, strategies, and goals). Each of these will be covered in depth
below. The proposal is that conservation GROs must conform to GIS to ensure
eŒective usage; however, in the process of that use, they mould the GIS to their own
objectives. This ‘reciprocal conformity’ or ‘re-invention’ (Rogers 1995) can be per-
ceived as both positive and negative throughout the stages of adoption. Thus, an
organization might conform to the practices of GIS implementation but not conform
in centralizing GIS resources; it might alter the way in which spatial data is modelled
by a larger number of users but exert no impact on the ways in which data is
distributed. Conformity can be exerted upon the organization, but also can be exerted
by the organization as it seeks to in(cid:143) uence stakeholders and other actors.

Conformity can be further de(cid:142) ned along several dimensions. In adoption indi-
vidual GROs will contend with external conformity—the degree to which they
resemble other private, public sector, or academic institutions or the degree to which
external organizations resemble GROs. Another dimension concerns internal con-
formity—the degree to which GIS adoption exerts a homogenizing eŒect on a group’s
activities. Conformity also can diŒuse horizontally, across similar organizations (e.g.
across land trusts) as well as vertically, throughout an organization with chapters,
clubs. Sequential conformity occurs through the life stages of the innovation’s adop-
tion in an organization (e.g. does conforming in GIS installation induce conforming
to a GIS ideology?). The con(cid:143) icting dimension occurs when one type of conformity
con(cid:143) icts with another. Anyone of these dimensions may occur simultaneously,
consecutively, individually, or not at all.

Even though the proposal links eŒective usage (to be de(cid:142) ned later) to conformity,
this does not exclude the potential for eŒective nonconforming use of GIS in the
conservation movement. This paper attempts to identify the role of nonconformity
in GIS adoption and speculates on the sustainability of nonconformity. Does a
practice remain nonconforming or can it become institutionalized into a set of
practices to which others conform?

Admittedly, the term conformity is controversial—note that de(cid:142) nitions of
conformable range from ‘similar’ to ‘submissive’—and conjures up visions of

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 780

R. E. Sieber

environmentalist automatons marching to the corporate beat of co-opted issues. (It
should be noted that I do not advocate GIS adoption for all conservationists—see
Sieber forthcoming.) Conformity, by the above de(cid:142) nition, does not automatically
mean rigid adherence to a dominant ideology, but suggests an elastic interplay of
actor and technology, models and theories. The word re(cid:143) ects the adaptation of
individuals to, according to Harvey and Chrisman (1998, 1683), a ‘technology [that]
successfully connects multiple, even opposing perspectives...throug h stabilizations of
facts [, relations,] and artifacts’. Harvey and Chrisman’s ‘boundary objects’ are the
place where power relations intersect, serving the interests of some at the possible
expense of others. In the organizationa l theory literature eŒective organizations span
the boundaries between the internal and external world (Daft 1989). Boundaries are
places for organizations to engage threats and opportunities. Conformity can be
viewed as a method to operationalize the boundary and understand the processes
by which organizations and individuals engage the external and either adapt or resist.

3. Conformance Properties in action

This section describes more fully the four properties of conforming (to) GIS.
Each section provides the base literature and examples from research, much of it
single case studies, that underscore the complexity one encounters when framing
GIS adoption in social movements as one of conformity. Most of these examples
are drawn from the author’s decade-long research on the use, value, and impact of
GIS in the environmental movement (much of which can be found in Sieber 1997 ).
It is also based upon six years of participating in the Society of Conservation GIS,
whose annual conference has drawn increasing numbers of conservation activists
and scientists.

Use of GIS by conservation GROs holds special importance. Comparison of
adoption rates with other grassroots GIS users such as community development
corporations (Obermeyer 1998b) suggest that environmentalists and conservationists
play an early adopter role in GRO’s GIS diŒusion. The study of early adopters is
important since they represent a bellwether of the use of innovation in similar groups
(Rogers 1995).

A brief word on operationalizing eŒective usage: Authors from various disciplines
have expressed the limits of applying strict quantitative measures such as system
performance or single measures such as cost eŒectiveness in IT adoption (Keen 1981,
Ives et al. 1983, Kanter and Summers 1987, Poe et al. 1992 ). Instead they endorse
the attainment of organizationa l goals as a measure of eŒectiveness. Assessing parti-
cipants’ satisfaction with the use/output of GIS, according to the Management
Information Systems (MIS) community, is viewed as a reliable surrogate for the
more di(cid:141) cult-to-measure goal attainment (Bailey and Pearson 1983, Ives et al. 1983,
Igbaria and Nachman 1990). Satis(cid:142) ed users better achieve group goals, improve the
quality of the working environment, and increase voluntary system usage (Galletta
and Lederer 1989). Words such as eŒective and successful appear throughout the
paper. EŒective use of GIS is assessed through interviews with GRO members,
document review, and interviews with public agencies and other external agents that
interact with GROs.

3.1. Accommodating GIS

Drawing on numerous case studies in public agencies, researchers have concluded
that technical factors of implementation are far less important in predicting the

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

781

likelihood of successful GIS implementation than organizationa l
factors. These
include factors such as gaining upper management support, ensuring organizationa l
communication and coordination, and allocating su(cid:141) cient resources (French and
Wiggins 1990, Croswell 1991, Onsrud and Pinto 1993, Budic 1994, Huxhold and
Levinsohn 1995). Although based on larger and more stable municipalities than
fragile GROs, this codi(cid:142) ed list suggests that any organization accommodating the
rules will more likely ensure a functional GIS.

This list presumes that most organizations will conform to a certain implementa-
tion type: purchase the GIS hardware and software, input or acquire data, and hire
GIS technical support. This may not be possible for a cash-strapped group.
DiŒerences between GROs and public agencies appear to be due largely to the cost
of adoption, in terms of cash outlays, training, and social reorganization (Sieber
1997, Barndt 1998, Tulloch 1998).

Insu(cid:141) cient resources may not preclude adoption because some GROs have
discovered creative alternatives to the traditional model. This is largely due to a
nonconforming strategy of resource substitution. This substitution comes in the form
of an emerging support infrastructure of intermediaries that spans the public (e.g.
US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s creation of software), private
(e.g. ESRI donation of software), academic (provision of equipment, students, and
time), nonpro(cid:142) t (e.g. the Conservation Technology Support Program’s provision of
training and grants) , and individual (supply of computers and expertise) (Sawicki
and Craig 1996, Barndt 1998, Leitner et al. 1998, Sawicki and Peterman 1998, Sieber
2000 ). A group might be unable to aŒord a GIS, but can borrow a member’s
computer, install on it software donated by a vendor, acquire georegistered data
from a university, receive GIS training from a technical assistance nonpro(cid:142) t, and
print out a map on an E-sized plotted supplied by a public agency.

This support infrastructure encapsulates a set of practices with which GROs
should more easily conform. Presumably, sympatheti c agencies and vendors create
a normative milieu that supports activist goals. However sympatheti c the infrastruc-
ture, the new set of implementation practices can impose its own accommodating
costs, including the acquisition of inappropriate technology, mismatch of skills and
schedules, compliance with other institutions’ regulations, and co-optation by institu-
tions’ values. Research has shown that resource-poor groups increase their likelihood
of being co-opted as organizationa l goals shift to those (cid:142) tting their funding agencies
(Gittell 1980, Rubinyi 1989, Snow 1992). Some GIS-using community development
corporations (CDCs) have been obliged to use HUD’s Community 2020 software to
ensure continued access to various types of support (Obermeyer 1998b). It should
be noted that GIS diŒusion to CDCs has had a very spotty record (Obermeyer
1999 ). Without a well-developed infrastructure that speci(cid:142) cally supports the GIS
technical needs of these GROs—CDCs, by contrast, receive considerable support
from intermediaries for (cid:142) nancial technical
information—CDCs have no set of
consonant practices with which to conform.

The Nature Conservancy of Lanphere Christensen Dunes Preserve (Lanphere),
a small outpost of the larger organization, exempli(cid:142) es a conservation GRO that
relies on the support infrastructure for the entirety of its GIS. Lanphere is a small
organization of two paid staŒ, an area ecologist and a preserve manager, who oversee
the protection of the dunes preserve. The physical removal of non-native species and
public education are its primary missions; other issues are of low priority, including
GIS. The organization has no in-house GIS capacity and does not plan to increase

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 782

R. E. Sieber

that capacity.
(Since the research was conducted, The Nature Conservancy
has transferred the dunes to the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Functions remain
essentially the same and it is still headed by the area ecologist.)

Because Lanphere desires the maps and analysis (if not the capacity), it outsources
all its GIS needs to a local university. Outsourcing, according to the MIS literature,
represents an eŒective technique to manage technology that quickly obsolesces and
requires highly trained staŒ(Slaughter and Ang 1996 ). The organization then can
focus on its ‘core functions’. This arrangement is perceived to be bene(cid:142) cial to both
entities; nonetheless, Lanphere has had to conform to the university by constructing
projects of three-month durations and continually remaking projects to meet pro-
fessors’ research needs. Professors may resist requests for yet another thematic map
when they are worrying about retention, tenure, and promotion.

Further research may reveal the degree to which GROs mirror or diŒer from the
implementation factors found in public agencies. It also will enumerate costs of
accommodating GIS, including the redirection of resources to computing, staŒ, and
data and the politics of that redirection. It should demonstrate the in(cid:143) uence of the
support infrastructure as groups implement and use the technology. Further, it might
reveal modi(cid:142) cations to implementation practices that inform other users, such as
municipalities. There are indications that accommodation practices used by resource-
poor GROs can assist GIS implementation in small towns and villages (Wheeler
1998 ).

3.2. Centralizing and formalizing GIS

Changes in organizationa l structure and concentration of/reliance on expertise
may occur through the centralization of GIS-related resources and the formalization
of organizationa l structures and relations. GIS implementation researchers suggest
that higher degrees of centralization and formalization (e.g. IT policies) and lower
levels of uncertainty in the organization promote successful use (Campbell 1991,
is inherently destabilizing
Croswell 1991, Budic 1997) because innovation itself
(Rogers 1995). This limits GROs that are loosely organized or operate in highly
volatile political arenas. It runs counter to recommendations of Leitner et al. (1998 ),
for (cid:143) exibility and responsiveness in systems developed for GROs. The model further
limits many GROs, which tend to be hierarchically (cid:143) at and operate informally.

However bereft of department heads, research in conservation GROs has found
GIS technical expertise to be highly centralized (Sieber 1997). One individual advoc-
ates for the organizationa l use of GIS, installs the software, and creates most all of
the applications. This ‘super’ GIS champion, (since GIS champions ordinarily func-
tion to diŒuse GIS use) was found to be crucial to GIS use in environmental
organizations. Rogers (1993, 1995) contends that champions or ‘opinion leaders’
translate external practices into internal norms. Whereas the reliance on GIS cham-
pions represents an instance of conformity with the social practices of GIS imple-
mentation, it also exempli(cid:142) es an instance of induced nonconformity. Rogers continues
that these opinion leaders become entrenched in the demands of the technology,
adopting its jargon and acculturating to its conferences and literature. They eventu-
ally estrange themselves from organizationa l norms as they adopt the norms of the
GIS community, which could include its methods of approaching environmental
issues. More critical to day-to-day use, high turnovers and burnout in GROs could
strand GIS. This dependence on a singular source of expertise could cause champions
to wear out or take their GIS skills to the better paying private sector.

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

783

Environmental Protection Information Center (EPIC), located north of San
Francisco, California, exempli(cid:142) es the struggle to cope with the centralization and
formalization of GIS. EPIC is dedicated to protecting old growth redwoods primarily
on private lands. It acts as an umbrella non-pro(cid:142) t for several GROs and serves as
nexus for their organizing and clerical activities. Some of these GROs employ direct
action. They operate in a highly reactive environment, in which GRO members are
frequently arrested for preventing logging. EPIC has successfully litigated over 20
lawsuits, particularly under the Endangered Species Act. The organization employs
four people and relies on two computers, although it makes extensive use of members’
computers. They have used GIS to produce small thematic maps and create a slowly
growing bioregional database.

EPIC has adopted GIS four times. All have been one-person operations and all
have foundered due either to the champion’s burnout or departure (the fourth has
spun oŒinto a separate organization that still uses GIS). Its (cid:142) rst attempt at GIS, in
the late-1980s, was enthusiastically met—many GIS champions resemble GIS evan-
gelists —as the individual purchased his own GIS-speci(cid:142) c hardware, software and
training. However, the learning process was steep; an enormous amount of primary
data collection was required; and he tried but failed to get other members interested.
One map was completed. Then he returned to his regular employment and traditional
activism. He professes no desire to return to GIS. EPIC’s many attempts suggest
that GIS remains incompatible with the norms of the organization. EPIC’s dynamic
adoption of GIS suggests that organizationa l practices must be predisposed to
accommodate GIS practices even if expertise is concentrated.

3.3. Standardizing spatial data

GROs may develop eŒective alternatives to conformity in GIS implementation.
Data is another matter. Organizations devote considerable resources to enter or
acquire spatial data. Because GROs are resource-poor, they may need to conform
to preset standards of data de(cid:142) nitions, models, and transmission. These include
technical issues of GIS data entry and use and organizationa l issues of data acquisi-
tion and sharing.

3.3.1. T echnical issues in standardizing spatial data

Hardware and software acquisition may be expensive; however, spatial data entry
historically has represented an overwhelming portion, 85%, of GIS costs (Parent
1989 ). The acquisition of already digitized spatial data, in theory, should dramatically
ease GIS use and propels e(cid:141) ciency arguments with the increasing availability of
data over the web. Formalized acquisition of geographical data—on-going spatial
data sharing agreements among institutions—should add substantial combinatorial
value to existing organizationa l data because it ensures continued access to the most
current information (Azad and Wiggins 1995, Budic 1995, Pinto and Onsrud 1995).
GAP analysis data is a prime source of digital data for conservation GROs and
it highlights the technical issues of GRO data entry and use. GAP data can be too
highly aggregated (e.g. biodiversity quality instead of individual species), of insu(cid:141) -
cient resolution or too-small scale, and incomplete in coverage (Scott et al. 1993,
Crist and Jennings 1997, Morain 1999, Walker and Craighead 1997). GROs likely
will consume resources in converting and verifying data (e.g. of quality, error, and
sampling). GAP and other secondary data inevitably embed assumptions about
scale, patch size, measures, landscape context, and value into the models. Further,

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 784

R. E. Sieber

GAP recognizes that each state’s information, while based on the same Landsat
imagery, is still often fragmentary, compiled from existing datasets, and may re(cid:143) ect
particular agendas of the state program. Work with community-base d organizations
reveals similar concerns, such as scale and resolution, formats, levels of aggregation,
and media (Barndt 1998, Elwood and Leitner 1998).

Trinity Community GIS (Trinity), in rural and poor Hayfork, California high-
lights the success and frustration of using standardize d data. Trinity functions as a
centre of GIS services and research for other nonpro(cid:142) ts, government agencies,
businesses, research stations, and local citizens. Trinity supports three full-time staŒ,
all of whom participate in system maintenance. The two local staŒhave been trained
in GIS by the director, a graduate of the University of California at Berkeley
(although the two had considerable prior experience in handling maps or in using
computers).

Trinity has been investigating wildcrafting of special forest/non-timber products
(SFPs) as a way to replace lost timber industry jobs. Trinity is applying GIS to
predict the distribution and location of SFPs; maps are then printed for community
residents’ use. On the one hand, TCGIS is leading the way among local public
agencies and research centres in general research in and GIS applications for SFPs.
Indeed, agencies are conforming to Trinity’s GIS practices. Conversely, current
agency practices complicate Trinity’s data acquisition from and data sharing with
others interested in SFPs. One issue concerns agency emphasis of feature data on
timber (frequently garnered from satellite imagery of forest canopies) and not on the
understory (i.e. the vegetation near the ground). Another involves the level of data
abstraction: the US Forest Service, for example, tracks ‘ecological units’, which are
indicators (and valuations) of biodiversity types aggregated from combinations of
soils, vegetation, and water data. Trinity staŒhave experienced problems in generat-
ing likely plant sites from aggregated data, especially when SFPs are disturbance-
related and not a normal part of a particular ecology.

3.3.2. Organizational issues in standardizing spatial data

Organizational issues further complicate the technical issues of digital spatial
data access. Access to public data is governed by issues of de(cid:142) nitions of access,
format and standards, but also by more political issues of assumed and actual
liability, cost, and power (Epstein 1995, King 1995). Public agencies may view data
access by GROs as a source of danger if data distribution reveals errors or sensitive
material, revenue if they view GROs as a potential customer for data, or power if
agencies can withhold or restrict information (cid:143) ows from seemingly hostile groups.
To ensure access, large and small organizations may wish to establish more formalized
data sharing arrangements. These arrangements exhibit their own set of challenges,
which includes variations in resources, skills, goals and priorities, and organizationa l
structure (Campbell 1991, Onsrud and Rushton 1995). Not surprisingly, published
models, which are based upon data sharing among agencies, do not re(cid:143) ect the
extreme diŒerences between GROs and public agencies (Sieber 1997, Elwood and
Leitner 1998), particularly regarding resources and goals. Irrespective of any utility
that GRO data might hold for potential partner agencies, GROs still might not be
able to conform su(cid:141) ciently to access or share data.

The following example highlights the complicated terrain of conforming to
acquire and share data. The Wildlands Project (TWP) is a nonpro(cid:142) t organization
based in Tucson, Arizona and is a loose compilation of 250 member-organization s

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

785

and individuals–traditional conservation biologists, conservation GROs, and indi-
vidual activists from across the continent. Its mission is grand in scale and scope: in
1000 years members hope to return half of North and Central America to wild land.
In the short term, TWP has found GIS to be essential in allowing its members to
create and manage data sets at a bioregional scale.

Within TWP, acquisition of spatial data from outside sources appears eased
when GROs utilize comprising and negotiation strategies, that is conform to the
status quo to acquire data. Some member groups work within the system and
consequently acquire data easily, although informally. More confrontationa l groups
have found access limited. A direct action group, involved in protecting old growth
hardwood forests, has had to enter all its data from scratch.

Spatial data sharing would bene(cid:142) t TWP since it would allow headquarters to
coordinate activities at a bioregional scale. Sharing would require some amount of
standardization : of data de(cid:142) nitions, models, and metadata. To date, sharing has
proved di(cid:141) cult because member organizations, several of which come out of a direct
action tradition, reject initial attempts at conformity (particularly in de(cid:142) nitions and
symbology).

Further understanding of GIS conformity means exploring how data access is
occurring and data sharing by conservationists mirrors or diŒers from other docu-
mented organizations. With whom are conservationists sharing and to what extent
do factors diŒer dependent upon the institution with which they are sharing informa-
tion? To compensate for limited access or ensure data quality, what new types of
sharing or acquisition networks are emerging within the conservation movement?
Only then do we understand the data component of GIS conformity.

3.4. Acquiescing to GIS

To achieve eŒectiveness in GIS use, must GROs conform, that is acquiesce, to
the ideology, values, and strategies implicit in GIS practice? Might GROs transform
the ideology of GIS that others practice? Is GIS simply an objective tool that is free
from ideology? That last question has been well argued elsewhere (Lake 1993, Pickles
1995 ). If GIS is a social practice then it inevitably embeds value in the hardware.
This paper will contain its discussion to two parts: the products of GIS use and the
objectives of GIS use.

3.4.1. Products of GIS use

Issues of data standardizatio n are undergirded by an unstated assumption of
many spatial data sharing researchers that spatial data can somehow be reduced,
through metadata and other standardizing devices, to a universal neutrality (Curry
1998 ). Just as US Census data has been viewed as neutral (perhaps because of its
widespread availability and utility although it is not without growing challenges to
its veracity), so eventually could environmental and cadastral data set standards for
extant species and land value. Following this model, GROs should experience only
technical problems in using secondary spatial data. Standardizatio n involves more
than systematizing media type, however. Dependence upon contextual and highly
aggregated secondary data might bound how groups meaningfully extract data and
oblige them to accept the explicit and implicit assumptions, such as the interpretation
of wilderness as natural resources.

The products of GIS are also not neutral. They re(cid:143) ect choices and power: a
particular cultural frame of reference (Chrisman 1987) and a pictorial of our biases

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 786

R. E. Sieber

and preferences (Monmonier 1991, Wood 1992). Maps serve interests that are not
always apparent; maps do not grow naturally but are embedded in a history they
help create; and maps embody the interest of their owners by showing some things
but omitting others. More generally, information has long been shown to be value-
laden, wielded, and used to support pre-existing convictions (Dalton 1986, Reagan
and Fedor-Thurman 1987) or, if it does not, it is disregarded (Deshpande´ and Kohli
1989 ). Certainly GROs are no strangers to the perceived neutrality and objectivity
of data; they exploit the perception and wield spatial data (Aberley 1993). Problems
remain even with some understanding of that context. GIS can analyze physical
information, but remains in its infancy in analyzing social information, such as
values, belief systems, and traditions (Curry 1995, Pickles 1995). As mentioned above,
power still divides data providers. Designing and printing, for instance, an ArcView
shape (cid:142) le does not automatically lead to policy changes. Even if it did, would it
clearly represent the spirituality of place?

An illustration of value-laden data comes from southern California. In 1995, the
director was leaving one organization (Friends of the Tecate Cypress) in Orange
County to form the San Andreas Land Conservancy (San Andreas), a land trust
headquartered in the individual’s home just north of Santa Cruz. The ambitious
mission of San Andreas is the acquisition, protection and restoration of native habitat
along the San Andreas Fault. A completely volunteer organization, its applications
have included thematic maps of the proposed land trust for San Andreas, mountain
lion movements, and the impacts of a toll road in Orange County.

The director of San Andreas attempted to obtain and evaluate threatened species
data from the Natural Communities Conservation Program (NCCP). NCCP is a
program proposed by a corporation and sanctioned by California State agencies
and a county government, in this case, to voluntarily protect the California gnat-
catcher bird, in advance of its listing on the California Endangered Species list. San
Andreas’s director believes that the corporation has co-opted high-level government
o(cid:141) cials and well known environmental organizations. To him, this co-optation
renders the NCCP data rife with agenda-laden errors. He believes that the data will
deliberately undercount gnatcatchers and misplace their locations so that real estate
development can continue unabated. He never obtained the data, since he was viewed
by the NCCP as too agenda-laden to responsibly use the data.

3.4.2. Objectives of GIS use

The reported bene(cid:142) ts of using GIS show a similar process-oriented neutrality.
These include improvements in software, hardware, and technical capacity; e(cid:141) ciency
gains in spatial data handling;
increases in cartographic and analytic capacity;
improvements in communicating and visualizing spatial information; and enhance-
ments in decision-making (Budic 1994). Newer versions of GIS software conform to
the demands from clients: relational databases and other aspects of GIS are further
optimized to realize e(cid:141) ciencies from reduced redundancy of data.

In these organizations, issues of e(cid:141) ciency played a small part in the reasons for
adoption and the bene(cid:142) ts received. Instead GIS enhanced strategies for achieving
organizationa l goals. Craig and Elwood (1998) have researched the diŒerent reasons
that CBOs use GIS. They categorize the uses into four types: administrative (e.g.
program evaluation) , strategic (e.g. assessment of neighbourhood needs), tactical (e.g.
contest maps), and organizing (e.g. recruit members). Achieving goals are further

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

787

assisted by GIS’s strong visualization capacity: a shorthand of complex environ-
mental problems as it allows GROs to better clarify and identify issues (Aberely 1992).
Quite diŒerent from public agencies that may use GIS to rea(cid:141) rm the status quo,
GROs may rede(cid:142) ne GIS and therefore transform the meaning of issues to which
GIS is applied. Asserting meaning for oneself allows one to throw oŒthe yoke of
being de(cid:142) ned by the dominant class. Touraine (1985) places the struggle for cultural
meaning as the central con(cid:143) ict in modern society. Boggs (1986) speaks of the drive
of social movements to form an ‘alternate ideological framework that subverts the
dominant patterns of thought’. In this way, external agencies and the public may be
in(cid:143) uenced to conform, that is, adopt the environmental agenda of the nonpro(cid:142) t.

The Greenbelt Alliance (Greenbelt) operates with 13 paid employees and an in-
house GIS system. GIS plays a prominent role in Greenbelt’s representation of open
space at risk in the greater San Francisco Bay region to the public, press, and other
institutions. Greenbelt learned about and adopted GIS in 1989, when GIS was in
its initial diŒusion stages in the public and private sectors.

To Greenbelt, the At Risk map has become the central metaphor of the organiza-
tion and, according to a staŒmember, has earned it the reputation for ‘creating
powerful images and documents to express our research (cid:142) ndings...[T]he graphic
images immediately connect people to the choice of saving or developing’ at risk
land. According to another staŒmember: ‘So far we’ve dominated the [open space]
agenda, set the strategy, even though they [public o(cid:141) cials and developers] have
more power. So I don’t think we’ll be left behind. Our edge is in the adaptability of
message [and ] the ability to (cid:142) nd and build partnerships’. As reported by its director,
various political actors have felt the velvet glove of Greenbelt’s advocacy through
the years; GIS use reinforces that impact. Public o(cid:141) cials have found analyses
conducted by Greenbelt advantageou s to their own agendas of growth management
(Sylvester 1995). Greenbelt also has attracted prominent players in the analysis of
limiting sprawl. The Bank of America was certainly viewed as a startling ally, given
its history as major (cid:142) nancier of suburban development (Newman 1995).

EPIC, Trinity and San Andreas are using GIS for another nonconforming reason:
to subvert existing models through the reverse engineering of models and data sets.
Environmentalists have long contested the generation and use of information by the
powerful. Agency spatial data is no diŒerent. The GROs have discovered, much to
their dismay (or delight), numerous errors in secondary spatial data, some uninten-
tional and some deliberate miscalculations. (Some would argue that information
created in the context of power is never free from malign intent. By ‘unintentional’,
I mean misplacing a datapoint or decimal point or, at worst, sloppiness in posi-
tioning). The groups have found that GIS can be used to reveal those errors,
omissions, or agendas in data collection/use. Groups also use GIS to dissect the
resultant output and consequently understand the constituent data and decisions.
Through these strategies, Trinity staŒcheck and correct unintended data errors to
assist its clients. Conversely, San Andreas’s director uses his GIS as a ‘guerrilla
ground truthing tactic’ to discredit opponents’ information before information is
concretized into policy.

Notwithstanding these nonconforming innovations, GIS could force a conformity
upon these GROs that devalues place-based knowledge. The use of GIS has caused
some dissent in Trinity’s membership. The umbrella nonpro(cid:142) t’s director sees a
friendly tension between residents in this poor and rural community,
‘who know
what’s on the ground’, and Trinity’s director, who is academically trained. This

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 788

R. E. Sieber

tension between passion and progress could oŒer one explanation for why local
environmentalists show up ‘late at night’, after the director is gone, and confer with
the system manager, who is local. As mentioned above, high burnout occurs in the
case of EPIC, where members would rather chain themselves to trees instead of
‘chaining’ themselves to digitizers.

Additionally GIS could force a conformity upon these GROs that detracts from
their spiritual vision. Piven and Cloward (1977) maintain that GROs may be so
involved in technical and organizationa l issues that they neglect proven methods of
activism. Resource demands might propel GROs to shift to GIS technical assistance
provision to other nonpro(cid:142) ts or to government. This represents the homogenizing
eŒect of internal conformity: the means become the technocratic ends. Trinity was
created as a separate GIS service centre for its umbrella nonpro(cid:142) t. It accepts contracts
from public agencies. How confrontationa l can a GRO be to the agencies that supply
their accounts receivable?

Greenbelt spun-oŒ its GIS capacity into a GIS technical assistance centre,
GreenInfo Network, for other area nonpro(cid:142) ts (see www.greeninfo.org). It could be
said that the spin-oŒof GIS-speci(cid:142) c organizations, such as GreenInfo and Trinity,
re(cid:143) ects the geological de(cid:142) nition of conformance: instead of disturbing the existing
direction of the organization, the new ‘strata’ of two ideologies lie side-by-side. Thus
spin-oŒs suggest a limit to acquiescence. In these examples, GROs appear to allow
only so much acquiescing conformity before they sever that activity into a separate
entity. The parent group preserves its goals, but for the new groups, advocacy, at
best, has become less direct.

4. Conclusion

This paper has proposed a new way of framing the diŒusion of GIS to social
movement groups: conforming (to) GIS. The framework covers the extent and
processes of GIS diŒusion and implementation, spatial data use, and application of
GIS to goals in conservation organizations. This paper has an activist bias to
facilitate the diŒusion of GIS technology to the grassroots and guide conservationists
in an implementation that supports not only diverse and distributed technology
platforms and data structures, but also diverse ideologies and goals.

In summary, what does this framework suggest for GIS adoption by GROs? GIS
can be conceptualized as a social practice of reciprocal conformity: the software
GROs install on their machines may change what they do, but it will not remain
the same software. Instead of monolithically viewing conformity as negative and
nonconformity as positive, conformity can good (e.g. Greenbelt’s use of the At Risk
Map as central metaphor) and nonconformity can be bad (e.g. adoption of GIS by
community development corporations without a support infrastructure).

Conformity consists of multiple facets and dimensions. GROs appear able to
ignore normative implementation practices although they are greatly advantage d
when they create their own infrastructure of support. This suggests that if a collection
of GROs rejects (or is unable to comply with) a particular set of practices, then it
might invent (and institutionalize) its own set. GIS implementation practices represent
an instance of sequential conformity, in which GROs do not conform in initial
implementation but conform as the infrastructure matures and the reliance increases.
The infrastructure’s conformity may not always be benign, but instead an exact price
for membership. The presence of an agreeable intermediary may be moot if an

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

789

organization’s GIS champion’s allegiance to the GIS community con(cid:143) icts too much
with the allegiance to his/her conservation community. Adoption may halt.

Irrespective of innovative approaches to implementation and support from a GIS
champion, data standards demand far greater conformity. GROs gain signi(cid:142) cant
bene(cid:142) ts when they obtain secondary data. It is hard to extract the data from its
implicit assumptions, even though it can be done—reverse engineered—after the
fact. Data sharing is also better assured when groups conform to the sharing network.
A group can conform in all other regards, but if it adopts a confrontationa l stance
then it likely will (cid:142) nd data access restricted. Clearly, researched groups are unsatis(cid:142) ed
with the traditional reasons for adopting GIS. They apply GIS to goals loftier than
e(cid:141) ciency, such as the transformation of meaning. However, it is important for GROs
to remain attuned to GIS’s potential for homogenization. This eŒects a transforma-
tion, not of social meaning, but of the organization itself.

What does this framework portend for GROs and their supporters? It follows
Harris and Weiner (1998), that GIS can empower GROs but it can simultaneously
marginalize them. To extract bene(cid:142) cial eŒect, groups must (cid:142) rst have and then
maintain a sophisticated appreciation of their ever-evolving GIS practices and the
impacts upon their larger organizationa l missions. For instance, would they be able
to jettison GIS if it became ‘dangerous’? (Would they have been inexorably changed
even if they stopped using it?) The framework portends changes for PPGIS academics
and practitioners as well. If external supporters of GIS seek to diŒuse the technology
then they also must rethink GIS. It is not a reactive technology to which GROs
must adapt. Instead the new (and improved) GIS generated by early innovators,
such as conservation organizations, should be examined as a more agreeable product
for other GROs. This inductive and not deductive model should produce better
results for GROs and supporters of those eŒorts. Finally, what might be the shape
of this social practice and its potential for diŒusion to the larger GIS and environ-
mental policy community? Activist GIS practices are (cid:143) owing into the larger GIS
forest products are one example of this cross-fertilization.
community. Special
Because conservationist GIS users move from avocation to occupation, including
into ESRI employment, their passion for the environment will likely in(cid:143) uence their
work. GIS development may conform to that passion.

References
Aberely, D., editor, 1993, Boundaries of Home: Mapping for L ocal Empowerment (Philadelphia,

PA: New Society Publishers).

Aitken, S. C., and Michel, S. M., 1995, Who contrives the ‘real’ in GIS? Geographic
information, planning and critical theory.. . Cartography and Geographic Information
Systems, 22, 17–29.

Azad, B., and Wiggins, L. L., 1995, Dynamics of inter-organizational geographic data sharing:
A conceptual framework for research. In Sharing Geographic Information, edited by
H. J. Onsrud and G. Rushton (New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research
(CUPR) Press), pp. 22–43.

Bailey, J. E., and Pearson, S. W., 1983, Development of a tool for measuring and analyzing

computer user satisfaction. Management Science, 29, 530–545.

Barndt, M., 1998, Public participation GIS— barriers to implementation. Cartography and

Geographic Information Systems, 25, 105–112.

Boggs, C., 1986, Social Movements and Political Power: Emerging Forms of Radicalism in the

West (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press).

Budic, Z. D., 1994, EŒectiveness of geographic information systems in local planning. Journal

of the American Planning Association, 60, 244–263.

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 790

R. E. Sieber

Budic, Z. D., 1995, Mechanisms for coordinating development and use of GIS databases: A
research framework. In Proceedings of the Urban and Regional Information Systems
Association, 1, 662–674.

Budic, Z. D., 1997, GIS technology and organizational context: Interaction and adaptation.
In Geographic Information Research—Bridging the Atlantic, edited by M. Craglia and
H. Couclelis (London: Taylor and Francis), pp. 165–184.

Campbell, H. J., 1991, Impact of Geographic Information Systems on Local Government.
TRP 101, Department of Town and Regional Planning, The University of She(cid:141) eld,
She(cid:141) eld, UK.

Castells, M., 1989, T he Informational City (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell).
Chrisman, N. R., 1987, Design of geographic information systems based on social and cultural

goals. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 53, 1367–1370.

Chrisman, N. R., 1997, Exploring Geographic Information Systems (New York: John Wiley

& Sons).

Convis, C., 1998, Personal Conversation with the Author, Redlands, CA., 28 June, 1998, 16:00.
Craig, W. J., and Elwood, S., 1998, How and why community groups use maps and geographic

information. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 25, 95–104.

Crist, P. J., and Jennings, M., 1997, Introduction to the gap analysis program. In Proceedings

of the Annual ESRI Users Conference.

Croswell, P., 1991, Obstacles to GIS implementation and guidelines to increase the opportun-
ities for success, Journal of the Urban and Regional Information Systems Association,
3, 43–56.

Curry, M. R., 1998, Digital Places: L iving with Geographic Information T echnologies (New

York: Routledge).

Company).

Daft, R. L., 1989, Organization T heory and Design, 3rd edition (New York: West Publishing

Dalton, L. C., 1986, Why the rational paradigm persists: The resistance of professional
education and practice to alternative forms of planning. Journal of Planning Education
and Research, 5, 147–153.

DeshpandeÁ , R., and Kohli, A. K., 1989, Knowledge disavowal: Structural determinants of
information-processing breakdown in organizations. Knowledge: Creation, DiVusion,
Utilization, 11, 155–169.

Edwards, M., and Hulme, D., editors, 1995, Non-governmental Organizations: Performance

and Accountability (London: EarthScan Publications).

Elwood, S., and Leitner, H., 1998, GIS and community-based planning: Exploring the
diversity of neighborhood perspectives and needs. Cartography and Geographic
Information Systems, 25, 77–88.

Epstein, E. F., 1995, Control of public information. In Sharing Geographic Information, edited
by H. J. Onsrud and G. Rushton (New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy
Research (CUPR) Press), pp. 307–318.

Evans, S. W., and Boyte, H. C., 1992, Free Spaces: T he Sources of Democratic Change in

America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Feldman, M. S., and March, J. G., 1981, Information in organizations as signal and symbol.

Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 171–186.

Fox, S., 1985, T he American Conservation Movement: John Muir and his L egacy (Madison,

WI: University of Wisconsin Press).

French, S. P., and Wiggins, L. L., 1990, Computer planning agency experience with automated
mapping and geographic information systems. Environment and Planning B: Planning
and Design, 17, 441–450.

Galletta, D. F., and Lederer, A. L., 1989, Some cautions on the measurement of user

information satisfaction. Decision Sciences, 20, 419–436.

Gittell, M., 1980, L imits to Citizen Participation: T he Decline of Community Organizations

(Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications).

Goldman, B. A., 1991, The environment and a community’s right-to-know: Information for

participation. Computers in Human Services, 8, 19–40.

Gottlieb, R., 1993, Forcing the Spring: T he T ransformation of the American Environmental

Movement (Washington, D. C.: Island Press).

Haraway, D., 1985, A manifesto for cyborgs: Science, technology, and socialist feminism in

the 1980s. Socialist Review, 15, 65–101.

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

791

Harris, T., and Weiner, D., 1998, Empowerment, marginalization and ‘community-integrated’

GIS. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 25, 67–76.

Harvey, F., and Chrisman, N. R., 1998, Boundary objects and the social construction of GIS

technology. Environment and Planning A, 30, 1683–1694.

Huxhold, W. E., and Levinsohn A. G., 1995, Managing geographic information system projects

(New York: Oxford University Press).

Igbaria, M., and Nachman, S. A., 1990, Correlates of user satisfaction with end user computing:

An Exploratory study. Information and Management, 19, 73–82.

Innes, J. E., 1988, The power of data requirements. Journal of the American Planning

Association, 54, 275–278.

Ives, B., Olson, M. H., and Baroudi, J. J., 1983, The measurement of user information

satisfaction. Communications of the ACM, 26, 785–793.

Kanter, R. M., and Summers, D. V., 1987, Doing well by doing good: Dilemmas of performance
measurement in nonpro(cid:142) t organizations and the need for a multiple-constituency
approach. In T he Nonpro(cid:142) t Sector: A Research Handbook, edited by W. W. Powell
(New Haven: Yale University Press), pp. 154–166.

Keen, P. G. W., 1981, Value analysis: Justifying decision support systems. MIS Quarterly,

King, J. L., 1995, Problems in public access policy for GIS databases: an economic perspective.
In Sharing Geographic Information, edited by H. J. Onsrud and G. Rushton (New
Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research (CUPR) Press), pp. 255–276.
Klosterman, R. E., 1987, The politics of computer-aided planning. T own Planning Review,

March, 1–15.

58, 444–451.

Laituri, M., and Harvey, L., 1995, Bridging the space between indigenous ecological know-
ledge and New Zealand conservation management using GIS. In Nature Conservation:
T he Role of Networks, edited by D. Saunders, J. Craig, and E. Mattiske, (New South
Wales, Australia: Surrey Beatty and Sons), pp. 122–31.

Lake, R. W., 1993, Planning and applied geography: Positivism, ethics, and geographic

information systems. Progress in Human Geography, 17, 404–413.
Latour, B., 1987, Science in Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Leitner, H., McMaster, R., Elwood, S., McMaster, S., and Sheppard, E., 1998, Models for
making GIS available to community organization: Dimensions of diŒerence and
appropriateness. Paper presented at NCGIA Special Meeting: Empowerment,
Marginalization and Public Participation GIS, Santa Barbara, CA, URL
http://www.nciga.ucsb.edu/varenius/ppgis/papers/index.html.

Manes, C., 1990, Green Rage: Radical Environmentalism and the Unmaking of Civilization

(Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company).

Monmonier, M., 1991, How to L ie with Maps (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
Morain, S., editor, 1999, GIS Solutions in Natural Resource Management: Balancing the

T echnical-Political Equation (Santa Fe, NM: Onwood Press).

Newman, M., 1995, New report is critical of sprawl. California Planning and Development

Report, 10, 9.

Obermeyer, N. J., 1998a, The evolution of public participation GIS. Cartography and

Geographic Information Systems, 25, 65–66.

Obermeyer, N. J., 1998b, HUD’s community connection for local empowerment, Paper
presented at NCGIA Special Meeting: Empowerment, Marginalization and Public
Participation GIS, Santa Barbara, CA, URL http://www.nciga.ucsb.edu/varenius/
ppgis/papers/index.html

Obermeyer, N. J., 1999, Phone Conversations with the Author. Albany, NY.19 February, 15:00.
Onsrud, H. J., and Pinto, J. K., 1993, Evaluating correlates of GIS adoption success and the
decision process of GIS acquisition. Journal of the Urban and Regional Information
Systems Association, 5, 18–39.

Onsrud, H. J., and Rushton, G., editors, 1995, Sharing Geographic Information (New

Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research (CUPR) Press).

Openshaw, S., 1991, Commentary: A View on the GIS crisis in geography, or, using GIS to
put Humpty-Dumpty back together again. Environment and Planning A, 23, 621–628.
Parent, P., 1989, Issues arising from the proliferation of information. Journal of the Urban

and Regional Information Systems Association, 1, 17–26.

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 792

R. E. Sieber

Pickles, J., editor, 1995, Ground T ruth: T he Social Implications of Geographic Information

Systems (New York: Guilford Press).

Pinto, J. K., and Onsrud, H. J., 1995, Sharing geographic information across organization
boundaries: A research framework. In Sharing Geographic Information, edited by H. J.
Onsrud and G. Rushton (New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research
(CUPR) Press), pp. 44–64.

Piven, F., and Cloward, R., 1977, Poor People’s Movements (New York: Pantheon).
Poe, G. L., Bishop, R. C., and Cochrane J. A., 1992, Bene(cid:142) t-cost principles for land information
systems. Journal of the Urban and Regional Information Systems Association, 4, 20–31.
Poole, P., 1995, Indigenous Peoples, Mapping & Biodiversity Conservation: An analysis of
current activities and opportunities for applying geomatics technologies. Biodiversity
Support Program Discussion Paper Series. Washington: WWF, The Nature
Conservancy, World Resources Institute.

Reagan, M. D., and Fedor-Thurman, V. L., 1987, Public participation: Re(cid:143) ections on the
California energy policy experience. In Citizen Participation in Public Decision Making,
edited by J. Desario and S. Langton (New York: Greenwood Press), pp. 89–113.

Rogers, E., 1993, The diŒusion of innovations model. In DiVusion and Use of Geographic
Information Systems, edited by I. Masser and H. Onsrud (London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers), pp. 9–23.

Rogers, E. M., 1995, DiVusion of Innovations, 4th Edition (New York: The Free Press).
Rubinyi, R. M., 1989, Computers and community: The organizational impact. Journal of

Communication, 39, 110–123.

Rundstrom, R. A., 1995, GIS, indigenous peoples, and epistemological diversity. Cartography

and Geographic Information Systems, 22, 45–57.

Rycroft, R. W., 1991, Environmentalism and science. Knowledge: Creation, DiVusion,

Utilization, 13, 150–169.

Sawicki, D. S., and Craig, W. J., 1996, The democratization of data: Bridging the gap for
community groups. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62, 512–523.
Sawicki, D. S., and Peterman, D. R., 1998, Understanding the breadth and depth of PPGIS
supply, Paper presented at NCGIA Special Meeting: Empowerment, Marginalization
and Public Participation GIS, Santa Barbara, CA, URL http://www.nciga.ucsb.edu/
varenius/ppgis/papers/index.html.

Scott, J. M., Davis, F., Csuti, B., Noss, R., Butterfield, B., Groves, C., Anderson, H.,
Caicco, S., D’Erchia, F., Edwards, T. C., Jr., Ulliman, J., and Wright, R. G., 1993,
GAP Analysis: A Geographic Approach to Protection of Biological Diversity. W ildlife
Monographs , No. 123.

Sheppard, E., 1995, GIS and society: towards a research agenda. Cartography and Geographic

Information Systems, 22, 5–16.

Sieber, R. E., 1997, Computers in the Grassroots: Environmentalists, GIS, and Public Policy.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Rutgers University. Dissertation Committee Members: Lyna
Wiggins, Chair (Rutgers University), Richard Brail
(Rutgers University), Scott
Campbell (Rutgers University), Will Craig (University of Minnesota).

Sieber, R. E., 2000, GIS implementation in the grassroots. Urban and Regional Information

Systems Association Journal, 12, 15–29.

Sieber, R. E., forthcoming, Should the environmental movement adopt GIS? In Community
Participation and Geographic Information Systems, edited by W. Craig, T. Harris, and
D. Weiner (London: Taylor and Francis).

Slaughter, S., and Ang, S., 1996, Employment outsourcing in information systems.

Communications of the ACM, 39, 47–54.

Snow, D., 1992, Inside the Environmental Movement (Covelo, CA: Island Press).
Sylvester, D. A., 1995, In San Jose, mayor oŒers plan for controlling urban sprawl. San

Francisco Chronicle (10 May), A19.

Touraine, A., 1985, An introduction to the study of social movements. Social Research, 52,

749–787.

Tulloch, D., 1998, Environmental NGOs: Community access to technology as a force for
change, Paper presented at NCGIA Special Meeting: Empowerment, Marginalization
and Public Participation GIS, Santa Barbara, CA, URL http://www.nciga.ucsb.edu/
varenius/ppgis/papers/index.html.

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 Conforming to GIS

793

Walker, R., and Craighead, L., 1997, Analyzing wildlife movement corridors in Montana

using GIS. In Proceedings of the Annual ESRI Users Conference.

Webster, F., and Robins, K., 1986, Information T echnology: A L uddite Analysis (Norwood,

NJ: Ablex).

Wheeler, M., 1998, Should Cooperative Extensions DiŒuse GIS? Unpublished research paper.

Albany, NY: State University of New York at Albany.

Wolch, J. R., 1990, T he Shadow State: Government and Voluntary Sector in T ransition (New

York: The Foundation Center).

Wood, D., 1992, T he Power of Maps (New York: The Guilford Press).

Downloaded by [Gazi University] at 07:24 19 August 2014 