The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief
Features in Plan. The Case of Spanish American
Cartography in the Sixteenth Century: Three
Significant Examples

Manuel Morato-Moreno

To cite this article: Manuel Morato-Moreno (2016): Empirical Antecedents of Representation
of Relief Features in Plan. The Case of Spanish American Cartography in the Sixteenth Century:
Three Significant Examples, The Cartographic Journal

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000102

Published online: 17 Feb 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 36

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [University of Western Ontario]

Date: 15 March 2016, At: 14:19

The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society

pp. 1–12

2016

2016

O B S E R V A T I O N P A P E R

Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief Features
in Plan. The Case of Spanish American Cartography in the
Sixteenth Century: Three Significant Examples

Manuel Morato-Moreno

Department of Graphic Engineering, High Technical School of Engineering at University of Seville, Ctra. de Utrera,
Km. 1. Seville, 41013 Spain
Email: mmorato@us.es

Although the representation of the Earth’s surface in plan has been used since antiquity, the first and most important uses
of these representations come from the Renaissance. As a result of the discovery of the new American territories, many
topographic surveys were performed during the sixteenth century. These maps developed various empirical methods to
represent terrain and relief. In this comprehensive corpus, we find three maps with surprising representations of terrain
that depart from pictorial methods, such as hill profiles or aligned or grouped mounds (sugar loaf hills), that were used
from the origins of cartography until the eighteenth century. The procedure used on these maps is, to a certain extent, an
intuitive anticipation of the scientific method used by modern surveying, in which the land relief is represented in an
orthogonal view by the contour lines. This method was not developed and systematized until two hundred years after the
three maps analysed in this study were produced.

Keywords: history of cartography, relief representation, empirical methods, Spanish America, sixteenth century

INTRODUCTION: EVOLUTION OF REPRESENTATION OF
OROGRAPHY

the evolution of
From its origin to the Renaissance,
followed an evolutionary
representation has
territorial
process characterized by constant change, selection and
survival of the best graphic resources and abandonment of
less ﬂexible resources and conventions that provide fewer
possibilities. Although this process has been demonstrated
in methods of representing land in plan view throughout
time, in the representation of reliefs, we ﬁnd that until the
sixteenth century (except for some speciﬁc cases), there was
no progress beyond the convention of hill in proﬁle,1 the
oldest method used to depict relief on a map. Since its
origins, artists have wanted to paint the mountain views
from inﬁnity, drawing elevation and overlapping the
horizontal projection of the maps; however, the elevation
hides part of the horizontal plane, the real purpose of the
representation. The representation of mountains has always
been the mapmaker’s hardest problem, for mountains have
length and breadth as well as height, and they hide
something round every corner which must nevertheless be
shown on the map (Lynam, 1953; cited by Wood, 1992).
The symbol of the hill proﬁle, in any of its many forms, was
used as the cartographic representation par excellence of the

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000102

relief because of its simplicity. It could easily be included
within a set of codes or conventions. However,
this
convention does not reﬂect the height of the elevation,
does not permit altimetry comparisons, and does not
quantify the large volume occupied by the mountains.

In very brief summary form,

the different ways of
representing the altimetry have appeared throughout the
history of cartography according to the following order.
The proﬁle view (in the side view), is simply illustrations of
mountains and hills in proﬁle: it was very used from the
origins of territorial representation (Gasur map, 2500 BC),
during the Renaissance and it continued to be used until
the end of the eighteenth century. Oblique high perspective
or bird’s-eye view: it begins to be used in the Renaissance, is
a more realistic representation of landforms that arises when
scientists and artists began to be interested in the landscape
orography. Spot heights points: used mainly in marine
maps, began to be used from the eighteenth century, when
operations altimetry allow determination of a number of
levels of altitude adapted to a reference level. Shading:
although it is plastic technique already used in some isolated
cases in the Renaissance (Leonardo maps of Windsor and
the Codex Madrid), in the eighteenth century this method
is used widely. Subsequently other techniques of relief
depiction were appearing: structural lines, horizontal form

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 2

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. Sketch of the conquest of Captain Diego Palomino. Diego Palomino, 1549. The Royal Academy of History, Madrid

lines, hachures, hypsometric tinting, etc. to conclude with
the contour lines method.2

PRECEDENTS OF CONTOUR LINES

The scientiﬁc representation of terrain altimetry is con-
sidered to have begun with the discovery of contour lines.
The precedents of relief depiction by contour lines do not
come from land surveying but rather from representations
of hydrography beds. Therefore, it can be said that contour
lines appear chronologically before bathymetry that topo-
graphy. The earliest representation of isobaths discovered
so far is found in a manuscript map, dated 1584, of the
Dutch surveyor Pieter Bruinss. This map, quite astonishing
for its time, shows a 7-foot depth line off Het Spaarne, near
Haarlem.3 This document is considered the ﬁrst bathy-
metric representation because it contains a dashed line
connecting points of equal depth (Imhof, 1982).

A century and a half later, in 1730, another Dutchman,
Nicolaus Samuelis Cruquius (1678–1754), represented the
bed of the Merwede estuary in the conﬂuence of the Maas
and Waal rivers. Whereas in Bruinss’s drawing a single
dotted lines is traced joining points of the same depth, on

this map we see already a whole system of isobaths lines at
different depths. In 1738, this method was used by French
engineer Philippe Bouache (1700–1773), who drew a
bathymetric map of the English Channel based upon
previous practices used by navigators to measure the seabed
using probes that measured differences in levels below water
level, drawing a line on a map connecting points of equal
measure. These precedents correspond to the representa-
tion in plan view of the depth of hydraulic beds. In 1771,
Du Carla created the ﬁrst contour map of an imaginary
island – and ﬁnally, in 1791, Dupain-Triel compiled the ﬁrst
contour map of an existing land surface, that of France
(Imhof, 1982).

Therefore, except for the case of Leonardo da Vinci,4 it is
commonly accepted that the representation of the earth’s
surface in plan view did not begin until the end of the
eighteenth century. However, there is evidence that in the
cartography produced during the discovery and coloniza-
tion of America, empirical methods were used for relief
depiction, as in the works of Leonardo in Tuscany, these
can be considered precedents of modern methods for
depicting terrain that use a graphical system to represent
land relief on a horizontal plane. In chronological order,
these cartographic documents are the map of Captain

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief Features in Plan

3

Figure 2. Palomino’s map, redrawn version

Diego Palomino, 1549; Relacio´n Geograﬁca map of
Huehuetla´n, 1579; and Relacio´n Geograﬁca map of San
Miguel and San Felipe of the Chichimecas, dated 1580.

SKETCH OF THE CONQUEST OF CAPTAIN DIEGO
PALOMINO, 1549

the provinces

Diego Palomino arrived in America in 1526 from the
Spanish city of Jaen, where he was born in 1506. In 1531,
Palomino joined Pizarro’s expedition as a soldier. He
participated in the founding of various populations of the
Viceroyalty of Peru in the eastern Amazon region. In 1549,
as a result of some of his expeditions, Diego Palomino made
in the Chuquimayo (current
a list of
Chinchipe),
located in the north-western part of Peru,
and attached a map of the conquered lands (Jime´nez,
1885). The Palomino map was discovered in 1885 by
Marcos Jime´nez de la Espada (1831–1898), who published
it without realizing its value for the history of the relief
depiction. Most likely, Jimenez de la Espada copied the
original map and reproduced the drawing, which is the
image of the document that has been used since then.
The original map (Figure 1) is preserved in the Royal
Academy of History, in Madrid.

Map analysis
The map represents, with acceptable accuracy, the hydro-
graphy of the region discovered by the author and is designed
as a sketch (see Figure 2). The map has an unusual
orientation because the East-West direction coincides with
one of the diagonals of the drawing, which is represented by
the ﬁgures of the sun in the upper right corner and the moon
in the opposite corner. The plan of the town of Jaen, which
Palomino re-founded and named in honour of his home-
town, is aligned with the cardinal points. The Spanish towns,
Indian villages and the sparse vegetation present on the map
are represented by elevation (proﬁle). Jaen and Guancabanba,
the two most important towns of the region, are represented
differently than the others. Jaen and Guancabanba are
represented by the plan of a walled enclosure with an oval
form, inside of which the elevation of an important church or
cathedral is drawn on a basement with three towers topped by
pyramidal roofs. To represent the towns the author of the
map seems to have used a sketch of each village instead of a
sign or convention, as we found in many cases in the
cartography of the era, where they function as metonymic
signs: church5town of Spanish, hut5village of Indians.

To represent the orography (see Figure 3a), Palomino
uses sinuous lines – usually open – around the hydrographic
network and populations. Principal curves and construction

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 4

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Palomino’s map, redrawn version: (a) orography, (b) hydrographic network, (c) inhabited places and (4) full map

or auxiliary curves are distinguished. Construction curves are
drawn with a tenuous ﬁne line. We do not ﬁnd any signs
about the representation of relief through hill proﬁles, the
most usual convention used in Cartography from its origins.
The sinuous lines move away from the banks of rivers in the
direction of the ﬂow of water. The curves that occupy the
upper reaches of the mountains are closed lines, unlike those
found lower, along the rivers, which form long, winding
open forms. In some areas, construction lines have been
drawn in the form of open curves, no doubt for more patent
terracing of land (Bla´zquez Delgado-Aguilera, 1910).

These sinuous lines resemble the curves of horizontal
conﬁguration, precursor of the contour lines, which would
be available after a quarter of a millennium (Silva-Sua´rez,
2005). It is necessary to admit that the procedure designed
by Diego Palomino has no uniformity; he draws the
elevation of the buildings, huts, and boats in different
directions on the horizontal plane of projection. The
practical absence of terrestrial ways, striking on the map
of Palomino is perhaps due to the fact that communications
were carried out mainly by river. This map showed an
absence of stylistic features particular to native manuscripts;
it seems that the author did not have any inﬂuence of the
pre-Hispanic traditions to represent the territory.

Although the map that Diego Palomino drew in 1549 was
the ﬁrst in America with this characteristic form of relief
depiction in horizontal projection; our research, which
reviewed different representations of territory in Spanish
America during the sixteenth century, identiﬁed two other
maps that used a convention similar to the Palomino map for
relief depiction. These documents belong to the pinturas
that accompanied the body of the Relaciones Geogra´ ﬁcas:5
the Huehuetla´n map, dated 1579, and the San Miguel and
San Felipe map, dated 1580, both of unknown authorship.
Although both maps have been studied by several authors,
no published essay has focused on relief depiction on these
maps or has related them to the Palomino map.6

RELACIO´ N GEOGRA´ FICA MAP OF HUEHUETLA´ N, 1579

The Relacio´n Geogra´ ﬁca of Huehuetla´n was made in 1579.
The map (Figure 4) includes the village of Santo Domingo
Huehuetla´n (now part of the Mexican state of Puebla) and
those of its jurisdiction. The population of Santo Domingo
Huehuetla´n is in an enclave crossed by a crystalline stream
of the same name, tributary of the river Atoyac.

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief Features in Plan

5

Figure 4. Relacio´n Geogra´ ﬁca map of Huehuetla´n. Artist unknown, 1579. Benson Latin America Collection, Texas University, Austin

is known that

Map analysis
The map describes the region that contains the town of
Santo Domingo Huehuetla´n and the town’s subject villages
(see Figure 5). The author drew the hydrographical net-
work in a dark brown colour, constituted by a main river
(also named Huehuetla´n) as well as numerous streams and
tributaries that feed them in an environment of rugged
relief and lush nature. It
the Spanish
inscriptions on this map were added by a noble Indian,
Don Juan Herna´ndez (Mundy, 1996). They indicate the
names of the subject towns and describe the topography of
the region. This corresponds to mountainous territory due
to its location next to the Sierra del Tentzo, which is part of
the Sierra Madre Oriental, and its relief is determined by the
presence of southern mountain ranges of the neo-volcanic
axis. The inscriptions identify the names of 18 villages
subject to Huehuetla´n’s jurisdiction: San Miguel, San Juan,
Santa Marta, Santa Maria Magdalena, and San Augustı´n,
among others. Although there is no graphical or written
indication of the orientation of the map, the situation of the
villages, suggests that it is oriented to the north.

The village of Huehuetla´n is represented on the map by
drawing the simple church of his Dominican convent (Acuna,
1985). This church is located in the central left part and is
drawn with its elevation next to the plan of the atrium – double
line drawn to indicate the thickness of the wall – both in red. A

network of red roads connects this head church with the
subsidiary parishes, represented by a drawing identical to that
of the Dominican church but smaller and in black ink, with its
corresponding toponymy in Spanish and, in some cases, with
comments in Nahuatl. The signs for villages are shown
proportionally to the rank of the places concerned (Harley
and Laxton, 2001). Here, the representation of the paths
presents certain peculiarities because they are plotted as a single
line in red. Those that seem to be main ways are presented with
greater thickness, including footprints in black, a convention
typical of the indigenous cartography.

This geographical view proposed a generic understanding
of the topography surrounding of villages speciﬁed in the
texts, and respond to the representation of territorial space,
where the head town and subject villages are depicted. This
is the model we see on the Relaciones Geogra´ ﬁcas maps,
with settlements nucleated and ranked in a hierarchy of
cabecera (head town)
(Mundy, 1996).
Schematic elements are used to structure the whole, as
roads, rivers, mountains, and buildings that, metonymically,
come to identify the different urban enclaves (Morales-
Folguera, 2001). Sometimes the hierarchy are speciﬁed
with increasing details or elements. On these maps,
communities are organized by and around a central
religion, and they reveal this by their iconography, in which
communities are symbolized by churches (Mundy, 1996).

and subjects

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 6

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. Huehuetla´n’s map, redrawn version

To represent the relief (see Figure 6a) have been drawn
sinuous lines that surround the riverbeds and inﬂections of
land. In some cases these curves are closed within the limits
of the map, creating areas that are painted with different
shades of brown that may differentiate the highlands of the
lowlands, or the wasteland of the forested (these both
hypotheses are not incompatible). Either ways, the terrain is
shown in a manner consistent with the latest European
techniques (Buisseret, 1998). This open and closed lines
system has divided into zones the territory: some areas are
painted in light brown and the others with the same dark
colour. These areas (painted dark brown) are ﬁlled with
graphics as we have been from earliest times, so-called ‘ﬁsh
scales’, ‘molehills’, or ‘sugar loaves’ have been used to
represent relief (Thrower, 1996). As Leonardo was already
doing, the innovation of this artist was the use of different
shades of colour to denote changes in elevation.

RELACIO´ N GEOGRA´ FICA MAP OF SAN MIGUEL AND SAN
FELIPE, 1580

In the northern region of New Spain, at the time the
Viceroy Luis de Velasco, in 1544 it was necessary to found
the presidios (fortresses) of San Miguel and San Felipe,
which would later be the villas of the same name. During

this time, a way was built to connect Mexico City to
Zacatecas. This way, known as Ruta de la Plata (Silver
Road) or Camino Real de Tierra Adentro, passed through
the villages of San Miguel el Grande (now San Miguel de
Allende) and San Felipe. The Relacio´n Geogra´ ﬁca of San
Miguel and San Felipe, whose text is lost, was written in
1580. Its text is lost, but
the painting (Figure 7) is
preserved in the library of the Royal Academy of History
in Madrid (Acuna, 1985).

Map analysis
The pintura (Figures 7 and 8) shows the geography of the
Valley of the San Miguel River (today Laja River), from its
sources to San Francisco Chamacuero, as well as the reality
of this conﬂict area, bordering the Chichimeca Indians
(Manso-Porto, 2012). The brightly painted map, represents
the terrain with brown and green shades; rivers, springs and
streams in blue, the villages of San Miguel el Grande and
San Felipe, the town of San Francisco Chamacuero, areas of
the ﬁelds, the roads by a single red line, with ranches and
the forts guarding them, as well as nomadic Indians hunting
cattle and the Spanish who fought them during the wars of
conquest. Along the way are represented in proﬁle view, but
they are in different orientations with respect
to the
horizontal direction; Spanish wagons pulled by oxen,

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief Features in Plan

7

Figure 6. Huehuetla´n’s map, redrawn version: (a) orography, (b) hydrographic network, (3) inhabited places and roads and (4) full map

protected by soldiers on foot and on horseback, armed with
harquebuses. The quality of the border region, which were
frequent clashes with the Chichimecas; is evidenced in the
drawing of the Indians armed with bows and arrows,
located at the crossroads and possible confrontations places
(Lo´ pez-Guzma´n, 2007).

In the mountain passes of Nieto and Chamacuero, we ﬁnd
one each Indians executed by hanging. Along the mountain
pass of Chamacuero it is the drawing of the decapitated heads
bleeding Franciscan friars who were assaulted by the
Chichimeca Indians in the stream of Chamacuero, today
Comonfort
(see
Figure 9a). The map is oriented with the ﬁgures of two suns
indicating the East and the West. This feature, together with
the absence of glyphs and indigenous conventions, supports
its Spanish authorship, although the technique used is a
mixture of Spanish and indigenous styles.

and Escando´n-Bolanos, 1996)

(Rea

The orography of the area is mostly ﬂat, although it is
crossed by mountains of medium altitude in its extreme
East and West as well as in the centre of the territory. The
main stream through the region is the Laja River, whose
origin is depicted on the map in the middle left (West) and
surrounding the elevation that occupies the lower central
part of it: the mountainous area of Guanajuato; describing a
meander that disappears from the map on the Southeast. In

streams are
addition to the Laja River, other minor
represented. In one of these, the stream of Charco del
Ingenio (middle right of the map), was installed the ﬁrst
watermill
(see Figure 9b) mentioned by the colonial
authority, was built by friars, which preserves the ruins.

The terrain is represented by a series of curves that
enclose areas (see Figure 10a), which are coloured on their
outlines and often also in the interior. Although in the top
of the map these curves may seem to represent mountains in
proﬁle view, in the rest of the map the winding route of
these lines, alternating convex and concave parts on all
directions; we think that we can discard this hypothesis.
This convention is reinforced by the use of colour with
gradients and shading to create a sensation of volume. In
the central part of the map area, near the village of Santa
Catalina and the river of the same name, we ﬁnd an
indigenous tepetl symbol (see Figure 9c), used in the
indigenous cartography for the hill or mountain. A simple
line in red is used to represent the roads, whereas for the
rivers and streams, a double line with a blue interior is used.
The buildings, vegetation, fauna and human ﬁgures are
drawn in elevation, view from the side. The Spanish
are drawn with armour, ﬁrearms and horses with blankets,
protecting the ways and cattle, whereas
the Indians
carry bows and arrows (Morales-Folguera, 2001). Three

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 8

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. Relacio´n Geogra´ ﬁca map of San Miguel y San Felipe. Artist unknown, 1580. Royal Academy of History, Madrid

conventions are used to represent the inhabited places. For
the towns of San Miguel, San Felipe and San Francisco
(Figure 9d1), a simple church or house with a slender gable
roof topped by a cross and semicircular arch entrance. The
ranches and farm are represented by a simple house with a
ﬂat roof (Figure 9d2), in elevation view, sometimes with
arch entrance. Finally, Indian villages are represented by the
drawing a hut made of woven material and hemispherical
shape (Figure 9d3).

CONCLUSIONS

Delineation of the continuous three-dimensional form of
the land has always been one of the most challenging
problems in cartography. As we have been from earliest
times, so-called ‘ﬁsh scales’, ‘molehills’, or ‘sugar loaves’ in
proﬁle or, at best, oblique views have been used to
represent relief (Thrower, 1996).

Although of different dates, places and authorship, these
three maps made during the sixteenth century and
representing various Spanish American regions show the
originality of representing terrain relief with a different from
the commonly used method. Do not try to represent the

mountains in proﬁle view, or oblique perspective of a high
perspective or bird’s-eye view; but intuitively seem to want
to represent the relief in a plan view. To do this, and with
some differences between the three maps, the method used
consists of representing the terrain relief through wavy lines
with inﬂections similar to those of the terrain, which implies
some knowledge of their morphology and the ability to
draw it by a succession of sine curves with alternating
concave and convex forms. This method of representing the
relief in horizontal projection is completely different from
the method of hill proﬁles, such as those used throughout
the history of cartography.

The interesting thing – the amazing thing – of these three
maps is that, contrary to what he did Leonardo on the maps
of Tuscany, they are not meant to represent the relief by
their actual appearance, as the landscape would look in an
aerial photograph, but in an intuitive way they use a system
of sinuous lines, viewed from above, that try to become a
non-pictorial conventional sign to represent the features of
terrain. By contrast, in the representation of those other
elements that are not part of the relief, such as buildings,
instead of using conventional
people, trees and plants;
signs, used their actual appearance, seen in elevation
drawing, from the side.

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief Features in Plan

9

Figure 8. Map of San Miguel and San Felipe, redrawn version

This intuitive way of expressing terrain shape in a single
horizontal projection could be an empirical precedent
of what centuries later called ‘method of approximate
or ﬁgurative contour lines’.7 This procedure achieves
represent the terrain and its relief in a single orthogonal
projection. This allows a fairly good approximation to the
real
the area represented, but without any
numerical indication of altitude or elevation of land. On
maps studied, although attempts have been made to
represent relief by a system of sinuous curves, has not
been done following a strictly technical criteria, but rather
intuitive.

relief of

Interestingly, in these three cases, we observe that the
method used to represent the relief in horizontal projec-
tion coexists with the elevation representation used for
vegetation, buildings, and the ﬁgures of people and
animals
that are superposed on horizontal plane of
projection in different directions, as if viewed from the
side at ground level (proﬁle). In terms of the representa-
tion of the towns in these maps, map of Palomino uses the
sketch of the layout of buildings, houses and huts; we
don’t know if they correspond to the actual image that had
those places. But without a doubt is different in the way
human settlements are represented in the other two maps,

using conventional signs: a house or a church. In the ﬁrst
case, the expansion of the city, town or village is indicated
by the number of buildings, houses or huts; while the
second is the size of the conventional sign which indicates
the importance or size of the place that represents.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Manuel Morato-Moreno
graduated in Architecture
at
of
the University
Seville. He received his
PhD in Architecture from
University of Seville in
2010. He is
currently
Professor in Department
of Graphic Engineering,
University
Seville,
where he teaches graphic
expression in the engi-
in
neering in Degree
Civil Engineering, Degree in Aerospace Engineering, and
Degree in Agricultural Engineering. His current research

of

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 10

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 9. Relacio´n Geogra´ ﬁca map of San Miguel y San Felipe, details

interests include history of cartography, history of relief
land surveys in the Renaissance, topographic
depiction,
maps and regional cartographic.

NOTES

1. Profile views represent the hills as seen from the vantage point of a

viewer standing directly on the ground.

2. Since the Babylonian civilization, hill signs begin to develop
rapidly, and their history from this point forward has been
frequently summarized. In Lynam’s account, (Lynam, 1953, cited
by Wood, 1992) covering the period from about 1250 to 1800,
the essential changes involve a gradual shift from an elevation or
profile view (‘rather like cock’s combs’), through an oblique or
bird’s-eye view (‘little rows of shady sugar-loaves’), to the use of
the plan view (leading in the eighteenth century to the hairy
caterpillars ‘found crawling across maps of Asia and America until
the end of the nineteenth century’). This shift in perspective was
paralleled by the development of conventionalized shading, from
the arbitrary medieval practices of shading of later bird’s-eye views,
to veritable vertical shading of plan views. Early in the eighteenth
century, cartographers began to draw their hill-hatching as if
vertically shaded or illuminated from a source above the object.

This led, in Skelton’s view, to the development of hachuring
(Skelton, 1958, cited by Wood, 1992). This convention was used
with plastic effects in 1757 in the physical maps of Philippe
Buache. Although Buache had already used contours 20 years
earlier. (Bathyme´trie mapping of the English Channel, 1737).
Still, it took most of the nineteenth century for the contour to
establish its superior ability to embody the interests-in naming,
claiming, marking bounding, crossing, climbing, mapping,
mining-accumulating around the hill-signs. But it was not until
the middle of the nineteenth century that contouring displaced
the hachure method of relief representation in many of the great
national surveys.

3. Later, in Rotterdam in 1697, manuscript isobathic charts were
produced by Pierre Ancelin showing the Meuse with depth
contours from 5 to 5 feet. Similar attempts followed in France and
again in Holland. In 1725, Luigi de Marsigli issued his Histoire
Physique de la Mer (Physical History of the Sea), and attached to
this work was a Carte du Golfe du Lion, which had depth contours
(Imhof, 1982).

4. The spiritual revival of the Renaissance period, however, soon
demanded maps with more detail and on larger scales. An interest
in the features of the natural environment was now awakening.
Also, a more realistic representation of landforms was to appear in
maps when natural scientists and artists became interested in
mountains. Also, a more realistic representation of landforms was
to appear in maps when natural scientists and artists became
interested in mountains. The earliest and more beautiful examples

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 Empirical Antecedents of Representation of Relief Features in Plan

11

Figure 10. Map of San Miguel and San Felipe, redrawn version: (a) orography, (b) hydrographic network, (c) inhabited places and roads and
(4) full map

of this development are the maps of Tuscany drawn by Leonardo
da Vinci in 1502–1503. For the first time they show relief forms
individually and continuously related, as if seen in an oblique,
bird’s-eye view (Imhof, 1982). These maps, which are present in
the manuscript of Windsor and in the Madrid Codex achieve a
remarkable graphic quality and the concern for the representation
of territory that emerged in the new Renaissance society.

5. The need to identify and accurately represent the new overseas
territories for their control and delimitation and to as well as
achieve a greater awareness of the availability of the resources
required that, by Royal Decree of Philip II in 1577, a
questionnaire was sent to America to be answered by Indian
authorities, officials, and mayors. The objective of this 50-question
survey was to obtain more information on the overseas territories
to establish a better image of the interior of the continent. The
responses, known as ‘Relaciones Geogra´ ficas de Indias’, constitute
the largest body of original sources of Spanish America in the
sixteenth century. In addition to requesting written information
about geography, the questionnaire also specifically referenced
maps, or pinturas (paintings), as they were called then. The idea
was to collect sufficient information to obtain regional maps of the
New World as well as a continental map.

6. Among the studies that have been published about the pinturas
that accompanied the Relaciones Geograficas, and that include
Huehuetla´n map and/or San Miguel and San Felipe map, we can
mention: Acuna (1985), Morales-Folguera (2001) and Mundy
(1996).

7. About ‘approximate contours’ see Great Britain Army Royal
Engineers (1866). See also Reguera-Rodrı´guez (1998) and
Department of the Army U S (1961).

REFERENCES

Acuna, R. (1985). Relaciones Geogra´ficas del siglo XVI: Tlaxcala,

volumen 5, UNAM, Mexico.

Bla´zquez Delgado-Aguilera, A. (1910). Una joya de la cartografı´a
americana del siglo XVI, Imprenta del patronato de Hue´rfanos de
Administracio´ n Militar, Madrid.

Buisseret, D. (1998) ‘Meso-American and Spanish Cartography’, in
The Mapping of the Entradas into the Greather Southwest, ed.
by Reinhartz, D. and Saxon, G., pp. 30–55, University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Department of the Army Unite State (1961). Topographic Symbols.

Field Manual, Headquarter, Washington DC.

Great Britain Army Royal Engineers (1866). Papers on Subjects
Connected with the Duties of the Corps of Royal Engineers,
Jackson & Son, Woolwich.

Harley, J. B. and Laxton, P. (Eds.) (2001). The New Nature of Maps:
Essays in the History of Cartography, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore.

Imhof, E. (1982). Cartographic Relief Presentation, Esri Press,

Redlands.

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 12

The Cartographic Journal

Jime´nez de la Espada, M. (1885). Relaciones Geogra´ficas de Indias:

Peru´ , Tipografı´a M. G. Herna´ndez, Madrid.

Lo´ pez-Guzma´n, R. (2007). Territorio, poblamiento y arquitectura.
Me´xico en las Relaciones Geogra´ficas de Felipe II, Atrio,
Granada.

Lynam, E. (1953). The Map Maker’s Art, The Batchworth Press,

London.

Manso-Porto, C. (2012). Real Academia de la Historia. Seleccio´ n de
cartografı´a histo´ rica (siglos XVI–XX), Real Academia de la
Historia, Madrid.

Morales-Folguera, J. M. (2001). La construccio´ n de una utopı´a. El
proyecto de Felipe II para Hispanoame´rica, Servicio de
Publicaciones de la Universidad de Ma´laga, Ma´laga.

Mundy, B. E. (1996). The Mapping of New Spain: Indigenous
Cartography and the Maps of the Relaciones Geograficas,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Rea, A. and Escando´ n-Bolanos, P. (1996). Cro´ nica de la orden de N.
Sera´fico P.S. Francisco, provincia de S. Pedro y S. Pablo de
Mechoaca´n en la Nueva Espan˜a, El Colegio de Michoaca´n,
Zamora.

Reguera-Rodrı´guez, A. T. (1998). Geografı´a de estado: los marcos
institucionales de la ordenacio´ n del territorio en la Espan˜a
contempora´nea (1800–1940), Universidad de Leo´n, Leo´ n.
Silva-Sua´rez, M. (2005). Te´cnica e ingenierı´a en Espan˜a. III El siglo
de las luces. De la industria al a´mbito agroforestal, Institucio´ n
Fernando el Cato´ lico, Prensas Universitarias, Madrid.

Skelton, R. A. (1958). ‘Cartography’, in A History of Technology
volume IV: The Industrial Revolution, ed. by Bagrow, L., pp.
596–628, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Thrower, N. J. W. (1996). Maps and Civilization: Cartography in
Culture and Society, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Wood, D. (1992) The Power of Maps, The Guilford Press, New York.

Downloaded by [University of Western Ontario] at 14:19 15 March 2016 