The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 2

pp. 135–142 May 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Cross-Hatched Shadow Line Maps

Patrick Kennelly

LIU Post, Brookville, NY, USA
Email: Patrick.Kennelly@liu.edu

Cross-hatching is an artistic drawing method in which lines of variable thickness and orientation approximate tonal
variations associated with shading and shadowing. Research in computer graphics has focused primarily on creating
illustrations with cross-hatching that conforms to the three dimensional surface of virtual objects. Cross-hatched shadow
maps apply cross-hatching to shadowed areas, with the length of these hatching lines based on the distance shadows are
cast from point illumination sources at a number of discrete inclinations above the horizon. Thickness of lines increase
within areas remaining shadowed at greater inclinations. By adding hatching lines from a second illumination azimuth, the
resulting map is both cross-hatched and rendered with more diffuse shadows. The resulting map uses only shadows to
represent terrain, a departure from other techniques such as hill-shading.

Keywords: shadows, hill-shading, terrain representation, cross-hatching

INTRODUCTION

Horn (1981, p. 14) compares methods for representing
terrain with tonal variations to ‘chiaroscuro’, the artistic
method that utilizes the interplay of light and dark to
render three-dimensional (3D) shapes. In the artistic realm,
these tones generally represent both shading and shadow-
ing (Sayle, 2010). In cartography, variations in tone are
much more likely to represent shading, often referred to as
hill-shading, rather than shadowing. In some cases, this may
be a conscious decision not to include shadows, which blot
out shading details and must be calculated separately from
hill-shading by geographic information systems
(GIS)
software. Also, hill-shaded renderings are most often
created using an illumination vector of moderate (e.g. 45u
inclination from the horizon). Shadows modelled with the
same vector cover relatively small areas near to only the
steepest of terrain.

Imhof (1982, p. 171) offers additional considerations

regarding what he calls ‘cast shadows’:

In deeply dissected terrain, or in a model of such a
landscape, oblique light gives rise not only to shading on
the features themselves, but also to cast shadows. These
contribute considerably to an impressionistic relief
image. Relief maps have been drawn, repeatedly, with
cast shadows. This naturalism may be intended only for
works of art, but it is certainly out of place in a
functional map. Cast shadows should be omitted from
the latter. In a dense topographic landscape they would
be quite incomprehensible, as they have no formal
relationship with the local terrain.

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000005

As Imhof states, hill-shading is deﬁned by local terrain
while shadows are not. Hill-shading of a digital elevation
model (DEM) is based on the orientation an illumination
vector and the surface normal of each grid cell (Imhof,
1982), which in turn is based on the elevation of a grid cell
and its eight nearest neighbours (Chang, 2011). Shadows,
on the other hand, also use an illumination vector, but are
deﬁned as areas over which this light would be blocked by
intervening terrain. These landscape features providing
umbrage could be at distances of many kilometres.
Cartographers generally treat shadows as a binary function,
which does not help to make terrain beneath more
comprehensible. If shadows are present, the hill-shading
value is overwritten by black. If shadows are absent, the hill-
shaded value is used.

Although shadows have their problems, they are also
useful visual cues for interpreting displays of 3D phenom-
ena on a two-dimensional (2D) map image. On aerial
photographs and remote sensing imagery, the azimuth
direction of illumination is represented by the orientation of
shadows on such images, whereas it can only be estimated
from a hill-shaded map of terrain. The relative height of
objects can also be ascertained by comparing the lengths of
various shadows, in some cases (Lillesand et al., 2007).

The objective of the methodology of this paper is to use
lines representing the length and orientation of shadows to
render terrain with a 3D effect. These ‘shadow lines’ are
oriented in the direction of illumination to visually under-
score the lighting direction. To boldly highlight shadow
effects from more local terrain, the shadow lines will thicken
within areas shadowed at increasingly higher angles of

136

The Cartographic Journal

illumination. This methodology will also use two azimuthal
directions of illumination to create a more diffuse shadow
effect. This is done to soften the sharp edges associated with
shadows. Whereas hill-shaded maps offer frequent and often
subtle tonal variations, shadows on maps result in a relatively
small number of linear boundaries associated with dramatic
tonal variations.

This procedure, which uses lines drawn in two different
directions and thickens lines in the most shadow-prone areas,
mimics the artistic technique of cross-hatching. Historically,
cross-hatching was a common technique used by engravers
and printmakers working with woodblocks, copper and steel
plates, and lithographs (Sayle, 2010). Artists continue to
render cross-hatched images with these methods, as well as
with direct drawing methods such as pen-and-ink or pencil.
In all cases, long, continuous straight or curved lines of
varying thickness, spacing or darkness drawn in two or more
directions are used to create tonal variations associated with
shading and shadowing. The objective of the current use of
this technique is often not to achieve the smoothest and most
detailed rendering of an object, but rather to achieve a stark,
textured, representation.

The artistic technique of cross-hatching is different than the
cartographic technique of hachuring. Hachures are relatively
short lines drawn in the direction of steepest slope to create
tonal variations approximating oblique hill-shading or slope-
shading (terrain illuminated from directly above) (Imhof,
1982). This technique was ﬁrst documented by Lehmann
(1799), and computer automated by Yoeli (1985) and
Kennelly and Kimerling (2000). Unlike cross-hatching lines,
the length, thickness and orientation of hachures are based on
local variations in terrain. In this way, hachures are similar to
hill-shading and do not provide any shadowing effect.

Artists who have worked with cross-hatching and their
works are far too numerous to list. A few noteworthy
examples would include The Sudarium of St Veronica
Supported by Two Angels (1513, copper engraving, The
British Museum, London) by Albrecht Du¨rer, Head of a
Satyr (1620–1630, pen-and-ink over chalk, Muse´e de
Lourve, Paris) by Michaelangelo, The Three Crosses (1653,
etching, Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam) by Rembrandt, Portrait
of Joseph Roulin (1888, reed quill pens and brown ink and
black chalk, The J. Paul Getty Museum) by Vincent Van
Gogh, and East Side Interior (1922, engraving, Whitney
Museum of American Art, New York) by Edward Hopper.
Figure 1 displays the last of these, and includes the original
black conte´ crayon drawing on which the cross-hatched
engraving was based (Figure 1a), as well as
the ﬁrst
(Figure 1b) and ﬁnal (Figure 1c) state of the etching. The
resulting cross-hatched etching was printed by Hopper in his
studio on his own press. He worked meticulously on every
step of the process, ‘so that the result depended not on minor
tonal effects but on essential
form and design’
(Goodrich, 1989). The print pays meticulous detail to the
lighting orientation and the resulting areas of darkness and
illumination after the rays pass through a window, a
recurrent theme in numerous works of art by Hopper.

line,

The ﬁeld of computer graphics has done extensive research
in an attempt to automate and emulate the cross-hatching
technique. Saito and Takahishi discussed line drawing
illustrations in computer graphics as early as 1990. Using a

Figure 1. The drawing for etching (a), and the ﬁrst (b) and ﬁnal
(c) state of
the etching East Side Interior (1922) by Edward
Hopper. The drawing was done in black conte´ crayon. This etching
resides in the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, NY, a
bequest of Mrs Edward Hopper

Shadow Lines

137

Figure 2. An illustration of the method used to construct shadow lines. Lines of increasing thickness are drawn along proﬁles in area ‘B’ to
represent areas in the shadow of the northwestern hill by illumination sources of higher inclination from horizontal. No shadow lines are
drawn in locations ‘A’, while the smaller hill produces thicker shadow lines from light sources at higher inclinations at ‘C’

computer model of a torus, they deﬁned a number of
geometric buffers (G-buffers) and their associated lines,
including curved hatching parallel and perpendicular to the
axis of the torus. In combination, these lines create a cross-
hatching effect on the 3D surface. Salisbury et al. (1994)
translated such lines to stroke textures to render shading and
shadowing and mimic pen-and-ink illustrations. Winkenbach
and Salesin (1996) introduced the idea of ‘controlled-density
hatching’ to more quantitatively display tone, texture and
shape variations with a pen and ink style of automated
drawing.

Hertzmann and Zorin (2000) developed more efﬁcient
algorithms for ‘line art rendering’ of smooth virtual surfaces.
Their rendering were inﬂuenced by the work of the popular
American artist Thomas Nast, who used cross-hatching
creatively and extensively in famous caricatures he created,
including Uncle Sam, Santa Claus, and the elephant and
donkey to represent the USA Republican and Democratic
parties, respectively. Advances in computational efﬁciency led
to the discussion of cross-hatching in real-time (Praun et al.,
2001). Two books (Gooch and Gooch, 2001; Strothotte
and Schlechtweg, 2002) categorized such cross-hatching as
‘pen-and-ink’ and ‘stroke-based’ illustrations respectively in
the ﬁeld of non-photorealistic renderings (NPRs). The goal
of NPR is not to produce a rendering identical to a
photographic image, but rather to mimic the stylized
rendering of an artistic method such as cross-hatching.
Zander et al. (2004) speciﬁcally explored the importance of
using lines of variable thickness, spacing and orientation to
creating high quality cross-hatching.

Kennelly and Kimerling (2006) discuss the relationship
between NPR and cartography, highlighting speciﬁc simila-
rities between long established cartographic methods for
rendering terrain and newly promoted NPR techniques.

line-based techniques

include illuminated
Examples of
contours (Tanaka, 1950; Peucker et al., 1974; Kennelly
and Kimerling, 2001) and inclined contours (Tanaka, 1932;
Peucker et al., 1974; Kennelly, 2002). These methods
involve establishing tonal variations by using lines of variable
thickness or
these cartographic
techniques use hatching or cross-hatching.

spacing, but none of

A focus of many of the NPR cross-hatching techniques is to
draw lines directly on a 3D surface viewed from an oblique
angle, creating curved hatching lines. From a mapmaking
perspective, it proves easier to draw straight, evenly space proﬁle
lines on terrain to achieve the cross-hatching effect, as is
illustrated with this method. In choosing among line darkness,
thickness and spacing, this methodology opts to vary the
thickness of the cross-hatched lines. Varying the darkness of the
lines does not result in the stark contrast evident in Figure 1.
Varying the spacing of lines with the GIS software utilized
(ArcGIS 10) would not result in continuous lines, a common
element of many cross-hatched renderings. Speciﬁcs of the
methodology for creating such cross-hatched shadow lines and
the resulting map are presented in the following section.

METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS

The length and thickness of shadow lines in this paper
increases with increased angles of the illumination vector
above the horizon, as illustrated in Figure 2. The technique
is illustrated in a topographic proﬁle of a high hill to the
northwest and a much smaller hill further southeast. Angles
of illumination from the horizon vary from 10u to 30u.
Parallel vectors are used for inclinations of 20u, 25u and 30u
as the illumination source is assumed to be at a great
distance from the terrain and these angles allow for both
hills to cast shadows.

138

The Cartographic Journal

seamless.usgs.gov/website/seamless/viewer.htm). Hill-
shading is used to show a typical detailed rendering of the
terrain in Figure 3. The rendering was produced with
ArcGIS software, using the default illumination vector
values of 315u azimuth and 45u inclination. This rendering
includes shadows, which was selected in the hill-shading
tool. Because Figure 3 uses an illumination vector of
moderate inclination from horizontal (45u), only one-third
of 1% (0.3%) of this image is shadowed. The longest of
these shadows are cast by the western edge of the volcano’s
crater and have maximum lengths of about 400 m
(equivalent to approximately 15 pixels).

A cross-hatched shadow line map of the same terrain as
illustrated in Figure 4 is created in the following manner. First,
the DEM is
rendered using hill-shading and shadow-
ing from an azimuth of 315u and an inclination of 15u
(Figure 4a). Shadowed areas throughout the map are shown in
black and have grid cell values of 0, and at this inclination the
shadow of the volcanic landform is apparent. In the next step
(Figure 4b), the grid is reclassiﬁed to separate grid cells on
which shadows are cast from those on which no shadow is cast.
To implement this step, a reclassify command assigns all
shadowed areas a value of ‘0’ (displayed in black) and all non-
shadowed areas a value of ‘1’ (now displayed in white). This
technique relies on assigning a hatched ﬁll pattern to these
areas, so the grid is then converted into a vector polygon
format, and shadowed areas are symbolized hatching and no
outline (Figure 4c). The hatched lines are aligned parallel to the
illumination azimuthal direction and mimic the shadow lines
illustrated in Figure 2.

the areas

inclination, as

shadowed at a 20u

The same azimuth and an inclination angle of 20u is used
to deﬁne the shadowed polygonal areas displayed in grey
(Figure 4d). Because this ﬁgure uses a grey ﬁll and shows
only two similar line thicknesses, the shadow lines in these
grey areas are drawn with a slightly exaggerated change in
thickness for illustrative purposes. Subsequent portions of
the illustration, however, remove this exaggerated thickness
of
the
background in Figure 4e and f are white and there are
more variations in shadow line thickness. The combined
result of shadow lines created using the same azimuth for
inclinations from 5u to 30u at 5u increments is shown in
Figure 4e. The shadow lines display six variations
in
thickness,
from 0.4 points (for shadows cast from an
inclination of 5u) to 2.4 points (for shadows cast from an
inclination of 30u) at 0.4 point increments. The cross-
hatched shadow line map Figure 4f is created by repeating
the process using an azimuth of 360u and combining the
results with the map in Figure 4e. A larger map display of
the results from Figure 4f is presented as Figure 5.

Cross-hatched shadow lines can also be displayed with
some of the traditional methods for representing terrain,
especially ones using variations in colours or shading. This
method does not work well with other line-based techniques
for representing terrain, such as contours or hachures, due to
the discordant nature of the lines. In Figure 6, hypsometric
tints (Robinson et al., 1995; Slocum et al., 2003) are added
to a cross-hatched map with blue shadow lines. Blue shadow
lines offer a good contrast to the hypsometric tints used in
this map, and are based on bluish-grey shading used for hill-
shading with hypsometric tinting (e.g. Imhof, 1982, Plate

Figure 3. A hill-shaded map of Mt St Helens, Washington using
an illumination source at an azimuth of 315u and an inclination
from horizontal of 45u. This methodology results in very local and
often subtle tonal variations resulting from differences in the orien-
tation of terrain. Shadows are also included in this map, but cover
only a small area due to the moderate inclination angle used

Using an illumination source 10u above the horizon, the
northwestern hill would cast a shadow on all of the area
shown by ‘B’ at the bottom of the illustration. A thin line is
drawn to represent this shadow. No shadows would be cast
in areas designated by ‘A’, either because the area falls on
the illuminated side of the higher hill, or because the area is
beyond the extent of that hill’s shadow. As the illumination
source is increased to 15u of inclination, the length of the
shadow decreases substantially, so a line of greater thickness
overprints the ﬁrst to represent this second shadow.

At an angle of 20u, the shadow from the higher hill is no
longer cast on the smaller hill. This geometry results in the
smaller hill casting its own shadow for the ﬁrst time, as
indicated by the second parallel line oriented 20u from the
horizon. This is the case for shadows cast at 25u and 30u as
well, resulting in successively thicker shadow lines for both
hills. The area designated by ‘C’ indicates the full extent of the
shadow of the smaller landform that is also in the shadow (cast
from a lower angle) of the much larger landform. In this
illustration, it can be seen that shadow lines preserve details in
areas of the terrain that are in shadow, and thus offer more
local representations of terrain.

The area at and around Mt St Helens, Washington, USA
is used to illustrate this cartographic effect. The elevation
data are from a DEM of one-third arc second (approxi-
mately 26 m2) resolution downloaded from the United
States Geological Survey seamless data viewer (http://

Shadow Lines

139

Figure 5. The resulting cross-hatched shadow line map

tonal variations, but it can be argued that subtleties of
Figure 5 would be lost. A map with hatching in only one
direction, for example, would require only one azimuth of
illumination, as illustrated in Figure 4e. There are, however,
some aesthetic issues to consider. First, there is much more
interplay of dark and light associated with features on the
northeast and southwest ﬂanks of the volcano than on the
mostly dark or
southeast and northwest ﬂanks,
respectively. This seems to be attributable to the orientation
topographic features, which are generally
of
illumination in these
perpendicular to the direction of
rendered areas. Second, the outlines of shadows from
discrete inclinations of illumination are readily apparent in
this display. For example,
the area
shadowed from a 15u inclination (shown in black in
Figure 4b) is obvious in Figure 4e.

the boundary of

smaller

light

Both of these issues are mitigated with the addition of a
second azimuthal direction of illumination in Figures 4f, 5
and 6. Greater terrain detail and dimensionality now appear
to the southeast of the volcano, although only a bit more
appears to the northwest. Also, stark shadow edges are
blurred by the addition of a second illumination direction.
In essence, the mountain is being illuminated by a more
diffuse lighting source. The merits of such diffuse lighting
techniques and the associated softer shadows in carto-
graphic displays are discussed in detail by Kennelly and
Stewart (2006) and Stewart and Kennelly (2010).

Another method to make a cross-hatched map would be
to use one azimuthal direction of illumination and cross-
hatch the shaded and/or shadowed areas. As an example,
Figure 7a shows cross-hatching on a shadowed map of Mt

Figure 4. The step-by-step methodology for creating a cross-hatched
shadow line map. (a) The terrain is hill-shaded and shadowed from an
azimuth of 315u and an inclination of 15u. (b) The grid is reclassiﬁed
into shadowed (black) and non-shadowed (white) areas. (c) Shadowed
areas are converted into polygon format and symbolized with a hatch ﬁll
pattern, with hatching lines running parallel to the direction of illumina-
tion. (d) The process described for (c) is repeated using an azimuth of
315u and an inclination of 20u. Resulting ﬁll patterns use thicker lines.
(e) The process is repeated four additional times to include inclinations
of 5u, 10u, 25u and 30u, with lines thickening with increased inclination.
(f) The process described above is repeated using an azimuth of 360u

11). In the north and northwestern area of the map, isolated
cross-hatched areas accentuate variations in elevation dis-
played with hypsometric tinting. In the heavily shadowed
southeastern portion of the map, some tinting is visible
between the thick line-work.

DISCUSSION

There are simpler methods than that documented in the
previous section for creating maps with strokes representing

140

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. Two rendering with edges of shadowed or shaded areas
apparent. (a) A map created by adding a single cross-hatch ﬁll pat-
tern to polygons representing shadows from an azimuth of 337.5u
and inclinations varying from 5u to 30u. (b) Hatching and cross-
hatching applied to a 3D computer model of a statue (from Zander
et al., 2004, Figure 13c). Published with the permission of the
Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing

maps, art and computer graphics used for display in this
paper. Using a 90u angle in maps of Mt St Helens created a
display with a pixilated appearance. An angle of 45u between
azimuthal directions of illumination also provides a direc-
tional light source while adding a diffuse lighting effect to the
display, as discussed previously.

It is worth noting that traditional cross-hatching uses
unique orientations within a 180u range, as vertical lines can
be drawn from top to bottom or vice versa. With cross-
hatched shadow lines, however, a shadow line originating
from northern light would be drawn in different locations
and have different changes in thickness than one drawn from
a southern source. Although this seems to open additional
possibilities for varying tone across a map, cartographers
generally shade using illumination from northwest, north or
northeast azimuths to avoid an inversion of terrain perceived
by some map users with southern illumination (Imhof, 1982;
Kimerling et al., 2010). In practice, this limits cross-hatched
shadow lines to the range of illumination sources from
approximately an azimuth of 270–90u.

Comparing the conventionally hill-shaded map of Mt St
Helens (Figure 3) to the cross-hatched shadow line map
(Figure 5), it is apparent that these two displays utilize very
different ﬁgure to ground relationships, as discussed by
Dent (1993). In Figure 3, variations in shades of grey
delineate the edge of Mt St Helen’s crater and the volcano’s
associated lava ﬂows, all easily discernable features in the
hill-shaded map. This is true both on the illuminated and
the non-illuminated side of the volcano. In Figure 5,
however, edges are more poorly delineated. This technique
instead utilizes the quality of ‘intraparallelism’ (Dent, 1993)
to create a comprehensible display. Dent (1993, p. 269)
deﬁnes intraparallelism as the ‘similar alignment of elements

Figure 6. The cross-hatched shadow line map using hypsometric
tints to represent changes in elevation and blue shadow lines

St Helens created with cross-hatched area ﬁll to areas
representing categories of varying darkness. The azimuth of
illumination is halfway between the directions of illumina-
tion used for Figures 4–6 (337.5u), and once again six
inclinations of illumination from 5u to 30u are used. Similar
to the hatched map in Figure 4e, edges of shadows are
readily apparent. Another artefact of the method shown in
Figure 7a is that lines are always of equal thickness when
they cross.
In the cross-hatched shadow method of
Figure 6, lines are often of different thickness when they
cross. The result is a more variable pattern that may more
closely approximate hand-drawn renderings.

representing a statue in the moai

Figure 7b is an example of cross-hatching from the ﬁeld
of computer graphics (Zander et al., 2004, Figure 13c).
This portion of the image shows shading of a 3D graphic
object
style. One
orientation of hatching is used for the least shaded category,
followed by thickening cross-hatching for discrete cate-
gories of increasing darkness. Boundaries are apparent when
the thickness of cross-hatched lines change, much as they
would be if a hill-shaded map were categorized into, for
example, ﬁve shades of grey.

Cross-hatching patterns associated with two stroke direc-
tions are common, and most computer graphics renderings
do not use more than four orientations. (e.g. Salisbury et al.,
1994). Often, as in Figure 7b, additional directions are
added only in darker areas. For straight cross-hatching lines
in ﬁne art and computer graphics, variations in angle are
generally 45u or 90u. Cross-hatching with lines separated by
45u (or an approximation thereof) is predominant in the

Shadow Lines

141

in a visual ﬁeld to achieve order and harmony in the
experience’.

One natural result of this cross-hatching method is that
there will noticeable amounts of areas lacking in shadows in
the sector of the map from which the illumination originates.
This is apparent in the predominantly white north and
northeastern sectors of the Mt St Helens map (Figure 5).
Such areas are referred to as ‘negative space’, and are used
with interesting effects by some artists. Figure 8 shows a
cartoon drawn by Thomas Nast and ﬁrst published in
Harper’s Weekly in 1886. Nast’s caricature was in response to
the Haymarket Square riot in Chicago, Illinois earlier that
year in which eight police ofﬁcers were killed. Nast shows the
seven anarchists who were sentenced to death in the grasp of
Justice (Paine, 1904). Most of the ﬁgure of Justice is barely
discernible in the negative space of this rendering, resulting
in darker areas in the shadow of her robe being brought into
sharp focus (Paine, 1904; Keller, 1968).

Figure 8 also illustrates Nast’s use of non-linear hatching
lines to illustrate surfaces of greater curvature. While the
sword’s blade is represented with straight hatching and cross-
hatching lines, portions of Justice’s robe and arms are clearly
drawn with curved lines. This is in contrast to the map in
Figure 5, which consists exclusively of straight cross-hatching
lines. Such straight lines, however, are appropriate for shadow
lines and can be transformed to curved lines if so desired.

Shadow lines, as conceptualized in Figure 2, are two
dimensional effects that will only be cast along the plane
deﬁned by the direction of illumination and the proﬁle
section. Given this construct, shadow lines will always
appear straight on a planimetrically correct map, where the
map viewer is looking directly down upon the datum. From
any other 3D oblique view, however, the terrain would
seem to be covered with curved lines. Other researchers
have used plots of proﬁle lines to render oblique views of
terrain. Most notable is
the P-stroke (proﬁle stroke)
method (Visvalingam and Dowson, 1998; Visvalingam
and Whelan, 1998), which highlights concave and convex
surfaces with a ﬁltered subset of proﬁle plots. None of these
techniques, however, attempts to modulate the thickness or
darkness of proﬁle lines based on shadowing properties.

SUMMARY

The cross-hatched shadow line technique presented in this
paper is unique in providing a 3D representation of terrain
based on shadowing alone. This is in contrast to other
techniques that use tonal variations based on local variations in
surface orientation and an angle of illumination, commonly
referred to as hill-shading. The resulting map is not meant to
be more detailed than a hill-shaded map, but rather to provide
a stark, textured and stylized rendering of the terrain.

Cross-hatched shadow line maps use lines of varying
thickness and orientation to create approximations of tonal
variations with a diffuse but detailed effect. First, illumina-
tion vectors from multiple inclinations from horizontal are
used to vary the thickness of shadow lines. In addition to
providing diffuse lighting, these lines are shorter and thicker
shadowed from increasingly higher
when the area is
to shadow maps.
inclinations. This adds

local detail

Figure 8. Thomas Nast’s political cartoon entitled ‘Liberty is Not
Anarchy’, ﬁrst published in Harper’s Weekly on 4 September 1886
(Volume 30, No. 1550, p. 564)

Additionally, multiple inclinations allow shadows to be cast
beneath shadows from lesser inclinations, which adds
additional detail. Adding similar shadow lines from a
second azimuthal direction provides crossing hatch lines
of variable thickness at their intersections. Cross-hatched
shadow lines also approximate a more diffuse lighting effect,
especially by interrupting continuous edges associated with
terminations of lines in moving from shadowed to non-
shadowed areas.

Horn (1981) was not incorrect in comparing the tonal
variations in hill-shaded maps to the artistic technique of
chiaroscuro, but for many non-cartographers this term may
not be the ﬁrst associated with a hill-shaded map. Cross-
hatched shadow line maps are inspirited by the often
striking interplay of light and dark by use of the cross-
hatching technique in the visual arts, and build upon the
body of literature from the computer graphics industry for
approximating such techniques. Such non-conventional
techniques provide the curious cartographer the opportu-
nity to explore territories charted by other disciplines
similarly concerned with the visual display of form and
effect.

142

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Pat Kennelly is an associate
professor of geography at
LIU Post in New York. He
has a PhD in geography
from Oregon State Uni-
versity, a MS in geophysics
from the University of
Arizona, and a BS in geol-
ogy from Allegheny Co-
llege, Pennsylvania. He is
an ardent researcher of car-
tographic representations of
terrain.

REFERENCES

Chang, K.-T. (2011). Introduction to Geographic Information
Systems, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math, New
York.

Dent, B. D. (1993). Cartography: Thematic Map Design, 3rd ed.,

Wm. C. Brown Publishers, Dubuque, IA.

Gooch, B. and Gooch, A. A. (2001). Non-Photorealistic Rendering,

A. K. Peters Ltd, Natick, MA.

Goodrich, L. (1989). Edward Hopper, Harry N Abrams, Inc., New

York.

Hertzmann, A. and Zorin, D. (2000). ‘Illustrating smooth surfaces’, in
Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 2000, pp. 517–526, ACM Press/
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., New York.

Horn, B. K. P. (1981).

‘Hill shading and the reflectance map’,

Proceedings of IEEE, 72, pp. 14–47.

Imhof, E. (1982). Cartographic Relief Presentation, Walter de

Keller, M. (1968). The Art and Politics of Thomas Nast, Oxford

Gruyter, Berlin and New York.

University Press, New York.

Kennelly, P. J. and Kimerling, A. J. (2000). ‘Desktop hachure maps
from digital elevation models’, Cartographic Perspectives, 37, pp.
78–81.

Kennelly, P. and Kimerling, A. J. (2001). ‘Modifications of Tanaka’s
illuminated contour method’, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 28, pp. 111–123.

Kennelly, P. (2002). GIS applications to historical cartographic
methods to improve the understanding and visualization of
contours’, Journal of Geoscience Education, 50, pp. 428–436.
Kennelly, P. and Kimerling, A. J. (2006). ‘Non-photorealistic rendering
and terrain representation’, Cartographic Perspective, 54, pp. 4–23.
Kennelly, P. and Stewart, J. (2006). ‘A uniform sky model to enhance
shading of terrain and urban elevation models’, Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, 33, pp. 21–36.

Kimerling, A. J., Muehrcke, J. O. Buckley, A. R. and Muehrcke, P. C.
(2010). Map Use: Reading and Analysis, 6th ed., Esri Press
Academic, Redlands, CA.

The Cartographic Journal

Lehmann, J. G. (1799). Description of a New Theory of Mountain
Illustrations in Inclined Areas in Planimetricic Maps or Situational
Diagrams of Mountain Ranges (German, title transl.). Leipzig.
Lillesand, T., Kiefer, R. W. and Chipman, J. (2007). Remote Sensing

and Image Interpretation, John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Paine, A. B. (1904). Th. Nast: His Period and His Pictures, Harper

& Brothers Publishers, New York and London.

Peucker, T. K., Tichenor, M. and Rase, W. D. (1974). ‘The computer
version of three relief representations’, in Display and Analysis of
Spatial Data, ed. by Davis, J. C. and McCullagh, M., pp. 187–197,
John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Praun, E., Hoppe, H., Webb, M. and Finkelstein, A. (2001). ‘Real-
time hatching’,
in 28th Annual Conference on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, pp. 581–586, Los
Angeles, CA, Aug 12–17.

Robinson, A. H., Morrison, J. L., Muehrcke, P. C., Kimerling, A. J.
and Guptill, S. C. (1995). Elements of Cartography, 6th ed., John
Wiley & Sons, New York.

Saito, T. and Takahashi, T. (1990). ‘Comprehensible rendering of 3-D

shapes’, in Computer Graphics, 24, pp. 197–206.

Salisbury, M. P., Anderson, S. E., Barzel, R. and Salesin, D. H. (1994).
‘Interactive pen-and-ink
in Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH ’94, Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual
Conference Series, ed. by Glassner, A., pp. 101–108, ACM
SIGGRAPH, New York.

illustrations’,

Sayle, H. M. (2010). A World of Art, 6th ed., Prentice Hall, Boston,

MA.

Slocum, T. A., McMaster, R. B., Kessler, F. C. and Howard, H. H.
(2003). Thematic Cartography and Geographic Visualization,
2nd ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Stewart, J. and Kennelly, P. (2010). ‘Illuminated Choropleth Maps’,
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 100, pp.
513–534.

Strothotte, T. and Schlechtweg, S. (2002). Non-Photorealistic
Computer Graphics: Modeling, Rendering, and Animation,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.

Tanaka, K. (1932). ‘The orthographic relief method of representing
hill features on a topographic map’, Geographical Journal, 79, pp.
213–219.

Tanaka, K. (1950).

‘The relief contour method of representing

topography on maps’, Geographical Review, 40, pp. 444–456.
Visvalingam, M. and Whelan, J. C. (1998). ‘Occluding contours within
artistic sketches of terrain’, in 16th Annual Conference of the
Eurographics Association (Eurographics-UK ‘98), pp. 281–
289, Leeds, Mar 25–27.

Visvalingam, M. and Dowson, K. (1998). ‘Algorithms for sketching

surfaces’, Computers & Graphics, 22, pp. 269–280.

Winkenbach, G. and Salesin, D. H. (1996). ‘Rendering parametric
surfaces with pen and ink’, in Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ’96,
Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference Series, ed. by
Rushmeier, H., pp. 469–476, ACM SIGGRAPH, New York.

Yoeli, P. (1985).

‘Topographic relief depiction by hachures with
computer and plotter’, Cartographic Journal, 22, pp. 111–
124.

Zander, J., Isenberg, T., Schlechtweg, S. and Strothotte, T. (2004).
‘High quality hatching’, Computer Graphics Forum, 23, pp.
421–430.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

