DOI: 10.1111/tgis.12593  

R E S E A R C H   A R T I C L E

Obstacle‐limited service coverage: A new 
geospatial approach

Insu Hong1  |   Alan T. Murray2

1Department of Geology and 
Geography, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV, USA

2Department of Geography, University of 
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, 
CA, USA

Correspondence
Insu Hong, Department of Geology and 
Geography, West Virginia University, 98 
Beechurst Avenue, Morgantown, WV 
26505, USA.
Email: insu.hong@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract

Service  coverage  is  a  crucial  component  of  spatial  deci‐

sion‐making  involving  facility  siting.  Determining  coverage 

requires knowledge about travel behavior and accessibility 

across a region, as well as supporting methods of measure‐

ment and derivation when actual travel cannot necessarily 

be observed. When service is provided using vehicles that 

move  freely  without  the  restriction  posed  by  roads  (e.g., 

airplanes,  helicopters,  unmanned  aerial  vehicles/drones, 

boats,  ships,  and  submarines),  straight‐line  travel  is  regu‐

larly  assumed.  However,  this  common  assumption  is  often 

violated  by  geographical  obstructions,  resulting  in  overes‐

timated  service  coverage.  To  date,  no  methods  have  been 

developed  capable  of  accounting  for  obstacle‐limited  ser‐

vice  coverage.  Existing  methods  either  completely  ignore 

obstructions  or  crudely  estimate  impacts  on  travel.  In  this 

research,  we  develop  a  novel  method,  ESP‐Cover,  capable 

of  deriving  accurate  obstacle‐limited  coverage  without  in‐

troducing  representation  errors.  A  location  siting  problem 

involving  drone‐based  package  delivery  is  presented  to 

highlight the necessity of explicitly accounting for obstacles 

in system design. The assessment results demonstrate the 

importance  of  accurate  derivation  of  the  obstacle‐limited 

coverage  for  spatial  decision‐making  and  the  accuracy  of 

the ESP‐Cover method in coverage derivation.

Transactions in GIS. 2019;00:1–17. 

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/tgis 

  |  1

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd2  |    

1 |  I NTRO D U C TI O N

Service coverage is critical in facility location where planning and evaluation involve standards‐based access to 

public and private services (Church & Murray, 2009; De Silva, Eglese, & Pidd, 2003). Coverage represents the area 

in which an effective or adequate level of service can be provided from a given facility. Typically, coverage is based 

on a desired maximum range of access to a good or service. Examples of coverage include the arrival of firefighters 

before flashover, the audible range of a tsunami warning siren, and the maximum travel range of a drone. Church 

and Murray (2009) provide an extensive list of coverage standards‐based services. Finding ideal locations for new 

facilities or assessing the effectiveness of existing facilities requires standards‐based approaches involving service 

coverage (Church & ReVelle, 1974; Church & Murray, 2009). Many standard‐based location decisions simplify the 

problem to two‐dimensional space, as the height information either has no influence on the decision or can be 

ignored without producing significant errors in the results (Hong, Kuby, & Murray, 2018).

However, knowing the service standard alone is not enough. One must also know the response distance and/

or travel time, yet often this is not generally observable for all locations across space. This means that local access 

and accessibility must be derived, enabling coverage to be ascertained. It is assumed that service travel happens 

via the shortest or fastest route between a facility and a demand location (Feng & Murray, 2018). For example, a 

fire engine may travel via a road network to get to a structure fire as quickly as possible. A drone will fly directly 

to a destination unless it has to avoid an obstacle. For a service that is constrained to travel via a pre‐defined net‐

work, assessment is rather straightforward as the options are finite (Aktaş, Özaydın, Bozkaya, Ülengin, & Önsel, 

2013). For services that move freely through space, such as drone‐based delivery (Pulver & Wei, 2018) and water‐

craft (Akbari, Eiselt, & Pelot, 2018), the number of options for travel are infinite.

Continuous space travel therefore represents a challenge. A simple estimate that has proven to be effective 

is Euclidean (straight‐line) distance as this is indeed the shortest and most direct route. However, the influence of 

potential obstructions on travel need to be considered. Obstacles prohibit movement through them, forcing de‐

tours that increase actual travel distance/time. For example, there are flight restrictions in and around airports, so 

a delivery drone may not enter this airspace. Therefore, service coverage is impacted by obstacles. If the demand 

is represented by a set of points, obstacle‐limited coverage can be derived as a collection of points through the 

use of the Euclidean shortest path (ESP) between facility and demand points (Hong et al., 2018). However, when 

demand is non‐point‐based, distributed across an area or line, then the ESP is not appropriate since there are no 

explicit (and finite) point sources for path derivation.

To date, no study has looked specifically at methods to derive obstacle‐limited coverage for non‐point demand 

in  two‐dimensional  space.  Two  alternative  strategies  have  implicitly  been  relied  upon  for  evaluating  obstacle‐

limited coverage: ignoring obstacles and altering demand representation. Both are problematic, with significant 

flaws. The limitation of the first approach is obvious as it does not consider travel impediments at all. The latter 

strategy enables estimation of the obstacle‐limited coverage, but is subject to error, bias, and uncertainty.

In this research, we develop a novel method to derive accurate obstacle‐limited service coverage for a two‐

dimensional surface. This method explicitly accounts for the impact of obstacles on travel without altering de‐

mand or obstacle representation. The next section reviews associated literature. Issues and errors with existing 

approaches  are  then  discussed.  The  core  concepts  and  detailed  steps  of  the  new  method  are  presented.  The 

necessity of the obstacle‐limited coverage for spatial decisions is explained using an empirical application. The 

article ends with a discussion and conclusions.

2 |  BAC KG RO U N D

Because coverage is key information for spatial decision‐making in standards‐based services assumed to be pro‐

vided in two‐dimensional space (Church & Murray, 2009), accurate derivation is vital for making good (or optimal) 

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  3

decisions. Determining coverage relies on knowledge about travel behavior under different conditions and cor‐

responding distances and/or travel time. For example, emergency dispatch and firefighting response assume that 

service vehicles will move through an existing road network, under the influence of road conditions and traffic 

(Aktaş et al., 2013; Iannoni, Morabito, & Saydam, 2009; ReVelle, 1991). In this case, network travel time will be 

an accurate measure of the reach of a given service via the given network. On the other hand, disaster warning  

sirens, Doppler radar, and cellular phone towers rely on the concept of propagating waves through the atmosphere 

(Church & ReVelle, 1974; Current & O'Kelly, 1992; Ray & Sangren, 1983). Signals spread from a facility in every  

direction,  and  the  service  standard  represents  the  maximum  effective  reach  of  a  given  signal.  Therefore,  the 

service coverage forms a circle centered on a given facility. Services that use free‐moving vehicles mostly assume 

the vehicles will move freely without the restriction of a pre‐defined travel network, despite the inevitable exist‐

ence of the obstacles in reality (Agatz, Bouman, & Schmidt, 2018; Akbari, Eiselt, et al., 2018; Amenyo et al., 2014; 

Dorling, Heinrichs, Messier, & Magierowski, 2017; Ha, Deville, Pham, & Hà, 2015; Hong et al., 2018; Murray & 

Chu, 2015; Pulver & Wei, 2018; Sandbrook, 2015; Scott & Scott, 2017; Wang, Poikonen, & Golden, 2016). This 

assumption naturally results in straight‐line travel from a facility to demand, as it is the shortest route on the two‐

dimensional plane (Feng & Murray, 2018). The result is circular service coverage.

The straight‐line travel assumption for services where there are free‐moving vehicles, however, is problematic 

when obstacles may not be traveled through. Vehicles in this case, whether drones or rescue vessels, must make 

detours  around  the  obstacles  to  reach  the  demand  for  the  service  (Hong  et  al.,  2018).  It  is  obvious  that  these 

forced detours will impact service in a way that makes the actual coverage smaller than a simple circle. To measure 

the impact of obstacles accurately, all routes from service facilities to every demand need to be evaluated. If travel 

happens  under  a  network  restriction,  the  influence  of  obstacles,  such  as  road  construction,  road  hazards,  and 

traffic conditions, is measured by network analysis methods that will derive detours and corresponding network 

service coverage (Arabani & Farahani, 2012; Simpson & Hancock, 2009). For the free‐moving services, as facilities 

are usually given as points (Murray & O'Kelly, 2002; Murray, O’Kelly, & Church, 2008), measuring obstacle‐limited 

travel will depend on the representation of demand. For point demand representation, this can be accomplished 

by identifying obstacle‐avoiding shortest paths, or ESPs, from facilities to demand points. The derivation of ESPs 

has been a topic of great research interest, and it is possible to derive an ESP through a complex environment with 

obstacles (Hong, Murray, & Wolf, 2016). A collection of demand points with ESP distances shorter than the service 

standard will represent the obstacle‐limited service coverage.

Unfortunately, it is not an easy task to determine obstacle‐limited coverage for non‐point demand. The ESP‐

based approach is not amenable to continuously distributed demand as there is no explicit reference point for ESP 

derivation. So far, no method has been developed that can derive polygon coverage for demand distributed across 

an area affected by obstacles. One approach to address this situation, referred to here as the forget‐obstruction 

approach, is to assume there are no obstacles present. This is the case for most drone‐delivery‐related research 

(Dorling et al., 2017; Ha et al., 2015; Murray & Chu, 2015; Scott & Scott, 2017; Wang et al., 2016). Obviously, this 

creates significant potential for errors in service coverage estimation. Figure 1 depicts an example of the error in 

the case of simple circular coverage. Demand location A, which is within the circle coverage of the facility, is not 

coverable since the actual travel distance to A (the ESP distance from the facility to A) is longer than the service 

standard due to the obstruction and resulting detour. Therefore, the forget‐obstruction approach will produce 

overestimated, incorrect service coverage.

An alternative, referred to here as pointrization, involves altering continuous demand representation, making it 

a set of discrete points. With this, it is then possible to use an ESP or equivalent estimation of the obstacle‐avoid‐

ing shortest path to derive coverage. Three pointrization approaches have been used to estimate coverage under 

obstruction (Figure 2): pointrization with centroids, pointrization with regular placement, and pointrization with 

rasterization (Hong & Murray, 2016; Murray & O'Kelly, 2002; Murray et al., 2008; Pelot, Akbari, & Li, 2015). In 

the pointrization with centroids approach (Figure 2a), the centroids of given demand polygons are used as prox‐

ies of polygons. The impediment is reflected by excluding the impeded portion of the polygon demand before 

HONG aNd MURRaY4  |    

F I G U R E   1  Coverage error in the forget‐obstruction approach

generating centroids. Pointrization with regular placement (Figure 2b) generates demand points in a regular inter‐

val over the given area, mostly by imposing a square grid. The centroids of the grid cells become demand points 

unless the centroids are located within the obstacles. The last pointrization approach, rasterization (Figure 2c), 

goes further by rasterizing obstacles as well. It classifies cells in the raster grid as either demand cells or obstacle 

cells. Unlike the previous approach, to prevent any possible impediment, the rasterization approach designates a 

cell as an obstacle cell if it intersects with any part of an obstacle. Therefore, even though they use an identical 

raster grid, the rasterization approach is likely to find fewer demand cells than the regular placement approach. 

Figure 2 depicts examples of the three approaches. There are 67 demand polygons, and 33 of them are partially 

or completed impeded by the obstacles. Pointrization with centroids generated 61 proxy demand points, while 

regular placement generated 166 demand points. The rasterization approach created 157 demand point locations, 

though it used an identical grid to the regular placement method.

The pointrization approaches are approximations, with inevitable errors in determining coverage introduced 

by demand representation (Murray & O'Kelly, 2002; Murray et al., 2008; Tong & Murray, 2009). A polygon demand 

area is determined as covered if its proxy point is covered, even though only a part of the polygon may actually 

be covered. This error will lead to overestimation of service coverage. Murray and O'Kelly (2002) measured the 

coverage errors induced by point representation and concluded that the pointrization with centroids approach 

produced the worst level of errors in coverage estimation, and the error margin was determined by the size and 

shape  of  the  demand  polygons.  Pointrization  with  regular  placement  tended  to  produce  significantly  reduced 

errors, especially with specialized placement techniques such as offset placing. Pointrization with rasterization 

adds an extra layer of representation error with obstacles (Hong & Murray, 2016). Similar to the regular placement 

method, a grid is imposed, but including the obstacles. It classifies cells as demand or obstructed cells. Any cell that 

intersects with the obstacles is designated as an obstructed cell to prevent a potential collision. Only the centroids 

of completely unobstructed cells are used as the demand points. This overrepresentation of the obstruction will 

exaggerate the impediment beyond the actual obstacle boundary, occupying an unobstructed portion of the de‐

mand, leaving unobstructed demand behind. Also, it will create unnecessary detours that cause underestimation 

of the coverage.

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  5

F I G U R E   2  Pointrization of demand: (a) centroids; (b) regular placement; and (c) rasterization

To minimize coverage errors in point and polygon demand representation, several modifications of existing meth‐

ods have been developed (Murray & O'Kelly, 2002; Murray et al., 2008; Murray & Wei, 2013; Tong & Murray, 2009). 

However, they require users to account for the impediment during the coverage derivation stage with the presence 

of obstacles. Previous research has shown that the improved point demand representations could reduce coverage 

errors significantly for simple circle coverage without impediments. However, if we apply existing pointrization ap‐

proaches to take advantage of point representation, it can pose a significant computational burden from the deriva‐

tion of a substantial number of ESPs, since the improved point demand approaches involve the iterative generation 

of a considerable number of points. This is unnecessary work if we can derive the obstacle‐limited polygon coverage.

There has been limited research analyzing free‐moving vehicle travel with consideration of obstacles. While most 

drone delivery system modeling attempts have essentially ignored the presence of obstacles, Hong et al. (2018) tried 

to estimate obstacle‐limited coverage using the pointrization with centroids approach. The work of Pelot et al. (2015), 

Akbari, Pelot, and Eiselt (2018), and Akbari, Eiselt et al. (2018) utilized the pointrization with rasterization approach. 

No previous research has examined or developed an exact service coverage approach for continuously distributed 

demand that accounts for travel obstacles in free‐moving vehicles.

HONG aNd MURRaY6  |    

3 |  O B S TAC LE‐ LI M ITE D S E RV I C E COV E R AG E

To  accurately  derive  obstacle‐limited  coverage  for  standard‐based  location  analysis,  a  new  method  is  required 

that  satisfies  the  following  requirements:  deriving  polygon  coverage;  evaluating  demand  without  changing  its 

representation;  and  accurately  reflecting  the  impact  of  the  obstacles.  With  polygon  coverage,  the  coverability 

of demand will be easily determined regardless of its representation. Preserving the original representation will 

prevent representation errors in the analysis.

In this study, we developed a new GIS‐based method to derive obstacle‐limited coverage while satisfying the 

above  requirements. The  key  idea  of  this  method,  ESP‐Cover,  is  to  identify  the  obstacle‐limited  portion  of  the 

simple circle coverage of a given facility location to determine the actual coverable area within it. Identification 

and derivation are conducted by exploiting the spatial information of the obstacles, especially the obstacle ver‐

tices and ESPs from the service locations to them. In this section, the details of the ESP‐Cover method will be 

presented.

For simplicity, we make three assumptions:

1.  All  obstacles  are  convex  polygons  (obstacle  convexity).

2.  Travel happens on a continuous surface (continuous space).

3.  Every facility can provide identical service and is uncapacitated (capacity).

Assumption 1 is a necessary restriction to simplify problem to develop fundamentals of the obstacle‐limited coverage 

derivation method. Assumption 2 reflects the fact that a given service will travel through two‐dimensional space, 

without relying on the existing network for movement, e.g. road network. Depend on the application, it may indicate 

the  give  analysis  problem  is  simplified  to  a  two‐dimensional  surface.  Assumption  3  represents  the  given  problem 

does not consider any capacity restriction of the service facility, which is classified as uncapacitated standard‐based 

location analysis (Church & Murray, 2009).

The following definitions will be required in subsequent sections. We define ESP(v1, v2) as the ESP between 
points v1 and v2, and ESP(v1, v2)d as the ESP distance between points v1 and v2. Let int(k) be the interior polygon 
of k. Let r be a service standard.

Derivation of the obstacle‐limited coverage begins from a simple circle coverage and narrows down the search 
scope for the evaluation within the circle coverage. Assume a facility site o and three convex polygon obstacles 
near it (Figure 3). The simple circle coverage for o shows the coverage without (or ignoring) the obstacle, which 

represents the maximum possible reach of the service without any impediments. Therefore, any relevant impedi‐

ments will occur only within the circle coverage.

Based on the above findings, the concept of the area of impact (AOI) is defined as follows.

3.1 | Definition (area of impact)

For a facility site o and its impeding obstacles, the AOI is the portion of the simple circle coverage of o where 
straight‐line travel from o is potentially impeded by the obstacles.

If a facility has several obstacles surrounding it, the facility may have multiple AOIs. An AOI is derived for an ob‐

stacle group, a collection of obstacles that impede each other's AOI. For a given obstacle group, its AOI is the smallest 

circular sector that contains the group (Figure 3). The ESP‐Cover method evaluates AOIs one at a time. The remaining 

portion of the simple circle will not be impeded, so it does not have to be evaluated.

The next step of the ESP‐Cover method is to identify the portion of each AOI that can be covered by the site 

by making detours around corresponding obstacles. This can be achieved by dividing the AOI into smaller pieces 

that can be evaluated easily for their coverability from the site. ESPs from the site to the obstacle vertices and 

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  7

F I G U R E   3  A facility with its AOI

their properties are used to split and evaluate the AOI. It is mathematically proven that an ESP only consists of its 
origin, destination, and the vertices of obstacles (Viegas & Hansen, 1985). So, for a location p within the AOI, if 
straight‐line travel from the site to p is impeded by the obstacles, some of the vertices of the obstacles will form 
its ESP, as well as the site and p itself. If the length of such an ESP is equal to or shorter than the service standard, 

a given location is coverable by the site, as depicted in Figure 3. Therefore, for each obstacle vertex, if we can 

identify locations that have ESPs that go through the given vertex, and if the length of such ESPs is equal to or 

shorter than the service standard, then the collection of such locations would form coverable area of each vertex. 

The coverable areas of all obstacle vertices will represent the portion of the AOI that can be covered, which will 

lead us to the derivation of the obstacle‐limited coverage.

One additional step for the coverable area derivation is to narrow it down it to a unique coverable area for 

each  vertex.  It  is  evident  that  some  vertices’  coverable  areas  will  completely  contain  other  coverable  areas  or 
largely overlap, creating inefficiency. The unique coverable area of an obstacle vertex, vm, is defined as the col‐
lection of locations p where vertex vm is the final entry point to p, which is the second last vertex of ESP (o, p), and 
ESP(o, p)d ≤ r.

Based on this, the coverable area of an obstacle vertex is defined as follows.

3.2 | Definition (coverable area)

For impeding obstacle vertex vm, its coverable area is the collection of locations p where vm ∈ ESP (o, p) and vmp is 
the last segment of ESP (o, p), while ESP(o, p)d ≤ r.

There  is  a  complicating  issue,  however,  that  makes  the  coverable  area  approach  challenging  to  implement. 

It is hard to identify such locations or areas for obstacle vertices, since a given problem occurs on a continuous 

surface, so no explicit reference point for ESP derivation exists. Identifying the coverable area on a continuous 

surface is not an easy task, since the ESP needs to be measured for the infinite number of locations on the surface. 

However, if an area that guarantees the inclusion of the coverable area of a given obstacle vertex can be derived 

HONG aNd MURRaY8  |    

problem.

and its coverability can be easily determined, it is possible to derive the obstacle‐limited coverage for the given 

The most simplistic but certain approach would be to derive a circular sector that represents the area cover‐
able from a given obstacle vertex. If travel occurs via the shortest route from the site to an obstacle vertex vm, the 
m = r − ESP(o, vm)d.  
service still can travel further from there, up to the distance of the remaining service standard, r�
If we draw a circular sector centered at vm with a radius of r′
m, defined by two neighboring obstacle vertices of vm,  
it will represent the area that is coverable via vm, if no other obstruction presents. Figure 4a depicts an example 
of  such  a  sector  for  obstacle  vertex v2.  Due  to  the  obstacle  convexity  assumption,  if  no  other  obstacle  exists, 
any  location  p  within  the  circular  sector  is  coverable  from  the  site,  since  p  can  be  reached  via  a  route  where 
ESP (o, v2) + v2p, and its length is equal to or shorter than r, even if such a route is not the shortest path to p. By 
definition, this sector will include the coverable area of v2.

However, Figure 4b clearly shows that this coverable sector tends to encompass too wide an area and largely 

overlaps with others, resulting in inefficiencies in coverage construction. Figure 4b presents two coverable sec‐
tors of two obstacle vertices, v2 and v3. The coverable sector of v3 is derived using its neighbors v2 and v4. Firstly, 
the overlap between them is severe, occupying nearly two‐thirds of the coverable sector of v3. Second, they in‐
clude locations that can be reached via a straight path from the facility (location i  in Figure 4b). Lastly, some parts 
of them will cause unnecessary and repetitive evaluation, such as location  j belonging to both coverable sectors. 

To prevent such unnecessary evaluations and inefficiencies, the coverable sector approach needs to be refined.

To refine the coverable sector, the properties of ESP are utilized. For an obstacle vertex vm, if we extend the 
last line segment of ESP(o, vm) by r′
m, referring to this as lm, it can be used to divide the sector into two subsectors, 
to  identify  a  portion  of  the  coverable  sector  that  includes  the  coverable  area  of vm.  The  relevant  subsector  is 
identified by each subsector’s spatial relationship with ESP(o, vm). If a given subsector intersects ESP(o, vm) with its 

F I G U R E   4  Coverable sector derivation

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  9

interior or boundary, it indicates that the given subsector does not include the coverable area. If a given subsector 
does not intersect ESP(o, vm) except at its center, the subsector includes the coverable area of vm, based on the 
properties of the ESP and circle. In Figure 4c, the subsector S1 does not intersect the ESP of v2, so it includes the 
coverable area of the vertex. The subsector S2 does intersect ESP (o, v2), and any part of it does not include the 
coverable area of v2. So, only the subsector S1 forms the coverable sector of v2.

Any remaining impediment to the refined coverable sector is accounted by dividing the sector into a sub‐AOI, 

as in the AOI approach (Figure 4d). Unlike the AOI approach, an impeded portion of the sector is removed rather 
than evaluated. For obstacle vertex vm, its impeded coverable sector is divided into multiple pieces for coverability 
evaluation, using the vertices of impeding obstacles. From vm, a line segment is drawn to each impeding obstacle 
vertex located within the coverable sector. In Figure 4d, v5 and v6 are such impeding obstacle vertices, for vertex v2.  
If the line segment is unimpeded, like v2v5 in Figure 4d, the segment is extended to split the coverable sector. An 
impeded subsector becomes a sub‐AOI and is split by an impeding obstacle, again as in Figure 4d. The portion of 
the sub‐AOI that is unimpeded (shaded dark blue) is coverable, since any location p within the portion is coverable 
via a route ESP (o, v2) + v2p, and the travel distance will be shorter than the service standard. The impeded portion 
of the sub‐AOI (shaded orange) is removed from the coverable sector. The unimpeded subsector is included as the 

coverable sector of the vertex.

It should be noted that some obstacle vertices may not have any coverable area except themselves, since no 

other  location  exists  where  its  ESP  goes  through  them.  Identification  of  these dead‐end  vertices  can  be  made 
by evaluating the lm of vertex vm and whether lm intersects with the interior of the obstacle to which vm belongs 
(see v7 and v8 in Figure 5). For any location p within the AOI, a route to p via a dead‐end vertex is always a detour. 
Therefore, these dead‐end vertices are excluded from the evaluation.

The last step of the obstacle‐limited coverage derivation is the inclusion of the completely unimpeded por‐

tion  of  the  AOI.  By  definition,  the  coverable  area‐sector  approach  will  miss  a  portion  of  the  AOI  where  unim‐
peded straight‐line travel from o is possible. Such an area will be automatically included in the resulting coverage. 

After that, the final obstacle‐limited coverage is derived by merging it with all coverable sectors, as presented in 

Figure 6. The highlighted area represents the coverage error of the simple circle coverage.

F I G U R E   5  Identifying dead‐end vertices

HONG aNd MURRaY10  |    

F I G U R E   6  Obstacle‐limited coverage

In summary, the ESP‐Cover method is able to derive accurate obstacle‐limited coverage by dividing the circle 
coverage into manageable pieces, based on the properties of the ESP and circles. For a given facility site o and 
a set of obstacles K, with a service standard of  r, the ESP‐Cover method derives the obstacle‐limited coverage 

through the following steps.

1.  Generation  of  simple  circle  coverage  of  o  with  radius  r.

2.  Identification of impeding obstacles within the circle coverage to create set Ko.
3.  Identification of obstacle groups and generation of an AOI for each obstacle group.
4.  For the obstacle vertices of Ko, calculation of the ESP distance from o to the obstacle vertex. This excludes those 
vertices having an ESP distance longer than r from the evaluation. Vertices are sorted in order of ESP distance.

d
, the last segment of ESP (o, vm) by r�
5.  For each vertex vm, in ascending order of ESP(o, vm)

m = r − ESP(o, vm)

d
 is 

extended. Refer to this line as lm.

6.  Identification of any dead‐end vertices of obstacle k ∈ Ko, the obstacle to which vm belongs. If lm ∩ int (k) ≠ ∅, it is 
a dead‐end vertex; go back to step 5 to move to next vertex. If lm ∩ int (k) = ∅, the coverable sector is derived.
7.  Identification of any impediment to the coverable sector. If any, the impediment is accounted for to update the 

sector.

8.  Repetition of steps 4–7 until all obstacle vertices are evaluated.

9.  Merging of all coverable sectors, including the completely unimpeded portion of the AOI, to derive the obsta‐

cle‐limited coverage of o.

4 |  A S S E S S M E NT

So  far,  we  have  discussed  the  importance  of  service  coverage  in  the  context  of  spatial  decision‐making  and  the 

implication of existing methods for deriving service coverage under the presence of obstacles to services using free‐

moving vehicles. The flawed strategies for reflecting impediments in coverage derivation may affect various stages of 

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  11

the spatial decision‐making process and make them erroneous. However, since no prior method has been developed 

that is capable of deriving accurate obstacle‐limited coverage, it was not possible even to measure the influence of 

flawed approaches in decision‐making. In what follows, to reveal the necessity and importance of accurate derivation 

of obstacle‐limited coverage for related spatial decision‐making efforts, we will analyze and assess errors induced by 

existing coverage derivation methods based on now‐available obstacle‐limited coverage and how they propagate to 

the final results. For this assessment, a simple location decision problem that tries to find the optimal locations for 

standard‐based service facilities to provide complete coverage is presented. We will use the five above‐mentioned 

coverage derivation approaches, including ESP‐Cover, to solve the given problem. We will then discuss the influence 

of each coverage derivation method on the stages of the decision‐making process.

Typically, standard‐based facility location decision‐making using optimization models is conducted based on the 

following four steps: (a) generation of candidate sites for new facilities; (b) representation of demand; (c) derivation 

of service coverage for candidate sites; and (d) finding the optimal or best solution. The coverage derivation method 

of choice will determine how to consider the impediments, and its assumptions and decisions will affect all stages 

of the location decision, including the decision itself. Therefore, a thorough analysis of the influence of the coverage 

derivation methods at each stage of the process is necessary. We tested five coverage derivation approaches for 

the identical location decision problem, and analyzed their different influences on and resulting errors regarding the 

location decision: ESP‐Cover, forget‐obstruction, pointrization with centroids, pointrization with regular placement, 

and pointrization with rasterization were utilized and compared.

The objective of the test problem was to find the locations for the minimum number of drone delivery service 

stations needed to serve the entire demand area. To focus on the analysis of the influence of the obstacle‐limited 

coverage  in  the  location  decision,  we  simplified  the  drone  delivery  model:  no  warehouse  existed,  and  an  item 

could be delivered from any service location. Figure 7 depicts an application area (demand) and obstacles. A por‐

tion of the Phoenix, Arizona, metropolitan area was utilized as the application area, and census block group poly‐

gons represented the demand. There were a total of 472 block groups. Within the area, nine polygon obstacles 

were arbitrarily generated to simulate various possible situations regarding obstructions. For the service standard, 

the maximum flight range of a drone was given as 2 miles.

F I G U R E   7  Drone based service delivery

HONG aNd MURRaY12  |    

Figure 8 and Table 1 summarize how each approach structures the same location decision problem differently. 

Candidates, demand polygons, and obstacles are shown through the lens of the ESP‐Cover method (Figure 8a), 

forget‐obstruction  (Figure  8b),  pointrization  with  centroids  (Figure  8c),  pointrization  with  regular  placement 

F I G U R E   8  Test problem structures by five coverage derivation methods

HONG aNd MURRaYTA B L E   1  Summary of test problem structures

 

ESP‐
Cover

Forget‐ 
obstruction

Pointrization: 
centroids

Pointrization: 
regular placement

Pointrization: 
rasterization

No. of candidates

152

203

Demand representation

Polygon

Polygon

No. of demand locations

421

472

152

Point

421

152

Point

1,042

130

Point

903

    |  13

(Figure 8d), and pointrization with rasterization (Figure 8e). At the first stage of the location decision, the gen‐

eration of candidate sites, the numbers of the sites varied due to the different assumptions for accounting the 

impediments. Four approaches. including ESP‐Cover. considered only unimpeded candidate sites, while the for‐

get‐obstruction  method  included  all  candidates,  completely  disregarding  the  obstacles.  However,  in  pointriza‐

tion  with  rasterization,  the  over‐represented  obstacles  induced  consideration  of  fewer  candidates  than  other 

methods. The second stage of the location decision was demand representation. Two methods, ESP‐Cover and 

forget‐obstruction, maintained the given polygon representation, while three pointrization approaches converted 

it to point representation. Again, the assumption for accounting impediments made a noticeable difference in the 

forget‐obstruction method, as it included partially or completely impeded demand polygons in the demand, unlike 

ESP‐Cover. The pointrization approaches took into account the obstacles but tended to produce a greater number 

of demand points than the original polygons, except the centroid method. Also, it is noticeable that the rasteri‐

zation method omitted near‐obstacle areas from the demand due to the over‐representation of the obstruction.

Due to the different assumptions, the five approaches differently structured the identical location decision 

problem, leading the production of different optimal solutions for the problem. This will be analyzed and discussed 

in the following sections.

5 |  R E S U LT S A N D D I S CU S S I O N

The optimal solution for each coverage derivation approach was derived based on the above test problem struc‐

tures. Solutions were identified using the commercial optimization solution software, Gurobi 8.0.1. Each solution 

is a guaranteed optimal solution based on the assumptions of the corresponding coverage derivation approach. 

Figure 9 and Table 2 depict these solutions and details thereof. For assessment of effectiveness, obstacle‐limited 

coverages were derived for the solutions based on four existing approaches as depicted in Figures 9b–e. The per‐

centage of covered demand polygons by obstacle‐limited coverage of each solution is included as actual covered 

demand in Table 2, and the missed demand polygons depicted in Figures 9b–e.

Wide variations in the number of sites of these solutions for the same problem indicate the influence of the 

coverage  derivation  methods.  Table  2  reveals  how  erroneous  influences  of  given  coverage  derivation  meth‐

ods propagate through the decision‐making process to produce flawed conclusions. Only the obstacle‐limited 

coverage‐based approach is able to provide service coverage free of measurement and representation errors. 

Disregard for obstructions and the alteration of representation cause errors at several stages of the decision‐

making process and result in flawed conclusions. The varying size of the solutions implies the sub‐optimality 

of some solutions by including either too many sites or too few due to the errors in candidate site selection, 

demand representation, and coverage derivation. The degree of coverage errors is measured in the actual cov‐

ered demand.

The ESP‐Cover method produced a solution with 21 stations, as shown in Figure 9a. Since it produces the 

obstacle‐limited coverage without altering the demand representation, its solution was the most accurate one. 

It  provides  exact  complete  coverage  for  the  entire  demand  area,  since  its  service  coverage  is  obstacle‐limited 

HONG aNd MURRaY14  |    

F I G U R E   9  Solutions of five coverage derivation methods

coverage using polygon representation. Therefore, the decision‐making process based on the ESP‐Cover method 

will be free from errors in coverage estimation caused by wrongful assumptions and alteration of the representa‐

tion as in the existing coverage derivation methods.

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  15

TA B L E   2  Empirical results

 

ESP‐
Cover

Forget‐ 
obstruction

Pointrization: 
centroids

Pointrization: 
regular placement

Pointrization: 
rasterization

No. of sites in solution

22(17)

No. of recognized obstacles

21

9

0

2

15

9

5

17

9

4

18

7

3

Actual covered demand

100%

88.48%

81.50%

84.93%

85.57%

Rank by covered demand

1

The other solutions failed to provide complete coverage over the demand area, though their levels of achieve‐

ment varied. For the solution based on the forget‐obstruction approach, there was an issue that needed to be 

addressed before the actual coverage measurement. As depicted in Figure 9b, five of the 22 solution sites were 

located within the obstacles, making them impossible to use. This was a consequence of ignoring the impediment 

from the very beginning of the candidate site selection. If we remove those five sites from the solution, it is evi‐

dent that the remaining 17 sites are not sufficient to provide complete coverage. The actual demand coverage was 

88.48%, recording the lowest coverage error among the existing methods. The solutions from the pointrization 

approaches, which considered the obstructions in coverage derivation, provided lower actual demand coverage 

than the forget‐obstruction method (Figures 9c–e). The solution from the pointrization with centroids approach 

served the lowest actual demand, 81.5%, with 15 facility sites. Pointrization with regular placement covered more 

of  the  actual  demand,  84.93%,  with  two  more  facilities.  The  pointrization  with  rasterization  method  provided 

slightly better service coverage, 85.57%, with one more station added.

The solution based on the forget‐obstruction approach provides the largest actual coverage over the obsta‐

cle‐limited demand area, even though it does not consider the obstacles at all. The primary reason is that it does 

not change the demand representation to a lower dimension like the pointrization methods, preventing represen‐

tation errors in coverage determination. However, it has a severe flaw, as five of the 22 facilities are impossible to 

operate due to the obstructions, so corresponding portions of the demand cannot be covered at all. Also, it leaves 

parts  of  demand  partially  covered  due  to  the  impediments.  The  three  pointrization‐based  solutions  produced 

inferior results to the forget‐obstruction solution even with consideration of the impediments. Pointrization with 

polygon centroids has explicit limitations, and its error margin is highly dependent on the size and shape of the 

given demand polygons. With a larger size and more irregularity in shape, the errors in the final decision will in‐

crease. Regularly placed proxy demand points produced a better result, though this method still suffered from 

representation errors. The rasterization‐based solution produced a slightly improved result with one more facility. 

As long as polygon representation is transformed to point representation, coverage errors induced from misrep‐

resentation are inevitable, resulting in partially covered polygons. In addition, the pointrization‐based coverage 

methods required more computational resources, since they needed to derive ESPs from all candidate sites to all 

demand points. This is an unnecessary computational burden if polygon coverage exists.

In short, except for the ESP‐Cover solution, the forget‐obstruction method produced the best quality solution 

for the given problem. However, the performance of the coverage derivation methods will depend on the config‐

uration of the candidates, demand polygons, and obstacles.

6 |  CO N C LU S I O N S

Accurate  derivation  of  the  obstacle‐limited  coverage  is  key  to  making  effective  spatial  decisions  for  standard‐

based  services  with  obstacles.  The  test  application  shows  that  the  coverage  derivation  method  dictates  many 

parts  of  the  candidate  site  selection,  demand  and  its  representation,  and  coverage  determination,  all  of  which 

govern  the  conclusions  of  a  given  spatial  decision.  Any  error  imposed  by  a  given  coverage  derivation  method 

HONG aNd MURRaY16  |    

will distort the final decision. Another reason to use obstacle‐limited coverage is its versatility. It is applicable to 

almost any demand representation and coverage determination without introducing errors. Coverability of point, 

line, and even continuous demands can be easily determined using a simple GIS overlay operation, since the obsta‐

cle‐limited coverage is derived as polygons. Also, improvements in polygon demand coverage determination, such 

as considering partial coverage from multiple facilities, can be easily integrated with obstacle‐limited coverage. 

Coverage determination related to the covered demand population, such as assessing the size of the population of 

existing facilities served and locating a given number of new facilities to maximize the demand population served, 

can also rely on obstacle‐limited coverage, without putting in additional effort such as altering the demand repre‐

sentation and redistribution of the demand population.

It should be noted that, even if one improves the existing methods to reduce the coverage estimation errors 

in  results,  as  discussed  in  Murray  &  O'Kelley  (2002)  and  Murray  et  al.  (2008),  they  will  not  be  capable  of  pro‐

ducing the obstacle‐limited coverage due to their fundamental limitations as discussed in the previous sections. 

Therefore, it will not be possible to accurately assess the effectiveness of the service considering demand cover‐

age and optimality of the service. The most effective solution to overcome thses limitations will be developing a 

method to derive the obstacle‐limited coverage, which has been accomplished in this research.

To make spatial decisions related to services with a limited maximum or effective reach of the service, deriving 

accurate service coverage is critical. The presence of obstacles that block service travel makes the calculation of 

coverage complicated, as their influence must be considered. Lack of a method that derives the obstacle‐limited 

coverage explicitly results in the utilization of flawed estimation approaches, such as ignoring the obstructions and 

altering the demand representation. In this study, we developed a novel method, ESP‐Cover, which can derive the 

obstacle‐limited coverage without creating representation and coverage errors. Through a simple location deci‐

sion problem, we demonstrated the necessity of accurate obstacle‐limited coverage to make an optimal location 

decision. It was revealed that with the utilization of the ESP‐Cover method, a location decision could be made free 

from coverage errors. Meticulous analysis of the influence of the coverage derivation methods during each stage 

of the location decision‐making process showed how errors in coverage estimation result in a sub‐optimal and 

incomplete solution. However, the ESC‐Cover method is not yet perfect, and there is plenty of scope for further 

work. Most of all, its obstacle convexity assumption needs to be relaxed to be applicable in a broader context. 

Iterative division of the AOI in a different way could be key to the enhancement of this method.

Insu Hong 

 https://orcid.org/0000‐0001‐5191‐8442 

Alan T. Murray 

 https://orcid.org/0000‐0003‐2674‐6110 

O R C I D

R E F E R E N C E S

Agatz, N., Bouman, P., & Schmidt, M. (2018). Optimization approaches for the traveling salesman problem with drone. 

Journal of Transportation Science, 52(4), 965–981. 

Akbari, A., Eiselt, H., & Pelot, R. (2018). A maritime search and rescue location analysis considering multiple criteria, with 

simulated demand. Information Systems & Operational Research, 56, 92–114.

Akbari, A., Pelot, R., & Eiselt, H. (2018). A modular capacitated multi‐objective model for locating maritime search and 

rescue vessels. Annals of Operations Research, 267(1–2), 3–28.

Aktaş, E., Özaydın, Ö., Bozkaya, B., Ülengin, F., & Önsel, Ş. (2013). Optimizing fire station locations for the Istanbul met‐

ropolitan municipality. Interfaces, 43, 240–255.

Amenyo, J.‐T., Phelps, D., Oladipo, O., Sewovoe‐Ekuoe, F., Jadoonanan, S., Tabassum, T., … Hossain, A. (2014). MedizDroids 
Project: Ultra‐low cost, low‐altitude, affordable and sustainable UAV multicopter drones for mosquito vector control 
in  malaria  disease  management.  In  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  Global  Humanitarian  Conference,  Silicon  Valley,  CA  (pp. 
590–596). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.

HONG aNd MURRaY    |  17

20(3), 207–226.

arXiv:1512.01503.

GIS, 20, 570–584.

Analysis, 48, 176–190.

Arabani,  A.  B.,  &  Farahani,  R.  Z.  (2012).  Facility  location  dynamics:  An  overview  of  classifications  and  applications. 

Computers & Industrial Engineering, 62, 408–420.

Church, R., & ReVelle, C. (1974). The maximal covering location problem. Papers in Regional Science, 32, 101–118.
Church, R. L., & Murray, A. T. (2009). Business site selection, location analysis, and GIS. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Current, J., & O'Kelly, M. (1992). Locating emergency warning sirens. Decision Sciences, 23, 221–234.
De Silva, F., Eglese, R., & Pidd, M. (2003). Evacuation planning and spatial decision making: Designing effective spatial 
decision support systems through integration of technologies. In M. Mora, G. A. Forgionne, & J. N. D. Gupta (Eds.), 
Decision‐making  support  systems:  Achievements  and  challenges  for  the  new  decade  (pp.  358–373).  Hershey,  PA:  Idea 
Group.

Dorling,  K.,  Heinrichs,  J.,  Messier,  G.  G.,  &  Magierowski,  S.  (2017).  Vehicle  routing  problems  for  drone  delivery.  IEEE 

Transactions on Systems, Man, & Cybernetics: Systems, 47(1), 70–85.

Feng, X., & Murray, A. T. (2018). Allocation using a heterogeneous space Voronoi diagram. Journal of Geographical Systems, 

Ha, Q. M., Deville, Y., Pham, Q. D., & Hà, M. H. (2015). On the min‐cost traveling salesman problem with drone. Preprint, 

Hong, I., Kuby, M., & Murray, A. T. (2018). A range‐restricted recharging station coverage model for drone delivery service 

planning. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 90, 198–212.

Hong, I., & Murray, A. T. (2016). Assessing raster GIS approximation for Euclidean shortest path routing. Transactions in 

Hong, I., Murray, A. T., & Wolf, L. J. (2016). Spatial filtering for identifying a shortest path around obstacles. Geographical 

Iannoni, A. P., Morabito, R., & Saydam, C. (2009). An optimization approach for ambulance location and the districting of 

the response segments on highways. European Journal of Operational Research, 195, 528–542.

Murray,  A.  T.,  &  O'Kelly,  M.  E.  (2002).  Assessing  representation  error  in  point‐based  coverage  modeling.  Journal  of 

Murray, A. T., O'Kelly, M. E., & Church, R. L. (2008). Regional service coverage modeling. Computers & Operations Research, 

Geographical Systems, 4, 171–191.

35, 339–355.

Murray, A. T., & Wei, R. (2013). A computational approach for eliminating error in the solution of the location set covering 

problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 224, 52–64.

Murray, C. C., & Chu, A. G. (2015). The flying sidekick traveling salesman problem: Optimization of drone‐assisted parcel 

delivery. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 54, 86–109.

Pelot, R., Akbari, A., & Li, L. (2015). Vessel location modeling for maritime search and rescue. In H. A. Eiselt & V. Marianov 

(Eds.), Applications of location analysis (pp. 369–402). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.

Pulver, A., & Wei, R. (2018). Optimizing the spatial location of medical drones. Applied Geography, 90, 9–16.
Ray, P. S., & Sangren, K. L. (1983). Multiple‐Doppler radar network design. Journal of Climate & Applied Meteorology, 22, 

1444–1454.

Association, 57, 471–484.

ReVelle,  C.  (1991).  Siting  ambulances  and  fire  companies:  New  tools  for  planners.  Journal  of  the  American  Planning 

Sandbrook, C. (2015). The social implications of using drones for biodiversity conservation. Ambio, 44, 636–647.
Scott, J., & Scott, C. (2017). Drone delivery models for healthcare. In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference 

on System Sciences. Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii at Manoa.

Simpson, N., & Hancock, P. (2009). Fifty years of operational research and emergency response. Journal of the Operational 

Research Society, 60, S126–S139.

Tong, D., & Murray, A. T. (2009). Maximising coverage of spatial demand for service. Papers in Regional Science, 88, 85–97.
Viegas, J., & Hansen, P. (1985). Finding shortest paths in the plane in the presence of barriers to travel (for any lp‐norm). 

European Journal of Operational Research, 20, 373–381.

Wang,  X.,  Poikonen,  S.,  &  Golden,  B.  (2016).  The  vehicle  routing  problem  with  drones:  Several  worst‐case  results. 

Optimization Letters, 11(4), 679–697.

How to cite this article: Hong I, Murray AT. Obstacle‐limited service coverage: A new geospatial approach. 

Transactions in GIS. 2019;00:1–17. https ://doi.org/10.1111/tgis.12593 

HONG aNd MURRaY