This article was downloaded by: [Fondren Library, Rice University ]
On: 17 April 2013, At: 10:57
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Knowledge discovery from soil maps
using inductive learning
Feng Qi a & A-Xing Zhu b
a Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 550
North Park Street, Madison, WI 53706, USA E-mail:
b State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental
Information System Institute of Geographical Sciences and
Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Building 917, Datun Road, An Wai, Beijing 100101, China E-mail:
Version of record first published: 19 May 2010.

To cite this article: Feng Qi & A-Xing Zhu (2003): Knowledge discovery from soil maps using
inductive learning , International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17:8, 771-795

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810310001596049

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any
representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The
accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified
with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims,
proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising
directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

INT. J. GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE, 2003
VOL. 17, NO. 8, 771–795

Research Article

Knowledge discovery from soil maps using inductive learning

FENG QI1 and A-XING ZHU1,2
1Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 550 North
Park Street, Madison, WI 53706, USA; e-mail: fqi@wisc.edu
2State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System
Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Building 917, Datun Road, An Wai, Beijing 100101,
China; e-mail: axing@geography.wisc.edu

(Received 10 July 2002; accepted 16 May 2003 )

Abstract. This paper develops a knowledge discovery procedure for extracting
knowledge of soil-landscape models from a soil map. It has broad relevance to
knowledge discovery from other natural resource maps. The procedure consists
of four major steps: data preparation, data preprocessing, pattern extraction,
and knowledge consolidation. In order to recover true expert knowledge from
the error-prone soil maps, our study pays speciﬁc attention to the reduction of
representation noise in soil maps. The data preprocessing step has exhibited an
important role in obtaining greater accuracy. A speciﬁc method for sampling
pixels based on modes of environmental histograms has proven to be effective in
terms of reducing noise and constructing representative sample sets. Three
inductive learning algorithms, the See5 decision tree algorithm, Naı¨ve Bayes, and
artiﬁcial neural network, are investigated for a comparison concerning learning
accuracy and result comprehensibility. See5 proves to be an accurate method
and produces the most comprehensible results, which are consistent with the
rules (expert knowledge) used in producing the soil map. The incorporation of
spatial information into the knowledge discovery process is found not only to
improve the accuracy of the extracted knowledge, but also to add to the
explicitness and extensiveness of the extracted soil-landscape model.

1.

Introduction
It is well established that the map is a powerful medium for presenting spatial
information and geographical relationships. Much of our understanding of the
relationships among spatial phenomena is inexplicitly embedded in maps. It is often
desirable to have these understandings explicitly stated for complex map inter-
pretation as well as for future map updates. With developments in both geographic
information processing techniques and geographic data warehousing, it is possible
to extract explicitly the knowledge embedded in maps. Malerba et al. (2002) used
machine learning tools to extract information from topographic maps. Compared
to the general purpose topographic maps, thematic maps concern speciﬁc geo-
graphic features and contain specialized domain knowledge. For example, natural

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810310001596049

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 772

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

resource maps are usually created by experts through a modeling process, and thus
convey knowledge about the particular models.

Soil maps are one example of these resource maps. In soil survey, soils are
is the result of the interaction of its
mapped based on the concept that soil
formative environment: S~f(E), as referred to as the soil factor equation by
Dokuchaeiv (Glinka 1927) and Hilgard (Jenny 1961). Hudson (1992) generalized
this soil factor equation to a soil-landscape paradigm, which is now the guiding
paradigm for soil surveys in the USA. When creating soil maps in soil survey, soil
experts through great effort work out the relationships between soil and its
landscape conditions and draw soil polygons based on the perceived distribution of
landscape units (Hudson 1992). The spatial conﬁguration of the resulting soil
polygons thus implies the relationships between soil and the environmental
conditions over the landscape. Information on how the soil types are related to each
other, and why certain soil is mapped at certain landscape locations, are the implicit
knowledge embedded in the soil map. This implicit knowledge is considered to be
the soil-landscape model (Hudson 1990, 1992).

The knowledge of the soil-landscape model embedded in soil maps is valuable in
at least two ways. First, it has the potential to facilitate traditional soil survey
updates. The conventional soil survey is a manual and time-consuming process. It is
very unlikely that the soil scientist(s) who initially mapped the soils over an area
would be the person(s) to conduct the soil survey update for the area, since the
update cycle is often longer than the career span of a soil scientist. On the other
hand, the soil-landscape model used to create the soil map often exists as the soil
experts’ tacit, undocumented knowledge. Therefore, when local soil experts retire or
move out of an area, they take the knowledge with them. To remap the area during
soil survey updates, new soil experts would have to develop their own model from
scratch. This would involve a tremendous amount of ﬁeldwork. However, if the
knowledge of the experienced soil experts could be retrieved and presented in a
proper form, the new soil scientists could then build upon it. This would greatly
facilitate the update of soil survey. Second, the knowledge of local soil-landscape
relationships, once extracted and properly formulated, could be used for automated
soil mapping, modelling, and classiﬁcation. Moran and Bui (2002) used machine
learning generated rules of soil-landscape relationships to mimic the mental process
used by soil surveyors and managed to reproduce the original soil map to a
considerable extent. Zhu and Band (1996) developed a soil-land inference model
(SoLIM) to combine the expert knowledge on soil-landscape relationships with
geographical information system (GIS) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques
under fuzzy logic to map soils. Like other knowledge-based systems, SoLIM builds
upon expert knowledge for automated inferences, and is only suitable for areas
where there are experienced local soil experts from whom the needed knowledge on
soil-landscape relationships can be obtained (Zhu 1996). For regions where there is
no experienced human expert available to provide the knowledge, a possible
alternative is to extract knowledge from other data sources. The soil map pro-
duced in previous surveys is one such potential source. The U. S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) has been maintaining a soil survey geographic (SSURGO)
database that contains soil surveys of much of the nation’s land. The availability
and accessibility of digital soil maps make it possible to extract useful information,
in this case, knowledge on soil-landscape relationships, from the maps.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

773

In this paper, we present a knowledge discovery procedure that uses inductive
learning to extract the knowledge embedded in natural resource maps. We use a soil
map as an example to illustrate this procedure. Soil maps created through manual
soil surveys, like other natural resource maps, are prone to two kinds of errors:
inclusions and misplacements of boundaries. Therefore, the map product may not
represent the soil expert’s true knowledge, but may contain noise. The procedure
presented here pays particular attention to this unavoidability of errors. To reduce
the impact of errors (noise) in the maps and recover the expert knowledge, as part
of the whole procedure we designed a sampling strategy for data preprocessing.
This paper examines knowledge discovery from three perspectives: (1) the impact of
data preprocessing, particularly from the perspective of noise reduction; (2) the
effectiveness of three basic types of inductive learning algorithms: a decision tree
learning algorithm, the neural network backpropagation algorithm, and the Naive
Bayes algorithm; and (3) the effect of the incorporation of spatial information on
the knowledge discovery process. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we
begin with a brief introduction to the conventional soil survey process to examine
how local soil scientists’ knowledge is encoded into the soil maps; this provides the
basis
for our knowledge discovery methodology. The knowledge discovery
procedure is then presented. The process is illustrated through a case study.
Last, we discuss our results and draw some conclusions.

2. Basis for extracting knowledge from soil maps

The conventional soil survey is based on Jenny’s classic model:

ð

Þ,

S~f d, o, r, p, t, . . .
where S is the soil, d is the climatic factor, o is the biotic factor, r represents the
topographic factor, p refers to the parent material, and t is the time factor. The
ellipses after t represent unspeciﬁed factors that might be important locally or even
regionally. Basically, the equation says that soil is the result of the interactions of its
formative environmental conditions, and the factors of soil formation interact in a
distinctive manner within the so-called soil-landscape units so that soils are con-
sidered to be predictable and mappable objects based on landscape units (Hudson
1990, 1992). The soil survey and mapping process is actually an inference process
based on observable landscape conditions and expert knowledge of the local soil-
landscape model. Work by Deka et al. (1995), McLeod et al. (1995), Wright (1996),
Bruin et al. (1999), and others demonstrates the continuing success of the soil-
landscape model concept for various terrain types. Therefore, the soil-landscape
paradigm is widely adopted in soil survey practice to produce soil maps. During soil
survey, soil experts ﬁrst conduct intensive ﬁeldwork to study the local soils toward
the construction of a soil-landscape model. They then characterize the landscape
conditions by studying aerial photos using stereoscopes, and examining the
geological information. Soil surveyors then delineate the spatial extents of different
soils or combinations of different soils based on their understanding of the soil-
landscape model and the observed landscape conditions.

During the soil mapping process, the soil-landscape relationships are elaborately
worked out and implicitly applied to the soil polygon delineation. The spatial
positions of the soil polygons thus imply the relationships between different soil
types and their underlying environmental conditions. When soil experts draw the
polygon boundaries, they implicitly integrate multiple environmental data layers:

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 774

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

the geology layer, the topographic layers and the land use layer observed through
stereoscoping. The basic idea of extracting knowledge from these polygon-based
soil maps is to reverse this mapping process. In other words, the relationships
between soil type and landscape characteristics can be revealed through a know-
ledge discovery approach by analysing soil maps together with the landscape
characteristics captured using GIS.

3. The knowledge discovery procedure

Knowledge discovery or data mining is ‘the non-trivial process of identifying
valid, novel, potentially useful, and ultimately understandable patterns in data’
(Fayyad 1996). The knowledge discovery procedure employed in this study is a
modiﬁed version of the general steps presented by Fayyad (1996), who states that a
complete knowledge discovery process includes ‘data warehousing, target data
selection, cleaning, preprocessing, transformation and reduction, and ﬁnally con-
solidation and use of the extracted knowledge’. Our knowledge discovery process
consists of four major steps: data preparation, data cleaning and preprocessing,
pattern extraction, and ﬁnally, knowledge examination and interpretation. The
implementation ﬂow is illustrated in ﬁgure 1.

3.1. Data preparation: data selection and compilation of a GIS database

To discover knowledge of soil-landscape relationships embedded within existing
soil maps, the ﬁrst task is to choose the relevant variables that effectively describe
the soil formative environment. While environmental conditions include various
factors, only some of them inﬂuence soil-formation. According to literature in
pedology (Hudson 1992, McSweeney et al. 1994), soil-formative environmental
factors include climate, parent material, geomorphology, biology, and human
interference. While at the watershed scale the practical environmental variables
topographical
used in a soil-landscape model are usually bedrock geology,
characteristics, and vegetation conditions.

It is important to point out that the speciﬁc list of environmental variables to be
used is area speciﬁc, depending on the pedogenesis in the local area. But among the
most commonly used variables in the construction of soil-landscape models are the
bedrock geology and the basic topographic variables: elevation, slope gradient,
slope aspect, and surface curvature (planform and proﬁle). Given no other
information concerning the local soil pedogenesis, these variables should be the
starting list of environmental variables used for knowledge discovery. Most likely,
further information on local soil pedogenesis can be obtained from soil survey
reports. Furthermore, since one of our purposes in extracting knowledge from
existing soil maps is to help inexperienced local soil experts to build their own soil-
landscape model, these soil experts may want to add some potential variables to
examine. Auxiliary variables other than the basic ones are thus added in most cases.
In §4, we will add two kinds of additional variables in a case study. One kind serves
to describe complex topographic characteristics by taking into account the spatial
relations of basic topographic variables. The other kind considers topological
attributes of the soil polygons to describe spatial relations between different soil
series. It will be shown that the inclusion of variables that describe spatial relations
will not only improve the accuracy of the extracted soil-landscape model, but also
lead to a more comprehensible knowledge representation.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

775

Figure 1. The knowledge discovery process.

Upon the determination of soil-formative environment variables in the mapped
area, the target dataset for knowledge discovery is a GIS database consisting of the
soil map and the data layers of the identiﬁed environmental variables. The
elevation, slope, aspect, and curvature data layers can all be derived directly from a
digital elevation model (DEM). Geology is often very important in soil formation.
However, detailed description of spatial variation of geology is very difﬁcult to
obtain, particularly for surﬁcial geology. Information on geology often exists in the
form of polygon maps, as is the soil map generated from traditional soil survey.
These polygon-based maps suffer from the same kind of drawbacks (subjectivity
and scale limitation) as the conventional soil maps do (Zhu 1996). Due to its
importance in soil formation, geological
information is often used to indicate
different areas of major pedogensis. Vegetation information can be obtained from

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 776

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

vegetation maps or from remote sensing images, such as tree canopy coverage
(Nemani et al. 1993) and leaf area index (Nemani et al. 1993, Fassncht et al. 1997).
However, the usefulness of vegetation information very much depends on the
ability of these data layers in relating to soil formation or soil conditions in the
given area.

It is worth noting that the variables included in our GIS database are not
necessarily the same variables used by the soil experts when they created the soil
map. Actually, it is impossible to obtain the same exact base maps that they used.
We may miss some of the layers they used because we don’t have their knowledge
of the actual soil-landscape model yet. On the other hand, it is usually the case that
we may add new layers that explicitly describe certain aspects of the landscape
characteristics. Furthermore, the data layers we use in our knowledge discovery
may be of greater accuracy or resolution than the original data soil experts used,
due to the constant improvement of data capture and data representation in GIS.
Although the use of different variables may lead to the extraction of a soil-
landscape model different in form from the original tacit knowledge of soil experts,
the better accuracy and explicit representation of landscape characteristics may lead
to a more extensive model. In section 6, we will see from a case study how the
inclusion of auxiliary data layers improves the extracted soil-landscape model to
make it more comprehensive.

3.2. Data cleaning and preprocessing

Tasks in this step usually include removing noise or outliers and eliminating
invariant or redundant representations of the data. As aforementioned, a con-
ventional soil map is produced through a manual mapping process that is not only
time-consuming, but also error-prone and inconsistent. Most soil mappers base
their soil unit delineation on visual interpretation of stereo photos. Subtle and
gradual changes in environmental conditions are often difﬁcult to discern via
stereoscoping. It is easy to misplace the boundaries of soil polygons in the manual
delineation process. Furthermore, due to the limitations of map scale, small patches
of soil types may not be shown on a soil map, but they exist inside polygons of
other soil types as soil inclusions. The misplacement of soil boundaries and the
existence of soil
inclusions result in some of the pixels being associated with
incorrect environmental conditions. These pixels are considered systematic noise
or outliers and will exert enormous inﬂuence on the accuracy of the extracted
knowledge.

In our study, the major effort we make to reduce noise and effective size of the
database is to sample only the pixels that are representative of the soil types. We
assume that the misplacement of soil lines is not exorbitant, so that the majority of
the polygon area is correctly categorized; thus the histogram mode(s) of a given
environmental variable enclosed in the soil polygons for a given soil type represents
the typical conditions under which the soil develops or is expected to occur. We
thus believe that the representative pixels are those whose environmental conditions
are at or close to the mode of environmental histograms. In implementation, for all
type, a histogram is constructed for each
pixels belonging to a single soil
environmental variable, with the horizontal axis representing the intervals of the
environmental variable, and the vertical axis representing the number of pixels
whose environmental condition falls within the interval. The resulting histogram

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

777

can be either unimodal or multimodal. A unimodal shape is the most common, with
one single mode of the histogram indicating the central concept of the soil type and
the low frequency tails representing map errors, inclusions, or transitional con-
ditions. An example of such a histogram for soil type Kickapoo based on environ-
mental variable slope gradient is illustrated in ﬁgure 2. This histogram has a modal
slope gradient of approximately 5 %, which demonstrates that Kickapoo develops
mainly in areas with slope ranging from 4 % to 6 %. Multimodal shapes are possible
when (1) the soil type occurs at more than one typical landscape positions, or (2)
one soil mapping unit is used to represent more than one soil taxonomic units. An
example of the ﬁrst situation is that soil type A occurs both on narrow ridge tops
and convex slope shoulders. The second situation happens when the map scale does
not allow for detailed differentiation of two or more soil types thus a complex map
unit is adopted.

A concern in the construction of a histogram is how to determine the number of
intervals. In our study, the number of intervals is determined to be proportional to
the number of pixels belonging to each soil type: Ni~Np/r. Here Ni refers to the
number of intervals of the histograms for a certain soil type, Np refers to the total
number of pixels contained in this soil type, and ﬁnally, r is the average number of
pixels expected to fall within each interval, which is to be determined by the
operator. With the increase of r, the number of intervals decreases, and the size of
interval increases. In a case study discussed in later sections, different choices of r
are experimented. This sampling speciﬁcation allows the number of intervals for
different soil types to be adjusted according to the number of pixels belonging to
the soil type, so that the number of pixels falling within histogram mode is
comparable across different soil types. This allows each soil type to be equally
represented in the samples,
thus preventing training bias and problematic
performance evaluation (Gahegan 2000).

Once a set of such histograms is constructed for each soil type, sampling is
conducted based on soil types. The individual sample set for each soil type is
produced in two steps. The ﬁrst step is to sample pixels one environmental variable
at a time, that is, to sample just the pixels falling into the mode(s) of the histogram
based on the given environmental variable. We investigated two options: one is to

Figure 2. Histogram of slope gradient for area mapped as Kickapoo.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 778

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

take the entire set of pixels within the mode(s), and the other is to sample randomly
a ﬁxed number of pixels (Nr) from each mode. The second step is to pool the
samples from all environmental variables for the soil type, and then select samples
from this pool. A single pixel may have more than one occurrence in this pool since
it could be selected based on the modes of multiple environmental variables. Two
approaches can be taken to generate non-redundant sample sets. The ﬁrst approach
is the union operation, which is done by retaining only one occurrence of repeats.
The second approach is the intersection of the samples. This is accomplished by
selecting only those pixels that show up in modes of more than one environmental
histogram. With both approaches, the ﬁnal set is constructed by simply combining
the sample sets for all soil types.

As aforementioned, this sampling strategy aims to reduce the noise that is
caused by errors in the original map. With the application of learning programs to
only these rectiﬁed samples, the learned result is supposed to approximate the soil
expert’s knowledge rather than the error-prone map. This sampling strategy,
therefore, is expected to improve the knowledge discovery performance.

3.3. Data transformation and pattern extraction

The central step of a knowledge discovery process is the extraction of patterns
from data. To achieve this, various data mining algorithms have been developed
(Fayyad 1996, Murray 1998, Koperski et al. 1999). The selection of suitable algori-
thms for a speciﬁc knowledge discovery task is determined by multiple factors,
including the nature of the data source, appropriate knowledge representation,
desired accuracy, and so on.

Among various data mining algorithms, inductive machine learning methods are
widely used in knowledge discovery and in various classiﬁcation practices because
they offer signiﬁcant advances in several ways. They usually make few assumptions
about model parameters and data distributions. They are able to deal naturally
with certain levels of noise. They scale well with the expansion of feature space, and
many of them are computationally efﬁcient. They also have their limitations in
terms of generalization behaviour, are user-demanding in selection of operational
parameters, and so on (Gahegan 2000). Different algorithms are suitable for dif-
ferent problem conﬁgurations.

In general, it is important to choose an appropriate knowledge representation
for knowledge discovery tasks. Common knowledge representations include pro-
duction rules, decision trees (Quinlan 1986), frames (Minsky 1975, Mennis et al.
2000), fuzzy membership functions (Zadeh 1965), semantic nets, regression and
correlation analysis results, and adaptation knowledge. The knowledge representa-
tion extracted from soil maps could take the form of either rules/decision trees or
fuzzy membership functions (Zhu 1999). We chose a decision tree to represent the
extracted knowledge of soil-environment relationships in our study, because the
conditional logic associated with a decision tree structure is compatible with how
soil scientists understand the soil-landscape relationship, and thus it is an easily
comprehensible form in this speciﬁc domain. Furthermore, a decision tree is easily
transformed into rules and descriptions, which can be directly used with knowledge-
based inference systems for automated soil inference.

Decision tree induction is one of the most established learning algorithms
(Russell and Norvig 1995). With a decision tree, training data is partitioned to the

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

779

children nodes using a splitting rule until all training samples can be categorized to
a predeﬁned class. For example, the soil-landscape relationships could be expressed
as a decision tree, as shown in ﬁgure 3. One of its branches basically says that if the
bedrock at a site is Oneota, the slope gradient is less than 12 %, and if the planform
curvature is almost linear on ﬂat ridge tops, then the soil is expected to be ‘Valton’.
When constructing a decision tree from training data, choosing the right size for
the tree is an important problem. A tree that classiﬁes the training data perfectly
may not be the tree with the best generalization performance when applied to real
data since (1) there may be noise in the training data that the tree is ﬁtting; and (2)
the algorithm might be making some decisions about the leaves of the tree that are
based on very little data. This phenomenon is called overﬁtting, and an overﬁtted
tree may not reﬂect reliable trends in the data. To avoid overﬁtting, various efforts
have been made to improve the decision tree algorithm itself, including various
pruning algorithms (Esposito et al. 1997). Yet another effective way to avoid
overﬁtting on noisy data is to reduce noise ahead of time, given prior knowledge in
the speciﬁc application domain, as we tried to do in the data preparation stage.

In our study, we use the See5 algorithm (Quinlan 1993, 2001) to derive decision
trees from training data. See5 is based on an information theoretic approach. To
build a decision tree, See5 recursively grows a tree top-down through batch
processing of the training data, using a greedy heuristic to search for a simple tree
based on information gain (Quinlan 1993). It selects an attribute for each node with
the most information gain. First, the entropy (or impurity or disorder) of a set of
examples S is calculated as:

Entropy Sð Þ~ X
i~1
where pi is the proportion of category i samples in S, and c is the number of
categories. The information gain of an attribute is the expected reduction in entropy

{pi log 2 pið Þ,

c

Figure 3. A decision tree representation of the soil-landscape model.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 780

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

caused by partitioning on this attribute:

Gain S, Að

Þ~Entropy Sð Þ{ Sv

Entropy Svð

Þ,

Svj
j
Sj
j

where Sv is the subset of S for which attribute A has value v. The entropy of the
partitioned data is calculated by weighting the entropy of each partition by its size
relative to the original set.

To examine the algorithm’s feasibility in terms of learning accuracy and result
comprehensibility, we also experimented with two other algorithms. They are Naive
Bayes and neural network backpropagation (Mitchell 1997). Naı¨ve Bayes uses
Bayes theorem to predict the value of a target ﬁeld from evidence given by labeled
it estimates the
examples. Under the assumption of conditional
posterior probabilities of all possible classiﬁcations; and the classiﬁcation with the
highest posterior probability is chosen as the prediction. Although the indepen-
dence assumption is essential for the optimality of the Naı¨ve Bayesian classiﬁer,
empirical results have shown that it performs well in many domains containing
clear attribute dependences and often outperforms more powerful classiﬁers.
Domingos and Pazzani (1997) justify its optimality in other sufﬁcient conditions,
and suggest that the simple Bayesian classiﬁer has a wide range of applicability.
However, one limitation of this simple probability-based classiﬁcation is that it does
not explicitly reformulate the feature space; rather it classiﬁes future samples on the
ﬂy. In other words, the learned concept is not interpretable.

independence,

Inductive learning with artiﬁcial neural networks uses an interconnected neural
network structure to model interrelationships between features. A neural network
usually consists of multiple layers of simple processing elements called neurons.
Each neuron is linked to certain of its neighbors with varying coefﬁcients of con-
nectivity that represent the strengths of these connections. Learning is accomplished
by adjusting these strengths to cause the overall network to output appropriate
results. Back propagation (Mitchell 1997) is commonly used to train neural
networks with labeled examples. It is known to be able to model a rich class of
concepts through non-linear modeling. Although it provides the best predictive
accuracy for many applications, problems arise when the learned network structure
and weights need to be interpreted. Further efforts have to be made to understand
the concept representations in a neural network (Craven and Shavlik 1997).

3.4. Examining and consolidating the discovered knowledge

In the last step of a complete knowledge discovery process, the extracted pattern
is ﬁnally examined and interpreted to be of future use. In our study, the learned
decision tree is tested using independent samples from the same map to obtain
learning accuracy. Once the accuracy is satisfactory, it is considered to approximate
the soil map sufﬁciently and is ready to be interpreted in terms of rules and
descriptions, and to be incorporated into performance systems or simply docu-
mented and reported to interested parties.

To further validate this knowledge discovery methodology, more validation
efforts were made in our case study. We chose a speciﬁc soil map from which to
extract knowledge. We also conducted knowledge acquisition with the soil expert
who created the soil map, through an interview to acquire his knowledge of the soil-
landscape relationships over the same area. Assuming that the acquired knowledge

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

781

is the exact knowledge that the expert applied in drawing the soil map, we
compared our extracted knowledge with this acquired knowledge to test the
accuracy. The details of this validation are described in §6.

Above we have outlined the basic knowledge discovery procedure. The actual
process can contain iterations of some steps and even loops between any two steps.
Most previous work on knowledge discovery from databases has focused on step
3—the speciﬁc algorithm taken. However, the other steps, especially the data
preprocessing step, are of considerable importance for the successful application of
knowledge discovery in practice. In this paper we pay attention to the importance
of the data preprocessing step in knowledge discovery.

4. Study site

Our study site is the Raffelson watershed in the state of Wisconsin, USA, with a
total area of approximately 4 km2. Located on the edge of the ‘driftless area’ of
southwestern Wisconsin that has remained free of direct impact from Pleistocene
era continental glaciers, the watershed is of a typical ridge and valley terrain with
relatively ﬂat, narrow ridges. A 3-D view of the area with an orthophoto is shown
in ﬁgure 4.

Zhu et al. (2001) have demonstrated the applicability of a soil-landscape model
to mapping soils in this non-glaciated ‘driftless’ area. The soil map created from a
recent soil survey indicates 16 different soil series in the area (ﬁgure 5). This area
was chosen as the study site for knowledge discovery because the recently created
soil map is suitable for testing our methodology. During the soil mapping process,
expert knowledge of the local soil-landscape relationships was acquired through
interviews with the soil expert and was documented in the form of rules and
environmental descriptions. The same knowledge was directly applied to create the
soil map. Because this study aims to reveal the knowledge that soil experts put into
soil maps, it is essential to compare the derived knowledge with the knowledge that
leads to the creation of the same map.

As §3.1 discussed, we started with ﬁve basic variables to characterize the
formative environmental conditions of soils over the study area: elevation, slope
gradient, planform curvature, proﬁle curvature, and geology. Aspect was not

Figure 4. Raffelson watershed, Wisconsin, USA.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 782

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

Figure 5. The soil map of Raffelson watershed.

chosen because there’s almost no indication of soil type changes due to aspect. The
lack of inﬂuence of aspect can be observed on the map, where soil polygons wrap
around slopes of all aspects. Known from the soil survey report as part of the
background knowledge, bedrock geology in this area is said to be complex and
plays an important role in the soil formation. Therefore, a detailed bedrock geology
layer is included in the database. The elevation, gradient, and curvature data are all
derived from a 10-metre resolution DEM recently produced by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS). Figure 6 illustrates the appearances of these data layers
that constitute the preliminary soil-landscape database.

Considering the spatial nature of soil formation and distribution would add to
the explicitness and extensiveness of the extracted soil-landscape model. However,
the variables that describe spatial structure should be conﬁned to those that soil
experts are familiar with or can easily understand. Considering this, we included
two kinds of variables in our case study to take into account spatial relations. One
kind serves to capture the spatial relations of soil-formative environmental factors,
and the other serves to describe spatial relations between soil types.

For the ﬁrst kind, we experimented with three variables that might be related to
soil formation, according to soil experts’ suggestions. They are distance to streams,
topographic wetness index, and percentage of colluvium from competing bedrocks.
To obtain the distances to streams for given locations, stream channels are ﬁrst
derived using the approach described by O’Callaghan and Mark (1984). The spatial
distance from the soil site to the closest stream is then measured. Topographic
wetness index is used to combine connectivity information based on ﬂow direction
with slope dynamics to represent the hydrological topographic characteristics that
inﬂuence soil formation (Moore et al. 1993, Band et al. 1993). Finally, since
colluvium from different bedrocks tends to inﬂuence soil development, we calculate
the percentage of colluvium from competing upslope bedrocks for footslope loca-
tions. Speciﬁcally, for a given footslope location, the relative amount of colluvium
it received from a certain bedrock is approximated on the basis of the accumulated
upstream drainage cells originating from the given bedrock polygon. The per-
centage of colluvium from multiple competing upslope bedrocks is then computed
relatively.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

783

Figure 6. The soil-landscape database for Raffelson watershed.

Unlike the above three spatial variables, the spatial relations between soil types
are not soil-formative factors, but
instead they serve as indicators of soil
distributions over the area. In other words, by including the topological relations
of the soil polygons in knowledge discovery, the extracted soil-landscape relation-
ships can be enriched to describe spatial patterns of soil types. The next section will
show that the extracted soil-landscape model can eventually be interpreted as
catenary sequences of soil series over landscape. Ester et al. (2001) described three
basic types of spatial relations that can be used in spatial data mining: topological,
distance, and direction relations. As for the representation of soil-landscape models,
both topological and direction relations are useful in generalizing soil distributions
over landscape. Speciﬁcally, the topological relation of direct adjacency deﬁnes
neighbors of a certain soil type. The direction relations of upslope and downslope
deﬁne relative slope positions of soils over landscape. For example, the upslope
neighbor and downslope neighbor of a certain soil type determine its position in a
catenary sequence. For areas in which aspect plays a role in soil formation,

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 784

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

directions other than up/down slope should also be considered. In our study area,
where there’s no indication of inﬂuence by aspect, we consider only the directions
along slope.

Inductive learning algorithms require that the training dataset consist of labeled
examples. A labeled example is a data record that contains values of all relevant
variables (or ‘features’) and the classiﬁed category (or ‘label’) (Mitchell 1997). In
our study, ‘features’ are the relevant environmental variables and spatial attributes,
and ‘label’ is the soil type. Therefore, a labelled example is a pixel with the known
soil category, a list of environmental conditions and spatial neighbors. Two kinds
of labelled examples were prepared. The ﬁrst kind was randomly drawn from the
area and is for evaluating the different learning algorithms. This set is referred to as
the unrectiﬁed sets. The second kind was drawn from the histogram modes of
environment variables, as described in §3.2, and is for evaluating the extracted soil-
landscape model. This kind is referred to as the ‘rectiﬁed sets’.

5. Learning algorithms

We started by examining the learning accuracy of the See5 program with our
preliminary soil-landscape database. Learning accuracy means how well the deci-
sion tree can approximate the soil map, regardless of the noise that might be
present in the map. In order to measure the accuracy of the decision-tree learning
algorithm, two other well-deﬁned learning algorithms—Naı¨ve Bayes and neural
network backpropagation—were implemented on the same data for comparisons. A
10-fold cross validation was conducted for this purpose. Speciﬁcally, a set of 416
unrectiﬁed labeled examples was randomly drawn from the study area. These
examples were then randomly divided into ten bins. Training was done ten times on
nine of the bins, with one bin left out as a test set. The ten test set accuracies were
measured for each of the three algorithms, and t-tests conducted between See5 and
Naive Bayes, and between See5 and neural network.

Using the standard See5 algorithm, decision trees were constructed from the
example sets. A typical output is shown in ﬁgure 7. The tree has a root attribute
Bedrock, from which we can trace down to a ﬁnal classiﬁcation of soil type along
the dotted lines. The number x/y in the parentheses after each soil type indicates the
number of examples labelled as this class in the training set (x) and the number of
examples that are incorrectly classiﬁed using this tree structure (y). If only one
number is listed, all examples are correctly classiﬁed as that category. For example,
the ﬁrst path in the decision tree in ﬁgure 7 basically says: if Bedrock is Oneota,
slope gradient is less than or equal to 13.17 %, the soil type would be Valton, and
there are 10 examples of this soil type in the training set, which are all correctly
classiﬁed using this tree structure.

Figure 8 shows the accuracies of See5, Naive Bayes, and neural network
algorithms from the ten-fold cross validation experiment. From the results, it is
observable that the mean accuracy of the See5 algorithm is apparently higher than
that of the Naive Bayes algorithm, but slightly lower than that of backpropagation.
Furthermore, Paired Student t-tests are conducted under a 95 % conﬁdence level.
The conﬁdence interval of the relative performance for See5 versus neural network
is 0.004¡0.052, or (20.048, 0.056). That of See5 versus Naı¨ve Bayes is 20.1¡0.061
or (20.161, 20.039). From this result we can conclude that under a conﬁdence level
of 95 %, the See5 algorithm is signiﬁcantly better than Naive Bayes, while there’s no

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

785

Figure 7. A decision tree built from training samples.

signiﬁcant difference between the performance of See5 and that of neural network.
Therefore, in terms of learning accuracy, the See5 and the neural network back-
propagation algorithms exhibit similar performances. As mentioned in §3.3, a
signiﬁcant limitation of the neural network is that the representation is barely
comprehensible. In order to interpret a neural network, Craven and Shavlik (1996)

Figure 8. Accuracies of the See5, neural network, and Naive Bayes algorithms in a 10-fold
cross validation.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 786

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

used an additional decision tree learning program to re-represent the network
structure and weights with a decision tree. Given that the See5 results are already
easily comprehensible without extra effort, it is concluded to be a better approach
to extracting knowledge of soil-landscape relationships.

6. Knowledge discovery results and discussion

In this section we examine the accuracy of the extracted knowledge and the
effect of the noise reduction effort as outlined in §3.2. In order to measure accuracy,
we obtained an expert-deﬁned test set. Speciﬁcally, the soil expert who drew the
map was provided with the orthophoto in 3-D view on a computer screen. He then
digitized on screen a set of sample points that he believes are consistent with his
understanding of the soil-landscape relationships over the area. These sample points
were then recorded, and their values for the associated environmental variables
were attached to generate a test set. Since the expert was asked to give only typical
points that are consistent with his knowledge, this test set was expected to represent
the expert knowledge instead of the map product.

6.1. The impact of different sampling options

Sample sets were constructed based on different sampling options in data
preprocessing—either by taking the entire mode(s) or by randomly sampling from
the mode(s), either using the union operation or using the intersection operation to
pool modal samples. Each sample set was then used to derive a decision tree to
investigate how the decision tree behaves in response to the different sampling
options. Table 1 shows the sampling parameters of 32 different sample sets along
with their resulting tree accuracies on the expert-deﬁned test set. The parameter r
determines the number of intervals in the histogram of an environmental variable
(see §3.2), while the parameter N indicates the number of samples randomly
extracted from each mode interval.

It is observable that the results from all intersection sample sets are apparently
worse than those from the union sets. Actually the decision trees built from many
of the intersection sets are not even complete, because for some of the soil types
there are no training samples. Because the intersection sample set contains only
pixels falling into multiple modes, the number of samples for different soil types
differs. It often results in incomplete sample sets due to the fact that some soil types

Table 1. Rectiﬁed sample sets: sampling parameters and the resulting accuracies.

Sampling parameters

Sample size

Accuracy

Sample size

Accuracy

Pooled via INTERSECTION

Pooled via UNION

r~3

r~5

r~10

r~20

N~5
Entire mode
N~5
N~10
Entire mode
N~10
N~20
Entire mode
N~20
Entire mode

29
67
28
103
111
67
246
284
178
699

0.43
0.40
0.49
0.52
0.40
0.65
0.71
0.60
0.71
0.77

286
1298
289
517
1777
564
940
2881
1051
4728

0.83
0.83
0.86
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.86

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

787

Table 2. Accuracies of decision trees derived from rectiﬁed sample sets.

Size
r
N
Accuracy

Set1

286
3
5
0.83

Set2

272
3
5
0.80

Set3

289
5
5
0.86

Set4

285
5
5
0.86

Set5

517
5
10
0.83

Set6

504
5
10
0.80

Table 3. Accuracies of decision trees derived from unrectiﬁed sample sets.

Fold

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 Mean

Accuracy

0.80

0.71

0.74

0.71

0.80

0.74

0.74

0.74

0.74

0.74

0.75

occupy only a very small portion of the area. Even if the sample sets are complete
with bigger sample sizes, the severely uneven allocation of samples among the soil
series can introduce bias into the training process, thus impairing the learning
accuracy. Table 1 also shows that, although the sample sizes are usually much
bigger if we take the entire mode rather than randomly sample from it, there’s no
signiﬁcant difference between these two options in terms of test set accuracy under
the union strategy. Given that the See5 algorithm is not computationally intensive,
we say that taking the entire mode or sampling a few pixels from the mode basically
has a negligible impact on the results.

6.2. The effect of data preprocessing

In order to examine the effect of our data preprocessing strategy, we ﬁrst used
six rectiﬁed sample sets generated through data preprocessing to derive decision
trees, and then fed the expert-deﬁned test set to determine the accuracy of each
decision tree. The results of these tests are shown in table 2. The expert-derived
sample set was also fed to the decision trees generated using the See5 algorithm
based on the 10 fold unrectiﬁed example sets. The accuracy for each of the 10-fold
decision trees is listed in table 3. The mean accuracy of the 10-folds is 0.75. Since
the examples used to derive the 10 decision trees were not preprocessed using the
strategy described in §3.2, we treat the above accuracy (0.75) as the knowledge
discovery accuracy without data preprocessing.

Tables 2 and 3 show that the accuracy of each of the decision trees derived using
the rectiﬁed sample sets is higher than the mean accuracy from the sample sets
without data preprocessing (see ﬁgure 9). This provides one piece of evidence that
the data-preprocessing step is effective in reducing noise and outliers from the
original map.

6.3. Comparison of the decision tree results with documented expert knowledge

A decision tree representation can be easily converted into rule sets by tra-
versing all paths of the tree. The rules can then be compared with the environ-
mental descriptions directly obtained from the local soil expert for validation.
Table 4 shows part of such a comparison between the result from a rectiﬁed sample
set and the documented expert knowledge. The comparison reveals that consistency
is high between the environmental descriptions for soil series constructed from the

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 788

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

Figure 9. Accuracies measured on the expert-deﬁned test set.

decision tree result and those acquired directly from the local soil expert. The best
consistency is found for soil series developed on bedrock Oneota and Glauconite.
Results for soil series developed on Jordan sandstone are not as good. The reason is
that Jordan sandstone occupies only a very small area in the watershed, where, due
to the limited spatial resolution, soil polygons on the soil map may not effectively
capture the expert knowledge. For the continuous environmental variables, the
decision tree program has generated breaks automatically. From the comparison in
table 4, we see that most of these algorithm-derived breaks are fairly close to those
provided by soil experts. Therefore, we can say that the knowledge discovered from
the soil map has effectively approximated the knowledge that was used to create the
soil map by soil experts.

We also compared the previous results, obtained without data preprocessing, to
the documented expert knowledge. The breaks of the continuous features are less

Table 4. Comparisons of decision tree results with documented expert knowledge.

Soil series

Environmental Variable

Tree result

Expert Knowledge

Valton

Dorerton

Elbaville

Geology
Elevation
Gradient
Geology
Elevation
Proﬁle Curvature
Planform Curvature
Geology
Elevation
Proﬁle Curvature
Planform Curvature

Norden

Greenridge Geology
Gradient
Geology
Gradient
Geology
Gradient

Urne

Oneota
w1300
v12 %
Oneota
1150–1250
Linear-convex
Convex
Oneota
1150–1250

Oneota
w1298.68
v~12.57 %
Oneota
v1298.68
Linear-convex
Convex
Oneota
v1298.68
Slightly convex-concave Concave-slightly convex
Slightly convex-concave Concave-linear
Glauconite
v~14.37 %
Glauconite
14.37–28.84 %
Glauconite
w28.84 %

Glauconite
4–12 %
Glauconite
12–30 %
Glauconite
w30 %

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

789

Table 5. Comparisons of decision tree results with documented expert knowledge.

Environmental
Variable

Tree result (without
data preprocessing) Expert Knowledge

Tree result
(mode sampling)

Soil series

Valton

Lamoille

Dorerton

Geology
Elevation
Gradient
Geology
Elevation
Gradient
Geology
Elevation
Gradient
Proﬁle Curvature N/A

Oneota
w1194.95
v~9.86 %
Oneota
w1194.95
w9.86 %
Oneota
N/A
w27.37 %

Oneota
w1300
v12 %
Oneota
w1250
12–20 %
Oneota
1150–1250
w30 %
Linear-convex

Oneota
w1298.68
v~12.57
Oneota
w1298.68
w12.57 %
Oneota
v1298.68
N/A
Linear-convex

accurate than those from the rectiﬁed sample sets, due to the inclusion of noises
(table 5).

6.4. Effects of spatial information

For our case study on the Raffelson watershed, the consideration of two kinds
of spatial information is suggested by soil experts in addition to the basic environ-
mental variables, as described in §4. In order to examine the effect of including
spatial information in the knowledge discovery process, we use the same expert-
deﬁned test set to measure the changes in accuracies.

First, the three variables that portray spatial relations of soil-formative environ-
ments are added to the database. They are distance to streams, topographic wetness
index, and percentage of colluvium from competing bedrocks. Ten rectiﬁed sample
sets are generated to derive decision trees using See5. The test set accuracies of the
ten resulting trees are compared to the accuracies obtained using only the basic
environmental variables. Table 6 shows the result of
this experiment, which
indicates that the mean accuracy increases from 0.83 to 0.865 with the addition of
the new variables. A paired t-test under a 95 % conﬁdence level gives the interval of
relative performance (0.024, 0.056), indicating a signiﬁcant improvement. In the

Table 6. Decision tree accuracies with and without using spatial information.

Accuracy with
preliminary
database

Accuracy after
spatial topographic
variables added

Accuracy after
spatial neighbor
variables added

Run

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Mean

0.83
0.80
0.86
0.86
0.83
0.80
0.83
0.86
0.83
0.80
0.83

0.89
0.83
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.89
0.86
0.91
0.83
0.86
0.865

0.89
0.89
0.91
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.91
0.91
0.89
0.86
0.893

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 790

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

decision tree results, we see that two of the three newly added variables appear as
tree nodes to separate soil series. They are wetness index and percentage of
colluvium from competing bedrocks. It is the presence of these two features in the
decision tree that accounts for the increase of accuracy. On the other hand, the
other variable, distance to streams, does not affect the knowledge discovery
performance in that it is found not to play a role in the soil-landscape relationships
in this area. A merit of decision tree inductive learning is that it does not necessarily
use all the given features to construct the decision tree result, but adaptively selects
the most relevant variables. This is especially important when applying the process
to other areas, where the actual soil-landscape model behind the soil map is
unknown, and the environmental variables used by the soil experts who created the
map are untraceable. It is then necessary to include a wide range of variables in the
database to examine various potential factors in the soil-landscape relationships.
Last, we added another two variables into the above database to portray the
topological relations between soil types. The two variables are the upslope neighbor
and downslope neighbor of a given soil type. See5 was run on ten rectiﬁed sample
sets to derive decision trees, and the test set accuracies are listed in table 6. The table
shows that the mean accuracy has further increased from 0.865 to 0.893. A paired
t-test, again, conﬁrms the signiﬁcance of the improvement, with a conﬁdence
interval (0.010, 0.036). An examination of the decision tree results shows that a
considerable portion of tree nodes are now associated with these two variables. It is
thus evident that the inclusion of spatial neighborhood information has led to a
signiﬁcant improvement of the knowledge discovery performance. Furthermore, the
explicit spatial relationships between different soil types make it possible to create
catenary sequences of soil series, which are commonly used in soil survey to
illustrate soil-landscape models. For example, ﬁgure 10 shows part of a resulting
decision tree. The tree branch on bedrock Oneota can eventually be generalized to
the catenary sequence displayed in ﬁgure 11. Speciﬁcally, when the decision tree
says the upslope neighbour of a certain soil type is ‘None’, it usually denotes that
this soil type develops on ridge tops. Similarly, if one’s downslope neighbor is
‘None’, this soil may be at the lowest drainage ways. When two soil types appear to
be each other’s downslope (or upslope) neighbours, they are most likely at similar

Figure 10. Part of a decision tree result with spatial neighbour information.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

791

Figure 11. Catenary Sequence on Oneota.

slope positions and separable only by other environmental variables. Soil types
Elbaville and Dorerton are examples of this case. By looking at previous decision
tree results generated without using the spatial neighborhood information, we see
that Dorerton develops on convex positions, while Elbaville is more related to linear
and concave curvatures.

7. Conclusions and future efforts

This paper presented a knowledge discovery procedure to extract knowledge
from soil maps. It shows that inductive machine learning algorithms can be applied
to extract useful knowledge from previously underutilized soil maps. Previous
research has demonstrated the success of decision tree learning algorithms in soil
data modeling. Eklund et al. (1998) used decision tree induction in a knowledge-
based system for secondary soil salinization analysis. Moran and Bui (2002)
investigated the use of decision tree-generated rules for soil classiﬁcation. Although
that study showed that decision tree induction can be used to model existing soil
maps, it is more desirable to recover true expert knowledge from the error-prone
soil maps. Therefore, our study has paid speciﬁc attention to the reduction of
representation noise in soil maps. Furthermore, although previous studies have
used decision tree induction to model soils, the underlying soil-landscape model was
not explicitly extracted and represented. We argue that the soil-landscape model is
the key concept in soil survey practices. Once explicitly represented and docu-
mented, knowledge about the local soil-landscape model can be used by both
inexperienced soil experts and automated soil inference systems for soil survey
updates. In our study, the decision-tree learning algorithm See5 is found to be
suitable for extracting descriptive knowledge of soil-landscape relationships from a
soil map and the associated environmental database. The results are both com-
prehensible and accurate when compared to those obtained using other learning
algorithms. The discovered soil-landscape model can be represented in three
different ways: decision tree or production rules, soil descriptions, and catenary
sequences.

In the knowledge discovery process,

the data-preprocessing step,

like the

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 792

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

learning algorithm itself, is found to play a very important role. Since the decision-
tree learning algorithm is a general algorithm that is suitable for processing data
from various domains, it is important that data selection and data preprocessing are
done with the aid of prior understanding of the application domain, so that data
can be properly prepared to exclude noise and to make the samples more
representative. The preprocessing method of sampling only modal pixels according
to environmental histograms is found to be effective since it allows the selection of
typical samples that represent the central concepts of soil types. It helps to reduce
generalization bias of the algorithm and to avoid overﬁtting toward noisy data,
thus signiﬁcantly improving the knowledge discovery performance. When pooling
samples from different environmental modes, the union operation proves to be
more effective than intersection, since it maintains an even distribution of samples
over different soil types to the greatest degree. This helps avoid training bias in the
decision tree learning process.

We also showed that spatial relationships and other spatial variables can be
incorporated into the proposed knowledge discovery procedure, and demonstrated
that the incorporation of such spatial information further improves the accuracy of
the extracted knowledge. Use of spatial neighborhood information also results in a
more comprehensible knowledge representation in the form of catenary sequences.
it is generally recommended to explicitly involve
In geographical data mining,
spatial dependency and heterogeneity (Miller and Han 2001). However, some
spatial variables are not directly interpretable to soil experts. Therefore, our current
study considers only the spatial information that can be used to represent the soil-
landscape model in a way with which soil experts are most familiar. Yet we expect
that the inclusion of other spatial variables may lead to the discovery of new
insights into the soil-landscape relationships rather than strictly being limited to
those with which soil experts are familiar.

Our case study shows that the proposed knowledge discovery procedure applies
successfully in the ‘driftless area’ of Wisconsin, where the soil map was created
based on the knowledge of a local soil-landscape model. Although the concept of
the soil-landscape model is widely adopted in soil survey practices, particularly in
the USA, it should also be noted that there are soil maps that were not produced
using soil-landscape models. The knowledge discovery procedure reported in this
paper may not work for these maps.

In this paper we have discussed the applicability of using a knowledge discovery
procedure to extract expert knowledge from soil maps. Our aim is to approximate
the knowledge that soil experts used to create the map. However, soil mapping is an
inherently subjective process. Soil experts build the local soil-landscape model based
purely on their own experience and understanding. It is thus not guaranteed that
the soil-landscape model developed by individual soil experts represents accurately
the real soil-landscape relationships of the local area. In other words, two experts
may come up with different soil maps for the same area. Therefore, there are indeed
two levels of approximation: how well the extracted model approximates the soil
expert’s knowledge, and how well the expert’s knowledge represents the actual soil-
landscape relationships. Our goal in the current study is to recover the subjective
expert knowledge from the error-prone soil maps, and so the study concerns only
the ﬁrst level of approximation.

Although the knowledge discovery procedure described in this paper was

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

793

developed in the context of soil mapping, it has broad relevance to knowledge
discovery from other natural resource maps, particularly maps of those natural
resources which cannot be directly observed using remote sensing techniques, such
as wildlife habitats and potential natural hazards. The distribution of these natural
resources cannot be directly observed due to obscuring overstories and the high cost
of collecting information on these resources at many locations across the landscape.
Therefore, their distributions are usually inferred (or indirectly mapped) from other
easily observable environmental conditions (Mulder and Corns 1996, Zhu 1999).
The procedure presented in this paper can thus be applied to extract the relation-
ships between the mapped natural resource and its environment.

Our future plan includes exploring more realistic knowledge representations,
incorporating the extracted knowledge into an automated inference system,
modeling spatial autocorrelation, and developing an interactive knowledge dis-
covery tool to allow synchronous integration of human expert knowledge with map
information. Speciﬁcally, soil properties vary continuously over space. Soil-
landscape relationships are more appropriately modelled when the natural fuzziness
or uncertainties are considered. We are investigating the derivation of fuzzy
membership values during the construction of decision trees under the See5
framework based on information theory. Furthermore, boosting can be used to
capture the uncertainties that are ignored by constructing only one decision tree
from the training data. Another potential knowledge representation of the soil-
landscape model is the Bayesian network, which naturally models uncertainties
through probability.

The extracted knowledge eventually can be used to infer soils for soil survey
update. In automated soil inference, information on spatial autocorrelation of soil-
formative factors can be incorporated. Soil maps and fuzzy representations of the
soil distribution can be created by automated soil inference. The product can be
validated using ﬁeld data to measure the second level of approximation (See
section 7). Since soil inference is virtually a knowledge based process, it is desirable
to involve human experts in the knowledge discovery and soil inference process. An
interactive data mining tool is under development to allow the expert to visualize
the terrain in a 3-D view, direct
the data preprocessing, choose knowledge
representation, and control the use of different variables.

Acknowledgments

This study was funded by a grant from USDA-NRCS under Agreement No.
69-5F48-900186. Duane Simonson from USDA-NRCS Wisconsin Ofﬁce served as
the soil expert and provided the knowledge of soil-landscape relationships over
the study area. His assistance in this project is greatly appreciated.

References
BAND, L. E., PATTERSON, P., NEMANI, R. R., and RUNNING, S. W., 1993, Forest ecosystem
processes at the watershed scale: 2. Incorporating hillslope hydrology. Agricultural
and Forest Meteorology, 63, 93–126.

BRUIN, S. D., WIELEMAKER, W. G., and MOLENAAR, M., 1999, Formalisation of soil-
landscape knowledge through interactive hierarchical disaggregation. Geoderma, 91,
151–172.

CRAVEN, M., and SHAVLIK, J., 1997, Understanding time-series networks: a case study in

rule extraction. International Journal of Neural Systems, 8, 373–384.

DEKA, B., SAWHNEY, J. S., SHARMA, B. D., and SIDHU, P. S., 1995, Soil-landscape

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 794

F. Qi and A-X. Zhu

relationships in Siwalik hills of the semiarid tract of Punjab, India. Arid Soil Research
and Rehabilitation, 10, 149–159.

DOMINGOS, P., and PAZZANI, M. J., 1997, On the optimality of the simple bayesian classiﬁer

under zero-one loss. Machine Learning, 29, 103–130.

EKLUND, P. W., KIRKBY, S. D., and SALIM, A., 1998, Data mining and soil salinity analysis.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, 247–268.

ESPOSITO, F., MALERBA, D., and SEMERARO, G., 1997, A comparative analysis of methods
for pruning decision trees. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 19, 476–491.

ESTER, M., KRIEGEL, H. P., and SANDER, J., 2001, Algorithms and applications for spatial
data mining. In Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, edited by H. J.
Miller and J. Han, (New York, NY: Taylor & Francis), pp. 160–187.

FASSNCHT, K. S., GOWE, S. T., MACKENZIE, M. D., NORDHEIM, E. V., and LILLESAND, T. M,
1997, Estimating the leaf area index of north central Wisconsin forests using the
Landsat Thematic Mapper. Remote Sensing of Environment, 61, 229–245.

FAYYAD, U., PIATETSKY-SHAPIRO, G., and SMYTH, P., 1996, From data mining to
knowledge discovery: an overview. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, edited by U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, and R. Uthurusamy
(Menlo Park, CA: AAAI/MIT Press), pp. 1–34.

GAHEGAN, M., 2000, On the applications of inductive machine learning tools to geographical

analysis. Geographical Analysis, 32, 113–139.

GLINKA, K. D., 1927, The Great Soil Groups of the World and their Development (Ann Arbor,

HUDSON, B. D., 1990, Concepts of soil mapping and interpretation. Soil Survey Horizons, 31,

HUDSON, B. D., 1992, The soil survey as paradigm-based science. Soil Science Society of

MI: Edwards Bros.).

63–73.

America Journal, 56, 836–841.

Publication).

JENNY, H., 1961, E.W. Hilgard and the Birth of Modern Soil Science (Berkeley, CA: Farallo

KOPERSKI, K., HAN, J., and ADHIKARY, J., 1999, Mining knowledge in geographic data.

Accessed at URL: http://db.cs.sfu.ca/sections/publication/kdd/kdd.html.

MALERBA, D., ESPOSITO, A. L., and LISI, F. A., 2001, Machine learning for information
extraction from topographic maps. In Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, edited by H. J. Miller and J. Han, (New York, NY: Taylor & Francis),
pp. 291–314.

MCLEOD, M., RIJKSE, W. C., and DYMOND, J. R., 1995, A soil-landscape model for close-
jointed mudstone, Gisborne-East Cape, North Island, New Zealand. Australian
Journal of Soil Research, 33, 381–396.

MCSWEENEY, K., GESSLER, P. E., SLATER, B. K., PETERSEN, G. W., HAMMER, R. D., and
BELL, J. C., 1994, Towards a new framework for modeling the soil-landscape
continuum. Factors of Soil Formation: A Fiftieth Anniversary Retrospective. SSSA
Special Publication, 33, 127–143.

MENNIS, J. L., PEUQUET, D. J., and QIAN, L., 2000, A conceptual
into geographical database

incorporating cognitive principles
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14, 501–520.

framework for
representation.

MILLER, H. J., and HAN, J., 2001, Geographic data mining and knowledge discovery: an
overview. In Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, edited by H. J.
Miller and J. Han, (New York, NY: Taylor & Francis), pp. 3–32.

MINSKY, M., 1975, A framework for representing knowledge. In The Psychology of

Computer Vision, edited by P. H. Winston, (New York: McGraw-Hill).

MITCHELL, T. M., 1997, Machine Learning (New York: McGraw Hill).
MOORE, I. D., GESSLER, P. E., NIELSEN, G. A., and PETERSON, G. A., 1993, Soil attribute pre-
diction using terrain analysis. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 57, 443–452.
MORAN, C. J., and BUI, E. N., 2002, Spatial data mining for enhanced soil map modeling.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16, 533–549.

MULDER, J. A., and CORNS, I. G. W., 1996, Knowledge based ecosystem prediction: ﬁeld
testing and validation. In GIS Applications in Natural Resources, 2, edited by M.
Heit, H. D. Parker and A. Shortreid (Fort Collins: GIS World, Inc.), pp. 392–398.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 Knowledge discovery from soil maps

795

MURRAY, A. T., and ESTIVILL-CASTRO, V., 1998, Cluster discovery techniques for
exploratory spatial data analysis. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 12, 431–443.

NEMANI, R. R., PIERCE, L. L., RUNNING, S. W., and BAND, L., 1993, Forest ecosystem
processes at the watershed scale: Sensitivity to remotely sensed leaf area index
estimates. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 14, 2519–2534.

O’CALLAGHAN, J. F., and MARK, D. M., 1984, The extraction of drainage networks from
digital elevation data. Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing, 28, 323–344.

QUINLAN, J. R., 1986, Induction of Decision Trees. Machine Learning, 1, 81–106.
QUINLAN, J. R., 1993, C4.5 Programs for Machine Learning (San Mateo, CA: Morgan

QUINLAN, J. R., 2001, See5: An Informal Tutorial. Accessed at URL: http://www.rulequest.com.
RUSSELL, S., and NORVIG, P., 1995, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. (New York:

WRIGHT, R. L., 1996, An evaluation of soil variability over a single bedrock type in part of

southeast Spain. Catena, 27, 1–24.

ZADEH, L. A., 1965, Fuzzy Sets. Information and Control, 8, 338–353.
ZHU, A. X., 1996, A similarity model for representing soil spatial information. Geoderma, 77,

Kaufmann).

Prentice Hall).

217–242.

ZHU, A. X., 1999, A personal construct-based knowledge acquisition process for natural
resource mapping. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13,
119–141.

ZHU, A. X., and BAND, L. E., 1994, A knowledge-based approach to data integration for soil

mapping. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing, 20, 408–418.

ZHU, A. X., HUDSON, B., BURT, J. E., LUBICH, K., and SIMONSON, D., 2001, Soil mapping
using GIS, expert knowledge, and fuzzy logic. Soil Science Society of America
Journal, 65, 1463–1472.

Downloaded by [Fondren Library, Rice University ] at 10:57 17 April 2013 