G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

LEGAL ISSUES IN MAPS BUILT ON THIRD
PARTY BASE LAYERS
Adam Saunders and Teresa Scassa
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario

Tracey P. Lauriault, Geomatics and Cartographic Research Centre, Ottawa, Ontario

The recent growth in citizen map-making ability has been brought about in part by the availability of
base layers of geospatial information on which maps can be built, as well as software tools that allow geo-
graphic information to be represented. However, the legal relationship between the creator of the map and
the owner of the base layer has received relatively little attention. In this paper, we consider legal issues
regarding volunteered geographic information (VGI) submitted to third-party geographic information sys-
tems (GIS). This combination raises issues of copyright, database rights, trademark, and End User License
Agreements (EULAS). The paper will consider the IP rights on which the EULAs are founded and the cor-
responding rights of those who build their own maps onto the base layers; analyze some of the key EULAs
in  this  area,  and  identify  important  issues  for  those  who  create  maps  using  these  base  layers.

La croissance récente de la capacité des citoyens de créer des cartes est en partie la conséquence de la
disponibilité  des  couches  de  base  d’information  géospatiale  sur  laquelle  les  cartes  peuvent  être  créées  de
même que des outils logiciels qui permettent à l’information géographique d’être représentée. Toutefois, la
relation juridique entre le créateur de la carte et le propriétaire de la couche de base a reçu relativement peu
d’attention. Dans le présent article, nous examinerons les questions juridiques concernant l’information géo-
graphique volontaire (IGV) soumise aux systèmes d’information géographique (SIG), qui sont des tiers dans
ce contexte. Cette combinaison soulève des questions de droit d’auteur, de droit de base de données, de marque
de commerce et de contrats de licence d’utilisateur final (CLUF). L’article examinera les droits de propriété
intellectuelle sur lesquels les CLUF ont été fondés et les droits correspondants de ceux qui créent leurs propres
cartes à partir des couches de base, il analysera certains des CLUF clés dans ce secteur et il recensera les
enjeux importants pour ceux qui créent des cartes en utilisant ces couches de base.

Introduction

The new trend in geography towards increased
use  of  online  mapping  platforms  and  geospatial
datasets  available  at  no  cost  includes  a  shift  from
authoritative and professional mapping practices to
ones where individuals and entities with little or no
geomatics training leverage new software tools and
the  Internet  in  order  to  create  maps  of  all  kinds
[Tulloch 2008]. Indeed, the public passion for maps
and  map-making  is  evident;  from  major  crowd-
sourced mapping initiatives such as OpenStreetMap,
to the mapping of wildlife, natural disasters, disease
incidence  or  geo-political  upheavals,  maps  of  all
kinds  are  now  ubiquitous  online.  The  dramatic
growth  in  citizen  map-making  ability  has  been
brought about in part by freely available base layers
of  geospatial  information  on  which  maps  can  be
built, along with application programming interfaces
(APIs)  which  facilitate  the  representation  of  infor-

mation  of  all  kinds  in  geographic  context,  and  the
embedding of the resultant maps in web pages and
third-party  application  software.  The  use  of  these
tools  has  allowed  a  vast  number  of  non-experts  to
participate  in  the  online  dissemination  of  a  wide
variety of geospatial information. 

There is already a substantial evolving literature
that explores the potential of volunteered geograph-
ic  information  (VGI),  public  participation  GIS
(PPGIS),  and  neogeography  [Scassa 2012;  Elwood
2008; Tulloch 2008; Goodchild 2007]. Yet the legal
relationship between the creator of the map and the
owner of the base layer has received relatively little
attention. This relationship is principally defined by
intellectual property (IP) law, and is frequently also
governed by contract law through End User Licence
Agreements (EULAs). In this paper we consider the

Adam Saunders
asaun056@
uottawa.ca

Teresa Scassa
tscassa@uottawa.ca

Tracey P. Lauriault
tlauriau@gmail.com

GEOMATICA  Vol. 66, No. 4, 2012 pp. 279 to 290

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

impact  of  IP  law  and  EULAs  on  the  relationship
between  the  owner  of  rights  in  the  base  layer1 of
data and the party who georeferences their data to
these  or  builds  a  map  or  software  application
involving  the  use  of  their  own  data  with  the  third
party  base  layer.  Part  I  of  this  paper  briefly
describes the features of some of the most used free
online  digital  street  mapping  providers.  In  Part  II
we consider the scope of the IP rights in the compi-
lations of geospatial data that form the base layer of
these services. In Part III we examine the licensing
regimes for users of these services or datasets, and
their  implication  for  those  users’  ability  to  make
use of maps they generate based on them. 

Part I: Online Digital Mapping
Services

The  user-contributed  online  mapping  revolu-
tion  has  been  driven  by  the  ready  availability  of
inexpensive or even cost-free software for creating
maps,  as  well  as  inexpensive  and  highly  accurate
Global Positioning Systems (GPS) devices for the
consumer  market.  Today,  many  smartphones  con-
tain GPS, and applications are available that allow
these phones to be used to collect and compile data
and upload it to an online collaborative project. As
Aliprandi [2012,  at  16]  notes,  “any  mobile  phone
equipped with GPS […] can be used to detect high
precision geographical data which, thanks to free-
ware,  can  also  be  easily  processed,  even  by  non-
professional users and enthusiasts”. 

At  the  same  time  as  mapping  tools  and  soft-
ware  have  become  readily  available  to  ordinary
individuals, a vast amount of other data is also find-
ing its way into the public sphere. Further, the open
data movement has led to the making available of a
great deal of government data in machine-readable
formats  [Freeland 2011].  Journalists,  non-govern-
mental organizations (NGOs), and the general pub-
lic  also  seek  out  government  data,  either  by  hag-
gling  directly  with  public  officials,  discovering
them in data portals, acquiring them from open data
communities  or  consortia,  or  accessing  them
through  the  courts  [Ecojustice 2010].  Others  are
finding innovative ways to gather data of all kinds
[Halla et al 2010; Goodchild and Glennon 2010].
The convergence of map-making tools with author-
itative  and  non-authoritative  data  from  multiple
sources has also led to a growing movement—with
both  commercial  and  non-commercial  actors—to

place  information  in  a  geographic  context.  The
result  is  a  proliferation  of  maps  covering  a  wide
variety of topics and issues. 

For  many  map-makers,  access  to  affordable
mapping  tools  is  a  major  consideration,  and  the
ready  availability  of  free  mapping  software  has
undoubtedly contributed to their ability to prosper
in their activities. These users frequently place their
collected  geographic  information  onto  a  third-
party’s  base  layer  of  geographic  information  that
has already been coded and structured as a digital,
online  map.  There  are  many  different  base  layer
providers  from  which  to  choose.  OpenStreetMap,
Google, and Esri, for example, all offer street net-
work maps of the world that show road layouts, as
well as attributes such as locations of land marks,
restaurants,  schools,  and  other  features.  Also,
GeoBase,  a  Federal  Government  of  Canada  pro-
gram, disseminates as one of its many base layers a
National Road Network file. Users can add to and
modify these base layers by contributing new geo-
graphic information—for example, the location of
a  newly  opened  restaurant  in  a  user’s  neighbour-
hood—or by adding an additional data layer—such
as  a  compilation  of  scientific,  demographic,  and
economic  data—onto  those  maps,  either  online
using a third party service or on their own comput-
ers and servers. 

Google and Esri are for-profit companies which
offer  commercial  proprietary  mapping  tools  and
services. They make gratis versions of their mapping
software  available  to  users,  and  provide  access  to
their  base  layers  and  their  Internet  mapping  infra-
structure,  largely  through  APIs.  Esri  and  Google’s
motivation  to  do  so  is  at  least  in  part  commercial;
users  whose  maps  gain  significant  popularity  or
acquire commercial potential are generally required
to  upgrade  to  a  paid  service,  which  includes  more
features and permits more traffic from map viewers.
At the same time, these companies may seek to ben-
efit  from  the  goodwill  that  flows  from  providing
platforms for maps that serve under-resourced com-
munities or those that are experiencing strife, natural
disasters, or other crises. 

OpenStreetMap  is  a  crowd-sourced  mapping
project  that  “creates  and  provides  free  geographic
data  and  mapping  to  anyone  who  wants  it”
[OpenStreetMap 2012].  This  open,  collaborative
project was explicitly created to avoid some of the
licensing and cost recovery issues encountered with
the  use  of  proprietary  systems.  For  example,  the

1 For clarification, in the context of this article, by “base layer” we mean a set of geospatial data organized in geographic
context which is available to users on terms that allow for users to build their own enhancements or modifications on
top of that data. For example, Google Maps’s base layer is a street map of the world, with the locations of the streets
based off a variety of sources [Google 2012].

280

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

OpenStreetMap Main Page provides: “We started it
because  most  maps  you  think  of  as  free  actually
have  legal  or  technical  restrictions  on  their  use,
holding  back  people  from  using  them  in  creative,
productive,  or  unexpected  ways”  [OpenStreetMap
2012].  OpenStreetMap’s  data  license  allows  users
to  make  whatever  maps  they  want,  and  distribute
them however they want, including for commercial
purposes, with only two conditions. The first is that
for any “downstream” distribution—distribution of
one’s  derivative  works  to  another  individual  or
entity—attribution  is  given  to  the  OpenStreetMap
project. The second is that the distributed work is
also licenced under the exact same open terms. 

share 

GeoBase  is  a  Canadian  federal  government
program  to  provide  sets  of  geospatial  information
to  the  public  under  a  permissive  open  content
license [GeoBase 2012]. GeoBase’s National Road
Network  file  is  a  dataset  of  the  roads  in  Canada
[Geobase 2012a]. Although similar in many ways
to  OpenStreetMap’s  licensing  practices—which
have no restrictions on how the data is to be used—
GeoBase’s  data  does  not 
all  of
OpenStreetMap’s  restrictions  on  redistribution
[GeoBase 2012b]. While redistribution of GeoBase
data  requires  attribution,  redistributors  are  other-
wise free to change the licensing terms of any fur-
ther, downstream distribution as they wish, includ-
ing  to  a  much  more  restrictive  licensing  arrange-
ment  [GeoBase 2012b].  This  license  might  there-
fore  be  friendlier  to  businesses  who  seek  to  com-
mercialize  a  product  based  on  the  National  Road
Network file, as the license would allow the busi-
ness to sell a proprietary derivative work—that is,
a work that is distributed with restrictive licensing
terms—to others. 

Part II: Rights in the Base Layer

There  may  be  copyright,  database,  and  trade-
mark rights in any base layer of geospatial data on
which users build their own maps. This bundle of
different rights forms the main basis for the licens-
ing of these products to end users. These rights are
discussed below. 

i. Copyright

Copyright subsists in original literary, artistic,
dramatic  and  musical  works  [Berne  Convention
1886]. These categories are defined broadly in leg-
islation;  for  example,  computer  software—which
consists of written instructions telling the computer
what steps to perform—is considered to be a “liter-
ary work” (Canada, Copyright Act, s. 2). Although
there is no copyright in facts, copyright will subsist
in  an  original  selection  or  arrangement  of  facts

[Vaver  2011].  The  originality  of  the  selection  or
arrangement is key; however, the threshold is gen-
erally not high. In the United States, the standard is
a  “spark”  or  “modicum”  of  creativity,  whereas  in
Canada it flows from an exercise of “skill and judg-
ment” [Scassa 2010]. Thus there may be copyright
in a compilation of facts, such as a geospatial data-
base, so long as the necessary originality is present.
Databases consisting of geospatial data present
interesting issues of originality. A “whole universe”
set  of  data—for  example,  a  compilation  of  all  the
home addresses and phone numbers in the Ottawa
area—may not amount to an original selection, and
the originality of the arrangement itself may also be
open  to  question  [Judge  and  Scassa 2010].
Nevertheless, creators of geospatial databases con-
sistently assert copyright in these compilations and
the legitimacy of such claims can only be tested in
court.  In  addition  to  potential  copyright  in  the
underlying  database,  there  may  also  be  separate
copyrights  in  computer  software  associated  with
the database, and in graphical or visual displays of
the data. 

In general, there is little controversy that copy-
right subsists in base layers of geospatial data such
as those provided by companies such as Google or
Esri, although there may be debates about the scope
of copyright, particularly with respect to the under-
lying data. Such base layers would meet the stan-
dard  of  originality  in  copyright  law;  for  example,
the digital display of road layouts on online street
maps such as Google Maps often originates in the
tracing of digital high-resolution satellite images by
human  authors.  These  individuals  exercise  “skill
and  judgment”  in  choices  about  which  paths  to
trace (such as the decision as to whether to include
alleyways),  symbolization  such  as  how  to  distin-
guish  between  displaying  different  paths  (such  as
deciding whether or not a long highway should be
marked in a different colour, or should be displayed
as wider than is truly proportionate to highlight its
salience to those seeking navigational directions for
a long road trip) and generalization (which is decid-
ing on the amount of detail to be rendered at differ-
ent scales) [Gellis and Rubens, 2011].

ii. Database Rights

Most  member  states  of  the  European  Union
recognize  a  separate  statutory  database  right  for
data compilations [European Union 1996]. Unlike
copyright,  which  protects  only  the  original  selec-
tion and arrangement of a database from copying,
the  database  right  protects  certain  databases  from
unauthorized  third-party  extraction  and  reuse  of  a
substantial amount of the underlying data [European

281

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Union 1996]. The database right, which is not rec-
ognized in Canada or the United States, gives a more
robust protection for compilations of data and elimi-
nates some of the uncertainty present in Canada and
the United States over whether any given selection
or arrangement demonstrates sufficient originality. 
However,  not  every  compilation  of  data  will
enjoy the benefits of the sui generis database right.
Only  “a  database  which  shows  that  there  has  been
qualitatively  and/or  quantitatively  a  substantial
investment in obtaining, verifying, or presenting the
contents” will be protected [European Union 1996,
Article 7, section 1]. As well, there has been a court
ruling  that  interpreted  the  “substantial  investment”
requirement  quite  strictly  [British  Horseracing
Board  Ltd.  2005].  Nevertheless,  there  seems  to  be
little  doubt  that  compilations  of  geospatial  data  by
governments  or  major  mapping  companies  would
meet this requirement. By contrast, Aliprandi [2012]
suggests  that  this  requirement  may  prevent  at  least
part  of  the  OpenStreetMap  base  layer  from  being
subject to database protection. She argues that it is an
open  question  whether,  for  a  database  made  up  of
compiled data that is the result of contributions from
multiple  individuals  made  with  relative  ease,  the
“substantial  investment”  required  to  trigger  the
European database right is present [Aliprandi 2012]. 

iii. Trademark Law

Trademark  law  provides  the  trademark  owner
with exclusive rights to use their mark in association
with the wares or services for which it is registered.
Well-known marks can receive a level of protection
that transcends lines of products and services [Scassa
2011].  Trademark  law  serves  two  broad  functions:
protecting the investment of owners in the goodwill
associated with their marks, and protecting consumers
against confusion in the marketplace with respect to
competing products and services [Vaver 2011]. 

Proprietary base layers used by third-parties to
create  maps  are  typically  offered  under  the  well-
known trademarks of their owners, such as those of
Google  and  Esri.  As  well,  the  OpenStreetMap
Foundation holds some trademarks associated with
the OpenStreetMap project, and GeoBase is a reg-
istered trademark.

In this increasingly competitive area, the com-
pany  providing  the  base  layer  may  wish  to  have  it
known that they are the source of the base layer for
the maps made by their users. At the same time, it
may not wish to be seen to endorse the content that
has been layered onto their platform. Licence terms
will therefore govern how their trademarks are to be
used  in  association  with  the  maps  that  are  created
using their products. For example, it is Google’s pol-

[Google

icy  to  not  have  their  trademarks  associated  with
gambling  websites 
2012].  The
OpenStreetMap Foundation does not have a formal,
written policy for third-party uses of trademarks, but
generally  places  few  restrictions  on  such  use.  The
only  exception  is  OpenStreetMap’s  tendency  to
request  certain  developers  of  software  applications
that  use  OpenStreetMap  data  to  change  confusing
names that could give the misleading impression that
those applications have received formal approval by
the OpenStreetMap project [Ramm 2012].

Part III: End User License Agreements

As seen from the above discussion, the propri-
etors of geospatial data base-layers have commer-
cial  and  intellectual  property  interests  which  they
seek  to  protect  through  licence  agreements.  For
companies whose business models include provid-
ing  gratis  map-making  tools  to  non-commercial
users, an End User Licence Agreement (EULA) is
often  used.  A  different  EULA  will  often  govern
commercial  uses  of  the  base  layer.  A  EULA  is  a
standardized  contract. This  means  that  although  it
represents an ‘agreement’ between the parties, the
EULA effectively dictates the terms of use. EULAs
are not negotiated. The use of EULAs is standard
commercial practice and they are generally upheld
and enforced by courts. 

Because  a  EULA  is  a  contract,  the  terms  and
conditions agreed to by the licensee can go beyond
permission  to  use  the  licensor’s  IP. A  EULA  may
require that the licensee only use the licenced work
in certain ways or under certain conditions. It may
contain terms relating to proper and improper uses,
disclaimers, waivers of liability and dispute resolu-
tion.  As  a  contract,  the  EULA  is  binding  on
licensees regardless of the strength or weakness of
the licensor’s underlying IP claims.

In  this  part  of  the  paper,  we  examine  the
licences  used  by  some  of  the  major  providers  of
“free” base layers of geospatial data. We flag terms
and  conditions  that  may  prove  problematic  for
users and consider their ramifications.

Google

Google  Maps  is  a  proprietary  software  plat-
form. Google has licensing policies for its APIs for
Google Maps, which allow software programmers
to write programs that interact with Google Maps
[Google  Developers 2012].  One  API  is  available
gratis,  but  users  can  only  make  use  of  that API  if
they  do  not  charge  others  to  access  their  product
(with  the  exception  of  an  application  for  a  mobile
device),  and  only  relatively  low  resolution  map
images are allowed to be used [Google Developers

282

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

2012]. As a result, use of a free service may limit the
functionality available to developers. For example, if
one  wants  to  use  high  resolution  images,  allow  a
high  number  of  users  to  access  maps  made  using
Google  Maps,  use  Google  Maps  as  part  of  a  com-
mercial product that is not a mobile device app, or
control  how  much  and  what  type  of  advertising  is
shown to users, one must purchase a license to use
the  Google  Maps API  for  Business  at  a  minimum
cost of $10,000 per year [Google 2012a]. 

Google does not claim rights to information that
is  layered  onto  their  free  mapping  services.  Their
licence  provides  that  users  who  contribute  such
information  “retain  ownership  of  any  intellectual
property  rights  that  [they]  hold  in  that  content”
[Google 2012b]. Yet while the user may retain rights
in their own data, their right to pair it with the base
layer is contingent upon the terms of the agreement.
Free use of a copy of parts of the Google Map
Maker base layer, stored locally on an individual’s
or organization’s own computers, is available only
to  certain  types  of  users  and  for  certain  types  of
uses.  For  example,  individuals,  governments,  and
non-profit  organizations  may  request  a  download
of  a  copy  of  part  of  the  Google  Map  Maker  base
layer of data. One will not be granted such a copy
if “(a) you are a for-profit entity; or (b) you want to
use  the  map  data  for  any  commercial  purpose;  or
(c) you want to create a mapping service (such as
driving  directions);  or  (d)  you  want  to  create  any
other service that is similar to a service already pro-
vided  by  Google  through  its  products  and APIs.”
[Google 2012c]. Any  project  a  user  makes  that  is
based  on  this  copy  “must  be  for  non-commercial
uses  only”  and  “free  of  charge”  [Google 2012d].
The license to use this copy of data may be with-
drawn by Google “if Google has a good faith belief
that it must do so based on contractual, intellectual
property,  or  other  legal  requirements”  [Google
2012c].  This  is  a  very  broad  power  to  terminate;
users of this copy of the base layer who make their
own derivative works on top of that base layer can-
not be sure that they will continue to have the right
to  continue  to  use  the  Map  Maker  base  layer. As
well, Google reserves the right to change the terms
and  conditions  of  the  use  of  the  Map  Maker  data
base layer at any time [Google 2012c].

The Google Maps software Google provides is
subject  to  restrictions  common  to  other  EULAs.
For example, the licensee “may not copy, modify,
distribute, sell, or lease any part of our Services or
included software, nor may you reverse engineer or
attempt to extract the source code of that software”

[Google 2012b]. Finally, there is no guarantee that
Google Maps and the base layer will remain avail-
able to users in the future, as the Terms of Service
provide that Google may choose to cancel or sus-
pend their services. [Google 2012b].

Google’s  trademark  policy  is  also  restrictive;
some uses are either forbidden or require contact-
ing  Google  to  negotiate  permission  [Google 2012
and 2012d]. Google has specific guidelines govern-
ing  how  their  trademarked  products  are  used  by
others.  For  example,  the  guidelines  provide  that
Google  may  “turn  down  many  requests  because
sites […] are associated with objectionable materi-
al,  as  determined  by  Google”  [Google 2012e].
These  guidelines  include  bans  on  using  Google’s
brands  “on  any  web  site  that  contains  or  displays
adult content, promotes gambling, involves the sale
of tobacco or alcohol to persons under twenty-one
years of age, or otherwise violates applicable law”
[Google 2012].  As  well,  rights  to  use  or  display
Google’s brands are revocable at Google’s sole dis-
cretion. [Google 2012f].

Esri

Esri  is  a  company  that  sells  licenses  to  many
proprietary mapping software systems, and servic-
es  built  around  those  systems,  under  the  ArcGIS
name.  Given  the  variety  of  products  and  services
Esri  offers,  use  of  the  services  often  requires
accepting  a  licensing  agreement  or  terms  of  use
agreement,  with  additional  clauses  agreed  to
depending  on  which  service  one  uses.  Esri  offers
some gratis mapping programs that allow users to
combine their data with the base layer data provid-
ed  by  Esri  and  its  partners. This  includes ArcGIS
Explorer  Online,  ArcGIS  Explorer  Desktop,
ArcGIS  for  Smartphones  and Tablets,  and  limited
access to ArcGIS Online [Esri 2012).2 This section
will focus on implications of Esri’s licensing poli-
cies for users of these gratis programs.

As  with  Google,  Esri  uses  EULAs  to  licence
their products and services [Esri 2012a]. Users of
the Esri base layers and mapping services retain IP
rights in any data or other content that they submit
to the online Esri services [Esri 2012a]. 

Because Esri’s base layer is composed of data
from  a  variety  of  sources,  and  because  some  of
these  sources  assert  IP  rights  in  their  data,  the
licencing of the base layer is subject to other restric-
tions  that  may  be  imposed  as  a  result  of  these
licences.  For  example,  supplementary  terms  for
ArcGIS Explorer Desktop include a notice that the
ArcGIS Online Data must be used according to the

2 There  is  also  a  gratis  plug-in  for AutoCAD,  but  since AutoCAD  licenses  generally  cost  thousands  of  dollars,    the
licensing terms of the plug-in will not be discussed as part of this paper [Autodesk 2012].

283

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

terms  of  use  agreements,  of  each  third-party  data
source:  Microsoft  Bing  Maps,  British
Oceanographic  Data  Centre  bathymetry  data,  I-
cubed,  NAVTEQ,  and  Tele  Atlas/TomTom  [Esri
2012a]. To  give  some  examples  of  how  this  might
affect  users,  Microsoft’s  terms  include  multiple
restrictions on fields of use of its data, as well as pro-
hibiting  distributing  “derivative  Web  Service(s)”
[Esri 2011].  NAVTEQ’s  terms  include  several
restrictions on commercializing maps that use their
base layer; for example, paper maps of Britain made
using NAVTEQ’s base layer cannot be sold without
a  written  licensing  agreement  with  the  Ordnance
Survey  [Esri 2009].  Similar  restrictions  exist  for
mapping  the  Czech  Republic,  Switzerland,  France,
and other European countries [Esri 2009]. Tele Atlas
data cannot be used to make maps similar to the ones
distributed  by  the  Norwegian  Mapping  Authority,
nor can one commercialize maps of Poland through
the use of Tele Atlas data [Esri 2009a]. Data from i-
Cubed is only allowed to be used as part of “internal
business” [Esri 2010].

With regards to Esri’s own data and maps, its
“Data and Maps Redistribution Rights” license pro-
vides  a  comprehensive  list  of  the  extent  to  which
users have rights to redistribute or build upon Esri’s
data [Esri 2012b]. All of its data may be used inter-
nally;  some  of  the  data  can  be  redistributed  with
attribution  and  some  of  the  data  is  in  the  public
domain.  For  certain  sources  of  data,  users  cannot
make derivative works based on those sources; as
well, users cannot redistribute World Wildlife Fund
(WWF) Terrestrial or Marine Ecoregions data at all
[Esri 2012b]. 

As  is  the  case  with  Google,  users  of  Esri’s
products and services are vulnerable to the poten-
tial suspension or cancellation of their access to the
services.  In  its  “Web  Services  and  API  Terms  of
Use”,  Esri  asserts  the  “right  to  suspend  or  cancel
your  Account  or  access  to  Esri  websites  at  any
time”  [Esri 2011a].  Esri  also  forbids  users  from
using “Web Services for illegal, improper, or inap-
propriate purposes” [Esri 2011a].

Certain uses of the Esri base layer and servic-
es are forbidden by the EULAs. For example, the
licensee  may  not  use  the  services  to  provide  real
time  navigation  services.  Further,  any  use  of  the
services  that  “adversely  affect  Esri’s  commercial
interests  or  the  commercial  interests  of  any
Provider” is forbidden [Esri 2011a]. Users are also
not permitted to store the results of their use of the
web services with the goal of creating value-added
products or services that the licensee intends to reli-
cense  or  sell  to  others  without  Esri’s  written  per-
mission. [Esri 2011a]. 

Using “Esri’s Web Link Logo” is only permit-
ted if one accepts the terms of a license agreement,
and even then, the only permitted use is the display
of the logo on one’s personal website [Esri 2012c]. 
Overall,  there  are  numerous  restrictions  for
users  of  Esri’s  gratis  mapping  software  and  data
that may affect users who create maps by combin-
ing  Esri’s  base  layer  and  software  with  their  own
data. These include sharp limits on the use of trade-
marks, limitations on field of use, including a pro-
hibition on making certain types of maps and com-
mercializing them and limitations on the ability to
make derivative works based on the data provided
by Esri’s partners. However, as with Google, users
do retain IP rights in their contributions, which can
allow them to re-use their VGI in another context.

OpenStreetMap

In contrast to the proprietary options listed ear-
lier, OpenStreetMap provides a growing base layer
of  geographic  data  under  a  free  content  “copyleft”
license  [OpenStreetMap 2012a].  This  means  that
users are free to use the OpenStreetMap data for any
purposes,  including  commercial  ones,  so  long  as
attribution is given to OpenStreetMap and so long as
any redistribution of OpenStreetMap data, or a mod-
ified version of it, is licensed to recipients under the
same  licensing  terms  (often  referred  to  as  “Share
Alike”)  [OpenStreetMap 2012a].  Besides  these
requirements, no further restrictions are imposed on
other recipients of the data. Noncompliance with the
attribution and Share Alike requirements leads to the
loss  of  one’s  license  to  use  the  data  [Open  Data
Commons 2012].  However,  the  contributors  to  the
project  have  been  slow  to  launch  litigation  against
license  violators,  and  show  a  preference  to  work
with  violating  third-party  users  to  bring  them  into
compliance with the license, as has been seen with
Apple’s  recent  use  of  OpenStreetMap  data  with  its
[OpenStreetMap
iPhoto  mobile 
application 
Foundation 2012]

As  of  September  12,  2012,  data  from  the
OpenStreetMap  project  is  licensed  under  the  Open
Database Licence (ODbL) [OpenStreetMap 2012a].
OpenStreetMap  also  provides  downloads  of  the
entire  dataset  of  the  project,  updated  weekly  with
older  versions  remaining  available;  any  version
released before September 12, 2012, remains avail-
able under OpenStreetMap’s older license, Creative
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike  2.0  (CC-BY-SA)
[Creative  Commons 2012].  The  change  from  the
Creative  Commons  to  the  Open  Database  license
was  the  result  of  a  lengthy  process,  involving  the
OpenStreetMap Foundation and the project contrib-
utors; as a result of the change, some data has been

284

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

removed 
[OpenStreetMap Foundation 2012c] 

from 

the  current  ODbL  dataset

ODbL is very similar in spirit to CC-BY-SA, but
has some substantial differences. One of the motiva-
tions  for  the  license  change  was  the  CC-BY-SA
license’s lack of provision of any specific licencing
of  database  rights.  [OpenStreetMap  Foundation
2012a].  The  new  licensing  regime  will  give  users
more freedom should they choose to distribute maps
based on the base layer, or make a commercial prod-
uct that relies on the base layer. For example, while
redistribution  of  the  database  must  be  done  using
ODbL,  a  non-database  work  that  is  built  on  top  of
the data—such as a video game—can be distributed
under  any  license  the  author  of  that  work  chooses
[Open Data Commons 2012]. This is technically not
the case with CC-BY-SA [Creative Commons 2012].
The data can also be distributed as part of a product
that  includes  technological  protection  measures
(TPMs),  or  even  under  different  terms  entirely,  as
long  as  an  identical  product  without  those  techno-
logical or legal restrictions is available as easily as
the  restricted  product,  and  the  identical  product  is
available  gratis  [Open  Data  Commons 2012].  This
may  provide  software  developers  who  seek  to  use
maps they build on top of the base layer the ability to
sell  a  TPM  restricted  proprietary  software  applica-
tion  as  part  of  certain  mobile  device  application
stores, such as Google Play. As well, the more for-
giving  termination  language—which  allows  under
some  circumstances  for  license  violators  to  retain
their rights if they come back into compliance with
the  terms  of  the  license—will  greatly  reduce  the
costs  of  an  unintentional  license  violation  by  well-
meaning redistributors. [Open Data Commons 2012] 
The  Contributor  Terms  specify  that  the
OpenStreetMap Foundation can change the licens-
ing terms of the project, but only to a different “free
and open license”, and only if “approved by at least
a  2/3  majority  vote  of  active  contributors”
[OpenStreetMap  Foundation 2012b]. As  with  any
provider  of  data  or  software,  major  changes  in
licensing  practices  may  alienate  users;  in  the  case
of a collaborative project, such as OpenStreetMap
or Google Map Maker, the alienation of contribu-
tors  may  threaten  the  long-term  stability  of  the
project. As well, users who rely on the availability
of  the  database’s  contents  may  face  issues  with  a
license 
that
OpenStreetMap  is  in  the  process  of  completing.
Although after the license change the vast majority
of  the  database  has  been  retained,  some  contribu-
tors claim that the redaction process has resulted in
the  removal  of  large  quantities  of  geospatial  data
from  certain  areas,  where  contributors  have  not

transition, 

such  as 

the  one 

to 

their 

relicense 

agreed 
contributions
[OpenStreetMap  Foundation 2012c].  Those  who
rely on OpenStreetMap for their base layer of data
may  find  their  own  mapping  projects  affected  by
such changes. One could of course make the same
point with respect to Google and Esri; that access to
the  base  layer  of  data  is  unstable,  as  significant
change in licensing practices can lead to the elimi-
nation  of  geospatial  data  from  the  map,  or  even
access to the map entirely. 

The OpenStreetMap Foundation holds the UK
trademark on an image mark for OpenStreetMap (a
magnifying  glass  over  a  stylized  map),  as  well  as
the  EU  trademark  for  the  name  “OpenStreetMap”
[OpenStreetMap 2012b].  The  OpenStreetMap
Foundation does not have a formal trademark poli-
cy, and is very liberal with the use by others of the
trademark [Ramm 2012].

OpenStreetMap contains data from the United
States  government. All  works  of  the  U.S.  govern-
ment are automatically in the public domain for the
purpose of copyright. However, the federal govern-
ment claims that this only applies within the United
States, and that its works may be subject to copy-
right restriction outside American territory [United
States Government 2012].

of 

use 

heavy 

Overall,  OpenStreetMap  provides  much  more
flexibility to users seeking to build maps on top of
the  base  layer  of  data.  However,  users  seeking  to
make 
the
programmatic 
OpenStreetMap project – for example, for a popu-
lar  location-based  smartphone  game  that  renders
OpenStreetMap  tiles  as  necessary  for  the  game
player – cannot use the servers at the official open-
streetmap.org  website,  as  the  project  has  limited
computing  resources  [OpenStreetMap 2012c].
Instead,  the  project  recommends  that  those  who
seek to make heavy programmatic use choose a dif-
ferent supplier of computing resources, or supply a
server 
themselves
[OpenStreetMap 2012c]. This may act as an obsta-
cle  for  users,  as  they  may  have  to  research  and
compare these different options and may face addi-
tional costs for using these resources.

for  programmatic  use 

GeoBase’s National Road Network File

While  Google,  Esri,  and  OpenStreetMap  pro-
vide software tools to make modifications to their
sets of geospatial data represented as a street map,
GeoBase provides datasets of geospatial data with-
out accompanying mapping software. In contrast to
the  other  services,  GeoBase  points  the  potential
user  to  gratis  map  viewing  software;  as  well,
GeoBase layers can be accessed via web mapping
services  (WMS).  As  with  the  rest  of  its  datasets,

285

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

GeoBase’s  National  Road  Network  file—a  road
map  of  Canada—is  available  under  a  permissive
open  content  license  [GeoBase 2012  and  2012a].
This  grants  the  user  even  more  freedom  than
OpenStreetMap,  as  there  are  minimal  restrictions
placed  on  the  user  or  redistributor.  The  only
requirements  are  that  attribution  to  GeoBase  is
given  if  the  dataset  or  a  modification  is  redistrib-
uted, and that legal notices that the government of
Canada does not provide a warranty for the dataset
and  is  to  be  indemnified  from  any  legal  liability
must be passed along to any downstream recipient
[GeoBase 2012a] As with CC-BY-SA, non-compli-
ance with those requirements at any time automat-
ically terminates the user’s rights to make any use
of  the  data,  with  no  provision  for  reinstatement
[GeoBase 2012a]. 

Of  all  the  providers  examined,  GeoBase’s
National Street Network File offers the most free-
dom to users seeking to make, distribute, and com-
mercialize maps built on top of a third-party’s base
layer of geospatial data. The only significant limi-
tation is the scope of the data; this Canadian gov-
ernment  project  provides  data  on  only  Canada’s
geography [GeoBase 2012b].

Summary

Each  provider  of  free  base-layers  of  data  and
the APIs for creating maps does so under specific
licence terms and conditions. Table 1 offers a quick
comparison of some of the features of the licences
for Google, Esri, OpenStreetMap and GeoBase.

Discussion

The base layers of data and APIs provided by
companies such as Google and Esri either gratis for
non-commercial or personal use or through paying
for the right to commercial use are part of propri-
etary  systems.  They  may  consist  of  a  variety  of
forms of intellectual property, including copyright
protected material (compilations of data, software,
and visual elements), trade secrets, database rights
(where  applicable),  and  patents  (software). Where
these  complex  bundles  of  intellectual  property
rights  are  licensed  to  users,  there  is  little  need  to
parse  the  underlying  rights.  The  EULAs,  as  dis-
cussed  above,  set  the  terms  and  conditions  on
which the base layer and APIs may be used.

A  person  who  builds  a  map  using  data  ele-
ments  that  they  have  chosen  and  layered  onto  a
base layer of data may well believe that the result-
ant  work  is  their  own  creation.  Indeed,  they  have
almost certainly engaged in the kind of activity that

would be recognized under copyright law as meet-
ing the threshold of originality – either demonstrat-
ing a spark of creativity or the requisite low thresh-
old of skill and judgment [Vaver 2011]. By choos-
ing  what  data  to  represent  and  how  to  represent
them,  they  are  engaging  in  a  process  of  selection
and arrangement that is likely to give rise to copy-
right,  even  though  there  may  be  issues  as  to  the
scope  of  this  copyright.  The  more  complex  the
map, the more layered and extensive the rights are
likely to be. For example, a map that embeds audio,
visual, photographic and text components is a mul-
timedia work, and there may be separate copyrights
in the embedded works, alongside the copyright in
the compilation itself.

Nevertheless,  although  the  user  may  create  a
“work” that is recognized under copyright law, they
do not thereby acquire rights in the underlying base
layer of data, and their licence with the supplier of
this base layer will make that abundantly clear. For
example,  Google’s  Terms  of  Services  specify:
“Using our Services does not give you ownership
of any intellectual property rights in our Services or
the content you access” [Google 2012a]. Similarly,
OpenStreetMap’s  licence  gives  users  considerable
freedom to do what they wish with the data, but the
users do not acquire rights in the base layer. 

Depending on the content mapped to the base
layer,  user  contributions  may  receive  greater  or
lesser  recognition  in  law.  Someone  who  uses  the
base layer to create a VGI site to which others con-
tribute photographs and data may have a claim to
the compilation as a whole, but they will have little
rights to exploit the actual content of the site, unless
the  contributors  have  agreed  to  either  assign  or
licence their own rights to the creator of the compi-
lation. Further, an individual who maps data from
government or other sources (such as demographic
or scientific data) might have rights in the resultant
digital compilation, but they do not acquire rights
in the mapped data.

The contributor of the base layer of data does
not  acquire  rights  in  data  that  is  layered  onto  the
platform; indeed, as noted above, the licences with
users make it clear that any such rights rest with the
licensee. These compilations that result when users
layer data onto base layers might be characterized
as  “derivative  works”.  This  term  is  taken  from
American copyright law, and refers to works which
are  based  upon  a  previous  work.  For  example,  a
film version of a novel is a derivative work. In this
context,  the  information  map  is  a  derivative  work
built  upon  the  proprietary  base  layer.  Since  many
mapping  software  providers  allow  and  encourage
users to submit geographical data and generate and

286

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Table 1

Issue

Geographic 
scope

Restrictions  
on use

Google Maps

OpenStreetMap

Esri’s Gratis 
Mapping 
Software

Proprietary 

Yes 

Yes 

Entire world

Entire world 

Entire world

No

No.

No competing
*Personal use only
with Esri services
*No
* ‘Morality’ 
commercialisation
restrictions
*‘Morality’ 
restrictions
*Restrictions on
*No competing with commercial use
Google services

*Non-commercial
*No competition

Restrictions on 
redistribution 
of provider data? with Google 
*Attribution 
requirement

*Redistribution of the
database must be under
same terms and conditions,

*Multiple restrictions  *Attribution requirement
depending on data
source
*Non-commercial
*No competition with OR, redistribution can be
Esri
*Attribution 
requirement

restricted by TPMs or other
terms provided that there is
also a gratis distribution of
the downstream work
without these additional
restrictions, which is as
easily available as the
restricted downstream work

Are the licences Yes
revocable?

Yes 

GeoBase’s 
National Road
Network File

No

Canada

No

*Attribution
requirement

Yes (for non-
compliance with
the attribution
requirements.)

Yes (for non-compliance
with the share alike and
attribution requirements,
although, under certain
conditions, the licence will No means of
be restored if the
distribution corrects the
licence violation) 

automatic license
reinstatement
following
revocation.)

Yes, although any

No. The OpenStreetMap
Foundation can only change data received
the terms to a different “free under the current
and open license”, and only licensing regime
if “approved by at least a
2/3 majority vote of active
contributors.” 

will remain under 
that license,
regardless of 
future changes.

Yes

Yes

Are the terms
and conditions
subject to
unilateral
changes?

Do users retain Yes
IP rights in all
their submitted
content?

Yes

Yes

Yes.

287

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

style  their  own  maps,  these  providers  encourage
individuals  and  groups  to  make  derivative  works.
An example of a derivative map is the Map of the
Dead,  which  relies  on  Google  Maps  to  provide  a
humourous map of useful sites and locations to an
individual seeking to survive a zombie apocalypse
[Doejo 2012]. Although the language of “derivative
works”  is  not  present  in  the  Canadian  Copyright
Act, the concept is not foreign to Canadian law. The
law  recognizes  “adaptations”  (when  a  work  is
adapted from one media format to another, such as
a  movie  adaptation  of  a  book);  it  also  recognizes
that compilations can be built from different com-
ponents in which there are different copyright own-
ers. Nevertheless, the fact that a new work is built
from components taken from different sources does
not  automatically  result  in  the  creator  of  the  new
work  acquiring  rights  in  any  of  the  incorporated
materials. Creators of maps using proprietary base
layers must remain aware of the limited nature of
their rights to what they have created.

The  Canadian  Copyright  Modernization  Act
[2012,  s.  29.21]  recognizes  the  category  of  “user-
generated  content”  (UGC)  in  a  new  exception  to
infringement.  Essentially,  this  provision  allows
individuals to make and disseminate derivative works
which  are  based  upon  or  incorporate  another’s
copyright protected work, without need for permis-
sion. This new right is limited; the new work must be
used non-commercially, attribution must be given to
the  source  of  the  original  work,  and  the  work  on
which the UGC is based must not have been obtained
in a manner that infringed copyright. The new work
must also not have a substantial adverse effect on the
exploitation of the original work. This provision has
some significant grey areas and is untested in courts.
Nevertheless it might give important rights to non-
commercial Canadian users of proprietary base layers,
but  for  the  fact  that  it  does  not  override  the  con-
tractual provisions of proprietary EULAs. Where the
work of another is incorporated into one’s own work,
the licence terms under which the source work is pro-
vided will prevail over statutory copyright exceptions.
This  discussion  of  the  relative  rights  of  cre-
ators of maps and providers of the base layers and
applications is important because it underlines the
vulnerability  of  those  who  may  have  invested  a
great deal of time and energy in the creation of their
map. There are a number of circumstances in which
their ongoing ability to make use of the base layer
on  which  they  chose  to  create  their  map  may  be
called  into  question.  A  significant  change  in  the
volume of traffic flow to their map or a decision to
move to a commercial model for providing access
to the map may disqualify them from continuing to

use  a  proprietary  base  layer  at  no  cost.  Mapped
content that is considered offensive or inappropri-
ate  may  also  lead  to  termination  of  the  licence.
Further,  creators  will  be  vulnerable  to  changes  in
terms  and  conditions  in  EULAs;  these  unilateral
contracts frequently contain clauses, which permit
the licensor to change the terms and conditions of
the  licence.  In  this  respect,  for  certain  users,
OpenStreetMap may offer an attractive alternative
to those needing global coverage, as it comes with
relatively few restrictions; for those only requiring
Canadian  coverage,  GeoBase  might  be  the  best
option  overall.  But  the  savvier  users  and  creators
with access to their own online mapping infrastruc-
ture would still have the option to reuse their VGI
in other contexts.

Conclusion

Individuals and organizations seeking to make
maps  based  on  third-party  base  layers  and  APIs
should  determine  exactly  what  they  need  out  of
their  mapping  project  or  projects. Their  choice  of
map topic may be relevant, as the creation of maps
on  certain  themes  may  be  contrary  to  the  EULA
terms and conditions. In addition, the possibility of
a high volume of traffic to the map site, or plans to
introduce a commercial dimension in the future, are
also factors that should be taken into account. 

A user, simply by creating their own map using
one of these services, does not acquire rights in the
underlying  base  layer,  nor  may  they  have  guaran-
teed rights to continue using the free service. The
terms of EULAs may provide for termination in a
range  of  circumstances,  and  may  also  permit  uni-
lateral  changes  to  the  licence  terms.  While  these
free  mapping  tools  still  offer  users  unprecedented
opportunities to create maps and to find new ways
to  represent  information,  attention  should  be  paid
to terms and conditions of use, as well as to the full
range of options available. 

Acknowledgements

The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  sup-
port  of  the  GEOIDE  (NCE)  Network,  and  of  the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada.

References
Aliprandi, S. 2012. Open licensing and databases, IFOSS

L Rev, 4:1.

Autodesk.  2012.  Buy  AutoCAD  2013—Upgrade
AutoCAD,  http://usa.autodesk.com/autocad/how-
to-buy/.

288

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works. 1886. http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/trt-
docs_wo001.html (last accessed: 31 August 2012).
British Horse Racing Board v William Hill Organization
Ltd, [2005] EWCA Civ 863; [2005] RPC 35.

Copyright Modernization Act (2012) c 20.
Copyright Act, RSC, 1985, c C-42.
Creative  Commons.  2012.  Creative  Commons  Legal
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-

Code, 
sa/2.0/legalcode (last accessed: 31 August 2012).
Doejo. 2012. Map of the Dead, http://www.mapofthedead.com/

(last accessed: 31 August 2012). 

Ecojustice.  2010.  http://www.ecojustice.ca/media-cen-
tre/press-releases/court-victory-forces-canada-to-
report-pollution-data-for-mines (last  accessed:  16
September 2012)

Elwood,  S.  2008.  Volunteered  geographic  information:
future research directions motivated by critical, par-
ticipatory,  and  feminist  GIS GeoJournal 72:3-4,
173-183. 

of 

Use 

Esri. 

Esri. 

2009. 

2009a. 

NAVTEQ 

Data,
h t t p : / / w w w. e s r i . c o m / l e g a l / p d f s / j 9 7 9 1 -
navteq_use_data.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012).
of  Data,
Tele  Atlas  Use 
h t t p : / / w w w. e s r i . c o m / l e g a l / p d f s / j 9 7 9 2 -
teleatlas_use_data.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012).
Esri. 2010. Special Terms of Use for Data and/or Imagery
Owned by i-cubed, http://www.esri.com/legal/pdfs/j9946-
icubed.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012).

Esri. 2011. Microsoft Bing Maps Services Terms of Use,
http://www.esri.com/legal/pdfs/e-802-bing-
mapsvcs.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012). 
Esri.  2011a.  Web  Services  and  API  Terms  of  Use,
h t t p : / / w w w. e s r i . c o m / l e g a l / p d f s / e - 8 0 0 -
termsofuse.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012). 
Esri.  2012.  Free  Mapping  Software  for  the  Web,
Desktop,  and  Mobile,  http://www.esri.com/soft-
ware/free-mapping-software (last  accessed:  31
August 2012). 
2012a. 

Agreement,
http://www.esri.com/legal/pdfs/mla_e204_e300/eng
lish.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012). 

License 

Esri. 

Esri. 

2012b. 

Redistribution 

Rights,
http://www.esri.com/legal/pdfs/redist_rights_10.1.p
df (last accessed: 31 August 2012). 
Esri.  2012c.  Linking  Your  Site 

to  Esri.com,
http://www.esri.com/apps/company/legal/index.cfm
(last accessed: 31 August 2012).

European  Union.  1996.  Directive  96/9/EC  of  the
European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  11
March 1996 on the legal protection of databases.
Feist Publications, Inc., v. Rural Telephone Service Co.,

499 U.S. 340 (1991).

Freeland, C. 2011. Remaking Government in a Wiki Age,
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/19/us/19iht-let-
ter19.html?_r=2&pagewanted=all (last  accessed:
31 August 2012)

Gellis, C. and J. Rubens. 2011. Protection of Collaborative
Online Maps under US Copyright Law, http://mem-
bled.com/work/osm/Map_Project_Memo_public_FI
NAL.pdf (last accessed: 31 August 2012).

GeoBase. 

Home
2012. 
http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/index.html (last
accessed: 20 September 2012)
2012a.  National 

Road  Network

GeoBase. 

http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/nrn/descri
ption.html (last accessed: 16 September 2012)
GeoBase.  2012b.  GeoBase  Unrestricted  Use  Licence
Agreement http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/licence.jsp
(last accessed: 16 September 2012)

Goodchild, M. F. 2007. Citizens as sensors: The world of
volunteered geography. GeoJournal 69:4, 211-221. 
Goodchild,  M.F.  and  J.  Alan  Glennon.  2010.
Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster
response: a research frontier, International Journal
of Digital Earth, 3:3, 231-241.
for 

usage,
http://www.google.com/permissions/trademark/bra
nd-terms.html (last accessed: 20 September 2012). 
Google.  2012a.  Why  Google  Maps API  for  Business?,
http://www.google.com/enterprise/earthmaps/maps
-faq.html (last accessed: 20 September 2012).

Google. 

proper 

Rules 

2012. 

Google. 

2012b.  Google  Terms 

of  Service,
http://www.google.ca/intl/en/policies/terms/region-
al.html (last accessed: 31 August 2012)

Google. 2012c. Map Maker Data Download, https://ser-
vices.google.com/fb/forms/mapmakerdatadown-
load/ (last accessed: 31 August 2012). 

Google.  2012d.  Featuring  Google  products  in  films  or
TV,  http://www.google.com/permissions/google-in-
films-tv.html (last accessed: 20 September 2012). 
Google.  2012e.  About  our  trademarks  and  how  to  use
them,  http://www.google.com/permissions/trade-
content?Scassa,  T.  2010.  Copyright  reform  and
fact-based  works.  In  From  “radical  extremism”  to
“balanced copyright”: Canadian copyright and the
digital  agenda,  ed.  M.  Geist.  Toronto:  Irwin  Law,
571-597.

Google.  2012f.  Google  Brand  Features  Terms  and
Conditions,  http://www.google.com/permis-
sions/trademark/brand-terms.html
(last
accessed: 20 September 2012).

Google  Developers.  2012.  Google  Maps API  Licensing,
https://developers.google.com/maps/licensing (last
accessed: 20 September 2012).

Halla, G. Brent, Raymond Chipeniukb, Robert D. Feickc,
Michael  G.  Leahyd  and  Vivien  Depardaye.  2010.
Community-based  production  of  geographic  infor-
mation  using  open  source  software  and  Web  2.0,
International  Journal  of  Geographical  Information
Science 24:5, 761–781. 

Judge, E. F., and T. Scassa. 2010. Intellectual property and
the  licensing  of  Canadian  government  geospatial
data: An examination of Geoconnections’ recommen-
dations  for  best  practices  and  template  licences.
Canadian Geographer 54(3): 366-374. 

Open  Data  Commons.  2012.  Open  Database  Licence
(ODbL)  v1.0  http://opendatacommons.org/licens-
es/odbl/1.0/ (last accessed: 16 September 2012).
OpenStreetMap.  2012.  Main  Page,  http://wiki.open-
streetmap.org/wiki/Main_Page  (last  accessed:  31
August 2012).

289

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

OpenStreetMap.  2012a.  Copyright  and  License,
(last

http://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright 
accessed: 20 September 2012). 

OpenStreetMap.  2012b.  Trademark,  http://wiki.open-
streetmap.org/wiki/Trademark  (last  accessed:  31
August 2012). 

OpenStreetMap. 

2012c., 

policy,
http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tile_Usage_Polic
y (last accessed: 20 September 2012)

usage 

Tile 

OpenStreetMap  Foundation.  2012.  Welcome,  Apple!
http://blog.osmfoundation.org/2012/03/08/welcome-
apple/ (last accessed: 31 August 2012)

OpenStreetMap  Foundation.  2012a.  License/We  Are
Changing  The  License,  http://www.osmfounda-
tion.org/wiki/License/We_Are_Changing_The_Lice
nse (last accessed: 20 September 2012).

OpenStreetMap 

Foundation. 

2012b.
License/Contributor Terms, http://www.osmfounda-
tion.org/wiki/License/Contributor_Terms
(last
accessed: 20 September 2012)

OpenStreetMap  Foundation.  2012c.  Automated  redac-
tions 
complete,
http://blog.osmfoundation.org/2012/07/26/automat-
ed-redactions-complete/ 
20
September 2012).

accessed: 

(last 

Ramm,  F.  2012.  OpenStreetMap's  Trademark  Licensing
Policy, http://lists.openstreetmap.org/pipermail/legal-
talk/2012-June/007121.html (last accessed: 31 August
2012). 

Scassa, T. 2010. Copyright reform and fact-based works.
In  From  “radical  extremism”  to  “balanced  copy-
right”: Canadian copyright and the digital agenda, ed.
M. Geist. Toronto: Irwin Law, 571-597.

Scassa,  T.  2011.  Canadian  Trademark  Law.  (Toronto:

Lexis Nexis).

Scassa, T. 2012. Legal issues with volunteered geographic
information. The Canadian Geographer 00(0), 1-10.
Tulloch,  D.  L.  2008.  Is  VGI  participation?  From  vernal

pools to video games. GeoJournal 72:34, 161-171.

United  States  government.  2012.  Copyright  and  Other
Rights  Pertaining  to  U.S.  Government  Works,
http://www.usa.gov/copyright.shtml (last  accessed:
31 August 2012). 

Vaver,  D.  2011.  Intellectual  Property  Law. 2nd  ed.

Toronto: Irwin Law.

Authors

Adam  Saunders is  a  law  student  in  his  final
year of law school at the University of Ottawa. He
completed  a  Master’s  degree  in  Philosophy  in

2010. His academic interests include law and open
source software, open access, open data, geospatial
data, free culture, privacy, and civil liberties. He is
currently  working  on  a  paper  about  the  extent  to
which  copyright  law  permits  individuals  to  map
another  author’s  fictional  world  without  their
authorization. Adam spends some of his spare time
volunteering  for  Computers  for  Communities,  a
non-profit  organization  that  refurbishes  old  com-
puters,  installs  the  open  source  Ubuntu  operating
system  on  them,  and  donates  them  to  individuals
and families in the Ottawa area.

Teresa Scassa is the Canada Research Chair in
Information Law at the University of Ottawa. She is
a founder and former editor of the Canadian Journal
of  Law  and  Technology,  author  of  the  book
Canadian  Trademark  Law (LexisNexis  2010)  and
co-author of Electronic Commerce and Internet Law
in  Canada,  (CCH  Canadian  Ltd.  (second  edition
forthcoming 2013). She is a member of the External
Advisory  Committee  of  the  Office  of  the  Privacy
Commissioner  of  Canada,  and  of  the  Canadian
Government  Advisory  Committee  on  Open
Government.  She  is  also  a  past  member  of  the
Geoconnections Geospatial Privacy Advisory Group.
She  has  written  widely  in  the  areas  of  intellectual
property law, law and technology, and privacy. 

Tracey Lauriault is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the
Geomatics and Cartographic Research Centre working
as  the  lead  researcher  on  the  SSHRC  Partnership
Development Project entitled Mapping the Legal and
Policy Boundaries of Digital Cartography. She was the
Research  Leader  for  the  Pilot  Atlas  of  the  Risk  of
Homelessness funded by HRSDC and represents the
Lab on topics related to the access to and preservation
of  Data.  She  was  part  of  the  Project  Management
Team for the Cybercartography and the New Economy
Project and was responsible for collaboration, transdis-
ciplinary research and organizational theory. She was
the lead researcher of the Cybercartographic Atlas of
Antarctica Case Study for the International Research
on  Permanent  Authentic  Records  in  Electronic
Systems (InterPARES) 2 and led the General Study
Science  Data
of  Archival 
Archives/Repositories. She is co-author of the datal-
ibre.ca blog and founder of the civicaccess.ca list. !

Policies 

of 

290

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by TULANE UNIVERSITY on 02/12/19For personal use only. 