This article was downloaded by: [Columbia University]
On: 10 October 2014, At: 04:18
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Extending geographical
representation to include
fields of spatial objects
Thomas J. Cova & Michael F. Goodchild
Published online: 10 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Thomas J. Cova & Michael F. Goodchild (2002)
Extending geographical representation to include fields of spatial objects,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16:6, 509-532, DOI:
10.1080/13658810210137040

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810210137040

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 6, 509± 532

Research Article

Extending geographical representation to include (cid:142) elds of spatial
objects

THOMAS J. COVA
Department of Geography, University of Utah, 260 S. Central Campus Dr.,
Rm. 270, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA; e-mail: cova@geog.utah.edu

and MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD
Department of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106,
USA; e-mail: good@geog.ucsb.edu

(Received 11 November 2000; accepted 17 September 2001)

Abstract. This paper describes a means for linking (cid:142) eld and object representa-
tions of geographical space. The approach is based on a series of mappings, where
locations in a continuous (cid:142) eld are mapped to discrete objects. An object in this
context is a modeler’s conceptualization, as in a viewshed, highway corridor or
biological reserve. An object can be represented as a point, line, polygon, network,
or other complex spatial type. The relationship between locations in a (cid:142) eld and
spatial objects may take the form of one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, or
many-to-many. We present a typology of object (cid:142) elds and discuss issues in their
construction, storage, and analysis. Example applications are presented and
directions for further research are oVered.

1.

Introduction
Field and object models have increasingly gained acceptance as two alternative
approaches for conceptualizing and modelling geographical phenomena (Goodchild
1989, 1992, Couclelis 1992, Worboys 1995, Burrough and McDonnell 1998). In the
context of a (cid:142) eld perspective, each location in space is mapped to a value selected
from an attribute domain. Elevation, temperature, and precipitation are three
example spatial variables that are routinely modelled using a (cid:142) eld perspective. In
the context of an object perspective, space is perceived as a region populated with
discrete entities, each with identity, spatial embedding, and attributes. Roads, build-
ings, and rivers are three classes of phenomena that are commonly modelled using
an object perspective. Although most geographic phenomena are generally perceived
using either a (cid:142) eld or object perspective, the approach most suited in a given instance
depends on the purpose and context of the modelling exercise. For this reason, the
two model classes are best considered conceptual perspectives rather than inherent
qualities of geographical phenomena (Peuquet et al. 1999). Any aspect of geograph-
ical reality can be conceptualized and modelled using either of these two approaches.
The (cid:142) eld-object dichotomy is valuable from both a theoretical and applied

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Informatio n Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810210137040

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 510

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

perspective. In theoretical terms, the separation provides an elegant means for
framing two opposing conceptualizations of geographical space (Couclelis 1992).
This makes the classi(cid:142) cation valuable in GIScience research and teaching. From an
applied perspective, GIS studies generally rely on one, or both, of these approaches
in addressing a spatial problem. The dichotomy is reinforced in practice, as the
decision to utilize one of these two modelling approaches can signi(cid:142) cantly in(cid:143) uence
the analysis functions available to an analyst and, thus, the results of a study.
Operations like a mean-value focal operator (Tomlin 1990) are inherently (cid:142) eld-
based, while operations like a line buVer are object-based. It is the task of an analyst
to select the most appropriate conceptualization, representation, and spatial operator
set in a given modelling context.

Although the (cid:142) eld and object class duality is valuable and well articulated, certain
modelling approaches appear to combine aspects of these two perspectives. As
Worboys (1995, p. 177) notes, ‘There is some level at which (cid:142) elds and objects can
coexist.’ Worboys provides an example where a (cid:142) eld is a form of object that can
itself be ascribed identity, properties, and behaviour. This is akin to applying an
object-based modelling approach to the task of representing (cid:142) elds. A second case
that combines aspects of a (cid:142) eld and object approach is the familiar concept of a
density (cid:142) eld. Density (cid:142) elds are (cid:142) eld-based in nature despite the fact that the value
at each location cannot be separated from the size and shape of the spatial object
used to assign the value (Peuquet et al. 1999). These examples demonstrate that
object and (cid:142) eld-based models of geographical reality can coexist.

The purpose of this paper is to describe a means for linking the (cid:142) eld and object
representations of geographical space. The approach is based on a series of mappings,
where locations in a continuous (cid:142) eld are mapped to discrete, geo-referenced objects.
In this context, an object is a modeller’s conceptualization, as in a viewshed, highway
corridor, or biological reserve. Objects can be represented using points, lines, poly-
gons, networks, or other complex spatial type. The paper begins with background
on the (cid:142) eld and object models of geographical phenomena. A conceptual framework
is presented that includes a typology of object (cid:142) elds and a formal speci(cid:142) cation. We
describe issues in constructing, storing, and analysing such (cid:142) elds. Three applications
of object (cid:142) elds are presented, and the paper concludes with a discussion of areas for
further research.

2. Background
2.1. Field models of geographical space

A (cid:142) eld model is one of many conceptual models of geographical variation and
a basis for much scienti(cid:142) c and geographical modelling (Sachs 1973, Angel and
Hyman 1976, Tobler 1978, 1991, Kemp 1997a,b, Heuvelink 1996, Goodchild 1997).
In this model, every location in a spatial framework is associated with a set of
attributes measured on a variety of scales. Fields are spatially continuous by de(cid:142) ni-
tion, but continuous might also refer to the measurement scale (z value). A (cid:142) eld can
be viewed as a mapping between a locational reference frame and an attribute
domain (Worboys 1995). For this reason, a (cid:142) eld is commonly referred to as a single-
valued function of space because it assigns a value to every location. Theoretically,
the set of locations in a (cid:142) eld is in(cid:142) nite, as we can always invent points at which to
make measurements. The measurement scale for the attribute domain can be any
common scale including binary, nominal, ordinal, interval, or ratio. The spatial frame
of reference can be of one, two, or three dimensions, with an additional dimension

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

511

to represent time. Z(x) is a common means of formalizing a (cid:142) eld, where x is a
locational vector. Time can be modelled in a (cid:142) eld context as either discrete time
slices or as a continuous (cid:142) eld in time which leads to a 3-D volume (Goodchild
1992). It is possible to perceive geographical variation entirely as (cid:142) elds, and there
are many terms to describe features in (cid:142) elds like peak, ridge, valley, plateau, and
saddle.

The most common (cid:142) eld types are scalar, vector, and tensor. In a scalar (cid:142) eld,
every location is assigned a scalar value from an attribute domain. This is the most
common type of (cid:142) eld in GIS modelling, and the term ‘(cid:142) eld’ with no additional
information generally refers to a scalar (cid:142) eld. In a vector (cid:142) eld, every location in space
determines a set of values that describe the direction and magnitude of a vector at
that point or its components in two or three dimensions. Vector (cid:142) elds can be used
to represent land surface gradients like slope and aspect, or dynamic phenomena on
the land surface like wind, water, and (cid:142) re. Vector (cid:142) elds can also be represented as
two scalar (cid:142) elds, one for direction and one for magnitude, or one for a vector’s x-
component and one for its y-component (Hunter and Goodchild 1995). Tensor (cid:142) elds
are commonly used to represent strain or stress in multiple directions and are
represented using a matrix at every location.

Representations of (cid:142) elds must always be approximate, as we cannot store an
in(cid:142) nite number of locations. Spatial tessellations (regular, irregular, or hybrid) are
the most common means for representing (cid:142) eld-based models. A central issue in using
a tessellation is the meaning of the value in a spatial unit. Is it the highest value in
the unit, the median, or the mean? It is also possible to build representations by
de(cid:142) ning how the (cid:142) eld varies within each spatial unit using a mathematical function,
as in a Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN). Resolution is also a signi(cid:142) cant issue,
as is the shape of each spatial unit. Regular and irregular point grids can also be
used to represent a (cid:142) eld. This is a common method for representing raw measure-
ments about a (cid:142) eld, as in the temperature at weather stations, elevation spot heights
from GPS, or ozone concentrations from air quality monitoring stations. Digital
contours are a means for representing (cid:142) elds using closed polylines. This is an
incomplete representation because every location does not have a value. It also does
not work for nominal data like land cover type. The accuracy of a contour model
depends on the density of contours and sampling along the contours. Irregular
polygons can also be used to represent a (cid:142) eld, given that the polygons tessellate the
area of interest. This representation is spatially complete, but each polygon is an
average or dominant type as in a soil or vegetation map. Thus, the detailed variation
within each polygon is lost. The accuracy and detail of this approach depends
primarily on the size of the polygons. Common operations on (cid:142) elds include interpola-
tion, classi(cid:142) cation, convolution, spatial overlay, statistical analysis, map algebra,
spread functions, corridor analysis, terrain analysis, and many others.

2.2. Object-based models of space

There are many phenomena in geographical reality that are readily perceived as
objects. Lakes, rivers, valleys, roads, land parcels, buildings, and islands are a few
examples. In an object perspective, space is viewed as a container populated by these
objects, each with identity, spatial embedding, and attributes. Natural language is
much more suited to describing objects than (cid:142) elds. Goodchild (1997) notes that
weather phenomena like temperature and pressure gradients, although modelled by
experts using continuous (cid:142) elds, are translated into objects to communicate with the

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 512

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

public, as in, ‘A high-pressure system is moving across Utah’, or, ‘A warm front is
approaching the west coast’. Smith and Mark (1998) distinguish (cid:142) at boundaries from
bona-(cid:142) de boundaries in de(cid:142) ning objects. Fiat boundaries exist only in virtue of
demarcations induced by human cognition and action, as in a county, park, or sand
dune. Bona (cid:142) de boundaries refer to genuine discontinuities in geographical reality,
as in the case of a lakeshore, river, or bridge. Bona (cid:142) de objects that are cultural
artifacts like buildings and roads are generally well de(cid:142) ned in their spatial projection,
while (cid:142) at boundaries (and thus objects) can range from crisp to very ill de(cid:142) ned, as
in an administrative unit, mountain, or desert.

An object’s spatial projection is commonly represented in a GIS environment
with points, lines, and polygons. The object conceptual perspective in geographical
data modelling is very compatible with object orientation in software engineering
(Egenhofer and Frank 1987, Gahegan and Roberts 1988, Oosterom and Vanderbos
1989, Worboys et al. 1990, Frank and Egenhofer 1992, Worboys 1994). Increasing
attention is being paid to improving the representation of
ill-de(cid:142) ned objects
(Burrough and Frank 1996). While crisp objects are more suited to being represented
with points, lines, and polygons, ill-de(cid:142) ned objects are more suited to techniques in
fuzzy modelling, a (cid:142) eld-based modelling approach to an object conceptual perspect-
ive. The most common GIS operations performed on objects are manipulation tasks
like adding, deleting, updating, moving, and transforming. Common object-based
analysis functions include spatial query, point pattern analysis, distance calculation,
overlay analysis, buVer generation, network analysis, cluster analysis, spatial
similarity analysis, shape analysis, and location modelling (Longley et al. 1999 ).

3. Object (cid:142) elds
3.1. Conceptual background

Couclelis (1992) and Worboys (1995) note that the (cid:142) eld and object conceptual
perspectives should not be considered mutually exclusive. Certainly the two perspect-
ives are routinely combined in a variety of GIS studies. For example, a meteorological
GIS might store a (cid:142) eld representation of temperature and pressure surfaces in
conjunction with an object representation of fronts, highs, and lows. In another case,
a roads layer might be used to generate a distance-to-road s surface to identify areas
in proximity to roads. Thus, the (cid:142) eld and object perspectives can be used in conjunc-
tion as well as derived from one another. This section describes a system for relating
the (cid:142) eld and object perspectives through a series of mappings. The mappings serve
as a conceptual bridge between the two perspectives.

An object (cid:142) eld (OF) is de(cid:142) ned as a continuous (cid:142) eld in which locations are
mapped to spatial objects. In other words, an object (cid:142) eld relates locations in a (cid:142) eld-
space to objects in an object-space. Therefore, it shares qualities of both the (cid:142) eld
and object conceptual perspectives of geographical phenomena. The object type
associated with a location may be a point, line, area, network, or other complex
spatial type. Figure 1 depicts an object (cid:142) eld as a series of mappings between the (cid:142) eld
and object perspectives. The (cid:142) eld perspective is depicted on the left, where each
location is mapped to an element of an attribute domain. As noted, a (cid:142) eld location
generally determines a scalar, vector, or tensor. The object perspective is depicted in
the centre of the (cid:142) gure. In this case, objects of various types with identity, embedding,
attributes, behaviour, and a representation populate a region. On the right is the
multi-representational perspective (object (cid:142) eld), where space is modelled as relation-
ships between a (cid:142) eld perspective and object perspective. This can be viewed as a

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

513

identity
embedding
attributes
behaviour
representation

object
space

field perspective
every location
determines a value

object perspective
geo-referenced objects

multi-representational
field locations

   

field
perspective
determine objects

Figure 1. The (cid:142) eld perspective, object perspective, and multi-representational perspective.

natural extension of the traditional (cid:142) eld perspective where every location determines
a scalar, vector, or tensor to one where every location determines a set of discrete,
geo-referenced objects.

The utility of an object (cid:142) eld can be elucidated with a few examples. Consider the
case where a user would like to explore the terrain that can be viewed from various
locations in a study area. A location’s viewshed is the region that can be seen from
that location. If a viewshed is identi(cid:142) ed for every location in an elevation (cid:142) eld and
associated with the location, this would yield an areal object (cid:142) eld, as each location
would be associated with an areal object (not necessarily singly bounded). Again,
this is not possible in continuous space because there are an in(cid:142) nite number of
locations in the (cid:142) eld, but a discrete representation of the elevation (cid:142) eld combined
with strategies for reducing the number of locations in the (cid:142) eld would allow for the
construction of this unique type of (cid:142) eld (O’Sullivan and Turner 2001).

A second example is a network-based (cid:142) eld, where every location along a network
is associated with a contiguous areal object. Assume that a decision maker would
like to explore the potential eVects of a toxic material spill along a highway transport
route. In theory, every location along the route represents a potential spill site with
varying consequences that depend on local meteorological conditions, topography
(Hepner and Finco 1995), and the surrounding population distribution. Using a
plume model, meteorological assumptions, a terrain model, and a discrete representa-
tion of the route, a plume ‘object’ could be simulated for every location along the
route (Charkraborty and Armstrong 1996). This would yield an areal object (cid:142) eld
de(cid:142) ned along a network (restricted (cid:142) eld) that could be useful in assessing risk. An
interesting aspect of this example is that the (cid:142) eld is restricted to locations along a
network but the spatial embedding of the associated objects is not.

A third example is a corridor object (cid:142) eld. Consider the case where a right-of-
way must be identi(cid:142) ed between two locations, an origin and destination. If the
corridor must pass through a third location, a gateway location (Lombard and
Church 1993 ), then a (cid:142) eld of corridors can be de(cid:142) ned. In theory, every gateway
location in the (cid:142) eld is associated with the ‘best’ corridor that passes through the
location en route from the origin to the destination. Solving a corridor location
problem instance for each location in a discrete representation of the (cid:142) eld yields a
corridor object (cid:142) eld, as every location in the (cid:142) eld is associated with a corridor

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 514

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

(Church et al. 1992). The corridor could be represented as a set of contiguous line
segments or grid cells, depending on the problem context.

This represents a sample of the possible types and applications of object (cid:142) elds.
Figure 2 graphically depicts a few more examples. An initial step is to develop an
object-(cid:142) eld typology. There are many types of (cid:142) eld and object representations, each
with unique characteristics. One approach is to distinguish OFs based on the method
for conceptualizing and representing the underlying (cid:142) eld combined with the method
for conceptualization and representing the associated objects. Table 1 depicts a
partial typology of object (cid:142) elds based on the above criteria. From left-to-right, the
(cid:142) rst major division is de(cid:142) ned by the conceptualization of the underlying (cid:142) eld. This
might be a continuous (cid:142) eld in n dimensions or a (cid:142) eld restricted to locations along
a network. If the (cid:142) eld is conceptualized as continuous, then there are a variety of

Figure 2. Example object (cid:142) eld types.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

515

Table 1. A partial object-(cid:142) eld taxonomy.

Underlying (cid:142) eld

Objects

Conceptualized

Represented

Conceptualized

Represented

Continuous (cid:142) eld
(1-d, 2-d, 3-d,...)

Raster
(rectangular, triangular,
or hexagonal )

Point grid
( lattice)

Irregular polygons

Triangulated irregular
network (TIN)

Point set

Corridor

Area

Network
Point set
Corridor
Area
Network
Points

Corridor

Area

Network
Point set

Corridor

Area

Network
Point set
Corridor
Area
Network

Set of cells
Set of points
Set of cells
Polyline
Set of cells
Closed polyline
Nodes and arcs
Set of points
Set of points
Set of points
Nodes and arcs
Set of spatial units
Set of points
Set of polygons
Polyline
Set of polygons
Closed polylines
Nodes and arcs
Set of facets
Set of points
Set of facets
Polyline
Set of facets
Closed polylines
Nodes and arc
Set of nodes
Node/arc subset
Node/arc subset
Nodes and arcs

Network
(restricted (cid:142) eld)

Nodes and arcs

methods for representing a (cid:142) eld in a discrete domain. These include a raster (used
here to refer to any regular tessellation of the plane), irregular polygons, or a
triangulated irregular network. A network is generally represented using a node-arc
structure, where dynamic segmentation can be used to model continuously varying
network attributes (Nyerges 1990).

The next step is to examine the method for representing the object(s) associated
with each location in the (cid:142) eld. Four types of object conceptualizations are listed
including point, corridor, area, and network. This set should not be considered
exhaustive. The types are repeated for each conceptualization and representation of
the underlying (cid:142) eld. To the right of the object conceptualization are a few example
representations. For example, one object (cid:142) eld involves conceptualizing space as a
continuous (cid:142) eld in the plane, representing the (cid:142) eld using a raster, associating a single
corridor with each location (raster cell), and representing the corridor as a polyline.
There are a number of OF characteristics in addition to the primary ones used
for the typology that might lead to further re(cid:142) nement. For example, are the objects
associated with the (cid:142) eld homogeneous, or is more than one type of object associated
with the (cid:142) eld? Is the spatial embedding of the objects crisp or fuzzy (Burrough and
Frank 1996)? Are objects contained within objects in a hierarchical fashion, and, if

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 516

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

so, is the object hierarchy all one type? Can the objects that are associated with a
location move or change with time? There are many more characteristics that could
be used to further re(cid:142) ne the typology.

A key quality that can be used to distinguish an object (cid:142) eld from representing
traditional spatial objects in the plane is the relationship between (cid:142) eld locations and
spatial objects. Object (cid:142) elds can be viewed as relating two spaces, one (cid:142) eld-based
and one object-based, that correspond in extent. Objects in object space can be
points, lines, polygons, or other type and may overlap. As noted, there are four
possible relationships between locations in (cid:142) eld space and objects in object space:
one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, or many-to-man y ((cid:142) gure 3). If the relation-
ship is one-to-one, then each (cid:142) eld location is associated with one object in object
space. If the relationship is one-to-many, then a (cid:142) eld location can be associated with
many objects, but each object is only associated with one location in (cid:142) eld space. If
the relationship is many-to-one , then many locations in (cid:142) eld space may be associated
with one object, but each (cid:142) eld location can only be associated with one object.
Finally, if the relationship is many-to-many , then a location in (cid:142) eld space can be
associated with any number of objects, and an object can be associated with any
number of (cid:142) eld locations.

A second interesting quality of an object (cid:142) eld arises from the separation between
the (cid:142) eld and object spaces. Because of this separation, (cid:142) eld locations can be associated
with objects that do not contain the location in their spatial embedding. For example,
a location in one part of a study area can be associated with an object in another
part of the study area. We refer to the case where a location is associated with an

Figure 3. Relationship types between (cid:142) eld locations and spatial objects.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

517

object in object space that includes the corresponding location in its spatial embed-
ding as locationally inclusive. Similarly, the case where a location in (cid:142) eld space is
associated with an object in object space that does not include the location is referred
to as locationally exclusive.

An object (cid:142) eld is similar to a meta-relational map in GeoAlgebra (Takeyama
1996, Takeyama and Couclelis 1997, Takeyama 1997, Couclelis 1997). A meta-
relational map assigns a binary (cid:142) eld, referred to as a relational map, to each location
in a (cid:142) eld to de(cid:142) ne the set of proximal locations that in(cid:143) uence the given location
(Takeyama 1997). For this reason, it is a mapping from each location in a (cid:142) eld to
its respective ‘(cid:142) eld of in(cid:143) uence’. This is similar to relating each location to an object
(or set of objects), as both involve relating a location to meta-information at other
locations. Takeyama (1996) notes that the conceptual perspective in GeoAlgebra is
(cid:142) eld-based rather than object-based. In this way, one can consider meta-relational
maps and object (cid:142) elds as analogous to the original (cid:142) eld-object dichotomy. In other
words, one is a (cid:142) eld-of-(cid:142) elds and the other a (cid:142) eld-of-objects.

3.2. Formalizing object (cid:142) elds

An OF can be formalized with existing approaches to formalizing (cid:142) elds and
objects. For example, a scalar (cid:142) eld can be de(cid:142) ned as set of tuples that contain a
location l and a value v selected from a set of locations L and a set of values V
(Goodchild 1992). If geographical space is perceived as continuous, then L is an
in(cid:142) nite set. Similarly, if the set of possible values at a location is perceived as
continuous, then V is an in(cid:142) nite set. In computational practice, L and V are both
(cid:142) nite, where any tuple selected from the Cartesian product is possible. Generally,
there is a unique value at each location, so a scalar (cid:142) eld is best considered a function
that maps a set of locations to a set of values f :L (cid:129) V . The arrangement of
f
locations in a study area can be irregular or regular and vary in detail (resolution).
The set of possible values V can be any of the common measurement scales binary,
ordinal, interval, or ratio.

An object can be conceptualized in n-dimensional continuous space as possessing
identity, spatial embedding, attributes, behaviours, and a representation (Worboys
1995). There are a variety of ways to represent an object’s spatial embedding
mathematically. One approach is to use an in(cid:142) nite binary (cid:142) eld that de(cid:142) nes whether
the object is present or absent at each location in a (cid:142) eld. An object’s spatial
embedding S can be de(cid:142) ned as:

S 5 {(x,

f (x))|x×Rn,

f (x)×{0, 1}}

(1)

is a function that de(cid:142) nes whether the object is
where x is a location vector and f
present or absent at a given location. To represent fuzzy objects, the function f can
alternatively be de(cid:142) ned continuously on the interval 0 to 1. This allows an object to
be present at a given location to a speci(cid:142) ed degree. For example, a lake with a
dynamic boundary could be modelled as a fuzzy object where locations within the
lake’s changing boundaries are de(cid:142) ned in terms of a degree-of-membershi p in the
object ‘lake’. Also, x may include a temporal dimension, which allows an object to
have a spatio-tempora l embedding that can be used to model movement.

In addition to a spatial embedding, objects have a set of attributes (properties)
generally measured on a nominal, ordinal, interval, or ratio scale A 5 {a1 , a2 , ..., ar},
a set of behaviours B 5 {b1 , b2 , ..., br} represented by procedural functions (methods)
that can be invoked on the object, and a pointer to a representation R (e.g. points,

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 518

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

lines, and polygons) . Example object behaviours include a building object’s ability
to return the solar radiation that it would absorb and re(cid:143) ect given a sun angle and
azimuth, or a watershed object’s ability to calculate its output given a pattern and
duration of precipitation. An object is thus a composite of its identity, embedding,
attributes, behaviours, and representation:

O 5 {i, S, A, B, R}

(2)

An object (cid:142) eld can then be formalized as a mathematical relation between (cid:142) eld
locations and geo-referenced objects:

(3)

R 5 {(x, O)|x ×Rn , O×U }
where x is a location vector, Rn is n-dimensional real number space (spatial frame-
work), O is an object, and U is the set of all objects of interest. In this way, each
location in a spatial framework can be related to any number of objects, and an
object may be related to any number of (cid:142) eld locations, all selected from the Cartesian
product of the location and object set Rn Ö U. A key aspect of the formulation in
(1)–(3) is the separation between (cid:142) eld locations and an object’s spatial embedding.
This makes it possible to associate a location with an object that does not include
the location in its spatial embedding (i.e. locational exclusion). The novelty of this
formulation is that it contains elements of both the (cid:142) eld and object perspectives of
geographical space. The (cid:142) eld perspective is represented in the relation between (cid:142) eld
locations and objects, and the object perspective is represented in that objects have
identity, spatial embedding, attributes, behaviour, and a representation.

Figure 4 depicts four types of object (cid:142) elds that would be possible using this
formulation. Figure 4(a) is a point-set object (cid:142) eld where every location is associated

Figure 4. Four types of object (cid:142) elds: point, corridor, areal, and network.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

519

with a set of points that may or may not include a point at the location. Figure 4(b)
is a corridor object (cid:142) eld where every location is associated with a corridor between
two locations. Figure 4(c) is an areal object (cid:142) eld where every location is associated
with an area object (not necessarily singly bounded), and (cid:142) gure 4(d) is a network
object (cid:142) eld where every location is associated with a network of locations of which
it may be a part. In this way, every location can be associated with any number and
type of complex spatial objects located anywhere in the (cid:142) eld.

4. Representing and constructing object (cid:142) elds
4.1. Representation

An object (cid:142) eld is a multi-representationa l model of geographi c variation that
can be represented with any combination of existing data models for representing
(cid:142) elds and spatial objects in a computational domain (Peuquet 1984, 1988, Goodchild
1992, Gahegan 1996, Burrough and McDonnell 1998, Longley et al. 1999). Table 1
depicts many of the combinations of (cid:142) eld and object representations that can be
used, but should not be considered exhaustive. There are three primary steps in
constructing an object (cid:142) eld to address a spatial problem: (1) de(cid:142) ne and represent
the underlying (cid:142) eld, (2) de(cid:142) ne and represent the objects, and (3) establish the relation
between (cid:142) eld locations and objects. In de(cid:142) ning and representing the (cid:142) eld, the central
questions are the (cid:142) eld’s qualities like its spatial dimensions, extent, unit of discretiz-
ation, and detail (resolution). The second step is de(cid:142) ning and representing the object
type, which involves de(cid:142) ning the object embeddings, properties, behaviours, and
associated representation. For example, the object associated with each location
might be a potential habitat corridor between two existing biological reserves that
is represented as a polyline and has a minimal attribute set of cost and width. The
(cid:142) nal step is establishing a relation between locations in the (cid:142) eld and associated
objects. This involves questions like the number of objects related with each location.
There are three approaches to generating an object (cid:142) eld: manual, semi-automated ,
and automated. A manual approach involves digitizing the spatial form of each
object, entering the object attributes, and relating each (cid:142) eld location to a set of
objects. A semi-automated procedure might generate the objects automatically but
require manual assignment of (cid:142) eld locations to objects, or the converse. Clearly, the
most eYcient method is a procedure that automates the complete construction of
an object (cid:142) eld. This procedure would generate both the objects and the location-
object pairs in equation (1). This process might be analytical, as in the case of
determining the visibility graph for every location (O’Sullivan and Turner 2001),
process-based, as in simulating a toxic plume for every location along a network to
derive a set of plume objects (Chakraborty and Armstrong 1996), or an exact or
heuristic solution to a spatial optimisation problem (Lombard and Church 1993,
Cova and Church 2000a, 2000b) .

4.2. Data structure and database issues

The appropriate data structure for storing an object (cid:142) eld depends on the repres-
entation of the (cid:142) eld and associated objects. There is a rich history of spatial data
structure development to draw from in GIScience (Peucker and Chrisman 1975,
Chrisman 1978, Samet 1990, Burrough 1992, Frank 1992, Oosterom, 1994). In
general, a random access data structure indexed by location will allow quick retrieval
of the object(s) associated with a location in the (cid:142) eld. This might be an array, list,
or tree structure (e.g. quadtree) if region queries will be common. Furthermore,

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 520

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

contemporary extended relational database management systems (RDBMS) allow
spatial objects to be stored directly in relational tables much like a text or numeric
(cid:142) eld (Worboys 1999). So, an object (cid:142) eld can be stored in a database as a table where
table rows correspond to (cid:142) eld locations, and a column is de(cid:142) ned that stores the
object, or objects, associated with that location. Figure 5 depicts an example data
structure for storing an object (cid:142) eld in a computational environment.

The two most important variables in determining the space required to store an
object (cid:142) eld are the detail (resolution) of the discrete representation of the (cid:142) eld and
the average space required to store an object’s spatial embedding, attributes, and
other elements. The space required is thus nm, where n is the average number of
bytes required for a spatial unit, and m is the average number of bytes necessary to
store an object. This number can be very large in some cases, and developing
strategies for storing object (cid:142) elds in an eYcient manner is an important area for
further research.

Figure 5. An example object (cid:142) eld data structure.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

521

5. Application examples

The central problem in constructing an object (cid:142) eld is identifying a suitable
representation of the (cid:142) eld, objects, and relation between the two (equation 1). This
section provides three examples of automatically constructing an object (cid:142) eld to
address problems in a spatial decision support context (SDSS). In an SDSS context,
the challenge is to provide decision makers with tools to assist in locating facilities
like (cid:142) re stations, transmission lines, and biodiversity reserves (Densham, 1991, 1994,
1996, Church et al. 1992, Armstrong et al. 1992, Armstrong 1993, Church 1999). The
three examples include a point, corridor, and areal object (cid:142) eld, respectively.
The common theme in these examples is that an object (cid:142) eld combines aspects of
the (cid:142) eld and object conceptual perspectives in a manner that is useful for exploring
a population of competitive spatial alternatives.

5.1. Point-set (cid:142) eld: multi-facility location problem

The problem in this example is a continuous p-median (facility location) problem.
The objective is to locate p facilities in continuous space to serve n demand points,
with varying demand, so as to minimize the total weighted travel distance from all
demands to all facilities. This is a classic location problem and a complete formulation
of the problem and common solution methods can be found in Ghosh and Rushton
(1987). For our purposes, the important quality of this problem is that a facility can
be located anywhere in the plane. A solution to this problem includes both a set of
facility locations and a set of assignments from each demand to its closest facility.
In a traditional location science context, the problem would be solved optimally for
a given set of demands and the solution would be presented. In the context of this
research, we can use this problem to generate a (cid:142) eld of facility patterns, where every
location is associated with the best pattern that can be identi(cid:142) ed, given that a facility
must be placed at that location. Solving this problem in a computational domain
requires a discrete representation of the (cid:142) eld, demands, and facilities.

The discrete representation selected for the underlying (cid:142) eld in this example is a
raster, where a demand and facility are both represented as a single cell. To generate
a point-set object (cid:142) eld, a constraint is added that (cid:142) xes one facility in a given location
(cell). This constraint states that cell i must be selected for a facility. Incrementing i
from 1 to n and iteratively solving the model above for every cell, yields a point-set
object (cid:142) eld. The results of each run are saved, and each cell is associated with its
best facility con(cid:142) guration. Therefore, we would refer to the resulting object (cid:142) eld as
locationally inclusive because every (cid:142) eld location is associated with a facility object
that includes the location in its spatial embedding (as well as other facilities located
elsewhere). To relate this back to the general formulation in equations (1)–(3),
solving the problem for a particular cell returns the spatial embeddings (locations)
of the point objects (S in equation 2), and associating the resulting solution with the
given cell relates the location to the set of facility objects ((x, O) in equation 3).

Figure 6(a) depicts both the original demand map on the left and the resulting
objective surface on the right. The objective surface represents the best objective
value achieved for each cell (problem instance). The heuristic nature of the solution
algorithm is evident in the speckled objective surface map. The arrow in each map
indicates the cell that is currently selected. Superimposed on the demand map and
the objective surface is the object (cid:142) eld. The facility con(cid:142) guration and associated
assignments displayed represent the best con(cid:142) guration, given that a facility must be
located at the indicated cell. It is impossible to depict the entire object (cid:142) eld in static

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 522

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

(a)

(b)

Figure 6. A point-set (cid:142) eld that has a set of points (facilities) associated with each cell.

form, but (cid:142) gure 6(b) depicts the facility con(cid:142) guration and associated assignments for
the best solution identi(cid:142) ed overall.

5.2. Corridor (cid:142) eld: biological reserve corridor selection problem

The problem in this second example is to identify a suitable corridor between
two existing habitat patches, a common spatial problem in biodiversity reserve
design. There are a number of ways to formulate a corridor location problem in a
GIS context. Ideally, the goal is a relatively suitable, direct corridor. This is a multi-
objective spatial optimization problem (Cohon 1978). One approach for transforming

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

523

the problem into a single-objective context is to formulate the objective as a weighted
trade-oV between minimising corridor distance and maximising corridor suitability.
Corridor suitability can be de(cid:142) ned as the sum of the cell suitability values that
comprise the corridor, and corridor length can be de(cid:142) ned as the sum of the distances
between cell centers that comprise the corridor.

To invert the suitability objective component, the suitability between two adjacent
cells can be de(cid:142) ned as one minus the sum of the cell suitability values divided by
two times the maximum cell suitability value, which yields a value from 0 to 1. The
resulting objective is then,

minimize: z 5 w1

dij1 w2

(1Õ

(si1

sj)/2m)

(4)

n

n

i=1

j=1

n

n

i=1

j=1

where z is the objective value; w1 and w2 are adjustable weights that sum to 1; dij is
the distance between adjacent cells i and j in the corridor; si is the suitability score
for cell i; and m is the maximum suitability value for a cell. In this example, eight-
neighbour adjacency was used to de(cid:142) ne the feasible paths between neighbouring cells.
The problem of (cid:142) nding the best path between two cells in a raster can be solved
optimally by converting the raster to a network and using Dijkstra’s (1959) algorithm
to solve for the least cost path. In this example, we used an eight-neighbour rule to
transform the raster into a dense network. To generate a corridor object (cid:142) eld, a
gateway cell can be added to each problem instance that the path must travel though
(Church 1992, Lombard and Church 1993). Iteratively solving the gateway problem
for every potential cell in the suitability map results in a ‘best’ corridor for each
gateway cell for a given model instance: a corridor object (cid:142) eld. The corridor can be
represented as either a set of contiguous cells or as a polyline (table 1). As in the
last example, this is a locationally inclusive object-(cid:142) eld because every cell is associated
with a corridor that includes the cell in its spatial embedding. To relate this back to
the general formulation, solving the problem for a particular cell returns the spatial
embedding of the corridor object (S in equation 2), and associating the resulting
corridor with that cell represents the relation from the location to the corridor object
((x, O) in equation 3). The corridor can either be represented as the set of contiguous
cells that it passes through or as a polyline, the option selected here.

Figure 7(a) depicts the results of this process with the original suitability map on
the left and the objective surface on the right. In this problem instance the distance
was weighted lightly as 0.2 with the corridor suitability weighted as 0.8. The arrow
in each (cid:142) gure represents the currently selected gateway cell. As Dijkstra’s algorithm
guarantees the optimal solution to a shortest path problem, the resulting objective
surface on the right is optimal for the problem instance. Figure 7(b) shows the global
optimal corridor for this problem instance, where selecting any cell along this route
results in the same corridor.

5.3. Areal (cid:142) eld: wilderness study area search

The problem in this third example is to search for a viable wilderness study area
(WSA)
in south-eastern Utah within the boundaries of the USGS Huntington
1:100 000 quadrangle. The Wilderness Act of 1964 in the US requires that a wilderness
area be contiguous public land of at least 5000 acres in size with no existing roads
(US Congress, 1964). This can be approached as a site search problem with the goal
of identifying a compact site as far as possible from any roads. As in the last example,
this is a multi-objective spatial optimisation problem. The area and compactness

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 (cid:158)
(cid:158)
(cid:158)
(cid:158)
524

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. A corridor (cid:142) eld that has a corridor associated with each cell.

objectives can be formulated as constraints to transform the problem into a single-
objective problem of maximising the site’s distance to proximal roads (Cohon 1978 ).
To address the requirements that a wilderness area must be public land without
a road, land screening (Dobson 1979) was initially performed to remove locations
that are private land or contain a road. The objective of the search is to maximise
the distance of the site from existing roads subject to constraints on area, com-
pactness, and contiguity (Cova and Church 2000a, 2000b) . The model includes the
notion of a ‘root’ land unit that must be present in the site and a feasible neighbour-
hood around the root in which the best site must exist. The feasible neighbourhood

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

525

surrounding each cell is calculated using the area and compactness requirements of
the site. Iteratively solving this model for every feasible cell in the suitability map
(i.e. public and no road) yields a (cid:142) eld of contiguous site areas (objects). As in the
last two examples, the object (cid:142) eld is locationally inclusive because the object (area)
associated with each location includes the location in its spatial embedding. To relate
this to the general formulation in equations (1)–(3), solving the problem for a
particular cell returns the spatial embedding of the best contiguous site for that cell
(S in equation 2), and associating the resulting site with that cell relates each location
with an areal object ((x, O) in equation 3). The site can be represented as the
boundary surrounding the set of contiguous cells that comprise it.

In this problem instance, a site’s compactness is de(cid:142) ned in terms of a normalized
area-to-perimete r squared ratio (Austin 1984, MacEachren 1985), with 1 representing
a maximally compact site. A cell’s suitability score is de(cid:142) ned simply as its Euclidean
distance to the nearest road. The study area was converted to a grid of 1 km
resolution, and the proximity of each cell to its nearest road was calculated using
the proximity operation in ArcViewTM . An additional land ownership map was
acquired, and cells that contained a road or private land were screened. The site
search problem must be solved for each remaining cell. In many cases, the cell cannot
support a site with the required spatial characteristics. These cells are not related
with an object (i.e. no site). The result is a (cid:142) eld of areal objects, but many locations
in the (cid:142) eld have no associated object.

Figure 8(a) depicts the resulting areal object (cid:142) eld and the site associated with a
selected cell. Despite the fact that this is one of the least populated regions in the
US, there are few cells capable of meeting the spatial requirements of the problem.
For each viable cell, there is an associated compact, contiguous site of 5000 acres
that is as far from proximal roads as possible. Figure 8(b) shows one of the best sites
in this study area for a wilderness study area as it contains a signi(cid:142) cant buVer from
any roads. While it is easy to identify the best areas for a wilderness study area
without the use of the site object (cid:142) eld, the added value of the site (cid:142) eld is to answer
the question for a given cell, ‘Can this cell support a relatively compact wilderness
study area?’ It is therefore a search for all areas that could be a WSA rather than a
search for areas that should be a WSA.

6. Discussion

The examples presented in the previous section demonstrate that object (cid:142) elds
are relatively easy to construct, store, and analyse. This section addresses their
potential value in spatial analysis and decision support. The primary bene(cid:142) t of an
object (cid:142) eld is that it reveals the spatial variation in an object, or object set, as a
function of location. This information is not evident when a set of favoured locations
is selected for a particular operation (e.g. toxic plume simulation). A secondary
bene(cid:142) t is that object (cid:142) elds provide the ability to perform location-based spatial
sensitivity analysis. We describe each of these concepts and argue that they can
improve a user’s understanding of geographical reality as well as that of a particular
spatial model.

6.1. Analysis of model results as a function of location

The most central type of inquiry that can be pursued with an object (cid:142) eld pertains
to the spatial variation in a model’s results as a function of location. In other words,

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 526

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

(a)

(b)

Figure 8. An areal (cid:142) eld that has a contiguous site associated with each cell.

how do the results of a spatial operation that returns an object vary by location?
As noted, there are many types of spatial operations (e.g. analytical, simulation, or
optimisation) that result in a geographical object (e.g. toxic plume, viewshed, corridor,
best site) where a location is required as an input parameter, or the results of the
operation would be aVected if a location was constrained to being in the solution.
These operations are typically performed for a small sample of locations in a study
area, or globally, if an input seed location is not required. In the context of an object
(cid:142) eld, the operation is performed for all locations in a study area (or a much denser

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

527

sampling of locations). This comes with signi(cid:142) cant computational costs, and it is
worth examining the bene(cid:142) ts of this approach.

A central challenge in GIScience is to increase our understanding of geographical
reality through spatial modelling. This raises the question of how object (cid:142) elds might
serve to increase a user’s understanding of geographical reality. When an operation
is calculated or simulated for a sample of locations, as in a potential (cid:142) re scar, the
results are typically used to create a static map. A drawback to this approach is that
it doesn’t eVectively communicate to the user how a (cid:142) re scar varies continuously as
a function of the ignition location. Discontinuities in the scar may occur over hilltops,
it may contract and elongate in narrow canyons, expand in plains, and so forth.
Simulating a (cid:142) re scar for each location (or a dense sample of locations) would
provide a user with a more intuitive sense of the spatial variation in the scar as a
function of the ignition location. This same point can be made regarding a user’s
understanding of how a viewshed or watershed varies continuously across the land-
scape. Calculating, simulating, or solving for objects at all locations holds potential
to improve a user’s understanding of the phenomenon under study, and, therefore,
aspects of geographical reality.

A second challenge in GIScience is to develop new approaches for improving a
user’s understanding of the similarity and diVerences between spatial operations to
accomplish the same task (e.g. competing plume simulation models). This raises the
question of how an object (cid:142) eld might be used to meet this goal. A pitfall to avoid
in pursuing this goal is revealing too much algorithm or implementation detail in
comparing methods. This implies that there is a suitable level of detail to reveal to
a user, where too little or too much is entirely possible. This goal can be stated as
one of improving a user’s understanding of a model’s behaviour without introducing
an overwhelming degree of technical detail. Object (cid:142) elds hold the potential to
contribute to this end, as they increase a user’s understanding of the behaviour of a
spatial model (results) without revealing algorithmic detail. This understanding is
garnered by improving the user’s intuitive grasp of how a model’s results vary across
the study area as a function of location. In short, interactive exploration of an object
(cid:142) eld gives a user geographical control over a dimension of the problem that would
not otherwise be possible if the operation was only performed for speci(cid:142) c input
locations and presented in a static map (Batty and Xie 1994, Bailey and Gatrell 1995).
An improved understanding of geographical reality and the spatial model in use
is likely to lead to improvements in the spatial model itself. This can be viewed as
a bene(cid:142) cial feedback into model construction and re(cid:142) nement. If the user’s mental
model of the problem domain does not match the representation or implementation
of the current model, this is likely to be revealed in the exploration of an object
(cid:142) eld. This occurs because the user is exploring a very large number of results in a
very eYcient manner. For example, a wild(cid:142) re expert may discover that a (cid:142) re simula-
tion model is not behaving as a real (cid:142) re would in certain terrain and wind conditions,
or a conservation biologist might discover that a corridor location model is behaving
erratically in areas where the suitability surface is rough. In other words, an object
(cid:142) eld reveals more to a user regarding the behaviour of a spatial model than select
static calculations at speci(cid:142) c locations. The corridor (cid:142) eld example in the prior section
is one example of where this is the case. Calculating the single best corridor in a
study area, or a small set of competing corridors, falls short of revealing that there
may be many near-optimal corridors proximal to these corridors (Church et al. 1992,
Lombard and Church 1993). Furthermore, the degree to which these near-optimal

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 528

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

solutions are similar spatially to the model’s de(cid:142) ned optimal solution is also revealed.
As no model can include all criteria, these near-optimal solutions are important and
may result in a better (cid:142) nal decision.

6.2. L ocation-base d spatial sensitivity analysis

Another line of inquiry that can be pursued with an object (cid:142) eld pertains to the
spatial variation in the results of a spatial model as a function of the algorithm,
data, and parameters in use. The objective here is to communicate the sensitivity of
the results of a spatial model as a function of location. A fundamental tenet of
geography is that everything varies spatially, and this holds for the spatial sensitivity
of a model to changes in the algorithm, data, and parameters. A problem is identifying
some means for communicating this sensitivity to a user. Object (cid:142) elds allow one
to analyse how the results of a spatial model vary by location given changes in
the algorithm, data, or parameters. This might be termed location-based spatial
sensitivity analysis.

One example of this type of investigation is examining the spatial sensitivity of
model results to changes in the input (seed ) location. In any object (cid:142) eld, there are
areas where small changes in the seed location may result in very diVerent spatial
outcomes. For example, in the corridor location problem presented in the prior
section, moving the gateway location one cell can result in an optimal path that
shares very little with the neighbouring gateway location’s optimal path. This means
the decision maker is on a boundary between two very diVerent spatial outcomes.
In other areas, the resulting optimal corridor may be much less sensitive to changes
in the gateway location. This would not be evident to the user if the corridor model
had not been solved for all locations in the (cid:142) eld. In another context, this might
occur when a small move in the seed location across a ridgeline results in an entirely
diVerent viewshed, watershed, or (cid:142) re scar. This understanding can be quickly garn-
ered on the part of the user when the procedure used to calculate an object is
performed at all locations in a study area and the user is allowed to interactively
explore the results.

A second area of investigation that becomes possible in the context of an object
(cid:142) eld is analysis of the spatial sensitivity of a model’s result to changes in the
algorithm, data, and parameters in use as a function of location. In other words, a
model can be altered in terms of the algorithm, data, and input parameters in use,
and the resulting spatial change can be mapped to reveal the spatial variation in the
sensitivity of the model to these changes. For example, consider two competing
approaches for simulating a (cid:142) re scar from an initial seed location. An interesting
question would be the spatial variation in the diVerences between the two approaches.
In some areas, the two may correspond very closely while in others they may vary
substantially. This would also be true for changes in the data, where the results may
remain very stable in one area to changes in the underlying data while in other
areas, small changes in the data may result in entirely diVerent spatial outcomes.
Finally, changes in the parameters to a model or algorithm that generates an object
would also vary spatially. Constructing an object (cid:142) eld before and after the alteration,
either in the algorithm, data, or parameters, would allow an analyst to generate a
diVerence map that could be used to assess the spatial sensitivity to the alternation
and communicate this to a user or decision maker.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

529

7. Conclusion

This paper described a means for linking (cid:142) eld and object models of spatial
phenomena through a series of mappings. We presented a typology of object (cid:142) elds
and a general formulation. The formulation includes unique qualities that can be
used to distinguish object (cid:142) elds from traditional objects in the plane. Foremost,
object (cid:142) elds allow a one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one , or many-to-man y rela-
tionship between (cid:142) eld locations and objects. Of lesser importance, but still unique
in geographical data modelling, a location can be associated with an object that
does not contain the location in its spatial embedding. The potential application of
this quality remains open, as it was not used here. Three application examples were
presented that share the common theme that object (cid:142) elds are useful for exploring a
population of competing spatial alternatives in a spatial decision support context.
Finally, the potential bene(cid:142) ts of object (cid:142) elds in spatial analysis and spatial decision
support were discussed. These include the ability to enhance a user’s understanding
of geographical reality and the particular spatial model in use as well as the ability
to perform location-based spatial sensitivity analysis.

Object (cid:142) elds extend geographical representation in a direction that is recognized
as an important research need (UCGIS 1998). A means for linking the (cid:142) eld and
object representations of geographical phenomena may lead to further innovation
in using the two perspectives together. The approach to linking the (cid:142) eld and object
perspectives presented in this paper provides one example of a multi-representationa l
framework that relies on the two perspectives. It should not be considered the only
approach. The linkage between the two perspectives is achieved through mapping
(cid:142) eld locations to objects, but there are likely other means for using the two perspect-
ives together. Innovation in this area may enhance existing concepts of geographical
space in GIScience (Gatrell 1983, 1991 ).

Object (cid:142) elds are a potentially useful geographical data model, and there are a
number of interesting GIS applications to pursue in environmental modelling, spatial
decision support, and many other (cid:142) elds. Analysis of object (cid:142) elds is an interesting
area in need of further research. This includes interactive exploration, as well as
more rigorous techniques like quantifying the spatial dependence between objects,
mapping the pattern of shared object embeddings, and exploratory analysis of object
attributes in a (cid:142) eld (Getis and Ord 1992, Anselin 1994, 1995). Topological relation-
ships between objects in the (cid:142) eld is another area of interest. For example, do the
objects at neighbouring locations coincide, touch, or overlap, or are they disjoint
(Egenhofer and Franzosa 1991)? Object-(cid:142) elds may have application in assessing
spatial data uncertainty, particularly for procedures that generate objects as a func-
tion of location. Finally, there is a general need for GIS vendors and the Open GIS
Consortium (OGC) to recognize that all data models are not grounded in either a
(cid:142) eld or object perspective and that some data models may include elements of both.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for constructive,
detailed comments. The interactive examples described in this paper can be found
at: http://www.geog.utah.edu/papers/cova-ijgis1.html

References
Angel, S., and Hyman, G. M., 1976, Urban (cid:142) elds: a geometry of movement for regional science

(London: Pion Limited).

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 530

T . J. Cova and M. F. Goodchild

Anselin, L., 1994, Exploratory spatial data analysis and geographic information systems.
In New T ools for Spatial Analysis, edited by M. Painho (Luxembourg: Eurostat),
pp. 45–54.

Anselin, L., 1995, Local indicators of spatial association (LISA). Geographical Analysis,

27, 93–115.

Armstrong, M. P., 1993, Perspectives on the development of group decision support systems

for locational problem-solving. Geographical Systems, 1, 69–81.

Armstrong, M. P., Densham, P. J., Lolonis, P., and Rushton, G., 1992, Cartographic displays
to support locational decision making. Cartography and Geographic Information
Systems, 19, 154–164.

Austin, R. F., 1984, Measuring and comparing two-dimensional shapes. In Spatial Statistics
and Models, edited by G. L. Gaile and C. J. Willmott (Boston: D. Reidel Publishing
Company), pp. 293–312.

Bailey, T. C., and Gatrell, T., 1995, Interactive spatial data analysis (Harlow Essex: Longman

Scienti(cid:142) c & Technical ).

Batty, M., and Xie, Y., 1994, Modelling inside GIS: part 1. Model structures, exploratory
spatial data analysis and aggregation. International Journal of Geographical Information
Systems, 8, 291–307.

Burrough, P. A., 1992, Are GIS data structures too simple minded? Computers & Geosciences,

Burrough, P.A., and Frank, A., 1996, Geographi c objects with indeterminate boundaries

Burrough, P. A., and McDonnell, R. A., 1998, Principles of Geographical Information Systems

18, 395–400.

(London: Taylor & Francis).

(Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Chakraborty, J., and Armstrong, M. P., 1996, Using geographic plume analysis to assess
community vulnerability to hazardous accidents. Computers, Environment, and Urban
Systems, 19, 341–356.

Chrisman, N., 1978, Concepts of space as a guide to cartographic data structures. In
Proceedings of the First International Advanced Study Symposium on T opological Data
Structures for Geographic Information Systems, edited by G. Dutton (Cambridge:
Harvard Laboratory for Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis), pp. 1–19.
Church, R. L., 1999, Location modelling and GIS. In Geographical information systems:
principles, techniques, applications, and management, Volume 1, edited by P. A. Longley,
M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire and D. W. Rhind (New York: John Wiley & Sons),
pp. 293 –303.

Church, R. L., Loban, S. R., and Lombard, K., 1992, An interface for exploring spatial
alternatives for a corridor location problem. Computers & Geosciences, 18, 1095–1105.

Cohon, J. C., 1978, Multiobjective programming and planning (New York: Academic Press).
Couclelis, H., 1992, People manipulate objects ( but cultivate (cid:142) elds): beyond the raster-vector
debate in GIS. In T heories and Methods of Spatio-T emporal Reasoning in Geographic
Space, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 639, edited by A. U. Frank and I. Campari
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag), pp. 65–77.

Couclelis, H., 1997, From cellular automata to urban models: new principles for model
development and implementation. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design,
24, 165–174.

Cova, T. J., and Church, R. L., 2000a, Exploratory spatial optimization and site search:
a neighborhood operator approach. Computers, Environment, & Urban Systems, 21,
401–419.

Cova, T. J., and Church, R. L., 2000b, Contiguity constraints for single-region site search

problems. Geographical Analysis, 32, 306–329.

Densham, P. J., 1991, Spatial decision support systems. In Geographical Information Systems:
Principles and Applications, Volume 1, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild and
D. Rhind (New York: John Wiley & Sons).

Densham, P. J., 1994, Integrating GIS and spatial modelling: visual

interactive location

selection. Geographical Systems, 1, 203–219.

Densham, P. J., 1996, Visual interactive locational analysis. In Spatial Analysis: Modelling in
a GIS Environment, edited by P. Longley and M. Batty (Cambridge: GeoInformation
International ), pp. 185–205.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

531

Dijkstra, E. W., 1959, A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische

Dobson, J. E., 1979, The regional screening procedure for land use suitability analysis. T he

Mathmatik, 1, 269–171.

Geographical Review, 62, 224–234.

Egenhofer, M. J., and Franzosa, R. D., 1991, Point-set topological spatial relations.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5, 161–174.

Egenhofer, M. J., and Frank, A. U., 1987, Object-oriented databases: database requirements
for GIS. In Proceedings of the International GIS Symposium: T he Research Agenda,
Volume 1 (Washington, DC, US Government Printing OYce), pp. 189–211.
Frank, A. U., 1992, Spatial concepts, geometric data models, and geometric data structures.

Computer & Geosciences, 18, 409– 417.

Frank, A. U., and Egenhofer, M., 1992, Computer cartography for GIS: an object-oriented

view on the display transformation. Computers & Geosciences, 18, 975–987.

Gahegan, M., 1996, Specifying the transformations within and between geographic data

models. T ransactions in GIS, 1, 137–152.

Gahegan, M., and Roberts, S. A., 1988, An intelligent object-oriented geographical informa-

tion system. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 2, 101– 110.

Gatrell, A. C., 1983, Distance and space: a geographical perspective (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Gatrell, A. C., 1991, Concepts of space and geographic data. In Geographical Information
Systems, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild and D. W. Rhind (Harlow:
Longmans), pp. 119–134.

Getis, A., and Ord, J. K., 1992, The analysis of spatial association by the use of distance

statistics. Geographical Analysis, 24, 189–206.

Ghosh, A., and Rushton, G., 1987, Spatial analysis and location-allocation models (New York:

Van Norstrand Reinhold).

Goodchild, M. F., 1989, Modelling error in objects and (cid:142) elds. In Accuracy of spatial databases,

edited by M. F. Goodchild, and S. Gopal (London: Taylor & Francis).

Goodchild, M. F., 1992, Geographical data modelling. Computers & Geosciences, 18, 401–408.
Goodchild, M. F., 1997, Representing (cid:142) elds, Core Curriculum in GIScience, National Center

for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA), Santa Barbara.

Hepner, G., and Finco, M., 1995, Modelling dense gas contaminant pathways over complex
terrain using a geographic information system. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 42,
187–199.

Heuvelink, G. B. M., 1996, Identi(cid:142) cation of (cid:142) eld attribute error under diVerent models
of spatial variation. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 10,
921–935.

Hunter, G. J., and Goodchild, M. F., 1995, A new model for handling vector data uncertainty
in geographic information systems. Journal of the Urban and Regional Information
Systems Association, 8, 51–57.

Kemp, K. K., 1997a, Fields as a framework for integrating GIS and environmental process
models. Part I: representing spatial continuity. T ransactions in GIS, 1, 219–234.
Kemp, K. K., 1997b, Fields as a framework for integrating GIS and environmental process

models. Part 2: specifying (cid:142) eld variables. T ransactions in GIS, 1, 235–246.

Lombard, K., and Church, R. L., 1993, The gateway shortest path problem: generating

alternative routes for a corridor location problem. Geographical Systems, 1, 25–45.

Longley, P., Goodchild, M. F., Maguire, D. J., and Rhind, D. W., 1999, Geographical
information systems: principles, techniques, applications, and management (New York:
John Wiley & Sons).

MacEachren, A. M., 1985, Compactness of geographic shape: comparison and evaluation of

measures. Geogra(cid:142) ska Annaler, 67B, 53–67.

Nyerges, T. L., 1990, Locational referencing and highway segmentation in a geographic

information systems. IT E Journal, 60, 27–31.

Oosterom, P.v., 1994, Reactive data structures for geographic information systems (Oxford:

Oxford University Press).

Oosterom, P.v., and Vandebos, J., 1989, An object-oriented approach to the design of geo-

graphic information systems. Computers & Graphics, 13, 409–418.

O’ Sullivan, D., and Turner, A., 2001, Visibility graphs and landscape visibility analysis.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15, 221–237.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 532

L inking (cid:142) eld and spatial object representation s

Peucker, T. K., and Chrisman, N., 1975, Cartographic data structures. American Cartographer,

2, 55–69.

Cartographica, 21, 66–113.

Peuquet, D., 1984, A conceptual

framework and comparison of spatial data models.

Peuquet, D., 1988, Representation of geographic space: toward a conceptual synthesis. Annals

of the Association of American Geographers, 78, 375–394.

Peuquet, D., Smith, B., and Brogaard, B., 1999, T he ontology of (cid:142) elds: report of a specialist
meeting held under the auspices of the Varenius Project (Santa Barbara: National Center
for Geographic Information and Analysis).

Sachs, M., 1973, T he (cid:142) eld concept in contemporary science (Spring(cid:142) eld: Charles C. Thomas).
Samet, H ., 1990, T he design and analysis of spatial data structures (Reading: Addison-Wesley).
Smith, B., and Mark, D., 1998, Ontology and geographic kinds. In Proceedings of International
Symposium on Spatial Data Handling (SDH ’98): Vancouver, B.C., pp. 308–318.
Takeyama, M., 1996, Geo-algebra: a mathematical approach to integrating spatial modelling
and GIS [Unpublished doctoral dissertation thesis]: Santa Barbara, University of
California.

Takeyama, M., 1997, Building spatial models within GIS through geo-algebra. T ransactions

in GIS, 2, 245–256.

Takeyama, M., and Couclelis, H., 1997, Map dynamics: integrating cellular automata and
GIS through geo-algebra. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
11, 73–91.

Tobler, W. R., 1978, Migration (cid:142) elds. In Clark, W., and Moore, E., eds., Population Mobility
and Residential Change, Studies in Geography No. 25 (Evanston: Department of
Geography), pp. 215–232.

Tobler, W. R., 1991, Visual evidence for urban potential (cid:142) elds. MappeMonde , 4, 46–47.
Tomlin, C. D., 1990, Geographic information systems and cartographic modelling (Englewood

UCGIS, 1998, Extension to geographic representation, GIScience Research Agenda,

CliVs: Prentice Hall ).

http://www.ucgis.org/research98.html.

US Congress, 1964, Wilderness act. P.L. 88-577. 78 Stat. 890.
Worboys, M. F., 1994, Object-oriented approaches to georeferenced information. International

Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 3, 385–399.

Worboys, M. F., 1995, GIS: a computing perspective (London: Taylor & Francis).
Worboys, M. F., 1999, Relational databases and beyond. In Geographic Information Systems:
Principles, Applications, and Management, edited by P. Longley, M. F. Goodchild,
D. Maguire, and D. Rhind (New York: John Wiley & Sons), 373–384.

Worboys, M. F., Hearnshaw, H. H., and Maguire, D. J., 1990, Object-oriented data and
query modelling for spatial databases. International Journal of Geographical Information
Systems, 4, 369–383.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 04:18 10 October 2014 