International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 25, No. 8, August 2011, 1221–1239

Calibration of a spatial simulation model with volunteered
geographical information

Mark Birkina* , Nick Mallesona, Andy Hudson-Smithb, Steven Grayb and
Richard Miltonb

aSchool of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; bCentre for Advanced Spatial Analysis,
University College London, London, UK

(Received 25 October 2010; ﬁnal version received 21 January 2011)

For many scientiﬁc disciplines, the continued progression of information technology
has increased the availability of data, computation and analytical methodologies includ-
ing simulation and visualisation. Geographical information science is no exception. In
this article, we investigate the possibilities for deployment of e-infrastructures to inform
spatial planning, analysis and policy-making. We describe an existing architecture that
feeds both static and dynamic simulation models from a variety of sources, including
not only administrative datasets but also attitudes and behaviours which are harvested
online from crowds. This infrastructure also supports visualisation and computationally
intensive processing. The main aim of this article is to illustrate how spatial simulation
models can be calibrated with crowd-sourced data. We introduce an example in which
popular attitudes to congestion charging in a major UK city (Manchester) were col-
lected, with promotional support from a high-proﬁle media organisation (the BBC).
These data are used to estimate the parameters of a transport simulation model, using
a hungry estimation procedure which is deployed within a high-performance computa-
tional grid. We indicate how the resulting model might be used to evaluate the impact of
alternative policy options for regulating the trafﬁc in Manchester. Whilst the procedure
is novel in itself, we argue that greater credibility could be added by the incorporation
of open-source simulation models and by the use of social networking mechanisms to
share policy evaluations much more widely.

Keywords: crowd-sourcing; simulation; calibration; e-infrastructure

1.

Introduction

Scientiﬁc research is being fundamentally transformed by continued progression in com-
putational technologies. The ability to share information across the Internet has now been
supplemented by the development of web services permitting complex transformation of
increasingly massive datasets. In many disciplines, it is now argued that data-intensive
research is leading on to a new paradigm of scientiﬁc investigation (Bell et al. 2009).

These trends are obviously relevant in the domains of Geographical Information
Science (GIS) and spatial science. Of particular importance is the increasingly widespread
availability of spatial data. Thanks to initiatives as diverse as Google Earth and
OpenStreetMap, for example, new map-based representations of the physical environment

*Corresponding author. Email: m.h.birkin@leeds.ac.uk

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.559169
http://www.tandfonline.com

1222

M. Birkin et al.

are being created and updated. Existing providers, such as Ordnance Survey in the United
Kingdom, are becoming obliged to make data more widely available through a combination
of commercial and regulatory pressures. A second important dynamic is growing interest
in model-based applications, with a special emphasis on multiagent systems – an overview
is provided by Epstein (2007) and notable examples with a geographical emphasis include
UrbanSim (Waddell and Borning 2002), ILUTE (Miller et al. 2004) and EpiSims (Eubank
et al. 2004) amongst many others. The convergence of data manipulation, visualisation and
spatial analysis and modelling gives rise to an emergent sub-discipline of geosimulation
(Benenson and Torrens 2004).

An e-infrastructure for social and spatial simulation which brings together these fun-
damental components of data integration, analytic simulation and visualisation is reviewed
in Section 2. The rationale for this project combines both an academic and a more applied
policy dimension. In the remainder of this article, the applied value of this work is demon-
strated in the context of a real planning scenario, in which the impact of a transport policy
initiative on a UK city is evaluated. In Section 3, the transport simulation component of
the infrastructure is described, before we go on to discuss the way in which individual
behavioural data are captured and incorporated within the model calibration process. The
resulting models are deployed in a policy-analysis context. This article ends with a dis-
cussion of results and a statement of the major implications for the immediate research
agenda.

This work is distinctive in seeking explicitly to drive a simulation from ‘crowd-sourced’
data which capture the attitudes and stated behaviours of a sub-population and to use
these data to enhance the speciﬁcation and calibration of the model. A high-performance
infrastructure is used as the means for detailed parameterisation of the model outputs.

2. The genesis infrastructure
In this section, we describe brieﬂy the two major components which are combined as the
core of our approach – a series of demographic models (‘Moses’) which are used as the
basis for small area representation and projection of local populations, and visualisation
functionality (‘MapTube’) which provides a ﬂexible mechanism for the representation of
model data, analytics and simulation results. In Section 3, we review the architecture by
which these components are brought together.

2.1. Moses demographic models
Moses is a microsimulation framework comprising a synthetic estimation procedure or
population reconstruction model (PRM) and a dynamic simulation model (DSM). The
PRM allows the population of a geographical area to be represented as a sequence of
individual households and their constituent members. In addition to sociodemograph-
ics, behaviours, attitudes and microlocations can all be captured from the combination
of anonymised individual microdata and neighbourhood-level census-based population
counts (Birkin et al. 2009). Although the population reconstruction process is relatively
complicated, an important advantage is that individually speciﬁed household units provide
the perfect basis for the simulation of population dynamics. The DSM simulates funda-
mental demographic transitions using evidence from a variety of longitudinal and dynamic
sources, including British Household Panel Survey, International Passenger Statistics,
Special Migration Statistics and Vital Statistics from the Ofﬁce for National Statistics
(ONS). The model has been enhanced for speciﬁc applications through the introduction

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1223

of agent-based representation of demographic interactions (Wu et al. 2008, 2010). In sum-
mary, Moses provides synthetic individual datasets for both existing and future populations
with the capacity for ﬂexible disaggregation across a combination of sociodemographic,
attitudinal and microlocational characteristics.

2.2. MapTube visualisations

The MapTube website has been originally conceived as a repository or ‘a place to put
maps’ and was designed for disseminating geographic information to the general public
(http://www.maptube.org). Subsequently, the technology has been extended through the
GMap Creator product which allows users to combine attributes for small geographical
areas with boundary data, which specify the extent of each area, and underlying rep-
resentations of the background geography, for example as Google Maps. Furthermore,
the technology has been extended to allow maps to be created dynamically by com-
bining attribute data with boundary data to create thematic overlays on Google Maps
or OpenStreetMap. The latest innovation in the MapTube portfolio is SurveyMapper
(http://www.surveymapper.com) which allows registered users to easily generate and dis-
tribute survey questionnaires to a wide variety of potential respondents. SurveyMapper
allows the input of user-generated content into the simulation process. There is no widely
accepted, precise deﬁnition of user-generated content, but it is generally considered to be
content that is made publicly available over the Internet; reﬂects a degree of creative effort;
and is created outside of professional routines and practices (OECD 2007). With respect
to mapping there are two aspects that are important: crowd-sourcing location-related data
to create maps and crowd-sourcing other data to overlay onto a map backcloth (Anand
et al. 2010). When user-generated or crowd-sourced data are applied to a mapping context,
they can be viewed as volunteered geographic information (Goodchild 2007). In our case
SurveyMapper is a public data collection tool with elements of both crowd-sourcing and
volunteered geographic information. In Section 3 we will explain how SurveyMapper has
been used proactively to generate crowd-sourced survey data.

2.3.

e-Infrastructure for social and spatial simulation

In recent years, GIS technologies have developed to combine spatial data with analyti-
cal functions and to visualise the resulting outcomes. Speciﬁc large-scale projects often
combining data with customised spatial analysis or modelling capabilities can give rise to
spatial decision support systems for planning and policy-making (for further discussion
and a range of examples, see Geertman and Stillwell 2003). In this research, we seek to
combine a similar range of components within the framework of an e-infrastructure, which
we see as applicable to a range of problem domains in both the spatial and social sciences.
The breadth and ambition of the project are expressed in its characterisation as a National
e-Infrastructure for Social Simulation (NeISS: Birkin et al. 2010).

The overall architecture for NeISS is illustrated in Figure 1. The data sources which are
enabled by the e-infrastructure include established geospatial and social data sources such
as the census of population and households, government surveys and map data, as well
as crowd-sourced data unique to this project and which we will discuss in more detail in
Section 3.1. These data feed into the demographic models – PRM and DSM – as we have
already described above, as well as a suite of simulation models which we will illustrate
further below. For other social modelling applications a data fusion tool is under develop-
ment in which, for example, the relationships between social background, employment and

1224

M. Birkin et al.

reconstruction
model

simulation
models

fusion
tool

data

Synthetic data
sets provenance

Synthetic data
sets provenance

Reports provenance

Dynamic
model

Persistent
repository

Figure 1. The NeISS Architecture.

education can be explored in a variety of information environments and policy contexts
(Warner et al. 2010). The MapTube component allows for the spatial representation and
visualisation of model outputs.

The NeISS architecture depends on e-infrastructure concepts in a number of important
ways which are worthy of further brief comment and distinguish the NeISS from a con-
ventional GIS or spatial decision support system. First, the core datasets may be accessed
remotely as virtual data stores. In the current implementation of NeISS the data are main-
tained by the National e-Science Centre at the University of Glasgow and accessed through
a shibboleth-enabled authentication mechanism through which the regulation of access to
secure datasets can be maintained (Shibboleth and UK Access Management Federation
2010). The simulation engine, including both the PRM and the DSM, is maintained on
a distinct web server at the University of Leeds. The server is linked to the White Rose
Grid node of the UK National Grid Service (NGS: Geddes 2006) in order to support com-
putationally intensive simulations such as that to be described in Section 3.3. The data,
simulation models and visualisations are combined as web services into a series of social
simulation workﬂows using the Taverna Workbench (Birkin et al. 2010), and these work-
ﬂows are in turn reconﬁgured and integrated in order to present portal-based applications
which are readily accessed by academic or third-party users (Townend et al. 2009). Speciﬁc
workﬂows, and the simulations or policy applications which invoke them, may be archived
through a repository management tool known as MyExperiment, where the philosophy is
to bundle together speciﬁed instances of data, models and visualisation services as pub-
lishable Research Objects which may be shared, annotated and reused (De Roure et al.
2007). This sharing can take place over popular social networks such as Facebook and
Twitter.

Perhaps the most important beneﬁt of the NeISS for spatial analysis and social sim-
ulation is that it provides a distributed mechanism for both service delivery and system
development. While at present the constituent NeISS services are all developed and deliv-
ered by a core team, there is no reason why infrastructure components might not be
contributed by a variety of collaborators. The existing team is dispersed widely across the
United Kingdom, from Southampton and London in the south, to Leeds and Manchester in

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1225

the north of England, Glasgow and Stirling in Scotland. The scope for adding in new data
sources and simulation components within a portal-based plug-and-play workﬂow archi-
tecture is extensive, while if more intensive computation is a requirement then the data and
services can be moved easily to match its availability within the network.

3. Transport simulation within the NeISS
3.1. Background

Following the success of the London Congestion Charge after its introduction in 2005,
similar proposals were put forward for other cities, including Manchester. The proposal
includes two rings of charging points, the ﬁrst an inner ring with a radius of approximately
2 miles around the city centre and the second an outer ring bounded by the M60 motorway.
Various pricing options and alternative conﬁgurations of the congestion charge zones were
offered for public consultation.

In parallel to the consultation process a survey was commissioned by BBC North West
from the Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis at University College London in September
2008. Using a simple form connected to the MapTube visualisation software, respon-
dents were invited to answer a single question regarding their attitude to the Manchester
Congestion Charge (see Figure 2). A residential postcode was requested for each respon-
dent. Following promotion of the survey on local TV and radio, a total of 15,902 responses
were received. Views were categorised under ﬁve headings – (1) would be affected but
would not change behaviour, (2) would use a new route or time of travel, (3) would change
their method of travel, (4) would select a different destination because of the charge or
(5) not affected by the charge. The results are summarised in Figure 3. The spatial dis-
tribution of responses is well spread, with views being expressed from as far away as
Aberdeen and Bournemouth. A small number of completed forms amounting to just over
5% (N = 760) were unusable due to invalid or incomplete responses, the most common
problem being provision of a postcode which could not be matched to the current version
of the Postcode Address File. A notable aspect and risk of this type of crowd-sourcing is the
possibility of survey manipulation via multiple submissions. We identiﬁed two attempts at
mass voting, which were picked up by identifying non-unique IP addresses and mapping
according to response densities.

Respondents were not asked to provide personal details such as age or occupation;
however, from the postcodes it was possible to undertake geodemographic proﬁling using
the publicly available Output Area Classiﬁcation of small geographic areas (Vickers and
Rees 2007). The main skew revealed by this analysis was a strong bias towards residents in
areas of City Living, and away from Blue Collar Communities.1 Given that the former are
most likely young and prosperous and the latter much likely to be elderly or deprived, this
is not entirely surprising.

The distribution of responses was used to deﬁne an appropriate study region. As we
shall see below, the scope of the simulation task bears an exponential relationship to the
size of the area; hence limiting the size of this region is of considerable importance. The
boundary which was selected is shown in Figure 4 and includes 10,513 or 76.7% of valid
responses to the congestion charge survey. Each of the constituent local authorities shown
in Figure 4 was disaggregated into a series of electoral wards, providing a convenient geog-
raphy for subsequent analysis. There are 214 electoral wards in the extended Manchester
region as deﬁned in this way. The ﬁgure shows the response rate as the total number of
valid responses divided by the number of households in each ward.

1226

M. Birkin et al.

Figure 2. Online Survey for the Manchester Congestion Charge.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1227

Not
affected
9%

Drive and pay
14%

Work/shop
elsewhere
46%

Different TIR
14%

Public
transport
17%

Figure 3. Results of the Greater Manchester Congection Charge Survey.

Figure 4. Survey responses and study area deﬁnition.

1228

M. Birkin et al.

From the 2001 Census, this region comprises 2,591,550 individuals spread across
1,086,001 private households. Individuals living outside private households are not con-
sidered further in this case study application. The PRM is used to construct a synthetic
population in which the household characteristics include location, household size and
housing type, and the individual characteristics include age, gender, marital status, ethnic-
ity, health and occupation. It uses an iterative proportional ﬁtting procedure ﬁrst introduced
to the literature by Birkin and Clarke (1988) and which has been reviewed against alter-
native techniques with satisfactory results (Harland et al. 2010). A ‘complete’ set of more
than 2.5 million synthetic individuals is generated by the PRM.

The DSM provides a means for updating and projection of the base population. For the
current application, an update from the 2001 Census to the survey date (2008) is required.
Development work on the DSM allows the evolution of the population to be represented as
a series of dynamic transitions including ageing, household formation, migration, fertility,
changing health status and mortality (see Wu et al. 2010). However, the estimation of
parameters and ground-truthing of the model is an intensive process which has not yet been
completed for the areas in this case study. Hence a much simpler proportional updating
procedure was adopted. For each local authority area a revised population estimate was
obtained from the ONS and converted to an appropriate growth rate gi. In cases where gi is
greater than 1 then households are ‘cloned’ with probability (gi–1). In cases where gi is less
than 1 then households are eliminated with probability (1–gi). According to ONS, average
population growth of 4.4% was experienced across the region from 2001 to 2008.

3.2. Transport simulation
The essence of the simulation is to add attributes for each individual, representing a trip
destination and the mode of transport associated with this trip. The major part of this task
is achieved through a trip assignment model which estimates the number of trips between
each pair of zones (i and j) by mode (k):

T k
ij

= AiriOi

+ F2
j

exp

+ λk + μdij

(cid:2)
F1
j

(cid:3)α

(cid:2)
−βkck
ij

(cid:3)

Ai =

(cid:4)

(cid:2)
F1
j

j

(cid:3)α

+ F2
j

exp

1
(cid:2)
−βkck
ij

(cid:3)

+ λk + μdij

(1)

(2)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
F1
j

in which Oi is the population of zone i; ri the average number of trips per year for residents
ij the cost of travelling from i to j. α, βk, λk and μ are
at i; dij the distance from i to j; and ck
parameters to be estimated in the model.
(cid:2)
F2
j

The attractiveness component of the model represents the two major activities of
. Initially, we set retail attractiveness to be 0,
journey-to-work
and employment totals for each destination are derived from the 2001 Census. These are
then adjusted to maintain the balance between jobs and residents, implying that activity
rates are held constant between 2001 and 2008. We estimate attractiveness values for each
zone iteratively, so that the sum of the trips into each zone balances the total number of
employment trips at each destination.

and retail trips

(cid:3)

Retail attractiveness is generated from an assessment of the size and quality of each
retail destination in the region according to Management Horizons (MHE Retail Limited
2008), whose centre rankings are considered as an authoritative guide by retail analysts.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1229

Management Horizons identify more than 300 centres in the region, of which ﬂows
are modelled to centres ranging in size from Manchester (index = 655) to Wythenshawe
(index = 51). We use an estimate from the National Travel Survey, which indicates that for
every 10 work trips there are 11 associated with retail in order to scale the two attractiveness
measures. In other words, we estimate a scalar ω such that

(3)

(4)

(5)

and

F2
j

= ωMj

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

=

F2
j

F1
j

× 1.1

j

j

where Mj is the Management Horizons index for centre j.

The trip costs of origin–destination pairs can often be estimated in models of this type
using drive times or even straight-line distance. In this case, however, the individual links
are extremely important as the levy of a congestion charge is not determined by the origin
and destination points but whether the route between them passes through the congestion
charge zone. For each i–j pair we generate a set of links so that

cij =

[γ ]m

ij Sm + δmn

ij

θ n

(cid:7)

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

mn

where γ m
= 1 if link m is on the shortest route from i to j, and Sm is the length of link m
ij
= 1 if link m forms part of a congestion charging zone n with charge θ n (and 0 oth-
and δmn
ij
erwise, including all cases in which k (cid:2)= 1, so the charge applies only to private vehicles).
For each link origin–destination pair a route is constructed to minimise the interaction cost
in Equation (5), from which it can be seen that the congestion charge may leave the link
unaffected; the cost of the trip may increase but the route may stay the same, or the route
may change as the cost also increases.

Then in the microsimulation, we allocate a trip destination and a transport mode for
each of the households in the synthetic population using a Monte Carlo sampling proce-
dure. Each destination and mode is also associated with a route (combination of links γ m
ij )

and a cost

(cid:2)
ck
ij

(cid:3)
.

3.3. Calibration of the simulation parameters
3.3.1. Conﬁguration of the simulation

The next step in the process is to generate a set of synthetic behaviours within the model
described in Section 3.2, which can be aligned with the BBC North West responses. For the
baseline, and for any congestion charge scenario, each individual is attached a destination,
mode of transport, trip cost and travel route, using the model described in Section 3.2. If
there is no change in any of these attributes between the baseline and the scenario then
this individual is assigned to the category ‘Response (5) – Unaffected’ (see Section 3.1,
Figure 2 and discussion). The following rules are then applied hierarchically in order to
determine the response category for synthetic individuals:

1230

M. Birkin et al.

if there is a change of destination, ‘Response (4) – Change of destination’;

(cid:129) if there is a change of route, ‘Response (2) – Change of route’;
(cid:129) if there is a change of mode – ‘Response (3) – Change of mode’; or
(cid:129) if there is a change in the cost, ‘Response (1) – Drive and pay’.

This assignment process is illustrated in a ﬂow diagram (Figure 5).
The allocations in both the baseline and the scenario are dependent on the parameter
settings for β1, the distance deterrence associated with trips by car; β2, the distance deter-
rence associated with public transport; λ, the importance of money costs; μ, the importance
of non-money costs (especially time); and α, the attractiveness of Manchester city centre
as a retail and workplace destination. However, each of the parameters is associated with
multiple response variables and vice versa. For example, if a high value attaches to money
costs (λ >> 0) then the probability of changing destinations will be high, but so will be
the probability of switching modes and routes. The calibration problem is therefore to ﬁnd
a set of parameter values in which the simulation matches the behaviour of the respondents
in the survey data. Because the calibration is complex and non-linear, the problem was
addressed using a genetic algorithm (GA) which is described next.

3.3.2. Calibration with a GA

A GA is a heuristic search routine which takes its inspiration from the concepts of nat-
ural selection and survival in the biological world. The algorithm can be used to search
for an optimal model conﬁguration in a complex parameter space and is particularly
useful for complex problems which require the optimisation of several variables simul-
taneously (Heppenstall et al. 2007). GA is based on Charles Darwin’s theory of natural
selection, whereby small variations in organisms can accumulate if they induce an increase

Change of
destination?

Yes

No

No

Change of
route?

Yes

Response 5

Response 4

No

No

Response 1

Change of
cost?

Yes

Response 2

Figure 5. Simulated responses to the Congestion Charge.

Individual
(baseline)

Individual
(scenario)

Change of
mode?

Yes

Response 3

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1231

in the overall ﬁtness which improves the individuals’ ability to reproduce (Reeves and
Rowe 2003).

The algorithm operates by maintaining a population of individual model parameter
conﬁgurations (termed ‘chromosomes’) which, at each iteration, can be combined to form
new populations. A chromosome is made up of a number of ‘genes’ (the ﬁve model param-
eters that must be conﬁgured for values of β1, β2, μ, α and λ – see discussion above,
Section 3.3.1) and it is the combination of these genes that characterise an individual. Only
the most optimal (‘ﬁttest’) chromosomes remain in the population and form part of the
new generation so the overall ﬁtness of the population increases gradually over time. In
this manner, the algorithm should converge on an optimal or near-optimal solution. To
broaden the search space and prevent the algorithm becoming stuck in non-optimal local
minima, mutations can be applied to the new generation whereby the genes in a chromo-
some are perturbed by a random amount. Figure 6 illustrates the general form of a GA and
the remainder of the section will outline some of the individual functions in more detail.
The code used in the implementation of the GA is described further in the Appendix 1 in
which instructions are also provided for users wishing to download the software and data
for the purposes of their own research.

Figure 6. A genetic algorithm for parameter selection.

1232

3.3.3. Fitness

M. Birkin et al.

Using the rules expressed in Figure 5 above, model-based estimates were generated for
each of the behaviours which were captured in the congestion charge survey.2 Labelling
each of these stated behaviours as B(n), and the associated model estimate as B(cid:3)(cid:3)(n) then the
goodness-of-ﬁt of the model is evaluated as the sum of differences between the estimates
and the observations:

G =

|B(n) − B(n)|

5(cid:5)

n=1

(6)

One of the most important difﬁculties in the modelling is the very high levels of impact
reported from the congestion charge survey. For example, nearly half of the responders
stated that they would ‘work or shop elsewhere’, while in practice it seems unlikely as
many people living in the study area will work or shop in the centre of Manchester to begin
with. In order to resolve this difﬁculty, data on the distribution of trips from the National
Travel Survey were used, showing that nearly half (49%) of trips are for purposes other
than work and shopping (i.e. education or leisure). Since these ‘other’ trips are mostly local
they are much less likely to be affected by the congestion charge boundary. We assume the
responses to the question ‘not affected by the charge’ relates only to non-local trips, which
we adjust up to 54% (0.49 + (0.09 × 0.51)) and the other responses were down-weighted
proportionately. The calibration was optimised to the following proportions:

B(1) – Carry on 7%
B(2) – Change route 9%
B(3) – Change mode 7%
B(4) – Change destination 23%
B(5) – Unaffected 54%

3.3.4. Selection

Selecting parents based on their ﬁtness is the means by which the GA converges on an
optimal solution. In this implementation, roulette wheel selection is used such that the
probability of a chromosome being selected to form the next generation is proportional
to its share of the total ﬁtness of all chromosomes in the population. However, so that
the maximum ﬁtness of the population never decreases, the ﬁttest chromosome is always
selected (Reeves and Rowe 2003).

3.3.5. Breeding a new generation
There are numerous methods for combining parents to form children chromosomes and
in this implementation intermediate recombination is used. With this method, values for
each of the child genes are chosen from within the range of the parent’s genes. To retain
diversity, this range is extended by ±25%, ensuring that the gene space of new children
does not decrease with time.

3.3.6. Mutation
To make sure that a large search space is covered, it is essential that a GA retain diversity
(Holland 1975), and mutation is a means of both increasing diversity and exploring existing

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1233

areas of the search space. The principle of mutation is that a gene (or a number of genes)
has its values changed by a chosen amount. This amount can decrease over time so that the
algorithm can narrow down to optimal solutions.

Implementation on a computer grid resource

3.4.
Calculating the ﬁtness of a chromosome requires running an instance of the transport
model with the given parameter/gene conﬁguration. Over the course of a GA execu-
tion, large numbers of individual model runs must therefore be conducted (the size of
the population of chromosomes multiplied by the maximum number of GA iterations).
As these individual models do not interact with each other, the situation is ideally suited
for ‘lazy parallelisation’. This is a method of parallelisation whereby a single compute
node can execute a model without any intervening communication with other nodes, reduc-
ing communication overheads and requiring minimal changes to an existing non-parallel
model.

To run the model on a grid, access to the NGS compute resources were provided and
the GA algorithm has been implemented in Java using the MPJ Express message-passing
interface. A ‘master’ node is responsible for maintaining and evolving the population of
chromosomes, but the task of calculating the ﬁtness of a chromosome is delegated to slave
nodes. In this manner, a GA run of 100 iterations and a population of 100 chromosomes
can be executed in under 10 minutes using 101 separate compute nodes (100 slaves and one
master). Running the equivalent algorithm on a single machine could take over 13 hours
(approximately 4.8 seconds per model, 100 × 100 individual model runs).

3.5. GA results
Initially, parameter values are set at random between 0 and 10 for the ﬁve parameters dis-
cussed in Section 3.3.1(β1, β2, λ, μ and α). The performance of the algorithm is illustrated
in Figure 7, which plots the magnitude of the error between the transport model results and
the expected data (computed according to Equation (6)). Only the model with the best ﬁt
(lowest error) is shown for each iteration. Over the course of the calibration, a substantial
improvement in the model ﬁtness is evident. While progress is initially rapid, better solu-
tions continue to be found, even after relatively long periods of stability. For example, there

Genetic algorithm calibration

s
s
e
n
t
i
f
 
l

e
d
o
m

 
l

a
m

i
t
p
O

1.8

1.6

1.4
1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

10

20

30

40

70

80

90

100

60

50
Iteration

Figure 7. Fitness of the GA calibration.

1234

M. Birkin et al.

Table 1. Gene values of the optimal model following GA calibration.

Gene

Parameter

Description

0
1
2
3
4

β 1
β 2
λ
α
μ

Distance deterrence – trips by car
Distance deterrence – public transport
The importance of money costs
The attractiveness of Manchester city centre
The importance of non-money costs

Value

0.38
0.53
1.09
1.08
0.

is no change between iterations 40 and 75, but then a small change is quickly followed by
more jumps in the quality of the solution. After 110 iterations, the lowest error was 0.141,
and we found that extending this further to 500 iterations yielded no further improvements
in the model goodness-of-ﬁt.

The best ﬁt parameter values from the model optimisation are shown in Table 1. For
the remainder of this section, this conﬁguration of values will be used to explore sce-
narios in which travel patterns are subject to change under the inﬂuence of a congestion
charge.

3.6. Model outcomes

The key behavioural outcomes of the survey are reproduced in Table 2, along with the
equivalent model predictions, in which 33 wards are selected to approximate the congestion
charging area shown in Figure 4 and in which the congestion charge is set to £5. This
conﬁguration is referred to as scenario 1 and generates model behaviours which are closely
aligned to the survey results. The model is then run for a second time with the same area,
but with the charge raised to £10 (scenario 2). In this case, some signiﬁcant changes of
behaviour can be seen. In particular, the number of people willing to carry on regardless of
the charge is reduced signiﬁcantly, and instead people are much more likely to ﬁnd a new
destination or travel by a different mode.

Table 2 also shows results from scenarios in which the charging area has been approx-
imately doubled in size to include 69 wards in the Manchester area. This is shown for
scenario 3, with a charge of £5, and for scenario 4 with a charge of £10. Again, the most
noticeable effects are a big increase in switching both modes and destinations, while the
number of people affected by the charge is successively reduced. Through simulations of

Table 2. Travel behaviour in the survey and in the congestion charge scenarios.

Survey

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

Scenario 3

Scenario 4

(%)

33 wards in
central ring with
£5 charge (%)

33 wards in
central ring with
£10 charge (%)

Carry on
Change route
Change mode
Change

destination

Unaffected

7
9
7
23

54

9
6
7
23

55

2
4
12
27

55

69 wards in
extended ring
with £5 charge
(%)
10
5
12
24

69 wards in
extended ring
with £10 charge
(%)
2
2
22
30

49

44

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1235

this type, planners could therefore begin to evaluate changes in travel behaviour from the
implementation of different policy alternatives using evidence which has been generated
as volunteered geographical information.

The software and data which were used in these simulations are described further in the
Appendix 1 in which instructions are also provided for users wishing to download these
ﬁles for the purposes of their own research.

4. Discussion
There are a number of reasons to treat the speciﬁc results from the simulation exercise
with caution. Regarding the survey itself, the number of people who felt they were unlikely
to be affected by the charge is surprisingly low, especially in view of the fact that many
would be expected to travel by public transport and others will tend to live, work and shop
in free-standing satellite towns which would be largely unaffected. It seems likely that the
survey has attracted a skewed response from those who have particular concerns about this
policy. There is also uncertainty in both the model and the survey itself about the nature
and extent of the charge. At the time the survey was undertaken, the size of the charge, its
structure (for example, a high-rate central charge and a lower rate for the periphery) and
the physical extent of its coverage were still open for debate and consultation. Within the
model, although it was possible to explore a number of alternative scenarios, the calibration
is derived from a fairly straightforward representation of the congestion charge area and
one which is unlikely to match exactly either the perception of our survey respondents or
the ﬁnal implementation of the policy.

The model itself is also affected by a number of error sources. The size of the study
area has been restricted, partly to keep the matrices of links connecting each pair of origin
and destination nodes to a manageable size. Although the study area accounts for nearly
80% of respondents to the MapTube survey, it is clear that there are many people outside
this area who have strong views and are likely to be affected. The interactions with large
surrounding conurbations such as Liverpool and Leeds cannot be allowed for without a
signiﬁcant increase in the range of the model. In relation to the calibration itself, we chose
to utilise single region-wide parameters rather than trying to represent spatial or social
variations in behaviour and attitudes, for example that older and more afﬂuent people are
perhaps more likely to have a positive view of car ownership and use. From the inspec-
tion of the GA results it seems likely that the model optimisation is far from monotonic,
and that particularly with uncertain data inputs a marginal variation in the assumptions
or response behaviours could give rise to a rather different model parameterisation, from
which inconsistent policy conclusions might be drawn.

Many of these problems could be addressed by drawing more well-established simula-
tion technologies into the NeISS infrastructure. There are software packages in abundance
for the estimation of travel patterns in both the academic and planning domains (Paramics,
Transim, SATURN, OmniTRANS and many others). By designing an open, service-based
infrastructure there is no reason why such third-party software might not be incorporated
as plug-and-play services within the infrastructure, although major issues of licensing and
copyright would need to be overcome in order to achieve this. One possible solution here
would be to conﬁgure the e-infrastructure into speciﬁc decision support applications, so
that if for example the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive is an established
user of Paramics, then this can be conﬁgured as the simulation engine within a congestion
charge study for Manchester. An example of such a decision support system is described

1236

M. Birkin et al.

by Townend et al. (2009) and its architecture including the necessary security requirements
is discussed further in Birkin et al. (2010).

Notwithstanding these reservations, the capability to link crowd-sourced data, visual
simulation, scenario evaluation and analysis within the e-infrastructure which has been
proposed in this article provides a valuable framework for both policy-making and the aca-
demic study of urban and regional systems. Since the survey of attitudes to congestion
charging which has been reported above, further developments in the MapTube software
have facilitated the development of a discrete SurveyMapper toolkit. After a straightfor-
ward registration procedure, SurveyMapper allows users to generate questionnaires, post
these online and map the results in real time. The package is accessible to computationally
unsophisticated users (for more discussion, results and analysis, see Hudson-Smith et al.
2010). While the distribution of online surveys remains a signiﬁcant obstacle, and the
response biases will be heavily skewed by the digital divide (Longley and Singleton 2009),
crowd-sourced data generation is clearly now cheap, workable and egalitarian. It would be
surprising to see anything less than a dramatic upswing in data gathering through these
methods in both academic and commercial applications such as market research (Savage
and Burrows 2007).

This article speciﬁcally raises the possibility of crowd-sourced data as a mechanism
for the calibration of policy models. Secondary data from sources like the 2001 Census
and National Travel Survey will continue to provide a robust basis in fact for model-based
planning. However, the inclusion of response data which are both up-to-date and speciﬁc
to the problem at hand is potentially an appealing possibility. An aspect of this which we
intend to pursue in future work is the addition of a further feedback loop from the sim-
ulation back to the crowd. Thus having given their opinions on the effect of a policy on
their behaviour, responders (e.g. the general public) might then explore the results of sim-
ulations, using a platform such as NeISS to gauge the effects of their behaviour when
extrapolated back to the real world. Following the MapTube survey in September 2008
the Manchester Congestion Charge was rejected overwhelmingly by a local public vote.
Apparently the population was inﬂuenced by the immediate ﬁnancial effects and inconve-
nience of the scheme. Whether public opinion might have been swayed by the provision of
simulations showing the effect of their decisions on future congestion patterns, economic
activity or other indicators is debatable. However, a strong case can be made that this would
add a valuable perspective to the planning process.

5. Conclusions and next steps
In this article a straightforward case study of a trafﬁc simulation for the Manchester
Congestion Charge has been used to illustrate a portal-based simulation architecture for
spatial planning. This illustration has been based on a public consultation commissioned
by an inﬂuential media group (the BBC). The next stage in the development is to develop
use cases in relation to real planning situations. The NeISS team is currently working with
a European project examining urban population dynamics, alongside an academic study of
the impact of family background and social circumstances on education and life chances,
with a group of users to articulate potential social policy applications in educational attain-
ment, life chances and inequality, and with health care planners exploring scenarios for
resource utilisation, need and service provision.

It has been argued that Web 3.0 tools, such as SurveyMapper, provide a powerful means
for the engagement of relatively unsophisticated users within the analytical simulation pro-
cess. At the same time, the possibility of including more powerful algorithms, that is, for

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1237

trafﬁc simulations, has been noted. The project will continue to cater to a multilayered
community, ranging from the naive (contributors of data and potentially consumers of sim-
ulation outputs), through competent users (who might wish to employ reasonably complex
models, analytics and visualisation tools), on to development partners, who even have the
capability to contribute additional tools to the technologies already available.

Acknowledgements
The research reported in this article has been funded through the JISC Information
Environments Programme, e-Infrastructure for Social Simulation.

Notes

1. The penetration rates for all seven OAC groups were as follows: Blue Collar Communities, 69;
City Living, 171; Countryside, 107; Prospering Suburbs, 102; Constrained by Circumstances,
104; Typical Traits, 107; Multicultural, 108. Penetration of 200 indicates that members of this
group are twice as likely to complete the survey, while 50 shows that they are half as likely.
2. For the purpose of estimating the models in this article, it has been assumed that stated prefer-
ences are a reliable indicator of revealed behaviours. Although this simpliﬁes our analysis, the
integrity of the model is not seriously compromised by this assumption.

References
Anand, S., et al., 2010. Data mash-ups and the future of mapping, JISC TechWatch, Technology and

Standards Watch. Bristol, UK: Joint Information Systems Committee.

Bell, G., Hey, T., and Szalay, A., 2009. Beyond the data deluge. Science, 323 (5919), 1297–1298.
Benenson, I. and Torrens, P., 2004. Geosimulation: automata-based modeling of urban phenomena.

Chichester: Wiley.

Birkin, M. and Clarke, M., 1988. SYNTHESIS: a SYNTHetic spatial information system for urban

modelling and spatial planning. Environment and Planning A, 20, 1645–1671.

Birkin, M., et al., 2009. MoSeS: a grid-enabled spatial decision support system. Social Science

Computer Review, 27, 493–508.

Birkin, M., et al., 2010. The elements of a computational infrastructure for social simulation.

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 368 (1925), 3797–3812.

De Roure, D., Goble, C., and Stevens, R., 2007. Designing the myExperiment virtual research envi-
ronment for the social sharing of workﬂows. In: Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE international
conference on e-science and grid computing, December 2007, Bangalore, India. Washington,
DC: IEEE Computer Society, 603–610.

Epstein, J., 2007. Generative social science: studies in agent-based computational modelling.

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Eubank, S., et al., 2004. Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks. Nature,

429 (6988), 180–184.

Geddes, N., 2006. The National Grid Service of the UK. Paper presented at

the interna-
tional conference on e-Science and grid computing. Los Alamitos, CA. Available online at
http: doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/E-SCIENCE.2006.138

Geertman, S. and Stillwell, J., eds., 2003. Planning support systems. Berlin: Springer.
Goodchild, M.F., 2007. Citizens as sensors: the world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69 (4),

211–221.

Harland, K., et al., in press. Creating realistic synthetic populations at varying spatial scales: a
comparative critique of microsimulation techniques. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social
Simulation.

Heppenstall, A.J., Evans, A.J., and Birkin, M.H., 2007. Genetic algorithm optimisation of a multi-
agent system for simulating a retail market. Environment and Planning B, 34 (6), 1051–1070.
Holland, J.H., 1975. Adaptation in natural and artiﬁcial systems. Ann Arbor, MI: University of

Michigan Press.

1238

M. Birkin et al.

Hudson-Smith, A., et al., 2010. Harvesting the crowd for e-science, and simulation:

the
SurveyMapper toolkit. Paper presented at the e-Science all hands meeting, Cardiff, UK.
Available online at http://www.allhands.org.uk/2010/session/t4-4 (accessed 28 April 2011).
Longley, P. and Singleton, A., 2009. Linking social deprivation and digital exclusion in England.

Urban Studies, 46 (7), 1275–1298.

MHE Retail Limited, 2008. Management Horizons Europe, Twickenham, UK: UK Shopping Index.
Miller, E.J., et al., 2004. Microsimulating urban systems. Computers, Environment and Urban

Systems, 28 (1), 9–44.

OECD, 2007. Participative web: user-created content: Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development. Available from: http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf [Accessed
12 April 2007].

Reeves, C.R. and Rowe, J.E, 2003. Genetic algorithms – principles and perspectives. Boston, MA:

Kluwer Academic Publishers.

885–899.

Savage, M. and Burrows, R., 2007. The coming crisis of empirical sociology. Sociology, 41,

Shibboleth and UK Access Management Federation, 2010. Available from: http://www.

ukfederation.org.uk/ (accessed 28 April 2011).

Townend, P., et al., 2009. Modelling and simulation for e-Social science. Philosophical Transactions

of the Royal Society A, 367, 2781–2792.

Vickers, D.W. and Rees, P.H., 2007. Creating the national statistics 2001 output area classiﬁcation.

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 170 (2), 379–403.

Waddell, P. and Borning, A., 2002. A case study in digital government: developing and applying
UrbanSim, a system for simulating urban land use, transportation, and environmental impacts.
Social Science Computer Review, 22 (1), 37–51.

Warner, G.C., et al., 2010. A social science data-fusion tool and the data management through
e-Social science (DAMES) infrastructure. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,
368 (1925), 3859–3873.

Wu, B., Birkin, M., and Rees, P., 2008. A spatial microsimulation model with student agents.

Computers Environment and Urban Systems, 32, 440–453.

Wu, B., Birkin, M., and Rees, P., 2011. A dynamic MSM with agent elements for spatial demographic

forecasting. Social Science Computer Review, 29 (1), 145–160.

Appendix 1. Introduction to the supplementary materials

The model code and data which were used in the preparation of this article are available as
a download for readers of the International Journal of Geographical Information Science.
These supplementary materials are bundled into a single zip ﬁle, and the content and imple-
mentation of the model is described in the associated ‘readme.txt’ document. Users of the
software will be able to recreate the calibration of the simulation parameters using a GA
which is described in Section 3.3 and to reproduce the experimental results which are
discussed in Section 3.6 and presented in Table 2 of the article.

The GA is implemented in Java and can be conﬁgured for a range of populations of
chromosomes and model iteration cycles. The results reported in this article were gener-
ated with 100 chromosomes over 500 iterations; the congestion charge was set at £5, and
the ‘normal’ congestion zone was selected (as described in Section 3.6). However, the algo-
rithm uses randomly generated seeds so we would expect to see some degree of variation
whenever these experiments are reproduced. Lower quality solutions would be expected
if the population size or iteration limit is reduced, although this would also speed up the
execution time for the algorithm.

The transport simulation model is written in FORTRAN and uses parameter values
derived by the GA. The model can be executed using either the ‘normal’ or ‘extended’
congestion charge area, and the level of the charge can also be varied through the user
interface. Thus, the model results presented in Table 2 of this article can be re-created with
the normal or extended congestion zone and a charge of either £5 or £10. Other outcomes

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1239

not reported in this article can be generated by varying the cost of the congestion charge
(i.e. values other than £5 or £10). More ambitious users could consider the creation of other
congestion zones by manual editing of the control ﬁle (TCONTROL.TXT) rather than
automatic generation through the simulation procedure. Alternative parameter settings can
also be effected through manual editing of the control ﬁle (e.g. increasing β to represent
the effect of rising fuel prices). The simulation code also supports other interventions such
as road pricing and priority lanes for public transport.

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd

and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright

holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

