This article was downloaded by: [University of California, Riverside Libraries]
On: 13 October 2014, At: 13:24
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Developments in statistical
approaches to spatial uncertainty
and its propagation
Gerard B. M. Heuvelink & Peter A. Burrough
Published online: 10 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Gerard B. M. Heuvelink & Peter A. Burrough (2002) Developments in
statistical approaches to spatial uncertainty and its propagation, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 16:2, 111-113, DOI: 10.1080/13658810110099071

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810110099071

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information
(the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor
& Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties
whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose
of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the
opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor
& Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis
shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs,
expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising
directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes.
Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan,
sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is

expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of California, Riverside Libraries] at 13:24 13 October 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 2, 111± 113

Guest Editorial

Developments in statistical approaches to spatial uncertainty and its
propagation

GERARD B. M. HEUVELINK
Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, Universiteit van
Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht 166, 1018 WV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

and PETER A. BURROUGH
Utrecht Centre for Environment and Landscape Dynamics (UCEL), Faculty
of Geographical Sciences, University of Utrecht, PO Box 80.115,
3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands

As most readers of this journal are aware, the issue of spatial data quality is a
recurring theme on the GI Science agenda. Over the past 15 years, an impressive
number of scienti(cid:142) c articles have addressed the issue of uncertainty and error in
relation to GIS, and many of them have been published in this journal. From its
inception in 1989, IJGIS established a reputation for reporting the latest develop-
ments in this (cid:142) eld; three of the 10 most cited papers in the (cid:142) rst 10 years of IJGIS
address issues of data quality and error (Fisher 2001). This special issue, which
focuses on statistical approaches to handling spatial accuracy assessment and spatial
uncertainty propagation, continues the tradition.

Spatial data quality research begins with the acknowledgment that the data
stored in a spatial database are rarely, if ever, truly free of error. What we store in
the database is merely an approximation of the real world. There will often be
meaningful discrepancies between reality and its representation because we force
reality into rigid data storage formats, or merely estimate the properties of spatial
objects. Other discrepancies arise through interpolation and contamination by meas-
urement error, or because the data are outdated, and so on. It is crucially important
to know how accurate the data contained in spatial databases really are, because
without that knowledge we cannot assess the true value of the derived information,
nor the correctness of the decisions it supports.

Spatial data are being used increasingly as inputs to numerical models of environ-
mental processes, ranging from global climate change to detailed studies of soil
erosion or crop yield. In addition to the data, the formulation of these models is
also subject to uncertainty. Clearly, it is of great importance to understand how
uncertainties in the predictions made by these environmental models re(cid:143) ect uncer-
tainties in the data or de(cid:142) ciencies in model structure. Consequently, the challenge is
to arrive at a proper assessment of the quality of spatial data and environmental
models, as well as to determine the accuracy of the information derived from them.
This is a continuing eŒort, re(cid:143) ected in many articles published during the last 15 years.

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Informatio n Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110099071

Downloaded by [University of California, Riverside Libraries] at 13:24 13 October 2014 112

G. B. M. Heuvelink and P. A. Burrough

An important stimulus to developments in this research area, in particular for
applications in the earth and environmental sciences, has been the series of biannual
symposia on ‘Spatial Accuracy Assessment in Natural Resources and Environmental
Sciences’. The series started in 1994 with a moderately sized meeting in Williamsburg,
Virginia, followed by meetings in Fort Collins (Mowrer and Congalton 2000), Quebec
City (Lowell and Jaton 1999) and Amsterdam (Heuvelink and Lemmens 2000). The
next symposium in the series will be held in July 2002, Melbourne (for details see
http://www.geom.unimelb.edu.au /hunter/conferences/accuracy2002.htm l ).

Although papers from every meeting have been published as Proceedings, the
organisers of the Amsterdam meeting wished to create the opportunity for wider
scienti(cid:142) c publication of the very best presentations. Therefore all presenters at the
Amsterdam symposium were invited to submit extended versions of their conference
paper to be included in this special issue. Four manuscripts survived the rigourous
refereeing process. What unites them is their statistical approach to characterizing
the accuracy of spatial attributes. But there are also diŒerences, such as whether the
emphasis is on application or theory, on uncertainty assessment or uncertainty
propagation, on ‘classical’ statistics or geostatistics.

The (cid:142) rst article by Bachmann and Allgo¨ wer presents a very interesting application
of uncertainty propagation in wildland (cid:142) re modelling. Because of
its realistic
approach and its relevance to real-life problems, it is an exemplary illustration of
the maturing of uncertainty propagation analyses in GIS. The authors also make a
clear statement that we should not automatically discard analytically based methods
for tracking the propagation of spatial uncertainty in favour of simulation-based
methods, even for fairly complicated computational models.

The second article by Canters, De Genst and Dufourmont also addresses the
propagation of errors in spatial modelling, in this case a model of landscape classi-
(cid:142) cation. The strength of this work lies in the fact that the authors also address the
propagation of categorical errors, which is nothing like so easy as computing the
propagation of quantitative errors. Moreover, they include the spatial dependence
in the categorical errors in their analysis. We could not agree more when the authors
assert that ‘In spite of a growing demand from the user community for a better
documentation of spatial data quality, and the existence of established standards for
doing so, in most cases meta-information on the accuracy of spatial data is lacking
or is limited to simple, overall measures that do not describe spatial variation in error.’
The third article, by Das, Lele, Glass, Shields and Patz, demonstrates how a
fairly advanced statistical technique known as the Generalized Linear Mixed Model
can be used to map the geographic distribution of disease vectors and their associated
uncertainty. As such,
it is an excellent example of how comprehensive meta-
information on the accuracy of spatial data may be obtained. In the case of the
Lyme disease ticks mapping reported in this article, this is complicated by the fact
that explanatory environmental factors are incorporated in the model, and because
the model has to account for spatial autocorrelation and overdispersion. An attractive
property of the presented model is that it can be used for spatial extrapolation of
the abundance of disease vectors.

The fourth and last article by Goovaerts illustrates the rapidity of developments
in stochastic imaging. It is only recently that the (cid:142) eld of geostatistics has created
methodologies to draw realizations eŒectively and adequately from random (cid:142) elds,
and already we can see many improvements and extensions of the basic algorithms.
These developments are extremely valuable for spatial uncertainty analyses because

Downloaded by [University of California, Riverside Libraries] at 13:24 13 October 2014 Guest editorial

113

Monte Carlo methods are built on the presumption that spatial realizations can
readily be obtained. The method proposed in this article is an improvement over
existing methods in that it better reproduces statistics such as the histogram and the
semivariogram.

The collection of papers in this special issue demonstrates that although consider-
able progress has been made in the theory and practice of data quality and error
propagation in numerical modelling in GIS, there is still a long way to go before we
have a coherent and comprehensive toolkit for general application. The ideal future
sketched by Burrough (1992), in which both data quality assessment and error
propagation are essential ingredients of an intelligent GIS, has not yet been reached.
Clearly, many important technical problems have been, and are being solved.
However, it is also essential to convince our colleagues in the user community that
these new methods and procedures are being developed to help them make better
decisions and not just to make life di(cid:141) cult. The sociology of how people deal with
the problems of spatial data quality also needs to be addressed, and just as with the
development of
improved methods, this forms an important challenge for the
coming years.

References
Burrough, P. A., 1992, Development of

intelligent geographical

information systems.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 6, 1–11.

Fisher, P., 2001, Editorial. Citations to the International Journal of Geographical Information
Systems and Science: the (cid:142) rst 10 years. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 15, 1–6.

Heuvelink, G. B. M., and Lemmens, M. J. P. M., 2000, Proceedings of the 4th International
Symposium on Spatial Accuracy Assessment in Natural Resources and Environmental
Sciences (Delft: Delft University Press).

Lowell, K., and Jaton, A., 1999, Spatial Accuracy Assessment. L and Information Uncertainty

in Natural Resources (Chelsea, Michigan: Ann Arbor Press).

Mowrer, H. T., and Congalton, R. G., 2000, Quantifying Spatial Uncertainty in Natural
Resources: T heory and Applications for GIS and Remote Sensing (Chelsea, Michigan:
Ann Arbor Press).

Downloaded by [University of California, Riverside Libraries] at 13:24 13 October 2014 