International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 19, No. 4, April 2005, 429–457

Research Article

Embedding landscape processes into triangulated terrain models

ENRIQUE R. VIVONI*{, VANESSA TELES{, VALERIY Y. IVANOV{,
RAFAEL L. BRAS{ and DARA ENTEKHABI{
{Department of Earth and Environmental Science, New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology, Socorro, NM 87801, USA
{Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

(Received 19 February 2003; in final form 7 July 2004 )

Triangulated irregular networks (TIN) can form the basis for multiple-resolution
representations in distributed hydrogeomorphic simulations over complex basins.
Current methods for deriving TIN meshes depend primarily on surface slope
without considering other terrain attributes significant to the watershed response
such as the specific basin area. As an alternative, we present a methodology for
combining a hydrogeomorphic or landscape index with an unstructured
triangulated mesh. Landscape indices provide a concise method for describing
steady-state terrain processes by isolating the dominant physical factors. The
mesh-generation algorithm results in an adaptive discretization that resembles
the spatial pattern of the landscape index with a high resolution retained in areas
expected to impact the basin response. We compare the proposed algorithm with
a slope-preserving method as a means for initializing the terrain representation in
two TIN-based hydrogeomorphic models. Through three case studies in
saturation-excess runoff, transport-limited soil erosion and shallow landslide
simulation, we assess the distributed model sensitivity to the triangulated terrain
algorithm. Model comparisons reveal that the process-based triangulations focus
the distributed simulation in regions anticipated via a steady-state index to affect
the transient watershed response.

Keywords: Triangulated irregular networks; landscape processes; topography;
hydrology; geomorphology; distributed models; mesh generation; index

1.

Introduction

Geographical information systems (GIS) facilitate the analysis of the spatial and
temporal variability of hydrologic and geomorphic processes operating in a landscape.
In most hydrogeomorphic or ‘landscape’ simulations, digital terrain models (DTMs)
form the basis of the computational domain due to the topographic control on system
responses such as runoff or erosion rates. The most common DTM in GIS-based
landscape models is the rectangular grid as it provides a simple means for representing
data and performing computations. Nevertheless, grid-based DTMs are tied to a
single, uniform resolution irrespective of the spatial variability of the hydrogeomorphic
processes in the domain. As an alternative, triangulated irregular networks (TINs) can
be used to sample grid-based DTMs and derive multiple-resolution domain models for

*Corresponding author. Email: vivoni@nmt.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2005 Taylor & Francis Group Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810512331325111

430

E. R. Vivoni et al.

use in distributed landscape simulations (Tucker et al. 2001a,b, Ivanov et al. 2004a,b).
Among other advantages, TINs permit an adaptive model representation with a
variable node density determined by a specific node selection criterion (Lee 1991,
Nelson et al. 1999).

triangulated meshes

The recent development of TIN-based landscape models has prompted an interest
in the generation of
specifically for hydrogeomorphic
applications. For example, Tucker et al. (2001a,b) and Ivanov et al. (2004a,b)
describe two TIN-based models for geomorphic and hydrologic prediction in
watersheds. The Channel-Hillslope Integrated Landscape Development (CHILD)
model simulates the landscape evolution resulting from erosion and deposition,
while the TIN-based Real-time Integrated Basin Simulator (tRIBS) predicts the
surface and subsurface hydrologic response to rainfall. Both models capture the
transient behaviour in sediment transport or runoff production by solving physically
based equations that describe hydrogeomorphic processes over an unstructured
triangulated mesh. In model applications to date, the generation of the TIN mesh
has focused on selecting points based on the topographic or slope significance of
each DTM node (Tucker et al. 2001b, Ivanov et al. 2004a,b). This ‘traditional’
approach retains high node density in regions of sharp terrain variability while
reducing the mesh resolution in flat or gently sloping topography (Goodrich et al.
1991, Lee 1991).

While the traditional method is appropriate in many GIS applications, distributed
models such as CHILD and tRIBS simulate landscape processes that depend on
various terrain attributes in addition to slope,
in particular the upslope or
contributing area. As a result, resolving a domain according to a slope-preserving
criterion may neglect smooth regions where hydrogeomorphic activity can be high
(floodplain or riparian zones). As an alternative, terrain analysis can be used to
classify catchment regions according to the landscape process of interest (Beven and
Kirkby 1979, Moore and Wilson 1992, Montgomery and Dietrich 1994). An index
of hydrogeomorphic significance can then be used to select the DTM nodes retained
in the multiple-resolution TIN, thus allowing for the hydrologic or geomorphic
dynamics to be explicitly embedded in the model domain.

In this paper, we present a new mesh-generation algorithm that ties the TIN
model resolution directly to an a priori estimate of the hydrogeomorphic response
derived from a steady-state landscape index. The procedure consists of two general
steps: (1) index-based node selection from a DTM, and (2) node triangulation based
on proximal distance. The final result is a multiple-resolution TIN that resolves
critical domain areas expected to impact the model response, as determined by the
landscape index (greater density in high runoff or erosion areas). The method
provides a consistent means for initializing distributed landscape models by
adaptively gridding a domain using process physics. We illustrate the process-based
triangulation using the CHILD and tRIBS models in three applications with
different indices: (1) saturation-excess runoff, (2) transport-limited soil erosion, and
(3) rainfall-triggered shallow landsliding. Three watersheds were selected to assess
the model sensitivity to the traditional or process-based triangulations based on the
occurrence of the landscape process in each basin: saturation-excess runoff (Baron
Fork, OK), soil erosion (Owl Creek, TX), and shallow landslides (Tolt River, WA).
We utilize separate routines in tRIBS to simulate saturation-excess runoff and
for the transport-limited erosion
landslide potential and the CHILD model
simulation (see table 1).

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

431

Table 1. Experimental design for three case studies.

Landscape process

Landscape index

Watershed

Distributed model

Saturation-excess runoff Beven and Kirkby

Baron Fork, OK tRIBS runoff routines

Transport-limited soil
erosion
Rainfall-triggered shal-
low landsliding

(1979)
Moore and Wilson
(1992)
Montgomery and
Dietrich (1994)

Owl Creek, TX

Tolt River, WA

CHILD erosion
routines
tRIBS landslide
routine

This study extends the work of Vivoni et al. (2004a) by presenting the details of
the GIS algorithm and performing a model comparison of the traditional and
process-based triangulations for three landscape indices. We organized the paper as
follows. Section 2 reviews the traditional approach to sampling DTMs for TIN mesh
generation. Section 3 details the three steady-state indices used to constrain the
triangulation of the distributed models. In section 4, the method for process-
constrained triangulation is described with algorithmic details given in Appendices
A and B. Section 5 presents the CHILD and tRIBS models used to evaluate the
sensitivity to the traditional and process-based triangulations in section 6. Finally,
section 7 discusses key issues concerning the new process-based triangulation
method, and section 8 presents the study conclusions.

2. Slope-preserving triangulation

Traditional methods for deriving triangulated irregular networks from grid-based
DTMs retain critical nodes representative of the surface topography (Peuker et al.
1978, Kumler 1994). Essential topographic information is captured by sampling a
DTM according to a slope-preserving criterion which can vary among different
algorithms. For example, Lee (1991) compared two slope-preserving methods, the
very important point (VIP) and the LATTICETIN routines in ArcInfo GIS. The
two algorithms result in markedly different TINs since VIP is a local procedure
based on elevation comparisons of immediate neighbours, while LATTICETIN is a
global algorithm that takes the entire surface into account (Vivoni et al. 2004a). Lee
(1991) concluded that a TIN generated with LATTICETIN exhibited greater
accuracy than VIP in relation to the DTM. For this reason, we selected the
LATTICETIN method to construct the slope-preserving TINs in this study. While
point selection algorithms vary, traditional methods retain nodes whose elevation is
considered significant relative to its local or distant neighbours. The result is a TIN
where regions of high terrain variability (mountains, hillslopes) are captured with
greater density as compared with areas of lower variability (plateaus, floodplains).
For terrain visualization, slope-preserving algorithms are appealing as the number
of nodes can be reduced in flat regions without significant visual impact (Cignoni et
al. 1997). Nevertheless, the sampling of DTMs using traditional methods results in a
TIN whose element sizes only reflect the slope distribution. As a result, low model
resolution may be retained in smooth terrain locations that may be critical in the
hydrogeomorphic dynamics occurring in a watershed. For example,
low-lying
floodplain areas near streams are typically depicted with a few sparse nodes by
traditional TIN methods while the runoff production and surface-subsurface
dynamics in these regions require a detailed model representation (Vivoni et al.
2004b). In the following, we describe a set of landscape indices capable of discerning

432

E. R. Vivoni et al.

hydrogeomorphic properties from a DTM. The spatial patterns captured via a
landscape index are subsequently used as a template for selecting DTM nodes
retained in a triangulated irregular network model of the catchment.

3. Steady-state landscape indices

Recognizing the importance of terrain attributes on the prediction of hydrologic and
geomorphic processes has led to the development of various landscape indices
(Beven and Kirkby 1979, Moore and Wilson 1992, Montgomery and Dietrich 1994).
A landscape index is intended to compactly represent the spatial variation of a
process by isolating the dominant landscape factors. Typically, a combination of
factors is used to define a single metric capable of classifying the domain into a few,
distinct classes which exhibit process similarity. Thus, a landscape index represents
an a priori estimate of the hydrogeomorphic response. A steady-state assumption is
typically made to obtain a meaningful yet succinct index directly from terrain or
landscape properties. Steady-state indices also permit a probability distribution
approach to the transient modelling of hydrogeomorphic phenomena (Beven and
Kirkby 1979). Here, we utilize landscape indices to generate a triangulated mesh
that reflects the spatial variability of a landscape process. Three distinct steady-state
indices are described in the following (see table 1).

3.1 Saturation-excess runoff

Terrain analysis forms the basis for developing steady-state landscape indices. Beven
and Kirkby (1979) and O’Loughlin (1986) introduced the topographic or wetness
index as a means for describing runoff produced in saturated areas. The index
combines the effect of specific area (a) and slope angle (b) in a log-transformed
metric (l):

l~ ln a=tanb
ð

Þ,

capable of discerning between convergent and divergent flow regions. The index is
intended to represent the terrain control on soil wetness at steady-state. The
assumptions used in equation (1) are discussed in Beven and Kirkby (1979) and
Beven et al. (1995). Expansion of the index to include transient conditions through a
variable area (a) has been proposed by Barling et al. (1994). For grid-based DTMs,
the specific area is computed using a recursive equation (Rodrı´guez-Iturbe and
Rinaldo 1997, Tucker et al. 2001c):

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

a~

Ai
b

~ 1
b

 

X

j

!

wi,AjzAc

,

where Ai is the upslope or contributing area at the ith cell, b is the DTM cell length,
wi,j specifies the element connectivity (wi,j51, if i, j connected, wi,j50 otherwise) and
Ac is the DTM cell area. The slope angle is computed by fitting a nine-term
polynomial to a 363 neighbourhood for each cell, as described in Moore et al.
(1991).

In figure 1a, the spatially distributed wetness index (1) is presented for the Baron
Fork basin in northeastern Oklahoma where saturation-excess runoff is a dominant
flow mechanism due to a shallow aquifer (Ivanov et al. 2004b). The wetness index
has high values in convergent areas with a high specific area and low slope, while

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

433

Figure 1. Steady-state landscape indices. (a) Spatial distribution of l for the Baron Fork
watershed. (b) Frequency distribution of l. (c) Spatial distribution of ln(Tc) for the Owl Creek
basin. (d) Frequency distribution of ln(Tc). (e) Spatial distribution of Qc for the Tolt River
basin. (f) Frequency distribution of Qc.

low l values are depicted in high slope, upland regions. Given a range of possible l
values over a landscape, the distribution function of the wetness index is used to
classify regions with a similar hydrological response. Landscape elements within
each l class will respond similarly to incident rainfall, producing runoff according to
the steady-state element wetness (figure 1b, Beven and Kirkby 1979). In principle, a
distributed hydrologic model of saturation-excess runoff should preferentially

434

E. R. Vivoni et al.

resolve landscape regions predicted via the wetness index to have high runoff
potential (large l).

3.2 Transport-limited sediment erosion

Specific area and slope are also used to characterize landscape geomorphology,
where the slope–area relationship provides a fundamental measure of fluvial
processes (Tarboton et al. 1989, Willgoose et al. 1991, Rodrı´guez-Iturbe and
Rinaldo 1997). Overland erosion and sediment transport can be parameterized by a
landscape index using either a stream power or shear stress approach (Moore and
Burch 1986, Wilson and Gallant 1996). One measure for erosion utilizes slope angle
(b) and specific area (a) to predict transport-limited rill or sheet erosion as (Moore
and Wilson 1992):

Tc~

(cid:1)

a
22:13

(cid:3)

(cid:2)m

(cid:4)n

,

sinb
0:0896

ð3Þ

where Tc is the dimensionless transport index, and m50.56 or 0.9, n51.22 or 1.05
for rill and sheet erosion, respectively. This index is analogous to the length–slope
factor in the RUSLE model (Renard et al. 1991) adapted to three-dimensional
terrain (Moore and Wilson 1992). Though limited to net erosion, equation (3) can be
used to classify landscapes according to a steady-state erosive hazard. Similar
indices incorporating erosion and deposition have recently been implemented in a
GIS by Mitasova et al. (1996).

Figure 1c illustrates the sediment transport index for rill erosion in the Owl Creek
basin in central Texas (Teles and Bras 2002). Basin locations with a similar Tc are
considered to have equal erosion potential under equilibrium conditions. Due to the
large range of a, the log-transform of Tc is a useful operation on the distribution
function (figure 1d). Similarity in the erosion process is assumed in areas of high
ln(Tc) near large topographic gradients (large b) or within areas of low ln(Tc) values
in flat terrain (small b). Given that n.m in equation (3) for rill erosion, the sediment
transport potential depends strongly on terrain slope and Tc may mimic a slope-
preserving criterion. A distributed landscape model predicting rill erosion due to
overland flow should preferentially resolve areas with a high erosion potential.

3.3 Rainfall-triggered shallow landslides

Topographic control on geomorphic processes has also been used for landslide
hazard prediction. Montgomery and Dietrich (1994) proposed a shallow landslide
model using the wetness index and an infinite slope stability model. For
cohensionless soil, the critical steady-state rainfall (Qc) required to trigger shallow
landslides is expressed as:

Qc~

Tsinb
a

(cid:5)

(cid:3)

rs
rw

1{ tanb
tanw

(cid:4)

(cid:6)
,

ð4Þ

where T is the saturated transmissivity, rs is the soil bulk density, rw is the density of
water, and w is the soil friction angle. The critical rainfall predicted to cause
instability can be used as a measure of landslide hazard. Similarity in the response to
Qc classifies elements with equal landslide initiation potential given a steady-state
rainfall rate. Montgomery et al. (1998) also provide criteria for unconditional
stability and instability in cohesive and cohensionless soil. For variable rainfall

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

435

rates, Borga et al. (2002) has recently extended equation (4) using the quasi-steady
state wetness index of Barling et al. (1994).

In figure 1e, the shallow landslide index is shown for the Tolt River basin in
central Washington. Landscape elements with a low Qc are prone to landslide
triggering at low rainfall rates. Unconditionally stable and unstable elements are
also predicted by equation (4) using the regional soil parameters (T, rs, w) in
Montgomery et al. (1998) for this basin. The distribution function for Qc (figure 1f)
depicts the required steady-state rainfall to initiate a landslide using the assumptions
of infinite slope stability and cohensionless soil. For transient landslide modelling,
resolving only the critical, landslide-prone areas in a distributed domain could
potentially lead to improved model accuracy and computational efficiency as
compared with current methods (Burton and Bathurst 1998).

4. Process-constrained triangulation

In the previous section, terrain analysis was used to derive landscape indices that
represent three steady-state hydrogeomorphic processes that may occur in a
catchment. Figure 1 illustrated the spatial distribution of each index in a particular
basin where the specific landscape process has been documented (Montgomery et al.
1998, Teles and Bras 2002, Ivanov et al. 2004b). In this section, we detail how each
landscape index can be used to guide or constrain the selection of DTM nodes
during TIN mesh generation. Rather than sampling terrain data with a slope-
preserving criterion, process-constrained triangulation allows for an adaptive
resolution that
interest.
Subsequently, the process-based triangulation will be compared with the traditional
method in three case studies using either the CHILD (transport-limited soil erosion)
or tRIBS (saturation-excess runoff or landslide potential) distributed models.

landscape process of

represents

explicitly

the

The proposed method for constraining a TIN mesh with a hydrogeomorphic
index embeds the steady-state system behaviour into the model representation. The
landscape index distribution is used to classify DTM points according to their
significance in describing the hydrogeomorphic process. For each distribution class
(figures 1b, d and f), the method samples the DTM at a different resolution,
retaining the highest detail in domain areas contributing significantly to the steady-
state watershed response predicted by the index. The significance measure for each
distribution class is subsequently translated to a proximal distance criterion that is
used to filter the high-resolution DTM. Although only three indices are presented
here, the methodology is amenable to similarity measures used in other hydrologic
and geomorphic applications (Moore et al. 1993, Ambroise et al. 1996, Woods et al.
1997, Gallant and Dowling 2003).

To objectively select elevation nodes from a DTM using a process-based criterion,
the algorithm proposed in this study establishes a functional relationship between
the mean index value (ic) of the distribution class and the mean point spacing (dc)
between adjacent elevation nodes. The mean index value is simply the midpoint of
each distribution class (independent variable), while the mean point spacing
(dependent variable) represents the radial distance between any two points in an
index class. The functional relation between ic and dc can be represented as:

dc~f icð Þ

rƒdcƒl

ð5Þ

where f is a site-specific, prescribed function for each index, l is the mean hillslope
length, and r is the DTM resolution. In the procedure, the original DTM is

436

E. R. Vivoni et al.

disaggregated into a set of grids containing nodes with similar index values.
Subsequently, the mean point spacing is used as a proximity criterion to filter each
disaggregated grid at a resolution specified by equation (5). Physical limits on the
filter size ensure that critical domain areas are sampled at a resolution proportional
to the cell size (r). Resolving the hillslope length for non-critical regions guarantees
that this natural landscape scale is preserved. The mean hillslope length is computed
from the total stream length (LT) and basin area (A):

l~ 1
2Dd

~

A
2LT

,

ð6Þ

where Dd is the drainage density, a key basin descriptor closely related to the long-
term hydrogeomorphic response (Tucker et al. 2001c). In the following, we discuss
the selection of the functional relation (f) for each landscape index and the use of a
variable-sized filter to retain nodes at a specified resolution in each index class.
Appendices A and B present pseudo-code for the two important steps in the
algorithm: (1) the index-based point selection from a DTM and (2) proximity
filtering prior to node triangulation.

Figure 2 shows an example of the mesh-generation algorithm to illustrate the
relation between the landscape index and the proximity filter. Here, the spatial
pattern of the wetness index, l5ln (a/tan b), is shown for a region near the outlet of
the Baron Fork (notice range 6.8(l(36.7 as in figure 1b). Darker shades represent
high l values occurring in areas of flow convergence such as floodplains and channel
confluences. Lighter shades correspond to hillslope areas with low wetness values.
Superimposed on the spatial pattern of l is the triangulated irregular network
derived from the index-based mesh algorithm. Notice that the TIN resolution varies
according to the spatial pattern of the wetness index. In regions of high l value
(labelled 1), the proximity filter has a low mean point spacing (d1,90 m), thus
retaining more nodes as compared with regions with a lower l value (labelled 2 and

Figure 2. Example of a process-constrained triangulation. The spatial distribution of l is
shown in grey-scale for the highlighted region in the Baron Fork. DTM point selection is
based on a proximity filter (dc) ranging in size from 90 to 200 m (high to low l).

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

437

3). In this example, as the index value decreases, the filter increases in size
(d2,120 m, d3,200 m), retaining fewer nodes in these areas.

An appropriate selection of the relation between the mean point spacing and the
mean index value (5) is critical for generating a TIN that resembles the spatial
pattern of the landscape index. Since the functional relation for each landscape
index is not readily available from theoretical considerations, we have prescribed
each function using: (1) the probability distribution of the index in the basin of
interest (figures 1b, d and f), (2) knowledge of the critical values for each landscape
index, and (3) determination of the DTM cell size (r) and mean hillslope length (l).
In testing the process-constrained triangulation for the three landscape indices in
three specific basins, we have developed a generalized method for constructing the
functional relation (5) that is applicable to other basins, and possibly to other
landscape indices. In the following, we first discuss the site-specific functional
relations and then present the generalized methodology.

Figure 3 displays the prescribed functions for the indices representing saturation-
excess runoff, transport-limited soil erosion and shallow landslide potential in the
Baron Fork, Owl Creek and Tolt River, respectively. The mean point spacing (dc) is
varied as a function of each index, ln (a/tan b), ln (Tc) and Qc, over a range of values
(90 m(dc(600 m). The upper limit of dc is chosen as the hillslope length (l)
computed for each basin (table 2), while the lower limit is selected in proportion to
the cell size (r,30 m). Notice that dc varies differently for each landscape index. For
the wetness index (figure 3a), a decreasing filter size is appropriate to retain a higher
resolution in regions that saturate frequently (high l). For simulating overland
erosion (figure 3b), a decreasing relation is suitable for erosive regions (ln(Tc).0),
while a filter size equal to the hillslope length is adequate where erosion is low. For
shallow landslide initiation (figure 3c), a higher resolution is desired for unstable
regions at low Qc, thus prompting an increasing filter size as rainfall rate is
increased. For unconditionally stable areas (high Qc), the hillslope length is
preserved. In summary, the filter size may increase or decrease with the values of the
landscape index depending on the critical regions retained within the TIN mesh.

It is possible to generalize the methodology for deriving equation (5) given the
shape of the probability distribution function of the landscape index of interest.
Note that the sharp change in the functional relation between the mean point
spacing (dc) and the mean index value (ic) in figures 3a–c coincide with the peak in
the distribution function in figures 1b, d and f. For example, the wetness index
distribution function has a peak near l510 (figure 1b), which signals a sharp
decrease in dc in figure 3a. In addition to coinciding with the peak distribution value,

Figure 3. Functional relations between the mean index value (ic) and the mean point spacing
(dc) for the three hydrogeomorphic applications. (a) Hydrologic wetness index, ln(a/tan b). (b)
Sediment transport index, ln(Tc). (c) Shallow landslide index, Qc.

438

E. R. Vivoni et al.

Table 2. Study basin characteristics extracted from DTMsa.

Watershed

DTM xo[dd]

USGS

294.84

yo[dd]

35.92

A[km2]

808.15

ng[#]

897 944

USGS

297.52

31.23

100.25

111 387

r[m]

30

30

l[m]

579.22

448.48

SRTM 2121.92

47.64

249.55

372 012

25.9

414.52

Baron Fork,
OK
Owl Creek,
TX
Tolt River,
WA

axo and yo are the longitude and latitude of the basin outlet (decimal degrees); A is the basin
area (km2); ng is the number of DTM cells; r is the grid resolution (m); and l is the mean
hillslope length (m). USGS: US Geological Survey, SRTM: Shuttle Radar Topography
Mission.

equation (5) also depends on which portions of the distribution must be retained at a
high resolution, as discussed previously. For the wetness index, the classes to the
right of the peak (l.10) should be represented at high resolution and are assigned
decreasing values of dc until a lower limit proportional to r is reached. A similar set
of rules applies to the erosion index relation (figure 3b), where dc is prescribed to
decrease sharply for classes with values greater than the distribution peak (ln
(Tc).1–2, figure 1d). In this case, the correspondence between the peak value and
the sharp decrease in dc is less strong as the erosion index has a broader distribution.
Similarly for the landslide index, the peak value at Qc50 (figure 1f) signals a
transition to higher dc values such that classes to the right of the peak are
progressively filtered until a limit equal to l is reached (figure 3c). These general
guidelines allow a functional relation (f) to be derived for any particular basin given
the peak value of the index distribution function, the limits on the filter size, and
knowledge of the critical index values.

After assigning dc to each index class, the set of grids disaggregated from the
DTM based on the index value are filtered using the radial distance equal to 0.5dc.
The retained nodes in each disaggregated grid are subsequently aggregated into a
single set of points from which the final tessellation is constructed. A constrained
Delaunay criterion is used to ensure an optimal triangulation and include linear
features such as streams and basin boundaries in the triangulated terrain model
(Tsai 1993). In summary, the proximal filter is sequentially varied during the
triangulation procedure to retain points as a function of the index value, leading to
high resolution in critical areas and lower resolution elsewhere. The physical link
between the triangulated terrain model, the landscape index distribution (l, Tc, Qc),
and the DTM properties (l, Dd, r) provides a consistent means of developing
process-based TINs for any particular basin application.

5. Distributed hydrogeomorphic models

The process-based mesh-generation algorithm previously described is intended as a
means for initializing the CHILD and tRIBS distributed models. Given a set of
process descriptions,
the models provide the integrated system (streamflow,
sediment yield) and internal basin response (saturation pattern, erosion and
landslide locations) to a set of applied forcing. By representing a catchment with
triangular elements, both models capture heterogeneities in surface descriptors,
forcings and initial or boundary conditions. Basin topography is particularly

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

439

important due its control on landscape processes and the model sensitivity to terrain
resolution (Vivoni et al. 2004b). Both models simulate a variety of landscape
processes by using a finite-volume or Voronoi polygon approach on the TIN mesh
to compute fluxes between elements, calculate mass balances and represent spatial
variability in a catchment (Tucker et al. 2001a). In the following, a brief overview of
the CHILD and tRIBS models is presented. For further details, the reader is
referred to Tucker et al. (2001a,b) and Ivanov et al. (2004a,b).

5.1 Channel-Hillslope Integrated Landscape Development (CHILD)

The CHILD model simulates watershed-scale changes in landscape morphology
resulting from channel and hillslope processes. The model incorporates climatic
forcing, runoff production, sediment transport, soil creep, floodplain deposition and
river meander evolution, among others (Tucker et al. 2001a,b, Lancaster and Bras
2002). Although CHILD is formulated to represent erosion dynamics over years to
epochs, recent work has focused on short-term sediment transport in real-world
catchments (Teles and Bras 2002). For these applications, the initial topography is
specified by developing a TIN mesh from a high-resolution DTM. During a
simulation, the effect of erosion and deposition on topography is captured by
dynamically remeshing the domain after vertical node displacement. The result is an
evolving landscape TIN where geomorphic processes determine basin shape.
Another recent development is a shallow landslide component in CHILD (Teles
et al. 2002), which has also been incorporated into tRIBS. For erosion or landslide
prediction, the multiple-resolution CHILD model could be initialized using an index
corresponding to the landscape process (high resolution in eroding regions).

5.2 TIN-based Real-time Integrated Basin Simulator (tRIBS)

The tRIBS model is a distributed hydrologic simulation tool suitable for real-time,
continuous operation (Ivanov et al. 2004a,b). The model utilizes meteorological
forcing to predict the surface and subsurface hydrologic response. Model processes
include interception, evapotranspiration, surface energy fluxes, a continuous
infiltration scheme, lateral subsurface flow and hydraulic channel routing, among
others. Currently, model verifications have been limited to streamflow observations
at outlet and interior gauges. Nevertheless, the spatial distribution of hydrologic
fluxes and states can be simulated for periods of up to several years. As in short-
term CHILD applications, topography is represented using a variable TIN derived
from DTM data (Vivoni et al. 2004a). Contrary to CHILD, the mesh is held
constant during simulations, underlining the importance of the initial terrain
representation. Model resolution is particularly important in convergent areas that
saturate frequently and produce runoff. A distributed model triangulation based on
resolving the wetness index could potentially depict the dynamic saturation zones
not captured in low-resolution traditional methods (Vivoni et al. 2004b).

6. Case studies

We explore the sensitivity of the transient predictions of the CHILD and tRIBS
distributed models to the initial triangulation by comparing the process-constrained
and traditional methods in three case studies: (1) basin runoff response and
saturation, (2) basin sediment yield, and (3) basin landslide initiation. Table 1
presents the experimental design used in the following case studies, while table 2 lists

440

E. R. Vivoni et al.

the watershed characteristics used to develop each index-based triangulation. For
each example, the reader is referred to figures 1 and 3 showing the spatial pattern,
frequency distribution and the functional relation for the landscape index of interest
in each basin: Baron Fork (saturation-excess runoff), Owl Creek (transport-limited
soil erosion) and Tolt River (rainfall-triggered shallow landslide potential). We limit
our scope to demonstrating the sensitivity of the tRIBS and CHILD distributed
models to the process-based or traditional triangulations in order to evaluate the
impact of terrain representation on hydrogeomorphic response.

6.1 Basin runoff response and saturation

Distributed hydrologic models simulate the internal watershed response to rainfall
including the interstorm processes that evolve pre-storm soil moisture conditions.
The delineation of surface-saturated zones within a catchment is critical, since these
areas can produce high runoff intensities during storm events via the saturation-
excess mechanism (Beven and Kirkby 1979). Accurate estimation of surface
saturation depends on the terrain resolution, particularly in near channel areas.
Vivoni et al. (2004b) have recently shown how the coarsening of model resolution in
floodplains and riparian zones using a traditional
triangulation method has
important effects on the basin hydrograph, surface saturation pattern and
catchment water balance. A critical transition in basin response was identified at
a resolution in which the floodplain region was no longer represented with sufficient
detail (Vivoni et al. 2004b). In principle, a TIN mesh that preferentially resolves
areas according to the wetness index or a similar hydrologic measure will
automatically capture floodplain regions critical to the watershed response (high l).
We test the impact of the triangulated terrain representation by comparing the
hydrologic response simulated by the tRIBS model for the traditional and process-
based (hydrologic) methods in the Baron Fork basin. Figure 4 highlights the
differences in TIN resolution between the two approaches, each with the same
number of nodes, such that 6.7% of the original DTM cells are retained (table 2).
This level of data reduction was selected to match the hydrologic simulations of
Ivanov et al. (2004a,b) in the Baron Fork. Differences in the TIN models are

Figure 4. Triangulated irregular network representation for the Baron Fork watershed. (a)
Traditional slope criteria method. (b) Hydrologic wetness index method.

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

441

dramatic in areas of low terrain variability such as floodplains and the upper basin
plateau, where the traditional method retains few model nodes. Along rugged
hillslopes where elevation variability is high, the traditional TIN captures rapid
changes in slope with many elements, while the hydrologic TIN samples the region
more evenly with fewer nodes. The basin-wide TIN element size distribution is also
quite different as quantified by the coefficient of variation of triangle element area:
CVA50.88 and 2.06 for the hydrologic and traditional TINs, respectively.

The tRIBS model is applied identically for each triangulated mesh over a 7-month
period during the 1997–1998 winter and spring seasons. Hourly rainfall data from
the NEXRAD network (4-km radar grid) and surface weather observations
obtained in Baron Fork were used to force the model continuously. Hydrologic
model calibration was achieved using US Geological Survey (USGS) discharge
observations at the Baron Fork over a sequence of events spanning the period from
1996 to 2000 for a traditional TIN mesh (Ivanov et al. 2004b). Calibrated
parameters are considered to be robust in light of the multi-year verification period
detailed by Ivanov et al. (2004b). An identical set of calibration parameters is used in
these model simulations to isolate the effects of terrain representation on the basin
response. While it is possible to calibrate each mesh to match the discharge data, we
consider an identical parameter set to be more appropriate in this sensitivity study
and accept that simulations may not reproduce discharge observations exactly. Over
the simulation period, a sequence of storms arrives at the basin, producing hourly
discharge ranging from 10 m3/s (baseflow) to 900 m3/s (peak storm flow). Figure 5
shows the observed basin-averaged rainfall, as well as the simulated discharge for
the two triangulations. In addition, the USGS data are presented as a point of
reference rather than a means for evaluating model performance.

The basin hydrograph results compare favourably with the simulations detailed in
Ivanov et al. (2004b). However, important differences are shown in figure 5 between
the process-based (hydrologic) and traditional TIN simulations. The hydrologic
TIN exhibits higher baseflow and reduced peak flow as compared with
the traditional TIN over a series of flood events. Relative to the observations,
the hydrologic TIN does not reproduce the peak discharge as accurately as the
the baseflow. The
traditional TIN but provides an improved simulation of
sensitivity of the basin hydrograph is indicative of the importance of spatial
discretization on the hydrologic response. An explanation for the model sensitivity
can be deduced by analysing the rainfall-runoff transformation and the spatial
pattern of surface saturation. Table 3 shows the percentage of total runoff volume
from each runoff mechanism in the tRIBS model (infiltration-excess runoff,
saturation-excess runoff, perched return flow, groundwater exfiltration) for the two
triangulations. Notice that the hydrologic TIN leads to a higher proportion of
groundwater exfiltration (baseflow) and a lower fraction of saturation-excess runoff
(peak flow) as shown in figure 5. This suggests that the triangulation influences the
partitioning of incident rainfall in the tRIBS model.

Figure 6 illustrates the surface-saturation dynamics during the simulation period
for the process-based (hydrologic) and traditional triangulations. Despite high
fractional rainfall coverage (figure 6a), the fraction of total basin area at saturation
in the upper 10 cm (As) responds predominantly to large rainfall events and diurnal
evaporative forcing (figure 6b). For low rainfall (As,0) or large storm events
(As,0.5), the two triangulations produce similar saturated basin fractions. For
intermediate events (0.05(As(0.25) where saturation excess runoff
is more

442

E. R. Vivoni et al.

Figure 5.
tRIBS hydrograph simulations in the Baron Fork (11/01/1997 to 05/31/1998). (a)
Mean areal precipitation (mm/h) from NEXRAD rainfall. (b) USGS discharge data (light
grey) and model simulations for the traditional (dark grey) and hydrologic (black) TIN (m3/s).
The inserted figure details a 23-day period (03/14/1998 to 04/06/1998).

important, the traditional triangulation produces a higher saturated basin fraction
relative to the hydrologic TIN. This is consistent with a higher percent of saturation-
excess runoff for the traditional method (table 3). We hypothesize that the higher As

Table 3. Percentage of the total runoff volume (%) due to each runoff mechanism in the
tRIBS model for the Baron Fork hydrologic and traditional TIN simulations.

Percentage of total runoff
volume (%)

Infiltration-excess runoff
Saturation-excess runoff
Perched return flow
Groundwater exfiltration

Traditional TIN

Hydrologic TIN

5.88
27.00
6.71
60.41

5.96
18.94
3.51
71.58

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

443

Figure 6. Temporal distribution of fractional rainfall and saturation in the Baron Fork. (a)
Fractional rainfall coverage in the basin over the simulation period. (b) Saturated area
fraction (As) for the traditional (dark grey) and hydrologic (black) triangulated terrains. The
inserted figure compares the saturated fraction for each method relative to a 1:1 line.

during intermediate events in the traditional TIN is linked to the low resolution
retained in areas where saturation dynamics are critical. Since hydrologic
TINs use the wetness index (l) to resolve floodplain regions, the higher node
density may lead to a lower saturated basin fraction and less saturation-excess
runoff.

Differences in saturated area extent are further investigated by comparing the
spatial distribution of the basin saturation frequency (percent of total time under
surface saturated conditions) simulated by the tRIBS model. Figure 7 illustrates the
saturation frequency for the traditional and hydrologic triangulations over the
entire basin and for a specific region near the basin outlet. Notice the differences in
the distribution of the Voronoi polygons in the floodplain area. In the traditional
TIN, model coarseness near stream confluences and floodplains leads to large
elements that saturate frequently (figure 7a). Rainfall on these saturated areas
produces saturation-excess runoff which leads to a rapid hydrograph response and

444

E. R. Vivoni et al.

Figure 7. Spatial distribution of surface saturation frequency over the simulation period. (a)
Traditional slope criteria method. (b) Hydrologic wetness index method. The highlighted area
shows the differences in surface saturation along stream channels.

increased peak flow during storms. The higher resolution provided by the
hydrologic TIN in riparian and near channel zones reduces the areal extent of the
frequently saturated region and provides more detail as to the boundary between
wet and dry areas (figure 7b). A reduction in the saturated basin fraction,
in
particular for intermediate storms, results in a lower proportion of saturation-excess
runoff for hydrologic TINs. This suggests that the TIN resolution in the variable
source area impacts the saturation pattern with subsequent effects on the basin
runoff response.

A similar sensitivity was documented by Vivoni et al. (2004b) who analysed the
basin hydrologic response as a traditional TIN was progressively varied from a
coarse to a fine resolution. As model resolution increased in floodplain regions,
hydrograph peaks decreased (saturation-excess runoff) and baseflow (groundwater
exfiltration) increased. To capture the saturation dynamics, a high resolution was
required as low-lying riparian zones are the first to be poorly resolved in traditional
TINs. In this study, the process-based TIN depicts the variable source area
automatically according to the wetness index without the need to test various model
resolutions. In addition, a hydrologic TIN captures the saturated regions critical to
the runoff response with fewer basin nodes as compared with the higher resolution
required in traditional TINs (Vivoni et al. 2004b).

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

445

6.2 Basin sediment yield

The simulation of sediment erosion in a catchment depends to a large extent on the
resolution retained in highly erodable slopes (Walker and Willgoose 1999, Zhang et
al. 2002). A coarse model resolution along valley side slopes and steep hillslopes may
affect the long-term sediment yield in the basin. Resolving the catchment locations
that pose an erosion hazard permits an efficient distributed model representation
with a reduced set of nodes. In addition, constraining a TIN mesh with an erosion
index (Tc) provides a physically based criterion to incorporate the terrain attributes
that determine geomorphic dynamics (surface slope, specific area). For the sediment
erosion index of Moore and Wilson (1992), manipulation of the exponents (m, n)
allows the process-based triangulation to capture either rill or sheet transport while
preserving the surface slope as in traditional methods (Lee 1991).

We test the sensitivity of the short-term erosion predictions of the CHILD model
to the initial triangulation in the Owl Creek, a basin characterized by rapid rill
erosion (Teles and Bras 2002). The geomorphic response over a 14.5-year period
(temporal and spatial erosion pattern) is compared for the traditional and process-
based (erosion) TINs. During the simulation, vertical node displacement occurs as
sediment is eroded and deposited over the landscape, while the horizontal node
location specified in the initial mesh remains intact. Figure 8 shows the erosion and
traditional triangulations developed by retaining 6.8% of the original DTM cells.
Differences between the TINs are minor since the sediment transport index (3) is
applied to rill erosion for which the surface slope angle (b) is heavily weighted
(n51.22, m50.56), thus shifting the triangulation towards a slope-preserving

Figure 8. Triangulated irregular network representation for the Owl Creek basin. (a)
Traditional slope criteria method. (b) Erosion or sediment transport index method.

446

E. R. Vivoni et al.

criterion. Nevertheless, the erosion TIN has a higher resolution along the fluvial
network and a more even sampling in reaches with high erosion hazard. A
comparison of element sizes confirms the similarity in the two TINs with the
coefficient of variation of the triangle element area (CVA51.17) equal for both
triangulated models.

The CHILD model is identically applied for each TIN mesh over a sequence of
eroding storm events during the 1986–2000 period by using rainfall data from a
gauge located 40 km east of the watershed. Model parameter values were obtained
from a study conducted by Teles and Bras (2002) using soil surface characteristics
and sediment yield data in the Owl Creek. Uniform soil-erosion properties and
rainfall forcing are assumed throughout the basin. Prior to the model runs, the
observed hourly rainfall is converted to storm event totals expressed as a rainfall
depth per event (figure 9a). Over the simulation period, rainfall events produce a
similar sediment yield at the basin outlet for both initial triangulations (expressed as
an erosion volume in m3 per 3 months), in particular for low to moderate storms

Figure 9. CHILD sediment transport simulations over a 14.5-year period (1 February 1986
to 30 June 2000). (a) Rain-gauge forcing near the Owl Creek represented as a uniform rainfall
depth over each storm period (m). (b) Total basin erosion volume (m3) per 3-month period for
the traditional (%) and erosion (N) triangulations.

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

447

(figure 9b). However, higher erosion volumes are simulated in the traditional TIN
for larger storms with the difference being most notable in the peak event during the
ninth year: erosion TIN (6700 m3) and traditional TIN (13 300 m3). The sensitivity of
the sediment yield to extreme storm events is indicative of the importance of the
triangulated discretization on the basin geomorphic response.

An explanation for the model sensitivity can be deduced from the differences in
the eroded area in the basin for larger storm events. In table 4, we present the
percentage of the basin area undergoing erosion of a particular volume (ranging
from (0 to >200 m3) during the major event in the simulation period. For the peak
erosive episode, the erosion TIN experiences less total eroded area (18.06%) as
compared with the traditional TIN (22.83%). In addition, there are differences in the
percentage of catchment area with a particular erosion volume. Notice for the
erosion TIN that a larger basin percent (2.67%) contributes to moderate erosion in
the range of 50–150 m3 as compared with the traditional TIN (2.08%). At small
(,50 m3) and high erosion volumes (.150 m3), however, a larger basin area
contributes to sediment transport in the traditional TIN, consistent with the
increased sediment yield in figure 9. This suggests that the triangulated terrain
resolution impacts the basin erosion volume during extreme geomorphic events
through threshold changes in the eroding area. In the following, exceeding an
erosion threshold for large storms will be related to poorly resolved catchment areas
in the traditional TIN.

Differences in erosion are further illustrated by comparing the spatial distribution
of total erosion volume (m3) over the 14.5-year simulation period. Figure 10
compares the spatial pattern of total erosion for the two initial triangulations at
both the watershed scale and for a small region near the main channel. Similarities
in the CHILD predictions of total erosion for the process-based and traditional
TINs are evident. Nevertheless, the traditional TIN experiences higher erosion along
flat upslope areas, whereas the erosion TIN is primarily eroded in the steep region
along the canyon wall. Near channels, the erosion TIN can differentiate between the
steeper canyon slopes and valley bottoms. The increased erosion in the traditional
TIN during the peak episode is due primarily to elevated erosion in poorly resolved
upslope elements which contain a small percent of the basin area (table 4). In areas
of high erosion hazard along steep gradients, the erosion TIN predicts increased
sediment transport as compared with the traditional TIN. Thus, the process-based
initial mesh focuses the distributed geomorphic prediction to the critical regions
identified by the erosion index.

Table 4. Percentage of catchment area (%) experiencing erosion of a particular volume (m3)
during the peak event for the Owl Creek CHILD simulations.

Traditional TIN

Erosion TIN

Percentage area with erosion
volume (%)
(0 m3
0–25 m3
25–50 m3
50–100 m3
100–150 m3
150–200 m3
.200 m3

77.17
14.05
6.60
1.91
0.17
0.07
0.02

81.94
9.57
5.79
2.36
0.31
0.03
0.01

448

E. R. Vivoni et al.

Figure 10. Spatial distribution of total erosion volume (m3) over the simulation period. (a)
Traditional slope criteria method. (b) Erosion or sediment transport index. The highlighted
area shows the differences in erosion near areas of high (rugged slopes near bottom) and low
(flat upland area near top) erosion hazard and along the stream network.

6.3 Basin landslide initiation

Rainfall-triggered, shallow landslides are strongly controlled by the slope stability
and moisture characteristics of a complex topographic surface. Terrain resolution
impacts the slope gradient and curvature in areas of high landslide hazard, thus
determining the location and extent of a possible failure surface. Rainfall-triggered
landslides occur on steep basin slopes where shallow soils overlay a more
impermeable bedrock surface (Montgomery and Dietrich 1994, Dietrich et al.
1995). Resolving the regions of potential slope instability is critical to identifying the
onset or initiation of landslide events. The subsequent landslide runout or debris
flow that transports the material downslope is less dependent on the moisture and
slope characteristics in a specific catchment area. We focus here on capturing the
landslide initiation process for a particular triangulated terrain mesh. In principle, a
TIN mesh that preferentially resolves areas according to a landslide index (Qc) will
automatically capture potential landslide sites at a high resolution.

We compare the traditional and process-based (landslide) TINs by determining
the unstable regions in the Tolt River using the landslide initiation routine
developed for CHILD and recently implemented in the tRIBS model. Figure 11
presents the differences between the two initial triangulations, each derived with
6.1% of the original DTM cells. Notice the marked difference in TIN model
representation between the two meshes. The landslide TIN has a refined resolution

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

449

Figure 11. Triangulated irregular network representation for the Tolt River watershed. (a)
Traditional slope criteria method. (b) Shallow landslide index method.

in mountain slopes where shallow landslides may be initiated and a lower resolution
in the wide, unconditionally stable, floodplain area (figure 1e). The landslide TIN
derived using the Montgomery and Dietrich (1994) index depends on both the slope
and specific area distributions (tan b and a) and the basin soil properties
(T565 m2/day rs52000 kg/m3, w533u) in the Tolt River (Montgomery et al.
1998). The traditional TIN, however, selects elevation nodes exclusively based on
critical slopes, thus leading to a more even size distribution of TIN elements.

to predict regions of

Given spatially uniform soil properties (Montgomery et al. 1998) and a series of
steady-state rainfall forcing applied uniformly over the basin, we utilize the tRIBS
model
landslide initiation for each triangulated mesh.
Currently, tRIBS is used simply to simulate areas of potential shallow landslides
using a factor of safety (FS) approach with FS,1 implying slope instability (Selby
1993, Dietrich et al. 1995). Sensitivity in model predictions of landslide initiation is

450

E. R. Vivoni et al.

due exclusively to the spatial discretization of the triangulated mesh. Model
estimates could be compared with statistics of mapped landslide scarps in the Tolt
River (Montgomery et al. 1998). Shallow landslide simulations have also been
conducted by Teles et al. (2002) and Falorni et al. (2004) with the CHILD model for
a series of basins including the Tolt River.

Table 5 presents the percentage of unstable basin area for an applied steady-state
rainfall ranging from Qc50 to 25 mm/h. Unconditionally unstable and uncondi-
tionally stable elements are specified by the 0 and 25 mm/h rates, respectively. For
low rainfall (Qc50–1 mm/h), the landslide TIN exhibits a smaller percentage of
unstable basin area as compared with the traditional mesh. This is due to the better
definition of the landslide prone regions along the steep mountain slopes where high
gradients and low moisture can lead to landslide initiation. As the rain rate is
increased (Qc52.5–25 mm/h), the poor floodplain resolution in the landslide TIN
leads to an increase in unstable areas on flat terrain, relative to the traditional TIN.
For a steady-state rainfall of 1 mm/h, the two triangulations have a nearly equal
percentage of unstable areas, suggesting that this value minimizes the trade-off in
resolution between hillslope and valley regions.

Differences in landslide initiation for the two triangulations are further explored
in figure 12 where the spatial distribution of the factor of safety (FS) is shown for the
1 mm/h rain threshold. Values of FS,1 imply slope instability (darker shades), while
values of FS.1 correspond to stable areas (lighter shades). Along the mountain
slopes, the landslide TIN is capable of differentiating better between stable and
unstable model elements due to its higher resolution. Unstable areas are well defined
along convergent head slopes that accumulate moisture and have a high shallow
landslide potential. The sensitivity of
the predicted landslide locations and
percentage of unstable catchment area suggests the importance of the triangulated
terrain resolution in mountain basin response.

7. Discussion

The case studies in saturation-excess runoff, transport-limited erosion and shallow
landslide initiation demonstrate the differences between the traditional and process-
based approaches for generating a triangulated terrain model. The process-based
discretization preferentially resolves catchment regions anticipated to impact the
hydrogeomorphic response predicted by a steady-state landscape index. Utilizing
the new mesh-generation algorithm in the initialization of the tRIBS and CHILD
models leads to variations in the transient watershed characteristics as compared
with traditional methods. Model sensitivity is identified in the temporal and spatial

Table 5. Percentage of unstable catchment area (%) for a particular rainfall threshold (mm/h)
in the Tolt River tRIBS simulations.

Percentage area with rainfall
threshold (%)

Traditional TIN

Landslide TIN

0 mm/h
0.5 mm/h
1 mm/h
2.5 mm/h
5 mm/h
10 mm/h
25 mm/h

7.19
13.52
17.95
25.37
30.18
33.36
34.16

5.94
12.72
17.74
25.96
31.59
35.18
36.74

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

451

Figure 12. Spatial distribution of landslide instability (factor of safety, FS) for a rainfall
threshold of 1 mm/h. (a) Traditional slope criteria method. (b) Shallow landslide index
method. The highlighted area shows the differences in the unstable regions near the mountain
slopes and valley bottoms.

patterns of the hydrogeomorphic response, including the basin hydrograph, variable
sediment yield,
source area,
susceptibility.
the proposed triangulation selects model resolution objectively
Furthermore,
through a physically based constraint that can be tied to an a priori estimate of
the model behaviour. In the following, several issues regarding the potential for
index-based TINs in the context of geographical information systems are discussed.

erosion pattern and landslide

7.1 Physically based terrain initialization

Landscape discretization is a topic of particular interest for modelling land-surface
processes. In general, determining the appropriate structural representation and
resolution in a distributed model is often a subjective exercise. Most studies balance
the trade-off between the errors
introduced through aggregation and the
computational demands of a simulation (Vazquez et al. 2002). With regard to
TIN-based models, studies have yet to develop objective techniques for selecting
model resolution, in essence relying on geometric criteria, such as abrupt slope
changes, distances to boundaries and streams, or regular triangular elements
(Palacios-Ve´lez et al. 1998, Nelson et al. 1999, Mita et al. 2001). Vivoni et al. (2004b)
conducted a multiple-resolution evaluation of the traditional TIN method which
identified the sensitivity of the tRIBS model response, in particular as the detailed
dynamics of the variable source area were lost to model coarsening.

452

E. R. Vivoni et al.

The process-based approach presented in this study provides a physically based
TIN terrain model tailored by the selection of a landscape index. Landscape indices
are shown here to be objective criteria for embedding knowledge of process
behaviour into a terrain model. The new method does not depend on specifying an
arbitrary accuracy parameter (Lee 1991) but does rely on prescribing an appropriate
relation between the index value and the TIN resolution that is related to the index
frequency distribution. Since landscape indices can be derived from topographic
data at any resolution, these provide a consistent means for developing TINs across
basin scales. More importantly, the model representation can be customized for the
hydrogeomorphic application of interest. As shown in this study, the new approach
can also lead to a shift in the transient model response by focusing on the physical
process represented by the landscape index.

7.2 Dynamic remeshing with transient indices

The process-based mesh-generation algorithm has been tailored to derive an initial
topographic surface for use in two distributed hydrogeomorphic models. In the
current algorithm, a steady-state index provides an approximation of the watershed
response to rainfall forcing for each landscape process (runoff, erosion, landslide
potential). The distributed simulations on the initial terrain then provide the
transient watershed behaviour over periods ranging from minutes to decades,
including predictions of the evolving areas of saturation, erosion or landsliding.
These dynamic regions, in turn, provide a means for evaluating the landscape index
as a function of time. Barling et al. (1994) and Borga et al. (2002), for example,
derived transient indices to account for the temporal variability of specific area (a).
In the context of process-based TINs, dynamic remeshing of the terrain model as a
function of a transient index is an attractive possibility. For example, as the variable
source area expands and contracts during a storm, model resolution could be
dynamically altered in a floodplain region. Currently, the CHILD model has similar
capabilities to simulate river meander evolution (Tucker et al. 2001a, Lancaster and
Bras 2002). Dynamic remeshing using transient landscape indices could provide a
physically based, time-adaptive model discretization.

7.3 Generalizing landscape indices for multi-purpose modelling

The concise representation of a landscape process afforded by an index is a means
for approximating behaviour directly from terrain properties. An important
question is whether various landscape indices can be generalized by taking
advantage of the common denominators, primarily the specific area (a) and slope
angle (b) (see equations (1), (3) and (4)). Recent developments by Willgoose and
Perera (2001) suggest that the wetness index and slope–area relation can be
combined to predict the effects of erosion on saturation-excess runoff. It is possible
that given an appropriate manipulation of the exponents (m and n) on a and b, a
generalized index may be derived to embed landscape behaviour into TINs for
multi-purpose modelling. The CHILD and tRIBS models could be initialized with a
single index conditioned on the relevant process by varying the exponents for the
particular application. For the simultaneous simulation of runoff and erosion, an
intermediate parameter set may be suitable to capture both processes in the initial
representation of the deformable mesh. This may lead to a trade-off between

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

453

resolving each process and the overall goal of capturing multi-process knowledge in
the terrain model.

8. Conclusions

Distributed hydrogeomorphic models based on unstructured triangulated meshes
provide a means for representing catchment processes at multiple resolutions. The
TIN data structure provides a flexible framework which can adapt to the level of
detail or granularity in the available landscape data. In this study, we presented a
new approach for constraining a TIN mesh through the use of a steady-state
landscape index which depicts the hydrogeomorphic processes determined from
topographic analysis. Conceptually, the process-based method embeds a priori
process knowledge directly into the TIN structure. This domain representation
results in an adaptive discretization conditioned on the terrain attributes, including
surface slope, which determine basin response. The new method also bridges two
existing approaches, topographic distribution functions and finite-element meshes,
to provide an objective, physically based terrain initialization.

indices

We compared the new mesh algorithm with a slope-preserving method in three
transport-limited erosion and shallow
case studies, saturation-excess runoff,
in basins characterized by each process.
landsliding, using distinct
Comparisons of the results from the CHILD and tRIBS models revealed the
differences between the process-based and traditional
initializations. Model
sensitivity to the initial triangulation showed that the process-based TIN provides
an improved resolution in areas undergoing basin saturation, erosion or landsliding.
Determining whether the process-based triangulation is strictly better than the
traditional method would involve field tests where the extent of saturation, erosion
and landslides is compared with both methods. Currently, these field data are not
available in the study basins. Nevertheless, we believe that the new method is
promising and can be used to construct triangulated terrain models that embed
process knowledge.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the US Army Research Office (Contract ARO
DAAD19-00-C-0114), NOAA (Contract NA97WH0033), NASA (Contract NAG5-
7475) and the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (Contract NAG5-10684). We
gratefully acknowledge the comments by two anonymous reviewers and the journal
editor.

References
AMBROISE, B., BEVEN, K. and FREER, J., 1996, Toward a generalization of the TOPMODEL
concepts: topographic indices of hydrological similarity. Water Resources Research,
32(7), pp. 2135–2145.

BARLING, R.D., MOORE, I.D. and GRAYSON, R.B., 1994, A quasi-dynamic wetness index for
characterizing the spatial distribution of zones of saturation and soil water content.
Water Resources Research, 30(4), pp. 1029–1044.

BEVEN, K.J. and KIRKBY, M.J., 1979, A physically-based variable contributing area model of

basin hydrology. Hydrological Sciences Bulletin, 24, pp. 43–69.

BEVEN, K., LAMB, R., QUINN, P., ROMANOWICZ, R. and FREER, J., 1995, Topmodel. In
Computer Models of Watershed Hydrology, V.P. Singh (Ed.), pp. 627–668 (Boulder,
CO: Water Resources Publications).

454

E. R. Vivoni et al.

BORGA, M., FONTANA, G.D. and CAZORZI, F., 2002, Analysis of topographic and climatic
controls on rainfall-triggered shallow landsliding using a quasi-dynamic wetness
index. Journal of Hydrology, 268(1–4), pp. 56–71.

BURTON, A. and BATHURST, J., 1998, Physically based modeling of shallow landslide sediment

yield at the catchment scale. Environmental Geology, 35(2–3), pp. 89–99.

CIGNONI, P., PUPPO, E. and SCOPIGNO, R., 1997, Representation and visualization of terrain

surfaces at variable resolution. Visual Computer, 13, pp. 199–217.

DIETRICH, W.E., REISS, R., HSU, M.-L. and MONTGOMERY, D.R., 1995, A process-based
model for colluvial soil depth and shallow landsliding using digital elevation data. In
Scale issues
in hydrological modelling, J.D. Kalma and M. Sivaplan (Eds),
pp. 141–158 (New York: John Wiley & Sons).

FALORNI, G., TELES, V., VIVONI, E.R., BRAS, R.L. and AMARATUNGA, K.S., 2004, Analysis,
characterization and effects on hydrogeomorphic modeling of the vertical accuracy of
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission digital elevation models. Journal of Geophysical
Research—Earth Surface (In Press).

GALLANT, J.C. and DOWLING, T.I., 2003, A multiresolution index of valley bottom flatness
for mapping depositional areas. Water Resources Research, 39(12), pp. 1347.
GOODRICH, D.C., WOOLHISER, D.A. and KEEFER, T.O., 1991, Kinematic routing using finite
elements on a triangular irregular network. Water Resources Research, 27(6),
pp. 995–1003.

IVANOV, V.Y., VIVONI, E.R., BRAS, R.L. and ENTEKHABI, D., 2004a, The catchment
hydrologic response with a fully-distributed triangulated irregular network model.
Water Resources Research (In Press).

IVANOV, V.Y., VIVONI, E.R., BRAS, R.L. and ENTEKHABI, D., 2004b, Preserving high-
resolution surface and rainfall data in operational-scale basin hydrology: a fully-
distributed, physically-based approach. Journal of Hydrology, 298(1–4), pp. 80–111.
KUMLER, M.P., 1994, An intensive comparison of triangulated irregular networks and digital

elevation models. Cartographica, 31(2), Monograph 45, 48 pgs.

LANCASTER, S.T. and BRAS, R.L., 2002, A simple model of river meandering and its

comparison to natural channels. Hydrological processes, 16(1), pp. 1–26.

LEE, J., 1991, Comparison of existing methods for building triangular irregular network
models of terrain from grid digital elevation models. International Journal of
Geographical Information Systems, 5(3), pp. 267–285.

MITA, C., CATSAROS, N. and GOUNARIS, N., 2001, Runoff cascades, channel network and
computation hierarchy determination on a structured semi-irregular triangular grid.
Journal of Hydrology, 244, pp. 105–118.

MITASOVA, H., HOFIERKA, J., ZLOCHA, M. and IVERSON, L.R., 1996, Modelling topographic
potential for erosion and deposition using GIS. International Journal of Geographical
Information Systems, 10(5), pp. 629–641.

MOORE, I.D. and BURCH, G.J., 1986, Sediment transport capacity of sheet and rill flow:
Application of unit stream power theory. Water Resources Research, 22(8),
pp. 1350–1360.

MOORE, I.D., GRAYSON, R.B. and LANDSON, A.R., 1991, Digital terrain modeling: a review of
hydrological, geomorphological and biological applications. Hydrological Processes,
5, pp. 3–30.

MOORE,

I.D., NORTON, T.W. and WILLIAMS, J.E., 1993, Modelling environmental

heterogeneity in forested landscapes. Journal of Hydrology, 150, pp. 717–747.
MOORE, I.D. and WILSON, J.P., 1992, Length–slope factors for the Revised Universal Soil
Loss Equation: Simplified method of estimation. Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation, 47(5), pp. 423–428.

MONTGOMERY, D.R. and DIETRICH, W.E., 1994, A physically based model

for the
topographic control on shallow landsliding. Water Resources Research, 30(4),
pp. 1153–1171.

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

455

MONTGOMERY, D.R., SULLIVAN, K. and GREENBERG, H.M., 1998, Regional test of a model

for shallow landsliding. Hydrological Processes, 12, pp. 943–955.

NELSON, E.J., JONES, N.L. and BERRETT, R.J., 1999, Adaptive tessellation method for

creating TINS from GIS data. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 4(1), pp. 2–9.

O’LOUGHLIN, E.M., 1986, Prediction of surface saturation zones in natural catchments by

topographic analysis. Water Resources Research, 22(5), pp. 794–804.

PALACIOS-VELEZ, O.L., GANDOY-BERNASCONI, W. and CUEVAS-RENAUD, B., 1992,
Geometric analysis of surface runoff and the computational order of unit elements
in distributed hydrologic models. Journal of Hydrology, 211, pp. 266–274.

PEUKER, T.K., FOWLER, R.J., LITTLE, J.J. and MARK, D.M., 1978, The triangulated irregular
network. In Proceedings of the Digital Terrain Modelling Symposium, St. Louis,
pp. 516–540.

RENARD, K.G., FOSTER, G.R., WEESIES, G.A. and PORTER, J.P., 1991, Revised universal soil

loss equation. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 41(1), pp. 30–33.

RODRIGUEZ-ITURBE, I. and RINALDO, A., 1997, Fractal River Basins: Change and Self-

Organization (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

SELBY, M.J., 1993, Hillslope Materials and Processes (New York: Oxford University Press).
TARBOTON, D.G., BRAS, R.L. and RODRIGUEZ-ITURBE, I., 1989, Scaling and elevation in river

networks. Water Resources Research, 25(9), pp. 2037–2051.

TELES, V. and BRAS, R.L., 2002, Comparative soil erosion model protocol: CHILD model
preliminary results. USACERL unpublished report. Ralph M. Parsons Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

TELES, V., CAPOLONGO, D. and BRAS, R.L., 2002, A physically-based model for rainfall-
triggered landslides at a regional scale. Geophysical Research Abstracts, European
Geophysical Society Annual Congress Nice 2002. EGS02-A-03808.

TSAI, V.J.D., 1993, Delaunay triangulations in TIN creation: an overview and a linear-time
Information Systems, 7(6),

International Journal of Geographical

algorithm.
pp. 501–524.

TUCKER, G.E., LANCASTER, S.T., GASPARINI, N.M. and BRAS, R.L., 2001a, The Channel-
Hillslope Integrated Landscape Development (CHILD) model. In Landscape Erosion
and Evolution Modelling, R.S. Harmon and W. Doe (Eds), pp. 349–388 (Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers).

TUCKER, G.E., LANCASTER, S.T., GASPARINI, N.M., BRAS, R.L. and RYBARCZYK, S.M.,
2001b, An object-oriented framework for distributed hydrologic and geomorphologic
modeling using triangulated irregular networks. Computers & Geosciences, 27(8),
pp. 959–973.

TUCKER, G.E., CATANI, F., RINALDO, A. and BRAS, R.L., 2001c, Statistical analysis of
drainage density from digital terrain data. Geomorphology, 36, pp. 187–202.
VAZQUEZ, R.F., FEYEN, L., FEYEN, J. and REFSGAARD, J.C., 2002, Effect of grid size on
effective parameters and model performance of the MIKE-SHE code. Hydrological
Processes, 16, pp. 355–372.

VIVONI, E.R., IVANOV, V.Y., BRAS, R.L. and ENTEKHABI, D., 2004a, Generation of triangular
similarity. Journal of Hydrologic

irregular networks based on hydrological
Engineering, 9(4), pp. 288–303.

VIVONI, E.R., IVANOV, V.Y., BRAS, R.L. and ENTEKHABI, D., 2004b, On the effects of
response.

triangulated terrain resolution on distributed hydrologic model
Hydrological Processes (In Press).

WALKER, J.P. and WILLGOOSE, G.R., 1999, On the effect of digital model accuracy on

hydrology and geomorphology. Water Resources Research, 35(7):pp. 2259–2268.

WILLGOOSE, G., BRAS, R.L. and RODRIGUEZ-ITURBE, I., 1991, A physical explanation of an
observed link area-slope relationship. Water Resources Research, 27, pp. 1697–1702.
WILLGOOSE, G. and PERERA, H., 2001, A simple model of saturation excess runoff generation
based on geomorphology, steady state soil moisture. Water Resources Research,
37(1), pp. 147–155.

456

E. R. Vivoni et al.

WILSON, J.P. and GALLANT, J.C., 1996, EROS: A grid-based program for estimating

spatially-distributed erosion indices. Computers & Geosciences, 22(7), pp. 707–712.

WOODS, R.A., SIVAPALAN, M. and ROBINSON, J.S., 1997, Modeling the spatial variability of
subsurface runoff using a topographic index. Water Resources Research, 33(5),
pp. 1061–1073.

ZHANG, X., DRAKE, N. and WAINWRIGHT, J., 2002, Scaling land surface for global-scale soil

erosion estimation. Water Resources Research, 38(9), pp. 1180.

Appendix A

Index-based point selection algorithm

The algorithm shown below is designed to select DTM points using a terrain
landscape index field (I[i,j]) derived directly from the DTM elevation field (E[i,j]),
where i and j are location indices. One possible implementation of the algorithm
within ArcInfo GIS utilizes the GRID module for raster analysis. The frequency
distribution function of I[i,j] is used to disaggregate the original elevation field into h
grids Eh[i,j], each containing nodes with index values within each class, where h is the
number of bins selected in the distribution function. The algorithm depends on the
range of index values and the number of index bins. The result is a set of
disaggregated elevation fields, each containing a sparse set of points with index
values within the same class.

//Determine Maximum and Minimum index values
rangeIndex5max(I[i,j])–min(I[i,j])
//User specified number of bins nbrBIN
sizeBIN5rangeIndex/nbrBIN
step50

//Loop through the frequency histogram bins
FOR each bin histBIN51 to nbrBIN DO

FOR each pixel i,j DO

IF(I[i,j].min(I[i,j])+step)&(I[i,j),5min(I[i,j])+sizeBIN+
step)

Select E[i,j] and place in new grid Eh[i,j]

ENDFOR
step+5sizeBIN //Update step

ENDFOR

Appendix B

Proximal distance triangulation algorithm

The proximal distance triangulation algorithm creates a TIN landscape T[i,j,k] from
a series of elevation grids Eh[i,j]. One possible implementation in ArcInfo GIS
utilizes the TIN module. A proximity filter whose size varies with the landscape
index as specified by a functional relation (5), is used to sample points Ph[i,j,k] prior
to Delaunay triangulation. For each disaggregated elevation grid Eh[i,j], a unique

Embedding landscape processes into TINs

457

proximal filter is applied which eliminates adjacent nodes closer than dc. The value
of dc is updated for each index class grid Eh[i,j]. The final TIN model is created by
aggregating the set of resulting filtered points Ph[i,j,k] and the inclusion of other
relevant features (streams, basin boundaries) in a constrained Delaunay triangula-
tion. The algorithm depends on the specified functional relation, the limits on the
filter size and the number of index classes. The result is a process-based TIN
resembling the spatial pattern of the landscape index.

//Determine maximum proximity distance
maxDist5basinArea/2*streamLength //Hillslope length
//Determine minimum proximity distance
minDist5cellsize(E[i,j]) //DTM cell size or proportion of
//Proximity filter parameters
filterTIN5maxDist
filterBIN5maxDist–minDist/nbrBIN

//Loop through the frequency histogram bins
FOR each bin histBIN51 to nbrBIN DO

//Convert grid to points
Ph[i,j,k] from grid Eh[i,j]
//Create TIN with proximal filter
Th[i,j,k] from points Ph[i,j,k] using filterTIN as proximity criterion
//Convert TIN to points
PTh[i,j,k] from TIN Th[i,j,k]
filterTIN25filterBIN //Reduce filter size (apply functional relation)

ENDFOR

//Append all point coverages PTh[i,j,k]
PT[i,j,k]5sum(PTh[i,j,k]) for all histBIN
//Create final TIN incorporating all desired features
T[i,j,k] from PT[i,j,k] and other linear, polygon features

