The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu: The
First Japanese World Map with Latitudes and
Longitudes and with an Extensive Japanese
Explanatory Note

Gabor Lukacs

To cite this article: Gabor Lukacs (2016): Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu: The
First Japanese World Map with Latitudes and Longitudes and with an Extensive Japanese
Explanatory Note, The Cartographic Journal, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1104057

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1104057

Published online: 12 May 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 7

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [Nanyang Technological University]

Date: 14 June 2016, At: 05:10

The Cartographic Journal
© 2016 The British Cartographic Society

2016

pp. 1–9

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu: The First
Japanese World Map with Latitudes and Longitudes and with
an Extensive Japanese Explanatory Note

Gabor Lukacs

22 Boulevard Kellermann, 75013, Paris, France
*Email: gabor.kaitaishinsho2010@hotmail.com

In the early 1780s, Nagakubo Sekisui, the first Japanese scientific geographer, published a world map containing latitudes and
longitudes, based on Matteo Ricci’s map of 1602. The map and its extensive explanatory text had a considerable impact on the
educated classes of the late Edo Period (1603–1868) toward their new vision of the world. We are providing here an analysis of
the map and the first complete English translation of Nagakubo Sekisui’s most interesting, long explanatory text.

Keywords: sphericity of the earth; movement of the sun and the sky; knowledge of world geography; climatic zones on
the earth; latitudes (緯) and longitudes (經)

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu, 地球萬國山海
輿地全圖説, A Map of All Countries of the Globe with its
Mountains and Oceans, undated, early 1780s, by Nagakubo
Sekisui, 長久保赤水 (1717–1801), edited by Asano Yahei,
浅野弥兵衛, Edo. A significantly reduced hand-coloured
copy with latitudes and longitudes based on Matteo Ricci’s
revolutionary world map, published in Peking in 1602
(Kunyu Wangguo Quantu, 坤輿萬国全圖, Complete Geo-
graphical Map of All Countries). The map contains
additions, corrections and improvements compared to
Ricci’s map. Chinese inscriptions are accompanied here by
extensive ‘katakana’ reading marks for Japanese readership.
The map is also accompanied by an extensive and important
explanatory commentary in Japanese ‘kanbun’, inspired by,
but not translated from one of Ricci’s long Chinese texts.
The full English translation of Nagakubo Sekisui’s late 18th
century explanatory text is given here for the first time. The
map also has a Chinese language preface. On native mulberry
paper, 92 × 163 cm, without scale.

INTRODUCTION

Nagakubo Sekisui (hereafter Sekisui) was a Confucian
scholar with a samurai status of the Mito feudal clan (水戸
藩) north-east of Edo (Kôbe Shiritsu Hakubutsukan,
2000; Yonemoto, 1999, 2003). In his youth, he studied
with some disciples of Shibukawa Shunkai, 渋川春海
(1639–1715),
early astronomer

Japan’s most

famous

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1104057

(Guglielmina, 2011; Nakayama, 1969). Sekisui is considered
the founder of modern Japanese geography utilizing latitude
and longitude lines. He is credited with three important
maps: (1) Kaisei Nihon Yochi Rotei Zenzu, 改正日本輿地
路程全図, Improved Complete Map of Japan, 1779; (2)
Dai Chin Kôyo Zu, 大清広輿図, A Large Map of the
Great Qing Dynasty of China, 1785; (3) a world map, the
subject of our investigation.

Based on Matteo Ricci’s work (Chen Kenneth, 1939;
D’Elia Pasquale, 1938), world maps had already been pub-
lished in Japan long before Sekisui’s work. Some illustrated
even latitude divisions and/or longitudes. However, those
maps had been drawn by artists, not by professional geogra-
phers, and they did not fully understand the meaning of the
latitudes and longitudes and failed providing adequate expla-
nations for them (Ayusawa, 1964; Kôbe Shiritsu Hakubut-
sukan, 2000).1

As was usual for scholars of the period interested in
western culture, Sekisui travelled to Nagasaki in 1767. His
observations and experiences during this journey inspired a
book that he entitled Nagasaki Kôeki Nikki (長崎港駅日
記, Record of a Journey to Nagasaki). In the port of the
city, at the artificial island of Dejima, 出島, he met some
Dutch people. In the city, he also became acquainted with
the few Japanese scholars who had a good reading knowledge
of the Dutch language. The most important person among
them was Motoki Ryôei, 本木良永 (1735–1794), author of
entitled ‘Oranda Chikyû
an unpublished manuscript
Zusetsu’ (オランダ地球図説, Dutchmen’s Illustration of

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 2

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu

the Earth) (Goodman, 1986). Interestingly, the extensive
explanatory text accompanying Sekisui’s world map (vide
infra) was strictly based on late 16th century Jesuit teaching
and does not reflect any influence of his meeting with
Motoki Ryôei. According to Nakayama, the first introduc-
tion of the heliocentric theory and Kepler’s planetary laws
reached Japan in the late 1760s (Nakayama, 1969). It is
not surprising that the impact of the work of Shiba Kôkan,
司馬江漢 (1738–1818), about
the
Copernican theory in Japan cannot be detected on Sekisui’s
thoughts since Shiba Kôkan’s books were published a few
years after Sekisui’s world map (French, 1974).2

the introduction of

A short time after its publication, the Jesuits shipped
several copies of the 1602 edition of Ricci’s world map to
Japan (Debergh, 1986; Fontana, 2010). However,
to
ensure the prohibition of the Christian faith, the Edo govern-
ment began implementing a book-banning policy from
1630, prohibiting the importation, purchase or sale of any
Christianity-related literature (Itô, 1972; Sakanishi, 1937).
Such a policy prevented the learned men from obtaining a
correct understanding of western culture. Any book, map
or writing arriving from China and carrying Ricci’s
Chinese name (利瑪竇, Li Ma Tou) was immediately
burnt. Later, when the fear of Christianity abated, the strict
censorship was somewhat relaxed from the 1730s. In spite
of the prohibition and the severe consequences for those
secretly holding the prohibited items, several books and a
few copies of Ricci’s maps survived in Japan. It appears inter-
esting to note here that one copy of Ricci’s world map of
1602, preserved nowadays in a fine state at Kyôto University
Library, lacks the two oval form and one square seals of the
Society of Jesus used by Ricci to confirm authentic copies.
The seals were rubbed out from the Kyôto copy at some
point in time. During or after the prohibition, Ricci’s map
was also secretly copied and one such fine example survived
and is preserved at the Miyagi Prefecture library.

NAGAKUBO SEKISUI’S WORLD MAP

In preparing his map, Sekisui successfully solved the first
major difficulty consisting of the drastic reduction of the
size of Ricci’s huge map: xylography on six scrolls (1602,
Peking), designed to fit in a folding screen, measuring
about 182 × 365 cm. Sekisui’s map, Figure 1, 92 × 163
cm, strictly respects the proportion and shape of the conti-
islands as shown in Ricci’s map.
nents, oceans, seas,
However, some inscriptions on the two maps do not illus-
trate strictly identical territories. For example, the term
‘New France’ (for modern Canada) is phonetically written
in Chinese on both maps with the following same four char-
acters: 新拂郎察. In Ricci’s map, the first two characters are
written in vertical direction north and the two last characters
south of the Saint-Lawrence River.3 In Sekisui’s map, all four
characters are shown south of the river, indicating a different
territory. With some important improvement in the illus-
tration of Japan and the Kuril Islands (Akizuki, 1999;
Miyoshi and Kazuyuki, 2004), Sekisui’s map is geographi-
cally a faithful copy of Ricci’s map. However, the text or
inscriptions on the two maps, as discussed below, are differ-
ent. Although Ricci intended or recommended the use of

different colours for the identification of the six continents,
his map was engraved and published monochrome by his
close geographer friend Li Zhizao, 李之藻 (1565–1630).
The five traditional colours of the Chinese were the black,
white, red, blue and yellow. Sekisui followed Ricci’s advice
in colouring Africa in white, Europe in yellow, Asia in light
red, North-America in orange-red, South-America in dark
blue and the supposed border of Magellanica (The Antarctic)
in dark red. Mountains are schematically shown on Ricci’s
map while Sekisui indicates them in green as real mountains.
On Sekisui’s map, each 10° of the 360° long equator is
marked. At each 60°, a longitude line is drawn. Lines for
the Tropics at 23.5° of latitude on both sides of the equator
are clearly shown. One central vertical axis at 180° of longi-
tude, east of Japan, divides the western and eastern part of
the earth.

SEKISUI’S INSCRIPTIONS ON HIS WORLD MAP

Sekisui was a professional geographer. As such, his intention
was to provide a comprehensive world map without all the
complex astronomical illustrations shown and explained on
Ricci’s map (Chen Kenneth, 1939; D’Elia Pasquale, 1938).
Moreover, the understanding of western astronomical the-
ories of the early Renaissance as presented by Ricci was
beyond his capacity. To convince late Ming Dynasty China
(1368–1644) about the truth of the very unusual content
of his map, Ricci was very pleased to print on the map the
supporting opinion of some of his high official
learned
friends. Writing extensive prefaces, those ‘Mandarins’ were
praising the humble and unpretentious personality of the
Jesuit father as well as the new ideas about the world and
its geography shown by him. Although Sekisui omitted
reproducing those praising texts, he may have read them.
He may have been especially impressed by the preface of Li
Zhizao, the printer-editor of Ricci’s map. Sekisui
learnt
from that preface that in the remote past of China’s history
there were scientists who, advancing ideas about the possible
sphericity of the earth wrote that ‘the earth is isolated in the
heavens centre like the yellow is in eggs’.4

But in a very different historical context from Ricci’s,
Sekisui limited his endeavour to copying the strict geographi-
cal content of the map. Ricci’s single long explanatory
comment of about 95 characters that he reproduced was
the description of the equatorial region. This text is located
in both maps at the longitude of Southern California and
right below the equator. Sekisui copied hundreds of
Chinese geographical place names from Ricci’s map. Next
to them, he provided most or many of these names with
‘katakana’ signs for Japanese readership. He also copied
many short texts about the characteristics of the inhabitants
of given regions. Occasionally, when Sekisui was not sure
about the correct Chinese pronunciation of Ricci’s terms,
he did not hesitate to accompany the geographical terms
with two slightly different Japanese readings. In many
instances, instead of copying Ricci’s Chinese characters, he
simply substituted them with Japanese characters. Clearly,
his intention was to provide a fine and easily understandable
map for his contemporaries.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 The Cartographic Journal

3

Figure 1. The first Japanese world map with latitudes and longitudes with an extensive Japanese explanatory note by Nagakubo Sekisui (長久保赤水),
early 1780s, 92 × 163 cm

We have noticed a few interesting texts on Sekisui’s map
not found in Ricci’s. There are certainly others that escaped
our attention. We reproduce the Japanese texts below and
try to give their English translation.

a. Sekisui’s map shows an interesting text on the continent

of Magellanica (Antarctic):

此地正帯陽陰中和ノ善地ナレドモ中国ノ人至ル

事ナシ土風人物シルベカラス

‘Although this region with a more or less temperate
(climate) has been explored by Chinese people, they
were unable to learn about its products and inhabi-
tants’.

(Although we do not know Sekisui’s source allow-
ing him to make the quoted statement, we suspect that
his source was the famous ‘Kangnido’ of which late
15th century copies were available in Japan, most
probably in the shogunal library.)5

At about the same place, the following text is
found on Ricci’s map: ‘Very few are those who ever
came to these southern territories. Therefore, their
products and inhabitants are unknown’.6

b. On the west side of the Iberian Peninsula there is a text
about the Canary and other islands, including the far
distant Madeira Archipelago, that cannot be found on
Ricci’s map. When the reading of the ‘kana’ signs
remains ambiguous we use a question mark. The text
in several columns is as follows:

海中緒嶌大小十餘総名カナアリア (here,

in the
sea, there are about ten large and small islands whose

general names are Kanaaria) マインスルト云 (?) (the
name of the islands follows)

(コナラ, Konaru,

(カナアリア, Kanaaria), (テネ(?)ア?リハ, unclear,
probably Tenerife),
probably
Gomera), (ハルコ, Haruko, ?), (マゲラ, Madera), (ホ
ルトサント, Horuto Santo, probably Horta Sâo
Mateus), (カラチヨサ, Karachiyosa, unclear), (ホルテ
ヘシトラ, Horuteheshitora,
(バルマ,
Baruma, probably Las Palmas of the Grand Canary).
c. Immediately above the Tropic of Capricorn at the longi-
tude of Sumatra, we find the following Japanese text not
appearing on Matteo Ricci’s map:

unclear),

番人呼為ジャカタラ字咬留吧 ニ作二国別種否其

義不詳、紅毛人居え

(It is not known whether Djakarta and the region of
Karuba, thus named by primitive people, residence of
the Dutch people, are two different places.)

d. Another interesting text not present on Ricci’s map,
close to the Japanese islands, is shown in Figure 2.

THE ILLUSTRATION OF JAPAN AND THE KURIL
ISLANDS ON SEKISUI’S MAP

Sekisui must have been surprised at the presentation of
Japan on Ricci’s map. He found that the shape of the
islands was inaccurate and names of several provinces of
the empire were mistakenly placed. There was also a con-
fusion between provincial and road names. Sekisui was
the derogatory terms appearing on Chinese
aware of

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 4

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu

Figure 2. The first Japanese world map with latitudes and longitudes by Nagakubo Sekisui. Detail showing Japan, Korea, Eastern-China and east of
Japan the map’s central vertical axis; west and east of the axis are located, respectively, the mythical islands of Kinshima, 金島 and Ginshima, 銀島.

maps about Japan. Reading Ricci’s description of Japan,
based on some considerably earlier Chinese sources, was
unpleasant
for a Japanese scholar. For example, Ricci
wrote: ‘The Japanese are more inclined to warlike than to
peaceful activities’.7 As a consequence, Sekisui decided to
ignore Ricci’s text about Japan, located south of Kyûshû
on the Jesuit father’s map and did not copy it. In his illus-
tration of Japan, Figure 2, he substituted about 40 of
Ricci’s place names by no more than a dozen accurately
placed ones (Akizuki, 1999).

Ricci’s name of Hokurikudô for Hokkaidô, 北海道,

became Eso, エソ, in Figure 2.
North-east of Hokkaidô, the name of the following islands
(nowadays Kuril Islands) is given in Figure 2 with ‘katakana’
signs: (we also give here their modern names with Chinese
characters) Kunashiri (クナシリ, 国後島), Etorofu (エトロ
フ, 択捉島), Uruppu (as Urusafu, ウルサフ, 得撫島).
Further north-east a few other names, unclear to us are
shown. Kamchatka is written as Kamusasuka, カムサスカ)
and Sakhalin (as Karafuto, カラフト) is mistakenly located
on the main continent, but that part of the world was
unknown to Japanese geographers of the late 18th century.
East of Japan, Sekisui also illustrated the two imaginary
islands of Kinshima (金島, isle of gold) and Ginshima (銀
島, isle of silver), that the Spaniards and the Dutch were des-
perately looking for during the 17th century on the basis of
some earlier maps without ever finding them. The two
mythical islands were not shown on Ricci’s map.

South of Japan, right below the line of the Tropic of
Cancer, an archipelago, with very small islands (probably
intended to illustrate the Northern Mariana Islands) is
shown with three different Japanese texts not seen on
Matteo Ricci’s map: (from right to left)
a. 強盗嶌, Gôtôjima (The island of thieves)
b. 刺答蘭 ハタカシマ也 (Shidaran is an island with high

mountains)

ズ人ヲ炙リ喰フト云　

c. 此嶌ハ皆墨ニテ身ヲ文シ盗賊ヲ好ミ風俗人倫ニアラ
刺答蘭 ハタカシマ也
(The body of the inhabitants in those islands is covered
with black paint (tattooing ?). They practice stealing, enjoy
wandering around and are devoid of moral values. It is said
that they grill humans and eat them.)

THE EXTENSIVE EXPLANATORY TEXT ON TOP OF
SEKISUI’S WORLD MAP
The most interesting explanatory text of Sekisui’s map, con-
tains a mixture of about 1.450 Chinese and Japanese charac-
ters in Chinese style Japanese or ‘kanbun’, in 69 columns,
with guiding marks (kunten, 訓点) for Japanese readership.
The text is inspired by Ricci’s untitled long text on the
right or eastern border of his map published in 1602 in
Peking. In his full analysis of this section of the text of
Ricci’s work, in 1938 Pasquale d’Elia S.J. gave the title
‘General Notions about Cosmography and Geography’.8

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 The Cartographic Journal

5

All Japanese scholars of the Edo Period had a good reading
knowledge of Chinese. Sekisui carefully studied the long
Chinese text.9 The major part of Sekisui’s text was inspired
by Ricci’s, but his text should not be considered a translation
of the Jesuit father’s text.10 Sekisui adopted Ricci’s main ideas
and adapted them to a Japanese readership. Following Ricci,
he wrote about the sphericity and the size of the earth, its div-
ision into 360°, described the six continents and the climatic
zones according to latitudes with respect to the equator, the
tropics, and other geographical features. However, using
his imagination and understanding the new concepts of lati-
tude, longitude and time difference as a function of longi-
tude, he wrote his explanatory text by referring to Japan
and emphasizing Japan’s position in the world. His goal
was to make the text readily understandable to the educated
Japanese. As we now know, Sekisui was highly successful in
promoting the new ideas about a new vision of the world.
His world map became a kind of best-seller enjoying many
editions up to the middle of the 19th century.

a. The complete Japanese text: (in vertical direction on the

map from right to left)

地球萬國山海輿地全圖説

世界ハ丸キモノナル ヲ人々其理ヲウタガフ故ニ二極
星ノ高下ニヲイテ其丸キ道理ヲサトラシム因テ圖説ト云
タトヘバ南海ジアガタラノ北北極出地一度北ニ向テ日本
へ来レバ極星三十六度ヲロシアヘ行ハ五十度夜國ニイタ
レハ九十度極星人ノ頭上ニアリ是ヲスグレバ極星カヘツ
テ後ニ見ルマ ス マス行バ赤道ノ下ニイタル南極星出地
ヲ見ベシ天ハ一昼夜 ニ九万里廻ル矢ヨリモハヤシ其正
中ニ在故ニ海水モアフレズ天上地下ノ居所皆同陰陽ノ妙
渾天義 ウタガフベカラズ

◯此圖阿蘭陀ノ所レ製世ニ流布スル事多シ其大小精
(?, there is one unidentified Chinese character here) 疎分圖
全圖異同アルニ似タレトモ大概皆同也◯ 大東洋◯ 小東
洋◯ 小西洋◯ 大西洋ヲ四大海と云△亞細亞 (アジア)
△ 歐羅巴 (ヨウラハ) △ 利未亞 (リビア) △ △南北亞
墨利加 (アメリカ) △ 墨瓦臘泥加 (メカラニカ) 是ヲ六
大州ト云墨瓦臘泥加昔以西巴尼亞之臣墨瓦臘泥加者始渡
二北海一還于本國一故以一其名一為二國名

◯大地南北ノ正中ニ赤道線アリ南北各九十度アリ春
秋二分ノ日道 ニテ其下天 下 第一炎熱無レ冬ノ地也 暖帯
ト云此所ニテハ北極星モ南極星モ見ヘズ 高山登レハ南
北ノ二星各地ニ附テ見ユル也是ヲ極星出地ト云北方へ直
道廾五里移レバ 極星一度高ク見ユ漸々北へ行程高シ日
本ハ三十度ヨリ四十度蝦夷ハ四十度ヨリ四十七八度魯齊
亞ハ五十二度餘室韋ハ六十度突厥瀚海七十度或ハ八十度
此地日甚長夜甚短極星九十度高ケレバ即人ノ頭上ニ在リ
此所夜國水海也秋分ヨリ明年ノ春分マテ日ヲ見事ナシ其
故ニ春分ヨリ秋分マテ日地限ヲ東南西北へ一回リメ一日
トス毎日日ヲ見ル是ヲ半年夜半年晝ト云是ヲ寒帯ト云◯
南極星ノ出地度数モ赤道ヨリ始ル - 北極ト同シ然トモ南
方墨瓦臘泥加ノ地ハ大海ヲ北ニ受テ東西ニ連リタル大州
ナレトモ南極ノ地界へ通達スル海路ナキ故ニ其地理人物
ヲ知ル事ナシ南極星高九十度頭上ニ見ユル所ハ夜國ナル
事 凖知ベシ阿 蘭陀人モ南方ヲハ知ル事ヲ得ス故ニ記録
ナシ此四大海六大州ハ紅毛人ノ名ヅクル所ナリ故ニ中華
ノ書ニ見ル所ナシ◯ 日本唐土天竺ハ皆亞細亞州ノ中也
歐羅巴州ハ 阿 蘭陀インギリス以西杷尼亞 (イスハニア)

等ノ三十餘國福島鉞島木島アリ地中海大海等ノ内海アリ
運漕萬國 ニ通達シ豊饒ノ地ナリ天主教ヲ尊信ス此地大西
洋教ト云利未亞州ハ暖帯熱国也南北ノ界ハ正帯ニ接ス大
浪山ノ岸ヲ舩行スレハ南極出地三十五度ニ見ユ日本ト氣
候全同此モ亦西洋教ヲ奉ス◯ (The folding of the map goes
here through a vertical column of the text; in this sentence
there is one very weakly printed character, followed by one
unidentified Chinese character) 凡此圖 (?,?)者先赤道極星出
地一度ノ処ヲ以テ主トスベシ◯ 萬國土地ノ善悪ヲ考ル
ニ五帯アリ暖帯一寒帯二正帯二正帯ヲ善トス寒帯ヲ悪ト
ス暖帯ヲ中トス日本唐土天竺紅毛ハ正帯ナリ◯ 傅 云三
山六海一平地平地ノ内墾田應居半按地球ノ中人倫所栖大
概廾分ノ一ナリ◯ 往昔泉州一官某者携二此圖一来肥自
以珍藏或請寫之以國字一書二蕃語一今見 之, 緯二東西者,
乃 (unidentified, very weakly printed two Chinese characters
follow; they are perhaps:日月) 行躔之度, 所以三分二黄道
赤道一也, 可三以知二春秋晝夜之長短其經南北者, 乃一晝
夜三百六十度以地上百八十度分為二六段一則以三十度為
レ凖, 蓋天運一時行程所三以分晝夜十二時也古庖 犠氏仰
観二天文一, 俯察二地理一者, 又如レ此非特圖ニ地理一,
又所三以曉二天文之大概一也, 最可二珍重一, 因抄寫全圖
一, 以合二附之一, 可レ謂經天合地圖也◯ 地球ノ周三百
六十度九万里, 一度為 二二百五十里一以二陸路一量レ之
大率三四百里, 日本道三四十里而差二一度一也◯ 南極星
高九十度石二人頭上一, 謂二之夜国一,上半年晝, 下半年
夜也,可レ凖二北極一, 然無二海路之通一, 不レ知二氷海
之有無一, 南極之地理, 人物之異同雖二, 利未亞歐羅巴之
人一, 一切不レ能レ知也◯日輪寅時亞墨利加大東洋ニ出
其日ノ申時日本ノ上ニ来其間百八十度道程四万五千里又
其日巳時ニ大西洋以西把尼亞ノ福島ニ至ル其間モ百八十
度四万五千里也一晝夜ニ九万里一地球ヲ周リ終ル一時ノ
中ニ七千五百里ヲ行矢ヨリモ疾カルベシ福島ハ日本ノ直
下ニ當レリ氣候同◯

諸図ノ名稱諸書ニ記スル所, 各異同アリ今一々之ヲ載

セ 以テ 覧者ニ便ス◯東首合西尾為丸象而看

常陽水府 (Jôyôsuifu) 赤水　長玄珠述　(はるたか　述

べる)

b. Our English translation of Sekisui’s text: (care is required
in reading the text in view of the fact that the Ri, 里, the
distance unit, was different in China during Ricci’s time
and in the late 18th century. It was also ten times longer
in Japan than during the same period in China. The text
uses three types of Ri distance units).
The earth is round, but people have doubts about its
spherical nature. The main proof for this (statement) is the
existence of the earth under the two Polar Stars. Therefore,
this map explains, for example, that moving northward
degree by degree, from the Southern Sea to the north of Dja-
karta (ジヤガタラ, the name of modern Indonesia’s capital
also called at that time Batavia, バタヴィア), towards the
North Pole (北極), when coming to Japan the Polar Star
(極星) is (seen) at 36°. Moving further to Russia (ロシア),
the Polar Star is (seen) at 50°. Further north, the country
of the night can be reached where the Polar Star is above
people’s head at 90°. Continuing further on, the Polar Star
appears at
the back and proceeding even further and
further the region under the equator might be reached.
And continuing even further, one will see the region of the
Southern Polar Star. Within the time of one day and one

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 6

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu

night, the sky, traveling faster than the arrow, covers a dis-
tance of 90,000 Ri (about 354,000 km; 1 Ri, 1 里 = ca.
3.93 km in Japan). In view of this very fast movement of
the sky, the sea water remains steady and does not overflow.
The respective location of the sky and earth is very similar
to the good balance of the Yin-Yang. The heavenly law is
(or the astronomical observations are) indisputable.

Such maps have been made in Holland (阿蘭陀) and many
copies were disseminated in the whole world. There are
differences between them, but they are very similar.

The eastern part of the Pacific Ocean (大東洋), the western
part of the Pacific Ocean (小東洋), the Indian Ocean (小西
洋) and the Atlantic Ocean (大西洋) are called the four
large oceans. Asia (亞細亞), Europe (歐羅巴), Libya (利未
亞, meaning Africa),11 South- and North-America (南北亞
墨利加)
the Antarctic
Region) are called the six large continents. Magellanica was
named in honour of (Ferdinand) Magellan who first
crossed the North Sea (Pacific Ocean, ?) in past times and
returned to his home country.

and Magellanica

(墨瓦臘泥加,

The equator line (赤道線) between the south and the
north, is at the very centre of the earth. (From the equator
line) each of the southern and the northern part of the
earth is divided into 90° (of latitude). The spring and
autumn separating (lines) correspond to the Tropics of
Cancer (黄道) and the Tropics of Capricorn (黄道). In that
first extremely hot zone (between the equator and the
Tropics) there is no winter. In that warm region neither of
the two Polar Stars is visible.

Climbing tall mountains both Polar Stars become visible. This
is called the region of the Polar Stars (the reason of placing this
sentence here is unclear). Moving straight in the northern direc-
tion (after covering) each 25 Ri, (ca. 100 km),12 the Polar Star
becomes visible degree by degree. Gradually going higher north-
ward, Japan is located from 30° to 40° (latitude), Ezo (蝦夷, old
name of Hokkaidô, 北海道) is from 40 to 47–48°, Russia (魯齊
亞) at approximately 52°, Mongolia (室韋) at 60° and the large
sea of the Uyghur Region (突厥瀚海) at 70° or 80°. In that land
(during summer time; this is missing from the Japanese text),
the day light is very long and the night is very short. (In that
land) the Polar Star is at 90° height, therefore it is above
people’s head. This is the night country of the ice sea. From
the autumnal equinox (秋分) to the following year’s spring
equinox (春分) there is no day light. Therefore, from the
spring equinox to the autumnal equinox a full day consists of a
full turn of the universe. Watching the sun every day, (during)
half of the year there is night time and the other half of the
year corresponds to day time. This is called a cold zone. In
terms of degrees, the land from which the Southern Polar Star
can be seen begins from the equator. Magellanica is similar to
the northern polar region, but it is in the south and has on its
northern side a large ocean. It is a large continent stretching
from east to west. But, it is lacking a sea route reaching the
border of the South Pole. Therefore, the land is not inhabited
by human beings.

We should know that the land from which the Southern
Polar Star is visible by 90° above the head is the country of
the night. Even the Dutch people (紅毛人, red-haired
people) are unfamiliar with that southern region. Therefore,
there is no written record about it. Since the names to these
four large oceans and six continents have been given by

Dutch people, the names of those places cannot be found
in Chinese books.

Japan (日本), China (唐土)13 and India (天竺) are all in
Asia, while Holland, England (インギリス), Spain (以西杷
尼亞) and about thirty other countries as well as Fukushima
(福島), Etsushima (鉞島, the first Chinese character may not
be correct) and Kishima (木島) are located in Europe. The
inland seas of Europe are the Mediterranean (地中海) and
the Black Sea (大海). By way of these seas, ships are carrying
goods to many countries. As a result of this trade, European
countries became very wealthy. European people are respect-
ful of Christianity (天主教)14 which is their religion.15 Libya
(meaning Africa) is a warm region with countries of tropical
climate. Africa’s southern and northern parts enjoy a temper-
ate climate. The sea route on the shore of Dalang Mountain
(大浪山, near the Cape of Good Hope) leads to the South
Pole (南極). The climate in Japan, located at 35° (north of
the equator), is very similar (to the climate of the southern
part of Africa also located at 35°, but south of the equator).
Over there the people also revere the religion of Europeans.
凡此圖 (two unidentified characters follow: the first one is
so weakly printed that it is illegible) 者先赤道極星出地一度
ノ処ヲ以テ主トスベシ. (This part of the text is covered by
the folding line of the map. We prefer not to provide any
partial translation for it.)

In terms of the (life of people) the territories of all the
countries are considered good or unsuitable. There are five
types of climatic zones: one warm, two cold and two temper-
ate zones. The (climate) in the two temperate zones is plea-
sant, it is intermediate in the warm zone and bad in the
two cold zones. Japan, China, India and Holland are
located in the temperate zones.

According to the master (Matteo Ricci ?), there are three
mountains and six oceans and one flat land. (It is not clear
what Sekisui means by three mountains.) The cultivated
field and inhabited land make up (only) half of the whole
flat land. Only about one twentieth of the (flat) land on
earth has been developed (for human use).

A long time ago a (government) official from Senshû (泉
州),14 brought this map and said: this map has a rich content,
it is a precious (item), therefore, please, make a copy of it
with the help of Japanese characters. The map is using a bar-
barian language (蕃語), (perhaps he means a language differ-
ent from Japanese; the Chinese language was not considered
barbarian). Latitudes (緯) (are running) from the east to the
west. In other words, places are defined in degrees with
respect to the lines of the equator (赤道) and the tropics
(黄道). Longitudes (經) (are running) from the south to
the north. Thus, it is possible to determine the spring and
autumn length and shortness of the day. In other words,
during a complete day and night the firmament (蓋天)
covers (in its movement) a distance of 360°. The earth is sep-
arated (at its central meridian) into 180° (on both sides).
Therefore, at every hour 30°, its one-sixth, is the distance
covered by the sky during the 12 (Japanese) hours of the day.
In the remote past, Emperor Fu Xi (庖犠)17 observed the
sky from the point of view of a geographer. This extraordi-
nary map (of Matteo Ricci) is explaining (various) aspects
of astronomy. Based on this precious map, many details
have been extracted and copied from it. We have to say that
the longitude is uniting the heavens and the earth in the map.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 The Cartographic Journal

7

The circumference of the terrestrial globe is 360°, corre-
sponding to a distance of 90,000 Ri. (Thus in terms of
Ricci) One degree corresponds to a distance of 250 Ri.
(However, with the variation in time of the value of the
Ri) an overland territory of approximately 300–400 Ri (on
the Chinese continent at the end of the 18th century) was
worth of 30–40 Ri in Japan, meaning a distance of 1°.

The land where the Southern Polar Star is at 90° above
people’s head is called night country. The first half of the
year is day, the last half of the year is night. Concerning the
North Pole (北極), no navigation occurs in the sea (sur-
rounding it) and our knowledge is lacking about this sea
(covered) by ice. Although the South Pole region is inhabited
by all sorts of people, Africans and Europeans, it is impossible
to know anything about them.

On the eastern part of the Pacific Ocean (亞墨利加大東洋)
(this means near Southern California) the sun rises at Tora
time (寅時, between 3 and 5 A.M.). In Japan, located at
180° in longitude and 45,000 Ri of distance (the indicated
longitude and distance are only very approximate; here the
distance unit is that of Ricci, rather than Japanese Ri) west-
ward from the eastern part of the Pacific Ocean it will be
Saru time at that moment (申時, between 3 and 5 P.M.).
(This is not really correct; when it is 4 A.M. in California,
it is about 9 P.M. in Japan, but this may be a small mistake
of Sekisui whose intention was to promote knowledge
instead of giving great precision of time.) In Spain’s Fortu-
nate Islands (Fukushima, 福島, in the Canary Islands), at
the same distance of 180° and 45,000 Ri (eastward, from
the eastern part of the Pacific Ocean, Southern California),
at that moment there will be Hebi time (巳時, between 9
and 11 A.M.). Within the period of a full day, the sun
covers a distance of 90,000 Ri. This means that the sun, tra-
veling faster than the arrow, covers each hour a distance of
7500 Ri (1 hour in the Japanese system corresponds to 2
hours in the west, 12 × 7500 Ri = 90,000 Ri). The climate
of the Fortunate Islands, located on the other side of the
earth compared to Japan, is very similar to that of Japan.

Place names in many maps are written either in similar or
different ways in various books. Now, I am writing down
every single name for the viewers of this map. The eastern
end of the (spherical) globe is joining its western extremity.
常陽水府 (Jôyôsuifu, place name) 赤水 (Sekisui)　長玄珠

述　(written by Harutaka, Nagakubo Sekisui’s real name)

In some copies of the very first edition, Sekisui’s world
map is also provided with an unsigned preface. The text in
cursive Chinese was written by the brilliant young Japanese
physician Katsuragawa Hoshû, 桂川甫周 (1751–1809),18
fascinated by western culture. Without reproducing the orig-
inal Chinese text located on top on the right side of the map,
we give here its English translation19:

Mr Li (Li Ma Tou, 利馬竇, Matteo Ricci), made some
geographical maps of oval form. In its original form, this
map was made up of six scrolls. (Later) they were assembled
into one complete scroll. Mr Sekisui of the Mito clan made a
reduced sized copy of Mr Li’s map and published it. Mr Li’s
map, drawn during the 29th year (1601) of Wanli (萬曆),
was disseminated in China during the Ming Dynasty (明
朝). It was the first (world) map made by a European that
became known in China. According to Mr Ji Xiaolan (紀曉
嵐, 1724–1805) of the Qing Dynasty (清朝, 1644–1912),

‘with the exception of the calendar (and the related geo-
graphical science) as well as the game of chess, future gener-
ations will not be up to the level of older generations. In the
field of cartography, recently made maps are more accurate
with many more details than their older counterparts.
However, researchers should study the source of (old)
maps. They should not only investigate the recent more accu-
rate maps with many details and neglect studying older
maps’. The publication of this map by Mr Sekisui of the
Mito clan will be of considerably help to researchers in
their investigations.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Gabor Lukacs, PhD, Université de
Paris, Sorbonne, 1964. Retired scien-
tist and japanologist. Born in 1937 in
Budapest, Hungary. Author of about
160 scientific papers. Wrote and pub-
lished four books about Japanese medi-
and cultural history: Kaitai
cine
Shinsho & Geka Sôden. HES & De GRAAF Publishers,
Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2008. Extensive Marginalia in
Old Japanese Medical Books, Wayenborgh Publisher, Para-
guay, 2010 (European and North American distributor:
Kugler Publications, Amsterdam, 2010, The Netherlands),
Chinese Dermatology on a Japanese Handscroll (with Dr
Alain Briot), Wayenborgh Publisher, 2012. Hasshu Gafu,
the Japanese Edition of Bazhong Huapu, an Important
Chinese Painting Manual (with Lauriane Yiheng Luo),
Wayenborgh Publisher, 2013. He also published in The Car-
tographic Journal, Vol. 51, N°1, pp. 52–62, 2014, a paper:
An Important Little Known Seventeenth Century Manu-
script Map of China.

Notes

1 Unno (1994). A copy of Mori Kôan’s map of Japan, 1754,
using a grid of parallels and meridians was found in
Nagakubo Sekisui’s belongings after his death. Japanese car-
tographers think that Mori Kôan’s work gave the idea to
Sekisui for introducing latitudes and longitudes into his
own maps, see Unno (1994), p. 415.

2 Exhibition catalogue, Shiba Kôkan, artist under the spell of

the west, 2000, Amsterdam Historisch Museum.

3 The territory of New France is located on Ricci’s map
between latitudes +40° and +60° and on Sekisui’s map
between +40° and +50° only.
4 D’Elia Pasquale (1938), Table XII.
5 The Kangnido is the oldest world map surviving in East Asian
cartographic tradition. Made in Korea in 1402, later copies,
especially one from 1470, is preserved at the Ryûkoku Univer-
sity Library, Kyôto, 164.0 × 171.8 cm. It shows a clear delinea-
tion of Africa, the Arabian Peninsula and a recognizable outline

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 8

of the Europe. The hypothesis that Nagakubo Sekisui may have
seen and studied the map, kept probably at that time in the sho-
gunal library to which he had access, does not seem absurd to us.
See Ledyard (1994).

6 D’Elia Pasquale (1938) Table XVIII.
7 Chinese descriptions of Japan contained such sentences as
“the people of the country is highly dedicated to military
forces and only a little to the written words (culture). In
the light of the Korean invasion of Japan at the end of the
16th century, such a statement might have been justified in
Ricci’s time, but not at the end of the 18th century.

8 D’Elia Pasquale (1938), Table XVI.
9 Matteo Ricci studied at the Roman College of the Jesuits. One
of his teachers, Christopher Clavius, 1538–1612, wrote a
‘Commentary on the Sphere of Sacrobosco’, an introductory
text book about geography and astronomy, employed at
many schools. It is well known that Ricci’s text on the
eastern edge of his map was based on Clavius’ book.

10 Sekisui’s text is different from Ricci’s. It is inspired by Ricci’s
text, but is not a translation from Ricci. Sekisui’s text con-
tains terms and sentences, especially those related to Japan
that cannot be found in the model Chinese text. On the
other hand, Ricci’s text is much longer than Sekisui’s,
explaining terms and ideas with precise examples. For
example, Ricci explains that the knowledge of the latitude
and the longitude of a place allows its precise location. He
highlights the fact that if two places are distant by 30° of

longitude there should be a difference of one double hour
between them. Ricci criticizes the Buddhists for considering
the centre of the world on Mount Sumeru in the northern
part of India. Aimed at avoiding trouble with the powerful
and highly respected Buddhist monks, Sekisui remained
silent about this matter. Further, Ricci gave a precise value
of 28.636 and 30 hundreds of Ri for the earth’s diameter.
The term diameter is not found in Sekisui’s text.

11 In the western vocabulary of those days, the term of Africa
was restricted to the countries on the northern shore of the
continent while the whole continent was called Libya.

12 These are Japanese units of Ri.
13 In old Japanese texts, China is occasionally called 唐土, or
‘Morokoshi’, associating China with the Tang Dynasty,
618–907, the period when Japan began importing Chinese
culture.

14 As related by Nagakubo Sekisui, one surviving copy of Ricci’s
map was brought to his attention at an unknown date by an
unidentified person, perhaps a government official. All we
know is that the person came from Senshû. Such a vague
statement lacking any precision, hiding the person’s name
might also be indicative of the prohibition associated with
Ricci’s name even during the second part of the 18th
century. In contrast to our remark, it is interesting to note

Chikyû Bankoku Sankai Yochi Zenzu Setsu

that Sekisui’s explanatory text refers to the Christian religion
(天主教) as the one practiced by European people. Interest-
ingly, the Chinese preface contains Ricci’s name.

15 This text about Europe and Christianity was based on Ricci’s
text located in his map north of the Iberian Peninsula.
16 As related by Nagakubo Sekisui, one surviving copy of Ricci’s
map was brought to his attention at an unknown date by an
unidentified person, perhaps a government official. All we
know is that the person came from Senshû. Such a vague
statement lacking any precision, hiding the person’s name
might also be indicative of the prohibition associated with
Ricci’s name even during the second part of the 18th
century. In contrast to our remark, it is interesting to note
that Sekisui’s explanatory text refers to the Christian religion
(天主教) as the one practiced by European people. Interest-
ingly, the Chinese preface contains Ricci’s name.

17 Fu Xi was one of the old legendary or mythical emperors of
China whose reign extended to one hundred years about
5000 years ago.

18 As a friend of the famous physician Sugita Genpaku, 杉田玄白
(1733–1817), Katsuragawa Hoshû has actively contributed to
the understanding of the Dutch text of Kulmus’ Ontleedkun-
dige Tafelen, the first translation in Japan of a western book,
published in 1774 as Kaitai Shinsho (A New Book of
Anatomy). He became a physician with the important title
‘hôgen’ entitled to practice at the shogunal court. He was
also interested in geography and published two world maps
(Shinsei Chikyû Bankoku Zusetsu, New Illustration of all
Countries of the World), 1786 and Honyaku Chikyû Zenzu,
Translation of a World Map, 1791, based on western models.
19 We are indebted to our close friend, Miss Lauriane Yiheng Luo,
Ottawa, Canada, for the translation of the Chinese preface and
to several Japanese friends that we had to consult for the trans-
lation of Sekisui’s late 18th century extensive commentary
about his world map. We are also pleased to express our
thanks to Mr. Adel Chammakhi for his considerable help in pre-
paring the manuscript and for the correction of the proof.

REFERENCES

Akizuki, Toshiyuki. (1999). Nihon Hokuhen no Kentô to Chizu no
Rekishi (History of the Exploration of the Cartography of the
Northern Borders of Japan, Sapporo, Hokkaidô Daigaku Tosho
Kankôkai).

Ayusawa, Shintarô. (1964). ‘Geography and Japanese knowledge of

world geography’, Monumenta Nipponica, 3–4, pp. 41–80.

Chen Kenneth, K. S. (1939). ‘Matteo Ricci’s contribution and influence
on geographic knowledge in China’, Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 59, pp. 325–359.

Debergh, Minako. (1986). ‘La Carte du Monde du Père Matteo Ricci
(1602) et sa Version Coréenne Conservée à Ôsaka’, Journal
Asiatique, CCLXXIV(3–4), pp. 417–454.

D’Elia Pasquale, S. J. (1938). Il Mappamondo Cinese del Padre Matteo

Ricci, S.J., Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Vatican.

Fontana, Michela. (2010). Matteo Ricci, (1552–1610), Salvator, Paris.
French, Calvin L. (1974). Shiba Kôkan, Artist, Innovator and Pioneer in

the Westernization of Japan, Weatherhill, New York.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 The Cartographic Journal

9

Goodman, Grant K. (1986). Japan, the Dutch Experience, The Athlone
Press, London and Dover, New Hampshire, pp. 98–101, 103–106
and 192–193.

Guglielmina, François-Claude. (2011). Astronomie au Pays du Soleil

Levant, Burillier, Vannes, France.

Itô, Tasaburô. (1972). ‘The book banning policy of the Tokugawa

Shogunate’, Acta Asiatica, 22, pp. 36–61.

Kôbe Shiritsu Hakubutsukan. (2000). Collection Catalogue of the Kôbe

City Museum. p. 25.
Ledyard, Gari. (1994).

‘Cartography in Korea’,
in The History of
Cartography, eds. Harley, J.B., Woodward, D., University of
Chicago Press, Chicago/London, 2, pp. 243–248.

Miyoshi, Tadayoshi and Onoda Kazuyuki. (2004). Nihon Kochizu
Korekushon, (Collection of Old Maps of Japan), Kawade Shobô, Tôkyô.

Nakayama, Shigeru. (1969). A History of Japanese Astronomy, Chinese
Background and Western Impact, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Sakanishi, Shio. (1937).

‘Prohibition and import of some Chinese
books’, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 57(3), pp.
290–303.

Unno, Kazutaka. (1994). ‘Cartography in Japan’, in The History of
Cartography, ed. by Harley, J.B., Woodward, D., University of
Chicago Press, Chicago/London, 2, pp. 346–477.

Yonemoto, Marcia. (1999). Maps and metaphores of the small eastern sea
in Tokugawa Japan, 1603–1868, Geographical Review, 89(2),
Geographical Review, pp. 169–187.

Yonemoto, Marcia. (2003). Mapping Early Modern Japan, pp. 69–81,

University of California Press.

Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 05:10 14 June 2016 