The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 2

pp. 81–85

International Cartographic Conference, Paris 2011-Special Issue May 2011

V I E W P O I N T

Advancing Global Cartography and GIScience

William Cartwright

School of Mathematical and Geospatial Sciences, RMIT University, GPO Box 2476, Melbourne, Vic. 3001, Australia
Email: william.cartwright@rmit.edu.au

The International Cartographic Association (ICA) has, for over 50 years, strived to advance cartographic theory and
praxis. Throughout its work throughout the last half-century member organisations, commission and working group
members and its various executive committees have established mechanisms to investigate the Art, Science and
Technology of Cartography and GIScience. This paper provides an overview of the ICA. It outlines its work and its
commitment to facilitate discourse in the discipline through encouraging research, publishing the findings of research and
development, disseminating current thinking via various fora, encouraging excellence in map-making through competitions
and exhibitions and acting internationally as the key authority in Cartography and GIScience, in many instances through
member nations and with sister societies and other international bodies. This is offered to give a background to the papers
provided in this special issue of The Cartographic Journal, which offers papers selected by the Scientific Committee of the
25th International Cartographic Conference of the International Cartographic Association, held in July 2011 in Paris,
France. These selected papers formed part of over 900 papers that were received, reviewed and published. It is doubly
rewarding, as this conference celebrates the 50th anniversary of last Paris ICA conference.

INTRODUCTION – INTERNATIONAL CARTOGRAPHIC
ASSOCIATION

The International Cartographic Association (ICA) is ‘the
world authoritative body for Cartography, the discipline
dealing with the conception, production, dissemination and
study of maps’. The mission of the association is to promote
the discipline and profession of Cartography and Geographic
Information in an international context. The ICA is the prime
international body for Cartography and Geographic Infor-
mation (see http://www.icaci.org for more information).

The ICA was founded on 9 June 1959, in Bern, Switzerland
(Beijing, 2001) and in many other locations. The ﬁrst
president was Professor Eduard Imhof, of ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, who held this position between 1961 and 1964.

The ICA has a number of aims:

tal, economic, social and spatial
mapping;

N to contribute to the understanding and solution of
world-wide problems through the use of Cartography in
decision-making processes;
N to foster the international dissemination of environmen-
information through
N to provide a global forum for discussion of the role and
N to facilitate the transfer of new cartographic technology
and knowledge between nations, especially to the
developing nations;
N to carry out or to promote multi-national cartographic
research in order to solve scientific and applied problems;

status of Cartography;

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13038059668640

N to enhance cartographic education in the broadest sense
through publications, seminars and conferences; and
N to promote the use of professional and technical

standards in Cartography.

ADVANCING INTERNATIONAL CARTOGRAPHY AND
GISCIENCE

In order to ensure that both the professional and amateur
map producer/user are attuned to the issues related to
contemporary Cartography, it is essential for the association
to develop appropriate strategies. The ICA has a Strategic
Plan in place that details the essential activities that a
contemporary association must address. The Strategic Plan
proposes a number of actions related to Ideas and Actions
for
the Organisation and in the Wider Operational
Environments.

In order to meet the expectations of the Strategic Plan, the
ICA operates through a number of commissions and working
groups. It works with national and international govern-
mental and commercial bodies and with other international
scientiﬁc societies. Commissions and working groups carry
out the general operations of the ICA. Some of these activities
are outlined in the following sections of this paper.

Research
The ICA strives to address the full range of scientiﬁc,
technical and social research. Commissions and working

82

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1.
ICA Commission on Education and Training, in colla-
boration with the Ho Chi Minh University of Technology and the
Vietnamese Society for Cartography, Geodesy and Remote Sensing.
Workshop on Web 2.0 and Cartography – Ho Chi Minh City,
2010. Photograph by the author

groups promote and undertake research under 10 main
categories (Virrantaus et al., 2009):
N geographic information;
N metadata and spatial data infrastructures;
N geospatial analysis and modelling;
N usability;
N geovisualisation, visual analytics;
N map production;
N cartographic theory;
N history of Cartography and GIScience;
N education;
N society.

Capacity building
The ICA’s Strategic Plan proposes a number of actions
related to Ideas and Actions for the Organisation and in the
Wider Operational Environments. Some of these actions
that relate to capacity building are:

In education:

base and skills into new segments of society;

N to help widen the Cartographic/GIScience knowledge
N to increase efforts directed to capacity-building, espe-
cially in developing countries, especially with reference to
human resource development;
N in cooperation with commercial suppliers, develop virtual
academy courses on Cartography and GIScience to
support and complement what is on offer.

The ICA assists in the delivery of appropriate courses by (1)
assessing the availability of programmes; (2) delivering
education courses directly; (3) providing support materials
and publications; and (4) providing outreach support for
developing nations.

The ICA has investigated the possibility of offering
courses and programmes online, via discrete media (CD
ROM) and via conventional paper products. The ICA

Figure 2.
boration with Bakosortonal. Workshop
on Web
Cartography – Jakarta, 2010. Photograph by the author

ICA Commission on Education and Training, in colla-
and

2.0

Education Commission, in association with other commis-
sions and working groups, undertook this investigation.
Also through its Education and Training Commission, the
ICA has developed a virtual course on Cartography and
GIScience in collaboration with contributions from uni-
versities and individual academics. Users of this Web-
delivered resource can assemble a hybrid course.

In professional practice:

N organisation of workshops on specific topics;
N organize high-quality technical exhibitions and expert
panels during the congresses to attract practitioners to
participate;
N encourage national associations and universities to
translate outcomes of congresses and symposia into local
languages, and publish the translations on the Web and
link them to the ICA page;
N facilitate the exchange of experts between and within

developed and developing countries.

ICA Commissions and Working Groups have conducted many
outreach courses. For example, the ICA ran two outreach
education programmes under the ‘umbrella’ of the ICA
Commission on Education and Training. The workshops were
conducted to facilitate technology transfer to professionals in
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (Figure 1), and Jakarta, Indonesia
(Figure 2) during July and August 2010. The Ho Chi Minh
City Workshop covered cartographic information systems
(GIS with a cartographic emphasis), atlas production, prepress
and digital printing, Web cartography and its applications.

In society:

geospatial data on the Internet;

N atlas production on specific global themes;
N provide guidelines on the use and presentation of
N develop navigation tools for visually impaired people;
N participate in research and development projects aimed at
N collect funds from donors in order to organize expert
support for developing countries and for developing
regions within nation states;
N support United Nations by providing geospatial expertise.

personal security, public services and well-being;

Advancing Global Cartography and GIScience

83

Finally, looking at Cartography and children and the
Barbara Petchenik Children’s World Map Competition.
This is organized every second year to coincide with
biennial international conference of the association. This
is a map design competition for children ages 15 years and
younger. It is held to honour of the late Dr Barbara Bartz
Petchenik, a former Vice President of the ICA who was
extremely interested in maps for children and children as
cartographers. The competition is organized by the ICA
Commission on Children in Cartography. This competition
has been taken up by teachers around the world to involve
their students in the world of mapping.

The activities of the ICA are important for promoting and
advancing the theory and praxis of Cartography. Throughout
its 50-year history, ICA has brought together researchers,
government mapping agencies, commercial cartographic
publishers, software developers, educators, Earth and envir-
onmental scientists, and those with a passion for maps.

DISSEMINATING INFORMATION RELATED TO
CARTOGRAPHY AND GISCIENCE

An important aspect of the ICA’s activities is its biannual
conference, held in conjunction with the general assembly
every 4 years. The conference brings together carto-
graphic and GIScience professionals and researchers to
the latest
discuss and disseminate information about
developments in the profession, trends in national mapp-
ing programmes and research outputs. It is an essential
meeting for keeping abreast with developments in the
international arena.

Since its ﬁrst General Assembly (I) in Paris 50 years ago,
conferences have been held around the world from India
(Delhi, 1968) to South Africa (Durban, 2003), from Italy
(Stresa, 1970) to Mexico (Morelia, 1987), from Australia
(Perth, 1984) to China (Beijing, 2001) and to Chile
(Santiago, 2009). The map (Figure 4) illustrates the global
reach of ICA conferences.

In 2011, it is fortuitous that the French Committee of
Cartography is hosting this conference on the ﬁftieth
anniversary of the ﬁrst General Assembly of the organisa-
tion, held in Paris in 1961. It allows the current-day
international Cartography and GIS community to celebrate
the achievements of the ICA community since that ﬁrst
General Assembly, and to address future challenges. The
conference provides a most
stimulating agenda and
attendees will be able to attend the scientiﬁc programme,
exhibitions of maps and technical elements and comple-
mentary meetings of many of the commissions and working
groups of the ICA. Papers at the conference were submitted
as part of the review stream (this includes papers that form
issue of The Cartographic Journal), or as
this special
‘professional’ papers. This publication is part of
the
documentation generated from the 2011 International
Cartographic Conference.

CONCLUSIONS

In the Preface to the English edition of the Semiology of
Graphics (1983), Jacques Bertin reﬂected on the era of paper

Figure 3.
activity, Montreal, Canada, 2010. Photograph by the author

ICA Working Group on Art and Cartography workshop

The ICA has always championed outreach programmes. In
particular, the association has a working group entitled
‘mapping Africa for Africa’. Additional activities are out-
lined in the following paragraphs.

One example of the development of publications to
support international activities is the ‘cook book’ being
developed by the ICA Commission on National and
Regional Atlases for atlas editors highlighting 10 steps
towards a successful atlas edition. The book will be
published in an easily readable form furnished with many
illustrations and best practice examples. It will start with
editorial aspects (target group, atlas type, platform and atlas
structure), continue with organisation and marketing, atlas
use,
thematic content, data management, multimedia
elements, GUI and layout, map design and visualisation,
and functionality (tools and interactivity), and end up with
prototyping and update.

‘Art’ in mapping is also addressed through the ICA
Working Group on Art and Cartography. The ﬁrst formal
event of this relatively new initiative was a symposium in
Vienna, Austria,
in February 2008. The symposium
oganizers solicited contributions from Cartography and
the Arts addressing the topics of maps as artistic artefacts
and explorations of different interpretations of space and
place using New Media and experimental art forms. As well
as written papers’ contributions were also encouraged as
posters, installations, artwork, ﬁlm, video, Web applications
and experimental media. Some 70 papers, presentations and
installations were made at the symposium. The results of
this symposium were published in a book: Cartography and
Art (Cartwright et al., 2009). Another, more recent, event
was a workshop held in Montreal, Canada, in September
2010 (Figure 3). The workshop brought together around
20 participants who explored the theme of mapping
Montreal from a common database.

84

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Locations of ICA conferences to 2009. Map courtesy of Bernhard Jenny

information graphics and looked forward to changes that
were being made through the introduction of computers to
image production. About the paper era he said:

Classic graphic involves FIXED image, generally
encountered in published form. Too often useless
constructions obscures these results while displaying only
the initial elementary data. The reader realizes this
and turns to things like text for their information. The
’uninitiated author’ or the ‘habit-ridden’ designer,
and the ‘illiterate’ layout editor bear heavy responsi-
bility for this rejection… We must learn that graphics is
learned, not inherited. (Bertin, 1983, p. xv)

GIScience, to address these issues, ﬁnd solutions and
disseminate these ﬁndings globally.

and amateur

In conclusion,

international organisations like the
ICA must be realistic about our contributions to in-
communities.
ternational professional
However, we can’t contribute to all efforts. We need
to work with our strengths. We must promote carto-
graphic events and programmes internationally. The
papers contained in this special issue are indicative of the
in the international
wide-ranging research pursuits
cartographic community, conducted under the umbrella
of the ICA.

He then commented about the changes that computers
would make to contemporary graphics development and
production, viz.:

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Modern graphics
involves the TRANSFORMABLE
and reorderable (sic) image. The computer, particu-
larly the minicomputer, will find its most complete and
powerful means of expression in modern graphics. This
is the most rigorous research tool that enables the
decision maker to discover what should be said and
done. Moreover, this will take the form of the simplest
and most communicable image! (Bertin, 1983, p. xv)

learnt

The activities of the ICA are conducted to understand
lessons
from the history of Cartography and
GIScience – like the era of the paper image that Bertin
focussed on in his research. The association also strives to
better understand issues in contemporary Cartography and

Cartwright

William
is
President of the ICA. His
academic position is Profe-
ssor of Cartography and
Geographical Visualisation
in the School of Mathema-
tical and Geospatial Sciences
at RMIT University, Austra-
lia. He joined the university
after spending a number of
years in both the govern-
ment and private sectors of
the mapping industry. He is
the Royal
a Fellow of

Advancing Global Cartography and GIScience

85

Geographical Society, a Fellow of the British Cartographic
Society, an Honorary Fellow of the Mapping Sciences
Institute Australia and an Honorary Fellow of
the
Surveying and Spatial Sciences Institute. He holds a
Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Melbourne
and a Doctor of Education from RMIT University. He has
six other university qualiﬁcations – in the ﬁelds of
cartography, applied science, education, media studies,
information and communication technology, and graphic
design. He is the author of over 300 academic papers. His
major research interest is the application of integrated
media to cartography and the exploration of different

metaphorical approaches to the depiction of geographical
information.

REFERENCES

Bertin, J. (1983). Semiology of Graphics, The University of

Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Cartwright, W. E., Gartner, G. and Lehn, A. (Eds.). (2009). Art and

Cartography, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.

Virrantaus, K., Fairbairn, D. and Kraak, M.-J. (2009). ‘ICA research
agenda on cartography and GIscience’, The Cartographic Journal,
46, pp. 63–75.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

