International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Modelling sustainable urban development by the
integration of constrained cellular automata and
GIS

Xia Li & Anthony Gar-On Yeh

To cite this article: Xia Li & Anthony Gar-On Yeh (2000) Modelling sustainable urban
development by the integration of constrained cellular automata and GIS, International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 14:2, 131-152, DOI: 10.1080/136588100240886

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588100240886

Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 4303

View related articles 

Citing articles: 183 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [185.2.32.118]

Date: 09 November 2016, At: 01:17

int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 2, 131± 152

Research Article

Modelling sustainable urban development by the integration of
constrained cellular automata and GIS

XIA LI‡† and ANTHONY GAR-ON YEH†
†Centre of Urban Planning and Environmental Management, The University
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.
‡The Guangzhou Institute of Geography, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
E mail: xlib@gis.sti.gd.cn; hdxugoy@hkucc.hku.hk

(Received 16 June 1998; accepted 30 December 1998)

Abstract. Cellular Automata (CA) have attracted growing attention in urban
simulation because their capability in spatial modelling is not fully developed in
GIS. This paper discusses how cellular automata (CA) can be extended and
integrated with GIS to help planners to search for better urban forms for sustain-
able development. The cellular automata model is built within a grid-GIS system
to facilitate easy access to GIS databases for constructing the constraints. The
essence of the model is that constraint space is used to regulate cellular space.
Local, regional and global constraints play important roles in a(cid:128) ecting modelling
results. In addition, ‘grey’ cells are de(cid:142) ned to represent the degrees or percentages
of urban land development during the iterations of modelling for more accurate
results. The model can be easily controlled by the parameter k using a power
transformation function for calculating the constraint scores. It can be used as a
useful planning tool to test the e(cid:128) ects of di(cid:128) erent urban development scenarios.

1. Cellular automata and GIS for urban simulation

Cellular automata (CA) were developed by Ulam in the 1940s and soon used by
Von Neumann to investigate the logical nature of self-reproducible systems (White
and Engelen 1993). A CA system usually consists of four elements—cells, states,
neighbourhood s and rules. Cells are the smallest units which must manifest some
adjacency or proximity. The state of a cell can change according to transition rules
which are de(cid:142) ned in terms of neighbourhood functions. The notion of neighbourhood
is central to the CA paradigm (Couclelis 1997), but the de(cid:142) nition of neighbourhood
is rather relaxed. CA are cell-based methods that can model two-dimensional space.
Because of this underlying feature, it does not take long for geographers to apply
CA to simulate land use change, urban development and other changes of geograph-
ical phenomena. CA have become especially, useful as a tool for modelling urban
spatial dynamics and encouraging results have been documented (Deadman et al.
1993, Batty and Xie 1994a, Batty and Xie 1997, White and Engelen 1997). The
advantage s are that the future trajectory of urban morphology can be shown virtually
during the simulation processes.

The rapid development of GIS helps to foster the application of CA in urban

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/tf/13658816.html

132

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

simulation. Some researches indicate that cell-based GIS may indeed serve as a
useful tool for implementing cellular automata models for the purposes of geograph-
ical analysis (Itami 1994 ). Although current GIS are not designed for fast iterative
computation, cellular automata can still be used by creating batch ®
les that contain
iterative command sequences. While linking cellular automata to GIS can overcome
some of the limitations of current GIS (White and Engelen 1997 ), CA can bene® t
from the useful information provided by GIS in de® ning transition rules. The data
realism requirement of CA can be best satis® ed with the aid of GIS (Couclelis 1997 ).
Space no longer needs to be uniform since the spatial di(cid:128) erence equations can be
easily developed in the context of GIS (Batty and Xie 1994b).

Most current GIS techniques have limitations in modelling changes in the land-
scape over time, but the integration of CA and GIS has demonstrate d considerable
potential (Itami 1988, Deadman et al. 1993 ). The limitations of contemporary GIS
include its poor ability to handle dynamic spatial models, poor performance for
many operations, and poor handling of the temporal dimension (Park and Wagner
1997 ). In coupling GIS with CA, CA can serves as an analytical engine to provide
a ¯ exible framework for the programming and running of dynamic spatial models.

2. Constrained CA for the planning of sustainable urban development

Interest in sustainable urban development has increased rapidly in recent years.
Unfortunately, the concept of sustainable urban development is debatable because
unique de® nitions and scopes do not exist (Haughton and Hunter 1994 ). However,
this concept is very important to our society in dealing with its increasingly pressing
resource and environmental problems. As more nations are implementing this con-
cept in their development plans, it has created important impacts on national policies
and urban planning. The concern over sustainable urban development will continue
to grow, especially in the developing countries which are undergoing rapid urbaniza-
tion. A useful way to clarify its ambiguity is to set up some working de® nitions.
Some speci® c and narrow de® nitions do exist for special circumstances but there are
no commonly accepted de® nitions. The working de® nitions can help to eliminate
ambiguities and ® nd out solutions and better alternatives to existing development
patterns.

The conversion of agricultural land into urban land uses in the urbanization
processes has become a serious issue for sustainable urban development in the
developing countries. Take China as an example, it cannot a(cid:128) ord to lose a signi® cant
amount of its valuable agricultural land because it has a huge growing population
to feed. Unfortunately, in recent years, a large amount of such land have been
unnecessarily lost and the forms of existing urban development cannot help to
sustain its further development (Yeh and Li 1997, Yeh and Li 1998 ). The complete
depletion of agricultural land resources would not be far away in some fast growing
areas if such development trends continued. The main issue of sustainable urban
development is to search for better urban forms that can help to sustain development,
especially the minimization of unnecessary agricultural land loss. Four operational
criteria for sustainable urban forms can be used: (1 ) not to convert too much
agricultural land at the early stages of development; (2 ) to decide the amount of
land consumption based on available land resources and population growth; (3 ) to
guide urban development to sites which are less important for food production; and
(4 ) to maintain compact development patterns.

The objective of this research is to develop an operational CA model

for

Modelling sustainable urban development

133

sustainable urban development. A number of advantage s have been identi® ed in the
application of CA in urban simulation (Wolfram 1984, Itami 1988 ). Cellular automata
are seen not only as a framework for dynamic spatial modelling but as a para-
digm for thinking about complex spatial-tempora l phenomena and an experimental
laboratory for testing ideas (Itami 1994 ).

Formally, standard cellular automata may be generalised as follows:

St+ 1 = f (St, N )

(1 )

where S is a set of all possible states of the cellular automata, N is a neighbourhood
of all cells providing input values for the function f, and f is a transition function
that de® nes the change of the state from t to t +1.

Standard cellular automata apply a `bottom-up’ approach. The approach argues
that local rules can create complex patterns by running the models in iterations. It
is central to the idea that cities should work from particular to general, and that
they should seek to understand the small scale in order to understand the large
(Batty and Xie 1994a). It is amazing to see that real urban systems can be modelled
based on microscopic behaviour that may be the CA model’s most useful advantage .
However, the `top-down’ critique nevertheless needs to be taken seriously. An
example is that central governments have the power to control overall
land
development patterns and the amount of land consumption.

With the implementations of sustainable elements into cellular automata, a new
paradigm for thinking about urban planning emerges. It is possible to embed some
constraints in the transition rules of cellular automata so that urban growth can be
rationalised according to a set of pre-de® ned sustainable criteria. However, such
experiments are very limited since many researchers just focus on the simulation of
possible urban evolution and the understanding of growth mechanisms using CA
techniques.

The constrained cellular automata should be able to provide much better alternat-
ives to actual development patterns. A good example is to produce a `compact’
urban form using CA models. The need for sustainable cities is readily apparent in
recent years. A particular issue is to seek the most suitable form for sustainable
urban development. The growing spread of urban areas accelerating at an alarming
rate in the last few decades re¯ ects the dramatic pressure of human development on
nature. The steady rise in urban areas and decline in agricultural land have led to
the worsening of food production and other environmental problems. Urban develop-
ment towards a compact form has been proposed as a means to alleviate the
increasingly intensi® ed land use con¯ icts. The morphology of a city is an important
feature in the `compact city theory’ (Jenks et al. 1996 ). Evidence indicates a strong
link between urban form and sustainable development, although it is not simple and
straightforward. Compact urban form can be a major means in guiding urban
development to sustainability, especially in reducing the negative e(cid:128) ects of the present
dispersed development in Western cities. However, one of the frequent problems in
the compact city debate is the lack of proper tools to ensure successful implementa-
tion of the compact city because of its complexity (Burton et al. 1996 ). This study
demonstrate s that the constrained CA can be used to model compact cities and
sustainable urban forms based on local, regional and global constraints.

3. Suitability and constraints for sustainable urban forms using CA

In this constrained CA model, there are three important aspects of sustainable
compact patterns, land quality and the

urban forms that need to be consideredÐ

134

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

amount of land consumption. Compact patterns can be formed using some neigh-
bourhood functions in computer simulation. It is possible to create compact patterns
since cellular automata are fundamentally neighbourhood-based . The concern over
land quality is also an important issue in sustainable urban development since land
quality is a critical factor for agricultural production. The restriction of develop-
ment in fertile land or sensitive areas needs to be implemented in the sustainable
development model. There is also a need to properly arrange the amounts of land
consumption in di(cid:128) erent periods to avoid the early depletion of land resources.
This research will demonstrate that these three aspects can be well incorporated into
the constrained CA through the use of local, regional and global constraints.

3.1. State-based cellular automata

In a standard CA model, the state is usually used as the main attribute to describe
the development of a cell. Any cell cannot take on more than one state simultaneously,
although the state can change from one to another in di(cid:128) erent periods. In urban
simulation, the most general state for a cell is developed or not developed (alive and
dead ). The essence of cellular automata is that the states of the neighbouring cells
in¯ uence the state of the central cell. Iterative looping rules are used, but de® ning
the rules is not unique. A simple model is to project the state of a central cell using
a 3 Ö

3 window to count the distribution of states in its neighbouring cells.

A simpli® ed rule-based structure of this type of cellular automata may be de® ned

as (Batty 1997 ):

IF any cell {x Ô 1, y Ô 1} is already developed
THEN Pd{x, y }= (cid:158)

Pd{i, j }/8

{ i, j }× X

&
IF Pd{x, y }> some threshold value
THEN cell{x, y } is developed with some other probability r {x, y }

where Pd{x, y} is the probability of urban development for cell {x, y}, cell {i, j} are
all the cells which from the Moore neighbourhood V, including the cell {x, y} itself.
The model indicates that cells developed in the neighbourhood cells can add
some probability for development in the central cell. This sets o(cid:128) a `relax’ growth
process in which cells can successively develop as soon as they come into contact
with developed cells.

3.2. Suitability-base d cellular automata

More sophisticated CA systems have been further developed to simulate urban
growth through the concepts of `development probability’ and `development suita-
bility’ (White et al. 1997, Wu and Webster 1998 ). This kind of simulation assumes
a relation between the states (developed or not), development probability and
development suitability:

St+ 1 {x, y}= f (Pt
s{x, y}= f (DSt
P t

s{x, y })

s{x, y })

(2 )

(3 )

where S{x, y} is the state at location {x, y}; P s{x, y} is the probability of transition
to the state S at the location; and DSs{x, y} is the suitability of conversion to the
state S. f is a transition function.

The conversion criterion is that cells with high scores of development suitability

Modelling sustainable urban development

135

will ® rst be selected for development. It is obvious that the CA simulation heavily
depends on the calculation of development suitability based on neighbourhood
con® guration. The suitability of a cell for development is usually evaluated according
to location factors and site properties. Much work has been done on the evaluation
of land suitability, which usually involves multicritera evaluation (MCE) techniques
(Yeh and Li 1998, Wu and Webster 1998 ).

Land suitability which describes the potential of a cell for a speci® c type of land
use can act as an important constraint in the CA model. There are reasons to put
suitability into the model for sustainable land use. Suitability is crucial to determine
the use of land in urban planning to achieve e(cid:129) ciency, especially for sustainable
land use. For example, we may allow faster urban development in less fertile land
and more restricted or slower urban development
land.
Therefore, suitability also plays an important role in a(cid:128) ecting the state or the transfer
of the state of a cell in an idealised development pattern. One cell can take on more
than one suitability score for di(cid:128) erent proposed types of land use. Land suitability
is also subject to the land use change in a neighbourhood function (Yeh and Li
1998 ). Suitability scores should be re-computed in each iteration to achieve compat-
ible land use. The model may be expressed as a two-dimension model, including
states S(t) and suitability SS(t ):

in good agricultural

(St+ 1, SSt+ 1 )= f (St, SSt, N )

(4 )

where N is the neighbourhood providing input values for the transition function f.

3.3. Constrained cellular automata

Although constraints have been examined in some cellular automata models,
they are used to make more reliable and reproducible predictions of actual urban
land-use patterns (White et al. 1997 ). The constraints used are mainly related to
land suitability according to accessibility that a(cid:128) ects land development probability,
such as cost distance to city centres, roads and railways. There is a general lack of
consideration of other constraints of development, especially those related to sustain-
able development, such as environmental conservation. More constraints can be
incorporated in cellular automata to ensure that urban growth will satisfy sustainable
urban forms or at least ® nd better urban forms.

Constraints for sustainable urban development can be generally classi® ed into
three typesÐ
local, regional and global constraints. It is possible to simulate idealised
development or sustainable urban forms if these types of constraints are built within
a CA model. Local constraints contain detailed spatial information for each cell, but
regional constraints have only aggregated or partial-spatial information. Global
constraints, however, are characterised by temporal or non-spatial information.

Local constraints can be represented by cell-based values or scores that in¯ uence
the CA modelling process cell by cell. Regional constraints may only emphasize the
di(cid:128) erences of a geographical phenomenon among larger areas, such as towns. The
e(cid:128) ects of administrative boundaries could be crucial in in¯ uencing development
patterns. For example, the estimation of population growth is important in deciding
per-capita land consumption in a town. Local governments often report much higher
growth rates to higher level governments for obtaining larger quota of land for
development. This can signi® cantly exaggerate the consumption of agricultural land
in the towns that have low levels of `sustainable’ consciousness. However, regional
constraints can be applied to reduce the possibility of irrational development patterns

136

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

according to the detailed situations of each town. Global factors could temporally
change in correspondence with the dynamics of land resources and the decisions
from national and provincial governments. This type of constraint can be used to
control the amount of land consumption in the CA modelling. The combination of
local, regional and global constraints is expected to produce e(cid:128) ects in eliminating
unsustainable development patterns as far as possible.

The proposed constrained CA model that stresses the importance of constraints

as well as states is as follows:

P ¾ t

d {x,y}= f (St{x,y}, const

ld{x,y}, const

rd{x,y}, const

g d{x,y}, N )

= f (St{x,y}, CONSt

(5 )
d {x,y} is the development probability of cell {x,y} at time t; St{x,y} is the
g d are the evaluated scores of local,
d is the total evaluated constraint

where P¾ t
state of cell {x,y} at time t; const
regional and global constraints respectively; CONSt
scores by combining all the constraints; and N is the neighbourhood of cell {x,y}.

rd and const

d{x,y}, N )

ld, const

The model can be decomposed as a standard CA model, f (St{x,y}, N ), plus the

constraint coe(cid:129) cient CONSt

d{x,y}. It becomes:

P ¾ t

d {x,y}= f (St{x,y}, N )Ö CONSt

d{x,y}

(6 )

Constraint scores for development can be regarded as a scalar or a birth rate to
readjust the development probability that is calculated from a standard CA model.
The scores continuously range from 0 to 1. The maximum value of the scores is 1,
indicating 100% support for development. The minimum value is 0, denying any
possibility of development.

MCE techniques can be applied to estimate development suitability which is
usually dependent on more than one factor (Wu and Webster 1998 ). The techniques
can also be applied to obtain the ® nal score of constraints. This is:

CONSt

k

d{x,y}=A (cid:158)

i= 1

Wiconst

id{x,y}B ^

i= k+ 1
is the vector of weights for constraints. 1<

n

const

id{x,y }

(7 )

where wi
constraints whereas k +1<

i<

n are the restrictive constraints.

i<

k are non-restrictive

Non-restrictive constraints are the constraints that have some in¯ uences but do
not have critical impacts on the modelling process. Restrictive constraints are those
that have important e(cid:128) ects on the modelling process. For example, the barriers of
small water areas or hills can pose some di(cid:129) culties for urban development and they
can be regarded as non-restrictive constraints. Barriers such as steep mountains or
major agricultural areas can be used as restrictive constraints in restricting urban
development from taking place there. In our modelling process,
local, regional
and global constraints are restrictive factors since they are considered as equally
important in creating sustainable urban forms. The formula can be simpli® ed as:

n

CONSt

d{x,y}= ^

const

id{x,y }

(8 )

i= 1
The combination of local, regional and global constraints can be processed cell
by cell. Regional and global constraints which are aggregated need to be desegregated

Modelling sustainable urban development

137

into each cell before the combination. Global constraints, which are functions of
time, enable the system-wide growth rate to be changeable and controlled across
time. An example is the optimal arrangement of a given amount of resource consump-
tion for di(cid:128) erent periods. We have proposed an `equity’ model to allocate the amounts
of land consumption for di(cid:128) erent planning periods based on some sustainable criteria
(Yeh and Li 1998 ). The optimal allocation can be used as a global constraint so
that too much land consumption at an early stage is avoided. It is easy to control
the rate of urban growth using the global constraint. A value of 0 will be applied
for the global constraint when the growth reaches the optimal consumption for a
period. Then the product of all constraint scores becomes 0 and the system stops
growing. The global constraint is important in keeping urban growth within a
sustainable rate.

There is a unit problem in standard CA simulation which is operated on a cell
by cell basis. A cell which is the basic unit of cellular automata has only a binary
valueÐ
1 for successful development and 0 for non-change. There are no intermediate
values for these `black or white’ cells. This raises a problem when there is a need to
di(cid:128) erentiate growth rates between cells or for a cell between di(cid:128) erent periods. The
`grey’ state of a cell can be used to overcome this unit problem by assign a value
that ranges from 0 to 1 for each cell in the CA model. It can serve two purposes.
First, the `grey’ state can accurately represent the degree or percentage of development
for a cell. `Grey’ cells are those of partial development. However, a `grey’ cell could
be divided into many absolute `black’ sub-cells and `white’ sub-cells if the resolution
were increased. Secondly, `grey’ state may also be regarded as a useful dummy
variable in representing the accumulation of development or development probability
during the iterations of the CA model.

In our CA model, `grey’ state Gd{x,y} of a cell is de® ned to re¯ ect the developed
(urbanised ) percentage of the cell {x,y}. First, the development probability of a cell
at time t can be calculated based on its neighbouring states according to standard
cellular automata:

P t

d{x,y}= f (S{x,y}t, N )

(9 )

where N is the neighbourhood of the cell {x,y}.

The additional developed percentage or additional `grey’ state D Gt

d{x,y} of a cell
at the time t is proportional to the probability and also subject to the combined
constraint score.

D Gt

d{x,y}= Pt

d{x,y}Ö CONSt

d{x,y}

The ® nal `grey’ state is the accumulation of the developed percentages for each step
of the iteration.

Gt+ 1
d

{x,y}= Gt

d{x,y}+D Gt

d{x,y} Gd{x,y} ×(0,1 )

The `grey’ state should be kept within the range of (0,1 ). Therefore, D Gt
d{x,y} reaches 1.

should be assigned to 0 when Gt

An iteration formula for the constrained CA model based on the `grey’ value of

a cell is therefore as follows:

(10)

(11)

d{x,y}

(12)

St+ 1 {x,y }=Cdeveloped

partial developed
St{x,y }

d{x,y}= 1)

d{x,y}< 1 )

(Gt
(0 < Gt
(Gt

d{x,y}= 0)

138

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

4. Implementation and discussion

The constrained CA model for sustainable land development was implemented
in the ARC/INFO GRID environment using the Arc Macro Language (AML). The
development of the CA model within a GIS can facilitate the convenient access to
the land use information in the GIS database. The GIS database consists of land
use maps, soil maps, economic data and the monitoring results of land use change
detected from remote sensing for the Peal River Delta. The CA model was applied
to a city, Dongguan, in the Pearl River Delta as a case study. The essence of the
CA model is that constraint space plays an important role in regulating the growth
of `cellular cities’.

Before the application, the CA model was applied to simpli® ed arti® cial cities
for the easy identi® cation of modelling e(cid:128) ects. Figure 1 is the simulation result using
arti® cial constraint space and cities. The result clearly demonstrate s that the CA
model is straightforward in allowing constraints to shape urban growth. Much better
urban forms can be obtained by reducing urban encroachment on the `restricted
areas’ according to the constraint scores. Urban growth will be frozen in the areas

(a) Constraint space

(b) ‘Grey’ urban growth based on constraint
(Circular neighbourhood; radius=2, time=10)

Figure 1. Constraint space and cellular automaton. (a) Constraint space (b) `Grey’ urban
growth based on constraint (Circular neighbourhood; radius= 2, time= 10.

Modelling sustainable urban development

139

with constraint score equal to 0. It is obvious that the score of 0 or low values
should be applied to those environmentally sensitive areas or important agricultural
production areas to formulate better urban development scenarios. Figure 2 shows
that the model can also be valid for regulating polycentric urban growth.

In this study, the circular neighbourhood is used to improve model accuracy.
The circular neighbourhood is better than a rectangular neighbourhood (the Moore
neighbourhood ) because no bias exits in all directions (® gure 3 ). In ® gure 3(a), the
points of A, B, A¾ , and B¾ should have the same neighbourhood for a circular object.
However, the con® guration of neighbourhood by rectangles produce a discrepancy
of neighbourhood between A and B. Thus, the simulation from the rectangle
neighbourhood can produce signi® cant distortions, compared with that from the
circular neighbourhood (® gure 3(b)).

A simple way to de® ne constraint space is to use agricultural suitability in this
constrained CA model. Agricultural suitability can be assessed from a series of site
information that indicates agricultural production potential. Development suitability
scores that range from 0 to 1 can be de® ned as the inverses of agricultural suitability
scores. Then good-quality agricultural land will correspond to areas of low develop-
ment suitability scores. Restricting development in areas of high development suitab-
ility scores and relaxing development in other areas as the replacement can help to
sustain future food supply.

(a) Constraint space.

(b) Polycentric growth.
(Circular neighbourhood; radius=2, time=5)

Figure 2. Constraint space and polycentric growth. (a) Constraint space. (b) Polycentric
growth. (Circular Neighbourhood; radius= 2, time= 5 ).

140

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

(a) Rectangle and circular neighbourhood.

(b) Simulation based on rectangle and circular neighbourhood.

Figure 3. Rectangle and circular neighbourhood for the CA model. (a) Rectangle and circular
neighbourhood. (b) Simulation based on rectangle and circular neighbourhood.

In this CA model, development control is enhanced by the transformation of
development suitability scores into constraint scores using a power function. A non-
linear transformation of development suitability scores into constraint scores can
allow a control parameter k to be added into the modelling process. The advantage
of using the power function is its simplicity and e(cid:128) ectiveness in controlling develop-
ment patterns through the parameter k. A set of transformation curves can be
produced from di(cid:128) erent values of parameter k. This is especially useful when there
is a need to put more weight on protecting the best quality agricultural land by
choosing proper k values. The power transformation is de® ned as:

CONS=DSk

(13)

where CONS is the constraint score and DS is the development suitability score.

Modelling sustainable urban development

141

Figure 4 is the result of the power transformation with di(cid:128) erent values of k. A
normal linear transformation can be obtained when k = 1. It is apparent that no
constraints will be applied to the model when k is chosen as 0. It can be easily seen
that constraint scores will be closer to 0 for good-quality agricultural land when the
values of k are higher than 1.

The constrained CA model is applied to an actual city, Dongguan in the Pearl
River Delta, the fastest growing region in China. A great amount of agricultural
land has been lost in this region because of rapid land development and poor land
management (Yeh and Li 1997 ). The constrained CA model is useful to generate
some much better urban forms so that sustainable land development can be achieved
in the region. The city covers an area of 2465 km2 with 29 towns and a city proper.
Most of the best agricultural land is concentrated at the north-west corner of the
city. There is a strong challenge in protecting agricultural land during the rapid
urbanisation process. One may argue that strict prohibition of land conversion is
unrealistic. However, the constrained CA model can be used to ® nd out suitable
places for urban development and to regulate existing urban forms toward much
better ones.

The basic data were mainly from TM satellite data with 30-m resolution on the
ground. Agricultural suitability maps were produced mainly based on information
from soil and slope maps. The data set was converted into a resolution of 50 m on
889 pixels. The CA model used a circular neighbourhood
the ground with 619 pixels Ö
104 m2 on the ground.
with a radius of 2 pixels which included an area of about 3 Ö
The transition rules of this CA model were mainly based on the calculation of the
`grey’ state of each cell which was subject to development probability and a series
of constraints. The circular neighbourhood was used to count development probabil-
ity for a cell. The `grey’ state of a cell was calculated according to equations (6± 13 ).
The time steps of simulation (t ) for each scenario were decided to ensure that the
amount of ® nal land consumption would be equal to the actual or optimal.

Figure 5 shows the transformation of agricultural suitability into local constraint
scores using a power function. In the transformation function, di(cid:128) erent values of k
were used to compare the e(cid:128) ects on the protection of the best agricultural land.

Figure 6 is the simulation results when these constraint scores are applied in

Figure 4. Power transformation of development suitability into constraint score.

142

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

(a) Agricultural suitability.

(b) Constraint score (k=1).

(c) Constraint score (k=3).

Figure 5. Agricultural

suitability and constraint

scores.

(a) Agricultural

suitability.

(b) Constraint score (k= 1 ) (c) Constraint score (k= 3 ).

Modelling sustainable urban development

143

(a) Loss of the best agricultural land
(k=0, without constraints; t=5)

Figure 6(a). Controlling the loss of the best agricultural land using suitability constraints.

searching for much better urban forms for the city. The 1988 and 1993 TM images
were used to derive the urban areas in 1988 and 1993. The simulation started based
on the urban areas of 1988 and tried to search for better alternatives for 1993 using
the same amount of land consumption. Figure 6(a) is the simulation result without
suitability constraints (k = 0 ). Its initial stage is based on the urban areas from the
classi® cation of the 1988 satellite image. If land development proceeded according
to this scenario, a lot of land loss might take place in the north-west part of the city
where the best of agricultural land is concentrated. With the use of constraint factors
in the constrained CA model, urban encroachment on the best land can be reduced
by using less fertile land as a replacement of the more fertile land for development.
The use of linear transformation of development suitability into constraint score
(k = 1 ) produces less loss of fertile land although the land consumption is the same
(® gure 6(b)). There would be much less of
fertile land lost when the non-linear
transformation (k = 3 ) is used (® gure 6(c)).

An indicator related to suitability loss is used to assess the above di(cid:128) erent
scenarios. Urban land development will encroach on agricultural land which has an
attribute of agricultural suitability. The conversion of agricultural land will accom-
pany suitability loss because of the removal of agricultural production potential. The

144

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

(b) Controlling urban encroachment
on the best agricultural land
(k=1, with normal constraints; t=10)

Figure 6(b). Controlling the loss of the best agricultural land using suitability constraints.

measurement of suitability loss can provide an indicator for the assessment of
development impacts. The indicator of measuring suitability loss is as follows:

Sloss = (cid:158)

S(i,{x,y})

{x, y} × X

i

(14)

where Sloss is the total suitability loss and S (i, ({x,y}) is the suitability for agricultural
type i at cell {x,y}; and V is the set of all cells of land loss.

The e(cid:128) ects of CA modelling for protecting good agricultural land can be demon-
strated by the plot of suitability loss and land consumption. Figure 7 is the scatter
plot of suitability loss and land consumption for di(cid:128) erent values of k. There is a
linear relationship between suitability loss and land consumption. The slope is
reduced if higher values of k are applied. This indicates that higher values of k can
lead to a lesser amount of suitability loss for the same amount of land consumption.
More complicated factors besides agricultural suitability can be embedded into
the constrained CA model to re¯ ect other environmental settings for sustainable
urban forms. Land resources and economic factors vary regionally and globally. For
example, per-capita agricultural land resources may not be the same among towns
and this should a(cid:128) ect land supply regionally. Land supply may also change globally

(cid:158)
Modelling sustainable urban development

145

(c) Stricter control of urban encroachment
on the best agricultural land
(k=3, with stricter constraints; t=24)

Figure 6(c). Controlling the loss of the best agricultural land using suitability constraints.

Figure 7. Linear relationships between land consumption and suitability loss for various k
values.

146

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

because of government policies and intervention. Development suitability and con-
straints can be de® ned with reference to these changeable regional and global factors.
The integration of CA and GIS provides a useful tool to explore sustainable urban
forms under di(cid:128) erent development scenarios.

An example of using regional constraints is to plan urban growth rate based on
the percentage of available land resources by towns. It seems reasonable that the
rates of urban growth should be based on available land areas ( land supply). There
is evidence that land resources vary di(cid:128) erently among towns (Li 1998 ) and di(cid:128) erent
growth rates can be applied to di(cid:128) erentiate them. One may argue that local (neigh-
bourhood ) constraints could be built to deal with the di(cid:128) erences. However, actual
land use planning is usually made on an aggregated basis for an administration unit
(town). The aggregated data of population, land resources and economy within the
administration boundary will usually decide the scale and types of land use patterns.
The percentage of available land for conversion by towns was calculated using
satellite data. Figure 8(a) shows the constraint scores that are transformed from the
percentage of available land in each town. As the result of the constraint, towns with
higher percentage of available land will be allowed to grow faster in the CA model.
In contrast, the growth in the towns with lesser percentage of available land will be
restricted by applying lower growth rates. The modelling results are shown in
® gure 8(b) in which the non-linear transformation (k = 3) was used to convert the
percentages into constraint scores.

The combination of local constraints and regional constraints was carried out
by the product of these factors. Figure 9 (a) is the product of agricultural suitability
constraint and available land constraint. The objective is that urban growth should
be restricted in the areas of fertile agricultural land (cell-based ) and less available
land resources (town-based ). Global constraints were also embedded in the con-
strained cellular automata. The essence of the constraints is to control land consump-
tion across time. We obtained the amounts of optimal land consumption for di(cid:128) erent
planning periods using an `equity’ model according to the criteria of sustainable
development (Yeh and Li 1998 ). In the CA modelling, a global constraint score of
0 is applied when urban growth has reached its optimal land consumption. According
to the model, we ® nd that the actual land consumption in 1988± 93 is too much due
to wasteful use of land resources.

Figure 9 (b) is the modelling results when the product of local constraint score,
regional constraint score and global constraint score is applied to derive optimal
development patterns for the city. The optimal land consumption was decided
according to the `equity’ model. The simulation stopped when it reached the optimal
land consumption. The initial stage was based on the urban areas of 1988. The
simulation attempted to ® nd the reasonable land consumption and locations of
urban development for 1988± 93. Based on the model, a lesser amount of agricultural
land loss would be obtained and more e(cid:129) ciency could be achieved by controlling
land consumption and selecting much better development sites.

In this study, the `grey’ state of a cell can range from 0 to 1. There are other cells
with intermediate values which represent partial development. However, the number
of these cells is small since they will soon become fully developed after a few iterations.
The model developed here is related to the previous model that used the same
data set for simulating sustainable land development (Yeh and Li 1998 ). They are
two di(cid:128) erent models with respect to their framework and performances. The novelty
of the previous model is to provide an `equity’ allocation method within GIS, but

Modelling sustainable urban development

147

(a) Regional constraints — available land resources

by towns.

(b) Urban growth based on land resources

by town (k=3; t=37).

Figure 8. Regional constraints and urban growth. (a) Regional constraintsÐ

available land

resources by towns. (b) Urban growth based on land resources by town (k= 3; t= 37 ).

the model has some weaknesses in site selection. The procedures of site selection in
model 1 are not based on CA techniques and are time-consuming. The second model
can easily incorporate various types of complicated constraints using state of the art
CA techniques. This can allow the development patterns to be easily controlled by
constraints and parameters. The results from model 2 are more encouraging in terms

148

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

(a) Product of local constraints and regional constraints.

(b) Urban growth based on local, regional and global constraints

(k=3; t=22).

Figure 9. Local, Regional and Global Constraints for Sustainable Urban Forms. (a) Product
of Local Constraints and Regional Constraints (b) Urban Growth Based on Local,
Regional and Global Constraints ( k= 3; t= 22 ).

of the compactness and suitability loss generated. The compactness index CI can be
calculated by:

where S is the total area and P is the perimeter of land development or land loss.

It is obvious that a larger value of CI is preferable for compact development

CI = Ó S/P

(15)

Modelling sustainable urban development

149

patterns. Table 1 is the comparison of compactness and suitability loss for actual
land development and the results from model 1 and model 2, using equations (14)
and (15 ). It can be found that much better results are produced in model 2.
Furthermore, the run time for model 2 is about a few minutes whereas the run time
for model 1 is about an hour (using the same Sun Ultra workstation and ARC/INFO
GRID ). Apparently, model 2 has much better performance with regards to the output
and run time.

Table 1. Comparison of the e(cid:129) ciency between actual development, Model 1 and Model 2
with the same amount of land consumption in 1988± 1993.

Compactness index
(CI )

Suitability loss
(Sl o s s )

Actual development
Model 1
Model 2

1.78
4.20
9.79

9.26E +06
8.90E +06
1.31E +06

It seems that this proposed CA model is not related to urban suitability but
more to agricultural suitability. This raises the questions on how to take urban
suitability into account and keep the urban system sustainable in this model. We
consider that the local, regional and global constraints embedded in this model are
most important in generating sustainable urban growth in many developing countries
where the loss of agricultural land to urban development is serious. This model uses
agricultural suitability as an important local constraint and also uses other factors,
such as available land areas and population growth as regional and global con-
straints. Without using these constraints, the model is no di(cid:128) erent from standard
CA models which simulate urban growth that is mainly based on urban suitability
using the neighbourhood functions. There are con¯ icts of land allocation based on
agricultural suitability and urban suitability (Yeh and Li 1998 ). In this constrained
CA model, the k parameter of the model is used to balance between the constraints
and neighbourhood functions. All the in¯ uences of agricultural suitability and other
constraints will be eliminated when the value of k is assigned to 0. Higher values of
k will produce development scenarios that give more weights to agricultural suitabil-
ity. The choice of the appropriate k value is dependent on the decision-makers who
may consider political issues as well as resource factors, rather than simply the
model, in their decision making. This model provides an opportunity for the decision-
makers to see the results of di(cid:128) erent land development controls by using di(cid:128) erent k
values. This study has demonstrate d that the model is capable of producing compact
development patterns and conserving fertile agricultural land, both are important
issues in the planning of sustainable urban development in many developing
countries.

5. Conclusion

The protection of valuable agricultural land is important in many developing
countries where cities are growing rapidly. In China, cities are usually expanding
without properly considering land suitability and environmental impacts. Recent
rapid land development has been accompanied by the loss of large amounts of fertile
agricultural land. This study demonstrate s that CA can be used to simulate urban
development based on constraints that can re¯ ect our environmental concerns. The

150

X. L i and A. G. Yeh

objective is to produce sustainable urban forms as alternatives to the existing develop-
ment patterns. The study has suggested that programming the CA inside a GIS can
be as a useful planning tool to model urban development under complicated and
changeable environmental factors. The results of modelling can provide useful guide-
lines for policy making and urban management in developing countries, especially
in China where urban areas are rapidly expanding in a highly dispersed pattern.

Cellular automata have been widely applied to the simulation and prediction of
possible urban development according to empirical data and rules. However, this
paper provides a prototype implementation of CA that can be used in urban planning
by using various kinds of constraints which are associated with sustainable develop-
ment criteria. There is a need to broaden standard CA models in solving growing
environmental problems based on the principles of sustainable development. Local,
regional and global constraints can be embedded in CA models and thus regulate
urban development toward better urban forms. These types of constraints are equally
important in a(cid:128) ecting modelling results. This is quite di(cid:128) erent from the standard
cellular automata in which only the property of locality has a unique role.

The concept of the `grey’ state of a cell is proposed to represent the level of
development of a cell. It can overcome the limitations of absolute `black’ and `white’
cells that are used in standard cellular automata. The `grey’ state is the basis of the
constrained CA model. The advantage s are that constraint scores can be conveniently
included in the model and the iteration equations of the model can be executed
exactly using intermediate values of the `grey’ state.

There are signi® cant con¯ icts between protection of good-quality agricultural
land and urban development because good-quality agricultural land is often suitable
for urban development. This model provides an operational framework for balancing
the two di(cid:128) erent options based on CA techniques. Particularly, a power function
and k parameter are used in the transformation of constraints for regulating urban
development. This can allow the users to interactively choose di(cid:128) erent k values and
® nd better urban forms based on the background of available land resources and
other political situations. More emphasis will be put on the strict protection of good-
quality agricultural land by increasing the value of k.

The comparison of actual land development and modelling results reveals that
this model can produce much better urban forms in terms of compactness and
suitability loss. This is very important for sustainable urban development because
agricultural land loss is very severe in many developing countries. The comparison
also indicates that this model has also produced more plausible results than a
previous model that we have developed using the same data set (Yeh and Li 1998 ).
The integration of cellular automata with GIS could be of mutual bene® t. Cellular
automata can provide the much lacking simulation models in GIS. The use of GIS
could enable cellular automata to go beyond theoretic constructs and become more
realistic by taking into account real world data, factors and constraints in their
modelling. The incorporation of various kinds of constraints in cellular automata
can enable planners to compare the costs and bene® ts of di(cid:128) erent development
scenarios that are necessary for the formulation of plans for sustainable cities.

CA models can be completely developed within GIS for easily accessing the
information stored in the GIS database during the modelling processes. Constraints
for modelling sustainable urban growth can be de® ned using GIS and remote sensing
data. Neighbourhood functions can be calibrated using multi-temporal remote sens-
ing data. The inventory of land use and evaluation of land resources are prerequisites

Modelling sustainable urban development

151

for the modelling of land development. Remote sensing can be used to obtain land
use information which is then transformed into GIS for analysis and modelling. The
development of CA within GIS greatly enhances the ability of dynamic spatial
modelling within GIS. Other researches also support that integrated CA-GIS
approaches can enhance the current poor modelling capability of GIS (Park and
Wagner 1997 ).

Acknowledgment

We would like to thank the Croucher Foundation for funding this study and the
valuable comments from the three anonymous reviewers in helping us to revise
the paper.

References
Batty, M., 1997, Growing Cities (London: Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, University

College).

Design, 21, 531± 548.

Batty, M., and Xie, Y., 1994a, From cells to cities. Environment and Planning B: Planning and

Batty, M., and Xie, Y., 1994b, Urban analysis in a GIS environment: population density
modelling using ARC/INFO. In GIS and Spatial Analysis, edited by S. Fotheringham,
P. Rogerson (London: Taylor and Francis, pp. 189± 219.

Batty, M., and Xie, Y., 1997, Possible urban automata. Environment and Planning B: Planning

and Design, 24, 175± 192.

Burton, E., Williams, K., and Jenks, M., 1996, The compact city and urban sustainability:
con¯ icts and complexities. In T he Compact City: A Sustainable Urban Form? edited
by M. Jenks, E. Burton, and K. Williams (London: E&FN SPON ), pp. 231± 247.

Couclelis, H., 1997, From cellular automata to urban models: new principles for model
development and implementation. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design,
24, 165± 174.

Deadman, P. D., Brown, R. D., and Gimblett, H. R., 1993, Modelling rural residential
settlement patterns with cellular automata. Journal of Environmental Management, 37,
147± 160.

Haughton, G., and Hunter, C., 1994, Sustainable Cities (London: Jessica Kingsley).
Itami, R. M., 1988, Cellular worlds: models for dynamic conceptions of landscape. L andscape

Itami, R. M., 1994, Simulating spatial dynamics: cellular automata theory. L andscape and

Architecture, July/August, 52± 57.

Urban Planning, 30, 24± 47.

Jenks, M., Burton, E., and Williams, K., 1996, Compact cities and sustainability: an introduc-
tion. In T he Compact City: A Sustainable Urban Form? edited by M. Jenks, E. Burton
and K. Williams (London: E&FN SPON ), pp. 11± 12.

Li, X., 1998, Measurement of rapid agricultural land loss in the Pearl River Delta with the

integration of remote sensing and GIS, Environment and Planning B, 25, 447± 461.

Park, S., and Wagner, D. F., 1997, Incorporating cellular automata simulators as analytical

engines in GIS. T ransitions in GIS, 2, 213± 231.

White, R., and Engelen, G., 1993, Cellular automata and fractal urban form: a cellular
modelling approach to the evolution of urban land-use patterns. Environment and
Planning A, 25, 1175± 1199.

White, R., and Engelen, G., 1997, Cellular automata as the basis of integrated dynamic

regional modelling. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 24, 235± 246.

White, R., Engelen, G., and Uijee, I., 1997, The use of constrained cellular automata for
high-resolution modelling of urban land-use dynamics. Environment and Planning B,
24, 323± 343.

Wolfram, S., 1984, Cellular automata: a model of complexity. Nature, 31, 419± 424.
Wu, F., and Webster, C. J., 1998, Simulation of land development through the integration
of cellular automata and multicriteria evaluation. Environment and Planning B, 25,
103± 126.

152

Modelling sustainable urban development

Yeh, A. G. O., and Li, X., 1997, An integrated remote sensing and GIS approach in the
monitoring and evaluation of rapid urban growth for sustainable development in the
Pearl Rive Delta, China. International Planning Studies, 2, 193± 210.

Yeh, A. G. O., and Li, X., 1998, Sustainable land development model for rapid growth areas

using GIS. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, 169± 189.

