The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 3

pp. 183–186 UKCC National Report to ICA 2011-Special Issue August 2011

O B S E R V A T I O N S

OS OpenData and Its Effect on Non-commercial
Cartography

Steve Chilton

Middlesex University, London, UK
Email: steve8@mdx.ac.uk

There was considerable excitement in the geodata world when it was announced that Ordnance Survey would be releasing
considerable amounts of data, and on 1 April 2010, it finally came to pass. Immediately, there was discussion in the data
community on what the effect would be on cartography, both commercial and non-commercial. This report details some of
the discussion that took place in the non-commercial sector, mainly through a case study of the OpenStreetMap (OSM)
project. By April 2010, The Guardian had been running its Free Our Data campaign for 4 years. Would it continue or
stop because one of its primary targets had been hit? It took the blog 8 days to even comment on the data release, then
another month for a second entry to appear. Two more posts on 2 June and then on 4 June came one entitled ‘Is the
campaign won? What do you think?’. Nineteen people chose to respond, with a sprinkling of queries about derived data,
and the campaign and the blog just faded away. It re-surfaced as a twitter feed (@freeourdata) ‘lobbying UK gov’t to
make non-personal data such as maps free for all sorts of commercial or noncommercial use’.

Keywords: Ordnance Survey, OpenData, OpenStreetMap, OSM, non-commercial, cartography

OPENSTREETMAP: PROJECT BACKGROUND

The wiki page for the OpenStreetMap (OSM) project states
‘OpenStreetMap creates and provides free geographic data
such as street maps to anyone who wants them. The project
was started because most maps you think of as free actually
have legal or technical restrictions on their use, holding
back people from using them in creative, productive, or
unexpected ways’ (http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/).

Anyone can contribute location data across the globe
from a variety of sources such as traces from GPS devices,
from authorized satellite imagery, or simply from knowing
an area very well, for example because they live there.

As from April 2010, the data available via Ordnance Survey
(OS) OpenData became a potential data source in the UK,
even to the extent of being available to possibly import it in
bulk to the OSM database. As will be seen, this really has not
been the case. The reason for this is a combination of: having
existing complete data in the database, difﬁculties with
merging imported data with existing data, and perceived
problems with the OS data quality. The following sections
will detail some of the investigations of the different OS
OpenData formats, and their usefulness, or otherwise, for
augmenting the OSM database.

Some of the general responses were to do with what is
not in the data: for example, rights of way data, and ﬁeld
boundaries (as per OS 1 : 25 000). It is also acknowledged
that some rural areas of UK are still insufﬁciently mapped in

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13044121958786

OSM. Opinions differed about whether having basic
coverage in an area (i.e. from OS OpenData), rather than
a blank sheet, attracts OSM users and contributors or in fact
drives them away.

RASTER DATA

The main raster data types available were: Mini scale;
1 : 250 000 Scale Colour Raster; and Street View.

Of these StreetView had the most potential. This dataset
has a signiﬁcant amount of building outlines in it, something
that is difﬁcult to survey efﬁciently with a GPS device. Project
members investigated it, reporting on experiments with bulk
importing buildings auto-traced from OS StreetView, but
gave up in favour of manually tracing from Bing aerial
imagery – supplementing it with ground surveys. OS
StreetView data are of poor quality and are certainly inferior
to aerial imagery – complete coverage of the UK (from Bing)
becoming available to use for deriving data after the release of
OS OpenData. The StreetView building outlines, especially
houses, are crude and only indicative. Having said that, the
StreetView data are actually useful for checking ground
surveyed data against, and have been incorporated as a
background layer in the OSM editors. Even then caution
should be expressed as this has to be re-projected, may have
alignment errors due to generalisation, and can lead to users
having false levels of conﬁdence.

184

The Cartographic Journal

OTHER APPLICATIONS

Both VectorMap District and Land-Form Panorama have
both been used in some interesting experiments to combine
them with some of the existing OSM data. Even if OS
OpenData is not being used directly within the main OSM
database, it provides valuable additional data for OSM-
based projects.

One individual’s web-based example is a project combin-
ing the VectorMap District map with Land-Form Panorama,
and with footpaths from OSM, thus alleviating what is one of
the omissions of the OS OpenData. It can be viewed at
http://www.free-map.org.uk/expts/vmdlfp200/ where an
explanation of the methodology is also provided.

A company in Yorkshire has been putting a map together
using a mixture of OS StreetView (buildings), OS Vector-
Map District (roads, forests, water, crags), OS Landform
Panorama (contours, relief), OS BoundaryLine (civil parish
names), OS Strategi (national park boundaries, mountain
range names) and OpenStreetMap (point names, footpaths,
parks, schools, etc.). It is still in development, but a sc-
reen shot can be seen at http://www.grough.co.uk/lib/
documents/tmp/lss/nn17.jpg

Similarly, the UK Map App – for iPhone,

iPad and
Android – combines many of the OS OpenData sets with
footpath data from OSM, and also has a separate 3D version
for the Lake District (3D Lakes) as illustrated in Figure 2.
Details at http://ukmapapp.com/

Figure 1. Some ﬁsh farms near Drifﬁeld alongside the river Hull that
have many little lakes and streams. These have been imported into
OSM from VectorMap District
(http://chris-osm.blogspot.com/
2010/05/using-vectormap.html)

VECTOR DATA

REFERENCE DATA

Vector data are represented by Boundary-Line; Strategi,
Meridian 2; VectorMap District; and Land-Form Panorama.
Initially, it looked as if the availability of boundary data
would be a big win for OSM. Test imports were trialled,
dealing with the issues of using .SHP ﬁles, re-projecting the
data (some had incomplete .PRJ ﬁles), and of merging
adjacent closed admin areas with each other and with data
already in the database. The conclusion was that with care,
and a considerable amount of interaction, this data could be
used to augment the boundary data that was in the database.
VectorMap District is the other dataset that has received
most interest (see Figure 1). However, VectorMap has
inconsistencies that affect its usefulness. Waterways have
annoying gaps where anything crosses them, and woods have
somewhat clunky outlines and annoying gaps. The woodland
is subdivided into an absurd number of small parcels (some
of this is a production artefact). Furthermore, on checking
with ground survey, perhaps 20% is not woodland, but scrub,
small plantations (e.g. new planting on golf courses), foliage
of individual trees in parkland, avenues, narrow wood belts,
or erroneously interpreted (or coded) reed-beds, sedge-beds
and other ‘green’ areas. So, the woodland data have to be
treated with a great deal of caution if being considered for
import. Render artefacts are a nuisance that have to be dealt
with (e.g. bridges in water features).

Another feature that is difﬁcult to survey on the ground is
power lines. These are represented in VectorMap District,
but investigation revealed that the gaps in the lines – where
the pylons presumably were – would have to be manually
interpolated, making this again less than useful.

The 1 : 50 000 Scale Gazetteer, OS Locator and Code-
Point Open were the main reference datasets made
available.

Code-Point OpenData describes the centroids for each
postcode which is given as a list of post codes for England,
Scotland and Wales. There are about 1.7 million post codes
in the dataset, broken up into CSV ﬁles, one for each top
level code such as EN. Mapping the centroids and labelling
them proved possible but of no real use as the full data from
the jealously-guarded Royal Mail database (sold as the
PAF), is what would be really useful to work with.

OS Locator had much more potential usage. This gives a
list of roads with a containing rectangle and some location
data, such as settlement and county. The coordinates are in
OS northings and eastings. A company called Itoworld
have taken these data and compared it to OSM data in
Britain. They created an overlay showing the locations
where OSM and OS road names differ, using the OS
rectangle to highlight the area. They have also produced
a summary of the number of differences in districts,
counties and unitary authorities (http://www.itoworld.
com/static/osm_analysis.html). This has been a tremen-
dous resource for checking naming (and inclusion of)
roads in the database. However, there is the usual caveat
about groundtruthing. There
are often differences
between the OS version of a street name and that to be
found on road signs, particularly with regard to the use of
apostrophes. One user found 56 such discrepancies in his
Borough in London, which had the roads fully mapped
and named at the time.

OS OpenData and Its Effect on Non-commercial Cartography

185

Figure 2. Screenshot of the iPad version of UK Map App. Contains Ordnance Survey data cO Crown copyright and database right 2011 and
data from OpenStreetMap Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic (CC BY-SA 2.0)

CONCLUSIONS

Despite all the critical points raised above, there have been
some piecemeal
imports of OS Data into OSM. Small
quantities of the following have been imported: boundaries,
power-lines, woodland, water features, and a very limited
number of building outlines. Similarly, some areas have been
substantially traced from StreetView, and a very small number
of areas exist with names predominantly sourced from OS data.
OS OpenData gives access to places one cannot otherwise
go, such as docks, but so does aerial photography. It provides
features such as power lines and some waterways that cross
land that one does not have access to. It gives access to the
ofﬁcial, up-to-date boundary data that are just not available
in any other form that can be used. It is much more up-to-
date than some of the aerial imagery and some of the datasets
have names in them (StreetView and Locator), though that
does have some small
level of errors. There is also the
postcode dataset which is a valuable source of data that
would be very difﬁcult to gather exhaustively otherwise.
However, despite all this, there has not been, and there is
very little likelihood of there being, large-scale import of OS
data into OSM. It will, however, continue to be used in
various ways as a check mechanism for locally surveyed data.
This conclusion is reﬂected in two quotes by prominent

members of the OSM community:

Importing data, OS or not, without tempering it with
local knowledge or surveys is usually a bad idea.

We certainly will not be deleting or overwriting areas of
the map which have been lovingly created by our
mapping community. Carry on mapping! That’s what
this [OSM] project is all about.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

in

Steve Chilton is the current
Chair of the Society of Car-
tographers. He has worked
carto-
professionally
graphy for many years, and
has been involved in OSM
since early in 2006, contri-
buting
hours
countless
to the project since then.
He is currently employed
as Education Development
Manager at Middlesex University. He gets his ‘map ﬁx’ by
adding map data wherever he travels in the world, is also the
main designer of the cartographic styling of the default OSM
map, and is now co-maintainer of the stylesheets associated

186

The Cartographic Journal

with that aspect of the project. He is co-editor of the best-
selling book on OSM, http://www.openstreetmap.info/

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This summary has been compiled from the reflections of a
large number of people in the OSM community. However,

particular acknowledgement is due to the detailed work and
analysis of Jerry Clough (http://sk53-osm.blogspot.com/
), Chris Hill (http://chris-osm.blogspot.com/) and Andy
Robinson (http://blog.mappa-mercia.org/) who have
kindly agreed to some of their findings being used as part
of the detail of some of this review.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

