RESEARCH ARTICLE

15

Conflict between Indigenous land claims and
registered title: case studies from Canada
and Kenya1

Dennis Mbugua Muthama, Erin Tompkins, and Michael Barry

Abstract: Two case narratives illustrate the difficulties in resolving historical land restitu-
tion in different contexts. Cases from Canada and Kenya illustrate how different land con-
flicts between Indigenous land rights and registered title may be addressed. In Canada,
Williams Lake involved an Indigenous community with a long settlement history in the
region with a claim going back to early European settlement. In Kenya, Waitiki Farm
involved a post-colonial population established by local Indigenous and migrant groups.
The Williams Lake decision resulted in a First Nations land claim being settled in the form
of monetary compensation in a dedicated tribunal. The Waitiki Farm decision led to a nego-
tiated settlement in which the owner was compensated financially, and the current resi-
dents who had occupied the land were awarded long-term leases. The two cases are
illustrative of historical land restitution and identify enabling conditions for the effective
functioning of land restitution mechanisms in different contexts.
Key words: Canada, Kenya, Indigenous land claims, registered title, land restitution.

Résumé : Deux descriptions de cas illustrent la difficulté de régler une restitution de terri-
toire historique dans différents contextes. Des cas du Canada et du Kenya illustrent la
façon dont différents conflits territoriaux entre des droits fonciers autochtones et des titres
enregistrés peuvent être réglés. Au Canada, Williams Lake mettait en cause une
communauté autochtone avec une longue tradition de peuplement dans la région et une
réclamation remontant à l’arrivée des premiers colons européens. Au Kenya, Waitiki Farm
impliquait une population postcoloniale établie par des indigènes locaux et des groupes
de migrants. La décision Williams Lake a eu comme conséquence de régler une revendica-
tion territoriale des Premières Nations sous la forme d’une compensation monétaire dans
un tribunal spécialisé. La décision Waitiki Farm a mené à un règlement négocié dans lequel
le propriétaire a obtenu une compensation financière et les résidents actuels qui avaient
occupé le territoire se sont vus accorder des baux à long terme. Les deux cas illustrent une
restitution d’un territoire historique et l’identification des conditions habilitantes pour le
fonctionnement efficace des mécanismes de restitution d’un territoire dans différents con-
textes. [Traduit par la Rédaction]

Mots-clés : Canada, Kenya, revendications territoriales autochtones, titre enregistré, restitution
d’un territoire.

Received 5 September 2018. Accepted 8 September 2019.

D.M. Muthama and M. Barry. Geomatics Department, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
E. Tompkins. Surveyor General Branch, Natural Resources, Edmonton, AB T5Z 0E4, Canada.
Corresponding author: Dennis Mbugua Muthama (email: dennis.muthama@ucalgary.ca).
1This article does not reflect the views of the Government of Canada.
Copyright remains with the author(s) or their institution(s). Permission for reuse (free in most cases) can be obtained from
RightsLink.

Geomatica 73: 15–27 (2019) dx.doi.org/10.1139/geomat-2018-0019

Published at www.nrcresearchpress.com/geomat on 12 September 2019.

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.16

Introduction

Geomatica Vol. 73, 2019

There are an estimated 370 million indigenous peoples in 90 countries worldwide, and
they constitute 5% of the global population (UN Economic and Social Affairs 2009). The long
history of their dispossession of land through proclamations, treaties, laws, and violence is
well documented. In addition, the vulnerable state of current indigenous people’s rights to
land and resources in the post-colonial period is acknowledged and recognised in
international frameworks like the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (UNDRIP) (UNGA 2008) and jurisdictional legal frameworks such as Canada’s pro-
posed Bill C-262 and Kenya’s 2010 constitution. These legal frameworks affirm indigenous
people land rights and establish minimum standards to be met when addressing their land
rights claims within the respective jurisdictional boundaries. However, the contested his-
tory of recognising, adopting, and implementing these frameworks shows there are ten-
sions between the framework’s ideals and compliance with existing local standards,
procedures, and laws. The two cases examined in this article, the Williams Lake Indian Band
v Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development) in Canada and Evanson Jidraph Kamau
Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others case in Kenya provide important lessons
on redressing land related injustices. More specifically, we show that mechanisms designed
to address Indigenous land interests should be able to accommodate conflict, diverse
interests, and enforce decisions.

The article should interest policy makers, land professionals, and officials involved in
land restitution claims in Canada, Kenya, and internationally. The 2018 Williams Lake
Indian Band v Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development), Supreme Court of Canada
decision is instructive on historical land restitution claims stretching back more than
100 years, on the consequences of the failure of the Crown to exercise its fiduciary obliga-
tions to Indigenous people concerning land rights and the efficacy of dedicated land claim
tribunals. In Mombasa, Kenya, the Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney
General and Others, High Court of Kenya decision in 2001 informs the debate on land grab-
bing, the political, social, and economic consequences of the unwillingness or inability of
the state to prevent land invasion, which occurred under the guise of ancestral land claims,
and the effectiveness of the courts in post-conflict peri-urban areas in sub-Saharan Africa.
Together, the two case narratives illustrate the difficulties in resolving historical land
restitution claims and the need for negotiated settlements to limit future legal actions by
the parties (or their descendants) to the agreements. In addition, the two cases are instruc-
tive on how the level of development and culture of respect for the rule of law may impact
land tenure administration dispute resolution. The Williams case shows how a clear regula-
tory framework, progressive land administration jurisprudence, and good governance can
result in equitable land rights. The Canadian judicial system is slowly hearing and acknowl-
edging the role the Crown had to play in grievances against Indigenous peoples and the
need to secure equitable land rights to develop a positive relationship. The case confirms
that resolving land issues is a fiduciary duty of the Crown and is an important step towards
reconciliation. In contrast, the Waitiki Farm case shows that where poverty is widespread,
corruption is endemic, and court orders are not implemented judiciously, the effect of legal
interventions may be limited. Acknowledging our official land tenure administration bias,
we argue that for purposes of examining historical land restitution and identifying ena-
bling conditions or evidence for the effective functioning of land reinstitution mechanisms
the two cases are comparable because:

a.

Both cases look at how an imposed colonial experience defined how each Indigenous group
held land and the impact on the political, social, cultural, and economic well being of the

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.Muthama et al.

17

b.

Indigenous culture. More specifically, both cases show how the imposition of colonial legal
structures and processes impacted the two indigenous communities land tenure systems.
Both Williams Lake and Waitiki Farm illustrate the need to resolve historical land claims
and disputes between colonial settlers and Indigenous groups. Resolving these issues aids
in building and renewing relationships between settlers and Indigenous peoples through
the recognition of rights, co-operation, and partnership. This, we assume, will lead to social
cohesion and increased land ownership legitimacy and tenure security.

The paper begins by describing the methodology followed by a history of Canada’s land
claims structures and processes. The Williams Lake Indian Band claim and the Waitiki Farm
case are then examined. The paper concludes with a comparative analysis of the two decisions.

Method

The Williams Lake investigation included an examination of the Williams Lake Indian
Band v. Canada 2014 SCTC 3, Canada v. Williams Lake Indian Band 2016 FCA 63, and Williams
Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development) 2018 SCC 4 law
reports, plus historical documents and documents pertaining to the Specific Claims
Tribunal Act (S.C. 2008, c.22.). The Williams Lake investigation was based solely on a review
of current and pertinent literature. Information on Waitiki Farm was gathered from key
informant interviews, door-to-door interviews in Waitiki Farm, and law reports. The latter
include Attorney General v. Evanson Jidiraph & Bertha Wanjiru Kamau [2003], Mombasa Civil
Appeal No. 315/2003, Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and
Others [2000]a KLR, Nairobi High Court Misc. Application No. 18/2000, and Evanson Jidraph
Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others [2000]b KLR, Mombasa High Court
Misc. Application No. 40/2000, government reports and academic articles. Because the
2016 negotiated settlement is not publicly available, information was sourced from a news-
paper and the 2016 President’s State of the Nation speech.2 Findings were corroborated by
data collected from different sources.

The Williams Lake case

Treaty making and European settlement

Much of Canada is covered by Treaties, which are agreements signed by the Government
of Canada and Indigenous nations. The treaty process set out how lands would be occupied
and the rights and obligations of the government and Indigenous groups. Historic treaties
typically state the amount of land to be set aside for a First Nation, benefits the First
Nation would receive, and annual annuities. Treaties set out the rights of Indigenous
groups (as affirmed in S.35 of the Constitution Act 1982) and may include the right to use
and occupy lands, resource and fishing rights, and cultural and social rights. The
Constitution Act (1982) states that the Government of Canada has a fiduciary duty to consult
and accommodate Indigenous groups (S.35.1).

Much of what is now eastern Canada was settled prior to, and during the 1700s, whereas
much of western Canada was settled during the latter part of the 1800s. The numbered trea-
ties of western Canada, signed between 1871 and 1908 cover much of western Ontario,
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and portions of British Columbia. Most of mainland of
British Columbia was not covered by treaty. However, some agreements were made
between the colony of British Columbia and First Nations.

2State of the Nation speech. [Online]. Available from http://www.president.go.ke/2016/03/31/speech-by-his-excellency-hon-
uhuru-kenyatta-c-g-h-president-and-commander-in-chief-of-the-defence-forces-ofthe-republic-of-kenya-during-the-state-of-
the-nation-address-at-parliament-buildings-na-2/ [22 January 2019].

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.18

Geomatica Vol. 73, 2019

Specific claims: avenues for First Nations

Today, grievances by First Nations against Canada in regards to Treaties and Agreements
can be addressed through the Specific Land Claims structure, which was first introduced in
the 1970s (Hurley 2008). Specific Claims pertain to the alleged non-fulfillment of Treaties
and other lawful obligations, or the improper administration of lands and other assets
under the Indian Act or other formal agreements (Tompkins and Ballantyne 2017). First
Nations have the option of negotiating with Indigenous Services Canada (formerly
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada) to come to an agreement. If this first step does
not resolve the issue, then the First Nation can take their claim to the Specific Claims
Tribunal (SCT). The SCT was introduced in 2008 in terms of the Specific Claims Tribunal
Act. S.C. 2008, c.22 to accelerate the resolution of specific claims (Specific Claims Tribunal
Canada 2019). The SCT is an independent body created by the Assembly of First Nations
and the federal government to accelerate the resolution of specific claims in Canada. The
SCT is comprised of 6–18 Superior Court justices who have the authority to make binding
decisions on claims and can award monetary compensation of up to $150 million (Williams
Lake Indian Band v. Canada 2014 SCTC 3). As of July 2018, there have been 93 total claims sub-
mitted to the SCT, of which 33 are located in British Columbia. SCT rulings can be appealed
to the Federal Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Canada. Indigenous nations in
Canada also have the option of proceeding directly to litigation in the courts. However, this
option can be expensive and lengthy for all parties involved. Thus, the SCT aims to offer a
more expedient mechanism to litigation (Specific Claims Tribunal Canada 2019).

Settlement at Williams Lake

In January 1860, Proclamation No. 15 was issued by Sir James Douglas, Governor of the
Colony of Vancouver, to regulate the settlement of land in mainland British Columbia
and to set the terms under which settlers could record an interest on unsurveyed lands in
the colony (Williams Lake Indian Band v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada 2014).
This legislation permitted settlers to claim up to 160 acres of unsurveyed land unless the
lands were Indian Reserves or settlements (Indian Claims Commission 2006). This was origi-
nally meant as a way for European settlement to proceed quickly within the colony and for
First Nations to retain uninterrupted possession of their traditional settlement areas.

The influx of settlers and lax implementation of colonial policies such as Proclamation
No. 15 resulted in no lands being set aside for the Williams Lake Indian Band during the
1860s and a large percentage of their traditional lands were pre-empted by European set-
tlers. The Band did not have land on which to cultivate crops to sustain themselves and
their livestock and the Band ended up living on lands owned by the Catholic Church
(Williams Lake Indian Band v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada SCT 2014, para 82).

Williams Lake Band claim: through the court system

Indian Reserve Commissioners were responsible for allotting lands for First Nation
Reserves in British Columbia beginning in 1875. It was not until 1881 that some 4000 acres
of land was set aside 10 km east of the traditional village lands for the Williams Lake
Indian Band and became Williams Lake 1 (Williams Lake Indian Band v. Her Majesty the
Queen in Right of Canada 2014). Williams Lake 1 was set aside by Indian Reserve
Commissioner Peter O’Reilly along with 14 other Reserves for the Williams Lake Band
and confirmed in 1915 by the McKenna–McBride Commission (Indian Claims
Commission 2006, p. vi, p. 10).

The reserve lands for the Williams Lake Band were not transferred to the federal
Crown until 1938 under Provincial Order in Council PC911. However, only 7 of the
15 Reserves ended up being transferred (Indian Claims Commission 2006, p. 10). Some

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.Muthama et al.

19

1500 acres of land that the Band had historically occupied, including their traditional
lands and burial sites, was claimed by European settlers and would become the Town of
Williams Lake in 1929. Indian Reserve Commissioners admitted that mistakes had been
made by allowing European settlement on the traditional lands. The 19th century
Commissioners stated that nothing could be done to rectify the error: “with respect to
white men’s rights they (the Commissioners and the First Nation) cannot interfere, they
need not therefore ask for any land that has been sold by the Government” (Library and
Archives Canada 1879).

Since 2002, the Williams Lake Indian Band has requested through Indigenous Services
Canada that their claim be formally reviewed by the federal government. In 2014, the
Williams Lake Band claim pertaining to their Village Lands was brought to the SCT. The
SCT found that the Crown had breached its legal and equitable duty, a fiduciary obligation,
in allowing settlement on lands traditionally occupied by the First Nation (2014 SCTC
7004 11). Before the SCT could rule on compensation for the Williams Lake Band, Canada
sought a judicial review by the Federal Court of Appeal (2016 FCA 63). In 2016, the Federal
Court of Appeal set aside the findings of the SCT, as it was determined that Canada was
not responsible for the errors of the pre-Confederation Colonial government. The Federal
Court of Appeal found that the setting aside of a larger reserve at a later time mitigated
any grievance by the First Nation. The Williams Lake Indian Band then appealed to the
Supreme Court of Canada.

In 2018, the claim was heard by the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC); 17 years after the
Band first filed a claim against Canada. The Supreme Court ruled in favour of the First
Nation and found that the relationship between the Crown and Indigenous people was
founded before Confederation (based on s.14(1)b of the Specific Claims Tribunal Act).
Furthermore, Canada had a fiduciary duty to recognize the First Nation’s interests at the
Williams Lake village lands [Williams Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and
Northern Development) 2018 SCC 4]. The SCC decision held that the Crown allowed the village
lands to be pre-empted by European settlers and for said lands to be granted in fee-simple
by the Crown [Williams Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern
Development) 2018 SCC 4]. This decision by the Supreme Court of Canada found that although
Canada eventually procured a reserve for the band elsewhere, this did not undo the breach
of fiduciary duty [Williams Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern
Development) 2018 SCC 4]. The SCC ruled in favour of the First Nation and will result in
monetary compensation determined by the SCT.

Analysis

The Williams Lake case is an example of one of the types of land claim issues in Canada.
The case outlined how the Canadian judicial system can be used to resolve Indigenous land
claims in Canada. Today, Indigenous land claims are more readily acknowledged by the
federal government and the courts. The Canadian court system is hearing more claims
regarding Indigenous lands and, in many cases, is ruling in favour of First Nations and their
grievances against the Crown.3 The judicial system, although successful in resolving land
claim issues, is a slow process and expensive to all parties involved. The Williams Lake case
went through three different levels of federal court before it was resolved. Since the origi-
nal request for review by Williams Lake, this process took 17 years to resolve. The SCT is
slowly accelerating the resolution of Specific Claim cases in Canada; however, much still
needs to be done to resolve land claim issues faster.

3Some examples include Osoyoos Indian Band v. Oliver (Town) 2001 SCC 85, Haida Nation v. British Columbia 2004 SCC 73,
Tsilhqot’in Nation v British Columbia 2014 SCC 44.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.20

Geomatica Vol. 73, 2019

The Williams Lake case also highlighted the need to resolve historic land injustices to
Indigenous communities. The decision from the Supreme Court of Canada acknowledged
the historic grievances of the Williams Lake Band pertaining to their land base as the first
step towards building a more successful relationship between the First Nation and the
Crown. Once it was acknowledged that the Crown had made errors and that Treaty prom-
ises were not fulfilled, it was acknowledged that there was a fiduciary duty by Canada
towards the First Nation when settling the claim.

The Williams Lake case identifies that the Canadian judicial system is slowly hearing and
acknowledging the role the Crown had to play in grievances against Indigenous peoples
and the need to secure equitable land rights to develop a positive relationship. As well,
the case illustrates that resolving land issues is a fiduciary duty of the Crown and is an
important step towards reconciliation.

The Waitiki Farm case

Reconciling Indigenous land rights is not a task exclusively undertaken by Canada. In
2016, a similar case was settled at Waitiki Farm in Mombasa, Kenya. Waitiki Farm is a regu-
larised peri-urban settlement of more than 7000 households that was subject to nearly
20 years of competing land rights claims between the Digo tribe’s traditional ownership
and occupation of land and the legally registered leaseholders, Mr. Evanson Jidraph
Kamau Waitiki (hereinafter referred to as Mr. Waitiki) and his late wife Bertha Wanjiru
Kamau. The politically negotiated settlement came 15 years after the court had ruled in
favour of Mr. Waitiki in Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and
Others [2000] KLR. This settlement was finalized after a meeting between President
Kenyatta and the legal landowner Mr. Waitiki (Nyassy 2016).

Kenya’s Colonial era

The legal and administrative structures that had an enduring effect on Kenya can be
traced back to Kenya’s Colonial era. In 1895, the ten-mile coastal strip was declared a
British Protectorate (Ng’weno 1997). The Protectorate had a different legal status from the
rest of the colony and was administered based on an agreement between the British and
the Sultan of Zanzibar. Under this arrangement, the Colonial administration set up legal
and administrative structures that dispossessed and marginalised the Indigenous
Mijikenda community of their land rights (Okoth-Ogendo 1991; Kanyinga 2000; Yahya and
Swazuri 2007). The Mijikenda consists of nine tribes, namely: the Digo, Rabai, Ribe,
Chonyi, Giriama, Jibana, Kauma, Kambe, and the Duruma.

Laws such as the Crown Land Ordinance of 1902 facilitated the Colonial administration’s
acquisition of what was then defined as waste lands. This definition was at the discretion
of the colonial administrators and gave the colonial administration “control and disposi-
tion of unoccupied land not claimed by a group or an individual” (Ng’weno 1997, p. 65).
The acquisition confined Indigenous communities to the lands they occupied at the time,
whereas unoccupied, traditional territories were declared Crown land (Willis 1993). This dis-
possession of land was done under the assumption that Indigenous communities did not
have individual rights to lands other than those that they occupied for residential purposes.
In 1908, the recognition of Indigenous rights was revoked and communities such as the
Digo became beneficiaries of the Crown’s trusteeship system (Okoth-Ogendo 1991;
Kanyinga 2000).

The basic premise of the Land Titles Ordinance (LTO) of 1908 was the provision of security
of tenure for European settlers and corporations with the hope it would lead to increased
economic development in the Coastal region and revenue for the Crown (Cooper 1980;
Okoth-Ogendo 1991; Willis 1993; Kanyinga 2000). This objective coupled with a mechanism

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.Muthama et al.

21

through which all landowners’ claims4 to land could be adjudicated, verified, and deter-
mined, aimed at encouraging European settlement at the Coast region. The LTO established
a Land Registration Court5 where claims backed by documentary or oral evidence were to
be presented for assessment. In sum, one had to prove how one came to own the land.
Claims that were deemed valid were recorded and the owners were given “a certificate of
ownership, mortgage or interest depending on the nature of claim” (Okoth-Ogendo 1991,
p. 14). This concept was foreign to many Indigenous communities who did not have experi-
ence of treating land as a commodity (Cooper 1980; Kanyinga 2000). In 1910, the LTO was
amended to allow for the registration of certificates issued in 1908. This gave landowners
absolute and indefeasible title to the parcel. Lands not registered under the 1910 mecha-
nism were considered to have invalid evidence of title, further weakening the Indigenous
land claims (Okoth-Ogendo 1991).

Critics of the LTO argue that the system perpetuated fraud and entrenched historical land
injustices. Some of the registrations that took place during this period are usually perceived
as fraudulent because a majority of the native Mijikenda did not make land ownership claims
as was required by the 1908 LTO. Analysts cite the irrelevance of the 1908 land administration
system to the Mijikenda due to the language barrier (English) for the Mijikenda, lack of local
awareness and participation, and use of local elites to implement the laws as conditions that
supported this fraud (Cooper 1980; Okoth-Ogendo 1991; Willis 1993; Kanyinga 2000; Yahya
and Swazuri 2007). Concerns include the altering of land distribution at the coast, further
marginalisation of the Mijikenda community by favouring elite claims, and complex land
access for the indigenous through complicated procedures. Fraudulent claims were made,
as “registration of rights under this ordinance was not based on a procedure for establishing
the validity of claims” (Kanyinga 2000, p. 58). The fraudulent claims were recognised in post-
colonial Kenya in law through the first registration principle, which recognised a form of
immediate indefeasibility. For example, in Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The
Attorney General and Others [2000] the judge noted, “even [if] fraud had been proved, first regis-
tration is indefeasible”. The first registration principle was repealed after promulgation of the
2010 constitution and in the subsequent land law reform.

Historical land ownership of the Digo tribe

Likoni is a subcounty6 in Mombasa, where a majority of the population is made up of the
Digo tribe, a subtribe of the Mijikenda community. The Digo are considered natives of the
area and claim it based on a community’s traditional ownership, use of resources, and occu-
pation since time immemorial. In 1915, the Digo lived on a native land reserve7 south of
Mombasa. The reserve was under the local native council, and land administration was
done according to Digo customs, laws, and practices (Bresnahan 2010). Unlike other
Mijikenda tribes, the Digo inheritance system was matrilineal.8 This system was under
pressure from Islamic tradition; a religion to which the Digo were converting and whose
inheritance system was patrilineal (Willis 1993).9 Most conflicts stemmed from inheritance
cases and matrilineal inheritance practices (Ng’weno 1997). The Digo reserve was governed
by traditional leaders who were overseen by Colonial administrators. Traditional leaders

4This included claims of indigenes to land.
5According to Okoth-Ogendo (1991, p. 22), the court was established by section 6 of LTO and was “subordinate to the high
court of Kenya”.
6Subcounty means administrative jurisdiction within a county and in some cases similar in size to a constituency.
7The reserves were initially established under the Crown Land of 1915 and later on the Native Land Ordinance of 1938,
which renamed “native reserves” to “native lands”.
8Rabai and Duruma were also matrilineal (Willis 1993).
9Willis (1993, p. 121) notes a case from 1915 where a Muslim Digo and government headman failed to have his claim to
property (under Digo matrilineal inheritance) upheld in a court that upheld patrilineal inheritance.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.22

Geomatica Vol. 73, 2019

were later replaced by headmen who were appointed by the Colonial administration due to
leadership conflicts, elder’s conflict of interest, and the colonialists’ interest in controlling
indigenous people (Bresnahan 2010).

Colonial changes to the administrative and legal structure further complicated the
coastal land tenure situation to the detriment of the Indigenous communities who at the
time did not fully understand the new laws (Kanyinga 2000; RoK 2002). It is on this basis
that the new historical land injustices laws and rules identify the colonial period as the
starting point for land restitution reform. Section 38 of the Land Laws Amendment Act
2016 provides the legal framework to give effect to Article 67 (2) of the Kenyan constitution,
which mandates the National Land Commission (NLC) to investigate historical land injusti-
ces on its own initiative or on a complaint and give appropriate redress measures. To oper-
ationalise the law, NLC developed: The National Land Commission Investigation of Historical Land
Injustices Claims Rules, to guide the restitution processes. When operationalised, the rules
will apply to historical land injustices that occurred between 15 June 1895 and 27 August
2010 (NLC 2016).

Communal ownership of land

Leading up to, and during colonization, land among the Digo was recognized as commu-
nally owned and accessed through community membership. Allocation, use, development,
and control was done by the Council of Elders who were the community’s trustees, admin-
istrators, mediators, and judges (Yahya and Swazuri 2007; Bresnahan 2010). Land under this
traditional system was considered to “belong to God” and could not be owned or sold.
Community members held user rights where possession was gained through inheritance,
land clearing, transfers, or other means accepted by the collective. Occupants could sell
land products or mortgage lands to meet immediate needs, for example dowry payments
(Bresnahan 2010, pp. 45–46).

Households held individual user rights for their allocated plots of land. Collective land
uses included farming, grazing, burial, and ritual and prayers, catchment areas and
recreation (Yahya and Swazuri 2007). Land boundaries between tribal groups were not well
demarcated. However, plots that were occupied within the community’s land were clearly
demarcated using coconut and mango trees. Visitors or strangers access to land was tempo-
rary and determined by the Council of Elders (Yahya and Swazuri 2007, p. 8).

Waitiki Farm history

Waitiki Farm comprised of four land parcels namely, LR Mombasa/Mainland South/Block
1/363, LR Mombasa/Mainland South/Block 1/1031, LR Mombasa/Mainland South/Block V/109,
and LR Mombasa/Mombasa Mainland South/Block V/110. The parcels were registered in the
name of Mr. Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki and his late wife Bertha Wanjiru Kamau as joint
proprietors under the Registered Land Act cap 300. Three of the four parcels were registered
in 1975 and had a leasehold interest of 949 years with effect from 1963. The fourth parcel,
Mombasa/Mainland South/Block 1/1031, was registered in 1987 and had a leasehold interest
for 97.831 years beginning in 1987. It was not clear from the titles documentation why the
lease term was 97.831 years and not the usual 99 years. The lessor of all four parcels was
the Government of Kenya (Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and
Others 2000b). In the 1990s, Mr. Waitiki’s neighbours from the local Digo community began
invading and claiming the lands, citing ancestral land claims. Before the violent land clashes
in the Likoni division of Mombasa District in 1997, the registered owner, Mr. Waitiki, charged
the Digo community with trespass, resulting in a further deterioration of relations with the
community (Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others 2000b).

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.Muthama et al.

Competing claims

23

In Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others [2000] KLR, one
of the defendants i.e., the Maweni10 Land Development Committee, claimed Waitiki Farm
as their own. Addressing their claims, the court sought to answer the following questions:

1.

2.

“Is there tenure based on ancestral claim and or ethnicity, particularly where land has
been registered?” (Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others
2000b, p. 12)
Did trespassing occur on private land?

Claim I

The Digo tribe through their representatives claimed Waitiki Farm as their ancestral
land. They argued that they had a legitimate ancestral land claim to Waitiki Farm and that
their claim extinguished any other claim on the land because

1.
2.

they were born on the land and it had their cultural heritage sites and artefacts, and
their ancestors had lived there from time immemorial and had been buried there.

It is on the strength of these traditions that the Digo community disputed the plaintiff’s
claim. In their court submission and press interviews, representatives requested that the
plaintiff, Mr. Waitiki, show them the permanent trees he had planted to mark his boun-
dary, where his ancestors were buried and because he was a visitor, the elders that had
introduced him to the community and allocated him user rights. They claimed if this could
not be proven then his claim was invalid. The tribe representative declared that their ances-
tral land rights extinguished every other interest including those gained during the
colonial and post-colonial period.

Claim II

The plaintiff’s, Mr. Evanson Jidiraph Kamau Waitiki and his wife Bertha Wanjiru pur-
chased Waitiki Farm from Guldawood Likoni Dairy Farm Ltd. on 4 August 1975 and held
the land under leasehold tenure. All four land parcels were leasehold interest, with three
having a term of 949 years with effect from 1963 and one having a term of 97.8 years with
effect from 1987. The lessor in all the parcels was Government of Kenya. The annual rent
for the three parcels having a term of 900 years and above ranged between Kshs. 45 and
80 (app. 0.50–1.00 CDN$ at current exchange rates). The 97.8 years lease had an annual rent
of Kshs. 220 (app. 2.75 CDN$ at current exchange rates). The transaction was approved by
the Mombasa Land Control Board on 4 August 1976. The original land parcels totalled 940
acres, but at the time of eviction, it had reduced to 784.5 acres due to compulsory acquisi-
tions by the government and the plaintiff giving away some of the land to the Catholic
Church (RoK 2016). Following the Likoni land clashes between 1997 and 1998, which pitted
native Mijikenda against non-native migrant communities such as the Kikuyu, Luo, and
Luhya, local youths invaded the land, evicted Mr. Waitiki and his family, and subdivided
and allocated the land amongst themselves. The vacant parcels were then sold to migrants
from other communities. The locals did this without any reference to existing land laws and
on the premise that they owned the land and Mr. Waitiki was not a native Mijikenda.

Resolution

In 2001, the Mombasa High Court found that the local Digo’s, and those who purchased
parcels from them, had trespassed and settled illegally on Waitiki Farm, determining that

10A largely Digo tribe local group.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.24

Geomatica Vol. 73, 2019

the lands were private lands and not traditional ancestral lands. It further noted that the
land registration process that occurred under the Registered Land Act (RLA) had resulted
in individualised tenure, extinguishing any communal claims (Evanson Jidraph Kamau
Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others 2000b, p. 12). The court also found that
the Ministers and the political leaders named in the suit owed no specific statutory duties
to Mr. Waitiki. However, the court found that the Kenya Police owed Mr. Waitiki the statu-
tory duty to prevent his illegal eviction and his land from being invaded. In this regard the
High Court ordered the Commissioner of Police

“to move into the affected farm, evict the trespassers, arrest the violent ones and investigate and
prosecute those who have destroyed and damaged the houses and property and plants and to offer
security and bring the law to its repute and maintain law and order.” (Evanson Jidraph Kamau
Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others 2000b, p. 18)

The government appealed the decision, but the appeal did not proceed to litigation
because the appeal was rejected by the appeals court on a technicality (Attorney General
v. Evanson Jidiraph & Bertha Wanjiru Kamau 2003). The High Court ruling did not change how
the lands were used. The local Digos, and subsequent purchasers, continued to live on
Waitiki Farm, impeding repossession and use of the land by Mr. Waitiki, the legal owner.
This unresolved land tenure issue resulted in cases being filed against the district commis-
sioner for the non-implementation of the 2001 court order and against the Kenya Power
and Lighting Company for trespassing and supplying power to the residents on the farm
without Mr. Waitiki’s consent (RoK 2016).

To resolve this land tenure issue and foster social cohesion and economic development,
a Presidential Directive was issued, and it was agreed that the Waitiki Farm settlers i.e., the
local Digos and subsequent purchasers, would be given title to the land and that the
Ministry of Land Urban and Housing Development would enter into negotiations with
Mr. Waitiki for monetary compensation (RoK 2016). Negotiations between the government
and Mr. Waitiki were deemed necessary because he was unable to use his lands. After nego-
tiations, Mr. Waitiki signed a sale agreement with the Government, and the Waitiki Farm
residents, including Digo community members, were issued 99-yr land leases. The negoti-
ated settlement and subsequent leases resolved the longstanding Waitiki Farm conflict.

Analysis

The politically negotiated settlement developed in the Waitiki Farm case developed a
land restitution mechanism through which land tenure disputes between private land-
owners and squatters may be effectively resolved. The mechanism suggests that in resolv-
ing these disputes, arbiters should not privilege private property rights over the
indigenous settler’s land interests like the Court did in the 2001 judgement. However,
although the mechanism acknowledges the socio-economic developments that had taken
place since Mr. Waitiki had been evicted, it raises several issues, the main one being
whether this mechanism incentivises land squatters to invade private lands with the hope
that the state will resolve the issue in their favour at a later date. This is important because
there are currently a number of similar private land invasion cases in Mombasa, Kenya.

The Waitiki Farm case is also instructive on how a land tenure dispute between a private
landowner and indigenous settlers can take on a public dimension. In the Waitiki Farm
case, the evidence suggests that the case took a public dimension in two important ways.
One, Waitiki Farm settlers publicised the dispute through various local groups that coordi-
nated community action. Through this organised mobilisation, they were able to maintain
local actors support under conditions that were continually in flux. Two, the involvement

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.Muthama et al.

25

of national political leaders, e.g., the President. The public sentiments made by both
national and local leaders after resolution of the conflict suggest that these leaders acted
in what they believed to be the best interest of the actors to the dispute. It is important to
note that they did this for political gain too.

The Waitiki Farm case is instructive on the conflicting observation of the duty to protect
private property and duty to provide basic services. In upholding Mr. Waitiki’s private land
rights, the court required the police to protect his private right to land by evicting the
Indigenous settlers. The police were unwilling or unable to do this because of the settle-
ment’s socio-economic developments and population. Given the political unrest that had
occurred, we speculate that the police were unwilling to act for fear that evicting the tres-
passers would stir up more political unrest and violence. From a security perspective, it
was also not possible for Mr. Waitiki to return to his land. In contrast, the upholding of
Mr. Waitiki’s land rights meant the government through public agencies was not allowed
to supply basic public services within the property. However, public agencies did not adhere
to this and went ahead and supplied basic services. Drawing on other case studies, the
Waitiki case suggests balancing private and public interests under a historical context of
emotive colonial and post-colonial land injustices remains a challenge.

Synthesising the above, the Waitiki Farm case is instructive on the effectiveness of land
restitution mechanisms in unstable peri-urban situations in a developing country where
poverty is widespread, corruption is endemic, and a culture of respect for rule of law is
often absent in areas where land has been invaded. The case illustrates that the law, its pro-
cedures, mechanisms, e.g., courts, and instruments, e.g., court orders, are not enough to
safeguard land ownership in such situations. It also shows that not resolving land injustices
when they occur and postponing resolution of these land tenure conflicts only serves to fur-
ther complicate the situation. Consequences of not resolving the land tenure conflict
include development of informal settlements, as it happened on the Waitiki Farm.

Conclusion

The Williams Lake decision and the Waitiki Farm decision both required the involvement
of the judicial system to resolve the respective conflicts. They are similar in that in
Williams Lake, the court ruled in favour of the First Nation, while at Waitiki Farm, the court
ruled in favour of the private landowner. Both cases took approximately 20 years to resolve,
involved conflict over lands claimed by settlers and an Indigenous community, and
involved lands that were historically significant to the Indigenous community. The
Williams Lake decision resulted in the First Nations land interest being recognized with the
potential for monetary compensation, whereas the Waitiki Farm decision led to a politically
led negotiated settlement in which Mr. Waitiki was compensated financially11 and the cur-
rent residents were awarded long-term leases. The result from both cases was the resolution
of conflicting land claims at a cost to both governments in favour of the registered land-
owner in Kenya and the legitimate claimants in Canada.

The two cases may be viewed as being on a land restitution principles continuum. On
one end, the Supreme Court of Canada and the SCT in Williams recognised the symbolic
importance of land as a constitutive element of collective values and identity. The Federal
Court of Appeal held that the material compensation in the form of a land swap was suffi-
cient restitution. In contrast, the courts in Waitiki Farm privileged legal evidence over the
symbolic socio-cultural evidence. The community had claimed an Indigenous right to the

11Mr. Waitiki was paid Kshs. 1 250 000 000 (app. 15.6 million CD$). This amount was to be recouped from the approximately
7807 Waitiki Farm households under the Kenyan settlement fund trustee scheme. Each household was to repay Kshs.
182 000 for the leases to be discharged (RoK 2016).

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.26

Geomatica Vol. 73, 2019

land. However, as the land was subject to migration pressure, it had been sold off to strang-
ers. The political settlement addressed a situation where it was impossible to move people
off the land without violent eviction. The two cases show that land claims are complex
issues. Restitution settlements have to account for material loss that is also an object of cul-
tural identity, values, and emotions.

Acknowledgements

The Kenya component of the study was funded by the Chair in Land Tenure and

Cadastral Systems at the University of Calgary.

References
Bresnahan, D.P. 2010. Sacred spaces, political authority, and the dynamics of tradition in Mijikenda history.

M.A. thesis, Department of History, Ohio University, Athens, OH, USA.

Cooper, F. 1980. From slaves to squatters. Plantation labor and agriculture in Zanzibar and colonial Kenya. Yale

Hurley, M.C. 2008. Legislative summary. Bill C-30: the Specific Claims Tribunal Act, Parliamentary Information and

Indian Claims Commission. 2006. Williams Lake Indian Band village site inquiry. Indian Claims Commission,

University Press, New Haven, CT, USA.

Research Service, LS-592E.

Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Kanyinga, K. 2000. Re-distribution from above: the politics of land rights and squatting in coastal Kenya. The
Political and Social Context of Structural Adjustment in Sub-Saharan Africa Research Program Report No. 115.
The Nordic Africa Institute, Uppsala, Sweden.

Library and Archives Canada. 1879. William Laing-Meason, Justice of the Peace, Williams Lake BC, to Gilbert

Malcolm Sproat. Indian Commissioner, Victoria, BC, Canada. 21 April 1879.RG 10, V 3680 file 12395-1.

National Land Commission (NLC). 2016. The historical land injustices rules 2016. [Online]. Available from
http://www.landcommission.go.ke/media/erp/upload/historical_land_injustices_rules_27_1_17_-amended.pdf
[6 March 2019].

Ng’weno, B. 1997. Inheriting disputes: the Digo negotiation of meaning and power through land. Afr. Econ. Hist. 25:

59–77. doi:10.2307/3601879.

Nyassy, T.D. 2016. Evanson Waitiki says he is happy with Likoni land deal. Daily Nation, 15 Feb. [Online]. Available
from http://www.nation.co.ke/counties/mombasa/Waitiki-happy-Likoni-land-deal/1954178-3813846-dmsyk1/
[22 January 2019].

Okoth-Ogendo, H.W.O. 1991. Tenants of the crown: evolution of agrarian law and institutions in Kenya. African

Centre for Technology Studies Press, Nairobi, Kenya.

Republic of Kenya (RoK). 2002. Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Land Law System of Kenya on
Principles of a National Land Policy Framework Constitutional Position of Land and New Institutional
Framework for Land Administration. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.

Republic of Kenya (RoK). 2016. Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development Report on the titling project
on Mombasa/Mainland South Block 1/363, 367 and Block V/109 and 110 (Waitiki Land). Government Printer,
Nairobi, Kenya.

Specific Claims Tribunal. 2013. Frequently asked questions. [Online]. Available from http://www.sct-trp.ca/freq/

index_e.htm [26 July 2018].

Specific Claims Tribunal Act. (S.C. 2008, c.22.).
Specific Claims Tribunal Canada. 2019. About the Specific Claims Tribunal Canada. [Online]. Available from https://

www.sct-trp.ca/hom/index_e.htm [14 June 2018].

The Presidency. 2016. State of the nation speech. [Online]. Available from http://www.president.go.ke/2016/03/31/
speech-by-his-excellency-hon-uhuru-kenyatta-c-g-h-president-and-commander-in-chief-of-the-defence-forces-of-
the-republic-of-kenya-during-the-state-of-the-nation-address-at-parliament-buildings-na-2/ [22 January 2019].

The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). 2008. United Nations declaration on the rights of
indigenous peoples. [Online]. Available from http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf
[26 June 2018].

Tompkins, E., and Ballantyne, B. 2017. Reconciling Indigenous lands with the Honour of the Crow: certainty in
bounds, security in parcels & equity in rights. Proc. World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty: Responsible
Land Governance: Towards an Evidence-Based Approach, Washington, DC, USA, 20–24 March 2017.

UN Economic and Social Affairs. 2009. The state of the world’s indigenous peoples. [Online]. Available from http://

www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/SOWIP/en/SOWIP_web.pdf [23 July 2018].

Willis, J. 1993. Mombasa, the Swahili, and the making of the Mijikenda. Oxford University Press Inc., New York,

NY, USA.

Yahya, S., and Swazuri, M. 2007. Customary leaseholds and perpetual tenancies on the Kenyan Coast. Findings in

Built and Rural Environments (FiBRE) Series. RICS Research, London, UK.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.Muthama et al.

27

Cases
Attorney General v. Evanson Jidiraph & Bertha Wanjiru Kamau [2003], Mombasa Civil Appeal No. 315 of 2003.
Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others [2000]a KLR, Nairobi High Court

Evanson Jidraph Kamau Waitiki & Another v. The Attorney General and Others [2000]b KLR, Mombasa High Court

Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada) v Williams Lake Indian Band

Republic v Attorney General & 9 others Exparte Evanson Jidraph Kamau & another [2014] eKLR, Miscellaneous Civil

Miscellaneous Application No. 18 of 2000.

Miscellaneous Application No. 40 of 2000.

and Cowichan Tribes, 2016 FCA 63.

Application No. 40 of 2000.

Williams Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development), 2018 SCC 4.
Williams Lake Indian Band v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2014 SCTC 3.

Published by NRC Research Press

Geomatica 2019.73:15-27.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 01/08/20. For personal use only.