This article was downloaded by: [New York University]
On: 13 February 2015, At: 07:25
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer
House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Extending the automated zoning procedure to
reconcile incompatible zoning systems
David Martin a
a Department of Geography, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK; e-
mail: D.J.Martin@soton.ac.uk
Published online: 03 Dec 2010.

To cite this article: David Martin (2003) Extending the automated zoning procedure to reconcile incompatible zoning
systems, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17:2, 181-196, DOI: 10.1080/713811750

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/713811750

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of
the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied
upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall
not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other
liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

. .   , 2003
. 17, . 2, 181–196

Research Article

Extending the automated zoning procedure to reconcile incompatible
zoning systems

DAVID MARTIN
Department of Geography, University of Southampton, Southampton,
SO17 1BJ, UK; e-mail: D.J.Martin@soton.ac.uk

(Received 16 October 2001; accepted 25 June 2002)

Abstract. This paper concerns the problem of matching incompatible zonal
geographies, for example in the context of comparing census outputs over time.
The automated zoning procedure (AZP) proposed by Openshaw (1977)
is
reviewed and extended to permit its application to the intersection of two zonal
systems. A population stress statistic is proposed which may be used in the
extended AZP algorithm in order to maximise the match between two zonal
geographies. An implementation of this approach is described, and illustrated by
reference to UK Census data.

1.

Introduction
A general problem in spatial analysis is that of reconciling data from two
incompatible zonal systems. This is a particular issue, for example, when comparing
the results of two censuses where there has been change in statistical zone boundaries
during the intercensal period or when comparing published data for one zonal
geography with an alternative set of application-speciﬁc zones. Previous approaches
to this problem have included the production of lookup tables from manual records
and address lists (Atkins et al. 1993); the development of areal interpolation tech-
niques (Flowerdew and Green 1991, 1992), and attempts to identify ‘tracts’ with
constant boundaries within two incompatible systems of small zones (Morgan and
Denham 1982). This is a diﬃcult problem, in which the ‘best’ solution may actually
represent a complex trade-oﬀ between competing constraints. This paper presents
an automated zone matching (AZM) algorithm for the design of tracts, that is
developed from Openshaw’s (1977) automated zoning procedure (AZP). AZP is a
computationally intensive procedure which seeks to optimize objectives such as
minimum or target population sizes, zonal compactness or social homogeneity,
iteratively recombining a large set of building block polygons into a smaller set of
output areas. AZM extends this approach by the introduction of an intermediate
layer of boundary processing and a new objective function in order to minimize the
mismatch between two input zonal geographies as part of the zone design process.
AZP is being applied to the results of the 2001 Census in England and Wales in
order to create Output Areas (OAs) which are entirely separate from the system of

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1365881021000026548

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 182

D. Martin

Enumeration Districts (EDs) used for data collection. This represents the ﬁrst separa-
tion of collection and output geographies throughout the UK, and is described more
fully by Martin (1998). The advantages of such a procedure include its ability to
oﬀer uniform OA coverage using an explicit design methodology, something, which
has always been problematic when using manual approaches to census area design.
Such an approach does not, however, overcome the perennial (in the UK case)
problem of changing zonal boundaries between successive censuses, which is the
focus of the work presented here.

The rest of this paper reviews the use of automated zone design procedures and
relates them to the speciﬁc problem of matching two incompatible zonal geographies.
The need for such matching is reviewed, and the unsuitability of areal interpolation
approaches explained. A measure of population stress between two zonal systems is
introduced and exact and approximate matching situations illustrated. These con-
cepts are incorporated into a new zone design tool, and empirical applications are
presented in urban and rural study areas in the UK. Conclusions are drawn with
regard to the utility of zone design tools for matching incompatible geographies,
and the situations in which such an approach might be applied.

2. Automated zone design

Data describing the socioeconomic characteristics of populations, most typically
from censuses, are conventionally collected and mapped for zonal units. The use of
areal aggregations stems from data collection considerations; a requirement for
counts for existing geographical areas and the need to preserve the conﬁdentiality
of individuals. A diﬃculty with most zonal geographies is that their relationship
with the underlying population characteristics is undeﬁned, resulting in the familiar
modiﬁable areal unit problem (MAUP). Openshaw (1984) argues strongly that the
most appropriate response to the MAUP is to design purpose-speciﬁc zonal systems.
There is a long history of the modiﬁcation of electoral geographies in order to
achieve approximately equal political representation, and the automated partitioning
of geographical space in this context is discussed by Horn (1995) and Mehrotra
et al. (1998).

Openshaw’s (1977) Automated Zoning Procedure (AZP) provides a means to
automate the process of designing a zonal system in order to maximize the value of
some objective function. The procedure is based on the iterative recombination of
building block zones into output regions from an initial random aggregation (IRA)
by examining the eﬀect of swapping individual building blocks between output
regions. Improving swaps are retained as part of the emerging solution and the IRA
is thus reﬁned to produce an ‘optimal’ boundary conﬁguration, given a particular
set of design constraints. Important aspects of the implementation of AZP-type
algorithms are the methodology used for the construction of the IRA, and the
method used for the weighting and combination of the diﬀerent constraints (each
measured in diﬀerent units) into a single objective function. An essential part of the
implementation of such zonal recombination is the maintenance of a contiguity
matrix, allowing the identiﬁcation of valid swaps between adjacent zones. Practical
implementation thus requires the use of a topologically structured GIS database.

Application of these zone design methodologies to published census data is
demonstrated by Openshaw and Rao (1995), who consider the ‘reengineering’ of
1991 UK Census outputs by using enumeration districts (EDs) as input building
blocks, assembling larger zones using a variety of objective criteria. Openshaw and

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

183

Alvanides (1999) demonstrate similar applications using a national application with
ward-level data. In both cases, the census user is encouraged to reaggregate the
standard zones for which data are published to provide larger, purpose-speciﬁc zones
designed according to clearly deﬁned criteria. Openshaw and Rao (1995) discuss
various search algorithms including the simple AZP, simulated annealing (SA) in
which suboptimal swaps are permitted in the early stages of iteration, allowing the
procedure to escape from potential local suboptima and a tabu search approach, in
which recently tried swaps cannot be considered again until a certain number of
iterations have elapsed. There has also been consideration of parallel implementations
of AZP, although the partitioning of the problem into independent spatial sub-
regions is problematic due to the fact that a boundary reconﬁguration may have
ramiﬁcations across the whole of the problem space. Software tools for the imple-
mentation of automated zone design include the SAGE package (Haining et al. 1998,
2001) and ZD2K (http://www.ccg.leeds.ac.uk), the latter designed with the speciﬁc
objective of providing a tool for the reaggregation of 2001 Census output geography.
An automated zoning procedure has been adopted for the creation of 2001
Census OAs in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Scotland has a rather diﬀerent
trajectory, and will be creating its own OAs using an alternative methodology,
designed to maximize compatibility with those used there in 1991, based on their
membership of higher level areal units. 2001 OAs are being designed by the Census
Oﬃces after enumeration, coding and ‘one number census’ imputation are complete
(ONS/GROS/NISRA 1999), and represent a completely new subdivision of the
country, separate from the ED-based collection geography. The use of EDs for
output in previous censuses has a number of weaknesses, including wide variations
in population size (some EDs being too small to appear separately in the published
tables) and a poor match to the widely used postal geography. These diﬃculties may
be signiﬁcantly reduced by AZP using the smallest divisions of the postal geography
as building blocks to design OAs with explicit target minimum threshold populations.
This approach will create a larger number of smaller 2001 OAs than 1991 EDs,
making them more amenable to use as building blocks in user-speciﬁc geographies.
Automated zone design for 2001 Census processing is not the subject of this paper,
having been discussed more fully in Martin (1997, 1998). However, the way in which
these new 2001 OAs are used is very relevant here.

3. Matching zonal systems

Census users are faced with many challenges, one of which relates to the matching
of census output geography to other geographies. This occurs where there is a need
to compare published data with those from a previous census in order to examine
change over time, and also where data need to be aggregated to other (usually larger)
areal units which are important for research or policy purposes, but which cannot
be assembled by neat aggregation of the census OAs. The challenge is thus one
of ﬁnding the ‘best match’ between two zonal geographies at a given scale of
aggregation.

The usual approach to this problem in a research context has been to adopt
some form of areal interpolation, and the terminology of ‘source’ zones (for which
counts are currently held), ‘target’ zones (for which counts are required) and ‘inter-
mediate’ zones (the intersection of source and target zones) has become widespread.
Simple areal interpolation assumes that attribute values are uniformly distributed
across the entire area of each zone, and may be redistributed from source zones to

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 184

D. Martin

target zones in proportion to the areas of intersection. This procedure may be
appropriate for ratios and percentages, and for when the zones are ‘natural’ areal
units such as soil types or land use classes. However, uniform population density
very rarely occurs, and Flowerdew and Green (1991, 1992) suggest an enhanced
approach which is able to take account of ancillary information in order to weight
the interpolation process when count data such as population totals are to be
estimated. An overview of interpolation methods for socioeconomic data is provided
by Goodchild et al. (1993) and a comparison of methodologies by Fisher and
Langford (1995). Others have considered implementations of such techniques within
speciﬁc software environments (Bloom et al. 1996); the use of speciﬁc ancillary
variables (Langford et al. 1991, Xie 1995) and enhanced algorithms (Mugglin et al.
1999, 2000). Fundamentally, each of these is concerned with the statistical interpola-
tion of data between zonal systems rather than the need for direct or approximate
matching between zones: they make the best use of the existing zones rather than
attempting zone redesign.

The need to identify best matches between zonal geographies is of particular
concern to those who for some reason are unable or unwilling to engage in areal
interpolation, and who are therefore forced to reaggregate. Speciﬁcally, it is a chal-
lenge for data providers such as Census Oﬃces and government departments who
are required to report population statistics for diﬀerent zonal geographies but who
must always be conscious of the risk of diﬀerencing if data are released for slightly
diﬀering zones. Although population thresholds may be applied to published data
to prevent the inadvertent disclosure of information about individuals, the publica-
tion of above-threshold data for two slightly diﬀerent geographies may result in the
ability to produce data for sub-threshold intersections of these geographies (Duke-
Williams and Rees 1998). These organizations may have access to the actual counts
for both source and target zones, but are unable to publish both sets due to the
diﬀerencing risk. Further, there may be many other situations in which a requirement
to produce precise counts precludes the use of areal
interpolation or weighted
allocation from lookup tables. Lookup tables that include population counts in the
overlaps between two sets of zones provide a very simple and useful tool
for
reallocation of population, but do not incorporate adjacency information, and
provide information only at the lowest level of aggregation.

In the UK, EDs are designed solely for census purposes and the combination of
continual change in higher level administrative boundaries and new residential
development cause large numbers of EDs to be changed between successive censuses.
In England and Wales, only 44% of ED boundaries remained unchanged between
the 1971 and 1981 Censuses, and only 32% between 1981 and 1991 (again, the
geography system in Scotland is rather diﬀerent to that described here). The new
smaller OAs to be used for 2001 oﬀer many advantages in terms of increased
aggregation ﬂexibility, but will produce even higher levels of boundary change, with
very few 2001 OAs likely to be coterminous with 1991 EDs. At the time of the 1981
Census, a major manual eﬀort was undertaken to identify small areas whose external
boundaries were unchanged, resulting in 48 300 census tracts (mainly in urban areas)
comprising aggregations of one or more 1971 and 1981 EDs which could be grouped
to form areas with identical boundaries. A further 10 700 parishes or communities
were identiﬁed (mainly in rural areas of England, and in Wales) which remained
largely unchanged between the two censuses (Morgan and Denham 1982). In 1991
no such exercise was undertaken, leaving census users with no directly comparable

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

185

small areas between 1981 and 1991. Instead, a lookup table of 1991 EDs to 1981
wards was created by an approximate methodology based on a combination of
existing lookup tables and GIS analysis of centroids and boundaries (Atkins et al.
1993). It is this general problem of devising tracts for comparison between zonal
geographies which is the focus of the rest of this paper, hence the term ‘automated
zone matching’ (AZM).

Development of the AZM concept requires some measure of the ﬁt between two
zonal systems containing population data, and it is proposed that this is most
helpfully considered as the ‘stress’ between the two geographies which results from
population misallocation due to approximate matching of source and target zones.
Such a stress value could be expressed in terms of any attribute of the zonal data,
such as geographical area, but the concern here is with population counts and we
shall therefore refer only to population stress in the remainder of this discussion.
Consider the example illustrated in ﬁgure 1. When a zone from one (source) system
is used to represent a zone from another (target), a perfect match would represent
zero stress. As the match illustrated is approximate, both omission and commission
errors may occur.

ts

, some population P

In addition to the correctly matched population P

which
t
really belongs in target zone t is omitted, while other population P
which belongs
in the source zone s but not the target zone is incorrectly included. The total
population stress q
for zone t may be viewed as some measure of the omission and
commission errors as a proportion of the true population. Here, we use the sum of
the squared omission and commission errors due to its approximation by zone s,
divided by its true population, which is the sum of P
(the correctly matched part)
and P
(the omitted part). The errors are squared in this context in order to give
greater weight to large misallocations that would be highly unattractive from a zone
design perspective.

ts

s

t

t

P2
t
P
ts
In order to get a summary measure Q

=

q

t

+P2
s
+P
t

of population stress across all target
zones, we must sum over all T target zones and all S source zones (although many
P

T

ts

values will be zero, where the zones are disjoint).
+P2
s
+P
t

= ∑T
t=1

∑S
s=1

P2
t
P
ts

Q

T

(1)

(2)

Figure 1. Approximate match between a source zone s and target zone t.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 186

D. Martin

Such a measure may be used as an objective function in an AZP-type algorithm,
such that it is minimized during the iterative recombination stage. This is eﬀectively
an objective function for maximising the population match between two geographies.
It will be reduced to zero if a perfect match is achieved between the two zonal
geographies. In the aggregation of smaller to larger areal units within a perfect
hierarchy, there is no population stress, as every member of the population may be
correctly matched to a target zone on the basis of their source zone location. Some
pairs of geographies are more similar than others. If minor boundary revisions are
made to an administrative geography, but it retains the same number of zones, most
of which are unchanged, the stress between the two systems will be small, with very
few persons likely to have been reallocated between zones due to the revisions. If,
however, the ﬁrst boundary set is replaced with another that subdivides the space
in an entirely diﬀerent way, there is likely to be high population stress, with great
diﬃculty in approximating the populations of the new zones from the old. This stress
will tend to be at its highest when the source populations are high in relation to the
target populations, and will vary at diﬀering levels of aggregation according to the
precise relationship between the input geographies.

Haining et al. (2001) consider the provision of software tools for spatial analysis,
and note that although there is a role for the incorporation of frequently-used
functions within GIS software, specialist functions are probably best left to specialist
software. In this context, the ability to extract topological information from GIS is
a very important consideration. The work described in this paper has been imple-
mented using a newly written AZM program, which embodies the original AZP and
AZP-SA algorithms, combined with the necessary structures for boundary matching.
AZM has been written in Visual Basic 6 and will run under Windows 95/NT 4 or
later. As with Haining et al.’s (2001) SAGE software, it has been designed with
polygon and arc attribute output from Arc/Info as the primary input, but will read
the required topological information from any similarly formatted ASCII ﬁles. The
program, including documentation, is available for download and experimentation
from http://www.geog.soton.ac.uk/users/martindj/.

While existing zone design tools, including the original AZP algorithm, eﬀectively
create an output geography from an input geography, this formulation requires a
third, intermediate, layer. Two input geographies are intersected in an external GIS
and the attributes of the intersected polygons and arcs are supplied to the program
to provide the input building block layer. It is thus necessary to maintain not only
the contiguity matrices but the membership lists of each layer with respect to each
other layer, making this task signiﬁcantly more demanding than a conventional AZP
problem in both conceptual and computational terms. These concepts are illustrated
with reference to the series of ﬁgures 3–6, all of which are based on the intersection
of two input zonal geographies, A and B, illustrated in ﬁgure 2.

Figure 2. Two input zonal geographies, A and B.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

187

In each of the ﬁgures 3–6 the ﬁrst diagram (a) is the same, and shows the input
zone layer resulting from the intersection of zonal geographies A and B. The second
diagram (b) in each sequence shows the intermediate layer following aggregation
analysis and this forms the input to iterative recombination using some objective
function. The ability to derive layer (c) from layer (b) is an entirely new feature of
AZM compared to AZP. The third diagram (c) represents a valid output layer from
this processing. The details of the associated populations and objective function are
irrelevant here, the purpose being to illustrate the role of ﬁxed and approximated
geographies. If neither input geography is ﬁxed, the intermediate layer is the same
as the input layer, the program implements a conventional zone design procedure,
treating all the input building blocks as separate entities (ﬁgure 3), in this case
producing three output zones which cut across both the input geographies. If one
zonal geography is ﬁxed (in this case B), then the smallest possible building blocks
which nest exactly within each of the zones in that geography are aggregated to
form intermediate building blocks (ﬁgure 4) before recombination iteration, again
resulting in three output zones, which respect B but cut across A. If both zonal
geographies are ﬁxed, then a more complex aggregation analysis is required to ﬁnd
the smallest clusters of input building blocks which can be assembled from both
input layers simultaneously without cutting across either (ﬁgure 5). No iterative
recombination is required if the objective is to produce the smallest possible output
zones. A fourth scenario (ﬁgure 6) is that in which one of the zonal geographies is
ﬁxed (in this case, A), and the design objective is to achieve the minimum population
stress with geography B, using the stress measure introduced above. The two zones

Figure 3. AZM with neither layer ﬁxed.

Figure 4. AZM with layer B ﬁxed.

Figure 5. AZM with both layers ﬁxed.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 188

D. Martin

Figure 6. AZM with layer A ﬁxed and layer B approximately matched.

of geography B in the upper half of the map are reproduced exactly, whereas those
in the lower half cannot be exactly reconstructed from geography A, and the result
is therefore approximate.

If the objective is to achieve the best possible match between two zonal geograph-
ies, and this has priority over all other constraints, an initial non-random aggregation
may be produced which begins to assign successive building blocks into tracts on
the basis of the target zone to which they contribute the greatest proportion of their
population. Using this simple allocation, similar to the use of a lookup table, the
contiguity of the formative tracts must be monitored very carefully, as direct alloca-
tion will frequently result in non-contiguous tracts. This computed low-stress solution
will thus attempt to create an output tract corresponding with each zone to be
matched. Iteration may then be started from this conﬁguration, which attempts to
reﬁne the solution in terms of any other design constraints that may be set. This has
the eﬀect of giving the algorithm a starting position that is strongly biased in favour
of a good match between the two zonal systems. Alternatively, the population stress
measure may be used in the same way as the other constraints in order to reﬁne the
output conﬁguration from an initial pseudorandom aggregation.

4. Application

Two very diﬀerent application areas have been selected for this study, to demon-
strate the application of the zone matching approach in both urban and rural UK
contexts. The urban example is the City of Southampton, and the rural the County
of Pembrokeshire.

Southampton is a medium-sized city (1991 population 197 000) on the South
Coast of England which at the time of the 1991 Census was divided into 417
enumeration districts (EDs) nested within 15 wards. The Pembrokeshire study area
represents a remote rural region, with small settlements and extensive areas of
sparsely populated land. Unlike the major metropolitan areas, rural areas in England
and Wales have a further tier of local boundaries known as communities in Wales
and parishes in England, which are to be respected in the construction of 2001
Census output areas (OAs). The study area is slightly less than the entire county,
being that part for which the Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS) has created
prototype 2001 OAs. It contained 308 1991 EDs, although it is important to distin-
guish here between EDs/OAs and polygons, as the county includes a number of
oﬀshore islands both populated and unpopulated, which are represented by separate
polygons in the dataset.

As part of preparation for the 2001 census, unit postcode polygons have been
created around address locations by ONS for various test areas,
including
Southampton and Pembrokeshire. Thiessen polygons have been generated around
each address, taking into account some additional topographic information, and

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

189

boundaries dissolved between address polygons having a common postcode, in order
to create a set of synthetic boundaries for the smallest units in the postal geography.
These are based on 95 011 address locations in Southampton and 50 348 in
Pembrokeshire. Using an implementation of the AZP algorithm, the postcodes have
been grouped into 762 and 353 prototype OAs respectively, using the 2001 Census
conﬁdentiality thresholds of 100 persons and 40 households, and a target population
of 250. A simple tenure-based measure of homogeneity and square of perimeter
divided by area constraints were applied in the production of these areas. Detailed
2001 OA design considerations are discussed more fully by Martin et al. (2001). The
OA boundaries resulting from this combination of constraints are indicative of what
might be released to UK census users early in 2003.

All GIS-based boundary manipulation has been performed within Arc/Info. The
1991 ED and 2001 OA boundaries have been intersected, sliver polygons merged
with the neighbour with which they share the longest common boundary, and
addresses counted within each intersection polygon. This results in intersection
coverages containing 1771 polygons in Southampton and 1022 in Pembrokeshire,
in which each polygon retains identiﬁers from both the ED and OA input layers.
Polygon and arc attribute tables have been exported and used within the AZM
program described above. In the following experiments 1999 address counts are used
in lieu of actual 2001 population counts that are not yet known. Figures 7 and 8
show the 1991 EDs and 2001 OAs for Southampton, and ﬁgures 9 and 10 show the
corresponding EDs and OAs for the Pembrokeshire study area.

These datasets have been used to investigate a series of alternative zoning scen-
arios. In each of these the OA boundaries are ﬁxed in order to reproduce the
situation that will face users of the 2001 Census data when they are published. More
experiments have been conducted with the Southampton data, as this represents a
situation of considerably more complex boundary change between 1991 and 2001.
In the ﬁrst scenario, both the 1991 ED and 2001 OA boundaries are ﬁxed, and
test areas are divided into tracts which can be exactly constructed from either of the
input geographies: these are equivalent of the 1971–81 tracts described by Morgan

Figure 7.

1991 Census enumeration districts for the City of Southampton.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 190

D. Martin

Figure 8. Prototype 2001 output areas for the City of Southampton.

Figure 9.

1991 Census enumeration districts for the Pembrokeshire study area.

and Denham (1982). This is the equivalent of the zoning problem illustrated in
ﬁgure 5. No AZP iteration is required but AZM performs an analysis of intersection
zones’ membership of the input geographies, and aggregation is conducted until
tracts have been achieved which are exact aggregations of both input geographies.
A series of further solutions are then sought at three diﬀerent scales, corresponding
approximately with the ward, the 1971–81 tract (the only empirical precedent for
such an exercise in England and Wales) and the ED. In each case, the 2001 OA
geography is ﬁxed, but the solution may cut across the 1991 EDs, producing the
equivalent problem to that introduced in ﬁgure 6. At each scale the AZM algorithm
is run ﬁrstly with only population and shape controls set, then with population
stress added as a design constraint and ﬁnally with a computed low stress solution
as the initial conﬁguration. 250 iterations have been run in each case. The scales of
analysis have been set by taking the mean address count for Southampton wards

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

191

Figure 10. Prototype 2001 output areas for the Pembrokeshire study area.

(6333), 1971–81 tracts (4000) and EDs (228), and setting these as the target popula-
tions. A ﬁnal option is to run the computed low stress solution without setting
minimum or target populations and attempt to create a conﬁguration in which there
is one output tract corresponding to each zone of the approximated geography.

5. Results

The results of the detailed experiments are shown in tables 1 and 2. Table 1 shows
the results of the full range of zoning scenarios for Southampton and table 2 shows
the results of only two experiments in Pembrokeshire. In the latter case it is much

Table 1. Summary characteristics of Southampton tract geographies.

Scenario

Min

Target

Shape

Tracts Mean

%EDs % Pop

ED ﬁxed
Ward scale
Ward scale A
Ward scale A,I
Tract scale
Tract scale A
Tract scale A,I
ED scale
ED scale A
ED scale A,I
Smallest possible

N/A
5000
5000
5000
3500
3500
3500
200
200
200
N/A

N/A
6333
6333
6333
4000
4000
4000
228
228
228
N/A

Oﬀ
On
On
On
On
On
On
On
On
On
Oﬀ

14
15
15
15
23
23
21
327
323
294
405

6787
6334
6334
6334
4131
4131
4524
291
294
323
235

100
44
51
52
41
39
47
3
3
11
7

100
84
86
89
83
84
89
59
59
76
67

Table 2. Summary characteristics of Pembrokeshire tract geographies.

Scenario

Min

Target

Shape

Tracts Mean

ED ﬁxed
Smallest possible

N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

Oﬀ
Oﬀ

82
233

614
216

%EDs % Pop

100
30

100
77

Std
Dev

4024
392
459
897
314
384
599
76
76
102
137

Std
Dev

539
129

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 192

D. Martin

easier to achieve matches due to the higher degree of coincidence between ED and
OA boundaries: this is due to the fact that in many cases both the ED and OA
boundaries have actually been drawn to coincide with community boundaries. The
ﬁrst four table columns describe the zoning constraints, being a description of the
scenario used, the minimum and target populations set and whether the shape
constraint was applied. In the descriptions, ’A’ indicates that the population stress
measure has been applied to maximize the approximation, and ’I’ indicates that the
IRA has been replaced with a computed match conﬁguration. The last six columns
describe the characteristics of the output geography, namely the number of tracts
created, their mean population and standard deviation, and the percentages of
approximated EDs preserved without splitting, and of population correctly assigned
into a tract which matches between the two geographies.

The simplest task is the intersection of 2001 OAs and 1991 EDs with both
geographies ﬁxed, represented by the ﬁrst row in each table. In this case, we are
seeking the smallest output tracts that may be created precisely from both geograph-
ies. This processing is analytical and involves no iteration cycle, so the population
and shape constraints are redundant. In Southampton, the large degree of boundary
change from 1991 to 2001 leads to a subdivision of the city into 14 tracts with a
mean address count of 6787, which are broadly equivalent to the 15 wards, although
some boundary change and development causes two pairs of wards to be merged
and one small ‘island’ zone to be formed. This solution is illustrated in ﬁgure 11.
The equivalent scenario in Pembrokeshire is shown as ﬁgure 12. Here, the community
boundaries are common to many 1991 EDs and 2001 OAs, allowing 82 tracts to be
produced with a mean address count of 614. Due to this high degree of exact
matching, the full range of approximate design scenarios has not been applied to
the Pembrokeshire data.

Table 1 clearly reveals that poorer results are obtained as the scale of the output
tracts is reduced, with great diﬃculty encountered when the target size is small in
relation to the OA size. The ﬁnal row in both tables 1 and 2 shows the results when
no threshold or target are set and the shape constraint is not applied, but the initial

Figure 11. Exact aggregation of Southampton 1991 EDs and prototype 2001 OAs into tracts.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

193

Figure 12. Exact aggregation of Pembrokeshire 1991 EDs and prototype 2001 OAs into
tracts.

conﬁguration is simply computed so as to assign the population of each ED into
the tract with which it has the greatest population overlap. In both the Southampton
and Pembrokeshire contexts, there is still some loss of zones, with fewer tracts
returned in each case compared to the corresponding number of EDs. Only 7% of
EDs remain unsplit in Southampton and 30% in Pembrokeshire under this scenario.
It is apparent that at all levels of aggregation the proportion of population
correctly preserved is much higher than that of EDs which can be preserved intact
in the output solution. Including population stress in competition with the population
and shape constraints generally results in only small overall improvements to the
match, possibly because it is only one of four equally-weighted competing factors
and therefore receives too low an emphasis in situations where matching is really
the users’ intention.

At each aggregation scale, the best matching results are obtained when a non-
random initial conﬁguration is used to maximize the match between the two input
geographies. This approach eﬀectively forces the algorithm to begin with the best-
matching number of OAs to EDs, and the additional constraints serve only to reﬁne
this conﬁguration. At both the ward and tract scales, it is possible to achieve an
89% match in the populations–in other words a mean of 89% of the population of
each 1991 ED is correctly carried through to the grouping of 2001 OAs to which it
is assigned.

The 21 tract solution is presented as ﬁgure 13, which illustrates the irregularity
of shape which is necessary to achieve this level of matching, although this will have
been increased by the relatively high population threshold in proportion to the target
population. Even this approach does not guarantee a single OA to match every ED
as some may be split between a number of OAs, none of which contributes the
majority of its population to that ED, and others may be below the population
thresholds set for this exercise. When an IRA is used, the algorithm proceeds to
reﬁne this by considering all the current constraints in parallel, and this has the
eﬀect of trading oﬀ target population size, shape and population stress. The most
appropriate choice will depend on the importance to the user of achieving maximal

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 194

D. Martin

Figure 13. Approximate aggregation of Southampton OAs into tracts giving 89% population
match with EDs.

matching between the geographies. There will be many, particularly urban, situations
in England and Wales in which a high degree of match is only possible at the cost
of signiﬁcant irregularity of shape and/or broad variations in the population of the
tracts. Generally, the degree of matching possible improves with target population
size, making the approximation areas at the scale of the ward and above feasible
with relatively low levels of approximation using this methodology.

6. Conclusion

This paper has reviewed the problem of matching population data between
incompatible areal units, frequently encountered when census and administrative
geographies change over time. The problem of maximizing the goodness of ﬁt of one
zonal system to another has been characterised as one of minimizing population
stress, and a stress statistics has been proposed. In certain situations, such as those
in which both zonal geographies must be matched perfectly, the problem is one that
may be solved analytically, but where it is necessary to approximate one geography
by precise aggregation of another then the problem is more appropriately tackled
with an iterative zoning procedure. Openshaw’s (1977) AZP has been extended
into an automated zone matching (AZM) algorithm by employing an intermediate
boundary processing layer and a program written for its implementation.

A series of practical trials have been illustrated using the 1991 and 2001 Census
geographies for Southampton and Pembrokeshire. These illustrate that
(for
UK-speciﬁc historical reasons) it will be much easier to achieve exact census tracts
in rural areas where both 1991 and 2001 geographies have been drawn with reference
to a common set of community and parish boundaries. In urban areas, the problem
is complex, and there are no easy solutions or perfect matches but AZM oﬀers an
automated approach to the matching problem and allows an evaluation of the trade-
oﬀ between resolution and precision in the creation of approximate tracts. The
implementation described here will oﬀer the possibility of very rapid identiﬁcation
of the smallest exactly matching zones, avoiding the signiﬁcant manual eﬀort or
indirect calculations characteristic of previous attempts to devise intercensal tracts.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

195

Acknowledgments

The research described in this paper was undertaken while the author was a
visiting researcher at Census Division, Oﬃce for National Statistics, Titchﬁeld. The
assistance of Steve King and members of the 2001 Census Output Production team
at ONS are gratefully acknowledged. All views and opinions expressed in the paper
remain the responsibility of the author. The maps presented here have been developed
through the prototype 2001 Census Output Area Production System and are Crown
Copyright.

References
A, D., C, C., D, D., and W, C., 1993, Connecting the 1981 and 1991
Censuses Research Report 93/9 (Newcastle-upon-Tyne: NE.RRL, University of
Newcastle).

B, L. M., P, P. J., and W, G. E., 1996, Implementation of enhanced areal

interpolation using MapInfo. Computers and Geosciences, 22, 459–466.

D-W, O., and R, P., 1998, Can Census Oﬃces publish statistics for more than
one small area geography? An analysis of the diﬀerencing problem in statistical
disclosure. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, 579–605.

F, P. F., and L, M., 1995, Modelling the errors in areal interpolation between
zonal systems by Monte Carlo simulation. Environment and Planning A, 27, 211–224.
F, R., and G, M., 1991, Data integration: statistical methods for transferring
data between zonal systems. In Handling Geographic Information: Methodology and
Potential Applications edited by I. Masser, and M. Blakemore (Harlow: Longman),
pp. 38–54.

F, R., and G, M., 1992, Developments in areal interpolation methods and

GIS. Annals of Regional Science, 26, 67–78.

G, M. F., A, L., and D, U., 1993, A framework for the areal
interpolation of socioeconomic data. Environment and Planning A, 25, 383–397.
H, R., W, S., and M, J., 1998, Exploratory spatial data analysis in a geographic
information system environment. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society D, 47, 457–469.
H, R., W, S., and M, J., 2001, Providing spatial statistical data analysis functionality
for the GIS user: the SAGE project. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 15, 239–254.

H, M. E. T., 1995, Solution techniques for large regional partitioning problems.

Geographical Analysis, 27, 230–248.

L, M., M, D. J., and U, D. J., 1994, The areal interpolation problem:
estimating population using remote sensing in a GIS framework. In Handling
Geographic Information: Methodology and Potential Applications, edited by I. Masser
and M. Blakemore (Harlow: Longman), pp. 55–77.

M, D., 1997, From enumeration districts to output areas: experiments in the automated

creation of a census output geography. Population T rends, 88, 36–42.

M, D., 1998, Optimizing census geography: the separation of collection and output

geographies. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, 673–685.

M, D., N, A., and T, M., 2001, The application of zone design methodology

in the 2001 UK census. Environment and Planning A, 33, 1949–1962.

M, A., J, E. L., and N, G. L., 1998, An optimization based heuristic

for political districting. Management Science, 44, 1100–1114.

M, C., and D, C., 1982, Census small area statistics (SAS): measuring change

and spatial variation. Population T rends, 28, 12–17.

M, A. S., C, B. P., and Z, L., 1999, Bayesian areal interpolation, estimation
and smoothing: an inferential approach for geographic information systems.
Environment and Planning A, 31, 1337–1352.

M, A. S., C, B. P., and G, A. E., 2000, Fully model-based approaches for
spatially misaligned data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95, 877–887.
census.

to the one number
2001 Census: A guide
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/census2001/pdfs/onc.pdf Accessed 31 May 2000.

ONS/GROS/NISRA,

1999,

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 196

Reconciling incompatible zonal geographies

O, S., 1977, A geographical solution to scale and aggregation problems in region-
building, partitioning and spatial modelling. T ransactions of the Institute of British
Geographers, NS 2, 459-72.

O, S., 1984, T he modiﬁable areal unit problem. Concepts and Techniques in Modern

Geography 38 (Norwich: Geo Books)

O, S., and A, S., 1999, Applying geocomputation to the analysis of spatial
distributions. In Geographical Information Systems: Principles, T echniques, Applications
and Management, edited by P. A. Longley, M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire, and D.
W. Rhind (Chichester: Wiley), pp. 267–282.

O, S., and R, L., 1995, Algorithms for re-engineering 1991 Census geography.

Environment and Planning A, 27, 425–446.

T, M., and S, D. G., 1998, Using census data to investigate the causes of the

ecological fallacy. Environment and Planning A, 30, 817–831.

X, Y. C., 1995, The overlaid network algorithms for areal interpolation problem. Computers,

Environment and Urban Systems, 19, 287–306.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 07:25 13 February 2015 