G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

                        THE USE OF UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES 
            FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Ged F. Griffin
University of Melbourne, Centre for Disaster Management and Public Safety
ged.griffin@hotmail.com

This  paper  discusses  potential  applications  of  unmanned  aerial  vehicles  (UAVs)  for  disaster
man age ment.  Based  on  the  current  state  and  diversity  of  research,  there  is  considerable  evidence  to
sup port  the  strategic  investment  in  UAV  technology  to  develop  new  and  enhance  existing  operational
capabilities.  When  developing  these  capabilities,  it  is  essential  that  officials  understand  a  range  of
vari ables that will influence the development of a concept of operations for particular types of disasters.
As the technical capabilities of UAVs exceed the permissible use of this technology, public safety officials
and agencies will have to work closely with national airspace regulators to ensure that these responses
are  safe  and  do  not  endanger  other  aircraft.  The  community’s  attitude  and  perceived  risks  will  also
influ ence the potential  use of  UAVs for disaster management. It is essential that  officials address these
concerns and build in safeguards to protect against any breaches of privacy and individual rights. 

       Cet article examine les applications possibles des véhicules aériens sans pilote (UAV) pour la gestion
des  catastrophes.  Selon  la  diversité  et  l’état  actuels  de  la  recherche,  il  existe  de  nombreux  indices  pour
appuyer l’investissement stratégique dans la technologie des UAV dans le but de développer de nouvelles
capacités opérationnelles et améliorer celles qui existent déjà. Lors du développement de ces capacités, il
est  essentiel  que  les  responsables  de  la  sécurité  publique  comprennent  un  éventail  de  variables  qui
influenceront  le  développement  d’un  concept  d’opérations  pour  des  types  particuliers  de  catastrophes.
Comme les capacités techniques des UAV excèdent l’utilisation permissible de cette technologie, les
responsables et les organismes de la sécurité publique devront travailler en étroite collaboration avec les
organismes  nationaux  chargés  de  réglementer  l’espace  aérien  afin  d’assurer  que  ces  réponses  sont
sécuritaires et ne mettent pas en péril les autres aéronefs. L’attitude de la communauté et les risques perçus
influenceront également l’utilisation potentielle des UAV pour la gestion des catastrophes. Il est essentiel
que  les  responsables  de  la  sécurité  publique  tiennent  compte  de  ces  préoccupations  et  incorporent  des
mesures visant à assurer une protection efficace contre toute violation de la vie privée et toute atteinte aux
droits individuels.

1. Background

Public  safety  officials  continually  examine
ways of enhancing their agency’s service delivery
through  the  improvement  of  operational  policies
and  processes  as  well  as  the  expansion  of  their
existing  operational  capabilities.  Technological
developments  can  provide  a  range  of  operational
benefits from the enhancement of current practice
up to the complete transformation of busi ness prac-
tice.  For  example,  Victoria  Police  transformed
international police practice by introducing a wire-
less radio system within a motor vehicle patrol in
the 1920s. The ‘Patrol’ became the benchmark for
police  operations  internationally  [Haldane  1986].
Further  technological  advancements  have  contin-
ued  to  provide  enhanced  communication  and
operational  capabilities;  how ever,  wireless  voice

communications  remains  a  primary  aspect  of  cur-
rent international police prac tice. 

Within  the  public  safety  sector,  technological
advancement has led to the development of a range
of  sensor  systems  which  can  be  used  to  deliver
spe cific  operational  outcomes.  These  sensors  are
used in a range of ways, namely: 

•  Fixed  systems—monitored  close  circuit
tel e vi sion  systems  enhance 
the  situational
aware ness  of  what  is  occurring  in  a  given  area.
When  a  disturbance  or  incident  is  observed,  patrol
units can be sent to the location to resolve the matter
[GAO 2003];

•  Semi-mobile  systems—deployable  and
veh cle-mounted  speed  measuring  devices  which
detect  vehicles  travelling  at  excessive  speeds  and

dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2014-402

GEOMATICA  Vol. 68, No. 4, 2014 pp. 265 to 281

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

record  evidence  to  support  the  prosecution  of  the
offending driver [Cameron and Delaney 2006]; and 
•  Mobile  systems—aircraft  mounted  video
downlinks  capture  video  imagery  from  an  aircraft
and transmit that imagery to a control or communi-
cations centre [BMS 2012; Covert Systems 2005]. 
Recent advances in sensor and aviation tech nol-
ogy  have  lead  to  the  development  of  a  number  of
new  capabilities  and  opportunities  for  unmanned
aerial vehicles. The following sections describe how
these  unmanned  aerial  vehicles  can  be  used  to
enhance emergency management oper a tions. 

1.1 Unmanned Vehicles 

For  over  a  century  there  has  been  interest  in

unmanned vehicles. These vehicles include:

•  Unmanned  Ground  Vehicles  (UGV)—radio
controlled vehicles were used to move goods through
the  trenches  during  World  War  1  [Oudes  and
Zwijnenberg 2011];

• Unmanned  Underwater Vehicles  (UUV)  and
Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USV)—during mine-
sweeping  operations  [Oudes  and  Zwijnenberg
2011]; and

•  Unmanned  Aerial  Vehicles  (UAV)—the
Austrian balloon bombs and the Hewitt-Sperry auto-
matic  airplane  [Clothier  2012a;  Oudes  and
Zwijnenberg 2011].

While UAVs have been in existence for some
time,  public  safety  airborne  operations  have  nor-
mally been undertaken through the use of manned
aircraft [Clothier 2012a; EC 2007]. The expanded
military  use  of  UAVs,  predominantly  by  the  US
military in Iraq and Afghanistan, has generated sig-
nificant interest by public safety officials. The main
military roles include intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance 
(ISR),  communications  and
weapons delivery [Butler 2001]. The extensive mil-
itary  use  of  UAVs  has  meant  that  this  technology

has matured to a point which makes a range of civil
and  commercial  applications  financially  viable
[Clothier 2012a]. As a result, public safety officials
are  examining  how  this  type  of  technology  can
for  disaster
enhance  operational  capability 
man agement [EC 2007; GAO 2008].   

Technological  innovations  can  also  lead  to
community concern, such as perceived impacts on
privacy or the militarisation of the police [Wright
1998].  To  date,  significant  public  concern  exists
regarding the impact of UAV operations on privacy
[Graham 2010;  ICO 2010;  Stanley  and  Crump
2011;  Villasensor  2011,  2012].  A  stigma  is  also
attached to the use of UAVs due to the military use
of  them  as  a  key  offensive  weapon  in  what  has
been  described  as  the  ‘drone  wars’  [Cole 2012;
Oudes and Zwijnenberg 2011]. These perceptions
will limit the community’s acceptance of UAVs for
disaster management roles.

Once an unmanned vehicle has been fitted with
a sensor or range of sensors, it is often referred to as
an Unmanned Airborne System (UAS). Basically an
unmanned vehicle carries a sensor which provides a
particular  capability  that  can  be  used  during  an
oper ational response, as depicted in Figure 1.  

For  example,  underwater  unmanned  sub-
mersibles  are  used  to  inspect  objects,  especially  in
deep water, such as the inspection of damaged sub-
surface infrastructure and oil wells [Michaels 2003].

1.2 Operational Considerations of
UAVs

National airspace regulators’ principle concern
is safety through the avoidance of aircraft collisions
or crashes. UAVs are considered an aircraft and reg-
ulators  restrict  how  UAVs  can  be  used  within
national airspace. It is anticipated that these restric-
tions  will  gradually  reduce  due  to  improved  UAV
technology  [EC 2007;  GAO 2008].  Significant
research is underway in developing collision avoid-
ance  systems,  automated  emergency  landing
systems and autonomous flight control systems for
UAVs [Clothier 2012a; EC 2007; GAO 2008, QUT
2014].  The  autonomous  flight  control  systems
include  the  operation  and  coordination  of  swarms
of UAVs to provide coverage over large geographic
areas [Clothier 2012a]. Unprecedented access to the
United States national airspace for UAVs is planned
and it is esti mated that approxi mately 10 000 UAVs
will be flying by 2017 [Glor 2012]. Similarly, the
European  Remote  Piloted  Aircraft  Systems
(European RPAS) roadmap (a copy of the roadmap

Figure 1: Public safety use of UAVs [Griffin 2012].

266

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

can  be  found  at  http://ec.europa.eu/  enterprise/sec-
tors/aerospace/uas/) will form the basis for the safe
and  incremental  insertion  of  civil  UAVs  into
European  air  traffic  by  2016  [Blyenburgh 2013].
These  actions  are  indicative  of  trends  towards
strategically planning the integration of UAVs into
regulated airspace across the world.

When  developing  a  concept  of  operations  for
disaster  management,  it  is  essential  that  public
safety officials understand that the technical capa-
bilities  of  UAVs  exceed  those  activities  that  are
currently  permissible  by  national  airspace  regula-
tors.  It  is  also  essential  that  decision  makers
understand that UAV operations are a balancing act
between  multiple  variables  that  will  influence  the
operational  outcomes  and  UAV  performance
[Griffin 2012].

The  type  and  class  of  a  UAV  influences  the
potential mission role and payload capacity of the
UAV within the broader operational setting. There
are  four  main  types  of  UAV,  namely  fixed  wing,
rotary  wing,  multi-rotary  wing  and  airships
[Clothier  2012a].  Classes  of  UAV  range  from
micro-platforms  to  large  very  high-altitude  long-
endurance platforms [Brown 2011; EC 2007].

Mission  variables  can  be  collated  into  three

broad domains, namely:

•  UAV  Domain—consiting  of,  amongst  other
things, the systems to launch, recover, fly and main-
tain the UAV, the air frame, propulsion system and
telematics or flight control system;

•  UAS  Domain—consiting of  the  sensor
sys tems,  sensor  power  source  and  sensor  control
infrastructure; and

•  Operational  Domain—relating to  the  oper-
a tional environment in which the UAS is being used
and  into  which  the  sensor  outputs  must  be  inte-
grated. This domain is controlled by the Operational
Commander and any UAV operation must be con-
ducted in accordance with the commander’s intent.
Figure 2 depicts the inter-relationship between
these domains and some of the key variables within
those domains. The national airspace regulator con-
trols  the  use  of  UAVs,  and  the  range  of  variables
creates a complex network of relationships that need
to  be  fully  considered,  as  there  may  be  significant
costs associated with the acquisition and sustainment
of UAV capabilities [Clothier 2012b].   

UAVs  will  not  fully  replace  piloted  airborne
operations, but they have the potential to compliment

Figure 2: Domains of influence for public safety use of UAVs. Source: Adapted from Griffin [2012].

267

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

existing capabilities and to provide greater access to
information  derived  from  airborne  sensor  systems
[Clothier 2012a]. Within a military context, UAVs
have  been  used  to  ‘supplement  low-density,  high-
demand  airborne  assets’  [Butler  2001:9].  Existing
military  airborne  operations  and  tasks  that  are
assessed as being dull, dirty, dangerous or demand-
ing  are  often  considered  to  be  suitable  for  the
integration  of  UAV  capabilities  [Clothier  2012a].
New capabilities are normally identified by consid-
ering  the  potential  operational  benefits  of  sensor
outputs against the cost of delivering those sensory
outputs through a UAV solution [Clothier 2012b]. 
When  considering  how  UAVs  can  be  used,
mission planners should determine the operational
range  requirements  and  mission  performance
parameters  for  a  particular  task.  The  range  of  a
UAV  will  be  influenced  by  a  number  of  factors,
including the physical capabilities of the UAV, the
sensor payload requirements, communications link
requirements (for both the flight of the UAV as well
as  the  operation  of  the  sensor  payload),  physical
terrain,  operational  restraints  and  crew  fatigue
[Clothier  2012b;  Griffin  2012].  The  mission  per-
formance parameters will be influenced by factors
including the mission role, response time, mission
duration  requirements,  environmental  conditions,
security  arrangements,  single  or  multi-aircraft
operations  and  the  integration  with  other  systems
[Clothier 2012b; Griffin 2012].

UAV operations can be classified as either line
of site or beyond line of site. Line of site operations
are  frequently  used  for  small  UAVs  and  are  rela-
tively simple. For example, the Merseyside Police

has  used  a  multi-rotary  wing  UAV  with  a  sensor
payload, video glasses and a hand-held remote con-
trol [BBC News 2007]. Alternatively, beyond line of
site operations can be used; however, they become
increasingly complex, as displayed in Figure 3. To
support  these  types  of  missions  there  are  at  least
three key elements and two key links. The three ele-
ments include the air vehicle element, the data and
voice communications element and the control ele-
ment. The two key links are the line of sight link and
the over the horizon link [GAO 2008:7]. 

1.3 Sensor Payloads

The development of UAV payloads has mainly
been driven by the military’s need for ISR sensors,
communications  equipment  and  weapons  [Butler
2001]. More recently the US Army has been explor-
ing the cargo-carrying capabilities of UAVs and their
ability to resupply troops in forward operating bases.
The  lift  capacity  and  cost-benefit  of  these  types  of
applications  will  be  key  factors  in  determining  the
success of these types of UAV operations [Gallagher
2012; McLeary 2012, 2012a]. Other military innova-
tions include the development of multi-modal UAVs
which  have  the  ability  to  both  fly  and  drive
[Advanced Tactics 2014].

The capabilities and limitations of sensors will
be  key  factors  in  determining  potential  disaster
management roles for UAVs. The cost and capabil-
ities  of  sensors  can  vary  significantly,  and
decision-makers need to have a clear understanding
of what they want to achieve prior to selecting a par-
ticular sensor. For example, an Electro-Optical (EO)

Figure 3: Beyond line of site operations. Source: GAO [2008:7].

268

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

system or camera can take fixed or moving images,
high definition or low definition images. A low defi-
nition  moving  image  may  be  suitable  for  the
management of an emergency, for example a fire, but
may  not  provide  sufficient  detail  for  a  law  enforce-
ment  role  due  to  an  inability  to  clearly  identify
suspects  and  vehicle  registration  plate  numbers
[Griffin 2012]. Choices should be made with careful
consideration of the potential for rapid obsolescence
of a particular sensor, how the sensor outputs can be
integrated into information management systems and
the prevailing operational environment [Butler 2001].   

looks  at  what  happens  before,  during  and  after  an
emergency. Coppola [2001:12-13] argues that dis-
aster management based on response and recovery
strategies  are  ineffective  and  that  comprehensive
approaches  must  include  activities  that  relate  to
mitigation and preparedness. Within some jurisdic-
tions the prevention and preparedness elements are
combined into a single phase, where as others use
terms like mitigation and planning during the initial
phase  rather  than  the  term  prevention  [Coppola
2001; Harper 2006].   

The five key elements of disaster management

In  general  terms,  some  of  the  key  UAV

consist of:

sen sors are:

•  Electro  Optical  (EO),  sometimes  referred  to
as  cameras—these  sensors  capture  either  still
images or moving images that can be of either high
or low resolution;

•  Forward  Looking  Infra  Red  (FLIR)—these
types  of  sensors  capture  images  that  highlight  the
difference  between  the  temperature  of  objects
within the image;

•  Light  Detection  and  Ranging  (LiDAR)—
these  types  of  sensors  measure  the  distance  to  an
object or other properties of an object by illuminat-
ing the target with light;

•  Visible  Infrared  Imager  Radiometer  Suite
(VIIRS)—these types of sensors provide advanced
imaging  and  radiometric  capabilities  and  are  used
extensively in weather mapping and forecasting;

•  Chemical  Detectors—these  sensors  can  be
used to measure a range of particular chemicals that
can be explosive, dangerous, or indicative of drug
cultivation or manufacture; and

•  Synthetic  Aperture  Radar  (SAR)—these
types of sensors can detect and map the earth and
identify particular features on the earth.

2. Concept of Operations

A significant amount of research and discussion
has taken place over the potential roles for UAVs in
disaster  management.  Potential  roles  can  be  either
general or specific in nature and this will impact on
the choice of sensors. Potential disaster management
roles  are  discussed  in  the  following  sections  and
summarised in a mission/payload matrix at the end
of this paper.

2.1 Disaster Management

Disaster  management  is  a  broad  concept  that
involves  a  range  of  activities  which,  in  essence,

•  Prevention—relates  to  activities  that  will
either prevent an incident occurring or minimise the
impact of a potential incident; 

•  Mitigation—in  a  similar  manner  to  pre-
ven tion, seeks to reduce the likelihood and impact
of a hazard or an event on a community;

•  Preparedness—relates  to  activities  to  ensure
that  communities  are  better  placed  to  respond  to
and cope with the impact of an incident;

•  Response—relates  to  activities  that  allow  a
community  to  control,  respond  to  and  reduce  the
impact of an incident; and 

• Recovery—relates to returning the com mu nity
to a state of preparedness and to recover from the
impact of an incident and move toward rehabilitation. 
[Coppola 2011; Harper 2006]

When considering the potential roles for UAVs
for  disaster  management,  it  is  essential  that  any
potential capability benefit delivered is considered
across these five key elements.

2.2 Integrating UAVs into Disaster
Management Activity

Regardless  of  the  type  of  disaster,  there  are  a
number  of  generic  tasks  that  need  to  occur  across
all phases of a disaster [Wegner 2000]. Before an
event, activity is associated with training and exer-
cising both specific and generic skills. In addition
to  this  activity,  risk  assessments  are  conducted  in
order  to  develop  a  number  of  plans,  for  example
disaster  risk  management  plans  and  evacuation
plans.  Baseline  data  that  may  be  needed  during  a
potential event will also be captured [Claessens et
al. 2005]. Figure 4 depicts how these generic tasks
occur  during  the  different  phases  of  disaster
man agement.

Generic information includes ensuring that all
mapping  and  environmental  information  is  up  to
date  and  integrated  into  the  relevant  information

269

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

management system(s). This baseline data can help
establish situational awareness while managing an
incident and it can be used after an incident while
conducting post damage assessments [Bendea et al.
2008; Chou et al. 2010].

Topographical and three-dimensional maps are
important  for  disaster  management,  as  the  risk  of
exposure for an individual or object will be heavily
influenced  by  its  three-dimensional  location
[Griffin  et  al. 2012].  To  help  understand  this  risk
exposure and plan disaster management activities,
topographical  maps  with  contour  lines  (both
printed and digital versions) and three-dimensional
landscape models are required. When high-resolu-
tion detailed maps are unavailable, an agency will
have to either generate its own maps or arrange a
contractor to produce these maps [Cox et al. 2004].
Some types of UAVs have the ability to descend to
a lower altitude for a more detailed assessment of
areas  of  interest.  These  types  of  missions  can  be
performed by single, multiple or swarms of UAVs
[Quaritsch  et  al.  2011].  The  images  that  are  cap-
tured  are  stitched  together  as  part  of  an  image
mosaicking process to create a seamless image of a
given area in either 2D or 3D [Laliberte et al. 2011;
Quaritsch et al. 2011; Remondino et al. 2011].

Pre-incident  aerial  imagery  can  be  sourced
from  sensors  in  satellites,  manned  flights  or  via

UAVs. The decision to obtain a particular type of
imagery  will  be  determined  by  a  range  of  factors
including cost, availability, detail and suitability. It
is not unusual to combine imagery from a range of
sources. Manned flights and UAVs have the advan-
tage of being able to capture both moving and still
imagery.  Imagery  obtained  from  UAVs  bridges
“the  gap  between  ground-based  rangeland  meas-
urements  and  remotely  sensed  imagery  from
piloted aerial and satellite platforms, both in terms
of  image  scale  and  image  acquisition  costs”
[Laliberte et al. 2011:141].

Before  an  event,  these  maps  can  be  used  to
identify high risk areas, for example development
in a flood plain. A risk assessment can then be con-
ducted  and  emergency  plans  can  be  developed
[Claessens et al. 2005].

After  a  significant  disaster,  the  physical
struc ture of an area may change through the alter-
ation  of  the  physical  landscape  and  loss  of
structures,  vegetation  and  landmarks.  Similarly,
roads and bridges may be destroyed. As a result of
these  changes  and  losses,  pre-incident  maps  may
not  be  an  effective  tool  to  plan  and  manage
response and recovery activities. To overcome this
limitation,  the  rapid  acquisition  of  post-disaster
mapping  will  ensure  that  public  safety  officials
have an accurate understanding of the situation on
the  ground,  including  the  availability  of  access  to
the affected areas [Claessens et al. 2005].

During  the  response  phase  of  a  disaster,
offi cials  need  to  quickly  establish  and  maintain
their situation awareness of an incident. This situa-
tional  awareness  is  established  through  reports
received  from  the  community  and  agency  assets
deployed  at  an  incident.  Throughout  the  initial
stages  of  the  response,  officials  operate  in  a  high
level  of  uncertainty  and  they  must  try  to  make
sense  out  of  information  coming  from  multiple
sources. This information is sometimes incomplete
or contradictory; however, the availability of infor-
mation  is  critical  in  directing  first  responders  to
survivors  of  an  incident  as  quickly  and  safely  as
possible. Information has its greatest impact during
the  initial  period  following  an  incident  and  any
delay in obtaining or understanding the information
will reduce its value [Rao et al. 2007].

Aerial  imagery,  especially  multi-view  over-
lap ping imagery and video footage, of an incident
is a highly valuable commodity when obtained in
real time or close to real time, as it allows officials
to  understand  what  is  actually  occurring.  This
knowledge  helps  them  understand  who  and  what
are at risk. There has been a high level of interest in

Figure 4: Examples of emergency management activities clustered into
groups. Source: EMMV [2009:6].

270

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

this  type  of  application  of  UAV  capability.  The
Flemish  Institute  for  Technological  Research  has
been  experimenting  with  the  use  of  High Altitude
Long  Endurance  (HALE)  UAVs  to  provide  this
Information
the 
capability.  Alternatively, 
Technology 
for  Humanitarian  Assistance,
Cooperation and Action (ITHACA) has been work-
ing  with  the  United  Nations World  Food  Program
(WFP) testing small fixed wing UAVs that operate
at  low  altitudes  [Claessens  et  al.  2005;  Bendea  et
al. 2008]. Small hand-launched UAVs were used in
Florida  in  2004  during  the  response  to  Hurricane
Charley. The use of these types of UAVs was pre-
ferred  during  this  response,  as  they  could  be
deployed quickly, did not contend for airspace with
manned  flights  and,  by  staying  at  a  height  under
400 ft, there was no requirement to file flight plans
[Johnson 2005].

The  search  for  and  rescue  of  injured  persons
and survivors after a major incident is a key priority
during the initial response, and the ability to rapidly
locate  injured  people  will  greatly  enhance  their
chances of survival. When managing a major inci-
dent  over  a  wide  geographical  area,  this  task  is
particularly challenging and consumes a large num-
ber  of  assets.  After  Hurricane  Katrina  in  2005,
UAVs provided a rapid search capability for remote
areas in Mississippi and proved to be significantly
quicker than would have been possible by boats and
manned  helicopters  [Johnson  2005].  Research  has
also been conducted on the suitability of installing
a marker dispenser system as part of the payload in
order  to  mark  the  location  of  where  victims  have
been  located  by  the  UAV  [Hollinger  et  al.  2012].
This approach allows ground-based units to quickly
locate and attend to these victims.

In  a  disaster,  the  transition  from  response  to
recovery involves understanding and assessing what
damage  has  been  caused  by  a  particular  event  and
then the development of plans to repair that damage.
This  process  involves  comprehensive  fieldwork;
however,  detailed  post-incident  aerial  imagery  pro-
vides  the  ability  to  understand  the  extent  of  the
damage and to prioritise the deployment of resources
to  conduct 
these  post-disaster  assessments
[Claessens  et  al. 2005].  For  example,  in  2009  the
Morakot  typhoon  in  Taiwan  killed  673  people  and
caused  extensive  damage  across  the  country.  This
damage  occurred  in  areas  with  challenging  terrain
that  had  difficult  and  dangerous  traffic  conditions.
UAVs  were  used  during  the  post-disaster  damage
assessment process and demonstrated their ability to
both collect aerial imagery as well as produce Digital
Elevation Models (DEMs). These DEMs were then

used to simulate the current terrain environment and
to calculate debris that had been produced as a result
of  the  typhoon  [Chou  et  al.  2010].  During  this
incident the high mobility and high revisit rate of
the UAVs were found to be a key advantage over
traditional approaches to post disaster assessments
[Chou et al. 2010]. 

The following sections provide a more detailed
discussion regarding specific types of disasters and
how UAVs can be used to enhance existing capabil-
ities. The  appendix  provides  a  tabulated  summary
of  potential  UAV  missions,  particular  sensor  pay-
loads  and  the  enhanced  capabilities  and  benefits
which can be derived from these UAV missions.

2.3 Geophysical Events

Incidents  associated  with  the  Earth’s  natural
geophysical  processes  range  from  landslides  to
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. These types of
events  can  be  devastating  on  the  community  and
infrastructure.  Officials  try  to  identify  potential
events before an incident by detecting crustal defor-
mation in the earth using Interferometric Synthetic
Aperture  Radar  (InSAR)  and  LiDAR  [Cox  et  al.
2004;  Richards 2007].  These  sensors  are  used  to
generate  high-resolution  topographic  maps  of  an
area  or  location.  A  comparison  is  then  made
between  baseline  mapping  and  newly  generated
maps. Any change in the terrain can be investigated
further  [Cox  et  al.  2004;  Richards  2007].  The
United States Geological Survey (USGS) has used
LiDAR  to  generate  three-dimensional  bare-earth
maps that identify fault lines. Further examinations
over time are conducted to detect any changes to the
area  or  as  a  guide  for  the  placement  of  ground
sen sors to detect movement along the fault line. In a
similar fashion, this type of approach could be used
to monitor areas that are subject to land slippage. 

Earthquakes and other geophysical events have
an enormous potential to damage and destroy infra-
structure  associated  with  lifeline  systems,  which
are “the systems for delivering resources and serv-
ices necessary for the health, economic well-being,
and security of modern communities” [O'Rourke et
al. 2008:10]. These lifeline systems include electric
power,  gas  and  liquid  fuels,  telecommunications,
transportation,  waste  disposal  and  water  supply.
UAVs  can  be  programmed  off-line  and  controlled
in real-time to inspect infrastructure associated with
these key lifeline systems [Puri 2012]. Prior to an
event, UAVs can fly these routes to collect baseline
data and assist in the general maintenance and man-
agement  of  this  infrastructure.  After  an  event  or

271

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

during the response to an event, UAVs can be used
by engineers to provide an initial rapid assessment
of  any  potential  damage.  This  information  will
assist in identifying appropriate access and evacua-
tion  routes  as  well  as  identifying  and  prioritising
recovery activities. 

After an earthquake, structural integrity assess-
ments should be conducted to ensure that personnel
are  not  placed  in  danger  as  they  attempt  to  rescue
trapped and injured people. Traditionally a range of
ground  based  scanners  and  other  instruments  have
been used to make detailed assessments of structural
integrity. These assessments can be impacted by the
non-optimal image capture of potential damage and
therefore limit the identification of buildings that are
at risk of collapse. To overcome this limitation, satel-
lite  and  airborne  imagery  from  manned  flights  are
used to supplement the assessments [Dominici et al.
2012]. Unlike manned flights, UAVs can be used to
conduct  very  low  level  assessments  of  damage.
Micro  UAVs  can  also  be  used  to  conduct  limited
internal damage assessments [Dominici et al. 2012].
This  type  of  approach  has  been  used  during  earth-
quake responses in Italy and Chile [Dominici et al.
2012;  Osborne 2010].  During  the  response  to  the
2011  Tohoku  earthquake  of  Japan  and  associated
tsunami,  UAVs  were  used  to  determine,  amongst
other things, the damage to the Fukushima nuclear
reactors [Ackerman 2011; CRASAR 2012]. 

Landslide  management  requires  precise  data
and aerial photogrammetry is often used for close-
domain  mapping  to  supplement  satellite  imagery
[Carvajal et al. 2011; Rau et al. 2011]. The highest
level  of  precision  is  desirable,  as  small  landslides
have the potential to broaden very quickly [Rau et al.
2011]. Researchers in Taiwan have developed a sys-
tem for automating the detection of landslides using
fixed wing UAVs as well as using UAVs to rapidly
assess the damage caused by landslides [Rau et al.
2011]. While this work concentrated on large scale
assessments, Spanish researchers have used a small
multi-rotor UAV to map landslides on road embank-
ments [Carvajal et al. 2011]. This research showed
that this was an efficient method of providing a pho-
togrammetric  product  that  covered  a  gap  between
traditional  aerial  photogrammetry  and  hand-made
surveying  products  [Carvajal  et  al.  2011].  Further
research  in  France  has  identified  the  suitably  low-
cost UAV-based sensors to monitor landslides. The
research  found  that  “this  approach  does  not
require any ground control point information and
enables  surface  models  to  be  generated  from
UAV-based remote sensing without ground-based
measure ments”  [Niethammer  et  al. 2010:  501].

Ground-based monitoring can be hazardous due to
the  unstable  terrain,  and  the  use  of  UAVs  was
viewed  as  being  an  improvement  on  traditional
methods for monitoring landslides. 

During the 2004 eruption of Mount St. Helens
in  the  United  States,  research  was  conducted
regarding  the  suitability  of  UAVs  to  assist  in  the
study of volcanoes and to provide surveillance dur-
ing  an  eruption. As  part  of  this  research,  a  small
UAV  was  used  to  fly  in  and  around  the  volcano’s
crater to provide an ongoing assessment in relation
to the eruption [McCormack 2008; Patterson et al.
2005]. FLIR observations provided detailed infor-
mation  regarding  the  thermal  emissions  and
identified  the  development  of  a  new  lava  dome.
The research found that “the use of UAVs for vol-
canic exploration and assessment not only reduces
the potential risk to human life but may offer a con-
siderable  cost  advantage  over  existing  data
collection  approaches  from  manned  aircraft”
[Patterson et al. 2005: 6]. 

2.4 Fire Management

A  significant  amount  of  research  has  been
con ducted in regards to the potential use of UAVs
to assist in the management of wildfires. For over a
decade NASA and the US Forest Service have been
at  the  forefront  of  this  research  through  Project
FiRE (First Response Experiment) and the Wildfire
Research 
Partnership
and  Applications 
(WRAP)[Ambrosia  et  al. 2003,  2011;  Ambrosia
and Wegener 2009]. 

These projects divide the supply of remote fire

imagery into two distinct categories, namely:

• Strategic—data covering a wide area or region
to provide an overview of the distribution of fires; and
• Tactical—detailed, frequent and repetitive data
in relation to a specific fire [Ambrosia et al. 2003].
While  satellite  imagery  and  data  provides
valu able  strategic  information,  manned  flights  are
used  to  provide  tactical  data  to  assist  in  real-time
fire fighting and management decisions. UAVs are
being  assessed  as  having  significant  potential  to
provide  remote  fire  imagery,  especially  tactical
imagery  [Ambrosia  et  al.  2003,  2011;  Ambrosia
and Wegener 2009]. The use of both manned and
unmanned  aerial  assets  can  potentially  provide  a
range of significant benefits to fire fighting opera-
tions; however, the congestion of the airspace can
produce additional risks and issues that need to be
managed [Ambrosia and Wegener 2009].

Before an incident, fuel load management is a
critical  method  used  to  manage  the  risk  of

272

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

wild fires.  To  perform  this  task,  officials  need  to
understand  the  location,  extent  and  moisture  con-
tent  of  potential  fuel.  This  knowledge  allows
officials to plan and conduct preventative burns to
decrease  potential  fuel  loads  [Cox  et  al.  2004;
Griffin et al. 2012; Merino et al. 2012]. The chal-
lenge for public safety officials is that they need to
manage vast and remote areas that often have diffi-
cult terrain. To perform this task, both ground and
airborne assets are used to conduct risk assessments
and to make informed decisions. UAVs can be used
to supplement these airborne assessments.

Once an ignition of the fuel load has occurred,
the early detection of the ignition is a critical factor
in the successful management of that incident. It is
essential that any ignition and subsequent wildfire is
extinguished  as  quickly  and  safely  as  possible.
UAVs can perform patrol duties to detect a fire in a
remote location or to compliment ground sensor sys-
tems that may detect a potential ignition [Cox et al.
2004;  Krüll  et  al.  2012].  German  researchers  have
developed a fully integrated remote forest fire mon-
itoring system involving a range of ground sensors,
custom  built  camera-based  systems  and  UAVs,
[Krüll et al. 2012; Maza et al. 2011]. Under this sys-
tem,  an  airship-designed  UAV  was  fitted  with
radiometric sensors and was supported by a smaller
multi-rotary wing UAV. The radiometric sensors on
the  airship  UAV  autonomously  detected  a  fire
through  plant  cover,  smoke  and  dust.  The  smaller
multi-rotary wing UAVs were then used to conduct a
closer inspection of the incident location [Krüll et al.
2012; Maza et al. 2011].

As a wildfire grows, more resources are tasked
with combating the fire, based on a range of visual
observations and other information made available
to  fire  fighting  experts  [Merino  et  al.  2012].
During this period, officials need to understand the
current intensity, location and movement of the fire
front as well as understand where agency and com-
munity assets are located. The risk exposure of these
assets  can  be  influenced  by  a  range  of  factors
including  the  weather,  fuel  load  and  topography
[Griffin  et  al.  2012;  Merino  et  al.  2012].  This
knowledge influences decisions regarding how best
to  manage  the  fire  and  to  protect  both  agency  and
community  assets.  UAVs  can  perform  a  range  of
roles  during  this  process,  including  the  production
of  aerial  imagery  of  the  incident,  supporting  map
production, detection of hazards for manned flights
(for example transmission lines and wires) and the
identification  of  water  resources  for  use  in  fire-
bombing missions [Griffin 2012]. Manned airborne
fire  bombing  missions  are  used  to  support  fire

assets  deployed  on 

fight ing 
the  ground.
Unfortunately  these  missions  are  only  conducted
during  daylight  hours  due  to  the  inherent  danger
associated with these operations. Spanish researchers
are developing a UAV with the capability to maintain
firebombing missions  throughout  the  hours  of
dark ness to overcome this limitation [Nitrofirex 2014].
The  capabilities  of  UAVs  to  provide  long-
dura t ion  monitoring  of  disaster  events  have  been  a
key  focus  of  the  FiRE  and  WRAP  projects
[Ambrosia et al. 2003, 2011; Ambrosia and Wegener
2009].  The  Airborne  Infrared  Disaster  Assessment
System  (AIR DAS)  and  the  Autonomous  Modular
Sensor (AMS) Wildfire Sensor were developed dur-
ing  these  projects.  The  AIRDAS  facilitates  higher
temperature  discrimination  within  a  wildfire  and
AMS-Wildfire Sensor supports multiple fire science
measurements consisting of both imagery and other
fire data sets [Ambrosia et al. 2003, 2011; Ambrosia
and  Wegener 2009].  The  WRAP  project  is  now
examining  the  util ity  of  small  UAVs  to  provide
direct tactical information to fire teams deployed
in  the  field,  especially  during  mop-up  operations
and  when  manned  flights  are  unavailable
[Ambrosia et al. 2011].

The FiRE and WRAP projects have also led to
the  development  of  the  Wildfire  Collaborative
Decision  Environment  (W-CDE).  This  system  is  a
fire  data  visualisation  tool  based  on  Google  Earth
and it allows users to visualise fire imagery and other
data on a 3-dimensional landscape in near-real-time
[Ambrosia et al. 2003, 2011; Ambrosia and Wegener
2009]. This data includes real-time satellite weather
information,  predicted  winds,  remote  automated
weather  stations,  airspace  restrictions  and  satellite-
derived  fire  hot-spot  directions  [Ambrosia  and
Wegener  2009].  When  conducting  beyond  line  of
site operations, the researchers were able to deliver
disaster image data within 2–3 minutes and geo-cor-
rected  data  within  7  minutes  via  an  internet-based
distribution network [Ambrosia 2003]. The W-CDE
is a key step in link ing the sensor outputs to the oper-
ational  domain;  however,  it  requires  sufficient
communications  links  between  the  UAV,  ground
control station, information management and distri-
bution infrastructure and agency assets [Ambrosia et
al. 2003, 2011; Ambrosia and Wegener 2009]. 

Before an incident, apart from capturing base-
line data, there are limited opportunities for using a
UAV  for  the  management  of  a  structural  fire  or
chemical incident. During the response phase, offi-
cials  need  to  understand  what  is  occurring  at  the
incident scene and the potential impact of noxious
chemicals  and  vapours  that  have  been  released.

273

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Traditionally, ground-based sensors have been used
to  develop  two-dimensional  models  to  understand
where  a  chemical  plume  could  be  moving
[Matschke  2012].  Recent  studies  in  the  United
States  and  Germany  have  found  that  both  single
UAVs and multiple semi-autonomous UAVs can be
used  over  a  wide  area  to  detect  what  has  been
released  and  are  capable  of  developing  a  three-
dimensional  understanding  of  both  where  that
substance  is  and  where  it  is  going  [Daniel  and
Wietfeld 2011; Matschke 2012].   

2.5 Flood Management

Potential flood risk is influenced by a number
of  variables,  including  land  shape,  slope,  vegeta-
tion  and  storage  capacity  [Gillespie  and  Grech
2002; Griffin et al. 2012; NFRAG 2008]. Both nat-
ural  and  man-made  flood  controls  also  influence
the  spread,  speed  and  dispersion  of  flood  waters.
Natural  controls  include  gorges,  valleys,  river
courses and ocean levels in tidal areas. Man-made
structures  include  roads,  structures,  levee  banks
and  other  physical  barriers  [Gillespie  and  Grech
2002; Griffin et al. 2012; NFRAG 2008]. Historical
data  on  water  flows  and  discharges  of  rivers  and
flood  plains  are  used  in  combination  with  topo-
graphical  maps  to  produce  a  flood  hazard  map.
These maps give an indication of the expected loca-
tion and movement of floodwaters. To build these
maps and monitor river sediment, data is obtained
from multiple sources, including satellites, manned
aircraft,  physical  inspection  and  remote  sensors
[Rahmeyer 2011; Sohn et al. 2008]. UAVs have the
potential to compliment these existing data sources
and have the added benefit of being able to quickly
acquire imagery that has a higher spatial resolution
than traditional aerial imagery [Rahmeyer 2011].

Flood  hazard  maps  are  used  to  develop
mit i ga tion plans against the damage caused by flood
waters,  for  example,  the  construction  of  dams  and
levee banks. During a flood, excessive build-up of
debris and sediment at bridges, culverts and drains
can lead to the failure of that infrastructure, so it is
essential that regular inspections of these locations
are conducted before, during and after a flood event.
When  a  build  up  of  debris  or  sediment  is  located,
this material can be scheduled for removal as part of
an ongoing risk management plan. UAVs have the
potential  to  provide  a  significant  enhancement  to
existing  capabilities,  as  they  can  be  pre-pro-
grammed to fly specific flight paths over key river
courses,  levee  banks  and  infrastructure  to  capture
imagery  for  examination  and  evaluation.  After  an

event, baseline data can be used to support damage
assessments  and  to  assist  in  the  prioritisation  of
recovery  activity,  for  example  debris  removal  or
reconstruction of key roads and bridges.   

Before an incident, UAVs have the potential to
help develop our understanding of the microphysics
and properties of clouds. This inturn provides a bet-
ter understanding of rainfall and energy release from
cloud formations and helps to improve weather fore-
casting  and  planning  [Cox  2004]. When  applied  to
the observation and study of extreme weather events,
for example a hurricane, this approach enhances the
quality of storm prediction and provides more accu-
rate  estimation  of  hurricane  path  and  landfall  [Cox
2004; Kelly 2013; McKay 2013]. This capability pro-
vides  officials  more  time  and  better-quality  data  to
instigate  early  warning  messages  and  develop  risk
management and response plans. Once the extreme
weather  event  reaches  landfall,  the  UAV  could  be
used during the operational response to monitor the
associated flooding and storm damage.

The post-flood damage assessment capabilities
of UAVs were evaluated in Utah, where they were
found to increase efficiency and reduce timeframes
for  these  assessments  [Rahmeyer  2011].  Research
in  Korea  obtained  similar  results  but  also  showed
that  flood  management  requires  information  from
multiple  sources.  Officials  need  to  determine  the
optimal combination of available sensors and other
sources  of  information  to  support  their  decision-
making  [Sohn  et  al.  2008].  This  requirement  is
similar to the development of the W-CDE under the
FiRE and WRAPS projects.

In  Thailand,  UAVs  have  been  used  during
floods  to  collect  real-time  flood  data  for  incident
commanders, who used this information in a simi-
lar  fashion  to  the  Utah  and  Korean  experience  as
well  as  to  identify  people  stranded  by  the  flood
water [Sunday Times 2012]. This approach freed up
manned  aircraft  to  conduct  rescues  and  provide
relief  supplies.  Conceptually  pre-programmed
flight paths to examine flood damage could also be
used  for  search  and  rescue  operations  during  a
flood. These operations could be part of a general
search,  or  in  relation  to  a  specific  search  where  a
person has been reported as being swept away by
the flood water. 

UAVs have also been used along the Canadian
border to assist in the management of the potential
flooding of the Red River [Sternberg 2009]. Prior
to  the  flood,  high-definition  video  was  obtained
along  the course of the river and this imagery was
com pared against imagery taken after  flood as part
of  a  post-flood  damage  assessment  process.  UAVs

274

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

have  been  used  in  a  similar  manner  in  the  United
States  to  conduct  damage  assessment  in  the  Gulf
Coast after a number of hurricanes [Sternberg 2009]. 

2.6 Search and Rescue

Internationally, the potential value of UAVs for
search and rescue operations has been widely recog-
nised, as these missions are frequently conducted in
remote  maritime  and  wilderness  environments.
These missions are normally very slow and com plex
due the vast areas that need to be searched and the
difficult terrain often associated with these types of
incidents.  Search  timeliness  is  a  critical  fac tor,  as
any delay in finding a person increases the size of
the  search  area  and  delays  the  administration  of
medical  assistance  to  the  victim  [Goodrich  et  al.
2008].  In  Australia,  an  annual  UAV  outback
chal lenge promotes the use of UAVs and showcases
how this type of technology can be used for search
and rescue operations [Clothier 2011]. 

The  European  CLOSE-SEARCH  Project
tested  a  rotary  wing  UAV  to  support  the  search
component of a typical search and rescue mission
being conducted in a remote and difficult-to-access
area  [Molina  et  al.  2011].  This  project  developed
the  concept  of  a  search  and  rescue  action  chain
whereby  search  and  rescue  teams  and  the  UAV
sys tems  are  activated  when  an  emergency  call  is
generated. Once the person is located by the UAV,
their position is relayed back to the alarm coordina-
tion centre which in turn activates the rescue team.
The  research  identified  that  the  two  key  success
variables  in  this  type  of  mission  were  the  sensor
resolution and the flying height. This rationale was
based  on  the  fact  that  “the  finer  pixels,  the  more
chances  for  the  operator  to  recognize  a  person”
[Molina et al. 2011:3]. Other research supports this
finding  but  also  found  that  topography  can  also
impact on the success of UAV-enabled search and
rescue operations [Goodrich et al. 2008].

Researchers in Utah examined how the UAV-
based  search  could  be  conducted  using  a  small
UAV  fitted  with  an  EO  sensor  [Goodrich  et  al.
2008]. This research found that human factors were
a key consideration when using UAVs in a search
and  rescue  mission.  By  introducing  a  UAV  into  a
search  and  rescue  mission,  some  traditional  tasks
are  “fundamentally  changed  and  other  tasks  are
introduced”  [Goodrich  et  al. 2008:103].  This
find ing reinforces the need for officials to carefully
consider  how  the  sensor-derived  information  can
be  integrated  into  the  operational  domain.  The
research  identified  that  there  were  four  key  roles

that  need  to  be  considered  as  part  of  an  integrated
process; namely, pilot, sensor operator, mission man-
ager and searcher [Goodrich et al. 2008]. In effect,
these roles help to establish a common-ground model
that is used in other robotic operations, for example
robotically-assisted  underground  search  and  rescue
[Stubbs et al. 2008]. Under this concept, the mission
manager is able to develop situational awareness and
control  the  activities  of  both  the  searchers  and
per sonnel involved in operating the UAV.

Further research has been conducted in relation
to  information  display  paradigms  for  search  and
rescue  operations  [Cooper  and  Goodrich  2008].
This  research  was  based  on  the  premise  that  the
information display influences a person’s ability to
perceive  objects.  Three  main  display  paradigms
were identified, namely:

•  The  pilot-centred  display,  which  replicated

the cockpit environment of a manned aircraft;

• The  traditional  display,  which  used  multiple
windows to display maps, live video and communi-
cations information; and

•  The  integrated  display,  which  seamlessly
integrated a range of information including satellite
imagery,  simulated  terrain  video  imagery  and  a
rep resentation of the UAV.

[Cooper and Goodrich 2008]

Users recorded a higher level of performance when
using the integrated display paradigm [Cooper and
Goodrich 2008]. This type of approach is similar to
the  one  used  in  the  W-CDE  that  was  developed
under  the  FiRE  and  WRAP  projects  [Ambrosia  et
al. 2003, 2011; Ambrosia and Wegener 2009].   

In  Europe,  research  is  currently  underway  in
relation  to  UAV-based  marine  search  and  rescue
operations during adverse weather conditions. The
prototype UAV uses a shape-shifting design to per-
form  rapid  high-frequency  shape  changes,  to
counteract  the  effects  of  wind  gusts  [Amprikidis
2010;  Coxworth  2010].  It  is  hoped  that  this
approach will reduce the risk to personnel operating
manned aerial assets during search and rescue oper-
ations  in  hazardous  weather.  Surf  Life  Safing
Australia  is  currently  trialling  the  use  of  UAVs  to
monitor beaches and conduct environmental scans.
Advanced  image  analysis  automatically  detects
activities of interest, for example swimmers in dis-
tress,  large  marine  predators  and  fishing  boats  in
marine  parks  [Australian  Flying  2012;  Lovell
2012].  Conceptually,  the  use  of  UAVs  for  marine
search and rescue could be simpler than wilderness
search  and  rescue  operations,  as  the  impact  of  the
topography  is  reduced  and  there  is  decreased
back ground noise for FLIR sensors. 

275

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

3. Conclusion

The  current  state  and  diversity  of  research
provides  considerable  evidence  to  support  the
strategic  investment  in  UAV  technology  to
develop  new  and  enhance  existing  operational
capabilities for disaster management. The appen-
dix provides a mission matrix which can be used
as  a  guide  to  further  research  potential  disaster
management  roles  for  UAVs.  This  research
demonstrates  that  UAVs  can  be  used  across  all
phases  of  disaster  management  for  both  generic
technical
tasks;  however, 
and  specific 

the 

capa bil ities  of  UAVs  exceed  the  permissible  use
this technology. 

Public safety officials and agencies will have
to  work  closely  with  national  airspace  regulators
to ensure that UAV-based operations are safe and
do not endanger other aircraft. Similarly, officials
will  need  to  address  community  concerns  and
build in safeguards to protect against any breaches
of privacy and individual rights whilst developing
UAV-based  concepts  of  operations.  When  devel-
oping  these  concepts,  it  is  essential  that  officials
understand that UAV operations are a balancing act
across a wide range of variables and they need to
integrate into a complex operational envi ron ment.

Appendix
Mission Matrix Summary 

Mission
Type

General

Sub-Mission
Types

• Pre-disaster mapping
and assessment
• Rapid post-disaster 

assessments

• Route identification
and clearance
• Communications

support

• Search and rescue
• Relief supplies

Earthquake
Management

• Monitoring land 
movement
• Post damage 
assessment
Tsunami

•

Sensor
Payload

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     LiDAR
•     VIIRS
•     Chemical 
     Sensors 
•     SAR
•     Radio
     Repeaters

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     LiDAR
•     VIIRS
•     Chemical 
     Sensors 
•     SAR
•     Radio 
     Repeaters

Capabilities

Benefits

•
•

Allows development of baseline data
Provides near real-time information on
incident
Autonomous or remotely piloted flight
to position and patrol
• Rapid mapping of incident
•

Provides communications support         

•

•
•

Force multiplier
Lower cost air operations per 
flight hour

•

• Reduces risk of injury for officials 
Supports rapid acquisition of 
•
situational awareness
Identifies safe access and egress      
routes for emergency services
personnel and evacuees 
Allows personnel involved in 
incident the ability to communicate

•

•     Allows development of baseline data
•     Provides near real-time information on

•     Force multiplier
•     Lower cost air operations per flight 

incident

hour

•     Autonomous or remotely piloted flight

to position and patrol

•     Reduces risk of injury for officials 
•     Supports rapid acquisition of 

•     Rapid mapping of incident        

situational awareness

•     Identifies safe access and egress 
routes for emergency services 
personnel and evacuees 

•     Supports search for victims which 
can be rescued by manned aircraft

Fire
Management

Fuel load assessment

•
• Power line detection

•     Allows development of baseline data 
and pre-incident risk assessment

•     Force multiplier
•     Lower cost air operations per flight 

and mapping
• Water source

•
•

assessment
Fire detection
Fire front
detection/assessment
Fire fighting

•
• Plume analysis and 

monitoring

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     LiDAR
•     VIIRS
•     Chemical
Sensors 

•     SAR
•     Radio

Repeaters

•     AIRDAS
•     AMS-Wildfire

•     Rapid detection of fire
•     Provides near real-time information on

hour

incident

•     Autonomous or remotely piloted flight 

to position and patrol

•     Rapid mapping of incident scene and 
identification of hazards for manned 
aircraft

•     Ongoing operations in adverse 
conditions and during hours of
darkness

•     Reduces risk of injury for officials 
•     Supports rapid acquisition of 

situational awareness

•     Assists manned aircraft water 

•     Identifies and assesses water storage 

bombing operations

•     Ongoing monitoring of fire and fire 

gas plume behaviour

points

behaviour

monitoring

•     3-dimensional plume mapping and 

•     Provides enhanced understanding of 

•     Identifies safe access and egress 
routes for emergency services 
personnel and evacuees 

the ability to communicate.

•     Provides communications support         

•     Allows personnel involved in incident 

276

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Mission
Type

Flood
Management

Sub-Mission
Types

Sensor
Payload

Capabilities

Benefits

•
•

•

Flood plain prediction
Flood mitigation
assessment
Flood assessment and
monitoring

• Search and rescue 

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     LiDAR
•     VIIRS
•     SAR
•     Radio

•     Allows development of baseline data 
and pre-incident risk assessment
•     Identifies potential breaches in flood 
protection barriers and systems

•     Provides near real-time information on

incident

•     Force multiplier
•     Lower cost air operations per flight 

hour

•     Reduces risk of injury for officials 
•     Supports rapid acquisition of 

situational awareness

Repeaters

•     Autonomous or remotely piloted flight 

•     Assists manned aircraft search and 

Man Made
Disasters

• Hazmat incidents
• Biological incidents
• Chemical/radiological    

Incidents

• Structural failure

Search and
Rescue

• Search and rescue

support

Weather
Events

• Cyclone/hurricane
management and
response

• Drought management
• Severe storm
management

• Storm tides
and surges

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     LiDAR
•     VIIRS
•     Chemical 
     Sensors 
•     SAR
•     Radio 
     Repeaters

to position and patrol

rescue operations

•     Rapid mapping of incident scene and 
identification of hazards for manned 
aircraft

•     Identifies safe access and egress 
routes for emergency services
personnel and evacuees 

•     Enhances capabilities to rapidly search 

•     Allows personnel involved in incident 

for persons missing in flood water
•     Provides communications support

the ability to communicate

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     LiDAR
•     VIIRS
•     Chemical
     Sensors 
•     SAR
•     Radio
     Repeaters

•     Allows development of baseline data 
     and pre-incident risk assessment
•     Provides near real-time information on
     incident
•     Autonomous or remotely piloted flight 
     to position and patrol
•     Rapid mapping of incident scene and 
     identification of hazards
•     3-dimensional plume mapping and 
     monitoring
•     Reduces exposure of personnel to 
     dangerous substances
•     Provides communications support

•     EO
•     FLIR
•     Acoustic 
     Sensors
•     Loud Speaker
•     Rescue/life 
     support cargo

•     Systematic area search
•     Person and vehicle detection and 
     tracking
•     Real time instruction/communication 
     with victims
•     Transportation of rescue and life
     support equipment

•     Force multiplier
•     Lower cost air operations per flight 
     hour
•     Reduces risk of injury for officials 
•     Supports rapid acquisition of 
     situational awareness
•     Provides enhanced understanding of 
     gas plume behaviour
•     Identifies safe access and egress 
     routes for emergency services
     personnel and evacuees 
•     Allows personnel involved in incident 
     the ability to communicate
•     Can be used to enforce exclusion 
     zones

•     Force multiplier
•     Lower cost air operations per flight 
     hour
•     Identifies safe access and egress 
     routes for emergency services 
     personnel and victims 
•     Supports search for victims which 
     can be rescued by manned aircraft

•     Allows development of baseline data 
     and pre-incident risk assessment
•     Provides ongoing and long term 
     monitoring 
•     Identifies potential breaches in flood 
     protection barriers and systems
•     Provides near real-time information on
     incident
•     Autonomous or remotely piloted flight 
     to position and patrol
•     Rapid mapping of incident scene and 
     identification of hazards 
•     Enhances capabilities to rapidly search 
     for persons missing in flood water
•     Provides communications support

•     Force multiplier
•     Lower cost air operations per flight 
     hour
•     Reduces risk of injury for officials 
•     Supports rapid acquisition of 
     situational awareness
•     Early identification of stressed 
     vegetation and biodiversity loss
•     Assists manned aircraft search and 
     rescue operations
•     Identifies safe access and egress 
     routes for emergency services 
     personnel and evacuees 
•     Allows personnel involved in incident
     the ability to communicate

References

Ackerman, E. 2011. Japan earthquake: Global Hawk

UAV may be able to peek inside damaged reactors.
[Viewed 21/8/14]. Available from: http://spectrum.
ieee.org/automaton/robotics/military- robots/global-
hawk-uav-may-be-able-to-peek-inside-damaged- reactors
Advanced  Tactics.  2014.  Black  Knight  Transformer:

modular,  roadable  casualty  evacuation  and  cargo
resupply aircraft. [Viewed 22/3/14]. Available from:
https://www.advancedtacticsinc.com/technology/bla
ck-knight/

Ambrosia, V.G. 2003. Disaster management applications
—Fire.  30th  International  Symposium  on  Remote

277

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Sensing  of  Environment  2003,  Honolulu,  Hawaii.
Conference Proceedings.

Ambrosia,  V.G.,  S.S.  Wegener,  D.V.  Sullivan,  S.W.
Buechel,  S.E.  Dunagan,  J.A.  Brass,  J.  Stoneburner
and  S.M.  Schoenung.  2003.  Demonstrating  UAV-
acquired  real-time 
thermal  data  over  fires.
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing
Journal. Apr 2003: 391-402.

Ambrosia, V.,  S.  Buechelb,  S. Wegener,  D.  Sullivan,  F.
Enomoto,  E.  Hinkley  and  T.  Zajkowski.  2011.
Unmanned  airborne  systems  supporting  disaster
observations:  near-real-time  data  needs.  [Viewed
21/8/14]. Available from: http://www.isprs.org/pro-
ceedings/2011/isrse-34/211104015Final00096.pdf

Ambrosia,  V.  and  S.S.  Wegener.  2009.  Unmanned  air-
borne platforms for disaster remote sensing support.
[Viewed  21/8/14].  Available  from:  http://cdn.
intchopen.com/pdfs/9512/InTech-Unmanned_air-
borne_platforms_for_disaster_remote_sensing_
support.pdf 

Amprikidis,  M.  2010.  Eureka  Success  Story  >  E!  3931
ASARP:  Shape-shifting  robot  plan  offers  safer
alternative  for  maritime  rescue.  [Viewed  21/8/14].
Available  from:  http://www.eurekanetwork.org/
showsuccessstory?p_r_p_564233524_articleId=478
140andp_r_p_564233524_groupId=10137 

Australian  Flying.  2012.  Surf  Life  Saving  Australia’s
Remotely  Piloted Aircraft  Needs  CASA Approval.
[Viewed 21/8/14]. Available from: http://www. aus-
tralianflying.com.au/news/surf-life-saving-australia-s-
remotely-piloted-aircraft-needs-casa-approval

BBC  News.  2007.  Pilotless  police  drone  takes  off.
[Viewed  21/8/14].  BBC  Online  News  Service
Monday 21 May 2007. Available from: http://news.
bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6676809.stm#graphic 

Bendea, H., P. Boccardo, S. Dequal, F. Giulio Tonolo, D.
Marenchino and M. Piras. 2008. Low cost UAV for
International
assessment.  The 
post-disaster 
Archives  of  the  Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing
and  Spatial  Information  Sciences. Vol  XXXVII.
Part B, Beijing 2008: 1373–1379.

Blyenburgh,  P.  V.  2013.  European  RPAS  Roadmap.
[Viewed  21/8/14].  UAS  Vision.  Available  from:
http://www.uasvision.com/2013/06/11/european-
rpas-roadmap/?utm_source=newsletter 

Broadcast Microwave Services (BMS). 2012. Microwave
downlinks—short, medium, and long range. [Viewed
21/8/14]. Available  from:  http://www.bms-inc.  com/
wp-content/uploads/2012/07/short_  medium_long_
microwave_downlinks.pdf 

Brown, A. 2011. Unmanned systems and the environmen-
tal  sector:  a  user’s  perspective.  [Viewed  21/8/14].
Autonomous Systems Technology Related Airborne
Evaluation and Assessment (ASTREA) Conference,
London, 7 September 2011, Conference Proceedings.
Available from: http://www.astraea.aero/downloads/
astraea2011conference/Alan%20Brown%20User%
20Perspective.pdf 

Butler, J.T. 2001. UAVS and ISR sensor technology. Air
Command  and  Staff  College  Air  University,

Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama.

Cameron,  M.  and  A.  Delaney.  2006.  Development
strate gies for best practice in speed enforcement in
Western  Australia.  Monash  University  Accident
Research Centre, Victoria, Australia.

Carvajal, F., F. Agüera and M. Pérez. 2011. Surveying a
landslide  in  a  road  embankment  using  unmanned
aerial  vehicle  photogrammetry. 
International
Archives  of  the  Phtogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing
and  Spatial  Information  Sciences.  Vol.  XXXVIII-
1/C22  UAV-g  2001,  Conference  on  Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle in Geomatics, Zurich, Switzerland.

Center 

for  Robot-Assisted  Search  and  Rescue
(CRASAR).  2012.  Roboticists  without  borders.
[Viewed 21/8/14]. Available from: http://crasar.org/
roboticists-without-borders/ 

Chou, T.Y., M.L. Yeh, Y.C. Chen and Y.H. Chen. 2010.
Disaster  monitoring  and  management  by  the
unmanned aerial vehicle technology. In Wagner W.,
Székely, B. (eds.): ISPRS TC VII Symposium—100
Years  ISPRS,  Vienna,  Austria,  July  5–7,  2010,
IAPRS, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 7B: 137–142.

Claessens,  M.,  N.  Lewyckyj,  J.  Biesemans  and  J.
Everaerts. 2005. Pegasus, a UAV project for disaster
management.  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  International
ISCRAM Conference (B. Van de Walle and B. Carle,
Eds.), Brussels, Belgium, April 2005: 233–236.
Clothier,  R.  A.  2011.  The  Australian  UAS  experience.
[Viewed 21/8/14]. In New Zealand Robotic Systems
Network  Conference,  10  June  2011,  Auckland
University,  Auckland.  (Unpublished).  Available
from: http://eprints.qut.edu.au/41962/

Clothier, R. A. 2012a. An overview of UAS: capabilities
and  challenges.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  In  2012  Law
Enforcement  Agency,  UAS  Conference,  29
February–2 March 2012, Victoria Police Academy,
Melbourne,  VIC.  (Unpublished).  Available  from:
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/49042/

Clothier, R. A. 2012b. A requirements and capability dis-
cussion:  UAS  for  SAR  and  law  enforcement.
[Viewed  21/8/14].  In  2012  Law  Enforcement
Agency,  UAS  Conference,  29  February–2  March
2012,  Victoria  Police  Academy,  Melbourne,  VIC.
(Unpublished).  Available  from:  http://eprints.qut.
edu.au/49043/ 

Cole,  C.,  2012.  Drone  wars  briefing:  examining  the
growing  threat  of  unmanned  warfare.  Drone Wars,
UK, Oxford.

Coppola,  D.P.  2001.  Introduction  to  International
Disaster  Management  (Second  Edition). Elsevier
Butterworth Heinemann, Burlington, MA, USA.
Cooper, J. and M.A. Goodrich. 2008. Towards combining
UAV and sensor operator roles in UAV-enabled visual
search.  3rd  ACM/IEEE  International  Conference,
Human-Robot  Interaction  2008,  Amsterdam,  March
12–15, 2008 Conference Proceedings.

Covert Systems. 2005. Airborne video microwave down link
systems—designed  for  law  enforcement  operations.
[Viewed  21/8/14].  Available  from:  http://www.covert-
systems.com/airborne/pdf/helicopter-12A-new.pdf 
Cox,  T.H.,  C.J.  Nagy,  M.A.  Skoog  and  I.A.  Somers.

278

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

2004.  Civil  UAV—capability  assessment.  NASA.
[Viewed 
from:
http://www.nasa.gov/centers/dryden/pdf/111761ma
in_UAV_Capabilities_Assessment.pdf

Available 

21/8/14]. 

Coxworth,  B.  2010.  Shape-shifting  UAV  designed  for
stormy  sea  rescue.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  Gizmag—
Aero  Gizmo.   Available  from:  http://www.gizmag.
com/shape-shifting-marine-rescue-uav/16161/ 
Daniel, K., and C. Wietfeld. 2011. Using public network
infrastructure  for  UAV  remote  sensing  in  civilian
security  operations.  Homeland  Security  Affairs,
Supplement 3, March 2011.

Dominici, D., V. Baiocchi, A. Zavino, M. Alicandro and
M. Elaiopoulos. 2012. Micro UAV for post seismic
hazards  surveying  in  old  city  center  of  L'Aquila.
[Viewed 
from:
http://www.fig.net/pub/fig2012/papers/ts04h/TS04
H_dominici_zavino_et_al_5830.pdf 

Available 

21/8/14]. 

Emergency  Management  Manual  Victoria  (EMMV).
2009. Emergency Management in Victoria—Part 1:
Emergency  Management  Manual  Victoria,
Department  of  Justice,  Government  of  Victoria,
Anstat, South Melbourne.

European  Commission  (EC).  2007.  Study  analysing  the
cur rent  activities  in  the  field  of  UAV,  EC.  [Viewed
21/8/14].  Available  from:  http://ec.europa.eu/enter-
prise/policies/security/files/uav_study_element_2_en.pdf 
Gallagher, S. 2012. Look to the skies: is it time to stop
worrying and love the drone. [Viewed 21/8/14]. Law
and  Order.  Available  from:  http://arstechnica.com/
tech-policy/news/2012/04/look-to-the-skies-is-it-time-
to-stop-worrying-and-love-the-drone.ars 

Gillespie,  C.  and  P.  Grech.  2002.  Reconciling  develop-
ment  with  flood  risk:  the  Hawkesbury-Nepean
dilemma.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  Australian  Journal  of
Emergency  Management. Autumn  2002  Available
from: http://www.bewsher.com. au/pdf/EMA_1.pdf  
Glor, J. 2012. Drone use in the US raises privacy concerns.
[Viewed  21/8/14].  Available  from:  http://www.cbsnews.
com/  8301-505263_162-57409759/drone-use-in-the-
u.s-raise-privacy-concerns/?tag=nl.e875 

Goodrich, M.A., B.S. Morse, D. Gerhardt, J.L. Cooper,
M.  Quigley,  J.A. Adams  and  C.  Humphrey.  2008.
Supporting  wilderness  search  and  rescue  using  a
camera-equipped  mini  UAV.  Journal  of  Field
Robotics. 25(1): 89–110.

Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2003. Video
surveillance—information  on  law  enforcement’s
use  of  closed-circuit  television  to  monitor  selected
federal  property  in  Washington,  DC  [Viewed
21/8/14]. United States Government Accountability
Office,  Washington  DC.  Available 
from:
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-03-748

Government Accountability Office (GAO]. 2008. Unmanned
aircraft systems—federal actions needed to ensure safety
and  expand  their  potential  uses  within  the  National
Airspace  System.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  United  States
Government  Accountability  Office,  Washington  DC.
Available from: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08511.pdf
Graham,  S.  2010.  Inexpensive  drone  technology

threat ens privacy. [Viewed 21/8/14]. Available from:
http://www.grahamlawyerblog.com/2010/06/03/inex-
pensive-drone-technology-threatens-privacy/ 
Griffin,  G.F.  2012.  Strategic  implications  of  unmanned
aircraft  systems  for  public  safety  officials.  2012.
Association  of  Public  Safety  Officials  Australasia
Conference and Exhibition Gold Coast Queensland,
Conference Proceedings.

Griffin, G.F., A. Rajabifard and D. Williams. 2012. The
Victorian Emergency Management Continuum and
the  benefits  of  spatial  enablement.  Global
Geospatial  Conference  2012,  Quebec,  Canada,
Conference Proceedings.

Haldane,  R.  1986.  The  People’s  Force:  A  History  of
Victoria  Police. Melbourne  University  Press,
Melbourne.

Harper, P. 2006. Information paper: emergency manage-
ment  information  development  plan.  Australian
Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.

Hollinger, G.A., Z.A. Pezzementi, A.D. Flurie and B.A.
Maxwell.  2012.  Design  and  construction  of  an
indoor  robotic  blimp  for  urban  search  and  rescue
tasks. 
from:
[Viewed  21/8/14].  Available 
http://www.cs.jhu.edu/~zap/papers/e90Report.pdf 

Information  Commissioner’s  Office  (ICO).  2010.
Information  Commissioner’s  Report  to  Parliament
on the State of Surveillance. ICO. [Viewed 21/8/14].
Available  from:  http://ico.org.uk/~/  media/docu-
ments/library/Corporate/Research_and_reports/surv
eillance_report_for_home_select_committee.ashx
Johnson,  R.C.  2005.  Bots  prove  their  fitness  as  first
responders.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  EETimes. Available
from:  http://eetimes.com/electronics-news/  4055697/
Bots-prove-their-fitness-as-first-responders 

Kelly,  D.  2013.  Scientists  hope  to  predict  tornadoes  by
using little drones. Los Angles Times. June 8, 2013.
Krüll, W., R. Tobera, I. Willms, H. Essen and N. Wahl.
2012.  Early  forest  fire  detection  and  verification
using  optical  smoke,  gas  and  microwave  sensors.
[Viewed 14/12/14]. 2012 International Symposium
on Safety Science and Technology. Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1
877705812032201

Lalibertea, A.S., C. Winters and A. Rango. UAS remote
sensing missions for rangeland applications. Geocarto
International. Vol. 26, No.2, April 2011: 141-156.
Lovell, B. 2012. Eyes in the sky: how unmanned aircraft
could patrol our beaches (and more). The Conversation.
[Viewed 21/8/14]. Available from: http://theconversa-
tion.edu.au/eyes-in-the-sky-how-unmanned-aircraft-co
uld-patrol-our-beaches-and-more-5617

Matschke, T. 2012. Project AirShield—description of the
Project AirShield and its results in the final demon-
stration at Falck. RISC Rotterdam. Federal Ministry
of Education Research, Germany.

Maza, I., F. Caballero, J. Capitan, J.R. Martinez-de-Dios,
A. Ollero. 2011. Experimental results in multi-UAV
coordination  for  disaster  management  and  civil
security  applications.  Journal  of  Intelligent  and
Robotic Systems. 61: 563-585.

279

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

McCleary,  P.  2012.  Army  continues  to  study  idea  of
unmanned  lift.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  Army  Times.
http://www.armytimes.com/
Available 
news/2012/04/army-unmanned-lift-cargo-contin-
ues-studying-idea-041012d/ 

from: 

McCleary, P. 2012a. US Marines extend Afghan deploy-
ment  of  cargo  UAV.  [Viewed  21/8/14].  Defense
News.  Available  from:  http://www.defensenews.
com/article/20120509/DEFREG02/305090007/U-
S-Marines-Extend-Afghan-Deployment-Cargo-UAV 
McCormack,  E.D.  2008.  The  use  of  small  unmanned
air craft  by  Washington  State  Department  of
Transportation.  Washington  State  Transportation
Center,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,
Washington. 

McKay,  J.  2013.  Global  Hawk  flies  high,  offering  a
detailed hurricane measurement. [Viewed 21/8/14].
Emergency  Management.  Available 
from:
http://www.emergencymgmt.com/disaster/Global-
Hawk-Hurricane-Measurement.html  

Michaels, I. 2003. Unmanned submersible vehicle com-
pletes  inspection  voyage  of  city’s  Delaware
Aqueduct—ULIISYS  is  Home.  [Viewed  25/8/14].
New  York  City  Department  of  Environmental
Protection, Communications and Intergovernmental
Affairs.  Available  from:  http://www.nyc.gov/html/
dep/html/press_releases/03-31pr.shtml 

Merino, L., F. Caballero, J.R. Martinez-de-Dios, I. Maza
and A. Ollero. 2012. An unmanned aircraft system
for  automatic  forest  fire  monitoring  and  measure-
ment.  Journal  of  Intelligent  and  Robotic  Systems.
Volume 65: 533-548).

Molina, P., I. Colomina, T. Vitoria, P.F. Silva, Y. Stebler,
J.  Skaloud, W.  Kornus  and  R.  Prades.  2011.  Egnos-
based mulit-sensor accurate and reliable navigation in
search-and-rescue missions with UAVS. International
Archives  of  Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing  and
Spatial  Information  Sciences.  Vol.  XXXVIII-1/C22
UAV-g  2011,  Conference  on  Unmanned  Aerial
Vehicle in Geomatics, Zurich, Switzerland.

National Flood Risk Advisory Group (NFRAG). 2008. Flood
Risk Management in Australia. The Australian Journal
of Emergency Management. 23 (4) Nov. 2008: 21-27.

landslides. 

Niethammer,  U.,  S.  Rothmund,  M.R.  James,  J.
Travelletti and M. Joswig. 2010. UAV-based remote
sensing  of 
[Viewed  25/8/14].
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing  and  Spatial  Information  Sciences,  Vol.
XXXVIII,  Part  5  Commission  V  Symposium,
Newcastle  upon  Tyne,  UK.  2010:  498-501.
Available  from:  http://www.isprs.  org/proceed-
ings/XXXVIII/part5/ papers/102.pdf

Nitrofirex. 2014. We fight fires at night. [Viewed 25/8/14].
Available from: http://www.nitrofirex. com/?lang=en
O’Rourke,  T.D.,  T.  Holzer,  C.  Rojahn  and  K.  Tierney.
2008.  Contributions  of  earthquake  engineering  to
protecting  communities  and  critical  infrastructure
from  multihazards.  Earthquake  Engineering
Research Institute, Oakland, California.

Osborne, T. 2010. FIDAE 2010: Rafael UAVs assisting

in  earthquake  effort.  [Viewed  25/8/14].  Available
from:  http://www.shephardmedia.com/news/uv-
online/fidae-2010-rafael-uavs-assisting-in-eart/
Oudes,  C.  and  W.  Zwijnenberg.  2011.  Does  unmanned
make unacceptable—exploring the debate on using
drones  and  robots  in  warfare.  IKV  Pax  Christi,
Netherlands.

Patterson, M.C.L., A. Mulligan, J. Douglas, J. Robinson,
L.  Wardell.  2005.  Volcano  surveillance  by  ACR
Silver  Fox.  Journal  of  the  American  Institute  of
Aeronautics and Astronautics. 2005(6954): 1–7. 
Puri,  A.  2012.  A  survey  of  unmanned  aerial  vehicles
(UAV)  for  traffic  surveillance.  [Viewed  25/8/14].
University of South Florida. Available from: http://pdf.
aminer.org/000/368/807/integration_of_vision_and
_decision_making_in_an_autonomous_airborne.pdf
Quaritsch,  M.,  R.  Kusching,  H.  Hellwagner  and  B.
Rinner.  2011.  Fast  aerial  image  acquisition  and
mosaicking  for  emergency  response  operations  by
collaborative  UAVs.  Proceedings  of  the  8th
International 
ISCRAM  Conference,  Lisbon,
Portugal, May 2011.

Queensland  University  of  Technology  (QUT).  2014.
Unmanned aircraft: countdown to Mission Possible.
[Viewed  25/8/14].  Available  from:  http://www.
news.qut.edu.au/cgi-bin/WebObjects/News.woa/
wa/goNewsPage?newsEventID=68240

Rahmeyer,  W.  2011.  Report  as  of  FY2010  for
2010UT141B:  Development  of  flood  emergency
response  capability  using  UAVs.  [Viewed  7/8/12].
Available from: http://water.usgs.gov/wrri/ 10grants/
progress/2010UT141B.pdf 

Rao, R.R., J. Eisenberg and T. Schmitt. 2007. Improving
disaster  management:  the  role  of  IT  in  mitigation,
preparedness,  response  and  recovery.  Computer
Science  and  Telecommunications  Board,  National
Research  Council  of  the  National Academies,  The
National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
Rau, J.Y., J.P. Jhan, C.F. Lo and Y.S. Lin. 2011. Landslide
mapping  using  imagery  acquired  by  a  fixed-wing
UAV. 
the
Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing  and  Spatial
Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII-1/C22 UAV-g
2001,  Conference  on  Unmanned Aerial  Vehicle  in
Geomatics, Zurich, Switzerland.

International 

Archives 

of 

Remondino, F., L. Barazzetti, F. Nex, M. Scaioni and D.
Sarazzi.  2011.  UAV  photogrammetry  for  mapping
and  3D  Modeling—current  status  and  future  per-
spectives. 
the
International  Archives 
Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing  and  Spatial
Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII-1/C22 UAV-g
2011,  Conference  on  Unmanned Aerial  Vehicle  in
Geomatics, Zurich, Switzerland. 1–7.

of 

Richards, M.A. 2007. A beginner’s guide to interferometric
SAR concepts and signal processing. IEEE A and E
Systems Magazine. 22(9): 9–24. 

Sohn, H.G., J. Heo, H.H. Yoo, S.S. Kim and H.S. Cho.
2008.  Hierarchical  multi-sensor  approach  for  the
assessment  of  flood  related  damage.  International
Archives  of  the  Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing

280

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

and  Spatial  Information  Sciences,  Vol.  XXXVII,
Part B8, Beijing 2008 207–210.

Stanley, J. and C. Crump. 2011. Protecting privacy from
aerial surveillance: recommendations for govern ment
use of drone aircraft. American Civil Liberties Union,
New York.

Sternberg,  B.V.  2009.  Drone  aircraft  fighting  the  Red
River flood. [Viewed 8/3/12]. Star Tribune. March
25, 2009. Available from: http://www.startribune.com/
local/41841417.html?elr=KArks:DCiUHc3E7_V_n
DaycUiD3aPc:_Yyc:aULPQL7PQLanchO7DiUr

Stubbs,  K.,  D.  Wettergreen  and  I.  Nourbakhs.  2008.
Using  a  robot  proxy  to  create  common  ground  in
exploration  tasks.  3rd  ACM/IEEE  International
Conference,  Human-Robot 
Interaction  2008,
Amsterdam,  March  12-15,  2008  Conference
Proceedings.

Sunday  Times.  2012.  Drones  used  to  monitor  Taiwan
Floods. [Viewed 20/6/12] Sunday Times. Available
from:  http://www.straitstimes.com/BreakingNews/
Asia/Story/STIStory_812003.html

Villasenor, J. 2011. The drone threat to privacy. [Viewed
25/8/14].  Scientific  American.  Available  from:
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=
the-drone-threat-to-privacy 

Villasenor,  J.  2012.  The  drone  threat—in  the  US.
[Viewed  25/8/14].  Los  Angeles  Times.  Available
from: http://articles.latimes.com/2012/mar/27/opin-
ion/la-oe-villasenor-license-domestic-drones-20120327 
Wegner,  S.  2000.  UAV  over-the-horizon  disaster  man-
agement  demonstration  projects.  NASA  Ames
Research Centre.

Wright, S. 1998. An appraisal of the technology of polit-
[Viewed  25/8/14].  European
from:

ical 
Parliament, 
http://cryptome.org/stoa-atpc.htm 

Luxemburg.  Available 

control. 

Author

Ged  Griffin  is  an  Inspector  in  the  State
Emergency Response Coordination Division in the
Victoria Police Force. He has performed duties in
general  operations,  marine  policing,  criminal
investigations,  intelligence  and  counter  terrorism
operations.  He  has  performed  a  wide  range  of
inter national  roles  including  duties  at  the  UN
Serious Crimes Unit (Timor Leste), Victoria Police
Contingent  Commander,  and  as  Liaison  Officer
supporting  the  former  Victorian  Premier  Hon.
Mr. Steve Bracks during his work assisting the new
government of East Timor. He is a member of the
Australian Civil Corps and has been a Team Leader
for the Post Disaster Response Team.  

His  qualifications  include  a  Master  of  Police
Practice,  Master  of  Professional  Education  and
Training, Graduate Certificate in Police Management
and  Graduate  Certificate  in  Criminal  Intelligence.
Ged  is  currently  completing  a  PhD  at  Melbourne
University  in  regards  to  the  next  generation
emer gency management systems and procedures. q

281

Geomatica 2014.68:265-281.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by University of Waterloo on 10/07/18. For personal use only.