The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2013

Vol. 50 No. 1

pp. 91–97

February 2013

O B S E R V A T I O N S

New Insights into the Concept of Orienteering Maps

Angel Mun˜oz-Nieto, Pablo Rodrı´guez-Gonza´ lvez, Diego Gonza´ lez-Aguilera and
Juan Mancera-Taboada

University of Salamanca, Avila 05003, Spain
Email: almuni@usal.es

Orienteering is both a mental and physical activity. A compass and maps are the basic tools of orienteering, and
orienteering requires specialized maps that have been adapted and standardized to guarantee fair competition. Map-
making for orienteering has become a highly specialized cartographic task. This paper aims to answer three main
questions: What is an orienteering map (o-map)? How should we categorize o-maps? What are its essential components?
The answers to these questions provide insight into the concept and nature of o-maps. By analysing the functions of this
type of maps and by searching for similarities and differences between o-maps, topographic maps, and nautical charts, we
attempt to comprehensively characterize and conceptualize o-maps to contribute to their improvement.

Keywords: orienteering maps, maps taxonomy, map-making, map standardisation

INTRODUCTION

Orienteering is a sport in which an orienteer completes a
course of control points in the shortest possible time, aided
only by a map and compass. As both a hobby and a sport,
orienteering combines aspects of traditional disciplines (e.g.,
athletics, cycling, and skiing) with spatial and directional
awareness and map reading. For this reason, the mental and
physical activity of orienteering has been integrated into the
curriculum of educational systems in some primary and
secondary schools (Mcneill et al., 1998) and in some
institutes of higher education (Fairbairn, 1990).

Topographic maps, usually made by government agenci-
es, satisfy the demand of a medium-scale standardized
map product and are aimed at a multiple types of users.
Topographic maps are used by many different types of
professionals, such as engineers, geologists, geographers,
architects, and environmentalists. These maps have also been
used for recreational purposes, e.g., tourism and sports
activities such as hiking and mountaineering. Currently, the
topographic map user proﬁle has grown and has established a
speciﬁc product demand that
is characterized by new
formats, supports, scales, and symbols. Orienteering maps
(O-maps) are an example of this trend. Orienteering, a sport
in which the basic tool is a map, requires specialized maps.
The need for such specialized products is justiﬁed by the
uniqueness of their use (usually cross-country navigation).
The huge demand for o-maps has resulted in the establish-
ment of a specialized branch of the cartographic industry that
attempts to meet this demand (Petrie, 1977).

Map-making for orienteering takes into account speciﬁc
conditions arising from its own mapping standards (Zentai,

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000006

2009), attempts to promote fair competition and adheres to
its own quality requirements (Mun˜oz-Nieto, 2008). The
International Orienteering Federation, through its Map
Commission, has developed a strong standardisation effort
that has resulted in a comprehensive set of international
regulations. O-maps standardisation has been evolving for
more than 30 years (Zentai, 2001). The International
Speciﬁcations for Orienteering Maps (International Orien-
teering Federation, 2000) prevail at present for general
orienteering purposes.

We must also consider that new trends in Cartography
and Geomatics (e.g., remote sensing, GIS, and spatial data
infrastructures) make it easier for non-professional carto-
graphers to produce o-maps as an adaptation from base
maps obtained from rigorous cartographic procedures.

The main purpose of an o-map is to provide information to
help users navigate among control points in a race. User
should be able to quickly read a map, interpret its layers (e.g.,
vegetation, contour lines, hydrographic features, roads, and
buildings), and make decisions. Consequently generalization
tasks are very important. Participants’ performance is
signiﬁcantly related to their ability to attend to the map
while moving. The strategic control of attention is a proposed
explanation of this ability. Attention training might enhance
performance in sports characterized by multiple and dyna-
mically varying elements (Eccles et al., 2006). The cognitive
processes that take place in the orienteer before making a
decision primarily involve the selection of relevant map
information for route choice, the comparison of map and
terrain in map reading and in relocation, and a rapid
awareness of mistakes
(Ottosson, 1986; Seiler, 1996;
Almeida, 1997).

92

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. List of actions implicit in maps (adapted from Board, 1978)

Mapmakers, who have to be acquainted with speciﬁca-
tions, rules and traditions, are usually orienteering compe-
titors (Harvey, 1991). These mapmakers have to select which
elements of a landscape should be part of a map and how
these elements should be represented to satisfy users’
requirements and according to cartographic standards. It
is especially important for an o-map to include detailed
information about runnability (the degree of difﬁculty with
which an area can be crossed), which is derived both from the
ground and from vegetation, because runnability impacts
running speed.

We consider it relevant to address in depth a study that
leads to the characterisation and conceptualisation of such
maps. For this purpose, in the following sections, a theoretical
development is made that explains o-maps similarities and
differences compared to other types of maps. This study of
different mapping approaches allows us to break down the
nuances and features of o-maps.

THE FUNCTIONS OF MAPS

Board (1978) classiﬁes the uses for maps into three
categories (Figure 1): navigational aids, extraction and
inference measures, and aids for viewing geographical
features. The columns in Figure 1 show, in detail for each
of these three groups, a list of actions that are implicit in
these tasks. This categorisation may help us to classify maps
and to ﬁnd an appropriate deﬁnition for o-maps.

According to Figure 1, tasks that must be satisﬁed by o-
maps are mostly related to navigation. Deduction of
measurements is less important, because an o-map will
not be used for a quantitative, accurate measurement of
distances, angles, surfaces, or slopes. Thus, the concept of
relative positional accuracy becomes essential in assessing
the quality of o-maps (Mun˜oz et al., 2005). Because we can
consider maps to be images, visualisation tasks are common
to all types of maps.

We can classify maps into categories or classes that have
been established by various classic books based on general
cartographic principles. Authors support their classiﬁcations
based on different taxonomic criteria. For example, Robinson
et al. (1995) uses, without establishing rigid boundaries
between each class, the criteria of scale, function and subject
to establish an initial classiﬁcation.

On the basis of the function performed by a map, and
explicitly being ﬂexible in the application and interpretation
of
this criterion, Robinson makes a clear distinction
between topographic maps, thematic maps and charts.

Joly (1976), however, differentiates only between two
types of maps: topographic and thematic maps. Topographic
maps are based on ‘an accurate and detailed representation of
the earth’s surface, relating to the position, shape, dimen-
sions and identiﬁcation of terrain features, as well as concrete
objects’. In comparison, thematic maps are deﬁned as maps
that aim ‘to give, on a background of reference, through
qualitative or quantitative symbols, a conventional represen-
localised phenomena of any kind, and their
tation of

New insights into the concept of orienteering maps

93

Figure 2. Although at ﬁrst glance, o-maps and nautical charts are very different, conceptually they share many features

correlations’. Joly adds that the distinctions between these
two major types of maps are based on their goals, map-
making methods, and even the training and qualiﬁcations of
the cartographer.

According to Robinson, topographic maps are a type of
large-scale, general-purpose map that tend to pay close
attention to accuracy in the positional relationships between
the elements represented, that are usually produced by
cartographical agencies and that are created in series that
systematically cover the surface of a political demarcation.
Thematic maps are often generated at smaller scales than
topographic maps and provide characteristics of a particular
geographical distribution. Finally, according to Robinson,
navigational charts are a speciﬁc group of maps, whereas
according to Joly, they are a special case of topographic
maps with the basic objective to enable nautical or
aeronautical navigation. Thus, both its conception and its
implementation are very different.

We may consider, based on the functions of o-maps, that
they are not true topographic maps. However, it seems clear
that orienteering maps do not ﬁt the deﬁnition of a
thematic map. Therefore, further analysis is required.

SIMILARITIES BETWEEN O-MAPS AND NAUTICAL
CHARTS

Although the appearance of charts and o-maps is totally
different (Figure 2), we ﬁnd many similarities between them
in terms of goals, circumstances of use, methods and
processes involved in their production, and criteria used in
selecting the elements mapped. Figure 3 presents, in the
second column, a list of cartographic topics for comparison.
The other two columns illustrate these points with speciﬁc
details.

The main similarities are summarized in the following

paragraphs.

Accurate geometric representation of the landscape elements that
influence navigation
In the case of charts, the main factor is bathymetry. Thus,
coastal charts show undersea relief in a high degree of detail,
explicitly expressing channels, dangerous paths or remains of
wreckage. To ensure safety, the origin of coordinates is not
mean sea level but the level of low tide. Additionally, charts
can display the type of seabed (e.g., sand, mud, and coral).
O-maps are particularly careful with the representation of
elements that hinder runnability (i.e., relief and vegetation).
Relief representation generally offers the same contour
interval for the entire map. However, o-maps often use form
lines and special conventional signs. International rules
assign a pattern to each type of vegetation using accurate
methods. The origin of heights for o-maps is not relevant
and is thus normally not expressed. The main interest is in
relative differences in elevation.

Choice of a particular representation system
Mercator projections are used in charts and, as conformal
projections, help users with a compass to determine uniform
directions. Mercator projections also include a compass rose
and indicate the value of magnetic declination.

O-maps show, for the same reason, the magnetic meridian.
Representing small and unconnected areas, o-maps usually
inherit the projection system of their base map.

Representation of the key elements for navigation
Aeronautical and nautical charts include a set of speciﬁc
navigational aids that are not represented on topographic
maps such as buoys, beacons, headlights, and radar stations.
On o-maps, the most signiﬁcant elements of the landscape
that are typically represented include rocks and boulders,
cliffs, vegetation, and manmade features with a prominent
presence.

94

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Similarities between charts and orienteering maps

Use of symbols and special graphic criteria
libraries and
Both types of maps use their own symbol
have speciﬁc criteria for cartographic representation and
generalisation.

Critical updates
For any nautical or aeronautical chart, maintenance and
updates are of vital
importance and are critical for safe
navigation.

For o-maps that are used for recreation and sport,
updated information is not as critical from the standpoint of
safety. However, updates ensure the reliability of a map.

Orienteering events usually take place in natural environ-
ments (i.e., areas under less pressure from human transfor-
mations), which comparatively reduces the need to update
cartographic information. However, because the potential
for transformation of the natural environment is increasing,
updates become increasingly necessary for this type of
cartographic work.

In any case, the concept of security during the use of o-
maps is linked to the risk level in the decision-making of
runners, whose criteria for action are based on map reading.

Map specialisation according to navigation system
Nautical charts have evolved, adapting advances in naviga-
tion systems
radio
navigation, and satellite navigation. Likewise, o-maps have
been adapted for different speciﬁc types of land navigation
such as biking, skiing, and horse riding.

from traditional

forms of

sailing,

No representation or maximum simplification in those areas where
navigation is not required
The representation of the Earth’s surface in charts is quite
simple. Only those areas that may be helpful or that act as a
visual reference for navigation are represented.

O-maps show an enclosure area where events take place,
and surrounding areas are not of interest and do not need
to be represented.

Need for experts for production
Nautical charts require specialized surveying methods such
as astronomical methods, radio navigating systems, satel-
lites, and determination of depths through probes or
ultrasound. These cartographic works involve a high degree
specialisation. Similarly, map-making for orienteers
of
requires a deep knowledge of orienteering to know how
to select and adapt spatial information to the needs of land
navigation.

Very specific and particular conditions of use
Both types of maps must solve two basic problems: locating
a user’s position on the map and deducing the direction
and distance to another point. Due to unfavourable map
reading conditions
is
mandatory for the maps to be highly legible.

such as motion during use,

it

Therefore, from a conceptual point of view, we conclude
that o-maps can be considered a particular type of chart that
are suitable for land navigation and adapted to their speciﬁc
geographical environment, usually forested areas.

New insights into the concept of orienteering maps

95

Figure 4. Mapping the same territory: o-map (a) and topographic map (b)

SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES WITH OTHER TYPES
OF MAPS

At this point, we analyse the differences between topo-
graphic, thematic and orienteering maps to characterize and
clarify the true meaning of o-maps (Figure 4). These
differences are systematically explained in the following
paragraphs.

Metric accuracy
Topographic maps are generated from a capture process of
geoinformation following strict accuracy controls.
In
particular, all cartographic steps are controlled based on
error propagation to ensure a maximum absolute position-
ing error below the limit of visual perception. The relative
location of relevant elements is the most important aspect
of o-maps, and relative accuracy is only possible if the
overall accuracy is good.

Relief representation
Relief representation in orienteering maps is of great
importance because relief seriously affects runnability.

Therefore, relief representation is much more detailed on
o-maps than on topographic maps. Microtopography is
obtained through rigorous ﬁeldwork performed using a base
map. Recently, airborne laser scanning has improved the
relief representation of o-maps (Ditz and Gartner, 2005;
Gloor and Hohl, 2005). Accordingly, o-maps tend to use
form lines and special symbols that allow the representation
of microtopographic features (e.g., earth banks, earth walls,
erosion gullies, knolls, depressions, pits, and broken
ground).

However, unlike on topographic maps, no shading
technique is used to enhance relief representation, because
the o-maps’ colour patterns display information about
runnability and visibility. Map reading could be difﬁcult, if
shaded topographic representation was also added.

The aim of relief symbols is to show speciﬁc geomor-
phologic or landscape details that are not relevant to the
general mapping. The work of compiling these altimetric
details is the most time-consuming part of topographic
surveying.

Planimetric representation
To represents planimetric features, topographic maps, and
orienteering maps do not
follow the same criteria.
Selection, classiﬁcation, and generalisation of planimetric
features in orienteering maps depend on their use for land
navigation.

Therefore, the signiﬁcance of an object is considered
from two points of view. On the one hand, it takes into
account visibility, including the degree to which a runner
can locate himself on a map or deduce the position of other
topographic elements. On the other hand, cartographic
features (e.g., open lands, impassable cliffs, watered areas,
cultivated land, fences, stone walls, and crossing points) are
valued in mapping according to their ability to facilitate or
hinder runnability.

Cartographic representation systems
O-maps are an accurate type of map containing many
planimetric details with a main focus on the relative
positions between them. Relative accuracy is possible only
if the overall general accuracy is good generally, which is
inherit from the base map and is achieved by the deﬁnition
of the geodetic reference system and coordinate mapping
system.

Mapping isolated areas and having no need to overlap
with other maps, this information is not too much relevant
in o-map-making processes. From the user’s point of view,
geodetic information is also insigniﬁcant because only
information for navigational purposes is required.

However, it should be noted that rigorous georeferen-
cing improves the o-map-making processes by allowing
immediate integration of data from several sources: air-
borne laser
remote
sensing data, GPS surveys, and GIS data.

scanning, high resolution images,

The criteria for thematic representation
You cannot categorize o-maps as thematic maps because o-
maps do not use topographic maps as a framework for
illustrating a topic and abstracting the most relevant
information. O-maps use topographic maps to extract,
adapt, and modify adequate spatial information for their

96

The Cartographic Journal

purposes. O-maps omit items that are unimportant for
cross-country navigation and include items
that are
irrelevant on topographical maps.

Unlike geological maps, o-maps do not use topographic
maps as a simple background onto which to add speciﬁc
information. Neither o-map reduces
the information
displayed at the same level as other thematic maps, such
as those made for urban planning.

Orienteering maps are usually read under unfavourable
conditions while racing outdoors in the presence of wind,
rain, and sun glare. Therefore, attempting to increase
legibility on o-maps is more critical than on topographic
maps. It is true that the legibility of topographic maps is
very important; however, users often read them for longer
and under much more favourable viewing conditions.
Hence, topographic maps add other detailed information
such as place names.

Sheet size and shape
Map sheet size and shape are other differences between
orienteering and topographic maps. While sheet size is
standard for topographic maps, it varies to ﬁt the surface
shape represented on o-maps, which constitute individua-
lized representations of
isolated areas without overlay
problems to solve.

Standardisation
As referred to in the map-making process, topographic
maps consider systematic and objective criteria to guarantee
consistency in surveys of large areas. Controls are rigorous
to minimize standard deviation.

By contrast, o-map data acquisition is dependent on
subjective considerations and requires more cartographic
interpretation. Therefore, o-maps are more subjective. The
same surface can be represented in different ways depending
on the cartographer responsible for acquiring and proces-
sing information. The cartographer’s experience as an
orienteer is key to successful orienteering map generation.
This fact is noticeable due to the adoption of different
example,
cartographic generalisation. For
grades of
Scandinavian o-maps are usually highly readable because
they show a high level of generalisation. Due to the
common complexity of terrains, Scandinavian maps repre-
sent only major details that are genuinely important. At the
other extreme, Russian and Czech o-maps are usually very
detailed and incorporate so much information that map
legibility may be hindered. Due to the general
lack of
features in Central European terrains, mapmakers tend to
unnecessarily map many small features.

CONCLUSIONS

We found that o-maps are different and special type of
mapping made necessary by experts in orienteering, not only
mapping professionals. O-maps are the result of interpreting
the landscape from a topographic map. Through a functional
analysis and a comparison of differences and similarities
between topographic maps, nautical charts, and o-maps, we
reason that o-maps cannot be classiﬁed as a type of thematic

map. Nautical charts, which have a different appearance from
other maps, are more related to o-maps than thematic or
topographic maps. However, o-maps obey international
drawing standards unlike most other types of mapping that
only have local cartographic standards. Due to the speciﬁc
conditions of their production and use, o-maps call for
speciﬁc quality requirements focusing more on external
quality assessment than on absolute positional accuracy
requirements.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Angel Mun˜oz-Nieto receiv-
ed the received the BS
degree in geography from
University of Salamanca,
Spain, in 1986 and the BS
degree in surveying engi-
neering from University of
Extremadura, Spain, in 1989
and the PhD degree from
the University of Salamanca,
in 2008. He
Avila, Spain,
has been a Professor at
Salamanca University since 1991. He has authored more
than 10 research articles in international
journals and
conference proceedings. His teaching and research interests
are focused on orienteering maps, cartography, photogram-
metry, laser scanning applied to engineering and architecture.

REFERENCES

Almeida, K. (1997). ‘Decision Making in Orienteering’, Scientific

Journal of Orienteering, 13, pp. 54–64.

Board, C. (1978). ‘Map reading tasks appropriate in experimental
studies in cartographic communication’, Canadian Cartographer,
15, pp. 1–12.

Ditz, R. and Gartner, G. (2005). ‘Applying Laser Scanning as a basis
for deriving Orienteering Maps of Vienna’, in 22nd International
Cartographic Conference, A Corun˜a, Spain, Jul 11–16.

Eccles, D. W., Walsh, S. E. and Ingledew, D. K. (2006). ‘Visual
attention in orienteers at different levels of experience’, Journal of
Sports Sciences, 24, pp. 77–87.

Fairbairn, D. (1990). ‘Orienteering mapping and higher education’,

The Cartographic Journal, 27, pp. 128–131.

Gloor, T. and Hohl, T.

‘Representing the relief of
Orienteering maps with the aid of airborne laser scanning’, in
11th International Conference on Orienteering Mapping,
Toyota City, Japan, Aug 6.

(2005).

Harvey, R. (1991). Mapmaking for Orienteers, British Orienteering

Federation, Doune, Perthshire.

International Orienteering Federation (2000). International Standards
of Orienteering Maps (ISOM), http://www.orienteering.org/
index.php/iof2006/Rules-and-Guidelines/Mapping-Standards
(accessed November 2010).

Joly, F. (1976). La cartographie, Presses universitaries de France,

Paris.

McNeill, C., Cory-Wright, J. and Renfrew, T. (1998). Teaching

Orienteering, Human Kinetics Publishers, Champaign, IL.

Mun˜oz, A., Herrero, M. and Vidal, M. (2005). ‘Quality control in
in 22nd International Cartographic

orienteering maps’,
Conference, A Corun˜a, Spain, Jul 11–16.

Mun˜oz-Nieto, A. (2008). ‘Los mapas de orientacio´n: caracterizacio´ n,
ana´lisis normativo y evaluacio´ n de la calidad externa’, PhD thesis,
University of Salamanca, Avila.

New insights into the concept of orienteering maps

97

Ottosson, T. (1986). ‘Cognitive processes in orienteering: an outline
of a theoretical frame of reference and some preliminary data’,
Scientific Journal of Orienteering, 2, pp. 75–101.

Petrie, G. (1977). ‘Orienteering Maps’, The Cartographic Journal,

14, pp. 14–22.

Robinson, A., Morrison, J., Muehrcke, P., Kimerling, A. and Guptill, S.
(1995). Elements of Cartography, John Willey & Sons, New York.

Seiler, R. (1996). ‘Cognitive processes in orienteering. A review’,

Scientific Journal of Orienteering, 12, pp. 50–65.

Zentai, L. (2001). ‘Development of orienteering map’s standardiza-
tion’, in 20th International Cartographic Conference, Beijing,
China, Aug 6–10.

Zentai, L. (2009). ‘New technologies in making orienteering maps’,

Scientific Journal of Orienteering, 17, pp. 56–64.

