This article was downloaded by: [Massachusetts PRIM Board]
On: 06 April 2015, At: 21:04
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Identity-based change:
a foundation for spatio-
temporal knowledge
representation
Kathleen Hornsby & Max J. Egenhofer
Published online: 04 Feb 2010.

To cite this article: Kathleen Hornsby & Max J. Egenhofer (2000) Identity-
based change: a foundation for spatio-temporal knowledge representation,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14:3, 207-224, DOI:
10.1080/136588100240813

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588100240813

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any
opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and
views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor
& Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information.
Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities
whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in
connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 3, 207± 224

Research Article

Identity-based change: a foundation for spatio-temporal knowledge
representation

KATHLEEN HORNSBY and MAX J. EGENHOFER
National Center for Geographical Information and Analysis and Department of
Spatial Information Science and Engineering, Boardman Hall, University of
Maine, Orono, ME 04469-5711 , USA
email: khornsby, max@spatial.maine.edu

(Received 30 December 1998; accepted 24 June 1999)

Abstract. As e(cid:128) orts grow to develop spatio-temporal database systems and
temporal geographical information systems that are capable of conveying how
geographical phenomena change, it is important to distinguish the elements that
are fundamental to scenarios of change. This paper presents a model based on
the explicit description of change with respect to states of existence and non-
existence for identi(cid:142) able objects. Such changes are of concern when, for instance,
modelling and reasoning about nations that are subsumed through con(cid:143) ict only
to return once more at a later time, or about water bodies that (cid:143) uctuate due to
seasonal or climatic change. The basis for tracing these changes is the concept of
object identity. Identity, distinct from an object’s properties, values, or structure,
is that unique characteristic that distinguishes one object from another. Based on
a small set of primitives relating to the identity states of objects, we model the
semantics associated with change and through a systematic derivation, a complete
set of identity-based change operations evolves from the primitives. These opera-
tions are basic to the types of change commonly experienced by geographical
phenomena and modelled by researchers studying spatio-temporal change. This
approach highlights the minimum elements necessary for reasoning about change,
namely, object identity, an ordering of identity states, and co-occurrence of
identity states.

1.

Introduction
The spatial data models currently used as the foundation for geographical
information systems (GIS) fall short of conveying the rich and complex ways in
which phenomena change over space and time. One of the major limitations of
today’s systems, for example, is that they capture only a snapshot of reality, reliant
as they are on databases that contain only current data. Yet, the world around us
does not always change according to neat increments—neither do people conceptual-
ize change as discrete snapshots. Growing awareness of the importance of GIS to a
broader group of users means that the demands on these systems to represent
scenarios found in the everyday world increase. This changing view of the role of
information systems includes improving the methods for querying and conveying
how phenomena change.

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/tf/13658816.html

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 208

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

Traditionally, changes to geographical phenomena have been derived from a
temporal reference frame. Temporal aspects of GIS have been investigated from the
perspective of cartography (Langran 1992, Renolen 1996 ), data models (Frank 1994,
Peuquet 1994, Worboys 1994), and spatial databases (Armstrong 1988, Al-Taha and
Barrera 1990) although to date, no single model for including time in a GIS has
been adopted. Time has proved di(cid:129) cult to formalize, especially as more than one
type of conceptualization of time is needed for GIS (Frank 1998).

A more explicit focus on change has considered the semantics associated with
change, such as those typically encountered as part of many basic spatio-tempora l
processes including the appearance and disappearance of entities and production or
transmission of entities (Claramunt and The´riault 1995, 1996). These studies, how-
ever, have omitted certain kinds of change and so far no systematic treatment of
change has been undertaken.

This paper presents an approach to spatio-tempora l knowledge representation
based on the explicit description of possible changes to geographical phenomena
modelled at a high level of abstraction as identi(cid:142) able objects. Starting with a set of
basic types of change with respect to the existence and non-existence of objects with
identity, a methodology is presented that systematically builds on these fundamental
concepts and derives further types of change that are possible. The set of change
operations that results can be found in most scenarios of geographical change. This
change-based model provides a better understanding of the set of possible alterations
to which an object can be subject as it evolves over space and time and enables the
extension of spatial data models and the development of GIS query languages that
incorporate such semantics of change.

The foundation of the model is a set of primitives and the operations that can
be performed on them. These primitives are identity states of objects and transitions.
The term object refers to the representation of real world phenomenon in an informa-
tion system (Kim 1990) that may exist as a physical entity, such as a building or a
river, or something conceptual, such as a state or county. Objects may be naturally
delineated such as islands or lakes, or they may be (cid:142) at, representing the case when
an object is created through human imagination or convention, such as the creation
of counties or other administrative units (Smith 1995). Although, in general, it is
possible for objects to contain other objects, in this investigation, discussion is
restricted to single objects that do not change into parts or aggregates (Hornsby
and Egenhofer 1998).

The methods presented in this paper are based upon a classi(cid:142) cation of alterations
to objects through tracking changes to object identity. In scenarios of change, identity
is a key factor in proving the existence or non-existence of an object as well as being
able to track similarities or di(cid:128) erences in objects. Object identity is a trait that
distinguishes an object from all others (Khosha(cid:142) an and Copeland 1986). It provides
a way to represent the individuality or uniqueness of an object, independent of its
attributes and values. In object-oriented programming and object-oriented databases,
the concept of a unique object identity is commonplace (Khosha(cid:142) an and Baker
1996 ). It has been recognized as a tool to help track changes to objects (Cli(cid:128) ord
and Croker 1988, Abiteboul and Kanellakis 1989, Al-Taha and Barrera 1994,
Hornsby and Egenhofer 1997) and aids the idea of an object being a stable and
enduring element, something on which a perspective may be held (Smith 1996 ).
Identity states are associated with objects, capturing the notion that although an
object’s identity is enduring, the state of identity may change, for instance, from

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

209

existing to non-existing. In this work, existence refers to the physical presence or
occurrence of an object or, for conceptual objects, the belief in or perception of an
object. The United States, for example, can be modelled as an existing object. This
object is not a physically existing object, but rather an object that has been created
by human decree (Smith 1995). Objects and their associated identity states are linked
through another primitive, a transition. Transitions model the progression of an
object from one state of identity directly to another.

interpretation (Chang 1990; Glinert 1990). Visual

Changes to identity are described in the form of an iconic visual language. A
visual language uses pictorial or iconic primitives to allow one to model what are
normally abstract and ephemeral concepts and associates these icons with a certain
logical
languages provide an
alternative means of communication with a computer system, which is often easier
and clearer than a SQL-like database query language (Catarci et al. 1993 ). The
visual language presented in this paper is referred to as the Change Description
L anguage. It is based on an iconic representation of di(cid:128) erent kinds of change and is
used to depict a scenario of change,
i.e. the identity states of objects and the
transitions between these states. The approach distinguishes and classi(cid:142) es di(cid:128) erent
types of change, from modi(cid:142) cations to single objects based on a set of primitives,
such as creating or eliminating objects, to more complex scenarios that involve
combinations of change operations, for instance, spawning a new object from an
existing one. The model is developed through a systematic treatment of which
combinations of operations are feasible and which are infeasible. Stepwise extensions
of the model enable the representation of other semantic concepts, such as the
meaning associated with di(cid:128) erent methods of creating new objects, spatial relations
among objects, or properties of objects (Hornsby and Egenhofer 1997 ). At one level,
the Change Description Language can be seen as a query language describing
identity-based change in a qualitative fashion. The semantics of the changes stem
directly from the primitives and their combinations.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: §2 describes di(cid:128) erent types
of change. Section 3 discusses how models that incorporate change are being intro-
duced to GIS. Section 4 introduces the basic identity operations through the de(cid:142) ni-
tion of the Change Description Language. Section 5 extends the identity-based
change operations by focusing on the possible combinations of identity states and
transitions between two objects. The result is a set of identity operations that are
plausible according to certain semantic constraints. Section 6 illustrates an applica-
tion of the Change Description Language to a scenario that models changes in
native land ownership. Conclusions and needs for future research are presented in §7.

2. Types of change

Space, time, and change are an integral part of everyday life and (cid:142) gure largely
in commonsense reasoning (Egenhofer and Mark 1995). Consider these examples
that involve change: the TV weather forecaster describes the development of a storm
system over the past two days, explains how it is a(cid:128) ecting current weather patterns,
and forecasts what may happen in the next twenty-four hours; or a mortgage
company analyzes the change in ownership of a set of land parcels over the past
the company.
eight months in order to predict opportunities or
Epidemiologists respond to changes in disease distributions and search for clues in
the evolving pattern of disease occurrence that will aid in the prevention of further
spread of the illness (Cli(cid:128) et al. 1981, Cli(cid:128) et al. 1992), while coastal geomorphologists

risks

for

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 210

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

are interested in describing the materials and processes that a(cid:128) ect coastal forms
(Raper and Livingstone 1995 ). A forester sees change when viewing tree and vegeta-
tion growth in a new area or environment (Lowell et al. 1996), while to an image
processing specialist change may refer to the alteration in land cover between dates
of imaging (Lillesand and Kiefer 1987). As a contrast to these geographical views of
change, database software engineers refer to change as an update of a database
through the addition, deletion, or modi(cid:142) cation of data (Silberschatz et al. 1997 ).

Some of these examples describe continuous change. The (cid:143) ow of water, the
moving plume of an oil spill, and the weather are examples of phenomena that
continually evolve. Similarly, the spread of disease or wave action on a beach may
be viewed as being continuous. Other changes are regarded as being discrete, as with
the change in ownership of a land parcel, which happens instantaneously (Al-Taha
1992 ). Change can involve the creation or destruction of a phenomenon, or the
joining or splitting of some entity. In general, however, change refers to the fact that
an object or phenomenon is altered or transformed into something di(cid:128) erent through
the result of some action or process. In this paper, we con(cid:142) ne our discussion to
change as it applies to identi(cid:142) able, discrete objects and focus, in particular, on
describing changes with respect to the identity states of objects —i.e. tracking the
existence of an object over time.

3. Modelling change

Various models of change have been developed by mathematicians, geographers,
philosophers, and computer scientists. The French mathematician Rene´ Thom (1975,
1983 ) considered di(cid:128) erent types of change in his work on morphodynamic theory
and o(cid:128) ered a taxonomy for basic types of change or archetypal morphologies including
‘to end,’ and ‘to emit (give birth),’ which corresponded in his view to
‘to begin,’
commonly encountered actions and events in the world experience. Mathematical
functions have been used to model the temporal rate of change of geographical
phenomena (Tobler 1985) as well as for modelling continuous change in spatial
regions (Galton 1997 ).

One common method of capturing change has been to rely on a sequence of
snapshots or discrete displays at sequential moments in time (Langran 1992, Peuquet
1994 ). This approach to visualizing and describing change has been used in work
such as a study on the di(cid:128) usion of AIDS in Pennsylvania (Gould et al. 1991 ). The
snapshot approach is a procedure used by cartographers based on animating
sequences of maps (DiBiase et al. 1992 ). Various supporting techniques can also be
applied, such as playing the sequence of discrete displays at di(cid:128) erent speeds like
frames of a movie, changing the duration of a scene to a(cid:128) ect the pace of an animation,
or altering the order in which scenes are presented. Researchers interested in captur-
ing the complexities of underlying processes, however, are often dissatis(cid:142) ed with the
snapshot approach, because this method overlooks the events, each of which occurred
separately, that take place between the snapshots (Chrisman 1998). Indeed, the
changes that occur between snapshots are not explicitly stored—instead, they must
be determined by comparing the spatial patterns of two successive states. Another
commonly cited disadvantag e of the snapshot approach is the storage of redundant
that occurs from the
information (Langran 1992, Peuquet and Wentz 1994)
representation of those locations where no change occurred.

Other approaches contribute to the view that an information system should
preserve known links between events and their consequences. In this case, the events

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

211

behind change should be considered, with the belief that GISs should be capable of
monitoring and analyzing successive states of the spatial entities (Claramunt and
The´riault 1995 ). Renolen (1996) traces object states through a sequence of events or
mutations creating a history graph, and capturing changes to objects over time.
History graphs express certain events including splitting and merging and can be
further extended to describe the duration of events. Although these studies focus
explicitly on change, there is no systematic approach to determine the complete set
of processes or mutations and all events are expressed with respect to a timeline.

The recognition of di(cid:128) erent types of change and the need for an improved
understanding of the processes underlying geographical change have been echoed in
the work by those researchers investigating improved temporal capabilities for GIS
(Langran 1992, Frank 1994, Peuquet and Wentz 1994, Peuquet 1994, Worboys 1994,
Egenhofer and Golledge 1998 ). Traditional temporal query languages for GIS focus
on an ability to address such queries as:

E What is the state of a phenomenon at time t?
E What locations have been a(cid:128) ected by the phenomenon over the time period Dt?
E What phenomena exhibited certain characteristics at time t?

Scenarios of change, however, may require additional information. It may be
necessary, for example, to query about the existence of an object or to perform
queries about future states of an object such as:

Is this object in existence at time t ?
Is this object at time t

the same object as encountered at time t
1

?

2

E Has this object always been existing?
E What future changes are possible to this object?

Extensions to query languages that capture these semantics are possible through
the development of a language that describes identity-based changes. A possible set
of operations for tracking the evolution of a temporal feature’s identity has been
explored by Cli(cid:128) ord and Croker (1988) and Al-Taha and Barrera (1994). Using
object identity to track changes to objects is further explored by Hornsby and
Egenhofer (1997; 1998).

The present paper provides a systematic derivation of

identity-based change
operations based on the notions of existence and non-existence, distinguishing the
complete set of possible operations.

4. Basic identity operations

The identity-based model of change comprises primitive elements that can be
combined to yield meaningful change operations. The primitives are based on identity
states of objects and are founded on the concept of existence. Existence is di(cid:128) erent
to the notion of appearance, a similar concept in the visual domain (Hornsby and
Egenhofer 1998 ). The identity states of an object represent states in the real world,
rather than states of database objects; therefore, the model of change presented in
this paper describes changes as they occur (red) to entities in the real world.

4.1. Primitives of identity-based change

The model uses three basic symbols to convey the primitives of the model. These
primitives arise from the fact that an object can be in one of two identity states:
either existing, describing the case in which an identi(cid:142) able object is present, or

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 E
E
212

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

non-existing. We further discriminate non-existence to distinguish between non-
existing identity states: non-existing without history and non-existing with history.
Non-existing without history describes the situation in which no object with identity
is existing or has existed previously. The term history refers to the (previous) existence
of an object with identity; and without history means that no previous object with
that identity has existed. This case is contrasted with the third primitive, which
represents a non-existing object with history. In this case, an object with identity
previously existed, but has been eliminated and no longer exists. The primitives are
visualized through a Change Description Language (CDL) ((cid:142) gure 1). To aid identi-
(cid:142) cation of unique identities, objects have been given a label.

The change from one state of an object to the next is captured through an arrow
and is referred to as the fourth primitive, transition ((cid:142) gure 2). A transition links two
identity states of the same object. Scenarios re(cid:143) ecting changes to object identity are
developed from the left of the transition arrow to the right, where left corresponds
to before and right to after. Transitions are assumed to be direct, with no intermediate
states being portrayed. Within this setting, temporal change is represented qualitat-
ively based on the temporal order of events, an approach to temporal reasoning that
has been found to be valid for many of the domains using GIS (Frank 1994 ).

As a transition links di(cid:128) erent identity states of the same object, the CDL requires
the objects to be drawn along the same horizontal. Co-occurrence of transitions
a(cid:128) ecting di(cid:128) erent objects is modelled through aligning the objects vertically
((cid:142) gure 3(a)). Any transition linking two di(cid:128) erent identities along the same horizontal
would be a violation of the CDL’s semantics ((cid:142) gure 3(b)). Transitions also must
connect objects that are nearest neighbours with respect to temporal ordering
((cid:142) gure 3(c)). No quantitative measures of time are represented with the CDL.

Figure 1. Basic symbols used for (a) object existence, (b) non-existing object without history,
and (c) non-existing object with history.

Figure 2. A transition between two identity states of an object.

Figure 3. Visualizing transitions: (a) valid transitions for two objects, A and B, (b) invalid
transition from object A to B, and (c) invalid transition between two identity states.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

213

Although concurrent states can be depicted, information on the duration of a trans-
ition is neglected.

4.2. Identity operations based on the four primitives

A set of change operations is derived through systematic combinations of the
four primitives that model the identity state of an object and a transition. Since each
of the three identity states can be linked through a transition with each other, a
total of 32 = 9 combinations can be found ((cid:142) gure 4 ). It is worth noting that in certain
contexts, some of these combinations would seem to be impossible or contradictory
to a domain ontology and therefore may be considered unacceptable.

The nine combinations form a basic set of identity-based change operations:

E The transition between two identity states that are non-existing without history
is referred to as the operation continue non-existenc e without
history ((cid:142) gure 4(a)).

E The transition from a non-existing object without history to an existing object
with identity is referred to as a create operation ((cid:142) gure 4(b)). In this case,
an object with its identity is created.

E The transition from a non-existing object without history to a non-existing

object with history describes a recall operation ((cid:142) gure 4(c)).

E The operation destroy represents the permanent removal of an existing

object resulting in a non-existing object without history ((cid:142) gure 4 (d)).

E The operation continue existence re(cid:143) ects a transition between two states

of an existing object ((cid:142) gure 4(e)).

E A transition from an existing object to a non-existing object with history

conveys the operation eliminate ((cid:142) gure 4( f )).

The remaining three combinations involve transitions with objects that are

non-existing with history.

E The transition from a non-existing object with history to a non-existing object

Figure 4. Combination of the primitives relating to existence, non-existence, and transition
resulting in change operations: (a) continue non-existence without history,
(b) create, (c) recall, (d) destroy, (e) continue existence, ( f ) eliminate,
( g) forget,
(h) reincarnate, and (i ) continue non-existence with
history.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 214

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

without history that captures
((cid:142) gure 4(g)).

the semantics of a forget operation

E The transition from a non-existing object with history to an existing object
conveys the semantics of a reincarnate ((cid:142) gure 4(h)), describing the fact that
the same identity has existed previously.

E continue non-existenc e with history ((cid:142) gure 4(i )).

These basic operations are powerful enough to distinguish the semantics of
di(cid:128) erent changes such as the elimination of one object and the creation of a new
object with a di(cid:128) erent identity ((cid:142) gure 5(a)), from the case in which an object is
eliminated and subsequently recreated ((cid:142) gure 5(b)). In the latter case, the operations
are applied to the same identity, capturing the semantics of a reincarnation.

Given these change operations, it becomes possible to connect sequences of these
operations together in order to model scenarios of change. There are, however,
certain constraints on the occurrence of the basic change operations in a scenario
of change. Since the create operation signi(cid:142) es that an identity has not existed
previously, we employ a constraint that a create operation can occur only once
for each identity ((cid:142) gure 6).

5. Change operations involving two objects

More complex scenarios of change involve two objects, such that one object has
an impact on the identity change of the other. In this case, three transitions co-occur:
one between the two states of object A, another one between the two states of object
B, and a third between the (cid:142) rst state of object A and the second state of object B—
a cross-object transition. The cross-object transition is an additional primitive of the
model of change. It is symbolized in the CDL with a diagonal arrow that links two
objects of di(cid:128) erent identity ((cid:142) gure 7). The types of operations involving cross-object
transitions are referred to as dependent change operations. This section derives system-
atically a set of dependent change operations and analyses which operations are
plausible.

Figure 5. Two semantically distinct

combinations of eliminate and create:
(a) eliminate operation applied to object A and a create operation forming an
object B and (b) reincarnate of object A.

Figure 6. A create operation can occur only once for each object.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

215

Figure 7. Change operations between two objects: a cross-object transition from object A to
object B is symbolized with a diagonal arrow.

5.1. Derivation of dependent change operations involving two objects

Four concepts underlie cross-identity transitions:

E an initiating object with identity,

the identity state of the initiating object before a transition and after a
transition,

E an object that exists before a transition may continue to exist or may be

removed (eliminated or destroyed) and

E non-existing objects may be without history or with history.

These four conditions involve stepwise re(cid:142) nements and lead to a hierarchy of
constraints describing the states of object A and B both before and after a transition
((cid:142) gure 8). Since the re(cid:142) nements are Boolean in nature, they establish criteria that
provide a complete coverage and they are mutually exclusive. This property implies
that any such change operation must have one and only one true value for the state
before a transition and one true value for the state after the transition. With 3Ö 3
bases possible, a total of eighty-one combinations are possible ((cid:142) gure 9). Not all of
these combinations are plausible however. We impose constraints that limit the set
of possible change operations from the total set of eighty-one. This includes all cases
where: object A is non-existing before a transition and object B’s identity state does
not change over a transition.

In the (cid:142) rst case, a number of the combinations result in a non-existing object
linked through a cross-object transition to either non-existing or existing identity
states of object B. These combinations involve contradictory semantics and do not

Figure 8. Possible states for one object over a transition.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 E
216

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

Figure 9. Change description language visualization of the 81 possible combinations of
change operations involving two objects and a cross-object transition.

seem to make cognitive sense for most geographical phenomena of which we are
aware.

The second case refers to combinations where, for example, object B’s identity
state does not change, although, a cross-object transition takes place. Object B may
be existing ((cid:142) gure 10), non-existing with history, or non-existing without history,
before and after the cross-object transition, such that no identity change has occurred.
Removal of these implausible combinations results in a (cid:142) nal set of eighteen

dependent change operations between two objects ((cid:142) gure 11).

5.2. Groupings of dependent change operations

The set of dependent change operations represent situations that satisfy the
constraints and produce meaningful results. Some of these operations are similar to

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

217

Figure 10.

Invalid combination where objects A and B exist before and after the transition

(i.e. no identity change occurred).

Figure 11. Constraints limit the possible combinations from 81 to 18 plausible change
operations between two objects.

each other and can be grouped together for easier interpretation. The way that the
groupings are undertaken can vary according to di(cid:128) erent rationales. We have chosen
to group the results according to the state of the dependent object with respect to
the cross-object transition.

5.2.1. Change operations that result in dependent object in cross-object transition to
be existing after a transition

The (cid:142) rst group of dependent change operations includes those cases in which
the dependent object is existing after a cross-object transition. The (cid:142) rst two cases
describe scenarios where object B exists and the original identity, A, continues to
exist after the transition. For instance, an existing object A is linked through a cross-
object transition with a reincarnated object B ((cid:142) gure 12(a)). The second example is
similar except object B is newly created as a result of the cross-object transition
((cid:142) gure 12(b)). This combination of primitives and transitions captures the semantics
of a spawn-like operation. An example of this type of change occurs when a new
city is spawned from an existing city. In this context, it is valid for a cross-object
transition to link at least two existing objects of di(cid:128) erent identity, and in this way,
a connection is established between predecessor and successor objects.

The four remaining change operations in this section involve cross-object trans-
itions between two di(cid:128) erent identities that co-occur with the demise of the original

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 218

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

Figure 12. Dependent change operations where a di(cid:128) erent identity exists after a cross-object
transition: (a) object A continues to exist and object B is reincarnated, (b) object A
continues to exist and object B is created, (c) object A is eliminated and B is reincarn-
ated, (d) object A is eliminated and B is created, (e) object A is destroyed and B is
reincarnated, and ( f ) object A is destroyed and B is created.

identity. These operations capture metamorphose-like semantics. In the (cid:142) rst case,
object B is non-existing with history to begin with and then is reincarnated through
the transition with object A. Object A is eliminated as a result of the transition
((cid:142) gure 12(c)). The next example is similar except that object B is newly created
((cid:142) gure 12(d)). In one case, object B is reincarnated after the transition with object
A. Object A is destroyed as a result of the transition ((cid:142) gure 12(e)). In the (cid:142) nal
example, object A is destroyed simultaneously with the creation of new identity B
((cid:142) gure 12( f )).

5.2.2. Change operations that result in dependent object in cross-object transition
becoming non-existing after a transition

One group of dependent change operations involves a cross-object transition
where object B no longer exists as a result of the transition. The (cid:142) rst case, for
instance, object B is eliminated while A continues to exist after the cross-object
transition ((cid:142) gure 13(a)). Similarly, existing object A is linked through a transition to
object B that becomes non-existing without history ((cid:142) gure 13(b)). The original object
continues to exist. These combinations of operations re(cid:143) ect the semantics associated
with takeovers, for example, or replacing another object and identity.

Another group of change operations involves both objects ceasing to exist. In
the (cid:142) rst case, both objects become non-existing with history after all transitions
((cid:142) gure 13(c)). The second case is where through a cross-object transition with object
A, object B is destroyed while object A is eliminated ((cid:142) gure 13(d)). The next scenario
is where object A is destroyed simultaneously with the elimination of object B
((cid:142) gure 13(e)) and (cid:142) nally, both objects are destroyed as a result of the transition
((cid:142) gure 13( f )).

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

219

Figure 13. Change operations that involve a transition where object B no longer exists as a
result of a cross-object transition with object A: (a) A continues to exist and B is
eliminated, (b) A continues to exist and B is destroyed, (c) A and B are eliminated,
(d) A is eliminated and B is destroyed, (e) A is destroyed and B is eliminated, and
( f ) A is destroyed and B is destroyed.

5.2.3. Change operations where dependent object in cross-object transition is
non-existing before a transition

This group of change operations involves cases where object B is non-existing
both before and after a cross-object transition with object A. In the (cid:142) rst two cases,
A continues to exist after the transition, while B is forgotten ((cid:142) gure 14(a)) or B is
recalled ((cid:142) gure 14(b)). The next two cases are those where object A is eliminated and
B is forgotten ((cid:142) gure 14(c)) or recalled ((cid:142) gure 14(d)). Finally, there are the cases
where object A is destroyed and object B is forgotten ((cid:142) gure 14(e)) or recalled
((cid:142) gure 14( f )).

Figure 14. Change operations where object B is non-existing: (a) object A continues to exist
while object B is forgotten, (b) object A continues to exist and object B is recalled,
(c) A is eliminated and object B is forgotten, (d ) object A is eliminated and object B
is recalled, (e) A is destroyed and B is forgotten, and ( f ) A is destroyed and B is recalled.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 220

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

6. Applying the change description language

The Change Description Language can be used to convey changes expressed
through a natural language description of some scenario. An example is given based
on changes in native land ownership relating to the Maine Indian Land Claims in
the late 1970s—a case involving more than one view of land ownership.

In the late 1970s, the State of Maine was at the center of a controversy regarding
native land claims. The Passamaquoddy Tribe and Penobscot Nation claimed that
Maine and its predecessor state, Massachusetts acquired land in the 1790s without
the requisite Congressional approval, and (cid:142) led a native land claim for 12.5 million
acres, the approximate size of their lost ancestral hunting grounds. This claim
represented a land area approximatel y two-thirds the size of the State of Maine, an
area that was then home to a population of 350 000 non-native people (Brodeur
1982 ). The claim was eventually settled as the ‘Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act
of 1980’, in which the US Federal Government awarded the Indians su(cid:129) cient funds
towards purchase of 300 000 acres, as well as a trust fund (United States 1980).

Certain key events relating to native land ownership have been chosen for
modelling and only identity-based changes relating to existence and non-existence
are described:

E Governor Pownal of Massachusetts issues a proclamation in 1759 that the
land of the Passamaquoddies has been lost through conquest to the State of
Massachusetts.

E The State of Massachusetts issues 23 000 acres to the Passamaquoddies through

a Treaty in 1794.

E Maine separates from Massachusetts and joins the Union in 1820.
E By the 1960s, 6000 acres of the 23 000 acres of Passamaquoddy land had been

sold by the State of Maine.

and Massachusetts-owned land,

In modelling these events, two unique objects with identities are established for
representing Passamaquoddy-
respectively
((cid:142) gure 15). One possible view is that when Passamaquoddy land is lost through
conquest, the object and identity are destroyed. There follows a reincarnation
of the Passamaquoddy identity when the land treaty with Massachusetts takes e(cid:128) ect.
A third object, Maine, is created through a spawn-like operation when Maine
separates from Massachusetts and is recognized o(cid:129) cially as a State. Finally, although
6000 acres of Passamaquoddy land is sold by Maine and this event is actually the
trigger that set o(cid:128) a chain of events that eventually led to the land claim, at the level
of identities, no change is incurred.

Since no changes relating to the spatial properties of an object are being modelled,
the CDL does not explicitly represent any details relating to acreage, speci(cid:142) c land
holdings, etc. Further extensions to the language are necessary in order to describe
operations of splitting or joining objects. This example illustrates, however, the
presence and absence of identities through time and shows how objects can be
tracked even through periods of non-existence.

7. Conclusions

Describing spatio-tempora l phenomena with respect to change opens new doors
to understanding the underlying components of change and recognizing the semantics
associated with change. This paper has examined change from the perspective of
describing identity changes to objects that represent geographical phenomena found

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

221

Figure 15. Changes of Passamaquoddy (P) land ownership to Massachusetts (MA) and
Maine (ME) modelled with the Change Description Language.

in the real world. Identity allows us to distinguish objects from each other. Identity
also provides a mechanism with which to track changes, such as the existence or
non-existence of an object over time.

Modelling change from this perspective begins with a consideration of what
operations on an object’s identity are possible. A set of basic identity-based change
operations relating to states of existence and non-existence has been derived with
sequences of these changes to objects being visualized through use of an iconic
Change Description L anguage. Scenarios of change between di(cid:128) erent objects can be
modelled with this language and the sequences of operations compared. In addition,
the language can be used to model scenarios of change as viewed from di(cid:128) erent
perspectives —for instance, two contrasting views of land ownership changes. Higher-
level change operations can be derived through a process of systematically combining
the possible states of object identity before and after a transition. Such scenarios
result in a directed graph. Its three core elements are identity, co-occurrence, and
temporal ordering of identity states. All three elements of the model are needed in
order to describe change at a most basic level. If we were to eliminate the requirement
for co-occurrence, this would reduce our ability to reason over multiple identities
and the representation would be restricted to identity states of only one object. If
we take away the constraint of ordering, we e(cid:128) ectively reduce the model to a
representation of objects at one identity state and this does not convey change.
Finally, if the requirement for identities is removed, then there remains nothing to
represent with the model. Therefore, all three elements are necessary for describing
change.

Understanding all the possible con(cid:142) gurations of changes to identity combined
with the ability to compare current combinations of change operations with historic
sequences of change is useful for predicting or forecasting future modi(cid:142) cations to an
object. This comprehensive derivation of identity operations will also make it possible
to develop spatial query languages such that they re(cid:143) ect the constraints of the

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 222

K. Hornsby and M. J. Egenhofer

identity-based model and o(cid:128) ers users the ability to incorporate the semantics of
change as necessary in their work.

Although no explicitly spatial information has been incorporated in this model
of change, it has been shown that tracking changes to an object’s identity over
periods of existence and non-existence, gives useful insights into the behavior of an
object over time that are relevant to many cases of spatio-tempora l change. The
model can be extended, adding information about the properties of an object, spatial
relations among objects, and temporal histories associated with an object.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under
NSF grant number SBR-8810917 and by a Massive Digital Data Systems contract
the
sponsored by the Advanced Research and Development Committee of
Community Management Sta(cid:128) . Max Egenhofer’s research is further supported
through NSF grants IRI-9613646, SBR-9700465, BDI-9723873 , and IIS-9970123 ;
grants from the National Imagery and Mapping Agency under grant number
the Air Force Research Laboratory under grant number
NMA202-97-1-1023 ;
F30602-95-1-0042 ; the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences under
grant number 1 R 01 ES09816-01 , Lockheed Martin, and Bangor Hydro-Electric Co.

References
Abiteboul, S., and Kanellakis, P., 1989, Object identity as a query language primitive.

SIGMOD Record, 18, 159-173.

Al-Taha, K., 1992, Temporal Reasoning in Cadastral Systems. Ph.D. thesis, Department of

Surveying Engineering, University of Maine, Orono, ME.

Al-Taha, K., and Barrera, R., 1990, Temporal data and GIS: An overview. In Proceedings
of GIS/L IS ’90, (Anaheim, CA: ASPRS/ACSM/AAG/URISA/AM/FM), pp. 244–254.
Al-Taha, K., and Barrera, R., 1994, Identities through time. In Proceedings of International
Workshop on Requirements for Integrated Geographic Information Systems, edited by
M. Ehlers and D. Steiner (New Orleans, LA: Environmental Research Institute of
Michigan (ERIM )), pp. 1–12.

Armstrong, M., 1988, Temporality in spatial databases. In Proceedings of GIS/L IS ’88, (San

Antonio, TX: ACSM/ASPRS/AAG/URISA), pp. 880–889.

Brodeur, P., 1982, Annals of law: restitution, T he New Yorker, 11 October, 1982, pp. 76–155.
Catarci, T., Santucci, G., and Angelaccio, M., 1993, Fundamental graphical primitives

for visual query languages. Information Systems, 18, 75–98.

Chang, S.-K., 1990, Principles of V isual Programming Systems,

(Englewood Cli(cid:128) s, NJ:

Prentice Hall).

Chrisman, N., 1998, Beyond the snapshot: changing the approach to change, error, and
process. In Spatial and T emporal Reasoning in Geographic Information Systems, edited
by M. Egenhofer and R. Golledge, Spatial Information Systems (New York, NY: Oxford
University Press), pp. 85–93.

Claramunt, C., and TheÁ riault, M., 1995, Managing time in GIS: an event-oriented approach.
In Recent Advances in T emporal Databases, edited by J. Cli(cid:128) ord and A. Tuzhilin,
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag), pp. 23–42.

Claramunt, C., and TheÁ riault, M., 1996, Toward semantics for modelling spatio-temporal
processes within GIS. In Advances in GIS 11:Proceedings of 7th International Symposium
on Spatial Data Handling, edited by M. Kraak and M. Molenaar (London: Taylor &
Francis Ltd), pp. 47–63.

Cliff, A., Haggett, P., and Stroup, D., 1992, The geographical structure of measles epidemics

in the Northeastern United States. American Journal of Epidemiology, 136, 592–602.

Cliff, A., Haggett, P., Ord, J., and Versey, G., 1981, Spatial Di(cid:128) usion: An Historical
Geography of Epidemics in an Island Community, Cambridge University Press.

Clifford, J., and Croker, A., 1988, Objects in Time. Database Engineering, 7, 189–196.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 Identity-based change

223

DiBiase, D., MacEachren, A., Krygier, J., and Reeves, C., 1992, Animation and the role
of map design in scienti(cid:142) c visualization. Cartography and Geographic Information
Systems, 19, 201–214.

Egenhofer, M., and Golledge, R., 1998, Spatial and T emporal Reasoning in Geographic

Information Systems (New York, NY: Oxford University Press).

Egenhofer, M., and Mark, D., 1995, Naive Geography. In Proceedings of Spatial Information
T heory-A T heoretical Basis for GIS, International Conference COSIT ’95, edited by A.
Frank and W. Kuhn (Semmering, Austria: Springer-Verlag), pp. 1–15.

Frank, A., 1994, Qualitative temporal reasoning in GIS-ordered time scales. In Proceedings
of Sixth International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, edited by T. Waugh and
R. Healey (Edinburgh, Scotland: pp. 410–431.

Frank, A., 1998, Di(cid:128) erent types of ‘times’ in GIS. In Spatial and T emporal Reasoning in
Geographic Information Systems, edited by M. Egenhofer and R. Golledge, Spatial
Information Systems (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), pp. 40–62.

Galton, A., 1997, Continuous Change in Spatial Regions. In Spatial Information T heory—A
T heoretical Basis for GIS, International Conference COSIT ’97, L aurel Highlands, PA,
edited by S. Hirtle and A. Frank, L ecture Notes in Computer Science 1329 (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag), pp. 1–13.

Glinert, E., 1990, Nontextual programming environments. In V isual Programming Systems,
edited by S.-K. Chang, (Englewood Cli(cid:128) s, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc.), pp. 144–230.
Gould, P., Kabel, J., Gorr, W., and Golub, A., 1991, AIDS: Predicting the next map.

Interfaces, 21, 80–92.

Hornsby, K., and Egenhofer, M., 1997, Qualitative Representation of Change. In Spatial
Information T heory—A T heoretical Basis for GIS, International Conference COSIT ’97,
L aurel Highlands, PA, edited by S. Hirtle and A. Frank, L ecture Notes in Computer
Science 1329 (Berlin: Springer-Verlag), pp. 15–33.

Hornsby, K., and Egenhofer, M., 1998, Identity-based change operations for composite
objects. In Proceedings of 8th International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, edited
by T. Poiker and N. Chrisman ( Vancouver, Canada: International Geographical
Union), pp. 202–213.

Khoshafian, S., and Baker, A., 1996, Multimedia and Imaging Databases, (San Francisco,

CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.).

Khoshafian, S., and Copeland, G., 1986, Object identity. SIGPL AN Notices, 21, 406–416.
Kim, W., 1990, Introduction to Object-Oriented Databases, (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).
Langran, G., 1992, T ime in Geographic Information Systems, (Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis

Inc.).

Lillesand, T., and Kiefer, R., 1987, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation (New York,

Lowell, K., Edwards, G., and Kucera, G., 1996, Modeling Heterogeneity and Change in

NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).

Natural Forests. Geomatica, 62, 377-391.

Peuquet, D., 1994, It’s about time: A conceptual framework for the representation of temporal
dynamics in geographic information systems. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, 84, 441– 461.

Peuquet, D., and Wentz, E., 1994, An approach for time-based analysis of spatiotemporal
data. In Proceedings of Sixth International Symposium of Spatial Data Handling, SDH
’94, edited by T. C. Waugh and R. G. Healey (Edinburgh, Scotland: pp. 489–504.

Raper, J., and Livingstone, D., 1995, Development of a geomorphologial spatial model using
object-oriented design. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 9,
359–383.

Renolen, A., 1996, History graphs: Conceptual modelling of spatiotemporal data. In
Proceedings of GIS Frontiers in Business and Science,
(Brno, Czech Republic:
International Cartographic Association), available at http: //www.iko.unit.no/home/
agnar/publications/HistoryGraphs.ps.

Silberschatz, A., Korth, H., and Sudarshan, S., 1997, Database Systems Concepts (New

York, NY: The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.).

Smith, B., 1995, On drawing lines on a map. In Proceedings of COSIT ’95, edited by A. Frank

and W. Kuhn (Semmering, Austria: Springer), pp. 475–484.
Smith, B., 1996, On the Origin of Objects (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 224

Identity-based change

Thom, R., 1975, Structural Stability and Morphogenesis (Reading, MA: W.A. Benjamin, Inc.).
Thom, R., 1983, Mathematical Models of Morphogenesis (Chichester, UK: Ellis Horwood

Tobler, W., 1985, The morphology of geographical change. Ontario Geography, 25, 75–83.
United States, 1980, Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act of 1980, Public Law No 96-420,

94 Statute 1785, (Washington, DC: US Government Publications O(cid:129) ce).

Worboys, M., 1994, A uni(cid:142) ed model of spatial and temporal information. Computer Journal,

Limited).

37, 26–34.

Downloaded by [Massachusetts PRIM Board] at 21:04 06 April 2015 