This article was downloaded by: [The UC Irvine Libraries]
On: 30 October 2014, At: 19:24
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Formalizing fuzzy objects
from uncertain classification
results
Tao Cheng a , Martien Molenaar b & Hui Lin a
a Joint Laboratory for GeoInformation Science
and Department of Geography, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
b International Institute for Aerospace Survey
and Earth Sciences (ITC), P.O. Box 6, 7500AA
Enschede, The Netherlands.
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: Tao Cheng , Martien Molenaar & Hui Lin (2001) Formalizing
fuzzy objects from uncertain classification results, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 15:1, 27-42, DOI: 10.1080/13658810010004689

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810010004689

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and

Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 1, 27± 42

Research Article

Formalizing fuzzy objects from uncertain classi(cid:142) cation results

TAO CHENG1 MARTIEN MOLENAAR2 and HUI LIN1
1 Joint Laboratory for GeoInformation Science and Department of Geography,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
2 International Institute for Aerospace Survey and Earth Sciences (ITC),
P.O. Box 6, 7500AA Enschede, The Netherlands
E-mail: tcheng@cuhk; molenaar@itc.nl; huilin@cuhk.edu.hk

(Received 23 August 1999; accepted 28 April 2000)

Abstract. Concepts of fuzzy objects have been put forward by various authors
(Burrough and Frank 1996 ) to represent objects with indeterminate boundaries. In
most of these proposals the uncertainties in thematic aspects and the geometric aspects
are treated separately. Furthermore little attention is paid to methods for object
identi(cid:142) cation, whereas it is generally in this stage that the uncertainty aspects of
objects become manifest. When objects are to be extracted from image data then the
uncertainty of image classes will directly eŒect the uncertainty of the determination
of the spatial extent of objects. Therefore a complete and formalized description of
fuzzy objects is needed to integrate these two aspects and analyse their mutual eŒects.
The syntax for fuzzy objects (Molenaar 1998) , was developed as a generalization of
the formal syntax model for conventional crisp objects by incorporating uncertainties.
This provides the basic framework for the approach presented in this paper. However,
the model still needs further development in order to represent objects for diŒerent
application contexts. Moreover, the model needs to be tested in practice. This paper
proposes three fuzzy object models to represent objects with fuzzy spatial extents for
diŒerent situations. The Fuzzy-Fuzzy object (FF-object) model represents objects that
have an uncertain thematic description and an uncertain spatial extent, these objects
may spatially overlap each other. The Fuzzy-Crisp object (FC-object) model represents
objects with an uncertain spatial extent but a determined thematic content and the
Crisp-Fuzzy object (CF-object) model represents objects with a crisp boundary but
uncertain content. The latter two models are suitable for representing fuzzy objects
that are spatially disjoint. The procedure and criteria for identifying the conditional
spatial extent and boundaries based upon fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation result are discussed and
are formalized based upon the syntactic representation. The identi(cid:142) cation of objects
by these models is illustrated by two cases: one from coastal geomorphology of
Ameland, The Netherlands and one from land cover classi(cid:142) cation of Hong Kong.

1.

Introduction
For many natural phenomena that are distributed gradually and continuously
over space, there are no crisp boundaries that can be identi(cid:142) ed to diŒerentiate them,
as is articulated by Leung (1988 ). For examples, the boundary between beach and
foreshore, between woodland and grassland, and between urban and rural areas,
may be gradual through a transition zone rather than a crisp boundary. Furthermore,

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810010004689

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 28

T . Cheng et al.

when we use a remote sensing image to extract objects of interest, the pixel signal is
a confounding re(cid:143) ectance of sub-pixel elements. There are pixels that may contain
sub-pixel objects, trans-pixel objects, boundary pixels and/or natural intergrades
(Foody 1992, 1999, Gopal and Woodcock 1994, Fisher 1999). The mixture spectral
information of sub-pixels will lead to uncertain classi(cid:142) cation and indeterminate
boundaries. In such cases the spatial extents of objects should be identi(cid:142) ed (cid:142) rst then
the boundaries of objects can be formed (Cheng and Molenaar 1999a) . Therefore,
the complexity of natural environments requires appropriate new methods to repres-
ent it in GIS, if only because in the past there has been a tendency to force reality
into sharp objects and crisp classi(cid:142) cation.

The concept of fuzzy objects have been put forward to represent objects with
indeterminate boundaries (Burrough and Frank 1996, Goodchild and Jeansoulin
1998, Shi et al. 1999), although most authors discuss the uncertainties in remote
sensing image classi(cid:142) cation (Foody 1992, 1999 ). How spatial objects are extracted
from the fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation results is yet to be fully discussed and formalized.
Further many authors model the uncertainties either of the thematic aspects
(Robinson 1988, Burrough 1989, Usery 1996) or of the geometric aspects (Altman
1995, Brown 1998 ). For the integration of these two aspects a complete and formal-
ized description of fuzzy objects is needed. The syntax for fuzzy objects (Molenaar
1998 ), which was developed by incorporating uncertainties into a formal syntax
model for conventional crisp objects, provides the basic framework to achieve this
aim. However, the model still needs further development in order to represent objects
for diŒerent application contexts. Moreover, the model needs to be tested in practice.
Therefore, the aim of this paper is not to discuss fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation, but to
discuss the derivation of the fuzzy spatial extent of objects from uncertain classi(cid:142) ca-
tion results. This derivation eŒects the spatial relationships between fuzzy objects,
and consequently constraints the interpretation of the fuzziness of their spatial extent
with respect to their topological relationships. Three generic fuzzy object models are
proposed to represent objects with fuzzy spatial extents for diŒerent situations. The
criteria of identifying the conditional spatial extent and boundaries are discussed
and formalized based upon the syntactic representation. There are two folds of
meanings of ‘formalizing’ in our title. It means to derive (extract) fuzzy objects from
uncertain classi(cid:142) cation results. It also implies to formalize the procedure of this
derivation, the representation of the fuzzy objects and their topological relationship.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes three fuzzy object models
for the objects with fuzzy spatial extent extracted from uncertain image classi(cid:142) cation
results. The formalization of these fuzzy object models is explained in §3. The condi-
tional spatial extents (and boundary zones) of objects will be formalized . The applica-
tions of these fuzzy object models are presented in §4, which contains two cases. Case
1 discusses the identi(cid:142) cation of coastal geomorphologica l landscape units in Ameland
from height observations. Case two discusses the identi(cid:142) cation of land cover type in
Hong Kong by using a Landsat TM image. The last section summarizes and discusses
the major (cid:142) ndings of the paper and proposes the direction of further research.

2. Three fuzzy object models

We assume that after classi(cid:142) cation a membership vector is assigned to each grid
cell; that consists of the elements 0< MF[P,C ]< 1 (k 5 1, N). Here MF[P,C ]
represents the membership of grid cell P belonging to object class C, and N is the
total number of object class types.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 Formalizing fuzzy objects

29

Spatial objects can be extracted from these classi(cid:142) cation results as image segments
consisting of contiguous sets of pixels, or gridcells, belonging to one class. The objects
of one class can then be represented as a layer of the raster, so that N layers of
objects will be formed. A comparison of the N layer classi(cid:142) cation results with the
conventional crisp classi(cid:142) cation shows that each layer consists of fuzzy regions. If
each region represents the spatial extent of an object, the object is called a fuzzy-
fuzzy object (FF-Object), where the (cid:142) rst ‘fuzzy’ means that its spatial extent is fuzzy
and the second ‘fuzzy’ means that its thematic interior is fuzzy, because it contains
cells that have been assigned to the thematic class of the region with a certainty of
less than 1 (see (cid:142) gure 1(a)). Then the traditional crisp object can be called crisp-crisp
(CC-Object), which means that the boundary and the interior of the object are crisp.
There are two ways of interpreting FF-objects when we discuss objects de(cid:142) ned
in diŒerent contexts. In some applications, fuzzy spatial overlaps among objects are
permitted. In this notation, objects are de(cid:142) ned in diŒerent contexts, one, for example
in a soil map and the other in a land use map. Then it is quite possible that they
overlap, i.e. their semantic de(cid:142) nition does in general not forbid their overlap. In this
case, the cells in the overlap region may belong to multiple objects.

In other applications , area objects are de(cid:142) ned as being spatially disjoint in space (in
single context), i.e. they do not overlap such that each grid cell belongs in principle to
one object. If the objects form a spatial partition then each cell should belong to exactly
one object, as in the case study of §4, where foreshore, beach and foredune are considered
to be spatially disjoint objects. Although the boundary between beach and foredune
cannot be located very crisply, a speci(cid:142) c location should either belong to beach or
foredune, but not to both. In this case it is necessary to combine the objects of diŒerent
layers into one layer and to form a complete spatial partition of the area, which can be
further diŒerentiated into two cases. The (cid:142) rst case is that a conditional boundary has
to be set to de(cid:142) ne explicitly the spatial extent of objects and assign each grid cell exactly
to one object; the second is that a clear boundary cannot be de(cid:142) ned, but that there are
transition zones between the objects. In the transition zones, no decision is made about
which object the grid cells might belong to.

To diŒerentiate these two situations, we call objects in the (cid:142) rst view crisp-fuzzy
objects (CF-Object, see (cid:142) gure 1(b)), which means that the conditional boundaries
between objects are crisp but the interiors of the objects are fuzzy. We call objects
in the second view fuzzy-crisp objects (FC-Object, see (cid:142) gure 1(c)), where fuzzy means
that their spatial extents (transition zones) are fuzzy and crisp means that their
interiors (cores) are certain.

Figure 1 illustrates the three fuzzy object models. It can be seen that the FF-
object has a fuzzy spatial extent and a fuzzy thematic interior, the FC-object has a
crisp internal core but a fuzzy spatial extent (transition zone) and the CF-object has
a crisp conditional boundary but a fuzzy interior. The Fuzzy-Fuzzy object (FF-
object) model is useful to model fuzzy objects that spatially overlap each other, and
the Fuzzy-Crisp object (FC-object) model and the Crisp-Fuzzy object (CF-object)
model are suitable for modelling fuzzy objects that are spatially disjoint.

3. Formalization of fuzzy object models

Classi(cid:142) cation and segmentation are essential in extracting objects from (cid:142) eld
observation data or from remote sensing images. To identify the spatial extent of
objects, (cid:142) rst the grid cells have to be assigned to classes and then the raster/image
has to be segmented into regions with grid cells of the same classes, which represent

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 30

T . Cheng et al.

Figure 1. Three fuzzy object models.

spatial extents of fuzzy objets (Cheng and Molenaar 1999a) . The classi(cid:142) cation is
uncertain in the sense that the membership function value varies per grid cell and is
less than one. For this situation we (cid:142) rst discuss the criteria for assigning the grid
cells to classes based upon their fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation results, then the criteria for
segmentation. After identi(cid:142) cation of the regions that represent the spatial extent of
objects, the boundaries of objects are formed automatically. Since the spatial extents
(and their boundaries) of fuzzy objects are formed based upon prespeci(cid:142) ed criteria,
they are called the conditional spatial extent and the conditional boundary in order
to be diŒerentiated from crisp objects.

For each fuzzy object model discussed in §2, diŒerent criteria should be applied.
The formalization of the CF-object model has been discussed in (Cheng and
Molenaar 1999a). Here we resume the formalization in a more generic framework
by adding the other two fuzzy object models.

3.1. Assigning grid cells to classes

In the following sections MF [P,C ] represents the membership function of grid
cell P with respect to Class C, and D[P,C ] represents the decision function assigning
P to a region of C.

3.1.1. Fuzzy-fuzzy object model

Objects of the FF-type have an uncertain thematic content and an uncertain
extent. It might even be so that because is not su(cid:141) cient evidence that the object
really exist, i.e. the identi(cid:142) ed object might not be more than an artefact produced
by the observational process and the procedures for information extraction. In this
we always are uncertain about the assignment of a cell to the extent of an object,
this uncertainty directly relates to the uncertainty of the assigned class so that we
put D [P,C ] 5 MF[P,C ]. The domain of this function runs from 0 to 1, but in
practice the value 1 will hardly occur in this case. So there will be hardly any cells
that can be assigned de(cid:142) nitely to the extent of the object, whereas for the cells with

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 Formalizing fuzzy objects

31

a value 0 we know for sure that they do not belong to the object. Therefore,

If (MF [P,C ]> 0)

then let D [P,C ] 5 MF[P,C ]

If (MF [P,C ] 5 0)

then let D [P,C ] 5 0

(means: P belongs to a region of C );

(means: P does not belong to a region of C ).

3.1.2. Fuzzy-crisp object model

Objects of the FC-type have a de(cid:142) nite thematic content and there is no doubt about
their existence. That means that each object will have a core area with cells for which
D[P,C]5 1. Since the objects have been extracted in this case from classi(cid:142) ed image data,
the assignment s of cells to an object depends here on the uncertaint y of the classi(cid:142) cation.
Therefore, not all cells will be assigned to the object with absolute certainty. That means
that there will be a transition zone around the core (or a boundary zone) where we (cid:142) nd
cells with D[P,C]5 MF[P,C] ×(0, 1). Outside this transition zone we (cid:142) nd the exterior
of the object, i.e. cells that do not belong to the object so that D[P,C]5 0. Therefore,
If (MF [P,C ] 5 1)

then let D[P,C ] 5 MF[P,C ] 5 1

(means: P belongs to the core of an object of C );

If (0 < MF[P,C ]< 1) then let D[P,C ] 5 MF[P,C ]

(means: P belongs to the transition zone);

If (MF [P,C ] 5 0)

then let D[P,C ] 5 0

(means: P does not belong to an object of C ).

3.1.3. Crisp-fuzzy object model

Let NM [P,Ck ] 5 1Õ MF[P,Ck ] represent the ‘not-membership’, i.e. the certainty
that P does not belong to class Ck ; and let XM [P,Ck] express the membership that
P belongs exclusively to Ck and not to any other classes Cl for any l Þ k, hence, it
can be derived by applying minimum operations as
XM [P,Ck] 5 MIN (MF [P,Ck],MINlÞ

k(NM [P,Cl]))

(1)

For this case we will assume that the classes are mutually exclusive, so that P
can only belong to one class. This implies that there should be only one class for
which the function XM [
] has maximum value for P. If there are more classes
with the same maximum values then additional evidence is required to be able to
select a unique class. It can be represented as

if XM [P,Ck] 5 MAXcl

(XM[P,Cl])(l 5 1, ..., N ) then let D[P,Ck] 5 XM [P,Ck]

otherwise D [P,Ck] 5 0
if Si= 1 ,NMF[P,Ci]< 1 then MAXci
if MF[P,Ck] 5 MAX(MF [P,Ci]) then D[P,Ck ] 5 MF [P,Ck].

(2)
(XM[P,Ci]) 5 MAX(MF[P,Ci]) (i 5 1, ..., N ) and

For example, let’s assume a grid cell has a membership vector for three classes
, C

C

and C
3

2

1

MF[P,C ] 5 G0.1
0.2H

0.6

MF[P,Ci]< 1, MF[P,C
Since Si= 1 ,3
This means that this cell is assigned to class C
2
the calculation procedure see Cheng (1999, p.59)

2

]5 MAX(MF[P,Ci]) therefore D[P,C

]5 0.6.
with certainty 0.6. For details of

2

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 32

T . Cheng et al.

3.2. Segmentation

After assigning the grid cells to classes, regions of diŒerent class types can be
formed by segmentation. The regions represent the spatial extent of fuzzy objects.
For fuzzy objects boundaries can only be speci(cid:142) ed under certain conditions. We will
see in the following sections that these are generally related to certainty level of the
assignment of cells to the object. The cells that ful(cid:142) l such a condition form a
conditional spatial extent of an object. These should be clearly distinguished from
the conventional spatial extent of crisp objects. After segmentation, the pixel-based
information is transferred into object-based information.
Let Pkl ×S where S is a region of class type C and let Part[Pkl ,S ]; D[Pkl,C ].

If a grid cell Pij is adjacent to Pkl and D[Pij,C ] Þ 0, then Pij ×S and we de(cid:142) ne

Part[Pij,S ] 5 D[Pij,C ] as the membership function of Pij to S.

If the two conditions are not satis(cid:142) ed, then Pij 1 S, i.e. Part [Pij,S ] 5 0.
If S represents the spatial extent of an object O of C, the relationship between P

and O can be de(cid:142) ned as

(3)

(4)

(5)

Part[P,O] 5 Part[P,S ] 5 D[P,C ].

Therefore the relationship between P and O for objects in the CF-object model

can be written as

Part[P,O] 5 D[P,C ] 5 XM [P,C ].

The relationship between P and O for objects in the FF-object model and the

FC-object model can be written as

Part[P,O ] 5 D[P,C ] 5 MF[P,C ].

Equations 4 and 5 express the relationship between the uncertainty of the cell
belonging to the spatial extent of an object and the uncertainty of a grid cell
belonging to a class, i.e. the relationship of uncertainties between geometric and
thematic aspects. This means that uncertainty is transferred from thematic aspects
to geometric aspects of objects during segmentation.

3.3. Spatial extents and boundaries of fuzzy objects

According to the syntax proposed by Molenaar (1998), the spatial extent of an
object can be represented by faces belonging to the object, which is a set of grid cells
in a raster/image. The boundary of an object consists of edges of the cells that have
the object on one side only (Molenaar 1998). This subsection discusses the syntactic
representation of the conditional spatial extents and boundaries for each fuzzy
object model.

3.3.1. FF-object model

represented as

According to the de(cid:142) nition of §3.1.1, the spatial extent of an FF-object O can be

Face (O) 5 Cell(O) 5 {P| Part [P,O ]> 0}
(6)
where Face (O) is the fuzzy spatial extent of O and is the set of faces belonging to O
(in case the faces are grid cells this function can be replaced by Cell(O)).

Let t be a threshold value for Part[P,O]. Then a conditional function can

be de(cid:142) ned:

Part[P,O| t] 5 1 if {P| Part[P,O]> t}

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 Formalizing fuzzy objects

33

and a conditional object (i.e. and object with a conditional spatial extent) can be
de(cid:142) ned by

Face(O |t) 5 Cell(O| t) 5 {P| Part[P,O]> t}

The relationship between edges, faces and the conditional object can be de(cid:142) ned as

L e[e,O| t] 5
L e[e, f ]Ö Part[ f,O| t]
Ri[e,O| t] 5 Ri[e, f ]Ö Part[ f,O| t].

Where L e[e, f ] represents that an edge e has a face f on the left side, Ri[e, f ]
represents that an edge e has a face f on the right side. L e[e, O |t ] represents that e
has an object O on the left side under threshold value t, Ri[e,O| t] represents that e
has an object O on the right side under threshold value t ; they are crisp functions
that take the value of either 1 or 0.

Let B[e,O| t] 5

L e[e,O| t] 1 Ri[e,O |t ]. This function has a value 0 if the edge is
not related to the conditional object, it has value 2 if the edge is inside the conditional
object and it has a value 1 if it has the conditional object at only one side. Then the
conditional boundary of O at certainty level t can be de(cid:142) ned as:

tO 5 {e | B[e,O| t] 5 1}.

(7)

This means that a conditional boundary ‚
tO is the boundary of a conditional object.
It consists of edges e that have the object on either the left or the right side. The
boundary of FF-objects is a threshold-cut boundary, consisting of the edges of
outermost grid cells of the object.

3.3.2. FC-object model

represented as:

The spatial extent of an FC-object (O) is the core of the object, which can be

Face(O |1) 5 Cell(O |1) 5 {P| Part[P,O] 5 1}

(8)

Transition zones between FC-objects can be de(cid:142) ned as those cells that do not
belong to any core of the FC-objects but do belong to the intersection of the
transition zones. The transition zone between two FC-objects Oa and Ob comprise
the cells that satisfy

Face(Oa Ob) 5 Cell(Oa Ob )

5 {P| 0 < Part[P,Oa ]< 1 and 0 < Part [P,Ob]< 1}

(9)

The formulas can be generalized for cases where more than two objects intersect.
Here we de(cid:142) ne the ‘confusion index’ (CI) for each grid cell as one minus the
diŒerence between the maximal and second maximal membership values
(Burrough 1996),

CI5 1Õ

(Max1(MF[P,Ck])Õ Max2(MF[P,Cl])) (k, l 5 1, ..., N; k Þ

l)

(10)

where N is the total number of the class types, Max1 is a maximum operation among
the membership function value vectors, and Max2 is an operation to (cid:142) nd the second
largest value from the vectors. When the membership function values of adjacent
grid cells are very similar, the zones of confusion divide regions with relatively
homogenous membership values. In fact, these confusion zones indicate the presence
of conditional boundaries; they are transition zones between FC-objects.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 ‚
34

T . Cheng et al.

(11)

(12)

(13)

3.3.3. CF-object model

and Molenaar 1999a):

The spatial extent of two CF-objects should consist of faces that satisfy (Cheng

Face(Oa) 5 Cell(Oa ) 5 {P| Part [P,Oa ]> Part[P,Ob]} and
Face(Ob) 5 Cell(Ob ) 5 {P| Part [P,Ob ]> Part[P,Oa]}.

For CF-objects, the conditiona l boundary between two objects is the transition
boundary between two classes. It consists of edges that have simultaneously the cells of
Oa on the left side and the cells of Ob on the right side, or the cells of Oa on the right
side and the cells of Ob on the left side. Therefore, the edges of the boundary should satisfy
Ea,b 5 {e| B[e, f a] 5 1 and B[e, f b] 5 1 and fa ×Face (Oa) and f b ×Face (Ob)}

Then the transition boundary can be represented as

(Oa,Ob ) 5 {Na,b,Ea,b } and Na,b 5 {n|n ×e, e ×Ea,b }

4. Applications of fuzzy object models
4.1. Fuzzy objects extracted f rom (cid:142) eld observation data

For the sustainable use of coastal zones, Dutch coastal zones are monitored by
yearly pro(cid:142) le measurement along the coastline. Height observations are made by
laser scanning of the beach and dune area and echo sounding at the foreshore. These
data are interpolated to form a full height raster of the test area. Experiments show
that the uncertainty of the interpolated heights of the raster can be expressed by
standard deviation (s 5 0.15 m) (Huising et al. 1996 ).

The coastal geomorphologica l landscape units such as foreshore, beach and fore-
dune are identi(cid:142) ed from these measurements and their changes are studied in order
to predict the their future development (Cheng and Molenaar 1999b) . However, the
de(cid:142) nition of these landscape units varies from person to person, and from time to
time. For example, one de(cid:142) nition of foreshore is the area above the closure depth and
beneath the low water line (Reineck and Singh 1980). The value of closure depth may
be Õ 6.0 m or Õ 8.0 m. Therefore, the de(cid:142) nition of the landscape units is fuzzy and we
applied a trapezoidal membership function (Cheng et al. 1997) to describe them.

Figure 2 shows the interpolated height values of the test area of Ameland. Based
on this fuzzy object de(cid:142) nition, we classify the grid cells into classes of landscape
units (Cheng et al. 1997 ). As shown in (cid:142) gure 3(a) (b) and (c), each pixel has three
membership values to three classes of landscape units. Here we derive the objects
for the three fuzzy object models.

Figure 2. DEM of the test area of Ameland.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 ‚
Formalizing fuzzy objects

35

Figure 3. Fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation results of Ameland (Cheng and Molenaar 1998). (a) Member-
ship value of belonging to foreshore, ( b) Membership value of belonging to beach,
(c) Membership value of belonging to foredune (darker means lower membership).

4.1.1. Modelling by fuzzy-fuzzy object model

The modelling results by FF-object model are shown in (cid:142) gure 4. The edges of
the outmost grid cells of each object are the conditional boundaries, with a threshold
of 0.2. Figures 4(a), (b) and (c) each represents a layer with objects of one type. When
these layers are overlaid, it is clear that these regions overlap. The fuzzy spatial
extent of the objects is shown in (cid:142) gures 4(d to f ).

4.1.2. Modelling by fuzzy-crisp object model

Figure 5 (a) represents the core of the FC-objects. These objects have been formed
according to the rules of §3.1.2. Figure 4(b) represents the ‘confusion index (CI )’ as
de(cid:142) ned in §3.3.2. According to the de(cid:142) nition of CI, the cells with values approximatel y
equal to 1 represent transition zones among FC-objects. By combining (cid:142) gures 5(a)
and 5(b), FC-objects are shown in (cid:142) gure 5(c).

4.1.3. Modelling by crisp-fuzzy object model

The modelling results of the CF-object model are shown in (cid:142) gure 6. Figure 6(a)
shows the spatial extent of CF-objects. Figure 6(b) represents the uncertainty of cells
belonging to the objects. The transition boundaries among objects ( belonging to
three classes) are shown in (cid:142) gure 6(c).

4.2. Fuzzy objects extracted f rom remote sensing images

This subsection presents the case study of extracting land cover types of Hong
Kong from TM images. The image was taken on 3 March, 1996. The size of the test
window is 1865 (columns)Ö 1648 (rows).

As argued in the introduction, there is a mixture of sub-pixels in images. The
pixel signal is a confounding re(cid:143) ectance of sub-pixels. We apply the SMA (spectral
mixture analysis) method (Peddle et al. 1999) to classify the image. The method is
built on the fact that the IFOV of a pixel contains a number of individual surface
components which together contribute to the overall pixel level radiance received
by a remote detection instrument (Adams et al. 1993). In the case of linear mixing,
the spectrum measured by the airborne or satellite sensor can be modelled as a set
of pure spectra, each weighted by the areal proportion of material within the sensor
IFOV. We considered four types of land cover for image classi(cid:142) cation, man-made
objects, bare-hill, vegetation and water. Through SMA, we quantify the areal fraction
of these four type components at subpixel scales and interpret the fraction of
individual component (end-member) as surrogates for the fuzzy membership function
value, which is shown in (cid:142) gure 7.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 36

T . Cheng et al.

Figure 4. FF-Object modelling results of Ameland (Cheng 1999) . (a) FF-objects belong to
foreshore*, ( b) FF-objects belong to beach*, (c) FF-objects belong to foredune*,
(d)–(f ) FF-objects of (a)–(c) with fuzziness respectively (*threshold 5 0.2, darker means
greater uncertainty).

Figure 5. FC-Object modelling result of Ameland (Cheng 1999) . (a) Cores of FC-objects,
(C) FC-objects with fuzziness (darker means greater

(B) Confusion index (CI),
uncertainty).

Figure 6. CF-Object modelling result of Ameland (Cheng 1999) .

(a) CF-object Model,
( b) Certainty of cells belonging to objects, (c) Objects with uncertainty, (d) Conditional
boundaries between regions (darker means greater uncertainty).

Figures 8–11 present the mapping results of FF-objects of four layers, which
have fuzzy spatial extent and fuzzy boundaries. In all (cid:142) gures 8–11 (b, c, d, e and f )
represent the FF-objects at a-cuts (0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0), respectively. Therefore
(cid:142) gure ( f ) becomes the core of FC-objects. The result with changing areas at diŒerent

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 Formalizing fuzzy objects

37

Figure 7. SMA classi(cid:142) cation results of land cover of Hong Kong. (a) End-member fraction
of man-made objects, ( b) end-member fraction of bare-hill, (c) end-member fraction of
vegetation, (d) end-member fraction of water (darker means lower end-membership).

Figure 8. FF-objects belonging to class type of man-made object.

threshold values shows that the composite of material is diŒerent from place to
place, even when the material may belong to the same class, e.g. water, soil or
vegetation. For example, the purity of water (compared with the sample areas) is
increasing with the threshold. We might postulate the salty or mineral material to

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 38

T . Cheng et al.

Figure 9. FF-objects belonging to class type of bare-hill.

Figure 10. FF-objects belonging to class type of vegetation.

be diŒerent at these (cid:142) ve threshold levels, and would therefore consider further
(cid:142) eld tests.

When we combine (cid:142) gure f in four layers, the cores of FC-objects are formed,

which is shown in (cid:142) gure 12. The CF-objects are shown in (cid:142) gure 13.

5. Discussion and conclusions

Conventionally, the determination of the spatial extent of objects is generally
approached through the boundaries or more precisely through the position of the
boundary points. The analysis of the geometric uncertainty of the objects is therefore

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 Formalizing fuzzy objects

39

Figure 11. FF-objects belonging to class type of water.

often based on accuracy models for the coordinates of these points. However, when
there is no crisp boundary between objects, the fuzzy spatial extent of objects should
be identi(cid:142) ed (cid:142) rst and the conditional boundaries can then be formed. In such cases,
the geometric uncertainty is not only a matter of coordinate accuracy, but also a
problem of object de(cid:142) nition. The uncertainty of measurement and object de(cid:142) nition
will be combined in thematic classi(cid:142) cation. The uncertainty of thematic classi(cid:142) cation
will be converted to the geometric aspects (fuzzy spatial extent and conditional
boundaries) of the objects during their formation (Cheng and Molennar 1999a) .

This paper discussed the derivation of fuzzy objects from fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation
results based upon three fuzzy object models. These three models represent objects
with fuzzy spatial extents for diŒerent situations. The FF-object has a fuzzy spatial
extent and a fuzzy thematic interior, the FC-object has a crisp internal core but a
fuzzy spatial extent (transition zone) and the CF-object has a crisp conditional
boundary but a fuzzy interior. The FF-object model is useful for modelling fuzzy
objects that spatially overlap each other and the FC-object model and CF-object
model are suitable for modelling fuzzy objects that are spatially disjoint. These three
fuzzy object models, their spatial extent and conditional boundaries (transition zones)
are formalized based upon syntactic schema.

In our approach, the topologic relationships between fuzzy objects (overlap or
adjacency) form the basis for assigning pixels to regions and to objects. Here ‘overlap’
is interpreted as the intersection of the spatial extent of objects, i.e. the intersection
of their face sets. This is the basic relationship that can be detected when analysing
the relationships of fuzzy spatial objects extracted from image data. ‘Adjacency’ is
primarily a relationship between the geometric elements, i.e. the faces and cells. This
relationship can be detected between objects only when the intersection of their
spatial extents is reinterpreted after imposing semantic constraints. These constraints
should state that the objects are by de(cid:142) nition spatially exclusive as in single valued
maps (Molenaar 1989, 1998). So our approach shows that topologic relationships

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 40

T . Cheng et al.

Figure 12. Cores of FC-objects.

Figure 13. CF-objects of land cover.

between objects can not be found by geometric operation only. The full semantics
of the objects, combining their geometric and thematic data, should be taken into
consideration. The cases presented in this article illustrated that. This is diŒerent
from other algebraic models (Clementini and Di Felice, 1996, Cohn and Gotts 1996 ),
which are generally based purely on the geometric relationships of fuzzy regions.

Furthermore, in our approach the representation of FF-object is apparently
similar to the fully-fuzzy area concept proposed by Foody (1999). The fully-fuzzy
area is, however, still a direct representation of fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation result. This means
that thematic data is represented per cell (or pixel), the information has not been
aggregated to an object level so that the uncertainty of spatial extent of objects did
not play a role in his analysis.

Although we use a raster-based approach for implementation, the model can also
be implemented for vector data since the syntactic schema is a uni(cid:142) ed representation
for both the raster and the vector approachs (Molenaar 1998, Cheng 1999 ). The
only diŒerence between these two approaches is that the spatial extent of an object

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 Formalizing fuzzy objects

41

is made up of faces, with no preset geometric shape in the vector approach but as
rectangular grid cells in the raster approach. For both cases it is required that a face
should have homogeneous thematic content or membership value.

Two cases were applied to illustrate the practical usefulness of these models. We
use these two cases since they represent two typical ways to extract objects, e.g. (cid:142) eld
sampling and image classi(cid:142) cation (Cheng 1999 ). The experimental results revel that
the proposed fuzzy object models are suitable for these two methods of object
extraction.

These case studies provide examples for practical applications of the fuzzy object
models. It is believed that these fuzzy object models can also be applied to other
natural environmental and even in social-economic studies, in which objects have
fuzzy spatial extent due to their physical characteristics or due to vague de(cid:142) nition
of the objects of interest.

However, the contiguity of the spatial extent Face(O) and the connectivity of
Face (O| T hreshold ) (Threshold ×[0,1]) needs further analysis. If the threshold is
higher, the connectivity of the faces belonging to an object will change so that
beyond a certain threshold value islands may occur in the regions of an object. How
to handle this situation needs further investigation.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Marieke Eleveld for preparing the height data for the Ameland
case and Liangpei Zhang for the image processing of the Hong Kong case. We also
thank Theo Boulous for the stimulating discussions we had about several issue of
this paper. We also thank three anonymous referees for their suggestive comments
on an earlier version of the manuscript. The Survey Department of the Directorate-
General
for Public Works and Water Management of the Dutch Ministry of
Transport, Public Works and Water Management kindly made the data for the
Ameland case available.

The research for this paper is a continuity of a PhD project of the (cid:142) rst author
funded by the International Institute for Aeropsace Survey and Earth Sciences (ITC).
Her research is currently supported by grants from Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region Government (Project No. CUHK 4334/98E
and CUHK 4132/99H ).

References
Adams, J. B., Smith, M. O., and Gillespie, A. R., 1993, Image spectroscopy: interpretation
based on spectral mixture analysis. In T opics in Remote Sensing IV : Remote
Geochemical Analysis, edited by C. M. Pieters and P. A. J. Englert (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press), pp. 145–166.

Altman, D., 1994, Fuzzy set theoretic approaches for handling imprecision in spatial analysis.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 8, 271–289.

Brown, D. G., 1998, Classi(cid:142) cation and boundary vagueness in mapping presettlement forest
types. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, 105–129.
Burrough, P. A., 1989, Fuzzy mathematical methods for soil survey and land evaluation.

Journal of Soil Science, 40, 477–492.

Burrough, P. A., 1996, Natural objects with indeterminate boundaries. In Geographic Objects
with Indeterminate Boundaries, edited by P. A. Burrough and A. U. Frank (London:
Taylor & Francis), pp. 3–28.

Burrough, P. A., and Frank, A. U., 1996, Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries

(London: Taylor & Francis).

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 42

Formalizing fuzzy objects

Cheng, T., 1999, A Process-Oriented Data Model for Fuzzy Spatial Objects, Ph.D. Thesis,

Wageningen/ITC, Enschede.

Cheng, T., and Molenaar, M., 1998, The identi(cid:142) cation and monitoring of objects with fuzzy
spatial extent. International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS),
32, 207–212.

Cheng, T., and Molenaar, M., 1999a, Objects with fuzzy spatial extent. Photogrammetric

Engineering and Remote Sensing, 65, 797–801.

Cheng, T., and Molenaar, M., 1999b, Diachronic analysis of fuzzy objects. GeoInformatica,

3, 337–356.

Cheng, T., Molenaar, M., and Bouloucos, T., 1997, Identi(cid:142) cation of fuzzy objects from (cid:142) eld
observation data. In Spatial Information T heory: A T heoretical Basis for GIS, L ecture
Notes in Computer Sciences, edited by S. C. Hirtle and A. U. Frank (Berlin: Spring-
Verlag), 1329, pp. 241–259.

Clementini, E., and Di Felice, P., 1996, An algebraic model for spatial objects with indeter-
minate boundaries. In Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries, edited by
P. A. Burrough and A. U. Frank (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 155–170.
Cohn, A. G., and Gotts, N. M., 1996, The ‘egg-yolk’ representation of regions with indetermin-
ate boundaries. In Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries, edited by
P. A. Burrough and A. U. Frank (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 171–188.
Fisher, P., 1999, Lecture notes of the workshop ‘Empirical Issues of Uncertainty’. In the
International Symposium on Spatial Data Quality ’99, Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, 18–20 July, published by Department of Land Surveying and
Geo-Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, p. 625.
Foody, G. M., 1992, A fuzzy set approach to the representation of vegetation continua from
remotely sensed data: An example from lowland health. Photogrammetric Engineering
and Remote Sensing, 58, 221–225.

Foody, G. M., 1999, The continuum of classi(cid:142) cation fuzziness in thematic mapping.

Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 65, 443–451.

Goodchild, M. F., and Jeansoulin, R., (editors), 1998, Data Quality in Geographic Information

—From Error to Uncertainty (Paris: Hermes).

Gopal, S., and Woodcock, C., 1994, Theory and methods for accuracy assessment of thematic
maps using fuzzy sets. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 60, 181–188.
Huising, E. J., Jordans, R. W. L., Spruijt, F. M., Vaessen, E. M. J., Wicherson, R. J.,
Zomerdijk, J. F., and van Persie, M., 1996, Framework Digital Elevation Models
Dutch Coast—Various Techniques for Topographic Measurement Tested on a
common Site, The Netherlands Remote Sensing Board (BCRS) Programme Bureau,
Rijkswaterstaat Survey Department, Delft.

Leung, Y., 1988, Spatial Analysis and Planning Under Imprecision (Amsterdam; New York:

Molenaar, M., 1989, Single valued vector maps—a concept in GIS. GeoInformations systeme,

Molenaar, M., 1998, An Introduction to the T heory of Spatial Object Modelling (London:

Peddle, D. R., Hall, F. G., and LeDrew, E. F., 1999, Spectral mixture analysis and geometric-
optical re(cid:143) ectance modelling of boreal forest biophysical structure. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 67, 288–297.

Reineck, H. E., and Singh, I. B., 1980, Depositional Sedimentary Environments,Second edition

(Berlin: Springer Verlag).

Robison, V. B., 1988, Some implications of fuzzy set theory applied to geographic databases.

Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 12, 89–98.

Shi, W., Goodchild, M. F., and Fisher, P., (editors), 1999, Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Spatial Data Quality ’99, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, 18–20 July, published by Department of Land Surveying and Geo-Informatics,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.

Usery, E. L., 1996, A conceptual framework and fuzzy set implementation for geographic
feature. In Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries, edited by P. A. Burrough
and A. U. Frank (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 71–85.

North Holland).

2, 18–26.

Taylor & Francis).

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 19:24 30 October 2014 