The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 2

pp. 146–152

International Cartographic Conference, Paris 2011-Special Issue May 2011

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Mental Categorisation and Classification Process of
Information in Maps

Fernando Luiz de Paula Santil1, Claudia Robbi Sluter2 and Joa˜o Vitor Meza
Bravo1

1State University of Maringa, Maringa´, PR 87020-900, Brazil. 2Federal University of Parana´, Curitiba, PR, Brazil
Email: flpsantil@uem.br

Logical reasoning is a tool which man uses to find parameters and link them spatially, and this allows construction of a
mental model of the space by means of maps. The mental categorisation and classification processes of the information
contained in the maps help in the quest for understanding the operation of reasoning used in mental projections of space. In
this research, applying testing of open questions based on mental categorisation theory, an analysis was carried out. Six
volunteers were interviewed and the analysis revealed they used a basic level of mental categorisation or partonomy, whose
strategy is similar to that of the children.

le raisonnement logique est un outil que l’on utilise pour trouver des parametres et les lier spatialement. Cet outil permet de
re´aliser la construction d’un mode`le mental de l’espace a` l’aide de cartes. La cate´gorisation mentale et le processus de
classification de l’information contenue dans une carte aide a` la recherche ne´cessaire a` la compre´hension du raisonnement
utilise´ pendant la projection dans l’espace. Dans cette recherche, qui teste des questions ouvertes et qui est base´e sur la
the´orie de la cate´gorisation mentale, nous proce´dons a` des analyses. Six volontaires ont e´te´ interviewe´s. Ils utilisent un
niveau basic de cate´gorisation mental – ou partonimie – dont la strate´gie est similaire a` celle des enfants.

Keywords: mental maps, information communication, map information retrieval

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES

The static cartographic representation and bidimensional
representation in the twentieth century have become less
attractive. Modern cartography has adapted to new
technologies which, in turn, have brought with them the
development of different methodologies of data collection.
Concomitant with this, new methods of spatial representa-
tion were created by the need and demand of users and
their own cartographies.

Owing to these aspects of cartographic evolution, the
concept of visualisation has become part of the science
of cartography. Ware (2004) introduced the term view
as the ‘transformation of abstract concepts into real
images visible or mentally’. MacEachren (1995) com-
bines the cartographic visualisation of a possible inter-
disciplinary approach that involves mapping with the
visual information technology. This perspective shows
that the level of complexity in the representation and
interaction with the map, now,
is greater. In this
research, we seek to understand the functioning of the
reasoning of people who seek through maps, to associate
and understand spatial information.

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13038345996134

MENTAL PROCESS AND ELEMENTS OF
INTERPRETATION

With the intention to visualize a particular area through a
map, people use the graphic constituents to obtain, an
impression; in this moment, perception comes into play
combined with the user’s experiences. Nevertheless, it
may be noted that each user has his/her own impression
and these can interfere in the mental representation that
they construct. The symbol, in this context, leads the
user to conﬁgure and create new possibilities for spatial
analysis.

The adoption of a symbol that represents or instigates the
user to associate the representation with the real world, is
the purpose of those who produce maps. The scale also
affects the semantic level, i.e. the meaning provided by the
reduction or enlargement they impose limits the level of
graphics associated with it (Dent, 1985). The procedures to
implement these signs hold the key to understand the
acceptance of users of cartographic products, so you can say
that this acceptance depends on how the data were adjusted
in the product. Understanding how people interpret a map
is important because the similarity between representation

Mental Categorisation and Classification Process

147

and the real world concerns the integration of the concept
map.

in the case of geology: rocks;

When analysing geological maps or pedological maps, for
example, there is an increase in complexity related to the
data which represents reality, because interpretation of users
varies according to the information that our mind is able to
associate:
in the case of
pedology: soil. In both types, cartographers use colour to
achieve their goals. In such cases, the level of knowledge is
an important factor that will judge how faithful interpreta-
tion and the act of breaking up the space facilitate
visualisation of certain phenomena. Here, we can char-
acterize two forms of mental processing and categorisation
of the objects represented on a map, which are: the
taxonomy and partonomy (MacEachren, 1995).

MENTAL CATEGORISATION AND CLASSIFICATION
PROCESS

Mental categorisation
According to MacEachren (1995, p. 151), ‘as such, to
understand how maps work, we must understand categor-
ization’. In his studies, he transposes to cartography an
assertion made by Lakoff (1987) and says that ‘without
categorization, the maps would not be possible’. This
statement declares how important the studies are related to
mental categorisation and cartographic communication.

MacEachren (1995, pp. 151–170) gives a brief intro-
duction on the basis of theories of mental categorisation.
He indicates the bias of the classical approach that the
categories exist in the world and we can discover them. He
also says that some cartographers have accepted this
proposition and optimal categories of information could
be mapped. According MacEachren (1995), the three
pillars of this approach are:

1. Categories are as containers (objects are inside or

2.

outside).
Individual objects are assumed to be of the same class if
and only if, they have certain properties in common.

3. Natural categories exist and can be discovered.

Rosch (1975) exerts changes on how we see the human
form of categorising things and, by implication, the human
mind and reason, and points out
‘when describing
categories analytically, most traditions of thought have
treated category membership as a digital, all-or-none
phenomenon. That is, much work in philosophy, psychol-
ogy, linguistics, and anthropology assumes that categories
are logical bounded entities, membership of which is
deﬁned by an item’s possession of a simple set of criteria,
in which all
instances possessing the criteria’s attributes
have a full and equal degree of membership. In contrast, it
has recently been argued…that some natural categories are
analog and must be represented logically in a manner which
reﬂects their analog structure’. (Rosch, 1975, p. 173)

Rosch (1973) makes two observations appointments,
with commentaries by MacEachren (1995, p. 153), which
do not exist in practice:

1.

2.

If categories are defined by properties that all members
share, no members should be more representative of the
category than others.
If categories are defined by properties inherent in their
member, then categories should be independent from
characteristics of humans doing the categorizing (e.g.
neurophysiology, perception, culture, etc.).

An alternative was proposed by Rosch’s Prototype Theory,
which is based on the argument that membership of a
member of the category is not determined by a set of ﬁxed
set of properties, but the similarity to a prototype of the
class representing the member more typical (MacEachren,
1995). MacEachren also indicates that Prototype Theory
includes individual appointments such as family resem-
blances, fuzzy categories, typicality effects, radial categories
and basic level categories. In this article, we seek to explain
the conduct and results of the tests proposed here with an
emphasis on explanations of basic level categories in parallel
with explanations of Golledge and Stimson (1987), who
proposed an alternative system mental categorisation.

The theory of basic level categories suggests strategies
that we use to store information (about the objects) in
memory of three levels within hierarchical structures (Lloyd
et al., 1996; Rosch et al., 1976): the superordinate level,
the basic level and subordinate level. These levels are
classiﬁed according to the degree of abstraction needed.
These authors argue that there is a hierarchy and abstraction
used to ‘appoint’ the objects in each level. At superordinate
level, the degree of abstraction is very large, and it is
decreased at the basic and subordinate levels. This process
gives the impression that data about
the objects are
funnelled into the minds of people, which are categorized
according to the familiarity which you have with them. For
Brown (1958, p. 18), reasoning is divided into two types of
operations: the mind of a ‘concrete’, which operates at the
subordinate level, and the mind of an ‘abstract’, which
operates at the superordinate level. It exempliﬁes the fact
indicating ‘that children ordinarily when describing cate-
gories analytically, most traditions of thought use the words
milk and water before the word liquid… Very high-level
like article, action, quality, and
superordinate terms
relation, thought they are common in adult speech, are
very seldom heard from preschool children’.

Golledge and Stimson (1987) proposed three categories
of knowledge: declarative knowledge, procedural knowl-
edge and conﬁgurational knowledge. Declarative knowl-
edge corresponds to knowledge about objects and places:
Rosch (1973) shows this stage of categorisation as the
subordinate level, which refers to knowledge on objects
and places. Procedural knowledge is linked to tasks, which
can be carried out in the case of maps; it is the knowledge
needed to create paths, routes, which matches the basic
level. Conﬁgurational knowledge is the highest level of
cognitive processing: with it you can create relationships
between objects, corresponding to the superordinate level.
It can be inferred that people use mental categorisation
for all their actions, from the least to the most meticulous
labour, even if unconsciously. This statement is conﬁrmed
themental
by Lakoff
categorisation is usually automatic and unconscious. Here
we show that it happens in this way only in certain cases.

(1987, p. 6) who reveals

that

148

The Cartographic Journal

Classification process
Partonomy involves elements of spatial organisation in
which the junction of objects is made by the similarities
between parts of these or even by the similarity of attributes
contained therein. This is the ﬁrst step in the development
of spatial knowledge and it is given by perception.

Concerning taxonomy, its comprehension is a result of
associations made during the grouping of regions. The idea
that taxonomy is more complex than partonomy is based on
logical reasoning that when groups of data use the concept
of analysis associated with the concept of fragmentation
(the ‘why’ and deﬁne ‘how’ to deﬁne).

Like the concept of taxonomy, the act of grouping
places which have similar positions or not, does not act
only in perception:
the reasoning goes
in taxonomy,
beyond the limits imposed by the proximity of the designs
and search, in attributes, references allow ease of those
limits (graphics).

APPROACH AND METHODS

Based on the theory of mental categorisation and classiﬁca-
tion processes, tests were created with open questions. Six
volunteers participated in this
research. We used the
qualitative method of evaluation proposed by Suchan and
Brewer (2000). The technique used for consultation was
performed through a structured questionnaire; and we
observed the execution of spatial tasks (direct observation).
Finally, analytical tools used by participants in the comple-
tion development of tasks, used thematic maps (geological
and pedological) and photos of the constituent elements of
the maps presented.

Pictures and maps
The geological and pedological maps were obtained via the
Internet,
respectively, on sites of MINEROPAR and
EMBRAPA, as well as the pictures used to show soil. The
pictures of the rocks were obtained in the ﬁeld by the authors.

Participants and test environment
Participants were deﬁned by the following criteria:

1. There was no gender distinction and they were not

colourblind.

2. Different levels of knowledge: two second-year under-
graduates in Geography, two third-year undergraduates
in Geography and two postgraduates in Geography.
3. We ensure that all volunteers had continuous contact
with the rocks and soils presented in the tests, in their
scientific research.

Each student received: (1) a questionnaire related to their
identiﬁcation, education and physical characteristics data
(colour blindness); (2) all the maps and pictures of rocks
and soils had the same graphic, scale, type of presentation
(projector); and (3) a description of spatial
tasks, by
evaluating a questionnaire for this purpose. Items (2) and
(3) were only developed after the completion of all items
related to the initial questionnaire.

Evaluation procedures
It was recorded for the observation of maps and pictures
every 15 s. The time of responses to the maximum recorded
was a half minutes per question. In the ﬁrst step, volunteers
were presented for 15 s geological map and did the same
with the pedological map in the second round. After the
end of time, they could read and answer the questions. The
questions were the following.

First step (geology)

1. What is the map?
2. List in order of increasing knowledge of the topics that

are used to interpret the map.

Then participants looked for another 15 s at the geological
map and responded to the following questions:
3. Can you associate what is depicted in brown on the
map which is filled with the colour light green? If yes,
how? If not, why?

4. Do you notice any visual sequence on the presented

map? Justify.

5. Would you change something on the map? Justify.

After testing the maps and studying the photo of rocks for
15 s, the respondents answered the following questions:

1. Can you associate the rocks on the photos with some
elements of the map? Justify and indicate the colours
which are represented

2. Can you acknowledge and identify the rocks repre-

sented on the photos? If yes, how? If not, why?

Second step (pedology)

1. What is the map?
2. List in order of increasing knowledge of the topics that

are used to interpret the map.

Then participants looked for another 15 s at the pedological
map and responded to the following questions:
3. Can you associate what is depicted in light yellow on
the map which is filled with the colour pink? If yes,
how? If not, why?

4. Do you notice any visual sequence on the presented

map? Justify.

5. Would you change something on the map? Justify.

After testing with the maps and studying the photo of soil pro-
ﬁles for 15 s, the respondents answered the following questions:

1. Can you associate the soil profiles on the photos with
some element of the map? Justify and indicate the
colours which they are represented.

2. Can you acknowledge and identify the soil profiles
represented on the photos? If yes, how? If not, why?

As for situations that might interfere with the results, it can
be ensured that: none of the respondents exceeded the time
limit imposed and the visual conditions on the screen were
better than possible.

Objectives of questions
As for the planning of the activities implemented under the
maps and pictures, we sought to evaluate the following
aspects in both contents (geology and soil):

Mental Categorisation and Classification Process

149

Figure 1. Geological map of State of Parana´, Brazil, adapted from
Minerais do Parana´ (2009) (http://www.mineropar.pr.gov.br/)

Maps

1. Long-term memory (no need of captions and titles)
2. Establishment of a ‘mind map’
3. Associations (taxonomy)
4. Visual cues (shapes and colours – partonomy)
5. Taxonomy–partonomy

Pictures

1. Taxonomy
2. Partonomy

RESULTS

Taxonomy and partonomy in the geology and pedology
The complexity of geology and pedology events prompts us
to comprehend the difﬁcult interpretation which happens
when we read map representations.

Figure 1 illustrates the geological map used in the test.

Figure 2 illustrates the rock’s pictures used in the tests.

it

the images,

By looking closely at

is possible to
distinguish the stages of mental categorisation needed to
link what one sees in the real with the map. The partonomy
in this case is characterized when considering the position
of the rocks and their ages: nuclei are distinct and at
different ages. The Sandstone Caiua´
(in light green,
Figure 1) is a recent formation; therefore, it is younger than
the formation of Pirambo´ ia sandstone (generalized with
position among the dark green and gray): they are distinct
when looking at partonomy. These nuclei have different
positions and are separated by bending of igneous rocks. The
colours of the rocks are different, which encourages the user
to distinguish between them. However, when we have more
information about the type of formation of these rocks, it
becomes possible to group them. At this moment, the
taxonomy is characterized, where the group was composed
of rocks that have the same type of formation. Despite the
different ages and environments of formation, these rocks are

Figure 2. Photos of sedimentary formations used in the test

formed from the accumulation of sediments: the case of a
sandstone formation (Pirambo´ ia wind and river), as it has
small pebbles and more horizontal stratiﬁcation; Caiua´
sandstone in the plan stratiﬁcation indicates a formation
environment (just wind).

In pedology, we can also characterize the elements of
partonomy and taxonomy, because it is a science that
classiﬁes the soil as well as their morphology and structures.
It is worth mentioning that to understand the science of
pedology, we have to observe the lithology of the study area
to study the differences in the chemical characteristics,
migration of clays, intrinsic to each rock composition.

Figure 3 shows the distribution of the soils in the State of
Parana´. We observe the emergence of Oxisols (dark yellow)
in almost every map. More precisely, these soils are found in
virtually all the Parana plateau, i.e. they appear in all kinds of
rocks constituting the basement geology of this state. This
general view on Oxisols and their appearance throughout
the State of Parana´ are due to a taxonomic classiﬁcation,
which groups nuclei in different positions that have similar
characteristics. This only occurs when we have information
about the circumstances of appearance of these soils on a
slope; otherwise when there is a difference in the geological
formation and the user does not have enough concrete
information to analyse the soil, it will be distinguished by
factors such as the colour and geographical location, based
on partonomy.

Figure 4 shows the pictures of soils used in the tests,
which are two different types of Oxisols: left Oxisol found
in areas with igneous formation (Basalto) and right Oxisol
of sandstones formations. According to Embrapa, Oxisols
soils which are non-hydromorphic deep
are mineral
(typically greater than 2 m); B horizon is very thick
(.50 cm) with the sequence of horizons A, B and C,
which are poorly differentiated; colours vary from red to
very dark yellow.

There exists a difference in coloration and texture of
these soils. The chemistry compositions are different and
appear in distinct regions. However, they are classiﬁed as
Oxisols because they are well developed.

Analysis
The complexity of geological events evokes the difﬁculty
one has in interpreting representations associated with such
events. The pedology, no less complex, uses many variables
to establish methodologies to study. We emphasize that
although the units are different, the results were equal.

150

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Soil map of State of Parana´, Brazil, adapted from ITCG/PR (2009) (http://www.itcg.pr.gov.br)

undergraduate of the second year, an undergraduate of the
third year and two masters. In the case of pedological map,
the associations were only made by the undergraduate of
the second year and the undergraduate of the third year
who identiﬁed the shades of colour in identifying the types of
soils. This means that the concept of lithological and ped-
ological formation for these volunteers is not consolidated,

Through analysis of phase 1, all students who partici-
pated identiﬁed the State of Parana´, and this also applies to
phase 2. Moreover, in the case of the geological map of the
shapes of bends, plateaus helped in the formation of
mental map. For the pedological map, the bends were not
seen because it required participants’ observation of the
geological map.

The amount of information contained in the pedological
map of the participants required more time for selecting,
abstracting and organizing data pertaining to their reading.
Peterson (1995) asserts that the map is the result of a series
of psychological transformations occurring in the mind of
the person who looks at mental
images, which are
correlated with data structures of human memory, the
similarity to ‘surface map’ to compare and solve geogra-
phical issues related to this map.

As the long-term memory was prompted to create the
mental map (questions 1 and 2),
it revealed that ﬁve
participants used partonomy to develop their mental
optimisation of the spatial relationships contained in the
geological and soil maps.

In the third question, we evaluated the capacity of
association of elements of the map with the type of rock.
Four failed to make the connections because they were
confused by shades of
the colour map and its po-
ssible relationship to rock type: this group includes an

Figure 4. Photos used in the test of Oxisols (Empresa Brasileira
de Pesquisa Agropecua´ria, 2009) (http://www.embrapa.br)

Mental Categorisation and Classification Process

151

susceptibility to cognitive interference,
indicating their
reporting them to a basic level of categorisation,
not
allowing correlations between patterns of the mental map
with reality. We can be assured that, from the types of
knowledge proposed by Golledge and Stimson (1987), this
action of the participants required only declarative knowl-
edge, which allows them to indicate the cartographic features
shown on map.

In the fourth question, when analysing the geologic map,
a masters student, and undergraduates in the third year and
one in the second year pooled the age of the bending and
lithological formations with a visual sequence, indicating
that cognitive action (taxonomy) was originated in the form
of plateaus which was associated with age lithology. These
same students have, for the analysis of pedological map, the
same associations, seeking to, especially in colour, build
their relationships. The others differ in the colour tones and
failed to observe a visual sequence, indicating that there was
only partonomic action to enable viewing of the map. The
participants attempted to provide geographic patterns for
the formulation of hypotheses of spatial clustering, but
conﬁgurational knowledge did not appear (Golledge and
Stimson, 1987).

The participants had no contact with the particulars of
the external message, in the case of caption and title; among
other things, there was a break in the transmission of
information that made it impossible to be certiﬁed as the
purpose of the map shown. This statement justiﬁes the
heavy use of basic level of categorisation or partonomy.
Thus, one can infer that people use mental categorisation
for all the actions, from the least to the most meticulous
labour, even if unconsciously. This statement is conﬁrmed
by Lakoff (1987, p. 6) who reveals that
the mental
categorisation is usually automatic and unconscious and
we have shown that it still happens in that way, only in
problematic cases. The basic level categories in the two
stages of superﬁcial knowledge proposed by Rosch (1973)
are clearly evident when people with a higher level of
schooling, as in this case,
fail to make the necessary
relations, reinforcing the idea of cognitive interference.
These students are at the basic level and subordinate level of
mental categorisation almost around the time of testing,
clarifying the statement that their strategies are similar to
those of children.

In this regard, Ormeling (1996) in his experiments with
Dutch children suggests that he assimilates the data as
follows: ﬁrst, through the perception of the senses, a mental
conception or mental model of
in
question is reproduced. Then children are encouraged to
draw what their perception was able to capture (graph).
Finally, the children discover that the design represents
something real and that some forms coincide with the
actual shapes of the objects represented.

the environment

This ﬁnal step is intrinsically linked to the child’s
interpretive ability. Without prior knowledge of scale,
symbolisation, generalisation, location or orientation, the
concepts of interpretation, from graph to real, cannot be
developed. Therefore, we explain the need for an intro-
ductory study on the environment and on representations,
so that children can understand the true meaning of
representing the real world.

Above all, the authors of this study suggest, as indicated
by Ormeling (1996), similar actions at graduation. Both
children and adults must understand the two dimensions,
both on and representations about the environment, and
then associate themselves and generate products that are
more concrete in their minds, so as to reach the highest
cognitive stage (called procedures), which will assist in their
decision making to navigate in any environment. Rosch
(1973), in her Prototype Theory, indicates a high level of
abstraction in the superordinate level.

Finishing the tests, we presented two pictures: two rocks
and two soil proﬁles. In the case of geology, all respondents
stressed the linear features (stratiﬁcation) and the colouring
of the rocks as the main attributes to recognize and identify
the photos. Four of the respondents were able to associate
pictures with the geological map of the region because they
know what happens with frequency in the ﬁeld practices of
the disciplines of undergraduate and postgraduate courses
in Geography, beyond their own research.

From the present pictures of the soil proﬁles, it was
observed that the association of soil with the colours of the
map was present in ﬁve respondents. The identiﬁcation was
made through ﬁeld practices, as previously mentioned.
However, the second year undergraduate, who had not yet
the discipline of General Pedology, were able to relate the
colour of the soils with lithological origin. This can be
explained by taxonomy in which he seeks similarity between
the colours of soil and rock, for the recognition, identiﬁca-
tion and association of the same. As stated by Phillips
(1989), the processing of information is often not linear but
associative. The graphic information, either by maps or by
other forms of expression, allows for parallel processing due
to the large amount of information transmitted, assisting in
decision making. However, this success, which the user
should be able to think, not only reproduces what is known
by others.

CONCLUSIONS

Taxonomy and partonomy elements are present in the
construction of maps. These elements dictate the complexity
of the actions listed in the representations, each in its time.
When looking at the map, we seek to understand it through
‘cognitive processes’ and ‘classiﬁcation processes’.

Cognitive processes are important in shaping the mental
visualisation of the space analysis, which is part of this
process of perception and cognition. In the ‘classiﬁcation
processes’, taxonomy and partonomy are the key players
and are related to the density analysis in the identiﬁcation of
the groups.

The importance of graphic elements of map as tools for
interpretation was also noted. Furthermore, the materialisa-
tion of the concepts proposed by Rosch (1973) and
Golledge and Stimson (1987) was shown. It should make
clear that the proposed theories make sense.

More recent research focused on human perception as well
as on the inﬂuence of previous experience (cognition) of map
makers and users. These studies allow generating carto-
graphic products with greater accessibility to reading,
pointing out that the ‘user–mapper’ is mutual, depending

152

The Cartographic Journal

on how much will be made on the recognition of both space
and abstraction, providing further investigations.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Fernando Luiz de Paula
Santil graduated in Cartogra-
phic Engineering at Faculty
of Science and Technology
UNESP (1991), Master in
Cartography at Faculty of
Science
and Technology
UNESP (2001) and PhD in
Geodesic Sciences at Federal
University of Parana´ (2008).
He is currently professor of
Department of Geography at
State University of Maringa´,
and reviewer of the Bulletin
of Geography.

Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecua´ria (Brazilian Company of
Agricultural Research) . (2009). http://www.embrapa.br (accessed
10 November 2009).

Golledge, R. and Stimson, R. J. (1987). Analytical Behavioural

Geography, Cioom Helm, New York.

Instituto de Terras, Cartografia e Geocieˆncias (Land, Mapping and
(2009). http://www.itcg.pr.gov.br

Geosciences
(accessed 2 December 2009).

Institute)

.

Lakoff, G. (1987). Woman, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What
Categories Reveal about the Mind, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.

Lloyd, R., Patton, D. and Rex, C. (1996). ‘Basic-level geographic
categories’, The Professional Geographer, 48, pp. 181–194.
Maceachren, A. M. (1995). How Maps Work: Representation,

Visualization, and Design, The Guilford Press, New York.

Minerais do Parana´ (Parana´ Minerals). (2009). http://www.mineropar.

pr.gov.br (accessed 8 November 2009).

Ormeling, F. (1996). ‘Teaching Map Use Concepts to Children’, in
Seminar on Cognitive Map, Children and Education in
Cartography, p. 10-134, Gifu, Nov 8–10.

Peterson, M. P. (1995). Interactive and Animated Cartography,

Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Phillips, R. J. (1989). ‘Are maps different from other kings of graphic

information?’, The Cartographic Journal, 26, pp. 24–25.

Rosch, E. (1973). ‘Natural categories’, Cognitive Psychology, 4, pp.

328–350.

Rosch, E. (1975). ‘Cognitive representations of semantic concepts’,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 3, pp. 192–233.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C., Gray, W., Johnson, D. and Boyes-Braem, P.
categories’, Cognitive

in natural

(1976).
Psychology, 8, pp. 382–439.

‘Basic objects

Suchan, T. A. and Brewer, C. A. (2000). ‘Qualitative methods for
research on mapmaking and map use’, Professional Geographer,
52, pp. 145–154.

2nd ed., Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.

Brown, R. (1958). ‘How shall a thing be called?’, Psychological

REFERENCES

Review, 65, pp. 14–21.

Wesley, Reading, MA.

Dent, B. D. (1985). Principles of Thematic Map Design, Addison-

Ware, C. (2004). Information Visualization: Perception for Design,

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

