This article was downloaded by: [141.214.17.222]
On: 24 December 2014, At: 19:01
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Development of Voronoi-
based cellular automata
-an integrated dynamic
model for Geographical
Information Systems
Wenzhong Shi a & Matthew Yick Cheung Pang a
a Department of Land Surveying and Geo-
informatics Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: Wenzhong Shi & Matthew Yick Cheung Pang (2000)
Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata -an integrated dynamic model
for Geographical Information Systems, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 14:5, 455-474, DOI: 10.1080/13658810050057597

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810050057597

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any
opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and
views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor
& Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information.

Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities
whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in
connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2000, vol. 14, no. 5, 455± 474

Research Article

Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata—an integrated
dynamic model for Geographical Information Systems

WENZHONG SHI and MATTHEW YICK CHEUNG PANG
Department of Land Surveying and Geo-informatics
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
e-mail: {lswzshi, lspangyc}@polyu.edu.hk

(Received 30 November 1998; accepted 2 August 1999)

Abstract. This paper presents a development of the extended Cellular Automata
(CA), a Voronoi-based CA, to model dynamic interactions among spatial objects.
Cellular automata are e(cid:141) cient models for representing dynamic spatial inter-
actions. A complex global spatial pattern is generated by a set of simple local
transition rules. However, its original de(cid:142) nition for a two-dimensional array limits
its application to raster spatial data only. This paper presents a newly developed
Voronoi-based CA in which the CA is extended by using the Voronoi spatial
model as its spatial framework. The Voronoi spatial model oŒers a ready solution
to handling neighbourhood relations among spatial objects dynamically. By
implementing this model, we have demonstrated that the Voronoi-based CA can
model local interactions among spatial objects to generate complex global pat-
terns. The Voronoi-based CA can further model interactions among point, line
and polygon objects with irregular shapes and sizes in a dynamic system. Each
of these objects possesses its own set of attributes, transition rules and neighbour-
hood relationships. The Voronoi-based CA models spatial interactions among
real entities, such as shops, residential areas, industries and cities. Compared to
the original CA, the Voronoi-based CA is a more natural and e(cid:141) cient representa-
tion of human knowledge over space.

1.

Introduction
Sustainable development is one of the most fundamental objectives in policy
making and planning activities. A tool for evaluating diŒerent economic and ecolo-
gical considerations is necessary for planners and decision-makers, in order to meet
sustainability criteria. Thus, there is an urgent requirement for traditional geograph-
ical information systems (GIS) to provide not only spatio-tempora l data management
services but also tools for scenario generation. The integration of dynamic modelling
and GIS, i.e. dynamic GIS, is an important direction that improves the abilities of
current GIS in the decision making process and in planning activities (Hazelton
et al. 1992 ).

However, there are many obstructions to the successful integration of GIS and
dynamic models. The fundamental problem is that the conceptual representation of
space and time in dynamic modelling and in GIS are not compatible (Hazelton et al.
1992 ). As Despotakis et al. (1993) stated, the main di(cid:141) culty in developing dynamic

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 456

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

GIS is to link the data-driven procedures (i.e. map-based procedures) used by GIS
with the procedures that monitor economic-ecological interactions (i.e. process-based
procedures) . Due to the problems of incompatibility, contemporary dynamic GIS
can hardly represent dynamic interactions in a real world system, such as the complex
interactions among economic, human and ecological processes (Couclelis 1988,
Perez-Trejo 1993).

Cellular automata (CA) are a potential solution to the incompatibility between
dynamic models and GIS. CA are intrinsically spatial thus they can be directly
applied to spatial data stored in GIS (Itami and Clark 1992). Moreover, results of
dynamic modelling can be compared with other information in GIS directly. Most
importantly, CA are capable of representing the spatial interaction among diŒerent
sub-systems in the real world and generating a realistic prediction of a complex
spatial pattern based on simple rules. CA are currently applied to a two dimensional
array of rectangular cells. This paper, however, enriches the CA model by using a
Voronoi spatial model so that the dynamic spatial interaction among spatial objects
(i.e. point, line, and area) are represented. In the following section principles and
extensions of the CA dynamic model are presented. In section 4, a Voronoi spatial
model is described. This section also shows how the linkages between the Voronoi
spatial model and the CA are developed. An implementation of the integrated
Voronoi-based CA is described in section 5 and the results of the implementation
are compared to the original CA. In the last section, the status of current research
is discussed.

2. Cellular automata

Cellular automaton models are discrete-time system models with spatial exten-
sions. The abilities of cellular automaton to model the complex order hidden in
spatial detail have been demonstrate d (White and Engelen 1994). The basic form
((cid:142) gure 1) of the model consists of a two-dimensional array, a set of local states,
neighbourhood s and transition rules. The states of the cells in the array undergo
iterative changes according to transition rules. Transition rules are functions of the
cell’s state and the state of neighbouring cells. The spatial behaviour of the process
(i.e. agglomeration and diŒusion of a barrier, hierarchy or network process) and
the spatial interactions among spatial processes (i.e. interactions among contiguity
processes) can be expressed by transition rules (Bennett and Chorley 1978).

CA have a number of unique advantage s in geographical and environmental
modelling. Firstly, CA are capable of generating very complex, global spatial patterns
by using simple, local transition rules (Couclelis 1985 ). Geographic phenomena have
extremely complex characteristics as a result of interactions among diŒerent compon-
ents in a study area. Due to the di(cid:141) culties in handling such complexity, it was

Figure 1. Cellular automaton model.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

457

usually understood as noise. A system theory is proposed to study the interactions
among components as well as the complex behaviour of many real world phenomena.
Currently, complexity is no longer considered as noise, it is an essential component
of real world systems (White and Engelen 1993). CA are capable of studying the
complexity of global spatial patterns based on the spatial interactions of local units.
Secondly, CA produce a fractal structure, which is a natural representation of a
hierarchy between local and global behaviour. CA generate global spatial behaviour
based on the local knowledge of individual cells. This approach represents spatial
interactions across diŒerent levels of the hierarchy which are the most important in
understanding how complex phenomena work (Couclelis 1988). In many applications
of CA, applying local transition rules to some initial spatial structure produces a
spatial structure at a higher scale (Batty et al. 1997). Similar geometric structures
can be found in the initial spatial structure as well as the higher scale spatial structure
((cid:142) gure 2 (a and b)). Spatial structures that possess this fundamental structure across
diŒerent scales are known as fractal structures. Fractal structures are the result of
complex hierarchical phenomena and can be identi(cid:142) ed in many natural (Mandelbrot
1984 ) and human (Batty and Longley 1994) processes in the real world.

Thirdly, CA combine with the spatial information stored in GIS easily (White
and Engelen 1994). Having complete spatial and temporal data for the study area
plays an important role in dynamic modelling. However, these data can hardly be
obtained and integrated with the dynamic model in current GIS. The spatial frame-
work of CA is perfectly matched to raster GIS. Remote sensing, digital photogram-
metry and other imagery data can be used to derive the initial states of a CA
simulation. Moreover, intermediate and (cid:142) nal simulated results can be imported into
GIS for visualisation and integration with other spatial data stored in the GIS.

3. Extensions to cellular automata

CA are simple in principle, wide in potential applications, hierarchical in nature
and so they are powerful in theory. However, the restrictions of standard CA limit
their ability to model the complex real world. In the original CA, spatial units of
irregular shape cannot be handled. Each cell in the array must posses an identical
set of possible status, neighourhood and transition functions. Moreover, transition
functions must be applied to immediate neighbours only, and so a spatial unit cannot
eŒect more distant units. These restrictions limit the applicability of the CA to

Figure 2. Fractal structures generated by CA (From Mandelbrot 1984).

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 458

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

modelling spatial processes that operate over a regular and uniform space. However,
in many cases, realistic modelling of the spatial process cannot assume such a regular
and uniform space. For example, in modelling the development of residential areas
using CA, the land parcel is the fundamental spatial unit but such parcels have
irregular shapes and sizes. Moreover, lower-class, middle-class and upper-class resid-
ential areas should have diŒerent criteria for their location and the uniformity for
transition rules does not apply.

Many attempts have been made to develop a more general and (cid:143) exible CA.
Couclelis (1985) extended CA by separating the neighbourhood set and transition
rules from each cell. In other words, each cell can possess its own set of neighbour-
hood and transition rules. However, this extended version of CA still operates on a
regular array of square cells. Spatial units with irregular shape and size are not
applicable.

Takeyama and Couclelis (1997) adopt the concepts of Geo-Algebra in generalising
and extending CA. Geo-Algebra is an extension to map algebra which expresses
spatial data and cartographic operations on proximal space which aims to represent
the neighbourhood of spatial objects. Proximal space is located between absolute
space, which aims to represent locations of spatial objects on the earth surface, and
relative space, which aims to represent connections and relations among spatial
objects. Absolute space is important for spatial data manipulation (i.e. GIS) and
relative space is important for developing mathematical models. In their work, CA
is generalised and extended using the representations and operators of Geo-Algebra,
which represents neighbourhood s among spatial objects without restrictions on the
uniformity and regularity of the spatial objects. As a result, restrictions on CA are
relaxed when expressed in the framework of Geo-Algebra. Moreover, since proximal
space is the bridge between absolute and relative space, Geo-Algebra is capable of
handling both dynamic spatial modelling (i.e. CA) and spatial data analysis (i.e.
overlay, buŒering) in the same way. However, when Geo-Algebra is applied to
handling dynamic modelling and the spatial analysis of spatial objects with irregular
shapes and sizes, a formal de(cid:142) nition and calculation of neighbourhood relations
among spatial objects is required. However, in the vector model, neighbourhood
relations are maintained through the calculation of point intersections among spatial
objects. The overhead in computing time will be extremely large using Geo-Algebra
with current vector data models.

Theoretically, CA can be extended so that it works with any kinds of spatial
information as long as the local neighbourhood relations are represented in transition
rules, and global patterns are generated though these rules. In this sense, CA can
represent the spatial interactions among spatial objects (i.e. point, line, area) once
their local neighbouring relations are derived, and most restrictions of regular space
in the original CA are relaxed. However, as previously mentioned, the calculation
of neighbourhood relations in the current vector model is still the major obstacle to
calculating neighbourhood relations among spatial objects with irregular shapes and
sizes rapidly. This paper presents our approach to extend CA by adopting the
Voronoi model as the underlying spatial model. Neighbourhood relations among
spatial objects are calculated during runtime. In the follow section, a Voronoi spatial
model that combines the features of both raster and vector models is introduced.
The Voronoi spatial model (cid:142) ts perfectly to CA in modelling spatial interactions
among spatial objects. An approach for the integration of CA and the Voronoi
model is then developed in this study.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

459

4. An integrated dynamic model: Voronoi-based cellular automata
4.1. Voronoi spatial model

The Voronoi spatial model is a tessellation of space that is constructed by
decomposing the entire space into a set of Voronoi regions around each spatial
object. By de(cid:142) nition, points in the Voronoi region of a spatial object are closest to
the spatial object. The generation of Voronoi regions can be considered as ‘expanding’
spatial objects at a unique rate until these areas meet each other. The mathematical
expression of the Voronoi region is de(cid:142) ned as (Okabe et al. 1994 ):

V (pi) 5 {p |d(p, pi)< d( p, pj), j Þ

i, j 5 1 ... n}

(1)

In this equation, the Voronoi region of spatial object pi, V ( pi), is the region
de(cid:142) ned by the set of locations ( p) in space. Where the distance from p to the spatial
object pi, d( p, pi), is less than or equal to the distance from p to the other spatial
object pj, d(p, pj; j 5 1 ... n). As a result, points along a common boundary between
Voronoi regions are equidistant to the corresponding spatial objects. Thus, those
objects which share a common boundary are neighbours to each other in the Voronoi
spatial model.

An example of spatial objects modelled by the Voronoi spatial model is shown
in (cid:142) gure 3. In the (cid:142) gure, the point object (I) is adjacent to the area object (III ),
moreover, the area object (III ) is adjacent to the line object (II) since they share
common Voronoi boundaries. A Delaunay triangulation in which each edge of the
triangle implies the neighbouring (i.e. smallest separation) relations of two objects
(Gold 1992) is a dual representation of the Voronoi spatial model. As shown in the
(cid:142) gure 3, an edge of the Delaunay triangle must be associated with each pair of
neighbours in the Voronoi spatial model.

There are three basic operators of the Voronoi spatial model for managing and
updating a Delaunay triangular network. The most fundamental operator is the
switch operator. The switch operator is usually accomplished with the movement of
spatial objects. As illustrated in (cid:142) gure 4(a), a spatial object (a) is moved towards the
left of the (cid:142) gure. The object is kept outside of the circumcircle of the exterior triangles
before the movement. Actually, for a small movement of the point, the con(cid:142) guration
of the Delaunay triangular network (and Voronoi regions) remains unchanged and
therefore, the topological relationships among the spatial objects in the (cid:142) gure are

Figure 3. Voronoi regions and Delaunay triangulation for point (I ), line (II) and area (III)
objects.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 460

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

Figure 4. Operators of Voronoi spatial model. (a) Switch operator, (b) Insert operator and
(c) Delete operator.

not altered. For a larger movement of the point (i.e. the spatial object moves into
the circumcircle of the exterior triangles), topological relationships are maintained
by switching the common diagonal of the exterior/adjacent triangle pair. The other
triangles in the network are not aŒected. Once the point is moved out of the
circumcircle, the exterior/adjacent triangle pair is switched again. The switch operator
is continuously executed until the spatial object reaches its (cid:142) nal position.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

461

Both the insert and delete operators are extensions to the switch operator. In the
insert operator ((cid:142) gure 4(b)), a new spatial object (a¾ ) is added. Firstly, the closest
spatial object (a) is located. The new spatial object and the corresponding set of
triangles are generated at the identical location of the closest object. Secondly, the
newly created spatial object is moved towards its desired position. During the
movement, the con(cid:142) guration of the Delaunay triangles is updated by a series of
switching operators. Once the spatial object reaches its (cid:142) nal position, the required
triangular network is created as well. Furthermore, only those triangles involved in
the switching operators are modi(cid:142) ed.

The delete operator is the reverse of the insert operator ((cid:142) gure 4(c)). The spatial
object (a) to be deleted is moved to its closest spatial object (a¾ ). Triangles are
switched while the spatial object is moving towards its destination. Once ‘object (a)’
is moved to ‘object (a¾ )’, ‘object (a)’ and triangles that contain ‘object (a)’ as a vertex
are erased from the database. In both the insert and the delete operation, the
minimum number of triangles are modi(cid:142) ed to preserve the triangular network.

4.2. Voronoi-based cellular automata

The Voronoi spatial model is able to represent spatial objects as point, line and
area objects (i.e. similar to vector model). Neighbourhood relations among spatial
objects are well de(cid:142) ned with the Voronoi boundary (i.e. similar to the raster model ).
On the other hand, the CA operates on any form of spatial unit (e.g. square or
triangular pixel, location of (cid:142) re station, street or land parcel). The only requirement
is that neighbourhood relations among spatial units are described. Consequently, it
is possible for CA to operate on the Voronoi model. The integrated Voronoi-based
CA ((cid:142) gure 5) is able to describe the spatial interaction between spatial objects and
to generate a complex spatial pattern of spatial objects dynamically.

As an extension to the origin CA, the Voronoi-based CA must be de(cid:142) ned by
four principal components. These include a spatial framework, a set of states, neigh-
bourhood and transition rules. The spatial framework has already been de(cid:142) ned in
the Voronoi spatial model. Since space is represented by spatial objects instead of
regular cells, geometric, temporal and textual attributes of spatial objects or even
their combination, can be de(cid:142) ned as local states. In the original CA, only one state
(e.g. alive or dead) is used to represent the status of a cell. Spatial objects with a set
of spatial, temporal and textual attributes oŒers a more expressive way to represent
the state of the object.

Figure 5. Voronoi-based cellular automaton model.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 462

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

In the expression of neighbourhood , a spatial object can posses an in(cid:142) nite number
of neighbours instead of 8 for a square cell. As a result, the Moore neighbourhood
((cid:142) gure 6(a)) and Von Neumann neighbourhood ((cid:142) gure 6(b)) are no longer useful in
the Voronoi-based CA. In the Voronoi spatial model, adjacent relations among
spatial objects are well de(cid:142) ned by the Voronoi boundary. Only the states of those
spatial objects, which share common Voronoi boundaries to the speci(cid:142) ed spatial
object, are examined. Therefore, searching time is greatly reduced comparing with
the searching for spatial objects in the whole layer ((cid:142) gure 6(c)).

Neighbourhood in the Voronoi-based CA provides a more (cid:143) exible way of incorp-
orating human knowledge in the transition rules. For example, in the original CA,
the state of a cell is in(cid:143) uenced by its neighbouring cells only. With Moore neighbour-
hood and Von Neumann neighbourhood in the original CA, every change in state
must be acted locally and ‘action-at-a-distance ’ is not allowed in the original CA.
However, this restriction does not follow the law of gravitation which states that
objects can aŒect distant objects (Batty et al. 1997 ). In the Voronoi-based CA, a
spatial object may be in(cid:143) uenced by neighbouring objects with no restriction on the
distance of separation. No matter how far two objects are separated, one can aŒect
the other as long as they are neighbours. Moreover, in(cid:143) uences can be de(cid:142) ned as a
function of the distance between two objects and a ‘distance-decay’ eŒect can be
modelled in the transition rule.

According to Batty (1997), the basic form of the transition rule is:

IF
THEN some-other-thing happens to the cell

something happens in the neighbourhood of a cell

To develop transition rules for the spatial object, this is required to de(cid:142) ne criteria
for examining the neighbourhood to the spatial object and the operations applied
to the spatial object (i.e. things can happen in the THEN clause). Transition rules
of the Voronoi-based CA examine spatial objects with three components: the distance
(e.g. within 10m of a spatial object), the direction (e.g., in the North direction, follows
the street network, in the direction towards central business district) and the state
of neighbours. Once the conditions de(cid:142) ned in the IF clause are met, not only the
aspatial attribute but also the spatial attributes (e.g. position and shape) of the spatial

Figure 6.

(a) The Moore neighbourhood of cell ‘a’. (b) The Von Neumann neighbour of cells

‘a’. (c) Neighbourhood of object ‘a’ in Voronoi-based CA within distance de(cid:142) ned by ‘b’.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

463

object should be modi(cid:142) ed. The general form of transition rules in the Voronoi-based
CA is:

IF
something happens within distance X in direction Y of a spatial object
THEN some-other-thing (spatial and aspatial changes) happens to the spatial

object

The things that happen include change to the geometric (e.g. size, shape and
location), temporal (e.g. date of existence) and textual (e.g. population, soil type)
properties of spatial objects. Dynamic maintenance of adjacent relations is a critical
issue in developing CA for spatial objects. In the Voronoi-based CA, changes to
spatial objects are expressed using switch, insert and delete operators. The spatial
relations of the changed spatial objects to their neighbouring spatial objects are
updated as well. Compared to the maintenance of spatial relations of the whole map
layer by point intersection calculations, spatial relations are easily and rapidly
updated. This feature of the Voronoi spatial model is known as local topological
updates of spatial objects (Gold 1992). Changes to temporal and textual properties
are represented as changes of attributes to a spatial object.

5. An implementation of Voronoi-based CA
5.1. Voronoi Dynamic L inking L ibrary

The Voronoi-based CA can be implemented with the VORonoi Dynamic Linking
Library, VORDLL (Gold 1995). VORDLL is the (cid:142) rst programming tool for digitis-
ing, editing and querying spatial objects represented in the Voronoi model. VORDLL
is able to maintain the con(cid:142) guration of Voronoi regions around map objects as the
objects are modi(cid:142) ed. VORDLL can be used in any programming language equipped
with Windows application programming interface (API) (e.g. Visual Basic, Visual
C1
and Delphi). Portions of Voronoi Commands provided with VORDLL are
listed in table 1.

5.2. An Object-oriented model for Voronoi-based Cellular Automata

An Object Modelling Technique (OMT) which was developed by Rumbaugh et.
al (1991) is adopted to develop an object-oriented model of the Voronoi-based CA.
The model is illustrated in (cid:142) gure 7. This section discusses the structural and functional
aspects of the model.

In structural modelling, map objects are represented as an object class

Table 1. Useful Voronoi commands for Voronoi-based CA.

Voronoi
Commands

ADDAPT
ADDLIN
DELOBJ
BEKLIN
MOVOBJ
NBROBJ
ADJTRI
TRIINFO

Descriptions

Add a point object and re-construct the con(cid:142) gurations of Voronoi regions.
Add a line object and re-construct the con(cid:142) gurations of Voronoi regions.
Delete an object and re-construct the con(cid:142) gurations of Voronoi regions.
Split a line object and re-construct the con(cid:142) gurations of Voronoi regions.
Move a point object and re-construct the con(cid:142) gurations of Voronoi regions.
Find the neighbouring objects to a given object.
Find the adjacent triangles to a given object.
Retrieve the information of a given triangle.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 1
464

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

Figure 7. OMT model of Voronoi-based CA.

Geo_object, which is a super class of point, line and area objects. Point, line and
area objects are associated with a vertex shared by one or more triangles (one-to-
many relations). The class, Delaunay_Triangle , maintains the con(cid:142) gurations of
Voronoi regions of the map objects. Every instance in Delaunay_Triangl e stores the
three addresses of Geo_object as its vertexes ((cid:142) gure 8). As shown in (cid:142) gure 8, the
adjacency relationship between two points is represented by an edge of the Delaunay
triangle joining the points. The adjacency relationship between a line and a point is
represented by an edge joining the middle point of the line and the adjacent point.
Each edge of the Delaunay_triangl e implies a pair of Geo_objects which share the
Voronoi adjacent relation. In this sense, the neighboring objects to a map object can

Figure 8. Relationships among Geo_objects and triangles.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

465

be easily retrieved by referring to the associated Delaunay triangles (i.e. with the
Belong_to_triangl e relation).

For functional modelling, the Geo_object class possesses three function members.
Distance( ) is a function that returns the metric distance from one Geo_object to
another. Direction( ) returns the bearing from one Geo_object to another. As previ-
ously mentioned, distance and direction are two important parameters for Voronoi-
based CA. Apart from Distance( ) and Direction( ), each Geo_object is associated
with a Transition_rules( ) function. The Transition_rules( ) function contains a list
of IF-THEN clauses (as shown in section 3.2) that governs the dynamic behaviour
of the Geo_object.

For

IF clauses

each activation of a Geo_object,

stated in the
the
function are examined sequentially. This is accomplished by
Transition_rules( )
command:
searching its Voronoi neighbouring objects with the Voronoi
NBROBJ. Then, verifying the distance and direction from the neighbouring objects
to the activated Geo_object against the stated conditions. If the conditions are met,
operations stated in the THEN clauses should be executed. Possible operations
include ‘add a point object’ (ADDAPT), ‘add a line object’ (ADDLIN), ‘erase an
object’
(BRKLIN) and ‘move a point object’
(MOVOBJ). Operations on an area object are the combination of the above-
mentioned operations to point and line objects. The Voronoi commands take care
of the changes in the con(cid:142) guration of Voronoi regions caused by the operations in
the THEN clauses. Voronoi commands ADJTRI and TRIINFO retrieve the informa-
tion of changed and newly created triangles. The information should be propagated
to the Delaunay_triangl e objects.

‘split a line object’

(DELOBJ),

5.3. An application example of dynamic modelling of population movement

In this section, a simple example of population movement is used to illustrate
the operations of the Voronoi-based CA. The inital situation of the study area is
shown in (cid:142) gure 9. There are three population clusters, S1, S2, and S3. C1 and C2
are the objects which aŒect the movement of population. C1 is favourable for
population movements (e.g. transportatio n centre) whereas C2 is an unfavourable
condition (e.g. populated area). In order to avoid competitions and con(cid:143) ict, each
population cluster is not favourable to other clusters.

Figure 9. Movement of S1 with transition rules 1 and 2.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 466

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

Three transition rules govern the behaviour of population movements:

1.

IF

2.

3.

THEN
IF

THEN
IF

THEN

C1 is a neighbour within distance D1 in any direction from a
population cluster
move the population cluster by distance d1 towards C1
C2 is a neighbour within distance D1 in any direction from a
population cluster
move the population cluster by distance d2 away from C1
another population cluster is a neighbour which is located within
distance D2 in any direction from a population cluster
move the population cluster by distance d3 away from the other
population cluster

In (cid:142) gure 9, population cluster S1 is examined. With the Voronoi boundaries
( heavy lines) associated with S1, it is known that C1 and C2 are neighbours within
distance D1. The conditions stated in rules 1 and 2 are ful(cid:142) lled. There are two forces
to move S1, one towards C1 and the other away from C2. The heavy arrow shows
the resultant direction and distance of the movement. Voronoi regions modi(cid:142) ed by
the movement are shown in (cid:142) gure 9.

Figure 10 shows the movement of population cluster S2 as the result of neigh-
bouring objects C1 and C2. After this movement, S2 is moved within the distance
D2 from population cluster S3 ((cid:142) gure 11). According to transition rule 3, S3 should
move away from S2 by a de(cid:142) ned distance.

Though this application example, the spatial changes of population clusters are
modelled using Voronoi-based CA. The most interesting feature of Voronoi-based
CA is the ability to represent dynamic spatial interactions using simple rules of
transition. In this example movement of population clusters modi(cid:142) es the con(cid:142) gura-
tion of the Delaunay triangles. The newly developed con(cid:142) guration of triangles
in(cid:143) uences the succeeding movements of other population clusters. Moreover, tem-
poral interactions can be modelled as well by controlling the sequence of population
movements. Instead of movements, growth behaviour can be modelled by introducing
growth models as transition rules.

Figure 10. Movement of S2 with transition rules 1 and 2.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

467

Figure 11. Movement of S3 with transition rule 3.

5.4. Implementation

In this study, the Voronoi-based CA is implemented with VORDLL and
Microsoft Visual Basic. This implementation is aimed at demonstrating the abilities
of Voronoi-based CA in both producing fractal spatial structures and modelling real
world phenomena. The results of the simulation mentioned in this section are
generated by the synchronisation of the set of transition rules to all objects.
Neighbours of all objects are rapidly examined through the Voronoi neighbour
relations. Then, the set of transition rules is applied to each object in the structure.
In other words, the result of the simulation is not aŒected by the sequence of the
execution of rules.

As previously mentioned, an essential feature of the original CA is the ability to
model the hierarchy between global and local behaviour. This feature of CA is
demostrated by producing diŒerent fractal structures with diŒerent neighbourhood
con(cid:142) gurations. It is important for the Voronoi-based CA to preserve this feature of
the original CA. The following rule of transition is applied to the initial spatial
structure shown in (cid:142) gure 12(a).

IF

there are exactly 2 neighbours with distance 28.28m from a spatial
object

THEN produce neighbouring object with similar initial structure ((cid:142) gure 12(a)

to the spatial object

Figure 12(b) shows the initial spatial structure as well as that associated with the
Voronoi boundaries. Figure 12(c) and 12(d ) illustrate the results of applying the
transition rule after the (cid:142) fth and the seventh iteration respectively. It is clear that
the Voronoi-based CA is capable of generating a fractal structure similar to these
generated by the original CA (compare with (cid:142) gure 2(a). Another example of a fractal
structure generated by the implemented Voronoi-based CA is illustrated in (cid:142) gure 13
where the following transition rule is adapted to generate the fractal structure. The
result of the simulation can be compared to the structure generated by the original
CA ((cid:142) gure 2(b)).

IF

there are exactly 2 neighbours with distance 40 m from a spatial object

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 468

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

Figure 12. Fractal structure generated by Voronoi-based CA. a, b.) Initial spatial structure,
c.) After the (cid:142) fth iteration, d.) After the seventh iteration.

THEN produce neighbouring object with similar initial structure ((cid:142) gure 13(a)

to the spatial object

Figure 14 and (cid:142) gure 15 demonstrate dynamic modelling of population movement
in this
using the Voronoi-based CA. There are two groups of population, P
application ((cid:142) gure 14). It is known that members of two population groups are
attracted by members of the same group and repulsed by members of the opposite
group. For instance, in (cid:142) gure 14(a), point objects belonging to P
.
a
b
as shown in
Consequently, point objects P
(cid:142) gure 14(b). Moreover, it is common to consider the force of attraction as inversely
proportional to the distance of separation. The interactions between P
are
a
modelled by the following rules of transition:

are repulsed by the new positions of P

move towards P

and P
b

and P

b

b

a

a

IF
THEN move the spatial object toward the centre of the neighbours. That is,

all neighbours belong to the same group of spatial object

move the spatial object towards the position de(cid:142) ned by:

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

469

Figure 13. Fractal structure generated by Voronoi-based CA. (a, b) Initial spatial structure,
(c) After the (cid:142) fth iteration, (d ) After the eighth iteration.

Coordinates of the spatial object

Constant K
(Coordinates of neighbours ’ centreÕ Coordinates of the spatial object)

IF
all neighbours belong to the diŒerent group of spatial object
THEN move the spatial object away from the average positions of the neigh-
bours. That is, move the spatial object towards the position de(cid:142) ned
by:

Coordinates of the spatial object

Constant K
(Coordinates of the spatial objectÕ Coordinates of neighbours ’ centre)

IF

neighbours belongs to both the same group and the opposite group
of spatial object

THEN move the spatial object towards the compensated positions of the
neighbours. That is, move the spatial object towards the position
de(cid:142) ned by:

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 1
1
470

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

Figure 14.

Interactions of population movement.

Coordinates of the spatial object

Constant K
(Coordinates of the spatial objectÕ
Coordinates of centre of neighbours in the same group)

Constant K
(Coordinates of centre of neighbours in the opposite group

coordinates of the spatial object)

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 1
1
Õ
Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

471

Figure 15. Result of simulation (a) After the (cid:142) rst iteration and (b) After the fortieth iteration,
at the steady status.

Figures 15(a) and 15(b) illustrated the results of simulation after the (cid:142) rst and the
fortieth iteration respectively using 50 000 as the constant K and the minimum
attractive/repulsive distance is 10m (i.e. two objects have no interaction if their
separation is smaller than 10 m). In (cid:142) gure 15(a) object ‘a’ has 3 neighbours (object
1, 2, 3) of the same group. According to the rules of transition, object ‘a’ should be
attracted to the centre of the neighbours (as shown by the heavy arrow). After the
fortieth iteration, the population movement process has reached a steady status. As
shown in (cid:142) gure 15(b), each object is either located at approximatel y the centre of its
neighbours or separated by less than 10 m from its neighbours. Figure 16 shows the
average separation and standard deviation of all neighboring pairs of point objects
in the population movement process. During the forty iterations, both the average
separation and standard deviation move toward their steady values, a typical

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 472

W. Shi and M. Y. C. Pang

Figure 16. Average separation and standard deviation over 40 times of iteration.

behaviour of a dynamic system. Hence, this example shows that the Voronoi-based
CA is a workable tool to model dynamic behaviour of systems.

6. Analysis and conclusions

A newly proposed Voronoi-based cellular automaton that represents dynamic
spatial interactions among spatial objects in a GIS is described in this paper. The
most essential feature of CA is that it has a spatial model which is common with
the GIS. Detailed spatial data stored in a GIS can be applied to CA directly.
Moreover, CA is capable of generating a complex spatial pattern through simple
rules that describe local spatial interactions among square cells. CA is an important
tool in developing dynamic GIS for understanding complex spatial patterns in the
real world. However, the original CA restricts its application to regular grids only.
De(cid:142) nitions of regularity, homogeneity and universality in the original CA are
obstacles to its application in the real world. Many eŒorts have been made to extend
and generalise CA by modifying their representation of transitions rule, the neigh-
bourhood set for each cell and even the underlying spatial model of CA. However,
these extended versions of CA cannot provide an acceptable way to handle neigh-
bourhood relations among irregular spatial objects. We believe that the fundamental
problem is not the de(cid:142) nition of CA, but the underlying spatial model of CA.

In this paper, CA are extended to handle spatial interactions among irregular
spatial objects by using the Voronoi spatial model. The Voronoi spatial model
combines the advantage s of both vector and raster models. The model not only
represents point, line and area objects but also maintains the well-de(cid:142) ned neighbour-
hood set for each spatial object.

Most importantly, when spatial objects are modi(cid:142) ed, the neighbourhood relation-
ships normally change locally. The Voronoi-based CA can model this local topologic
change very e(cid:141) ciently. The implementation proves that important features of original
CA are preserved in the Voronoi-based CA. The ability to model the hierarchy
between local and global behaviour was illustrated by the fact that Voronoi-based
CA can generate a fractal spatial structure. A simple case study of population

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

473

movement shows that the Voronoi-based CA can be applied to model behaviour of
a dynamic system. However, the computing time of a Voronoi-based CA is a
drawback when compared to the original CA. Although the Voronoi spatial model
provides rapid manipulation of spatial objects, the operators of ‘add’, ‘delete’ and
‘move’ a spatial object are much more complicated than those of cell-based operators.
The implementation shows that computing time becomes remarkably long when
more and more objects are added to the structure.

The successful integration of the Voronoi spatial model with the CA model is
the result of neighbourhood relations which are the common focus of the Voronoi
spatial model and CA. With this integration, complex spatial patterns can be gener-
ated through the local spatial interactions among spatial objects which possess
irregular sizes and shapes. The status of a spatial object can be described by more
than one attribute in the transition rule. Each class of spatial object can possess its
own set of transition rules and neighbourhood relations. Moreover, neighbourhood
relations among spatial relations can be feasibly de(cid:142) ned in numerous ways according
to human understanding . Most restrictions in the standard CA are relaxed in the
Voronoi-based CA. The most fundamental feature of CA to generate complex global
patterns by using simple local transition rules is retained by the descriptions of local
spatial and temporal interactions among spatial objects. The Voronoi-based CA
oŒers not only a more natural and expressive way to describe human knowledge
but also a workable solution to the simulation of spatial and temporal interactions
in the real world.

The authors believe that handling neighbourhood relationships among irregular
spatial objects is the most fundamental requirement for the application of CA in
real applications. Further research may investigate how the Voronoi-based CA can
integrate with other approaches such as Geo-Algebra. The Voronoi-based CA is one
component of a process-based GIS which handles spatial, temporal and dynamic
interactions among spatial processes.

Acknowledgments

The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University and from the Research Grants Council of the Hong
Kong SAR (Project No. PolyU 5093). The authors would like to express their thanks
to Dr C. Gold and Dr W. P. Yang for their support of this research.

References
Batty, M., 1997, Cellular Automata and Urban Form: A Primer, APA Journal, Spring 1997,

266–274.

Batty, M., Couclelis, H., and Eichen, M., 1997, Urban Systems as Cellular Automata,

Environmental and Planning B, 24, 159–164.

Batty, M., and Longley, P., 1994, Fractal Cities, Academic Press.
Bennett, R. J., and Chorley, R. J., 1978, Space-time Systems, Environmental Systems:
Philosophy, Analysis and Control, London: Methuen & Co. Ltd., Chapter 4.
Couclelis, H., 1985, Cellular worlds: A Framework for Modeling Micro-Macro Dynamics,

Environment and Planning A, 17, 585–596.

Couclelis, H., 1988, Of Mice and Men: What Rodent Populations Can Teach Us about

Complex Spatial Dynamics, Environment and Planning A, 20, 99–109.

Despotakis, V., Giaoutzi, M., and Nijkamp, P., 1993, Dynamic GIS Models for Regional
Sustainable Development in Fischer, M., Nijkamp, P., (eds.), Geographic Information
Systems, Spatial Modelling and Policy Evaluation, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag,
pp. 235–261.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 474

Development of Voronoi-based cellular automata

Gold, C. M., 1992, An Object-based Dynamic Spatial Model and its Application in the
Development of a User-friendly Digitizing System, Proceedings of the 5th International
Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, Columbia, SC: Humanities and Social Sciences
Computing Lab, University of South Carolina, pp. 495–594.

Gold, C. M., 1995, Spatial Data Management T ools based on the Dynamic Voronoi Data Model

(V ORDL L 1.1): User’s Manual, Que´bec, Canada: Universite Laval.

Hazelton N., Leahy, F., and Williamson, I., 1992, Integrating Dynamic Modeling and

Geographic Information System, Journal of URISA, 4(2), 47–58.

Itami, R., and Clark, J., 1992, Spatial Dynamic Simulations Using Discrete Time and Discrete
Event Theory in Cell Based GIS Systems, Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium
on Spatial Data Handling, Columbia, SC: Humanities and Social Sciences Computing
Lab, University of South Carolina, 2, pp. 702–712.

Mandelbrot, B. B., 1983, T he Fractal Geometry of Nature, W. H. Freeman and Compary.
Okabe, A., Boots, B., and Sugihara, K., 1994, Nearest neighbourhood operations with
generalized Voronoi diagrams: a review in International Journal of Geographical
Information System, 8(1), 43–71.

Perez-Trejo, F. 1993, Landscape Response Units: Process-based Self-organising Systems,
edited by R. H. Young, D. R. Green and S. H. Cousins, L andscape Ecology and GIS,
Taylor & Francis, pp. 87–98.

Rumbaugh, J., Blaha, M., Rremerlani, W. et al., 1991, Object-oriented Modelling and Design,

Prentice-Hall.

Takeyama, M., and Couclelis, H., 1997, Map Dynamics: Integrating Cellular Automata and
GIS through Geo-Algebra, International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
11(1), 73–91.

White, R., and Engelen, G., 1993, Cellular Automata and Fractal Urban Form: A Cellular
Modelling Approach to the Evolution of Urban Land Use Patterns, Environment and
Planning A, 25, 1175–93.

White, R., and Engelen, G., 1994, Cellular Dynamics and GIS: Modelling Spatial Complexity,

in Geographical Systems, 1, 237–253.

Downloaded by [141.214.17.222] at 19:01 24 December 2014 