This article was downloaded by: [University of Chicago]
On: 10 June 2012, At: 17:54
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

User-friendly web mapping: lessons
from a citizen science website
Greg Newman a , Don Zimmerman b , Alycia Crall c , Melinda
Laituri d , Jim Graham a & Linda Stapel b
a Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO, USA
b Center for Research on Communication and Technology,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
c The Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, University of
Wisconsin—Madison, Madison, WI, 53706-1491, USA
d Department of Forest, Rangeland and Watershed Stewardship,
Warner College of Natural Resources, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO, USA

Available online: 11 Oct 2010

To cite this article: Greg Newman, Don Zimmerman, Alycia Crall, Melinda Laituri, Jim Graham
& Linda Stapel (2010): User-friendly web mapping: lessons from a citizen science website,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24:12, 1851-1869

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2010.490532

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,

demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 24, No. 12, December 2010, 1851–1869

User-friendly web mapping: lessons from a citizen science website

Greg Newmana*, Don Zimmermanb, Alycia Crallc, Melinda Laiturid,
Jim Grahama and Linda Stapelb

aNatural Resource Ecology Laboratory, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA; bCenter
for Research on Communication and Technology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA;
cThe Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, University of Wisconsin—Madison, Madison, WI,
53706-1491, USA; dDepartment of Forest, Rangeland and Watershed Stewardship, Warner College
of Natural Resources, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA

(Received 26 October 2009; final version received 22 April 2010)

Citizen science websites are emerging as a common way for volunteers to collect and report
geographic ecological data. Engaging the public in citizen science is challenging and, when
involving online participation, data entry, and map use, becomes even more daunting. Given
these new challenges, citizen science websites must be easy to use, result in positive overall
satisfaction for many different users, support many different tasks, and ensure data quality. To
begin reaching these goals, we built a geospatially enabled citizen science website, evaluated
its usability, and gained experience by working with and listening to citizens using the website.
We sought to determine general perceptions, discover potential problems, and iteratively
improve website features. Although the website was rated positively overall, map-based tasks
identified a wide range of problems. Given our results, we redesigned the website, improved
the content, enhanced the ease of use, simplified the map interface, and added features. We
discuss citizen science websites in relation to online Public Participation Geographic
Information Systems, examine the role(s) websites may play in the citizen science research
model, discuss how citizen science research advances GIScience, and offer guidelines to
improve citizen-based web mapping applications.

Keywords: Public Participation GIS; usability; citizen science; Web GIS; Internet GIS

1.

Introduction

The number of citizen science organizations, programs, and volunteers actively recording
the location of species is growing faster than the flowers, birds, frogs, wildlife, and worms
they seek to record. It is estimated that there are approximately 15 million citizens watching
or recording birds in the United States alone (Bhattacharjee 2005). Additionally, there are
over 4200 conservation organizations listed in an online conservation directory (National
Wildlife Federation 2009) and likely many more engaged in conservation activities using
volunteers. Programs such as the North American Breeding Bird Survey (Peterjohn and
Sauer 1993), NatureMapping (Dvornich et al. 1995), Project FeederWatch (Bonney and
Dhondt 1997, Lepage and Francis 2002), FrogWatch USA (MacKenzie et al. 2002), Project
Tanager (Rosenberg et al. 1999), and eBird built upon the first account of citizens observing
nature and recording data on Christmas Day, 1900 (the Christmas Bird Count; National
Audubon Society 2005). Today, citizen science projects continue to expand in scope and

*Corresponding author. Email: newmang@nrel.colostate.edu

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
# 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2010.490532
http://www.informaworld.com

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1852

G. Newman et al.

breadth and now include projects associated with climate change (Cohn 2008), invasive
species (Delaney et al. 2008), conservation biology (Galloway et al. 2006, Losey et al.
2007), biodiversity monitoring (Danielsen et al. 2005, Lepczyk 2005, Couvet et al. 2008),
population ecology (Peterjohn and Sauer 1997, Rosenberg et al. 1999), water quality
monitoring (Wilderman et al. 2004), street mapping (Haklay and Weber 2008), and traffic
congestion (Goodchild 2007) among others (Silvertown 2009). As more ‘voluntary citizen
sensors’ adopt new spatial Web 2.0 technology (Goodchild 2007), we must better under-
stand the relationship between people and computers; the usability of web mapping applica-
tions; and the intricate ways in which people expect to reason with, learn about, and
communicate aspects of their geographical world. Applied citizen science research improves
our understanding of these relationships and pushes us to explore novel geographic informa-
tion representation and visualization methods; invent new ways to ensure data quality;
improve approaches to express geographic data accuracy and precision in ways meaningful
to the user; and expand the very limits of GIScience itself.

1.1. Citizen science

What is ‘citizen science’? The term citizen science has been used in many situations to
represent many different scenarios in which citizens participate in the scientific process
along with professionals. Citizen science typically involves trained volunteers participating
in scientific studies as field assistants who collect data (Cohn 2008, Cornell Lab of
Ornithology 2008). According to Silvertown (2009), a citizen scientist is ‘a volunteer who
collects and/or processes data as part of a scientific inquiry.’

The citizen science research model is one of many along a spectrum of approaches to
community-based science and monitoring that encompasses varying levels of community
member involvement (Wilderman et al. 2004, Cooper et al. 2007, Danielsen et al. 2009). In
the citizen science research model, the public is involved in data collection across broad
geographic regions and long time frames to address questions raised by researchers (Cooper
et al. 2007). One of the cornerstones of this model is that participating citizens disseminate
the information they collect, thereby increasing awareness of the scientific research ques-
tions being addressed (Couvet et al. 2008). Recent principles proposed to guide good citizen
science suggest that this dissemination must come full circle; professional scientists must
disseminate research results, feedback, and updates back to volunteers (Cooper et al. 2007,
Silvertown 2009). To be effective, citizen-based efforts will require standardized monitoring
protocols and the ability to efficiently disseminate information on to decision makers
(Conrad and Daoust 2008). They will require effective project management; sufficient
citizen buy-in; innovation in quality assurance tools, recruitment strategies; marketing;
and information systems (e.g., web mapping applications) adept enough to communicate
goals, recruit volunteers, market programs, train participants, collect quality data, commu-
nicate results to stakeholders, and retain members (Cooper et al. 2007).

To meet these challenges, many organizations are developing websites to support their
volunteers and facilitate data entry and dissemination. Indeed, the increase in the number of
citizen-based websites available to the public may be one of the many factors driving the
growth and explosion of citizen science (Silvertown 2009). As the number of organizations
grows, so does the number of websites. For example, the Invaders of Texas (http://www.tex-
asinvasives.org/invaders/), the Invasive Plant Atlas of New England (IPANE; http://nbii-
nin.ciesin.columbia.edu/ipane/), Wisconsin NatureMapping (http://www.wisnatmap.org/),

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1853

EDDMapS (http://www.eddmaps.org/), the Community Collaborative Rain, Hail, and Snow
(CoCoRaHS; http://www.cocorahs.org/) network, Water Action Volunteers (http://water-
monitoring.uwex.edu/wav/), OpenStreetMap (http://www.openstreetmap.org), eBird (http://
ebird.org/content/ebird/), wikimapia
and EarthTrek (http://
www.goearthtrek.com/) are just a few of the many websites now supporting citizen science
and citizen-based activities.

(http://wikimapia.org/),

Many of these websites use Google Maps technology, interact with the Google Earth
desktop application, and disseminate citizen-contributed geographic information using
interactive web mapping applications. These technologies and applications now create
user expectations for fast performance and the ability to quickly and easily post information.
They are one example of the many approaches to Public Participation Geographic
Information Systems (PPGIS). They may equip millions of citizens with an online place to
upload geographic information, thereby increasing the availability of such information
worldwide (Goodchild 2007). However, as more web mapping applications are developed,
more attention must be given to their usability, user satisfaction, required tasks, data quality,
and applicability related to each purpose and audience they are being built to support.

Of special concern is the diversity of people using websites. Website developers must
account for the fact that their users come from all walks of life. They represent a variety of
age groups and cultures, form diverse social structures, and possess different levels of
technological sophistication. They are lifelong learners who speak different languages,
posses different levels of prior computer experience, have different goals and motivations,
and may be marginalized from new technology. They are high-school biology students,
amateurs, retired scientists, science teachers, volunteer coordinators, conservation group
members, scientists, land managers, bird watchers, hikers, and outdoor enthusiasts who
typically care about nature, have some understanding of the scientific process, and are
concerned about environmental problems (Cohn 2008). Creating websites in support of
such diverse audiences is both needed and fraught with challenges. These audiences need
websites that are easy to use, satisfying, supportive of many common tasks, and equipped
with data quality features. Future volunteer retention, motivation, and overall program
success may hinge on the usability and ultimate success of these websites.

Finally, interactive web mapping applications and visualization demand that users
posses some level of spatial literacy. Spatial literacy refers to the ability to understand spatial
relationships, comprehend how to represent geographic space, and reason and make key
decisions about spatial concepts (National Research Council et al. 2006). Often, citizen
scientists collect information using global positioning systems. Correct data collection and
contribution requires an understanding of such fundamental concepts as datums, projection,
map units, and resolution. Citizen science websites aim to simplify some aspects of data
collection and contribution so that a lack of understanding of these concepts does not hinder
their ultimate success. These websites advance the development of other web mapping
applications and present a growing arena for further GIScience research.

1.2. Website usability research
Despite commercial website usability design guidelines (Nielsen 2000), the usability of
geospatially enabled citizen science websites involving complex data entry features needs
additional evaluation. Traditional web evaluation approaches involve both quantitative and
qualitative assessments (Zimmerman and Paschal 2009) that employ usability engineering
(Good et al. 1986, Nielsen 1993, Coltekin et al. 2009). Usability factors evaluated include
satisfaction, efficiency, and effectiveness (Coltekin et al. 2009) and are often measured with

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1854

G. Newman et al.

task completion rates/times and standardized questionnaires that measure participants’
attitudes or preferences (Chin et al. 1988, Lewis 1995, Brooke 1996, Tullis and Stetson
2004, Pearson and Pearson 2008).

However, evaluating the usability of more complex user interfaces such as PPGIS
(Haklay and Tobo´ n 2003), interactive web mapping applications (Nivala et al. 2008), data
entry systems, digital repositories (Zimmerman and Paschal 2009), geovisualization envir-
onments (Koua et al. 2006), spatial decision support systems (Carver et al. 2001), and
collaborative GIS networks (Balram et al. 2009) requires more specialized evaluation
techniques (Coltekin et al. 2009). Human–computer interaction (HCI) methods and user-
centered design (UCD; ISO 13407 1999) improve the design and evaluation of complex user
interfaces (Haklay and Tobo´ n 2003) and aid corporate web mapping application develop-
ment (Nivala et al. 2007). Additional research (Henderson 1996, Chen et al. 1999,
McLoughlin 1999, Bentley et al. 2005) suggests that web designers should be more sensitive
and responsive to cultural differences that may exist between themselves, their target
audiences, and those using their products (Rogers et al. 2007). Although common web
mapping applications such as Google Maps, MSN Maps & Directions, MapQuest, and
Multimap have been evaluated (Nivala et al. 2008), and although eye movement analysis
techniques may better evaluate complex interactive map displays (Coltekin et al. 2009),
research is needed to address the new challenges citizen science web mapping applications
pose for GIScience. Usability methods must adapt to different citizen science roles, situa-
tions, and tasks to evaluate many system components such as content, connectivity, cap-
abilities, and levels of participation (Laituri 2003).

To directly wrestle with these challenges, we built an interactive citizen science web
mapping application, conducted a usability evaluation, and gained experience by listening to
website users. Our objectives were to build the website, determine general perceptions,
discover potential problems, iteratively improve the website, discuss citizen science web-
sites in relation to online PPGIS, examine the role(s) websites may play in the citizen science
research model, discuss how citizen science research advances GIScience, and offer guide-
lines to improve citizen-based web mapping applications.

2. Methods
We built a citizen science website (www.citsci.org) between 2005 and 2008 (Figure 1) to
support volunteers who collect and report invasive species data (Crall et al. 2010). The website
uses technology developed by our team (Graham et al. 2007) and engineered to provide fast
and reliable online interactive mapping capabilities at multiple spatial and temporal scales.
This technology drives several related websites through targeted web skins, including the
USGS National Institute of Invasive Species Science (www.niiss.org), the Global Invasive
Species Information Network (www.niiss.org/gisin; Graham et al. 2009), an environmental
literacy assessment website (www.niiss.org/msp), and a website dedicated to the invasive
species Tamarisk (www.tamariskmap.org).

2.1. Website development, features, and intended use

We built the citizen science website using a UCD approach (ISO 13407 1999). We incorpo-
rated user feedback from user interviews (Crall et al. 2010) into our initial website design to
help ensure that stakeholder-driven tasks guided the requirements specification. Our soft-
ware development lifecycle included iterative investigation, design, requirements specifica-
tion, development, implementation, testing, and maintenance – a process similar to the

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1855

Figure 1. The citizen science website map application page at the time of evaluation and following
improvements. The website changed significantly based on results and user feedback. Icons were
removed from the top toolbar and replaced with a legend edit link. Navigation changed from GIS
industry standard magnifier zoom in and zoom out tools to more commonly known sliders. The map
background was changed from Blue Marble data managed internally, to a custom implementation
using web service based Google maps to decrease server storage requirements and improve perfor-
mance; however, customization was required for proper geo-referencing of data, performance, cluster-
ing data, and user customization (e.g., ability to change layer colors). Legend layers were categorized
into plants, animals, diseases, and backgrounds for improved usability.

Unified Software Development Method (Jacobson et al. 1999). At the time of evaluation, the
website provided a broad range of features (Table 1) for citizen scientists to collect and report
invasive species location and attribute information.

The website allows citizen science organizations to create online projects managed by
volunteer coordinators who in turn manage project members. This ensures that only those with

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 G. Newman et al.

Table 1. Existing and future web map application features and the role(s) they support.

Features

Existinga Plannedb

1856

Roles

Project management

Communication and

feedback

Data entry

Quality control

Data download

Analysis

Decision support

Training

Request to join online projects
Approve/deny requests to join projectsc
Change project managers and change member rolesc
Activate/de-activate projectsc
Create and disseminate questionnairesc

Analyze questionnaires’ results automatically

in real time

Email project membersc
Control email settings (allow members to

send emails or not)c

Create and send monthly project newslettersc
Email project manager
Create customized project data entry formsc
Enter data by clicking on the map

Enter data using a generic data entry form
Enter data using customized project data entry forms
Check for latitude . 90 or , -90, longitude

Check for UTM Easting . 500,000 or Northing

. 180 or , -180

. 50,000,000

Provide error checking for all form variables
Use pick lists for controlled vocabularies
Download all data for a project
Download all data for a species
Download data from the map for a selected

Download data meeting advanced query

area of interest

specifications

Calculate overall total number of contributions to date
Calculate the number of contributions per year by

project

Create project statistics as charts
Report the most frequently reported species
Display and reward the member with the most

Display and reward the project with most

contributions

contributions

Activate early warning email alerts
Define locations of interest for early alerts
Define species of interest for early alerts
Make predictive models (MaxEnt species

distribution models)d

View online tutorials
Download GPS and website tutorials
Watch online training videos
Take online exams (e.g., become certified Level 1, 2, 3

XX
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
A

A

X

X
X

X

A

XX
XX

X
X
X
XX

XX

XX

A

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X

X

X

Logistics

Technical support

volunteer)

Checkout equipment
Schedule eventsc
Read online help
Receive phone support

aX, existing prior to evaluation; XX, existing post-evaluation based on results; A, existing admin.
bPlanned future feature based on feedback and recommendations from citizen scientists.
cFeature/task only available for approved project managers.
dSee Phillips et al. (2006).

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1857

permission may contribute locations of invasive species to certain online projects. Website
features include registration; login/logout; a ‘My Profile’ page where users request to change
their user level; a project list page where users request to join projects; an early alert system where
users request to receive emails when new species are added in and around locations of interest; a
mapping application that allows users to add species they wish to view, add new locations, get
information about species locations, and change the color of species layers; the ability to search
for projects and species; the ability to view information about species on a ‘Species Profile’ page;
features to support sensitive data (Jarnevich et al. 2007); data quality features; the ability for
project managers to create their own customized data entry forms; and data download features
(Table 1). For the usability evaluation, our scenarios focused on registration, the ‘My Profile’
page, email alerts, species profiles, map features, and the ‘Project Profile’ page.

2.2. Website usability evaluation

We sampled citizen scientists from Fort Collins, Colorado, using a snowball sampling
approach and obtained a purposeful sample of 16 citizen scientists for usability testing at the
Center for Research on Communication and Technology Usability Laboratory at Colorado
State University. Participants were volunteers from various citizen science groups with many
occupations. They represent retired teachers, a retired scientist, a bookkeeper, a U.S. Forest
Service employee, a lab tech, a librarian, students, and a master gardener. Participants claim to
spend as little as 5% and as much as 100% of their time as citizen scientists. Overall,
participants claimed to have numerous years of experience using a personal computer
(mean = 17; SD = 4.4), using the World Wide Web (mean = 11; SD = 2.6), and filling out
applications/forms online (mean = 8; SD = 3.6), and their self-reported level of expertise was
high on a 1–7 scale (1 = None and 7 = High) for using a personal computer (mean = 5.6;
SD = 1.3), using the World Wide Web (mean = 5.75; SD = 1.13), and filling out applications/
forms online (mean = 5.8; SD = 1.0). Of the 16 participants, 63% claim to visit other invasive
species websites and 13% visit other citizen science websites.

Participants learned about the research, received a $25 cash honorarium, signed a
consent form, and completed a protocol analysis yielding four task-based scenarios and
one exploratory scenario. These standard web usability methods (Haklay and Tobo´ n 2003,
Nivala et al. 2008) did not include a GIS ‘chauffeur’ (Nunamaker et al. 1991) because such
experts are not realistically available to citizen scientists. We observed the time to complete
each task from a separate video room, documented problems, and recorded whether parti-
cipants successfully completed each task. We asked participants to talk aloud and stopped
them after 4 minutes or when they became frustrated. We videotaped each participant and
kept observation logs. Participants completed a post-protocol survey including 30 questions
on a 1 (Strongly Agree) to 7 (Strongly Disagree) scale (N = 16) to evaluate web usability
concepts (Zimmerman and Akerelrea 2004), 17 questions on a 1–7 scale to asses user
experiences with scenario-related tasks (N = 14), and 8 questions to determine prior
computer experience and expertise on a 1–7 scale. Finally, the post-protocol survey also
included open-ended questions probing what participants liked or disliked about the site,
what they found difficult to use, any sections of the website they found irritating, and
recommendations they felt would make the site more user-friendly.

2.3. Citizen scientist feedback

After the usability evaluation, we continued to document user feedback and gain experiences
with website users between February 2008 and December 2009. We conducted additional

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1858

G. Newman et al.

user interviews, received feedback from an online analysis needs assessment, conducted
field experiments with citizen scientists, and listened to feedback from users creating
projects and entering data. These interactions resulted in 10 additional online projects
yielding over 1900 additional invasive species locations that provided us with more user-
based experiences and insights.

3. Results (lessons learned)
While the vision and development of CitSci.org yielded technical results specific to invasive
species data management practitioners (Graham et al. 2007, 2008, 2009, Jarnevich et al.
2007), this study focuses on lessons learned from website development and use of geo-
graphic data, evaluation, and user feedback. Thus, this research resulted in the development
of the geospatially enabled website (Figure 1); usability evaluation information (general
perceptions, potential problems, and suggested improvements); and feedback from users
leading to new and improved features (Table 1). We follow our results with a discussion of
citizen science websites in relation to online PPGIS, an examination of the role(s) citizen
science websites may play in the citizen science research model, and a discussion of how this
research advances GIScience. We conclude with guidelines for citizen-based web mapping
applications.

3.1. Development and use of geographic data
Results related to website development show that careful attention must be given to the
selection of programming languages, software packages, database, and data structures. The
design of the underlying database is critical and must be flexible and general. The storage,
retrieval, and fast rendering of large volumes of geospatial vector and raster data must be
accommodated; results show that using cached data and tiled maps similar to the Google
Maps approach best supports the potentially unlimited volume of volunteered geographic
information (VGI). Developing a scalable and object-oriented code base allows for flex-
ibility as new use cases arise and new features are requested. However, there is a fine line
between flexibility and rigorous adherence to standardized controlled vocabularies essential
to ensure data quality. Both are important and both require user interface simplicity. We
found that web skins allow for targeted user interface designs that simplify and improve the
user interface while maintaining system flexibility for multiple purposes at multiple spatial
and temporal scales. Cost–benefit analyses must be performed to select programming
languages; no single language is best for all applications and languages must be selected
based on their suitability to required tasks. Finally, we learned to design for dynamic user-
contributed content; layouts must adapt to varying length content and photo size.

3.2. Evaluation (general perceptions, problems, and suggested improvements)

While the Citizen Science website provides a broad range of information and participants
rate the website positively overall, completing basic website tasks and map-based tasks
identified a wide range of problems (Figure 1, Table 2). Most participants had a difficult time
with aspects of registration, navigation, early warnings, adding layers to the map for a given
species, and map features. Except for two participants with prior GIS experience, most had a
difficult time understanding the concept of layers on the map ‘legend.’ They also had
difficulty understanding map icons and tool tip terms. The terms and icons used for map
function buttons were not salient to non-GIS participants even though they were consistent

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1859

Table 2. Task completion times (minutes), rates (%), and related problems by scenario.

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

Scenario 3

Scenario 4a

Mean

Tasks and problems
/

Time % Time % Time % Time % Time %

(1) Register as a citizen scientist

3:49

0

2:41

100

2:44

100

2:28

100

2:55

75

2:44

33

1:50

0

1:12

92

1:41

67

2:14

67

2:38

56

(5) Learn about invasive species

1:00

100

1:32

100

1:05

75

3:22

33

1:14

67

3:26

75

2:54

75

2:44

63

2:44

33

1:50

0

Confused by questions

(2) Set early alert settings to on
Did not know to edit profile
(3) Define locations of interest
Did not understand concept

(4) Join a project

Did not notice button

No problems noticed
(6) Find invasive species

Problem with task wording

(7) Create and print maps
Could not locate link
(8) Use map help features

Wanted search capabilities
(9) Create species location maps

Confused by ‘map occurrences’

(10) Save species location maps
Did not understand concept
(11) Load and print saved map
Did not understand ‘load’
(12) Request to become initiator

Could not find link

(13) Change the color of a layer
Wanted to change it directly

(14) Edit the label of layer

2:55

33

1:09

67

1:00

100

2:38

67

1:19

33

2:46

100

1:20

0

2:59

67

3:36

100

2:18

33

1:46

67

1:53

75

2:39

100

2:09

69

1:26

33

0:45

67

0:56

100

2:00

75

1:16

69

0:30

33

1:26

33

1:43

75

1:36

50

1:18

48

2:03

67

2:11

67

1:06

100

1:46

78

3:26

25

3:26

25

1:00

75

1:00

75

Did not understand editing a layer

Overall

2:09

36

1:42

67

2:01

90

2:17

71

aScenario 4 focused on map tasks; it included reworded tasks 10 and 11 and two new tasks (13 and 14).

with industry standards. Common buttons such as ‘Save’ and ‘Print’ were more easily
understood. This emphasizes the role of spatial literacy and the need for a fundamental
understanding about web mapping applications.

Based on scenario tasks, numerous problems emerged (Table 2). Participants had a
difficult time finding the Register link. They had difficulty adding species locations to the
map. To do so, the website provided a link on the ‘Species Profile’ page that was labeled
‘Map Occurrences’ that automatically added a species layer to the map and displayed all
species locations. Participants searched the ‘Species Profile’ page initially, but overlooked
the ‘Map Occurrences’ link. Next, they would go to the ‘My Maps’ page but not figure out
how to add locations for a species (to do so they could have clicked the ‘Add Layer’ button
along the top of the map and added a layer for a species).

In summary, map tasks and email alert tasks took a long time to complete and had low
completion rates (Table 2); these features were not intuitive to participants. The mean completion
rates ranged from 25 to 75% for map tasks (tasks 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, and 14). Although only
evaluated in scenario 1, email alert features (tasks 2 and 3) had low completion rates (33 and 0%,
respectively). Throughout all tasks, participants could not find key links easily. The links and
buttons to ‘Register,’ ‘Join a Project,’ and view ‘Map Occurrences’ were continually overlooked
and not well understood. The ‘Email Alert’ and ‘Locations of Interest’ links were not easily found

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1860

G. Newman et al.

nor understood. Most participants were able to learn about invasive species, register, and
request to change their user level (92, 75, and 78%, respectively). Overall, the average time
to complete tasks ranged from 1:42 to 2:17 and the mean task completion rate ranged from 36 to
90% across all scenarios. The average time to complete a task for each scenario was as follows:
scenario 1 (N = 3; 2:09), scenario 2 (N = 3; 1:42), scenario 3 (N = 4; 2:01), and scenario 4 (N = 4;
2:17). Task completion rates ranged from 0 to 92%; task 1 (select locations of interest for early
alerts) saw a 0% completion rate while task 5 (learn about invasive species issues) was
successfully completed by most participants (92%).

3.3. User feedback

Results from continued interactions with website users following web evaluation show that we
overlooked many tasks citizen scientists and volunteer coordinators need to accomplish online
(Table 1). For example, both user groups need effective mechanisms to communicate with
each other. Both audiences suggested email features be added to web mapping applications to
facilitate communication about upcoming trainings, field data collection events, and data
quality concerns. We provide the following examples of feedback we received.

Some feedback illustrated the effectiveness of online training and instruction:

. . . your instructions on one page of your website were wonderful. Basically you gave an item by
item description of how to do the particular task and had it right there on the page rather than via
a link. It was just very helpful and very well done.

Other feedback suggested new features:

I would like to be able to have my own boxes for things like how much time they spent
monitoring or pulling weed[s]. That information is necessary so I [can] earn in-kind matching
money for my grants.

I wish that my volunteers had a way to query for their results (by map or list). I suppose it would
be really valuable if I could query by recorder too. If I map Japanese hops . . . by presence and
absence, I cannot tell which is which by the legend. I have had volunteers enter their lat/long
incorrectly. I have caught these instances; however, they cannot simply go back to their survey
and correct the error. They must delete the survey and begin again.

When [volunteers] are on the map and click the Add a Point icon, [can] they be directed to the
project data form instead of just the standard one? As it is now, they have to enter lat/long
coordinates for each point and really only use the map for viewing observations that have
already been entered. Any chance we could provide you with a layer of our Natural Area
boundaries that could be draped over the Google map so that volunteers could see [them]? Our
GIS dept has tried to work with map server companies like Tele Atlas to submit data . . . and
apparently it is not very easy.

. . . is there a built in listserv ability with CitSci.org? Will we be able to send out an email,
newsletter or the like to all the members of our project?

Additional feedback emphasized the need for simplicity:

Right now, I’m wondering how I’m going to sell this . . . to my [volunteers]. They don’t want to
spend anytime online . . . If they do . . ., it had better be simple and fast or they simply won’t do it
and [I will] have lost a [volunteer].

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1861

. . .it needs to be simple [emphasis added by interviewee] . . . it needs to be for lack of a better
word ‘dumbed down.’ I think it needs to [use] common names as much as possible. It needs to be
[for] the layman.

When asked about data entry options, citizen scientists emphasized simplicity. Although
excellent mobile systems are being developed (e.g., iPhone and Android mobile applica-
tions; see What’s Invasive, http://whatsinvasive.com/), results suggest that mobile personal
digital assistant (PDA) devices only add another level of complexity to an already steep
learning curve ripe with usability challenges. We found that it is best to keep field data
collection methods simple (e.g., use paper forms that directly match online forms), yet still
offer web service protocols for remote connections and advanced users using mobile devices
for real-time data entry. There will always be early adopters!

Finally, results indicate that volunteers are motivated more by increased levels of partici-
pation and rewards than by complex and hard to understand features. For example, participants
in this study wanted to edit layers, change colors, and display filtered query results, yet they
had difficulty accomplishing these tasks. When asked how they would perform such tasks,
they could not articulate how the user interface would be implemented and did not realize the
complexity of the feature they were asking for. Yet, simple features such as reporting the total
number of new sightings for each project or charting the most frequently reported species for
each project went unnoticed, but were used regularly and appreciated.

4. Discussion

In this article, our objectives were to (1) develop a citizen science website; (2) determine
general perceptions; (3) discover potential problems; (4) improve the website; (5) discuss
citizen science websites in relation to online PPGIS; (6) examine the role(s) websites may
play in the citizen science research model; (7) discuss how citizen science research advances
GIScience; and (8) offer guidelines to improve citizen-based web mapping applications.
Although our web usability evaluation helped us with objectives (2), (3), and (4), continued
development of the citizen science website and additional interactions with citizen science
volunteers and volunteer coordinators since helped us gain insights related to objectives (5),
(6), and (7). We discuss our results related to these latter objectives based on our experiences
and conclude with guidelines for citizen-based web mapping applications (objective 8).

4.1. Discuss citizen science websites in relation to online PPGIS
PPGIS applications focus on community interactions with GIS inextricably tied to the social
and geographic context of system production and implementation (Craig et al. 2002). It
consists of components and continuums whose outcomes are best understood by addressing
the questions of who is informed, who is empowered, and who benefits from the technology
(Laituri 2003). Citizen science projects focus on data collection by volunteers across broad
geographic regions (Cooper et al. 2007) with the aim to inform and empower citizens and
benefit scientists, land managers, and decision makers. Both approaches struggle to ensure
high-quality data. PPGIS applications struggle with spatial data accuracy and precision,
whereas citizen science applications must control the accuracy and precision of spatial data,
taxonomic data, attribute data, and temporal data. Initial PPGIS projects used industry-
standard desktop applications to involve participants in GIS in lieu of online systems,
claiming that users ‘see [online] applications as manipulative and frustrating because they
have begun to see what a GIS they can control [emphasis added] can do’ (Merrick 2003).

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1862

G. Newman et al.

Indeed, even today, most online PPGIS applications are still in no way ‘participatory’ or
transparent; they are clumsy, slow, and difficult to use systems that control content, layout,
visualization, available analysis capabilities, and the methods by which users interact and
participate (Merrick 2003).

Citizen science web mapping applications face these same limitations – but these
limitations need not be technological. Instead, perhaps they stem from decisions grounded
in the need for quality data, system usability, and intended audience. Although ‘canned’
black box features are best to be avoided (Merrick 2003), volunteers require simple features
that are within their cognitive access. They need to experience initial easy success. Once
successful, they may explore complex questions in more depth and have patience for more
complex user interface designs and features. More advanced users (project managers/
volunteer coordinators) require systems they can control, explore (e.g., trialability; see
Rogers 2003), and customize where appropriate.

Thus, although citizen science websites share many attributes with PPGIS applications,
there are several important differences. Citizen science applications focus on scientific data
collection of geographic and non-geographic information and require simplicity, data
quality, and features for multiple user groups. Data quality of both geographic and non-
geographic information is essential to their success. PPGIS applications also relate non-
geographic information to geographic data. However, some PPGIS approaches place less
attention on the quality (accuracy and precision) of their non-geographic attribute informa-
tion (e.g., the descriptions of places of interest, photos of a location), seeing this information
only as geospatially referenced posts. If a place description or location is incorrect, others
may comment on the error and eventually change it using blogs or open wikis, but what are
the ramifications of the temporary inaccuracies? If science-based decisions are to be made
using citizen-contributed data, controlled and accurate data are essential for correct decisions
and conclusions. Otherwise, scientific trust will be difficult to achieve.

Finally, citizen science applications require communication mechanisms among project
members and between members and volunteer coordinators. Some geographically focused
PPGIS initiatives consist of contributors who may or may not know each other and that
likely have little communication interaction (e.g., wikimapia.org), whereas others coordi-
nate through ‘mapping parties’ (Haklay and Weber 2008) similar to volunteer trainings.
Regardless of the level of interaction, citizen science projects mandate effective commu-
nication among and between participants, coordinators, and scientists.

4.2. Examine the roles websites may play in the citizen science research model

Because citizen science activities blur with community-based monitoring programs along a
spectrum of no local participation to entirely local endeavors (Danielsen et al. 2009), more
attention must be given to the role(s) websites play for their many user requirements (Table 1).
Citizen scientist requirements, like those of most map users (Meng 2005), are not sufficiently
understood. End-user requirements are too often not considered (Meng 2004) and may go well
beyond efficient map use (Table 1). They may involve tasks that require non-map-related
features, social networking features (e.g., blogs, email listservs, and bulletin boards), in-person
trainings using white-boards situated in traditional meeting rooms, online training resources,
themselves pose significant usability challenges
mobile field equipment devices that
(Stevenson et al. 2003, Siek et al. 2005), and certifications and digital awards for accomplish-
ments and contributions to foster motivation and participation (Longan 2005, 2007).

Given these tasks, websites may serve many citizen science roles, including project
management, feedback, data entry, quality control, communication, data download,

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1863

their

applications

that engage citizens

in problem definition as

analysis, decision support, training, logistics, and technical support (Table 1). Some web
mapping application developers and citizen science researchers envision exciting new roles
scientists
for
(Lakshminarayanan 2007); potentially improve volunteer scientific and spatial literacy
(Brossard et al. 2005); and foster group user interaction with a GIS using hand gestures
and dialogue (MacEachren et al. 2005). These roles may only be appropriate for certain
audiences. Novel technology supporting these new roles will follow the technology adoption
curve (Rogers 2003). However, they may further marginalize individual access to hardware,
software, data, and cognition (Laituri 2003, Merrick 2003) at the expense of serving critical
roles such as generating high-quality VGI slated for scientific research and decision support
that will be judged objectively by professionals based on position and attribute accuracy
(Flanagin and Metzger 2008).

Although citizen science websites will undoubtedly be leveraged to meet these new roles
and although new technologies (e.g., Web 2.0, Cascading Style Sheets, and Flex) will make
the development of beautiful and complex user interfaces supporting these new roles easier,
careful consideration for the appropriateness of these roles and technologies is needed.
Complex user interfaces allow for an increased amount of customization by the user that
requires increased levels of understanding. If citizen scientists cannot understand features,
they become more frustrated than they would without the features and disengage. A ‘less is
more’ approach focused on user clearly defined tasks may better meet their needs (Jones
et al. 2009).

4.3. Discuss how citizen science research advances GIScience

Citizen science research is advancing GIScience in many ways (Table 3). It is expanding the
science questions asked by GIScience to integrate questions of social science with questions of
the scientific disciplines citizen participants are involved with. Traditional GIScience questions
of how to represent geographic phenomena digitally, how to visualize accuracy, how to render
infinite amounts of data while maintaining flat performance, and so on, remain, but there are
now additional questions. How do web mapping applications ensure data quality, communicate
uncertainty and error, simultaneously allow for dual-purpose contributions (e.g., those foster-
ing motivation through wiki-like photo uploads and posts and those designed for rigorous
scientific data collection and dissemination), and allow for public participation in scientific
inquiry itself – a task GIS is touted to help improve through enhanced visual displays?

Citizen science research forces GIScience to consider volunteer perspectives. Decisions
need to be made regarding display of features that require either certain permissions or
certain data to exist (e.g., display the download treatments button only if there are treatment
data available; only show ‘edit project information’ links to logged in project managers).
Decisions also need to be made about who sees which features; CitSci.org now provides
online species distribution modeling capabilities. Results from this study show that volun-
teers still do not know how to use web mapping applications effectively. Without the
fundamentals of spatial literacy, how then will they be able to create more sophisticated
outputs such as predictive models?

Furthermore, problems identified by this study may represent only the surface of deeper
problems. For example, volunteers view maps as the gospel; they often lack the required
spatial literacy to understand the methods used to create maps. This may lead to misinterpreta-
tion. They may not understand that when a map of an invasive species does not show locations
in their state, it does not mean that the species is not located in their state. Instead, it only
implies that no data have yet been contributed for the species in their state. Unfortunately, our

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1864

G. Newman et al.

Table 3. How citizen science research advances GIScience.

GIScience questionsa

Representation

Communication

Visualization (display)

Relationship between the

representation and the user

Data quality

Data storage

Citizen science contributions

Formulate best practices for representing species locations on the
Earth’s surface from a citizen scientist perspective. (Points)
Discover ways to better communicate the relationship between the
representation (species location) and the user. [Use of a plus (+)
to indicate more locations can be seen upon further zoom]
How do methods of display affect the interpretation of geographic
data? How can the science of cartography be extended to take
advantage of the power of the digital environment? What basic
properties of display determine its success? (Use cartographic
symbols meaningful to citizen scientists such as flags for
surveys)

How do people, rather than machines, think about the world? How
can computer representations be made more like the ways
people think? How do people reason with, learn about, and
communicate their geographical world? (Volunteers think they
found a species; they do not think that they ‘made a visit to an
area and detected a species occurrence’)

How to assess the accuracy and precision of a representation? How
to measure its accuracy? How to measure what is missing, its
uncertainty? How to express these measures in ways that are
meaningful to the user? How to visualize them?

How to best store geospatial information? (Use cached tiles

generated on the fly as needed to allow users to customize their
own cartographic representation)

Data models/structures

Store/retrieve representation efficiently (Use cached data not

federated searches – see Graham et al. 2009)

aAdapted from Goodchild (1997).

website does not visualize these concepts yet; future web mapping applications need to better
communicate and visualize these important distinctions. Citizen science research advances
GIScience by asking these questions and requiring challenging new features to address them.

5. Conclusions
Citizen science research offers a pragmatic counter-balance to geospatial research that
together advances and transforms GIScience by identifying use cases across a wide spectrum
of activities – from geographic data collection to storage to dissemination to mapping to
analysis to retrieval. One of the things that emerged from this study is that it is important to
identify use cases that users want to do and that they know they can do using web mapping
applications. The typical citizen scientists arrive at a website on the recommendation of their
volunteer coordinator or by word of mouth. They bring with them preconceived notions of
what is possible (and what is not possible), even if more complex tasks might be able to be
accomplished. For example, participants arriving with knowledge of GIS might have an
easier time understanding and completing map tasks whereas those unfamiliar with GIS
might have more difficulty. It is important to communicate to users the purposes of a website.
These purposes may span the entire citizen-based data collection, entry, and analysis
process. Citizen science research, then, forces GIScience to look broadly at each of the
phases in this process and find ways to ensure usability and data quality at each step. Our
research highlighted the need to better understand user needs and use cases; more clearly

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1865

communicate the purpose(s) of citizen science websites; and create features related to these
tasks that are easy to use. Although integration of GIS into K-12 education promises to
transform the spatial literacy of the volunteer workforce, until then, volunteers from grass-
roots citizen science organizations will continue to come to the table with less expertise and
formal training in contributing, using, and obtaining geospatial data (Elwood 2008). The
limited technological sophistication of citizen science volunteers will remain a reality.
Citizen science usability research promises to advance and transform GIScience to better
accommodate this reality.

5.1. Guidelines for web mapping applications
In this study, we developed a citizen science website that allowed us to explore web mapping
application problems, roles, and features. Given these experiences, we offer the following
guidelines to improve citizen-based web mapping applications:

l Communicate the purposes of the website and the roles they support.
l Build features for both project managers and volunteers and clearly separate them.
l Develop customizable data entry forms that ensure data quality, yet remain simple.
l Create simple map applications that visualize accuracy, precision, and uncertainty.
l Add fun features to foster motivation and continued involvement.
l Incorporate spatial literacy learning into the use of websites.
l Add information to help with map interpretation (improve cognitive access).
l Provide a cursory understanding of spatial concepts through online help.
l Allow users to formulate their own research questions and answer them (analysis).
l Add features for communication between volunteers and volunteer coordinators.
l Research and develop features to map attributes and visualize their accuracy.
l Create transparent features that are used and explored by volunteers and volunteer

coordinators; avoid limited black box systems (Merrick 2003).

l Allow users to experiment, to ‘fail,’ and to play around by creating a test website.
l Market PDAs primarily to advanced users, early adopters, and young volunteers.
l Make use of web skins to target specific use cases and tasks and simplify searches.
l Provide rich content even in the absence of user-contributed web content.
l Clearly distinguish social networking (e.g., blogging) content from science content.
l Assign volunteer coordinators a data quality role and create features for data review.
l Communicate scientific rigor where appropriate.
l Incorporate communication features to augment face-to-face communication through
all project phases (e.g., training; data collection, entry, dissemination, and analysis;
and communication from scientists back to volunteers).

l Avoid advertisements and animations altogether or, if required, keep them off data

entry forms, profile pages, the home page, and map pages (Nivala et al. 2008).
l Create online questionnaire creation and delivery tools similar to Survey Monkey# to

better integrate user feedback, participation, and program evaluation.

This study illustrated the need to (1) integrate usability and user feedback into web mapping
application design and (2) create features that target user needs, support the many roles of
various user groups, and control data quality. We must integrate usability and user feedback
into web mapping application design because user requirements are demanding and often
unknown; websites support challenging new roles; user tasks and the user environment are
unfamiliar to developers; and applications are used by large numbers of diverse users (Nivala

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1866

G. Newman et al.

et al. 2007). The ways to identify end-user requirements vary along a continuum ranging from
end-user involvement prior to product design to no end-user involvement whereby developers
assume they ‘. . . already [know] what to do, and how, so that . . . end-users . . . [will] like it’
(Nivala et al. 2007). The latter approach assumes that features are based on the expert
knowledge and ‘know-how’ of developers. Involving volunteers in the design of the very
websites they end up using will improve websites and embodies the very essence of partici-
patory citizen science. Future research must focus on better ways to identify user requirements
throughout the design lifecycle. Additionally, determining how to address key issues related to
understanding the geographic data being used and created is critical and will fuel new
GIScience research and applications.

Thus, this study discovered that volunteers want to communicate with each other,
collect, contribute, and ‘publish’ their data online, be given easy to use and customized
data entry forms created by their volunteer coordinators, use websites targeted to their
specific tasks, create bar charts, pie charts, and compare treated locations to untreated
locations (e.g., perform analyses and comparisons; unpublished data), and be real scientists
themselves. They also want to be sent scientific outcomes derived from their efforts.
Websites must support these features and new roles. They must discover ways to ensure
data quality, make these types of analyses easy to perform, and motivate participants. Future
research is needed to assess the affects of usability and website design on data quality,
volunteer retention rates, motivation, and future website use. Does website satisfaction
translate into greater motivation for continued website use and volunteering that, in turn,
yields greater volunteer retention? How does citizen science linked to PPGIS further the
practice of GIScience and inform a citizenry increasingly dependent upon such products to
understand and participate in the complex and changing world of the twenty-first century?

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the National Science Foundation under grant OCI-0636213. Logistical
support was provided by the Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory at Colorado State University. We
thank the following organizations and people for their help with this research: the graduate students and
staff at the Center for Research on Communication and Technology Usability Laboratory of the
Department of Journalism and Technical Communication, Mariah Coler, Sarah Braun, Cindy Hale,
Erica Saunders, Brian Ewart, Laura McFarland, and all of our citizen science volunteer participants.
We especially thank Mariah Coler for her willingness to provide constant website testing throughout
our website development lifecycle. We thank Tom Stohlgren for providing edits to earlier drafts of this
manuscript.

References
Balram, S., Dragicevic, S., and Feick, R., 2009. Collaborative GIS for spatial decision support and

visualization. Journal of Environmental Management, 90, 1963–1965.

Bentley, J.P.H., Tinney, M.V., and Chia, B.H., 2005. Intercultural Internet-based learning: know your
audience and what it values. Etr&D-Educational Technology Research and Development, 53,
117–127.

Bhattacharjee, Y., 2005. Ornithology – citizen scientists supplement work of Cornell researchers – a
half-century of interaction with bird watchers has evolved into a robust and growing collaboration
between volunteers and a leading ornithology lab. Science, 308, 1402–1403.

Bonney, R. and Dhondt, A.A., 1997. Project FeederWatch. Chapter 3. In: K.C. Cohen, ed. Internet

links to science education: student scientist partnerships. New York: Plenum Press.

Brooke, T., 1996. SUS: a ‘quick and dirty’ usability scale. In: P.W. Jordan, B.A. Weerdmeester, and
A.L. McClelland, eds. Usability evaluation in industry. London, UK: Taylor & Francis, 189–194.

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1867

Brossard, D., Lewenstein, B., and Bonney, R., 2005. Scientific knowledge and attitude change: the
impact of a citizen science project. International Journal of Science Education, 27, 1099–1121.
Carver, S., et al., 2001. Public participation, GIS, and cyberdemocracy: evaluating on-line spatial
decision support systems. Environment and Planning B-Planning & Design, 28, 907–921.
Chen, A.Y., et al., 1999. Cultural issues in the design of technology-enhanced learning systems. British

Journal of Educational Technology, 30, 217–230.

Chin, J.P., Diehl, V.A., and Norman, K., 1988. Development of an instrument measuring user
satisfaction of the human-computer interface. In: Proceedings, ACM human factors in computing
systems (CHI 088), 15–19 May 1988 Washington, DC, ACM, 213–218.

Cohn, J.P., 2008. Citizen science: can volunteers do real research? Bioscience, 58, 192–197.
Coltekin, A., et al., 2009. Evaluating the effectiveness of interactive map interface designs: a case study
integrating usability metrics with eye-movement analysis. Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 36 (1), 5–17.

Conrad, C.T. and Daoust, T., 2008. Community-based monitoring frameworks: increasing the effec-

tiveness of environmental stewardship. Environmental Management, 41, 358–366.

Cooper, C.B., et al., 2007. Citizen science as a tool for conservation in residential ecosystems. Ecology

and Society, 12 (2), 11.

Cornell Lab of Ornithology, 2008. Citizen science central. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Lab of Ornithology.
Couvet, D., et al., 2008. Enhancing citizen contributions to biodiversity science and public policy.

Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 33, 95–103.

Craig, W., Harris, T., and Weiner, D., eds., 2002. Community participation and geographic information

systems. London: Taylor and Francis.

Crall, A.W., et al., 2010. Improving and integrating data on invasive species collected by citizen

scientists. Biological Invasions, DOI 10.1007/s10530-010-9740-9.

Danielsen, F., et al., 2005. Does monitoring matter? A quantitative assessment of management
decisions from locally-based monitoring of protected areas. Biodiversity and Conservation, 14
(11), 2633–2652.

Danielsen, F., et al., 2009. Local participation in natural resource monitoring: a characterization of

approaches. Conservation Biology, 23, 31–42.

Delaney, D.G., et al., 2008. Marine invasive species: validation of citizen science and implications for

national monitoring networks. Biological Invasions, 10, 117–128.

Dvornich, K.M., Tudor, M., and Grue, C.E., 1995. NatureMapping: assisting management of natural
resources through public education and public participation. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 23,
609–614.

Elwood, S., 2008. Grassroots groups as stakeholders in spatial data infrastructures: challenges and
opportunities for local data development and sharing. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 22, 71–90.

Flanagin, A.J. and Metzger, M.J., 2008. The credibility of volunteered geographic information.

GeoJournal, 72, 137–148.

Galloway, A.W.E., Tudor, M.T., and Vander Haegen, W.M., 2006. The reliability of citizen science: a

case study of Oregon white oak stand surveys. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 34, 1425–1429.

Good, M., et al., 1986. User-derived impact analysis as a tool for usability engineering. In:
Proceedings, human factors in computing systems (CHI 086), New York, USA, 13–17 April
1986, ACM, 241–246.
Goodchild, M.F., 1997. What

is geographic information science? NCGIA core curriculum in

GIScience. Available online at http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/giscc/units/u002/u002.html

Goodchild, M.F., 2007. Citizens as voluntary sensors: spatial data infrastructure in the world of Web

2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2, 24–32.

Graham, J., et al., 2007. A global organism detection and monitoring system for non-native species.

Graham, J., et al., 2008. Vision of a cyberinfrastructure for nonnative, invasive species management.

Ecological Informatics, 2, 177–183.

Bioscience, 58, 263–268.

Graham, J., et al., 2009. Federated or cached searches: providing expected performance from multiple

invasive species databases. Unpublished Manuscript.

Haklay, M. and Weber, P., 2008. OpenStreetMap: user-generated street maps. IEEE Pervasive

Computing, 7, 12–18.

Haklay, M.M. and Tobo´ n, C., 2003. Usability evaluation and PPGIS: towards a user-centred design

approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17, 577–592.

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 1868

G. Newman et al.

Henderson, L., 1996. Instructional design of interactive multimedia: a cultural critique. Etr&D-

Educational Technology Research and Development, 44, 85–104.

ISO 13407, 1999. Human-centered design for interactive systems. Geneva, Switzerland: International

Jacobson, I., Booch, G., and Rumbaugh, J., 1999. The unified software development process. Reading,

Jarnevich, C.S., et al., 2007. Balancing data sharing requirements for analyses with data sensitivity.

Organization for Standardization.

MA: Addison-Wesley.

Biological Invasions, 9, 597–599.

Jones, C.E., et al., 2009. A less-is-more approach to geovisualization – enhancing knowledge
construction across multidisciplinary teams. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 23, 1077–1093.

Koua, E.L., Maceachren, A., and Kraak, M.J., 2006. Evaluating the usability of visualization methods
International Journal of Geographical

in an exploratory geovisualization environment.
Information Science, 20, 425–448.

Laituri, M., 2003. The issue of access: an assessment guide for evaluating public participation
geographic information science case studies. Journal of the Urban and Regional Information
Systems Association, 15 (APA II), 25–32.

Lakshminarayanan, S., 2007. Using citizens to do science versus citizens as scientists. Ecology and

Society, 12 (2), r2.

Lepage, D. and Francis, C.M., 2002. Do feeder counts reliably indicate bird population changes? 21

years of winter bird counts in Ontario, Canada. Condor, 104, 255–270.

Lepczyk, C.A., 2005. Integrating published data and citizen science to describe bird diversity across a

landscape. Journal of Applied Ecology, 42, 672–677.

Lewis, J.R., 1995. IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires – psychometric evaluation and

instructions for use. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 7, 57–78.

Longan, M.W., 2005. Visions of community and mobility: the community networking movement in

the USA. Social & Cultural Geography, 6, 849–864.

Longan, M.W., 2007. Service learning and building community with the World Wide Web. Journal of

Geography, 106, 103–111.

Losey, J.E., Perlman, J.E., and Hoebeke, E.R., 2007. Citizen scientist rediscovers rare nine-spotted
lady beetle, Coccinella novemnotata, in eastern North America. Journal of Insect Conservation,
11, 415–417.

MacEachren, A.M., et al., 2005. Enabling collaborative geoinformation access and decision-making
through a natural, multimodal interface. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 19, 293–317.

MacKenzie, D.I., et al., 2002. Estimating site occupancy rates when detection probabilities are less

than one. Ecology, 83, 2248–2255.

McLoughlin, C., 1999. Culturally responsive technology use: developing an on-line community of

learners. British Journal of Educational Technology, 30, 231–243.

Meng, L.Q., 2004. About egocentric geovisualization. In: Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on geoinformatics: bridging the Pacific and Atlantic 7–9 June 2004, University of
Ga¨vle. Sweden: University of Ga¨vle, 7–14.

Meng, L.Q., 2005. Egocentric design of map-based mobile services. Cartographic Journal, 42, 5–13.
Merrick, M., 2003. Reflections on PPGIS: a view from the trenches. Journal of the Urban and

Regional Information Systems Association, 15 (APA II), 33–39.

National Audubon Society, 2005. The Christmas bird count: history and objectives [online]. New
York: National Audubon Society. Available from: http://www.audubon.org/bird/cbc/history.html
[Accessed 7 May 2010].

National Research Council, Committee on the Support for Spatial Thinking: The Incorporation of
Geographic Information Science Across the K-12 Curriculum, and Committee on Geography,
2006. Learning to think spatially: GIS as a support system in the K-12 curriculum. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press.

National Wildlife Federation, 2009. Conservation directory. Reston, VA: National Wildlife Federation.
Nielsen, J., 1993. Usability engineering. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Nielsen, J., 2000. Designing web usability. Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
Nivala, A.M., Brewster, S., and Sarjakoski, L.T., 2008. Usability evaluation of Web mapping sites.

Cartographic Journal, 45, 129–138.

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1869

Nivala, A.M., Sarjakoski, L.T., and Sarjakoski, T., 2007. Usability methods’ familiarity among map

application developers. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 65, 784–795.

Nunamaker, J.F., et al., 1991. Electronic meeting systems to support group work. Communications of

the ACM, 34, 40–61.

Pearson, J.M. and Pearson, A.M., 2008. An exploratory study into determining the relative importance
of key criteria in Web usability: a multi-criteria approach. Journal of Computer Information
Systems, 48, 115–127.

Peterjohn, B.G. and Sauer, J.R., 1993. North American breeding bird survey annual summary

1990–1991. Bird Populations, 1, 52–67.

Peterjohn, B.G. and Sauer, J.R., 1997. Population trends of Black Terns from the North American

breeding bird survey, 1966–1996. Colonial Waterbirds, 20, 566–573.

Phillips, S.J., Anderson, R.P., and Schapire, R.E., 2006. Maximum entropy modeling of species

geographic distributions. Ecological Modelling, 190, 231–259.

Rogers, E.M., 2003. Diffusion of innovations. 5th ed. New York: Free Press.
Rogers, P.C., Graham, C.R., and Mayes, C.T., 2007. Cultural competence and instructional design:
exploration research into the delivery of online instruction cross-culturally. Etr&D-Educational
Technology Research and Development, 55, 197–217.

Rosenberg, K.V., Lowe, J.D., and Dhondt, A.A., 1999. Effects of forest fragmentation on breeding

tanagers: a continental perspective. Conservation Biology, 13, 568–583.

Siek, K.A., Rogers, Y., and Connelly, K.H., 2005. Fat finger worries: how older and younger users
physically interact with PDAs. In: Human-computer interaction – interact 2005, proceedings,
Rome, Italy, 12–16 September 2005, International Federation for Information Processing, 267–280.
Silvertown, J., 2009. A new dawn for citizen science. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24, 467–471.
Stevenson, R.D., Haber, W.A., and Morris, R.A., 2003. Electronic field guides and user communities in

the eco-informatics revolution. Conservation Ecology, 7, 17.

Tullis, T.S. and Stetson, J.N., 2004. A comparison of questionnaires for assessing website usability. In:
Proceedings, usability professionals association conference (UPA 2004), Minneapolis, MN, USA,
7–11 June 2004, Usability Professional’s Association, 7–11.

Wilderman, C.C., Barron, A., and Imgrund, L., 2004. Top down or bottom up? ALLARM’s experience
with two operational models for community science. In: Proceedings of the 4th national monitor-
ing conference, Chattanooga, TN, USA. Chattanooga, TN: National Water Quality Monitoring
Council. Available from: http://water.usgs.gov/wicp/acwi/monitoring/conference/2004/procee-
dings_contents/13_titlepages/posters/poster_235.pdf [Accessed 7 May 2010].

Zimmerman, D. and Paschal, D.B., 2009. An exploratory usability evaluation of Colorado State
University Libraries’ digital collections and the Western Waters Digital Library Web sites. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2009.1003.1011.

Zimmerman, D.E. and Akerelrea, C., 2004. Usability testing: an evaluation process for Internet
communications. In: H. Bidgoli, ed. Internet encyclopedia. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. (RCT),
512–524.

Downloaded by [University of Chicago] at 17:54 10 June 2012 