The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 2

pp. 118–124 May 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Between the Cross and the Crescent: Countries Bordering
the Ottoman Empire in the Eyes of Dutch Cartographers

Mirela Slukan Altic´

Institute of Social Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia
Email: mirela.altic@zg.htnet.hr

The paper presents the results of original research based on the comparative analysis of maps from the atlases of Abraham
Ortelius, Jodocus and Henricus Hondius, Willem Blaeu, Jan Janssonius, Gerard and Cornelis de Jode, and Gerardus
Mercator. We discover the sources that Dutch cartographers and publishers used for their cartographic representations of
the above countries and the descriptions appearing on the reverse of these maps. In this regard, we devote special attention
to the role played by Gerardus Mercator and his successors. In addition, we evaluate the significance of Dutch
cartography in spreading knowledge about the geography and history of Southeastern Europe and, generally, its impact on
the perception of the countries bordering the Ottoman Empire.

Keywords: Southeastern Europe, Dutch cartography, mapping of territories under Ottoman rule, Ottoman border

INTRODUCTION

With the expansion of the Ottoman Empire in the early
sixteenth century,
the countries of Southeastern Europe
became a great European battleﬁeld. The countries bordering
the Ottoman Empire were reorganizing their territories into
the Military Frontier, thus becoming a shield for the rest of
Europe. Owing to the military strategic importance that
Southeastern Europe gained with the invasion of
the
Ottomans, countries that otherwise had not attracted much
attention from the European cartographic public suddenly
found themselves the focus of interest for West European
cartography. From the mid-sixteenth century, the maps of
countries such as Croatia, Slavonia or Dalmatia, which had
previously been represented only in the cartographies of directly
concerned countries (the Republic of Venice, the Habsburg
Monarchy, Hungary), became an indispensable part of most
Dutch atlases. Maps of countries that were at war with the
Ottomans were developed in a very speciﬁc way. Because of the
continuing warfare, there were no preconditions for extensive
ﬁeld surveys, and a handful of surveys conducted for the
purposes of war operations were mostly kept as military secrets.
How did Dutch cartographers, who built their reputation on
ﬁeld survey-based maps, cope with the depiction of countries
for which they had no original recent data? In this paper, we
analyse what sources Dutch cartographers and publishers used
to create maps of the area during the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, and how successful they were in the presentation of
new borders, the range of the Ottoman conquest, the marking
of military fortiﬁcations and the locations of decisive battles.

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000003

COUNTRIES BORDERING THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE IN
THE ATLAS THEATRUM ORBIS TERRARUM

the Danube in mid-sixteenth century,

The ﬁrst cartographic representation, as part of Dutch
cartography, of the countries along the new border with the
Ottoman Empire, was published within Ortelius’s atlas
Theatrum Orbis Terrarum. The problem of the expansion
of the Ottoman Empire, with a territory that extended as far
as
increasingly
preoccupied the public in the whole of Europe. As an
experienced publisher with a keen sense of commerce, with
the intention of conveying information about the Ottoman
conquests, Ortelius decided to include in his atlas a more
detailed representation of countries that came under direct
attack from the Ottoman conquerors. Even in his ﬁrst
edition of Theatrum, he included a map that represents the
immediate arena of armed conﬂicts between the Ottoman
Empire and the countries under Habsburg (Croatia,
Slavonia) and Venetian rule (Dalmatia). It is a map of
Slavonia, Croatia and neighbouring countries from the pen
of Habsburg cartographer Augustin Hirschvogel1 (map
number: Ort 145; van den Broecke, 2011). Hirschvogel’s
map is an original author’s work that was based on ﬁeld
observation2. It
the
Ottoman forces, which, after conquering Bosnia in 1463,
proceeded to conquer almost all of Slavonia, parts of
Croatia, and a signiﬁcant part of Dalmatia in the ﬁrst half
of the sixteenth century (Figure. 1). Made at a scale of
1 : 600 000, it was one of the most detailed maps of the area
made for public use. Given the wartime circumstances in

the area of expansion of

shows

Between the Cross and the Crescent

119

Figure 1. Hirschvogel’s map of Croatia and Slavonia, Ortelius’s
Latin edition, Antwerp, 1574. Provided by: Barry Lawrence
Ruderman Antique Maps

Sambucus, Ortelius’s
Johannes
Figure 2.
Antwerp, 1578. Provided by: Reinhold Berg Antique Book

Illyricum,

edition,

which it was created, the map shows all the fortiﬁed
settlements that played or might have played a defensive role
in the war with the Ottomans. It should be noted that some
of these often very small villages or feudal fortiﬁcations were
shown on Hirschvogel’s map for the ﬁrst time. Although
Hirschvogel’s access to the mapping of that area serves an
exclusively military strategic purpose, the author neither
shows the line of demarcation itself nor does he indicate the
possession of particular fortiﬁcations by either of the sides.
Thus, by examining the map, the reader actually only learns
about the spatial distribution and names of the fortiﬁcations,
but not about the scope of the Ottoman conquests. To be
more precise, the map does not even mention the Ottomans,
even though the greater part of the depicted area was already
part of the Ottoman Empire. It is unknown whether the
representation of the position of the border was omitted by
Hirschvogel or Ortelius for reasons of precaution (the border
was constantly shifting, and the data on the border could
have become outdated at the time of publication of the map),
but this fact certainly signiﬁcantly reduced the quality of
information that users of the map were able to gather about
the area. In addition, it is interesting to add that the same
Hirschvogel map was also published in Gerard de Jode’s atlas
Speculum Orbis Terrarum in 1578, but providing clear
indication as to the control of each fortiﬁcation (marking the
fortiﬁcations under Ottoman rule with a crescent; their
representations roughly correspond to the status in 1552)3.
It is particularly interesting to compare Hirschvogel’s map
with Ortelius’s text found on its reverse side. In the editions
from 1570 and 1571, the descriptions of Croatia and
Slavonia mainly refer to the situation in these countries
in this article,
during the period of Antiquity. Namely,
Ortelius mainly quotes the ancient writers (Pliny, Ptolemy,
Pomponius Mela, Dionysius of Alexandria, Strabo), whereas
more contemporary authors
such as Marcin Kromer,
Dominicus Nigrus and Volaterranus are mentioned only
incidentally as a possible additional source of information for
the readership4. At one point only does he brieﬂy mention

that
these countries are now mostly divided between
Hungary and Venice. The presence of the Ottomans is not
mentioned at all. All the settlements mentioned in the text
are ancient (Scardona, Iadera, Parentum, etc.), so the text
does not correspond with Hirschvogel’s map showing
Croatia and Slavonia, i.e. what they looked like in the late
Middle Ages, at all. Only the text published in the Latin
edition of 1572 and the German edition of 1573 brieﬂy
mentions that most of the regions shown on the map are now
under Turkish dominion. Ortelius himself discusses the
problem of obsolete information relating to the description
of Croatia and Slavonia in his text published on the reverse of
this map in the 1587 French edition of the atlas. Here
‘After having received a most exquisite
Ortelius says:
description of Slavonia by the highly learned Ioan
Sambucus […], I confess that we would not include another
one in this Theatre of ours’5.

the

Perceiving

above-mentioned shortcomings

in
Hirschvogel’s map, Ortelius decided that he would add
another map representing Croatia and Slavonia to the 1573
edition. Thus, the above-mentioned border area with the
Ottoman Empire was represented by two different maps,
which offered a completely different perspective on the
area6. This was the map entitled Illyricum, which was
created in Vienna in 1572 by Johannes Sambucus (Map
number: Ort 144; van den Broecke, 2011)7. Sambucus
based his map on Hirschvogel’s map of Hungary from
15658, but even more on the manuscript map of Croatia
and Slavonia made by Nicolo Angielini9. Thanks to the
exceptional quality of Angielini’s map, which was based on
ﬁeld observations10, in relation to Hirschvogel, Sambucus
signiﬁcantly improved the accuracy of the physical geogra-
phical base (Figure 2). Numerous errors in the hydro-
graphy, present in Hirschvogel’s map, were corrected and
the representation of relief was also slightly improved. The
fortiﬁcations in Croatia and Slavonia that were marked by
Sambucus are mostly the same ones that are also located by
Angielini on his map of Croatia and Slavonia. The position

120

The Cartographic Journal

of the border between the Ottoman Empire and Croatia
and Slavonia in Sambucus’s map approximately corresponds
to the conditions in 1552. It is unknown why Sambucus, in
his representation of the border, did not rely on Angielini as
well, as the latter’s account of the scope of the Ottoman
conquests was somewhat more up to date (Angielini’s map
depicts the situation in 1560). It is interesting that, in some
editions of Sambucus’s map, not only was the border with
the Ottoman Empire marked, but the territory of the
Military Frontier within the Croatian territory was shown
highlighted in a special colour, which speaks for the fact
that Sambucus was well acquainted with the territorial
organisation of the defense against the Ottomans that was
established in Croatia at that time. It is important to note
that, in Ortelius’s editions, Sambucus’s map also underwent
some minor amendments. Thus, in the editions published
after 1592, the map was amended with the name of the city
of Karlovac, a key Military Frontier fortress systematically
built in 1579 as a new centre on the Croatian Military
Border. This fact tells us that the data on the defensive war
against the Ottomans as well as on the fortiﬁcations playing
a key role in this war were carefully monitored in the
cartographic workshops of Western Europe11.

Unlike a relatively accurate picture of the situation of the
Habsburg–Ottoman demarcation in the area of Croatia and
Slavonia, the marking of the border between the Ottoman
Empire and the Republic of Venice in Dalmatia in
Sambucus’s map had many shortcomings (the line of
demarcation corresponds with the border status between
Dalmatia and Bosnia before the Ottoman invasion). It is the
result of using Venetian maps that were generally silent on
in Dalmatia.
the Ottoman conquests
the scope of
Speciﬁcally,
for the representation of Dalmatia and its
hinterland, Sambucus used the map Zara et Sebenici
descriptio created by Ortelius in 1573 according to the
1570 map of the same name by Natale Bonifacio12 (Map
number: Ort 143c; van den Broecke, 2011). As this map did
not indicate the then current boundaries of the Ottoman
Empire in Dalmatia, Sambucus adopted the aged data
showing the size of Dalmatia before the Ottoman invasion.

NEW BORDERS WITH THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE ON MAPS
BY GERARDUS MERCATOR AND HIS SUCCESSORS

Geopolitical changes in Southeastern Europe associated with
the expansion of the Ottoman Empire were, quite expectedly,
closely monitored by another great Dutch cartographer –
Gerardus Mercator. The volume Italia – Sclavonia – Grecia
with 21 maps13, in which he included a map of Slavonia,
Croatia, Bosnia, and part of Dalmatia14, appeared as early as
1589. The same map was also included in his 1595 Atlas sive
Cosmographicae (Mercator, 1595/2000). Unlike his prede-
cessors, he spread his map of Slavonia and Croatia toward the
east, encompassing the whole of Bosnia and the western part
of Serbia. As a basic source, Mercator used older maps of
Hungary by Lazarus (1528) and Lazius (1556). The
collection of data on the territories that came under
Ottoman rule was
an insurmountable problem for
Mercator. Unlike Ortelius for the area of Croatia and
Slavonia, Mercator did not have the direct support of a
cartographer well acquainted with the then current on-site

situation. The fortiﬁcations found in the area of Slavonia,
Croatia, Dalmatia and Bosnia are the same ones that were
marked by Lazarus and Lazius, even though many of them
had meanwhile disappeared. Generally, the failure to use
newer Habsburg cartographic sources inﬂuenced the fact that
the accuracy of Mercator’s map fell signiﬁcantly below that of
the maps that were published by Ortelius (the names of
fortiﬁcations are signiﬁcantly misspelled and their locations
incorrect). The depicted fortiﬁcations are largely feudal
fortresses from the medieval period. Thus, data on countries
that either became part of the Ottoman Empire during the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries or bordered these countries
were not updated. In addition, as a result of compiling from
multiple cartographic sources, some toponyms repeatedly
appear on the map in different forms. For example, Zagreb is
indicated twice – once as Zagrabia (Magyarized form), then
slightly further to the west once again as Agram (the
Germanized form of
the name). The lack of current
information is apparent in the names of administrative and
territorial units. Speciﬁcally, in the region of Slavonia, we ﬁnd
the names of the medieval counties that Mercator had
adopted from Lazarus’s map of Hungary15. These counties
were abolished as early as the mid-sixteenth century, with the
establishment of Ottoman rule, and territorial units called
sanjaks were introduced (Slukan Altic´, 2001).

In the ﬁrst editions of Mercator’s map of Slavonia and
Croatia (1589, 1595), the borders between the countries are
not indicated, and neither is the border with the Ottoman
Empire. The map was compiled only as a representation of
Slavonia, Croatia, Dalmatia and Bosnia without any mention
of the Ottoman encroachment and the establishment of their
authority over much of the depicted territory. We see the
medieval Kingdoms of Croatia, Slavonia, Bosnia and Serbia
as they looked before the invasion of the Ottomans. When
the publication of Mercator’s maps was taken over by
Jodocus Hondius (1606), there was a clear intention to
depict the scope of the Ottoman conquest on the map of
Slavonia and Croatia by delineating the line indicating the
new border with the Ottoman Empire. The awareness of the
presence of Ottoman rule in the regions represented was now
reﬂected in heraldry as well – Hondius added three coats of
arms, the Venetian, Habsburg, and Ottoman, in the upper
part of his map, informing us in this way that the represented
countries were divided between the three imperial powers.

In both Janssonius’s and Blaeu’s editions of Mercator’s
map, the coloured line clearly separates the territory of the
Ottoman Empire from the territory under the authority
of the Habsburg Monarchy and the Venetian Republic
respectively (Figure 3). As there were quite a few editions of
the above-mentioned Mercator’s map in the period after
1606, it is interesting to see how the different editions
recorded the position of the border with the Ottoman
Empire. In fact, apart from the artistic design of the title
cartouche, the only change in Hondius’s, Janssonius’s and
Blaeu’s editions of Mercator’s map refers to the position of
the indicated border. By comparing the editions of the
above map that appeared between 1606 and 1640, we can
see that the position of the Ottoman border is different in
almost all editions, but the observed changes do not
correspond to the expansion of the Ottoman Empire at all.
It is particularly interesting to compare the position of the

Between the Cross and the Crescent

121

Figure 3. Mercator’s map of Croatia and Slavonia, Blaeu’s edition,
Amsterdam, 1643. Provided by: Reinhold Berg Antique Book

Figure 4. Map of northern Dalmatia, Jan Janssonius, Amsterdam,
1650. Provided by: Barry Lawrence Ruderman Antique Maps

demarcation line in Slavonia, where the position of the
border did not change at all in the period from 1606 to
1688 (the western border of the Ottoman conquests was on
the river Ilova). The most accurate position of the border
can be found in the early Hondius editions. The 1609
edition not only indicates the western border of
the
Ottoman conquest correctly, but marks the inner border
of the Military Frontier within Croatian territory as well.
After the publication of Mercator’s maps was taken over by
Willem Blaeu (1629), the border of the Ottoman conquests
was moved further to the east, without any historical
foundation, and after 1640, the depiction of the border was
often completely missing (e.g. in the 1643 edition). The
cause of such inconsistency should probably be sought in
the misplotted hydrographic network. The western border
of the Ottoman conquests followed the line of river ﬂow,
and hydrography was one of the weakest elements in
Mercator’s map. Additional confusion was caused by the
fact that there was apparently no reliable information about
which of the Slavonian rivers the western border of the
Ottoman Empire was located on. Mercator had even less
information about the position of the Venetian–Ottoman
border in Dalmatia. He, like his predecessors before him,
thus depicted Dalmatia in its territorial extent before the
Ottoman encroachment.

The text appearing on the reverse of Mercator’s map of
Croatia and Slavonia is similar in structure and content to
the text on Croatia and Slavonia that was published in
Ortelius’s atlas. These texts show clear correspondences
between Mercator’s texts and those written by Ortelius.
However, Mercator’s text on Croatia, Slavonia, Dalmatia
and Bosnia is more relevant in many respects. Mercator was
much better acquainted with the range of the Ottoman
conquests (especially in Croatia and Slavonia) and the
changes occurring after the establishment of Ottoman rule.
He had gathered relatively detailed information from
certain European chronicles about the key battles that took
place in Southeastern Europe so, in the region of Croatia,

he speciﬁcally mentions the importance of the Battle of
Sisak in 1593. Thus, Mercator was better informed about
the chronology of the Ottoman conquests in Southeastern
Europe than Ortelius, which was reﬂected in better textual
descriptions of the depicted countries. At the same time,
because of
insufﬁcient knowledge of the more recent
Habsburg cartographic sources, Mercator’s knowledge of
the topography of the terrain in Croatia and Slavonia was
even worse, resulting in a poorer cartographic representa-
tion of the terrain than we ﬁnd in Johannes Sambucus.

MAP BY JAN JANSSONIUS – THE FIRST ACCURATE
REPRESENTATION OF THE OTTOMAN CONQUESTS OF
DALMATIA

As shown in the above examples, the biggest problem for
Dutch cartographers in representing the Ottoman conquests
was the Venetian–Ottoman border in Dalmatia. This is a
result of the previously mentioned fact that, as late as 1688,
Venetians maps depicted the borders of Dalmatia as they used
to be before the invasion of the Ottomans. Thus, Dutch
cartographers using Venetian maps were not able to take over
information on the exact position of the boundary line. One
of the few exceptions in this regard is the map of northern
Dalmatia published by Jan Janssonius in 1650 (Figure 4). The
map in question is the map of Zadar, Sˇibenik and Nin
Counties16 that was published in Volume V of Janssonius’s
Atlas Novus (Keuning, 1951)17. Unlike Ortelius, who used
the map by Natale Bonifacio to represent Dalmatia, when
compiling his map of Dalmatia, Janssonius made use of a
better source – the 1571 maps of Zadar and Sˇibenik
Counties18 by Martin Rota Kolunic´, the Croatian cartogra-
pher in the service of Venice19. These maps provided detailed
information on the Dalmatian hinterland and, more impor-
tantly, depicted the range of the Ottoman conquests. In order
to amend Kolunic´’s map depicting the border of 1570,
Janssonius apparently made use of Venetian war reports or

122

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. Hirschvogel’s map of Croatia, edition of de Jode, Antwerp,
1593. Provided by: Barry Lawrence Ruderman Antique Maps

descriptions of the 1536 line of demarcation. In his map,
Janssonius indicated no fewer than two lines of demarcation,
the 1536 and 1570 demarcations (unfortunately, for reasons
unknown, Janssonius failed to depict the border throughout
its entire length, but depicted only the section in the Zadar
hinterland). In addition, Janssonius’s map testiﬁes to the use
of certain Ottoman sources as well. His map is the only map
from the period of expansion of the Ottoman Empire
that provides information about new settlements in the
Dalmatian hinterland founded in the context of colonisation
by new populations after the establishment of Ottoman
authority (Slukan Altic´, 2007). These settlements ﬁrst appear
in Janssonius’s map, only later to be recorded by Venetian
sources as well. In this context, Janssonius’s map of northern
Dalmatia is a rare example of a very successful compilation of
Venetian and Ottoman sources, which resulted in the most
accurate representation of the Venetian–Ottoman border in
Dalmatia. The extraordinary achievements of Janssonius’s
map were only exceeded by the appearance of Coronelli’s
maps of Dalmatia produced from 1688 onward.

THE REALITY OF WARTIME CROATIA AND THE ECHOES
OF THE BATTLE OF SISAK (1592–1593) IN THE MAP
FROM THE DE JODE FAMILY WORKSHOP

In the context of sixteenth-century Dutch cartography, the
most important breakthrough in the currency and accuracy
of the representation of the Ottoman Empire’s expansion in
Southeastern Europe would be made by Gerard de Jode
and his son Cornelis. In his effort to surpass Abraham Ortelius,
his eternal rival, Gerard de Jode tried to collect more accurate
and more current data for his maps than those found in the
Ortelius or Mercator atlases. Thus, in his atlas Speculum Orbis
Terrarum from 157820, Gerard de Jode published a revised
Hirschvogel map of Croatia and Slavonia with a clear
representation of the range of the Ottoman conquest (Figure
5). But, aware of the obsolescence of Hirschvogel’s map, de
Jode decided to create a new map that would show the current
situation in the countries bordering the Ottoman Empire.
Thanks to his careful monitoring of the European chronicles
reporting the progress of the Turkish troops and the situation

Figure 6. Map of Croatian battleﬁeld, Cornelis de Jode, Antwerp,
1593. Croatian Museum of History

on certain fronts, in 1593, Cornelis de Jode published the most
detailed and accurate depiction of the Turkish front in the area
of Croatia that had hitherto been achieved by Dutch
cartography. The map in question is the map of Croatia21
published by Cornelis de Jode within the atlas Speculum Orbis
Terrae (van der Krogt, 2000). With respect to the physical
geographical base, de Jode’s map relies heavily on Sambucus’s
map Illyricum, but everything else is original work by Cornelis
de Jode (Figure 6). The map represents Croatia, Slavonia and
part of Bosnia on the eve of the fateful Battle of Sisak in 1593.
In June 1593, at Sisak, a small fortress at the conﬂuence of the
rivers Sava and Kupa, the Ottomans clashed with the combined
Christian forces which, in addition to the Croatian troops,
consisted of some forces from Styria, Carinthia, Carniola and
Germany. The defeat of the Ottomans at the Battle of Sisak had
not only military but also signiﬁcant symbolic repercussions.
After several centuries of successive victories, in which the
Ottomans had progressed rapidly towards the heart of Europe,
they experienced a crushing defeat for the ﬁrst time. The defeat
marked the end of their expansion into Croatian territory. The
news of the great victory of the Christian army spread the name
of the town of Sisak throughout Europe. In those years,
chronicles describing the ﬂow of the battle were printed, and
vedute of the Sisak fortress and numerous prints depicting the
battle itself were published all over Europe22.

Cornelis de Jode adopted this trend as well, promptly
including a representation of the battleﬁeld in Croatia in his
atlas. It is particularly important to emphasize that this was not
just a symbolic representation of the Battle of Sisak, but a very
real representation of the arrangement of the Ottoman troops.
In 1592, the Ottoman army led by Hasan Pasha captured Bihac´
and Krupa, key fortresses on the river Una, and were just
moving toward Sisak. At the same time, Ottoman squads were
looting Turopolje (Duropolia) and the area around the newly
established fortress of Karlovac (Carlstadt). The exact range of
the Ottoman conquest can be traced in the indications of
settlements – a crescent moon is placed above all the captured

Between the Cross and the Crescent

123

fortresses. de Jode’s level of information was remarkable – all
fortresses seized between 1591 and 1592 are marked with a
crescent moon. The same marking method was also applied to
all the fortresses in Slavonia to the west of the river Cˇ azma that
were part of the Ottoman Empire at the time of map
compilation. de Jode’s exceptional
level of information is
further conﬁrmed in the Latin text on the reverse of the map
(fol. 18 entitled Croatiae Tabula). Unlike Ortelius and
Mercator, who mainly concentrated on the period of
Antiquity in their descriptions of Croatia and Slavonia, de
Jode devotes the entire text to the present moment. He
carefully describes the Ottoman conquests in Croatia and
Slavonia in 1592 and 1593. In addition, he emphasizes the
unity of the Christian forces in their effort to stop the Ottomans
at Sisak, in which they ﬁnally succeeded in the famous battle
fought on 22 June 1593.

It is interesting that, in spite of de Jode’s obvious progress in
the depiction of the Ottoman conquests in countries directly
bordering the Ottoman Empire, his map was not taken over by
any Dutch publisher. The only reprint of this map was
published in Levinus Hulsius’s collection in Nuremberg in
159523. Thus, de Jode’s comprehensive depiction of the
Ottoman front from 1593 shared the sad fate of his brilliant but
little known atlas.

CONCLUSIONS

Based on the above, we can conclude that Dutch cartographers
were aware of the importance of geopolitical changes in the
Southeastern Europe. The encroachments of the Ottomans
and fear of their expansion deeper into the European continent
drew the attention of Western cartographers to the important
role of Croatia, Dalmatia and Slavonia in stopping the
Ottomans. However, collection of data at a site located in the
far southeast of Europe, which was also largely under Ottoman
occupation, was a major problem for all cartographers, and the
Dutch were no exception. At least some data on the parts of
Croatia, Dalmatia and Slavonia that were not under Ottoman
rule could be adopted from the Habsburg and Venetian maps.
At the same time, cartographers had no information at all on
large parts of the Croatian territory that was included in the
Ottoman Empire (in the case of Bosnia, this refers to its entire
territory), and their representations were based on obsolete
descriptions from the medieval period. Some cartographers
such as Ortelius found a way to ﬁx this problem by publishing
the maps by Habsburg and Hungarian cartographers who
personally
they were describing
territory
(Hirschvogel, Sambucus), but not even they always had the
most current data on the status of the border. Some such as
Mercator and Janssonius tried, with more or less success, to deal
with the problem of collecting current data by themselves
reading chronicles of the battleﬁelds, certain military reports or
descriptions of the line of demarcation. In this regard, the only
genuine breakthrough toward accurate representation of the
battleﬁeld was made solely by Cornelis de Jode, who managed
to entirely accurately represent the position of the border as well
as the situation at the Battle of Sisak almost simultaneously with
its occurrence. It was a rare success, which at the time
unfortunately went almost unnoticed.

knew the

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

fellow in

Mirela Slukan Altic´, is a senior
research
the
Institute of Social Sciences
Zagreb, Croatia, where she
works as a Head of the Centre
of Urban and Local History.
She specializes in historical
geography, historical carto-
graphy, urban and local his-
tory. At the Department of
History of
the Faculty of
Philosophy, University of
Zagreb, as associated profes-
sor, Dr Altic´
lectures on
‘Introduction to the Reading
and
of Historic Maps’
for
‘Cartographic
Croatian
European
History’. She is also participating in education at postgraduate
studies at the Department of History. Occasionally, Dr Altic´
teaches in universities in foreign countries. She has been the
head of Croatian national project, ‘Historic Towns Atlas’, since
2003. She is also the author of 12 books, including ﬁve
volumes of the Croatian Historic Towns Atlas. In 2004, she
won the annual prize for science for her book ‘Historical
Cartography: Cartographic Sources in Historical Sciences’. Dr
Altic´ is a member of the ICA Commission on the History of
Cartography.

Sources

and

NOTES
1 Schlavoniae, Croatiae, Carniae, Istriae, Bosniae ﬁnitimarum-
que regionum nova description/auctore Augustino Hirsvo-
gelio. [Scale: ca 1 : 600 000]. Copperplate map, with added
colour, 34646 cm (Antwerpen: Abraham Ortelius, 1573).

2 There are some controversies as to the formation of this
map. Although Hirschvogel undoubtedly made use of
certain older sources as well (e.g. Lazarus’s map of Hungary
this map primarily relies on Hirschvogel’s
of 1528),
this
It
personal on-site observations.
cartographer had lived in Ljubljana from 1536 to 1543,
then in Vienna, and that he had visited the border with the
Ottoman Empire on several occasions. Based on these visits,
in 1539, Hirschvogel allegedly created a detailed map of the
Ottoman–Croatian border. Although the map has not been
found, it certainly existed because it was mentioned in the
notes on Hirschvogel’s legacy (Hampe, 1904).

is known that

3 Illirici Seu Sclavoniae, Continentis Croatiam, Carniam,
Istriam, Bosniam, eisquae conterminas provincias, recens
ac emendatus typus Auctore Augustino Hirsvogelio. [Scale:
ca 1 : 600 000]. Copperplate map, with added colour,
30651.4 cm (Antwerpen: Gerard de Jode, 1578).

4 According to van den Broecke,

these texts were
certainly all written by Ortelius himself if introduced into
his atlas before his death in 1598. Texts appearing on maps
introduced after Ortelius’s death were written by Vrients
and later by the Plantin-Moretus family. The texts of maps
introduced by Ortelius no longer increase in length with
each edition and clearly lack the driving force for updating
information that was so typical of Ortelius.

124

5 Translation of the text according to van den Broecke,

http://www.orteliusmaps.com

6 In the editions of the atlas that were published from 1579
onward, Ortelius justiﬁes the inclusion of two maps for the
same area in the following way: ‘I intended, as I promised in the
preface of this book, to publish only one map for each country,
and that as exact as it might be. Thus, when the famous man
Iohannes Sambucus sent to me a more accurate map of this
country to be inserted into this Theatre of ours [than I had], I
decided to leave the other one out. But since it is often both
delightful to acquaint oneself with different opinions about one
and the same thing, I persuaded myself for this reason that it
will not be altogether unproﬁtable sometimes to see the
different descriptions by different authors of one and the same
country…’ (English translation according to van der Broecke,
http://www.orteliusmaps.com).

7 Illyricum/Johannes Sambucus. [Scale: ca 1 : 700 000].
Viennae, Vale 25. Octobrii 1572. Copperplate map, with
added colour, 36.5647.5 cm.

8 Zu Ehr der Ro¨mischen zu Hungern …/August
Hirschvogel. Nuremberg, 1565. Woodcut in 12 sheets,
150.7680.2 cm.

9 Croatia

et Sclavonia/Nicolo Angielini.
ca
1 : 600 000]. [S.l, ca 1560]. Manuscript map, with added
colour, 74.5653 cm.

[Scale

10 Nicolo Angielini, Habsburg cartographer and fortiﬁ-
cation expert of Italian descent who worked in the mid-
sixteenth century. He created several maps of Croatia,
Slavonia and Hungary, and a number of plans of fortiﬁed
settlements. Up to 1566, he visited more than 50 fortresses
in the areas of Croatia and Hungary. These maps and plans
were bound into a single volume and dated 1566; however,
the plans were created gradually over time, probably
between 1560 and 1566 (Slukan Altic´, 2003).

11 After Ortelius had included Sambucus’s map in his
atlas, the text that appears on its reverse side is the same text
that we ﬁnd on the map of Croatia and Slavonia by Augustin
Hirschvogel in the earlier editions (van den Broecke, 2011).
12 Bozˇo Bonifacˇic´ (1537–1592), also known as Natale
Bonifacio. Born in Sˇibenik, Dalmatia, he was educated in
Venice. He worked as a cartographer, mainly in Rome. For
the purposes of the Venetian Republic, he created a number
of maps and vedute that were mainly published within the
isolari, especially the isolari of Donato Bertelli and Francesco
Camocio (Slukan Altic´, 2003).

13 Italiae, Sclavoniae, et Graeciae tabulae geographicae,
per Gerardum Mercatorem Illustrissimi Duci Julie Clivie etc.
Cosmographum Duysburg edite.

14 Sclavonia, Croatia, Bosnia cum Dalmatia parte/
Gerardus Mercator. [Scale: ca 1:1 000 000]. Duisburg,
1589. Copperplate, 26638.3 cm.

15 In the Ottoman territory, we ﬁnd the names for
the Pozˇega (Posegiensis com), Srijem (Sirmiensis com) and
Vukovar Counties (Valconensis com), which no longer
existed in Mercator’s time. In the western part of the
country, which was under Habsburg rule, we ﬁnd indications
for the Zagreb (Zagrabiensis com) and Krizˇevci Counties
(Risi com). Apart from these, Varazˇdin County also existed at
that time, which Mercator failed to indicate even though it is
found in the Lazius map of 1556.

The Cartographic Journal

16 Iadera, Sicum et Aenona vulgo Zara, Sibenico et
Nona cum Insulis Adjacentibus in Parte Dalmatiae Boreali.
Amsterdam: Jan Janssonius, 1650. Copperplate map, with
added colour, 42652.5 cm.

17 The volume was published under a separate title Atlas

Maritimus, Seeatlas oder Wasserwelt.

18 These maps were entitled Zara et Contado citta principale
della Dalmatia posta sul mare Adriatico loco delli Illustrissimi
Signori Venetiani al presente molestata da Turchi and Sebenico et
Contado citta nella Dalmatia conﬁnate con Zara delli Illustrissimi
Signori venetiani al presente da Turchi molestado, 1571.

19 Martin Rota Kolunic´ (1532–1583), well-known artist
and engraver who was born in Sˇibenik, Dalmatia. By 1573,
he was established as the court portrait engraver of Rudolph
II. As a cartographer, he excelled in the creation of
numerous vedute of Dalmatian and Istrian towns that were
printed in Venetian isolari by Giuseppe Rosaccio, Francesco
Camocio and Francesco Valegio (Slukan Altic´, 2003).

20 It was aimed to compete with Ortelius’s Theatrum
which had been published eight years earlier. Unfortunately,
the Theatrum had become so popular by the time de Jode
published his own atlas that his version never sold well,
despite his outstanding reputation.

21 Croatiae [et] circumiacentiu[m] Regionu[m] versus
Turcam nova delineatio. Reverendiss[i]mo in Christo Parti as
D[omi]no D[omino] Laevino Torrentio, Episcopo
Antverpie[n]si. D[omi]no [et] Praesuli suo/Gerard de
Jode. [Scale: ca 1 : 700 000]. Antwerpen: Cornelis de Jode,
1593. Copperplate map, with added colour, 33640 cm.

22 One of the typical prints with a description of war
events at Sisak published by the Viennese printmaker and
wood engraver Wolfgang Halbmeister in 1592: ‘Warhaftige
Zeitung aus Krabatn was massen ein Tu¨rckischer Wasch
Hassan Wascha genand mit etlich hundert starck bey dem
Kloster und Vestung Zisekh…’.

23 Croatiae [et] circumiacentiu[m] Regionu[m] versus
Turciam nova delineatio/Levinus Hulsius.
ca
1 : 700 000]. Copperplate map, with added colour,
20644 cm (Nuremberg, 1596).

[Scale:

REFERENCES

Hampe, Th. (1904). Nu¨rnberger Ratsverla¨sse u¨ber Kunst und
Ku¨nstler im Zeitalter der Spa¨tgotik und Renaissance, No. 2417,
K. Graeser & Kie, Wien.

Keuning, J. (1951). ‘The Novus Atlas of Johannes Janssonius’, Imago

Mundi, 8, pp. 71–98.

Mercator, G. (1595/2000). Atlas sive Cosmographicae Medita-
tiones de Fabrica Mundi et Fabricati Figura, Digital facsimile of
1595 edition, Octavo Edition, Oakland (introduction by Robert W.
Karrow, Jr; English translation by David Sullivan).

Slukan Altic´, M. (2001). ‘Kartografski

izvori za povijest upravno-
teritorijalnog ustroja hrvatskih zemalja [Cartographic Sources for the
History of Administrative-Territorial Organization of the Croatian
Lands]’, Zbornik Pravnog fakulteta u Zagrebu, 51, pp. 645–672.
Slukan Altic´, M. (2003). Povijesna kartografija – kartografski izvori u
povijesnim znanostima [Historical Cartography – Cartographic
Sources in Historical Sciences], Publishing House Meridijani, Zagreb.
Slukan Altic´, M. (2007). Povijesna geogrfija rijeke Krke [Historical
Geography of the River Krka Region], National Park River Krka, Sˇibenik.
van den Broecke, M. (2011). Ortelius Atlas Maps. An Illustrated
Guide, 2nd revised ed., Hes & De Graaf Publishers, Houten.
van der Krogt, P. (2000). Koeman’s Atlantes Neerlandici, New
Edition, Vol. III, Utrecht University and Hes & De Graaf
Publishers, Utrecht.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

