This article was downloaded by: [Florida State University]
On: 21 December 2014, At: 10:50
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Criteria of geographic relevance: an
experimental study
Stefano De Sabbata a & Tumasch Reichenbacher a
a Department of Geography , University of Zürich , Zürich ,
Switzerland
Published online: 16 Feb 2012.

To cite this article: Stefano De Sabbata & Tumasch Reichenbacher (2012) Criteria of geographic
relevance: an experimental study, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26:8,
1495-1520, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2011.639303

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.639303

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 26, No. 8, August 2012, 1495–1520

Criteria of geographic relevance: an experimental study

Stefano De Sabbata* and Tumasch Reichenbacher

Department of Geography, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

(Received 21 June 2011; ﬁnal version received 1 November 2011)

The relevance of geographic information has become an emerging problem in geo-
graphic information science due to an enormous increase in volumes of data at high
spatial, temporal, and semantic resolution, because of ever faster rates of new data cap-
turing. At the same time, it is not clear whether the concept of relevance developed in
information science and implemented for document-based information retrieval can be
directly applied to this new, highly dynamic setting. In this study, we analyze the criteria
users apply when judging the relevance of geographic entities in a given mobile usage
context. Two different experiments have been set up in order to gather users’ opinions
on a set of possible criteria, and their relevance judgements in a given scenario. The
importance ascribed to the criteria in both experiments clearly implies that a new con-
cept of relevance is required when dealing with geographic entities instead of digital
documents. This new concept of ‘Geographic Relevance’ is highly dependent on per-
sonal mobility and user’s activity, whose understanding may in turn be reﬁned by the
assimilation of ‘Geographic Relevance’ itself.

Keywords: geographic relevance; criteria of relevance; mobility;
services

location-based

Introduction

1.
In the last few years, remarkable advances in mobile computing, telecommunication ser-
vices, and positioning systems have radically changed the way we create, share, and explore
geographic information. Vast amounts of geographic data have become available to experts
as well as to the public. The access to geographic information has also become much
simpler through lean web-mapping clients or applications such as Google Maps. In par-
allel, the usage of digital geographic information has moved on to mobile platforms. The
almost ubiquitous access to geographic information has become a commodity owing to
affordable and powerful mobile devices, widespread availability of mobile network con-
nectivity, provision of spatial datasets, and services built upon them, aiming at delivering
location-related information to mobile users.

At the same time, rapid technological advances have led to new fundamental chal-
lenges. Mobile devices feature small displays and limited interaction capabilities. Usability
studies reveal that a naïve approach to information supply is not applicable to mobile usage
of geographic information (Pombinho et al. 2009). The most eminent problem arising
from the large amount of spatial data available is the likelihood of human information

*Corresponding author. Email: stefano.desabbata@geo.uzh.ch

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.639303
http://www.tandfonline.com

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1496

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

overload. The reasons for limiting the number of geographic information objects in
visual representations are the limited capacity of information processing in both humans
and mobile computers, the limitations in display space, and the need for efﬁciency in
decision-making processes based on geographic information. The effective and efﬁcient
communication of geographic information to a mobile user in an accurate manner is a com-
plex process. In order to address this problem we need to understand which information is
relevant to a mobile user.

The issue is then how to dig into this potential mine of geographic information, in
order to deliver to the users just the relevant information, and how to deﬁne relevance in
this new setting. To handle this challenge, in Geographic Information Science (GIScience)
the concept of Geographic Relevance (GR) has been developed (Zipf 2003, Reichenbacher
2005, Raper 2007, Reichenbacher et al. 2009). GR refers to the relevance of a geographic
entity,1 given a speciﬁc context of usage. That is, GR does not refer to the relevance of
a geo-referenced document or a document reporting geographic information, it refers to
the relevance of the real world entity or event by itself. This deﬁnition encompasses the
concept of wireless/mobile relevance proposed by Coppola et al. (2004), since it entails
a situational relevance (Wilson 1973, Saracevic 2007) that deals with the user context and
the objects in the physical world. As such, this deﬁnition is rather far away from the cur-
rent understanding that underlies geographic information retrieval systems and information
retrieval systems. More pragmatically, GR is intended to assess the relevance of an object,
that is a representation of a geographic entity within a computer system or database. This
object can be a collection of documents or an entry in a database describing a point of
interest, or a combination of these two, accompanied by further information. Still, even if
the evaluation is based on a single document, the objective is to approximate the relevance
of the entity, not to judge how relevant the document is – in general, different documents
concerning the same entity may have different levels of relevance.

Considering this new concept of GR, the succeeding issue is how to evaluate GR for
a geographic entity in a given usage context. The relationship between the context of a
mobile user and a geographic object in his or her environment is complex. It may involve
not only the user’s interest, but also his or her position, time schedule, current activity,
and knowledge of the environment. Additionally, the category of the geographic object
is likely to be involved, together with its location, time validity, affordance, surrounding
environment, and relationships to other objects. At the moment it has not been ascertained
whether these factors have an actual inﬂuence on the assessment of relevance in the setting
described above, and how prominent this inﬂuence might be.

Therefore, the question is whether GR is conceptually equal to the concept of rele-
vance employed in Information Science and Information Retrieval (IR). That is, whether
the same criteria used in IR can be applied to judge the relevance of a geographic entity, or
if additional or different criteria – related to the factors mentioned above – have to be taken
into account. The issue is then to identify an appropriate set of criteria of GR necessary
and sufﬁcient to understand the relevance of a geographic entity in a given usage context.
In fact, it has been suggested that relevance criteria in IR may also be useful for GR. People
would probably use the same criteria they evidently use in common IR for judging the rel-
evance of geographic entities (Barry and Schamber 1998). However, there are also some
distinguishing criteria related to geography that have to be considered (De Sabbata 2010).
None of them has been tested yet, and others have still to be unveiled.

In this article, we aim to report on an experimental study we conducted on the crite-
ria of GR. In Section 2, a review of related work is presented, and the applicability of the
criteria proposed in the ﬁelds of IR and GIScience to GR is discussed. In Section 3, four
recently proposed criteria of GR (De Sabbata 2010) are presented and a new criterion is

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1497

suggested. Two human subject experiments are then presented in Sections 4 and 5. Both
the sections include the description of the experimental methods, the presentation of the
results, and a related discussion. In Section 6, the overall results obtained in the two men-
tioned experiments are summarized and discussed. Section 7 concludes the article with an
outlook of future research related to Geographic Relevance.

2. Related work

Since the dawn of IR, topicality has been the key criterion on which the retrieval of infor-
mation has been based (Mizzaro 1998). Generally, topicality is deﬁned as the extent to
which a piece of information (usually a digital document stored in an archive) concerns the
topic the user is interested in. In the context of GR, the criterion topicality can be deﬁned
as the extent to which the category of the entity matches the user’s needs in accomplish-
ing an activity. If one is searching for a hospital, theaters are not relevant to the topic of
that search. This type of category-ﬁltering is what most Geographic Information Systems
(GIS), Location-Based Services (LBS), and search engines offer, together with some type
of distance ﬁltering (e.g., ﬁltering out everything that is farther away than 300 m from a
given point).
However,

‘relevance is not necessarily the same as topicality; a document on a different topic might,
for one reason or another, satisfy the user’s information need. Conversly, a document may not
be judged satisfactory, if, for example, the patron is already familiar with its contents, or is
interested in an aspect of the topic other than that treated in the document’ (Bookstein 1979,
p. 270 ).

This led in the ﬁeld of IR to investigate which criteria of relevance people use in

information seeking (Boyce 1982).

The same applies when users are searching for geographic entities or geographic infor-
mation in general rather than digital documents, then not only topicality and Euclidean
distance – which can be considered the spatial equivalent of topicality – matter. This section
presents the result of our search through the literature in the ﬁeld of IR and GIScience,
seeking for criteria of relevance that may be speciﬁcally valuable to GR.

2.1. Criteria of relevance in IR

In the early 1990s, two different studies investigated the criteria of relevance (other than
topicality) taken into account by the users of information systems (Schamber 1991, Barry
1994). Later in the same decade, the same authors jointly published a list of 10 com-
mon criteria (Barry and Schamber 1998), such as depth/scope/speciﬁcity, availability of
information/sources of information, effectiveness, accuracy/validity, clarity, currency, tan-
gibility, reliability/quality of sources, accessibility, and veriﬁcation. This list has been the
base on which subsequent work on this topic has been founded. The listed criteria are those
that can be applied to almost any kind of information, and thus, they can also be applied to
geographic information. In particular, the described criteria are not directly related to the
properties or the attributes of a geographic entity, but they relate to how well an entity is
represented in an information system, and then presented to the user.

In the following, for each criterion of the above list a deﬁnition is reported, which
explains why it is valuable for GR, that is, how it can be used in judging the relevance of
a geographic entity. When referring to the source of information, the criteria refer to any
person or organization from which the information about the entity that is present in the

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1498

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

information system has been collected. These may be individuals such as the owner of a
shop or organizations such as national mapping agencies, or anything in between (e.g., web
pages).

The criterion availability can be deﬁned as the extent to which information or sources
of information about the entity are available to the user through the information system.
The criterion speciﬁcity (also referred to as depth or scope) can be deﬁned as the extent
to which the information about an entity has sufﬁcient detail or depth. The criterion accu-
racy can be deﬁned as the extent to which the information about an entity is accurate,
correct, or valid. The criterion currency can be deﬁned as the extent to which the informa-
tion about the entity is current, recent, timely, up-to-date. The criterion veriﬁcation can be
deﬁned as the extent to which information about an entity is consistent with or supported
by other information on the same subject. The criterion reliability can be deﬁned as the
extent to which general standards of quality or speciﬁc quality standards can be assumed,
based on the source providing the information; source is reputable, trusted, expert. The
criterion accessibility can be deﬁned as the extent to which some effort or cost is required
to obtain information (not to be mistaken with the concept of spatio-temporal accessibility
in GIScience, as explained later on). The criterion clarity can be deﬁned as the extent to
which the information about the entity is presented in a clear and well-organized manner.
The criterion tangibility can be deﬁned as the extent to which the information presented to
the user relates to real, tangible issues; deﬁnite, proven information is provided; hard data
or actual numbers are provided. The criterion affectiveness can be deﬁned as the extent to
which the user exhibits an affective or emotional response to information or source of infor-
mation, that is the extent to which the information or the sources of information provide
the user with pleasure, enjoyment, or entertainment.

Schamber (1991) identiﬁed two additional criteria that relate to how the information
about an entity is presented to the user. These may have a straightforward application in a
map-based system. The criterion presentation quality can be deﬁned as the extent to which
a source presents information in a certain format or style, or offers output in a way that
is helpful, desirable, or preferable (choice of format, entertainment value). The criterion
dynamism can be deﬁned as the extent to which presentation of information is dynamic,
active, or live (e.g., presentation manipulation, zooming).

More recently, other studies have introduced further criteria of relevance, whose use
can lead to an improvement of the assessment of GR. The criterion novelty can be
deﬁned within the context of GR as the extent to which the entity or related infor-
mation are unknown or novel to the user. This criterion was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Barry
(1994) and then suggested by Xu and Chen (2006) as part of a ﬁve-factor model of rel-
evance including also topicality, reliability, understandability (i.e., clarity), and scope (i.e.,
speciﬁcity).

Savolainen and Kari (2006) focused their work on the criteria of relevance in the con-
text of web searching, including image and video seeking. Part of the study was to analyze
the criteria users apply when accepting (i.e., clicking on) hyperlinks in web browsing.
This brought them to identify three new criteria that can be valuable for GR. The crite-
rion familiarity is deﬁned as the extent to which the user is familiar with the source of
information. The criterion variety is deﬁned as the extent to which the source provides a
sufﬁcient variety of information. The criterion curiosity is deﬁned as the extent to which
access to information is dependent on personal curiosity.

In da Costa Pereira et al. (2009), the authors explore the criteria of personalized IR.
This approach to IR strongly emphasizes the importance of the user’s preferences over the
popularity of web pages. The latter probably represents the main criterion applied in current

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1499

web search engines. In the same study, two new criteria are proposed, which can be used in
the context of GR to judge how the affordance (Jordan et al. 1998) of a geographic entity
matches the current activity of the user. The criterion appropriateness can be deﬁned as
the extent to which the affordance of the entity is focused on the user needs. The criterion
coverage can be deﬁned as the extent to which the user needs are satisﬁed by the affordance
of the entity.

2.2. Criteria of relevance in GIScience

The two main criteria studied in the ﬁeld of GIScience are spatial and temporal proximity.
These criteria can be identiﬁed as part of the ‘horizon’ involved in the ‘interpretational
relevance’ as deﬁned by Saracevic (1996). The same criteria have later been encoded in
the concept of ‘physical relevance’ by Reichenbacher (2005, 2007). As such, for this work
and particularly for the experiments (see Sections 4 and 5), we are concerned with an
egocentric perspective (see Raper 2007) of representing and assessing the relevance of
geographic information. That is, GR is understood in relation to the user in the centre of
space and time.

The criterion spatial proximity can be deﬁned as the extent to which the entity is spa-
tially close to the user’s location. A related criterion, ‘geographic proximity’, was identiﬁed
in a study by Schamber (1991), in which 30 users of a weather information system were
interviewed. Spatial proximity is one of the main criteria used in Geographic Information
Retrieval (GIR) and plays a central role in LBS.

The criterion temporal proximity can be deﬁned as the extent to which an entity (or an
associated event) is temporally close to the user. It may either be past, current, or upcoming.
Analyzing the criteria employed by users to evaluate the relevance of local events, Bierig
and Göker (2006) observed that the usage of this criterion causes a sensible change on
users’ perception of the usefulness of the information.

Nevertheless, as soon as one starts taking into account the user’s mobility, the two con-
cepts of space and time cannot be considered as independent anymore. In fact, users have
to ‘trade’ time for space in order to generate mobility (Miller and Bridwell 2009). A related
concept has been proposed by Mountain and MacFarlane (2007) using the term ‘temporal
proximity’. The proposed concept states that entities that can be reached in a short period
of time are more relevant than those that require more time to be reached. This deﬁnition
does not involve just time, as the criterion proposed by Bierig and Göker (2006), but also
space. In GIScience, this concept, that is, the part of space that can be reached within some
amount of time, is commonly referred to as ‘accessibility’. It describes whether a user
is able to interact with a geographic entity, considering the travel time the user needs to
reach the entity, and the respective spatio-temporal limitations. In this study, we will not
use the term ‘accessibility’ with this meaning, in order to avoid confusion with the crite-
rion accessibility as it is deﬁned in IR (see Section 2.1). Hence, we prefer to use the term
‘spatio-temporal proximity’. The criterion spatio-temporal proximity can be deﬁned as the
extent to which the entity (or a related event) is spatio-temporally close to the user – it may
be past, current, or upcoming at the time the user will be at the location of the entity – and
how long this status will last from the moment the user will have arrived at that location.

Mountain and MacFarlane (2007) also propose four ﬁlters for Mobile Information
Retrieval (MIR), from which two other criteria of relevance can be derived. The ﬁrst crite-
rion is based on the assumption that a user in a mobile environment is interested in what he
or she can see in his or her surroundings. The criterion visibility can be deﬁned as whether
the entity can be seen from the user’s location.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1500

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Another ﬁlter developed by Mountain and MacFarlane (2007) is the ‘search-ahead ﬁl-
ter’. It is based on the assumption that users may be more interested in the entities that
are on their future path, rather than those that have been passed already. This obviously
implies some level of knowledge stored within the system about user’s direction, future
path, destination, or the usage of a prediction algorithm. That ﬁlter entails the presence of
a criterion that in this article we name ‘directionality’. The criterion directionality can be
deﬁned as the extent to which an entity is in the same direction the user is heading, or the
amount of detour needed to include the location of the entity in the path planned by the
user.

3. Criteria of geographic relevance

In the previous sections, we have shown how most of the criteria studied in IR and
GIScience are applicable to GR, and will probably be at the core of a GR-based sys-
tem. Nevertheless, it has to be taken into account the possibility that users might consider
additional criteria when evaluating the relevance of geographic entities.

In this section, we present ﬁve possible criteria of GR that originate from well-known
and widely used concepts in geography (i.e., hierarchy, cluster, co-location, association
rule, and anchor-point), which are novel to the concept of relevance as it has been devel-
oped in IR. Four of these ﬁve criteria have been proposed in (De Sabbata 2010), but none
of them has been evaluated yet.

If these ﬁve criteria will be found to be important for the assessment of GR, then we
will have to reject the hypothesis of equivalence between GR and the concept of relevance
employed in IR, which was questioned in Section 1.

3.1. The role of the geographic environment
In De Sabbata (2010) four new criteria of GR were introduced. These criteria are hierar-
chy, cluster, co-location, and association rule. Each one of these four criteria refers to a
fundamental concept in geography.

The key idea behind these criteria is that the geographic entities, which are considered
in a relevance judgment, do not exist as independent entities, but rather they exist within
a speciﬁc geographic context (Reichenbacher et al. 2009). These entities are commonly
part of more complex phenomena that have to be taken into account when evaluating the
relevance of geographic entities.

The criterion hierarchy can be deﬁned as the degree of separation between the position
of the user and the location of the geographic entity within a predeﬁned spatial hierarchy.
This criterion is based on the evidence that ‘geographic units are cognitively and empir-
ically organized into a nested hierarchical form (e.g., school districts)’ (Golledge 2002,
p. 8). The effect of spatial hierarchies on the judgement of distances is well documented
(Stevens and Coupe 1978). For example, users may consider an entity situated in their city
district to be closer (and thus more relevant) than an entity located in a different city district
(even if the actual distance is the same).

The criterion cluster can be deﬁned as the degree of membership of an entity to a
spatial cluster (Han et al. 2001) of related or unrelated entities. The size of the cluster can
also be taken into account as a factor of relevance. We regard a cluster as a relevant area
that increases the relevance of the contained entities. Other things being equal, it can be
assumed that the relevance of a single entity increases, if there are several entities of the
same kind in the neighborhood (Reichenbacher 2005).

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1501

The criterion co-location can be deﬁned as the extent to which an entity satisﬁes a
co-location pattern (Huang et al. 2004) that has been identiﬁed as common and meaningful
for that category of entities within a related collection of geographic entities, and apropos
the user’s current needs. For example, if it is common to have restaurants close to movie
theaters (since people like to go for dinner before seeing or after having seen a movie),
other things being equal, a user would consider a theater with restaurants nearby to be
more relevant than a theater with no restaurants nearby.

The criterion association rule can be deﬁned as the extent to which an entity satisﬁes
an association rule (Koperski and Han 1995) that has been identiﬁed as common within a
related collection of geographic entities. These rules can involve spatial, temporal, and/or
other types of attribute. For example, a rule may be identiﬁed that correlates the offered
services and the price range of hotels within a given zone. A user would then consider not
relevant (or less relevant than others) a hotel in that zone, within that price range, that does
not offer those services.

3.2. Anchor-point proximity
The concept of anchor-points is related to the notion of landmarks (Couclelis et al. 1987).
There are several locations that we consider as silent clues in the environment, such as
our home and work place. These key locations can be considered as ‘anchor’ points in
our understanding of the geographic environment where we live. An operational deﬁnition
is not straightforward; however, an anchor-point can be deﬁned as a frequently visited
location or a location where one spends a great deal of time.

In addition to the four criteria discussed in Section 3.1, we propose the criterion anchor-
point proximity that can be deﬁned as the extent to which the entity is spatially close to a
place that the user accounts as an anchor-point. The idea behind the criterion anchor-point
proximity is that it is more comfortable to reach a geographic entity that is close to a well-
known, or frequently visited place. Given two similar places at the same distance from
one’s current location, if one is close to home or the work place, and the other is in a area
where one is not used to go, one would probably choose the ﬁrst place.

This choice can have different reasons. If one is traveling, it may be easier to reschedule
one’s agenda in order to reach a place near an anchor-point. If one frequently visits a given
neighborhood, it may be easier to reach it and perhaps go back to that place in the future.
If one knows an area, it may be easier to ﬁnd an unknown place within it.

3.3. Criteria list
In Section 2, along with the key criterion topicality, we listed 18 criteria of relevance pro-
posed in IR and 5 criteria of relevance proposed in GIScience. In this section, we presented
4 criteria of geographic relevance proposed in (De Sabbata 2010), and we unveiled the
new criterion anchor-point proximity. In total a list of 29 possible criteria of GR has been
collected.

We summarize all criteria in Table 1 grouped in four classes as suggested by De Sabbata
(2010): the class properties includes the criteria used in judging the entity, by means of its
properties; the class geography includes the criteria used in judging the entity, by means
of its geographical essence; the class information includes the criteria used in judging
how well the entity is represented within the information system, by means of the avail-
able information; the class presentation includes the criteria used in judging how well the
information is presented to the user.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1502

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Table 1. List of possible criteria of Geographic Relevance.

Properties

Geography

Information

Presentation

Topicality
Appropriateness
Coverage
Novelty

Spatial proximity
Temporal proximity
Spatio-temporal proximity
Directionality
Visibility
Anchor-point proximity
Hierarchy
Cluster
Co-location
Association rules

Speciﬁcity
Availability
Accuracy
Currency
Reliability
Veriﬁcation
Affectiveness
Curiosity
Familiarity
Variety

Accessibility
Clarity
Tangibility
Dynamism
Presentation quality

4. Experiment 1
To gain a ﬁrst insight into the applicability of the criteria presented in the previous sections,
we designed a questionnaire to test a subset of the discussed criteria. Our main interest was
to test the importance of four out of ﬁve geographic criteria presented in Section 3, that
is hierarchy, cluster, co-location, and anchor-point proximity. The criterion association
rule will be considered in further studies. A favorable feedback on those four, speciﬁcally
geographic criteria, would provide evidence of the difference between GR and the concept
of relevance employed in IR.

4.1. Method
Participants. A total number of 132 participants took part in this experiment. A ﬁrst group
of 53 participants was gathered by sending e-mails to different research mailing-lists, but
also groups of colleagues and friends (including researchers in Computer Science and
Geography, but also non-academics). This ﬁrst group participated in a web survey devel-
oped using the online service SurveyMonkey,2 and will be referred to as ‘SurveyMonkey
survey’ (SMs) group. A second group of 39 participants and a third group of 40 par-
ticipants was gathered through the online service Amazon Mechanical Turk,3 and they
will be referred to as ‘Amazon Mechanical Turk survey 1’ (AMTs1) group and ‘Amazon
Mechanical Turk survey 2’ (AMTs2) group, respectively. We assume they fall into Amazon
Mechanical Turk’s demographics (Ross et al. 2010) of computers savvy people with no
particular expertise in geography.
Scope. The overall idea of this ﬁrst study was to ask participants about their opinions on
the usefulness of the criteria we identiﬁed. The list of the 15 criteria taken into account is
presented in Table 2. Not all criteria listed in Table 1 were taken into account, since our
aim was to focus speciﬁcally on the geography-related criteria.
Materials. In this experiment, we used three similar web-based online questionnaires. As
mentioned above, one was developed using the online service SurveyMonkey, and two
were developed using the online service Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Procedure. The ﬁrst page of each questionnaire stated the objective of the project and the
purposes of the study. Then, participants were asked whether they agree or disagree (on a
7-point Likert scale) with the 15 statements presented in Table 2. Each statement represents
one of the criteria taken into account.

On the second page, in the questionnaire presented to the SMs group, the participants
were asked about their age and gender, and to state how frequently they use online yellow

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1503

Table 2. Statements representing the criteria in Experiment 1.

Questionnaire statement

Appropriateness

A place that offers just the services you need is more relevant than a

Criterion

Coverage

Novelty

Availability

Accuracy

Currency

Dynamism

Presentation quality

Directionality

Visibility

Hierarchy

Cluster

Co-location

Anchor-points proximity

place that also offers other services

A place that offers all the services you need is more relevant than a

place that offers just some of them

A place that was previously unknown to you is more relevant than a

place already known

relevance of the place

relevance of the place

The more information available about a place, the higher is the

The more accurate the information about a place, the higher is the

The more current, recent, timely, up-to-date the information about a

place, the higher is the relevance of the place

The more dynamic, active, or interactive the presentation of

information, the higher is the relevance of the presented place
The more the information about a place is presented in a certain

format or style, or offers output in a way that is helpful, desirable,
or preferable, the higher is its relevance

event) will be available at the time you will be able to reach it (e.g.
whether you can reach the shop before it closes)

If you are driving, cycling, or walking, a place on your future path is

more relevant than a place already passed

A place that is visible is more relevant than a place that you cannot

see from your point of view

Other things being equal (including distance), a place in the same city

or district is more relevant than a place in another one

A place that is close to a location you visit frequently (e.g., home or
work place) is more relevant than a place in an area you are not
used to visit

Other things being equal (including distance), a place close to a group
of similar places (e.g., a shop in a shopping center) is more relevant
than an isolated place.

Other things being equal (including distance), a place that satisﬁes

common co-location rules (e.g., a hotel with a restaurant nearby) is
more relevant than a place that does not satisfy the same
co-location rules (e.g., a hotel without a restaurant nearby).

Spatio-temporal proximity

It is important to take into account whether the place (or a related

pages, digital maps, and mobile maps. On the third page, the participants were asked to
rank a list of seven general criteria (summarizing the sets of criteria shown in Table 1)
from the most important to the least important. Pages four and ﬁve presented the set of 15
statements to the participants, the ﬁrst eight criteria on the fourth page and the remaining
seven criteria on the ﬁfth page. On both pages, a brief introduction was used to add some
context to the questions. On the last page, an open question gave the opportunity to the
respondents to specify not mentioned criteria that they would use to judge the relevance of
a geographic entity, and to give us any further comment or suggestions.

In the questionnaire presented to the ATMs1 group, the 15 statements were presented
to the participant at once on the second page (i.e., all the four classes in Table 2). In the
questionnaire presented to the ATMs2 group, we used a slightly modiﬁed structure that
was set up in order to better ﬁt the style commonly used in Amazon Mechanical Turk.
The statements were presented to the participant on three different pages (i.e., one for

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1504

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

each class). In both cases, on the last page, an open question gave the opportunity to the
respondents to specify not mentioned criteria that they would use to judge the relevance of
a geographic entity, and to give us any further comments or suggestions.

4.2. Results

The results of this study clearly indicate that our participants agree on the usefulness of the
geographic criteria. In particular, we observed a promising level of agreement on the use-
fulness of the four recently proposed criteria we tested (i.e., hierarchy, cluster, co-location,
and anchor-point proximity). These have been rated as important factors in the judgement
of the geographic relevance of an entity (see Figure 1 and Table 3).

The highest rated criteria are spatio-temporal proximity and coverage with mode equal
to the highest score (see Table 3). The participants also ‘agree’ on the importance of the
criteria currency, accuracy, and anchor-point proximity. The majority of participants at
least ‘somewhat agree’ (with ‘agree’ as the most common opinion) on the importance of
a group including four geographic criteria (i.e., co-location, hierarchy, directionality, and
cluster), and the criteria availability and appropriateness. Finally, lower scores have been
obtained by the criteria presentation quality and visibility and even lower by the criteria
dynamism and novelty. The participants seem to just ‘somewhat agree’ with the former
and seem to be ‘neutral’ with respect to the latter. The difference between these ﬁve groups
of criteria is clearly illustrated by the size of the bubbles in Figure 1.

A statistically signiﬁcant difference (p < 0.01) has been found for the median of
the rates collected with the ﬁrst questionnaire for the ﬁve criteria: availability, accuracy,
dynamism, presentation quality, and visibility, with respect to the median of the rates

Figure 1. Summary of the responses collected from Experiment 1.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1505

Table 3. Mode and median values of the collected responses.

Criterion

Spatio-temporal proximity
Coverage
Currency
Accuracy
Anchor-point proximity
Availability
Co-location
Hierarchy
Directionality
Cluster
Appropriateness
Presentation quality
Visibility
Dynamism
Novelty

Strongly agree

Mode

Agree

Median

Agree

Agree

Agree

Somewhat agree

Somewhat agree

Somewhat agree

Neutral

Neutral

collected with the second and the third questionnaires. That is, a statistically signiﬁcant
difference has been found between the responses given by the participants to the SMs’
questionnaire (mostly researchers and students in GIScience and Infromation Retrieval)
and the responses collected using Amazon Mechanical Turk. This pattern can be easily
spotted in Figure 1, looking at the bubbles related to these criteria. One can observe how
the size of the sectors changes going from high to low values of agreement. It is important
to notice that three out of ﬁve of those criteria are among the lowest rated ones. However,
the origin of this difference is not clear. No statistical difference has been found between
the data collected with the second and the third questionnaire. As mentioned above in
Section 4.1, the detailed analysis of these differences will be presented in a further paper.

4.3. Discussion
The results presented above give us a ﬁrst insight into the applicability of the single criteria
of GR and a ﬁrst conﬁrmation of the importance of the geographic criteria presented in
Section 3. This in turn suggests that the geographic facet of this retrieval problem appears
to be really signiﬁcant, and a clear indicator of a difference between GR and the concept
of relevance employed in classic document-based IR.

A substantial difference between GR and classic document-based IR is also reﬂected by
the rates of the criteria presentation quality and novelty. The ﬁrst was the most mentioned
criterion in Schamber’s study of criteria of relevance (Schamber 1991), and the second
was the third rated in the output list of Barry (1994). The results of this survey indicate
that, when a user has to judge a geographic entity rather than a document, these criteria
can be accounted as secondary, maybe even optional. The same applies to the criterion
dynamism, which can be also found in Schamber’s list of criteria of relevance (Schamber
1991). Moreover, this difference is conﬁrmed by the agreement about the usefulness of
the criteria anchor-point proximity, co-location, hierarchy, and cluster. These four new
geographic criteria are a distinguishing feature of the retrieval of geographic information,
and they seem to play an important role in GR.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1506

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Moreover, there is some evident discrepancy between the obtained results and the
responses collected by Mountain and MacFarlane (2007) in their study on ﬁlters for Mobile
Information Retrieval. In particular, the participants in our study have rated the criterion
spatio-temporal proximity as the most important criterion, and the criterion visibility as one
of the least important, whereas the participants in the study of Mountain and MacFarlane
(2007) have rated the ‘visible place’ ﬁlter as slightly more desirable (those were questions
about new possible ﬁlters to be developed) than the ‘accessible place’ ﬁlter. However, even
if the criteria and the ﬁlters have been developed starting from the same concepts, the key
distinct factor is the circumstance in which the concept is used. In our study, participants
were asked to imagine a situation where they have to ﬁnd a geographic entity in a urban
environment, whereas in the study of Mountain and MacFarlane (2007) the participants
were searching for information about the natural environment (e.g., tourist guide entries
about plants and animals, on a mobile device) while visiting a national park. On the other
hand, similar results have been obtained for the criterion directionality, with respect to
the ‘search ahead’ ﬁlter. In summary, given the noteworthy difference between GR and
the classic document-based IR, we can also assert that a certain level of difference exists
between GR and MIR, even if they share various characteristics.

The study described above has two main limitations. First, there may be a difference
between the answers given by a participant when asked about a criterion and the actual
usage of the criterion. In fact, the role of a criterion may not be clear as soon as one has
to use it in a practical situation. Second, different participants might have very different
situations in mind when answering to the same question, which can inﬂuence their answers.
In Section 5, a second experiment is presented where each participant is faced with an

explicit mobile usage context, and given geographic information needs.

5. Experiment 2
The purpose of this experiment was to let participants directly face the geographic facet
of the GR retrieval problem, in order to establish whether this fact has a signiﬁcant impact
when judging the relevance of geographic entities. The question was whether similar geo-
graphic entities at similar distances from the user’s position would get different relevance
judgements if placed in different geographic settings. In fact, most of the current geo-
graphic information systems and search engines would consider them as equally relevant,
since they would have same topicality, coverage, and spatial proximity. In particular, three
of the ﬁve criteria presented in Section 3 were tested (i.e., co-location, hierarchy, and
cluster).

The obtained results will allow us to formulate a response to the question of the equiva-
lence between GR and the concept of relevance employed in IR, which is the main interest
of our research.

5.1. Method
Participants. A total of 110 participants took part in this experiment. The participants were
gathered by sending e-mails to different mailing-lists, Google Groups4 and Yahoo Groups,5
related to the ﬁelds of IR, GIScience, and cartography. We assumed that the participants
gathered by those means would have at least some familiarity with web search engines and
digital maps. Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the four sub-scenarios.
Scope. The experiment was run using two different scenarios. Each scenario was com-
posed of two sub-scenarios. Each one of the four sub-scenarios was presented to different

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1507

groups of participants. In each of the two scenarios, the two sub-scenarios differed in the
information presented to the participant. In particular, in the second sub-scenario, addi-
tional information was presented to the participant. This supplementary information was
intended to allow the participant to apply one or more additional criteria with respect to
the ﬁrst sub-scenario. The objective was to compare the usage of the criteria between the
different groups of participants (each one responding to a different sub-scenario).

In fact, the participants were asked to simulate (i.e., ‘act as’, ‘play the role of’) a
hypothetical GR assessment system, taking into account all available information and the
criteria they consider to be important, in order to judge the relevance of the individual
geographic entities. The aim was not to test an actual application such as a geographic
recommendation system or LBS.
Material. In both scenarios, the base map (see Figures 2 and 3) was derived from the
geometries available on OpenStreetMaps6 for the town of Gorizia (Friuli-Venezia Giulia,
Italy), assuming that most of the participants would not be familiar with this town and
thus avoid a recognition effect. The base map has been ﬂipped vertically, the city center
limits have been chosen arbitrarily (i.e., they do not reﬂect the actual boundaries of the
town center of Gorizia), distinguishing buildings have been reshaped, and some park areas
have been arbitrarily added. None of the entities added to the maps (i.e., hotels, restaurants,
museums, and tourist attractions) directly represent real entities in Gorizia. The three pho-
tos used in the ﬁrst scenario do refer to hotels and bed&breakfasts in Gorizia, but they have
been arbitrarily chosen from the images obtained by searching ‘hotels Gorizia’ via Google
Images,7 and arbitrarily assigned to entities on the map that do not represent existing hotels
in Gorizia. The reported prices and opening hours have also been arbitrarily chosen, but
based on plausible values.
Procedure. On the ﬁrst page of the questionnaire, the purpose of the study was stated. On
the second page, the scenario and a related map was presented (see Figures 2 and 3). The
participants were asked to rate the relevance on a scale from 1 to 7 (i.e, 1 = ‘not relevant
at all’, 4 = ‘somewhat relevant’, 7 = ‘extremely relevant’) of a set of objects displayed on
the map and to give a brief mandatory description that explained their ratings. On the third
page, the participant were asked whether they used the hypothesized criteria (see Table 4).
An optional comment box was provided on the third page.

Four questionnaires for the four sub-scenarios were developed using the online service
OnlineUmfragen.8 The following sections describe in detail the composition and purpose
of the different scenarios and sub-scenarios.

5.1.1. Scenario 1
In this scenario, participants were presented with the following situation:

Consider the following scenario. You are visiting a city you have never been before. Just after
arrival you visit one of the museums in the city center. After the museum visit you feel tired
and look for a hotel for the night. Your digital city-guide on your mobile device suggests 6
hotels that ﬁt your needs in terms of costs, availability, and offered services. The suggested
hotels are all located at about the same distance from your current location. The map below
indicates your current position and the 6 suggested hotels, labeled A to F. Please rate each hotel
based on your needs described in the above scenario and the available information on the map.

5.1.1.1. Sub-Scenario 1 A. A total of 28 out of 110 participants took part in the ﬁrst sub-
scenario (referred to as S1A). In this sub-scenario (see Figure 2a) the position of hotels,
museums, and restaurants is shown on the map, together with the position of the participant

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1508

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Figure 2. Scenario 1: sub-scenario S1A (a) and sub-scenario S1B (b).

and his or her previous route. The city center (i.e., the touristic zone) is highlighted in a
brownish color, whereas the residential areas are colored in gray. Three hotels are located in
the city center: hotel ‘C’ is located near restaurants, museums and tourist attraction; hotels
‘E’ and ‘F’ are located near restaurants, with ‘F’ being a bit closer to them than ‘E’. Three
hotels are located in the residential area: hotels ‘A’ and ‘B’ are located close to the city

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1509

Figure 3. Scenario 2: sub-scenario S2A (a) and sub-scenario S2B (b).

center; hotel ‘D’ is located far away from the city center. We hypothesized that participants
would use the available information and judge the relevance of the hotels using the criteria
hierarchy and co-location, that is, the participant would take into account the distinction
between the city center and the peripheral urban areas, where the ﬁrst is more relevant
than the others; the participant would take into account restaurants, museums, and tourist
attractions, where the hotels near those POI are more relevant than the others.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1510

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Table 4. Sentences representing the hypothesized criteria.

Criterion

Hierarchy

Co-location

Accuracy

Statement

Sub-scenarios

I have taken into account the distinction between the city
center and the peripherial urban areas, where the ﬁrst is
more relevant then the others

I have taken into account the restaurants, museums, and
tourist attractions, where the hotels near those POI are
more relevant then the others

S1A,S1B,
S2A,S2B

S1A,S1B

Availability

I have taken into account the availability of information,

where the hotels presenting information about the price
are more relevant then the others

I have taken into account the accuracy of the information

about the price, where the hotels with detailed
information on the price are more relevant then the others

Presentation quality

I have taken into account the quality of the presentation,

where the hotels presenting an image are more relevant
then the others

Spatio-temporal
proximity

Cluster

I have taken into account the opening hours of the

S2A,S2B

restaurants, that is that the restaurants c (today closed)
and h (which will close 5 minutes after he or she could
arrive there) are not relevant

I have taken into account the groups of restaurants, where
the restaurants with other restaurants nearby are more
relevant than the others (e.g., if I do not ﬁnd a place in
one I can try in the others nearby)

Directionality

I have taken into account my direction and future

S2B

destination, the less I have to divert from the shortest path
to the hotel, the higher the relevance of the restaurant

S1B

S1B

S1B

S2A,S2B

5.1.1.2. Sub-Scenario 1 B. A total of 25 out of 110 participants took part to the second
sub-scenario (referred to as S1B). In this sub-scenario (see Figure 2b) the position of muse-
ums and restaurants is shown on the map, together with the position of the participant and
his or her previous route. The position of hotels is also displayed, and in some cases it is
accompanied by some further information on the price of the room or a hotel picture. The
hotels are placed in the same position as they were placed in sub-scenario S1A. Detailed
price information and a picture have been attached to hotel ‘E’ (located in the city cen-
ter, quite close to some restaurants) and to hotel ‘D’ (located in the residential area, far
away from the city center). Detailed price information has been attached to hotel ‘B’ and a
picture has been attached to hotel ‘A’, which are close to each other, just outside the city
center. No further information has been attached to the remaining two hotels. We hypoth-
esized that participants would use the available information and judge the relevance of the
hotels using the two criteria mentioned in the ﬁrst sub-scenario (S1A), along with the crite-
ria accuracy, availability, and presentation quality, that is, the participant would take into
account the accuracy of the information about the price, where hotels with detailed price
information are more relevant than the others; the participant would take into account the
availability of information, where the hotels presenting information about the price are
more relevant than the others; the participant would take into account the quality of the
presentation, where the hotels presenting an image (that is presenting information about
the hotel in a way that is common to be found in touring guides and websites) are more
relevant than the others.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1511

5.1.2. Scenario 2

In this scenario, participants were presented with the following situation:

You are visiting a city you have never been before. Just after arrival in the early morning
you visit one of the museums in the city center. At 13:45H you are hungry and decide to
have a late lunch. Your digital city-guide on your mobile device suggests 9 possible restau-
rants that ﬁt your needs in terms of cost and offered dishes. The suggested restaurants
are all located at about the same distance from your current location: a 10 minute walk.
You have not booked a table at any of those restaurants and you do not know anything
about table availability either. The map below indicates your current position and the 9 sug-
gested restaurants, labeled A to I, including their opening hours. Please rate each restaurant
based on your needs described in the above scenario and the available information on the
map.

5.1.2.1. Sub-Scenario 2 A. A total of 28 out of 110 participants took part in the ﬁrst
sub-scenario (referred to as S2A). In this sub-scenario (see Figure 3a) the position and
opening hours of the restaurants are shown on the map, together with the position of the
participant and the current time. The city center (i.e., the touristic zone) is highlighted in
a brownish color, whereas the residential area are colored in grey. Seven restaurants are
located in the city center. Three of them have been placed in order to form a cluster (these
are the restaurants ‘E’, ‘F’, and ‘G’), the other four restaurants have been placed in function
of their role in the second sub-scenario (as explained in Subsection 5.1.2.2). Two more
restaurants are located in the residential area, close to each other. We hypothesized that
participants would use the available information and judge the relevance of the restaurants
using the criteria spatio-temporal proximity, hierarchy, and cluster, that is, the participant
would take into account the opening hours of the restaurants, that is that the restaurants ‘C’
(today closed) and ‘H’ (will close 5 minutes after he or she could arrive there) would not
be relevant; the participant would take into account the visible distinction between the city
center and the peripheral urban areas, where the ﬁrst is more relevant than the others; the
participant would take into account the visible clusters, where the restaurants that are part
of a cluster would be more relevant than the others (if he or she does not ﬁnd a place in one
he or she can try in the others nearby).

5.1.2.2. Sub-Scenario 2 B. A total of 29 out of 110 participants took part in the sec-
ond sub-scenario (referred to as S2B). In this sub-scenario (see Figure 3b) the position
and opening hours of the restaurants are shown on the map. The participant knows the
path she has come from the museum to her current location (which is displayed on the
map), and she knows that, after lunch, she has to go back to the hotel (which is dis-
played on the map) in order to be able to pack her stuff and leave in the early afternoon.
The restaurants are located in the same position as they were placed in sub-scenario
S2A. Restaurant ‘A’ is located very close to the hotel and very close the participant’s
planned path, whereas restaurant ‘I’ is located at the same distance, but on the other
side. Restaurant ‘D’ is located on the participant’s past path, in the opposite direction
with respect to the participant’s future path. We hypothesized that the participant would
use the available information and judge the relevance of the hotels using the three cri-
teria mentioned in the ﬁrst sub-scenario, along with the criterion directionality, that is,
the participant would take into account his or her direction and future destination – the
less one has to divert from the shortest path to the hotel, the higher the relevance of the
restaurant.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1512

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

5.2. Results

Looking at the responses collected for sub-scenario S1A (see Figure 4a), we observe that
hotels ‘C’ (µ1/2 = 6.0) and ‘F’ (µ1/2 = 6.0) have been rated as relevant by the participants,
whereas hotel ‘D’ (µ1/2 = 1.0) has been rated as not relevant. The highly rated hotels are
both in the city center and nearby restaurants or museums. On the contrary, the low rated
hotel is in a residential area and far away from any restaurant or museum. The ratings
assigned to the three remaining hotels (i.e., ‘A’, ‘B’, and ‘E’) occur with equal probability,
so their relevance is undetermined. The criteria hierarchy and co-location have been widely
cited in the explanations given by the participants (7 and 19 mentions out of 28 participants)
and widely used according to the answers on the third page (78.6% and 85.7%).

Looking at the responses collected for sub-scenario S1B (see Figure 4b), we observe
that hotel ‘E’ (µ1/2 = 6.0) has been rated as relevant by the participants, whereas the hotel

Figure 4. Results obtained for Scenario 1: sub-scenario S1A (a) and sub-scenario S1B (b).

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1513

Table 5. Differences in the rates of the hotel between S1A and S1B.

Hotels

A

B

C

D

E

F

Mann–Whitney U
p
T-test F
p
Power

226.0
<0.05
0.128
<0.05
0.70

267.0
>0.05
0.516
>0.05

232.0
<0.05
0.691
<0.05
0.67

220.0
<0.05
2.402
<0.05
0.68

264.0
>0.05
0.445
>0.05

208.0
<0.05
0.195
<0.05
0.82

Note: None of the hotels had normally distributed rates. In order to double-check the robustness of the results of
Mann–Whitney U tests with respect to the number of participants, t-tests have been run on the same data, then
the power of the t-tests with signiﬁcant results have been calculated.

‘B’ (µ1/2 = 4.0) has been rated as somewhat relevant. The highly rated hotel is in the city
center, nearby some restaurants, and displaying exact prices of the rooms together with a
picture. The middle-rated hotel is in a residential area, but not too far from the city center
area (and thus from restaurants and museums); the detailed prices of the rooms of this hotel
are displayed. The ratings assigned to the four remaining hotels (i.e., ‘A’, ‘C’, ‘D’, and ‘F’)
occur with equal probability, so their relevance is undetermined. These are also the same
hotels whose rates are signiﬁcantly different (see Table 5) in the median with respect to
the sub-scenario S1A. The criteria hierarchy and co-location have been widely cited in
the explanations given by the participants (7 and 13 mentions out of 25 participants) and
widely used (65.4% and 57.7%). The criterion availability has also been well cited in the
explanations (6 mentions out of 28 participants) and used (50.0%). The criteria accuracy
and presentation quality have been far less cited (1 and 8 mentions out of 28 participants)
and used (23.1% and 30.8%).

Looking at the responses collected for sub-scenario S2A (see Figure 5a), we observe
that restaurants ‘E’ (µ1/2 = 7.0), ‘F’ (µ1/2 = 7.0), and ‘G’ (µ1/2 = 7.0) have been rated
as relevant by the participants, whereas restaurants ‘C’ (µ1/2 = 1.0) and ‘H’ (µ1/2 = 1.0)
have been rated as not relevant. The highly rated restaurants are the ones of the cluster in the
city center, which are also open full-time today. On the contrary, the low-rated restaurant
is the one that is ‘closed today’ and the one that is going to close in 5 minutes after the
participant’s arrival in loco. The ratings assigned to the four remaining restaurants (i.e.,
‘A’, ‘B’, ‘D’, and ‘I’) occur with equal probability, so their relevance is undetermined. The
criteria spatio-temporal proximity and cluster have been widely cited in the explanations
given by the participants (17 and 16 mentions out of 28 participants) and widely used
(89.2% and 78.6%). The criterion hierarchy has been less cited (8 mentions out of 28
participants) and used (42.8%).

Looking at the responses collected for sub-scenario S2B (see Figure 5b), we observed
that restaurants ‘A’ (µ1/2 = 7.0) and ‘I’ (µ1/2 = 6.0) have been rated as relevant by the
participants, whereas restaurants ‘B’ (µ1/2 = 2.0), ‘C’ (µ1/2 = 1.0), ‘D’ (µ1/2 = 2.0), and
‘H’ (µ1/2 = 1.0) have been rated as not relevant. The highly rated restaurant is the one
nearby the participant’s hotel and in the direction of his or her planned path, which is
also open full-time today. On the contrary, the low-rated restaurant is the one that is ‘close
today’, the one that is going to close in 5 minutes after the participant’s arrival in loco,
the one he or she passed by coming from the museum to his or her current location (i.e.,
in the opposite direction with respect to the hotel), and the one out of the city center.
The ratings assigned to the three remaining restaurants (i.e., ‘E’, ‘F’, and ‘G’) occur with
equal probability, so their relevance is undetermined. Almost all restaurants obtained rates
signiﬁcantly different (see Table 6) from the ones obtained in the sub-scenario S2A, apart

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1514

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Figure 5. Results obtained for Scenario 2: sub-scenario S2A (a) and sub-scenario S2B (b).

from the two restaurants with very low rates in both sub-scenaios (i.e., ‘C’ and ‘H’) and
restaurant ‘B’. The criterion directionality has been cited in 26 out of 29 explanations
and used by all but one of the participants according to the answers on the third page
(96.6%). The criteria spatio-temporal proximity and cluster have been widely cited in the
explanations given by the participants (12 and 7 mentions out of 29 participants) and widely
used (75.9% and 51.8%). The criterion hierarchy has been used just by a small number of
participants (17%).

5.3. Discussion

In general, we ﬁnd that similar geographic entities at similar distance from a user’s posi-
tion do get different relevance judgements, if placed in different geographic settings. The
responses collected in this experiment conﬁrm the insights gained from the ﬁrst experiment
(see Section 4) and suggest a rejection of the hypothesis of equivalence between GR and
the concept of relevance employed in IR. The results also conﬁrm the importance of the
three geographic criteria tested and reassert the uncertainty about other criteria.

The importance of the criteria co-location and cluster clearly emerges from the results
and is supported by comments obtained from the ﬁrst and second scenarios, respectively.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1515

Table 6. Differences in the rates of the restaurants between S2A and S2B.

Restaurants

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

322.5

Mann–Whitney U 107.0
p
T-test F
p
Power

122.5
<0.01 >0.05 >0.05 <0.01 >0.01 <0.01 <0.01 >0.05 <0.01
87.28
10.85
0.000
<0.01 >0.05 >0.05 <0.01 >0.01 <0.01 <0.01 >0.05 <0.01
0.99
0.98

362.5

185.0

172.5

163.0

162.5

383.0

0.000

10.27

0.99

0.85

5.75

0.00

0.99

0.98

1.82

0.98

Note: None of the restaurants had normally distributed rates. In order to double-check the robustness of the results
of Mann–Whitney U tests with respect to the number of participants, t-tests have been run on the same data, then
the power of the t-tests with signiﬁcant results have been calculated.

The closeness of a hotel to points of interest, such as restaurants and museums, seems
to be a good criterion to identify highly relevant hotels. Still, the co-location of hotels
with restaurants seems to play a more important role than the co-location of hotels with
tourist attractions and museums. In fact, among the meaningful co-location rules that can
be taken into account when computing GR, different co-colocation rules may have different
importance. Concerning the criterion cluster, the entities in the second scenario that were
part of a cluster (i.e., ‘E’, ‘F’, and ‘G’) do obtain higher rates speciﬁcally because they
are part of that cluster, as stated in the explanations provided by the participants about
their ratings. However, it is interesting to note how none of the participants considered the
entities ‘B’ and ‘C’ in the second scenario as a cluster. This may be due to the small number
of entities (i.e., two is not enough to form a cluster), but it is probably largely inﬂuenced
by the fact that ‘C’ was not spatio-temporally available.

The importance of the criterion hierarchy is evident in the ﬁrst scenario (e.g., compare
the different ratings of ‘D’ and ‘E’), given the explanations provided by the participants
about their ratings. Nevertheless, in both the sub-scenarios S1A and S1B, those entities
that are located in the residential area are also farther away from tourist attractions and
restaurants. That is, the criteria co-location and hierarchy are not fully independent factors
in this case. Moreover, in sub-scenario S2A, one-third of the participants took into account
this criterion, but decided not to use it, and in sub-scenario S2B, two-thirds of the partici-
pants did not think about this criterion. The criterion hierarchy is somewhat important, but
it seems to be superﬂuous in the second scenario, where the use of the other criteria seems
to be enough to make a decision about the relevance of an entity.

The outstanding importance of the criterion spatio-temporal proximity becomes evident
by the entities ‘C’ and ‘H’ that have been clearly rated as not-relevant in the second sce-
nario. The difference between the rates obtained in sub-scenario S2A and the rates obtained
in sub-scenario S2B for all entities (except ‘C’ and ‘H’, which are not relevant in both sub-
scenarios) is a prominent evidence of the importance of the criterion directionality. It is
also important to notice that this criterion has been mentioned in the explanation of almost
all participants, but with some differences. The responses can be categorized in three dif-
ferent connotations of the concept, that is the ‘easiness’ of route to a ﬁnal destination (i.e.,
the hotel in sub-scenario S2B) when including the additional stop; the length (to be mini-
mized) of the deviation from the planned route to the ﬁnal destination; and the proximity
to the ﬁnal destination. In fact the ﬁrst two are very similar, whereas the third is notably
different. Most participants in sub-scenario S2B mentioned the third connotation, whereas
the ﬁrst two have been mentioned just among those respondents who rated ‘A’ as more
relevant than ‘I’.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1516

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

The importance of the criterion availability is also very clear. In sub-scenario S1A (see
Figures 2a and 4a), the responses entail ‘F’ as slightly more relevant than ‘E’, because ‘F’
was closer to the restaurants and to the main road than ‘E’, given the explanations provided
by the participants about their ratings. In sub-scenario S1B (see Figures 2b and 4b), the
availability of further information marks a clear distinction between the two entities: ‘E’
(which is displayed together with price information and an image) have been rated as more
relevant than ‘F’ (which has neither price information nor image) by 13 out of 25 partici-
pants. Nine participants have assigned the same level of relevance to both objects, and ‘F’
has been rated more relevant than ‘E’ by just 1 participant.

The role of the criteria accuracy and presentation quality is rather unclear. Roughly a
quarter of the participants have used the ﬁrst criterion, one-third of the participants stated
to have used the second criterion, and one-third of the participants would use them, but
did not think about it. The entities ‘A’ and ‘B’ in the ﬁrst scenario were very close to each
other, in the same type of area, and at the same distance from the points of interest. In
sub-scenario S1B, the entity ‘A’ was shown with vague information about the room price
and an image, and the entity ‘B’ was shown with precise information about the room price
but with no image. From the collected answers, 5 out of 25 participants have considered
‘A’ as more relevant than ‘B’ (four of them have directly mentioned the presence of a
picture as motivation), 6 participants have considered ‘B’ as more relevant than ‘A’ (but
just one of them has mentioned the accuracy of the information as a motivation), and
14 participants have given the same rate to the two entities. Nevertheless, hotel ‘B’ has
been altogether rated as somewhat relevant, whereas the overall relevance of hotel ‘A’ is
undetermined. This is consistent with the result of the ﬁrst experiment, where the criterion
accuracy had been indicated as more important than the criterion presentation quality. It
may be that the importance of these criteria is more related to personal preferences than the
previous criteria. It may also be that the used example was not appropriate to understand
the relevance of these criteria, which can be more important in other speciﬁc situations.

In sub-scenario S1B, it is also difﬁcult to unquestionably distinguish the inﬂuences of
the criteria accuracy and presentation quality from the inﬂuence of the criterion availability
(which appear to be stronger, as explained above), and these three criteria are not fully
independent from one another. Still, in general, the effect of these criteria on the overall
relevance of the entity seems to be rather narrow. In fact, hotel ‘D’ in sub-scenario S1B
has been rated as the least relevant among the entities of that sub-scenario – as it was in
S1A, where no further information was given – even if it was presented with detailed price
information and a picture.

6. General discussion

Given the results obtained from the two experiments described above, we reject the hypoth-
esis of equivalence between GR and the concept of relevance employed in IR. Therefore,
we argue that GR and the concept of relevance employed in IR are different, because of
the geographic and mobile facets that concern the ﬁrst concept but not the second. It is
clear that the proposed criteria of co-location, cluster, and hierarchy play an important
role in the judgment of the relevance of geographic entities, and that these criteria are a
distinguishing feature of GR with respect to the classic document-based IR. The criterion
anchor-point proximity has not been fully tested, but the results obtained from the ﬁrst
experiment suggest that it is an important criterion of GR.

The objective of this study was not to provide a ﬁnite, stable, ordinate set of criteria for
a speciﬁc application of GR. We also do not mean to state the recently proposed criteria as

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1517

the most important criteria in the retrieval of geographic information. Nevertheless, aiming
to understand the importance of the ﬁve new geographic criteria, we faced the problem of
understanding the concept of ‘importance of a criterion’, which seems to be as fuzzy as the
concept of ‘relevance’ itself.

There are some criteria, such as topicality or spatio-temporal proximity, that deﬁne
whether an entity is relevant. If one is interested in hospitals, theaters are not relevant; if an
entity is not temporally available in the time range one needs it, it is not relevant. These few
‘fundamental’ criteria can be used to ﬁlter out options that do not ﬁt all the user’s needs in
terms of user’s interest or mobility limitations (Miller and Bridwell 2009).

A second set of criteria is composed by those that deﬁne how much relevant a feasible
option is. These can be labeled as ‘primary’ criteria. This group includes those criteria that
in our second experiment implied a signiﬁcant difference in the rates, such as directionality.
We argue that the criteria co-location, cluster, and hierarchy are part of this group. This
argument is supported by results obtained in both experiments, in particular, the results
obtained for the ﬁrst scenario in the second experiment regarding the criteria co-location
and hierarchy, and the results obtained for the second scenario in the second experiment
regarding the criterion cluster.

A last, third set of criteria is composed by those that can help to distinguish between
two similar entities, which are however non-compensatory criteria – that is, they do not
have a signiﬁcant impact on the relevance of an entity. These criteria can be labeled as
‘secondary’ criteria. For example, in the sub-scenario S1B in the second experiment (see
Section 5.1.1), the better presentation quality of hotel ‘A’ does not compensate for the lack
of information accuracy. It follows that hotel ‘A’ has been overall rated as less relevant than
hotel ‘B’, which has lower presentation quality but higher information accuracy – given
an undoubtedly equal relevance in the matter of the criteria availability, hierarchy, and
co-location.

The importance of the criteria in the third set can be related to the context of the search
(e.g., reference images may be quite important if one searches for a hotel, probably less
important if one searches for a post ofﬁce) or personal preferences. This group includes
criteria such as presentation quality and visibility, where the importance of the former is
probably dependent on personal preferences and the importance of the latter may be depen-
dent on the situation (e.g., more important in open spaces than in an urban environment).
Further studies are needed to better understand how the importance of a criterion can be
related to the situation the criterion is used in.

A further interesting point unveiled in our second experiment concerns the ‘Geography’
set of criteria (see Table 1). Analyzing the explanations given by the participants to jus-
tify their responses, it is evident that this group is not homogeneous, but it is composed
of two distinct subgroups of criteria. These are criteria that are commonly mentioned
together in the explanations, sometimes they are combined in some more general con-
cept. A ﬁrst group is related to the user’s personal mobility and includes criteria such
as spatio-temporal proximity and directionality. These criteria are ‘dynamic’, that is, the
relevance of an entity with respect to these criteria can be calculated only in a given sit-
uation (e.g., user’s position, time schedule, and mode of transportation) and changes as
the situation changes. A second group is related to the geography of the environment and
includes criteria such as co-location and cluster. These criteria are more ‘static’, that is, the
relevance of an entity with respect to these criteria can be calculated just once ‘off-line’,
independently from the given situation in which the user will apply these criteria. Clearly,
these are not static in every respect; changes in the environment may imply changes in the
relevance of the entities. Still, it seems conceptually difﬁcult to apply this classiﬁcation

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1518

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

to the criterion anchor-point proximity. This criterion relates more to the user than to the
geographic environment, but it is ‘static’ at the same time.

The user’s personal mobility and the geography of the environment are the two dis-
cernible geographic aspects of GR. Both aspects have a great inﬂuence on the relevance
of the geographic entities. It is well known how those two factors also inﬂuence the user’s
activity (Raubal et al. 2004). It is also well known that the user’s activity inﬂuences the
user’s mobility (Miller and Bridwell 2009) and the relevance of the geographic entities
(Reichenbacher 2009). Thus, a topic to be further investigated is if (and how) the rele-
vance of the geographic entities inﬂuences the user’s mobility and activity, and then, how
the assessment of GR can modify and improve our understanding of personal mobility,
activities, and their relations to each other.

7. Conclusions
In this article, we presented a list of 29 criteria, which concern the geographic relevance
of an entity in a given usage context. We reported on a study, which is composed of two
user-based experiments that we set up to examine the importance of some of the listed
criteria.

Given the collected results, we argue that the criteria co-location, cluster, and hierarchy
are among the primary criteria that deﬁne how much relevant a geographic entity is –
assuming that topicality and spatio-temporal proximity criteria are satisﬁed. The insight
collected in the ﬁrst experiment suggests that the proposed criterion anchor-point proximity
is also part of these primary criteria. In turn, these results stand by the substantial difference
between GR and the concept of relevance as it is commonly understood in the classic
document-based IR and GIR.

Nonetheless, the two experiments presented here can only give us a ﬁrst insight into
GR, and the collected results are not enough to fully understand the complex system of
criteria underlying GR, nor all the criteria have probably been listed. Moreover, it is essen-
tial to develop efﬁcient and meaningful ways to communicate GR to users searching for
geographic information on a mobile map (Reichenbacher 2004, Crease and Reichenbacher
2011). Further studies are also needed to gain a better comprehension of GR and how it
can inﬂuence our understanding of personal mobility and human activity.

Future research on this topic will include a validation of the results presented here
through a second study, based on real-world data. We plan to develop a prototype software
that will incorporate a gradual implementation of the discussed criteria. This prototype
system will be used to generate GR assessments based on real-world geographic data.
At ﬁrst stage, the prototype system will not be sophisticated enough to deliver real-time
results to a mobile user through the network. Nevertheless, given a realistic situation, a
related output will then be available for further user-based experiments. This follow-up
study will allow us to settle the questions left open in this article, and to achieve an even
deeper understanding of GR and the related criteria.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge Omar Alonso, Paul Crease, Sara I. Fabrikant, Stefano Mizzaro,
and Christoph Schlieder whose collaboration has given a great contribution to this paper. We also
thank all the members of the GIScience Center of the University of Zurich for the valuable comments
and numerous discussions.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1519

Notes
1. As ‘geographic entity’, we refer to individual physical entities (or features) in the real world.
GR does not aim to assess the relevance of digital documents, unlike Geographic Information
Retrieval. Moreover, GR does not aim to assess the relevance, rank, evaluate the quality, or
evaluate the ﬁtness for use of entire spatial datasets.
http://www.surveymonkey.com
https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome
http://groups.google.com
http://groups.yahoo.com
http://www.openstreetmap.org
http://images.google.com
http://www.onlineumfragen.com

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

References
Barry, C., 1994. User-deﬁned relevance criteria: an exploratory study. Journal of the American

Society for Information Science, 45 (3), 149–159.

Barry, C. and Schamber, L., 1998. Users’ criteria for relevance evaluation: a cross-situational

comparison. Information Processing and Management, 34 (2–3), 219–236.

Bierig, R. and Göker, A., 2006. Time, location and interest: an empirical and user-centred study.
In: Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Information interaction in context,
Copenhagen, Denmark. New York: ACM, 79–87.

Bookstein, A., 1979. Relevance. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 30 (5),

269–273.

Boyce, B., 1982. Beyond topicality: a two stage view of relevance and the retrieval process.

Information Processing & Management, 18 (3), 105–109.

Coppola, P., et al., 2004. The concept of relevance in mobile and ubiquitous information access. In: F.
Crestani, M. Dunlop and S. Mizzaro, eds. Mobile and ubiquitous information access, Vol. 2954
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin: Springer, 3–6.

Couclelis, H., et al., 1987. Exploring the anchor-point hypothesis of spatial cognition. Journal of

Environmental Psychology, 7 (2), 99–122.

Crease, P. and Reichenbacher, T., 2011. Adapting cartographic representations to improve the infor-
mation seeking of LBS users. In: Proceedings of 25th international cartographic conference,
July 2011, France.

da Costa Pereira, C., Dragoni, M., and Pasi, G., 2009. Multidimensional relevance: a new aggre-
gation criterion. In: M. Boughanem, C. Berrut, J. Mothe and C. Soule-Dupuy, eds. Advances
in information retrieval, Vol. 5478 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin: Springer,
264–275.

De Sabbata, S., 2010. Criteria of geographic relevance. In: Proceedings of the 12th international

conference on geographic information science, September 2010, Zurich, Switzerland.

Golledge, R., 2002. The nature of geographic knowledge. Annals of the Association of American

Geographers, 92 (1), 1–14.

Han, J., Kamber, M., and Tung, A., 2001. Spatial clustering methods in data mining. In: H.J. Miller
and J. Han, eds. Geographic data mining and knowledge discovery. London: Taylor and Francis,
188–217.

Huang, Y., Shekhar, S., and Xiong, H., 2004. Discovering colocation patterns from spatial data sets: a
general approach. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 16 (12), 1472–1485.
Jordan, T., et al., 1998. An affordance-based model of place in GIS. In: Proceedings of 8th
International symposium on spatial data handling, SDH, Vol. 98, July 1998, Vancouver, Canada.
Princeton, NJ: Citeseer, 98–109.

Koperski, K. and Han, J., 1995. Discovery of spatial association rules in geographic information
databases. In: M. Egenhofer and J. Herring, eds. Advances in spatial databases, Vol. 951 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin: Springer, 47–66.

Miller, H. and Bridwell, S., 2009. A ﬁeld-based theory for time geography. Annals of the Association

Mizzaro, S., 1997. Relevance: the whole history. Journal of American Society for Information

of American Geographers, 99 (1), 49–75.

Science, 48 (9), 810–832.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 1520

S. De Sabbata and T. Reichenbacher

Mountain, D. and MacFarlane, A., 2007. Geographic information retrieval in a mobile environment:

evaluating the needs of mobile individuals. Journal of Information Science, 33 (5), 515.

Pombinho, P., Carmo, M., and Afonso, A., 2009. Evaluation of overcluttering prevention techniques
for mobile devices. In: Proceedings of 13th International conference information visualisation,
July 2009, Barcelona, Spain. New York: IEEE, 127–134.

Raper, J., 2007. Geographic relevance. Journal of Documentation, 63 (6), 836–852.
Raubal, M., Miller, H., and Bridwell, S., 2004. User-centred time geography for location-based

services. Geograﬁska Annaler Series B Human Geography, 86 (4), 245–265.

Reichenbacher, T., 2004. Mobile cartography: adaptive visualisation of geographic information on

mobile devices. Munchen: Verlag Dr. Hut.

Reichenbacher, T., 2005. The importance of being relevant. In: Proceeding XXII international

cartographic conference, July 2005, A Coruna, Spain.

Reichenbacher, T., 2007. The concept of relevance in mobile maps. In: G. Gartner, W. Cartwright,
M.P. Peterson, and L. Meng, eds. Location based services and telecartography. Berlin: Springer,
231–246.

Reichenbacher, T., 2009. Geographic relevance in mobile services. In: Proceedings of the 2nd
international workshop on location and the web, April 2009, Boston, MA. New York:
ACM, 10.

Reichenbacher, T., Crease, P., and De Sabbata, S., 2009. The concept of geographic relevance. In:
Proceedings of the 6th international symposium on LBS & TeleCartography, September 2009,
Nottingham, UK.

Ross, J., et al., 2010. Who are the crowdworkers?: shifting demographics in mechanical turk.
In: Proceedings of the 28th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems, April 2010, Atlanta, GA. New York: ACM, 2863–2872.

Saracevic, T., 1996. Relevance reconsidered. In: Proceedings of the 2nd conference on conceptions of
library and information science, October 1996, Copenhagen, Denmark. Denmark: Royal School
of Librarianship, 201–218.

Saracevic, T., 2007. Relevance: a review of the literature and a framework for thinking on the notion
in information science. Part II: nature and manifestations of relevance. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 58 (13), 1915–1933.

Savolainen, R. and Kari, J., 2006. User-deﬁned relevance criteria in web searching. Journal of

Documentation, 62 (6), 685–707.

Schamber, L., 1991. Users’ criteria for evaluation in multimedia information seeking and use

situations. Information Processing and Management, 30 (2), 205–221.

Stevens, A. and Coupe, P., 1978. Distortions in judged spatial relations. Cognitive psychology,

10 (4), 422–437.

Wilson, P., 1973. Situational relevance. Information storage and retrieval, 9 (8), 457–471.
Xu, Y.C. and Chen, Z., 2006. Relevance judgment: What do information users consider beyond
topicality? Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57 (7),
961–973.

Zipf, A., 2003. Die Relevanz von Geoobjekten in Fokuskarten. In: Proceeding of Symposium
fur Angewandte Geographische Informationsverarbeitung, XIV, July 2003, Salzburg, Austria.
Heidelberg: Wichmann, 567–576.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:50 21 December 2014 