bs_bs_banner

Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00): 00–00

“Laser Discoverers” – Web-based User-generated
Content in Heritage Detection in Poland

Krzysztof Stere(cid:2)nczak,(cid:2) Rafal Zapłata,† Maciej Sztampke‡ and
Radomir Bałazy(cid:2)
(cid:2)Forest Research Institute (IBL), Sekocin Stary
†Cardinal Stefan Wyszy(cid:2)nski University, Warsaw
‡GeoHistory Center Foundation, Stare Babice

Abstract
This article presents the results and potential of using volunteered geographic information (VGI) in heritage
detection. Research was completed under the project entitled “Laser Discoverers – non-invasive examina-
tion and documentation of archeological and historical objects in the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship”, carried
out as a part of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education program entitled “The Paths of Copernicus”.
Within the project, strong emphasis was placed on promotional and awareness-raising activities, to involve
as many voluntary users as possible. Project participants had at their disposal a web application, which pro-
vided access to a digital terrain model (DTM) where they identiﬁed possible heritage objects. All samples of
data were additionally available in eight variants of sunshine, based on the simulation of sunlight from eight
directions and at a constant angle. In total, 5,989 elementary areas with dimensions of 100 3 100 m were
used for the project. After conducting a ﬁeld inventory, Internet users together with specialists were able to
recognize several thousands of potential archaeological and historic objects. During the project, approxi-
mately 10% of those features were veriﬁed through non-invasive (ﬁeld survey) work, with 75% success.

1 Introduction

Volunteered geographic information (VGI) ﬁrst appeared in the literature in 2007 (Goodchild
2007). VGI can be seen as an extension of critical and participatory approaches to geographic
information systems (Elwood 2008) and as a speciﬁc concern within online or web credibility
(Flanagin and Metzger 2008), i.e. OpenStreetMap (http://openstreetmap.org/) or Google Maps
(https://maps.google.com/). These sites provide general base map information and allow users
to create their own content (Wikipedia 2015a).

VGI offers many possibilities for different forms of volunteer activation (Ball 2010). The
ﬁrst option is to involve volunteers in creating the map content/information, for example, by
adding sections of roads measured with GPS or points representing the POI of local neighbor-
hoods. The second way is to include volunteers in spatial data analysis, often involving not only
their time but also their equipment. One of the best-known examples is the seti@home project
(http://setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu/), another is Zooniverse (https://www.zooniverse.org/), a

Address for correspondence: K. Stere(cid:2)nczak, Instytut Badawczy Lesnictwa (IBL), SeR kocin Stary, 3 Braci Le(cid:2)snej Street, 05-090 Raszyn,
Poland. E-mail: k.sterenczak@ibles.waw.pl
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to express their appreciation to Marta Dulinicz for translating and proof-correcting the
manuscript and Gemma Teale for correction of the English version. This article was carried out as a result of the project” Laser Discov-
ers” funded by European Union resources, Program Innovative Economy, as part of the “Paths of Copernicus” project, established by
the Polish Minister of Science and Higher Education. We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their very constructive comments,
which helped us to substantially improve the manuscript.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12206

2

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

science web portal. The third group of VGI activities is associated with adding content to a data-
base with minimal involvement from volunteers. An example is the publication of geotagged
photos and videos on networks such as Twitter, where they are transferred automatically. The
method of generating content through non-professionals also has opponents, especially as when
research data are provided by non-specialists, they need to be critically treated. This can be
related to the credibility of volunteered geographic information (Flanagin and Metzger 2008).
This is a very interdisciplinary task, but raises an important issue when data/information preci-
sion and quality are discussed. VGI has become so important that it is referred to as a new trend
in IT and geoscience technology.

User-generated content (UGC) is related to the participation of volunteers in creating new
information, but encompasses a wider context than geographic information only, as in the case
of VGI. The UGC phenomenon was ﬁrst identiﬁed in 2005 and refers to the different types of
content produced and broadcast by the end-users (as opposed to traditional media content,
which is created by professionals, e.g. writers, publishers, journalists, broadcasters and pro-
ducers). It reﬂects changes in the new media associated with the development of technologies
that are more and more commonly used. UGC applies to various types of content, for example:
video, blog entries, podcasts or Wiki entries (Wikipedia 2015b).

According to the deﬁnition contained in the report of the OECD, published in 2007, user-

created content is characterized by:

1. A publication requirement: users publish on websites, blogs or forums information that

was never published online or elsewhere before.

2. Creative effort: users must add their own value to the work. It can be the creative effort
that was put into creating the work or adapting existing works to construct a new one.
For example, users share self-created music, videos, photos, etc.

3. Creation outside professional routines and practices: users generate content beyond their
standard professional routines and practices. Motivating factors include connecting with
peers, achieving a certain level of fame, notoriety, prestige and the desire to express one-
self. This element of UCC was implemented in the Laser Discoverers project.

Crowdsourcing, VGI or UGC, which nowadays support historical and archaeological
research in diverse ways, belong to a set of initiatives that allows society to be involved into the
research processes, in heritage protection and in the popularization of knowledge about herit-
age (see for example: Oomen et al. 2011; Harris 2012; Sylaiou et al. 2013). The best example
of this process in Poland is the discovery of Biskupin by the village teacher Walenty Szwajcer in
1933 (Kostrzewski 1970; Zaja˛czkowski and Szwajcer 1991). Across the world, numerous
social initiatives, driven by the selﬂess attitude of individuals and social groups towards herit-
age protection and safeguarding for next generations, contribute to the development of infor-
mal documentation of sites and objects connected with the past. Often they provide a basis for
further research (Hesse 2010), which is of great value for cultural heritage.

Volunteered geographic information can be, as mentioned above, a valuable input to the
research. VGI can be provided by existing or dedicated web applications, which can be used by
volunteers worldwide. The project “Laser Discoverers – non-invasive examination and docu-
mentation of archeological and historical objects in the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship”, carried
out as part of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education program entitled “The Paths of
Copernicus” is an example of using user (voluntary)-generated content for archeological
research. The main challenge of this project was the implementation of research conducted
with the involvement of people from outside the scientiﬁc community. That is why the most
essential aim of the project was to ensure the cooperation of volunteers with professional

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

3

scientiﬁc staff (Christian et al. 2012; Oberhauser and Prysby 2008). In the case of “Laser Discov-
erers”, UGC took the form of “citizen science”. The term “citizen science” was ﬁrst used by two
American physicists: Jo€el Primack and Frank von Hippel (1974) in their book Advice and Dis-
sent: Scientists in the Political Arena. With time, the concept of citizen science has become more
and more signiﬁcant, having been widely accepted as a component of scientiﬁc practice. Citizen
science existed even before it came to be categorized as such. Known examples include the Audu-
bon Society’s Christmas Bird Count, which began in 1900. The increased interest in citizen sci-
ence is closely correlated with the development of the Internet and its present role as a natural
communication channel. There are also other examples of global projects, such as Galaxy Zoo
(https://www.galaxyzoo.org/), in which volunteers classify galaxies or BioWeatherMap (http://
p2pfoundation.net/Bio_Weather_Map), a platform for collecting data on biodiversity and public
health or CoCoRaHS (Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network) for which
thousands of volunteers collect precipitation and weather data (http://www.cocorahs.org/).

This article presents the “Laser Discovers” project ﬁndings and results of an evaluation to
determine if web-based GIS can be used in heritage detection on a large scale. Two main ques-
tions were answered: (1) can members of the public who are not trained to recognize spatial
patterns associated with archaeological features be involved in such recognition? and (2) can a
web-based GIS application be an efﬁcient tool for supporting heritage recognition?

2 Materials and Methods

2.1 Study Area
The study area presented in Figure 1 was located in the northern part of the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voi-
vodeship, in areas directly adjacent to the border with the Mazowieckie Voivodeship. In admin-
istrative terms, the studied area is partly situated in the District of Starachowice (Municipality
of Brody) and partly in the District of Ostrowiec (Municipality of Kun(cid:2)ow). It is managed by the
Polish State Forests and lies partly within the boundaries of the Forest District of Starachowice
and partly within the boundaries of the Forest District of Ostrowiec (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie. The stud-
ied area is situated on the Iłz_eckie Foothills, to the north of the Kamienna Valley, within the
rock outcrop of the Jurassic Era, which form a low altitude monoclonal elevation spanning
from the northwest to the southeast. The eastern part of the region, within the upstream area of
the Kamienna River, is formed by rocks from the Cretaceous Period (Gorzkowska 2013; Kon-
Iłz_a and Ostrowiec
dracki 2011). The studied area is located between Starachowice,
(cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie, in the area of the primeval forest of Iłz_a, also known as Starachowickie Forests.
The main watercourse, around which there was more intensive human activity in the past, is the
Kamienna River, a left-bank tributary of the Vistula, with a length of 156 km and a catchment
area of 2007.9 km2. From the south, the studied area borders the valley of the Kamienna River,
with the artiﬁcial lake Brody Iłz_eckie. Several villages are located there: Henryk, Kitowiny, B(cid:2)or
Kunowski, Klepacze and partly Adam(cid:2)ow, Lipie and Podłaziska. (Zapłata et al. 2014).

2.2 Public Involvement and Training

The aspect of public involvement was essential from the very beginning of the conceptual plan-
ning of research that was to be carried out under the “Laser Discoverers” project. For this rea-
son, a strong emphasis was placed on promotional and awareness-raising activities. For one
thing, volunteers were needed for image interpretation of a large area and secondly, they
needed to be trained to use web-based GIS tools and to interpret the data provided. The main
activities regarding this aspect were as follows:

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

4

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

Figure 1 Study area map

1.

Involvement and support from institutions such as the Voivodeship Ofﬁce and entities
under its authority: (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie School Inspectorate and the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyski Historical
Preservation Ofﬁcer. Additional support was received from the Jan Pazdur Museum of
Nature and Technology “Eco-Museum” in Starachowice.

2. Local media and specialist industry-speciﬁc press interests. The TV and radio footage
concerning the Laser Discoverers included materials broadcast among others by TVP
Kielce, ntv Kielce, Polish Radio Three and Radio TokFM.

3. Usage of Internet and social media. To attract public interest in the project, a project website
was created (http://www.laserowiodkrywcy.pl). A Facebook account was also set up to publish
information about the most important events connected with the project.

4. Workshops. At ﬁrst, an open workshop was organized for residents of the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie
Voivodeship. The workshop was attended by 94 participants. In total, 127 people took part
in the ﬁrst stage of the project. During the second stage, workshops were organized for
pupils from the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship who attended lower and upper secondary
schools of general education. In total, 253 pupils from three educational establishments
from the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship, selected in consultation with the School Inspectorate
in Kielce, took part in 12 meetings. Every workshop consisted of a theoretical part – provid-
ing participants with introductory information on non-invasive methods of studying and
documenting archaeological and historical objects – and a practical part during which they
could try to interpret images representing data samples and become familiar with the web-
based GIS application used in the project. An overwhelming majority of pupils taking part
in the workshops declared their wish to join the project.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

5

Figure 2 National Stadium in Warsaw (Polish Press Agency by Paweł Supemak)

The main challenge with the involvement of people outside the scientiﬁc community was
to explain to them principles of GIS and make them ready to interpret the data provided. At
the preparation stage of the project, the team considered different ways to meet this challenge.
With a large number of potential volunteers, time pressure, and the open nature of the research
(in which everyone could join), it was very difﬁcult to provide a detailed understanding of the
complex and interdisciplinary theory used. There was also a danger that it would not be effec-
tive. Getting to know a large amount of additional information before assessing the samples
could discourage potential participants from joining. Therefore, it was agreed to change the
approach to the volunteers’ preparation. Instead of providing detailed technical knowledge, it
was decided to appeal to the spontaneous and intuitive perception of the participants, with
such knowledge of the issue as they had in the present moment. Thus, preparation for partici-
pation in the study was brought to a minimum, so each volunteer, after spending a few minutes
in preparation, could join the study. It was assumed that to appeal to the individual perception
of each participant, surveys could produce very interesting effects. Look at the following pic-
ture (Figure 2): What do we see? Most adults would answer a stadium. Some with knowledge
of this object and its location will say that it is the National Stadium in Warsaw. And here the
interpretation of this image usually ends.

Meanwhile, the picture is much more detailed. In addition to the stadium there are a river,
a bridge, numerous buildings and lots of greenery; moving further, a sandy beach, barges
moored at the quayside and public buses on the bridge can be seen. There are more details and
elements. Each potential interpreter will provide a different image description, depending on
their age, experience, knowledge, etc. (Barrett 2010).

Translating this example to the present study allowed its participants a fairly loose inter-
pretation of data samples, even at the cost of their making false readings. Thus, there was a
chance that they would identify objects, which, when evaluated by the well-trained user with a
detailed knowledge, could be rejected or ignored.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

6

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

2.3 Data Processing and Sharing

Non-invasive identiﬁcation and inventory of objects of historical interest, particularly archaeo-
logical features, within the “Laser Discoverers” project refers to the following two basic meth-
ods: (1) airborne laser scanning (ALS), and essentially the methods of processing and
visualization of digital terrain models (DTM) acquired with ALS under the “IT System for Pro-
tecting the Country Against Extraordinary Threats” (hereinafter ISOK); and (2) surface studies
(ﬁeld survey). The presented non-invasive studies were based on the following key elements:

1. Processing, analysis and interpretation of acquired data;
2. Field veriﬁcation of obtained results; and
3. Adjustment of geodata on the basis of ﬁeld observations.

The ﬁrst element, i.e. acquisition of ALS data within the project, was carried out in the
early stages of activities and was obtained from the Central Geodetic and Cartographic Docu-
mentation Centre. Afterwards, processing of acquired ALS data, including the reclassiﬁcation
of point cloud and DTM interpolation was carried out, in order to create a basis for the rec-
ognition of historic resources. The analysis and interpretation of the acquired and processed
geodata formed the third stage of work. The fourth element of the research procedure con-
sisted of ﬁeld veriﬁcation and summary of work results. The correction of geodata based on
ﬁeld observations constituted the last stage. Each of these stages consisted of smaller ele-
ments, such as the assessment of data quality, selection of DTM generation method, etc.
(Zapłata et al. 2014).

Project participants had at their disposal a web-based application, which provided access to a
digital terrain model provided in tiles, each with a GSP of 0.5 m and covering an area of 200 x 200 m
(Figure 3). All samples of data were additionally available in eight variants of hillshade, based
on the simulation of sunlight from eight directions and at a constant angle (ArcGIS tool Hill-
shade). In total, 5,989 elementary areas with dimensions of 100 3 100 m were used in the
project. Those areas, assembled in squares measuring 200 m on a side, were analyzed by pro-
ject participants. Randomly displayed images for visual interpretation had to fulﬁll the follow-
ing conditions:
1. The entire research area should be analyzed;
2. One research area should be displayed no more than four times;
3. The context of particular individual fragments of the area made available for visualiza-

tion should change; and

4. The analyzed area should be large enough to make it possible to notice objects with the
size of several dozen or so meters against its background; at the same time it should be
small enough to make it impossible to establish the actual location of a speciﬁc area,
thus protecting possible archaeological sites against looting, which is quite likely in
Poland, especially with the use of metal detectors.

The random selection scheme had been designed in such a way that a basic area (i.e. a
200 3 200 m fragment of DTM) could be displayed no more than four times. It was created
from four elementary fragments (a 100 3 100 m fragment of the DTM) (Figure 3). These ele-
mentary fragments could be displayed up to 12 times. The basic area was randomly displayed
to observers (Figure 3). This philosophy of data visualization was used to change the contexts
of interpretation of each elementary fragment.

A module to evaluate data samples was available after registering and logging in. To work
with the data samples, a number of tools were prepared. A detailed description of them was
available under the help icon. The main toolbars were as follows:

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

7

Figure 3 Schema showing creation of basic areas (raster cells measuring 200 m on a side) from
four elementary fragments (10,000 m2 area) (A) and way context was changed (B-D)

1. View bar used to change the view of the sample depending on the variant of the hillside

image (above the large image, containing small image icons on Figure 4);

2. Navigation bar that allowed for zooming in, zooming out and panning the sample (left

side of the image on Figure 4);

3. Editing bar for adding objects indicated as potential archaeological sites. Tools available
in this bar gave an opportunity to add objects with the following shapes: line, oval, rec-
tangular and other (it was possible to add more information about objects in the decryp-
tion section) (see Figure 4); and

4. Description bar allowing additional comments.

Project participants had the opportunity to interpret as many regions as they wished. After
ﬁnishing the current square they were able to save the results of the interpretation. They could
then go to another randomly selected region. Time was one of the main limitations during
interpretation, set up at a maximum of ﬁve minutes for each region. This time limit had two
functions – to make it harder to localize sites for locals and to keep the interpreter focused on
the task at hand.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

8

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

Figure 4 A screenshot showing the interface of the application for the processing of data samples
(Source: http://laserowiodkrywcy.pl/)

2.4 User (voluntary)-generated Content Evaluation

As mentioned in the introduction, voluntarily generated input has different value and accuracy.
To ﬁnd out how valuable it can be, the following veriﬁcations were carried out:

1. Detailed site-speciﬁc work was conducted based on publicly available data and informa-
tion concerning the area of research: forests. On the basis of the above mentioned data
or GIS layers, the researchers primarily identiﬁed contemporary topographic objects of
the area (roads, rivers, houses, etc.), which were classiﬁed as objects outside of the set of
potential historical objects and excluded them from further analysis.

2. Field veriﬁcation of the indicated objects was performed in the growing season, which
also allowed for the correlation of historical objects with plants growing directly above
the monuments as well as in their neighborhood. Approximately 10% of the potential
objects were veriﬁed in the ﬁeld, due to fund limitations and project duration (one year).
These elements formed an essential criterion based on which the designation of speciﬁc
areas and objects for ﬁeld veriﬁcation were made. The argument in favor of the selection
of the aforementioned periods of performing ﬁeld work was that the performance of ver-
iﬁcation work in the growing season made it possible to avoid the destruction of vegeta-
tion (e.g. in the case of work involving the exposition of plant litter), which is also
impossible during leaﬂess periods. The following general principles of identiﬁcation and
documentation were adopted for all objects identiﬁed in the ﬁeld: (a) local inspection
(location and identiﬁcation of remains of potential historical objects) and analysis of

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

9

context; (b) identiﬁcation of visible cultural layers, movable historical monuments and
characteristic features; (c) acquisition of movable historical monuments and samples
(optional); (d) measurement – determination of coordinates; (e) description of ﬁnding/
object; (f) optional – documentation (photograph, drawing/sketch); (g) determination of
the function and chronology of the object; and (h) ﬂora characteristics (optional).

Research work included also consultations and interviews among the local community, as
well as among people professionally related to the research area, i.e. foresters. These activities
resulted in the indication of sites of historical settlements, economic activities, and military
operations. Particularly valuable information was obtained from foresters, who indicated a
number of objects as being a result of modern human activities.

3 Results and Discussion

Field work was carried out in accordance with the applicable rules of conducting surface stud-
ies, regulations concerning access to the forest, as well as on the basis of developed guidelines
(Zapłata 2014). Due to the large concentration of historical objects of the same category on a
substantial parts of the research area, including several APP (Archaeological Picture of Poland
– AZP/Archeologiczne ZdjeR cie Polski), as part of the documentation of ﬁndings (in consultation
with the Historical Preservation Ofﬁcer of the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship in Kielce) separate
Archaeological Object Identiﬁcation Card (KEZA/Karty Ewidencji Zabytk(cid:2)ow Archeologicz-
nych) ﬁles were created for clusters of objects reported within one APP area. The speciﬁc nature
of objects and their intensity made it necessary to treat a set jointly, but with a division into the
existing APP system distinctions.

As a result of the juxtaposition of the results of the work of Internet users with the detailed

site-speciﬁc work of a specialist, the following potential objects were selected for veriﬁcation:

1. 19 objects associated with the extraction of natural raw materials (probably remains of

sites of the exploitation of natural resources);

2. 5,304 oval objects (remains of potential charcoal piles)
3. 840 linear objects (remains of potential roads and forest tracks);
4. 27 linear objects with side-elements (likely the remains of war trenches which occur in

5. 48 square objects (likely the remains of fences used in forestry);
6. Oval concave objects (several clusters and numerous individual objects) (lack of initial

two main clusters);

interpretation);

7. Eight unspeciﬁed objects (lack of initial interpretation);
8. 19 linear unspeciﬁed objects (lack of initial interpretation);
9. Remains of railway embankments (narrow gauge railway); and

10. Other (areas) – several places/areas.

The above mentioned set of objects selected for ﬁeld veriﬁcation contained only general
ideas concerning their probable function. At the stage of detailed site-speciﬁc work these
objects had been treated as potential historical objects, whose function was conﬁrmed to some
extent by surface studies and interpretation, primarily based on several characteristic features:1

1. Shape (e.g. regular, irregular, oval);
2. Measurements – size (e.g. surface, diameter, length, cross-section, depth – height differ-

ences, dimensions of individual elements);

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

10

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

3. Context of occurrence and/or co-occurrence with other objects;
4. Topographic location;
5. Arrangement of particular elements (e.g. regularity, frequency of occurrence or distribu-

tion, place of occurrence); and

6. Cultural layer and/or movable historical monuments (depending on the ﬁeld conditions).

On the basis of the above mentioned elements, two main groups of objects were singled
out: (1) objects with a (conventional) speciﬁed nature; and (2) objects of indeﬁnite nature
(anthropogenic objects, natural objects or errors connected with the processing of data). Veriﬁ-
cation of the obtained results of object recognition was also performed with reference to: (1)
the results of current archive and library inquiries, as well as (2) other available cartographic,
archival and remote sensing materials. The said veriﬁcation made it possible, inter alia, to elim-
inate some of the identiﬁed natural objects, such as: (1) watercourses located in forest areas
(topographic maps, satellite images); (2) traces of forest ploughing (e.g. satellite images); or
enabled positive initial veriﬁcation of such identiﬁed objects as (3) remains of inactive/historic
mines (the basis for veriﬁcation: literature on the subject and archival documents).

Internet users involved in the project interpreted more than 95% of the area provided.
While working, most participants used more than one image of shaded relief of the given area.
As many as 67.4% of Internet users used all eight images, with different exposure directions.
Among 655 members, up to seven went through more than 100 areas (486, 440, 225, 200,
179, 157, and 136, respectively). Seventy-two users analyzed between 10 and 100 squares.
Considering the results of ﬁeld inventory, it is worth pointing out that Internet users together
with specialists recognized several thousand objects of potential archaeological and historic
interest and indicated those which required further veriﬁcation. During the project, approxi-
mately 10% of those sites (of all mentioned above) were veriﬁed on the basis of the non-
invasive (ﬁeld survey) work. More than 75% of those thus veriﬁed were positive ﬁndings. One
caveat has to be made: many locations generated by users were false positive results. In general
they were connected with existing infrastructure (i.e. roads, fences or buildings), which without
additional GIS layers or information were impossible to detect through DTM interpretation
alone. But those cases were ﬁltered and excluded from veriﬁcation with additional GIS-based
spatial analysis, true map veriﬁcation and additional interpretation by specialist scientists. The
other potential objects pointed out by project participants need to be veriﬁed in the future. In
contrast, the objects already identiﬁed in the ﬁeld need further non-invasive (e.g. geophysical
exploration) and/or invasive work, to determine their function, chronology or state of preserva-
tion, e.g. residual mines.2

Volunteers have no problem with recognizing remains of potential charcoal piles (oval
depressions) and clear lines objects (war trenches). What is more, these were detected many
times, by other people interpreting the same fragment of the area. So in the ﬁnal results, there
were even several points on the one object, marked by several different volunteers. Most of the
charcoal piles and war trenches were found and positively veriﬁed in the ﬁeld. Objects associ-
ated with the extraction of natural raw materials (probably remains of sites of the exploitation
of natural resources) were relatively easy to detect as well, and all were located and veriﬁed cor-
rectly. Old forest roads or railways were difﬁcult to detect, due the fact that they were small
rises in the ground with smooth borders.

An example of positively veriﬁed historical objects include residues of charcoal piles (Figure

5), war trenches (Figure 6), historic mines/forms of mining (Figure 7) or forest roads (Figure 8).

Charcoal piles, in general oval objects, and the remains of objects related to the processing
of wood, most probably by charcoal ﬁring (which is the reason they were classiﬁed as charcoal

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

11

Figure 5 Charcoal on the site of locating one of the oval objects (remains of a charcoal pile), the
Starachowice Forest District (photo by R Zapłata)

Figure 6 Example of the remains of war trenches (photo by A Olszewski)

piles; they could also serve as tar kilns or birch tar plants): in total, 361 objects were identiﬁed
and documented in the area. According to relative dating based on trees growing on the
objects, it can be assumed that these objects were used before or in the ﬁrst half of the 20th cen-
tury. Historical premises indicate the operation of such facilities during the period of the Old
Polish Industrial Region (more information later in this article), and even earlier (Orzechowski
2013; Zapłata 2013; Zapłata et al. 2014). These objects are characterized by an oval construc-
tion with numerous regular surrounding pits. Their dimensions are: diameter, from a few to
several meters; depth of surrounding pits, from a few to several dozen centimeters; dimensions
of oval pits: length of approximately 100 cm and width of approximately 50 cm. A typical

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

12

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

Figure 7 Remains of one of the workings of natural resources. Example of ﬂooding of objects
with rainwater, Starachowice Forest District (photo by R Zapłata)

Figure 8 Example of remains of forest roads (photo by R Zapłata)

feature of the cross-section is an often-repeated elevation of the central part, with a height rang-
ing from several to several dozen centimeters. Charcoal and characteristic dark brown humus
lying on the surface are typical of many of these objects (Szady and Zapłata 2014).

Other examples of objects are linear objects with side-elements (military trenches). Two
objects were identiﬁed and documented (two rows of linear objects which should probably be
treated as the remains of two compact systems of trenches). Analysis of the structure, dimen-
sions and location suggest that these objects are associated with the First and/or Second World
War. The ﬁrst object is located in the south-western part of the research area, extending in the
NE-SW line from DeR bowe Pole, with characteristic parallel lines of trenches in the southern

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

13

part. The object is over 7 km long, in some parts more than 1 m deep and over 2.5 m wide. The
second row of trenches was located in the western part of the research area. The identiﬁed
object has a length of approximately 1 km. The shape and nature of objects is conﬁrmed,
among others, in the analysis of historical sources, including archival instructions on how to
construct this type of object, e.g. “Feld-pionierdienst aller Waffen” (Szady and Zapłata 2014).

Another group are objects associated with the exploitation of raw materials/former work-
ings and mines. In total, over 30 clusters of objects were identiﬁed and documented, consisting
of a set of oval objects with characteristic pits and surrounding heaps. Among these objects,
remains of the “Henryk” mine were documented. Apart from mines whose dates of establish-
ment or operation are known, as in the case of the “Henryk” mine (20th century), the remain-
ing objects are most likely related to the exploitation of natural resources. At this stage of work
their identiﬁcation cannot be accurately classiﬁed in terms of chronology, which also requires
further research work (Szady and Zapłata 2014).

The last type of objects positively veriﬁed in the ﬁeld are linear objects/remains of roads
and forest tracks related to silviculture – altogether 28 objects out of a total group of 840 were
identiﬁed and documented in the ﬁeld. No chronology has been determined for this type of
object; they have been recorded as unspeciﬁed. Based on some information and the co-
occurrence in the same area with the above mentioned objects (charcoal piles), it can be
assumed that they were created and operated in a similar time frame. The objects discussed are
mostly concentrated in a belt over 3 km, extending along the NW-SE line, at a length of over
11 km. They are distinctive structures: an elevation of the ground with trenches running paral-
lel along the object, usually approximately ﬁve meters wide. The length of these objects varies
from a dozen to several hundred meters. The objects have different orientations, and it is
believed that their distribution is associated with adaptation to local conditions in the past. The
height of the central elevation (hump) in some places exceeds 50 cm, but most of these objects
are signiﬁcantly leveled, which hinders their observation and identiﬁcation (Szady and Zapłata
2014).

On the basis of conducted research, several features can be named that allows evaluation
of the usefulness and effectiveness of activities undertaken within projects, such as “Laser dis-
coverers”. The evaluation discussed here is based on interviews/discussions, observations and
document analysis (Haber 2007). In addition to the scientiﬁc and research aspects (recognition,
veriﬁcation, documentation and cataloguing of heritage) several outputs should be mentioned:

1. Members of the public who are not trained to recognize spatial patterns associated with
archaeological features can be involved in such recognition with great success. This can
be connected with an increase in the sensibility of the information society/digital society
towards heritage, especially such features as are yet unknown and located in forested
areas. The term information society/digital society is used on purpose (Białobłocki et al.
2006). It is a society that communes with digital data, with various kinds of visualiza-
tions, and it is accustomed to such means of analyzing the world and the environemnt.
The information society today is a society of a transitional era and consists of two
groups. The ﬁrst, the “digital natives”, were born and raised in a digital civilization. The
“digital immigrants” have joined this civilization; digital technology appeared in their
lives at some point (Tepolitz 2006). Thus, the shaping of sensibility should take into
account the predispositions and expectations of the society, as well as tools used by it.
Contemporary culture is a culture with new means of education, new media and digital
technologies. Post-tourism emerges within contemporary culture, introducing ways of
spending free time and learning about new sites, which can be achieved without leaving

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

14

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

home (Podemski 2004, p. 84). This culture creates certain needs in individuals and, at
the same time, shapes a certain way of perceiving the world. Therefore, it seems justiﬁed
to direct their attention to heritage and issues connected with heritage through the use
of widely accessible devices and “attractive” means of presentation.

2. Web-based GIS application can be an efﬁcient tool for supporting heritage recognition.
Modern geoinformatic systems allow us to work online, offering hitherto unknown pos-
sibilities of processing and providing access to data, thus radically changing methods of
research and digital data analyses, simultaneously enabling us to include society in the
research on various levels. To carry out such work as have been conducted within this
research is only possible with the use of data, software, users and procedures that have
to be collectively described as GIS. In addition, it should be noted that more and more
countries provide free access to airborne laser scanning data (e.g. the Netherlands,
Denmark, Poland, Switzerland), thus, the area on which such research can be conducted
is increasing.

3. Web-based GIS application can protect our heritage from potential looting. In this case
DTM data are also helpful, although they rather did not provide much additional infor-
mation about heritage location, as colour images usually do. During ﬁeld veriﬁcation no
signs of looting or devastation were noticed.

4. The dissemination of knowledge, especially about ALS and its use for heritage detection
and protection. In comparison to the hitherto applied methods of non-invasive research
in forested areas, ALS appears as a revolutionary and unrivalled method that allows for
a thorough and non-invasive analysis of cultural heritage. However, taking into account
the diverse quality of data coverage (density of data), the authors have noticed a disad-
vantage that inﬂuences the research process itself and its results (Stere(cid:2)nczak 2014). The
differentiation in the density of measurements on the ground level results in limitations
to the recognition of heritage objects on some areas. This can be caused, for example,
by the vegetation period (leaﬂess period of vegetation period), the density of vegetation
or the parameters of measurements and ﬂight strips. Thus, in future social projects (this
can be treated as a proposal for future research) it might be worthwhile to invite volun-
teers not only at the stage of data analysis and interpretation, in order to pinpoint possi-
ble heritage features, but at the initial stage, when visualizations are prepared and
geodata processed. The so-called post-processing connected with processing ALS data is
often based on automatic methods of data processing. Additionally, data are not com-
pared with the present, real state of the investigated terrain. This results in the associa-
tion of measurement points with an inappropriate class, such as ground or low
vegetation.

5. Another aspect that has to be positively evaluated is the promotion of new means of
cooperation with the society, for example with the implementation of online methods.
With their use a traditional interview can be complemented with an analysis of visual-
ized geodata – consultations and interviews conducted, for example, with foresters. Thus
the potential of new technologies leading to the engagement of new data into the
research process has been noted. Hitherto such engagement has taken the forms of, for
example, a direct ﬁeld interview with local societies (for example the activities of Miec-
zysław Radwan, in Krawczyk (2010) and Kazimierz Bielenin in Orzechowski (2013)).
Contemporary technology allows an interview to be conducted from a distance; society
can share knowledge that is indispensable to and expected by researchers. An interview,
as a means to gather information about heritage objects in a particular region, is one of
the standard channels used to acquire knowledge about cultural heritage.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

15

In this article we have already answered some questions posed in the introduction, such as:
“how and to what degree can volunteers generate and are generating GIS data in a given project;
what kind of data do they generate?” Concerning another question: “what are the pros and
cons of GIS within such types of projects?”, it is worth stressing the disadvantages of geoinfor-
matic tools or rather the weak aspects of their implementation (several advantages have already
been mentioned). The latter is strongly recommended during the use of airborne laser scanning
(ALS) (ISOK; http://www.isok.gov.pl/) because of frequent errors in data classiﬁcation that
result in inaccurate digital elevation models and thus in inaccurate interpretations. In practice,
however, this is something on which we have little inﬂuence, because the forest is an unpredict-
able environment and even ﬂights with denser sampling do not guarantee uniformity of data.

Another weakness of the proposed procedure, which is based on the division of terrain
into squares, is, for the person interpreting the data, the limitation of contexts of particular fea-
tures, especially at the edges of each square (sample). It should be noted that this problem was
practically solved by the use of four small areas which formed one area visualized to the
observer. In another visualization each of the small areas could become part of the neighboring
area. Accordingly, the context of its display varied whenever it was presented more than once.
Yet another disadvantage is the exclusion of the thematic level (e.g. orthophotomap) from the
analysis. Such a map decidedly improves the quality of the analysis and the interpretation of
the results. However, the exclusion was justiﬁed by the, already mentioned, desire to withhold
information about the location of several heritage features.

Another question asked was: “whether and how such types of projects support the devel-
opment of VGI?” Firstly, as already mentioned, volunteers contribute to the development of
the geodata database within the created GIS. Secondly, volunteers have unambiguously con-
ﬁrmed the usability and effectiveness of implemented tools. This can advance further work on
the modernization of applications that can channel interest in the direction of similar projects.
An example of modiﬁcation, within providing online access to data, can be the substitution of
2D visualizations with 2.5D data analysis. Another example is taking into account research
contributed by the society within the analysis of natural features on the of the ALS data (such
as recognition and monitoring of speciﬁc habitats of plants or places of illegal exploitation of
natural resources) or during the documentation of geomorphic structures.

Presented research was similar to the “Field Expedition: Mongolia” project in extent relat-
ing to UGC, but use of ALS data in our case makes our analysis much more detailed and possi-
ble in all kind of environments. Using satellite images allows observation of large objects not
covered by vegetation, or very large objects which can be distinguished from their surroundings
even if they are covered with vegetation. In our case vegetation was not a big issue and the size
of the detected object was much smaller. Additionally, the use of DTMs rather than images
protects potential archeological sites because they are much harder to interpret on the ground.
Using images allows better recognition of a heritage location.

4 Conclusions

The main conclusions from the presented research are as follows:

1. VGI is useful in heritage recognition and protection.
2. Web-based GIS application can be an efﬁcient tool for supporting heritage recognition.
3. Web-based GIS application can protect heritage from potential looting.
4. ALS data provide very detailed information in the form of DTMs and can be used with

great success for heritage recognition.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

16

K Stere(cid:2)nczak, R Zapłata, M Sztampke and R Bałazy

This exploration of particular forested areas should lead to further activities, also investiga-
tions, which will allow the character of recognized objects to be deﬁned (because of the charac-
ter of implemented methods and of the project’s guidelines which were to be non-invasive, it
was only possible to provisionally recognize and verify heritage features) and will lead to the
establishment of appropriate methods for their protection on areas that are subject to
silviculture.

1 Features deﬁning particular categories of objects are the result of information gathered from the

research literature on the subject, historical sources and data from the project work.

2 The previous identiﬁcation (within the project) determines the function of objects only to an approxi-

Notes

mate extent.

References

Ball M 2010 What’s the distinction between crowd sourcing, volunteered geographic information and authorita-
tive data? WWW document, http://www.sensysmag.com/spatialsustain/whats-the-distinction-between-
crowdsourcing-volunteered-geographic-information-and-authoritativedata.html

Barrett T 2010 Principles for interpreting photographs. In Swinner J and Deneulin L (eds) The Weight of Photog-

raphy: Photography History Theory and Criticism. Brussels, Belgium, ASP: 147–72

Białobłocki T, Moroz J, Nowina-Konopka M, and Zacher L W 2006 Społecze(cid:2)nstwo Informacyjne: Istota, Prob-

lemy, Wyzwania. Warszawa, Poland, Wydawnictwa Akademickie i Profesjonalne

Christian C, Lintott Ch, Smith A, Forston L, and Bamford S 2012 Citizen Science: Contributions to Astronomy

Research. WWW document, http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1202/1202.2577.pdf

Elwood S 2008 Volunteered Geographic Information: Future research directions motivated by critical, participa-

tory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal 72: 173–83

Flanagin A J and Metzger M J 2008 The credibility of volunteered geographic information. GeoJournal 72:

137–48

Goodchild M F 2007 Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal 69: 211–21
Gorzkowska M 2013 Sprawozdanie z weryﬁkacyjnych bada(cid:2)n powierzchniowych (czeR(cid:2)sc´ obszar(cid:2)ow AZP 81-68,
81-69, 82-68, 82-69), Starachowice, Poland [typescript in the Forest Research Institute archive, in Polish]
Haber A (ed) 2007 Ewaluacja ex-post: Teoria i praktyka badawcza. WWW document, http://www.parp.gov.pl/

ﬁles/74/81/158/Ewaluacja_expost.Teoria_i_praktyka_badawcza.pdf

Harris T 2012 Interfacing archaeology and the world of citizen sensors: Exploring the impact of neogeog-
raphy and volunteered geographic information on an authenticated archaeology. World Archaeology
44: 580–91

Hesse R 2010 Extraction of archaeological features from high-resolution LiDAR data. In Proceedings of the Four-

teenth International Congress on Cultural Heritage and New Technologies, Vienna, Austria: 636–42

Kondracki J 2011 Geograﬁa regionalna Polski. Warszawa, Poland, Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN
Kostrzewski J 1970 Z mego _zycia: PamieR tniki. Wrocław, Poland, Zakład Narodowy im. Ossoli(cid:2)nskich
Krawczyk B 2010 Mieczysław Radwan – krajoznawca i naukowiec (1889-1968). WWW document, http://khit.

pttk.pl/teksty/mieczyslaw_radwankrajoznawca_i_naukowiec_b_krawczyk.pdf

Oberhauser K S and Prysby M D 2008 Citizen science: Creating a research army for conservation. American

Entomologist 54: 97–9

Oomen J and Aroyo L 2011 Crowdsourcing in the cultural heritage domain: Opportunities and challenges. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Communities and Technologies, Brisbane, Australia
Orzechowski S 2013 Region _zelaza. Centra hutnicze kultury przeworskiej. Kielce, Poland, Wydawnictwo Uni-

wersytetu Jana Kochanowskiego w Kielcach

Podemski K 2004 Socjologia Podr(cid:2)o_zy. Pozna(cid:2)n, Poland, Wydawnictwo Naukowe Uniwersytetu im. Adama

Mickiewicza

Primack J and Hippel F 1974 Advice and Dissent: Scientists in the Political Arena. New York, Basic Books
Stere(cid:2)nczak K 2014 Laser scanning and geomatics. In Zapłata R, Szady B, and Stere(cid:2)nczak K (eds) Laser Discover-
ers: Non-invasive Examination and Documentation of Archeological and Historical Objects in the
(cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship. Warszawa, Poland, GeoHistory Center Foundation: 91–110

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Laser Discoverers

17

Sylaiou S, Basiouka S, Patias P, and Stylianidis E 2013 The volunteered geographic information in archaeology.

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences II-5/W1: 301–06

Szady B and Zapłata R 2014 The past of the research area – between archeology and history. In Zapłata R, Szady
B, and Stere(cid:2)nczak K (eds) Laser Discoverers: Non-invasive Examination and Documentation of Archeologi-
cal and Historical Objects in the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship. Stare Babice, Poland, GeoHistory Center
Foundation, Forest Research Institute: 51–90

Tepolitz K T 2006 Doka˛d prowadza˛ nas media. Warszawa, Poland, ISKRY
Wikipedia 2015a Volunteered geographic information. WWW document, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volun-

Wikipedia 2015b User-generated content. WWW document,

https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/User-generated_

Zaja˛czkowski W and Szwajcer W 2013 Walenty Szwajcer opowiada o odkryciu Biskupina. Gazeta Biskupi(cid:2)nska

teered_geographic_information

content

158 (XVIII): 8

Zapłata R 2013 Nieinwazyjne metody w badaniu i dokumentacji dziedzictwa kulturowego – aspekty skanowania
laserowego w badaniach archeologicznych i architektonicznych, Warszawa. (Non-invasive methods in
studying and documenting cultural heritage – aspects of laser scanning in archaeological and architectural
research, Warsaw.) [in Polish]

Zapłata R 2014 Laserowi Odkrywcy – metodyka powierzchniowych bada(cid:2)n terenowych na obszarach le(cid:2)snych.
Wybrane zagadnienia w zakresie prowadzenia weryﬁkacyjnych bada(cid:2)n powierzchniowych, Mak(cid:2)ow Nowy-
SeR kocin Stary, Poland [typescript in the Forest Research Institute archive, in Polish]

Zapłata R, Szady B, and Stere(cid:2)nczak K (eds) 2014 Laser Discoverers: Non-invasive Examination and Documenta-
tion of Archeological and Historical Objects in the (cid:2)SwieR tokrzyskie Voivodeship. Warszawa, Poland, Geo-
History Center Foundation

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

