bs_bs_banner

Original Article

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00): 00–00

VGDI – Advancing the Concept: Volunteered
Geo-Dynamic Information and its Beneﬁts for
Population Dynamics Modeling

Christoph Aubrecht,(cid:2),† Dilek €Ozceylan Aubrecht,‡ Joachim Ungar,§
S(cid:2)ergio Freire(cid:2)(cid:2) and Klaus Steinnocher(cid:2)
(cid:2)AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Energy Department, Vienna, Austria
†The World Bank, Social, Urban, Rural & Resilience (GSURR), Washington DC, USA
‡Sakarya University, Department of Management Information Systems, Sakarya, Turkey
§EOX IT Services GmbH, Vienna, Austria
(cid:2)(cid:2)European Commission - Joint Research Centre (JRC), Institute for the Protection and Security
of the Citizen (IPSC), Ispra, Italy

Abstract
The concept of Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) has progressed from being an exotic prospect to
making a profound impact on GIScience and geography in general, as initially anticipated. However, while
massive and manifold data is continuously produced voluntarily and applications are built for information
and knowledge extraction, the initially introduced concept of VGI lacks certain methodological perspectives
in this regard which have not been fully elaborated. In this article we highlight and discuss an important gap
in this concept, i.e. the lack of formal acknowledgment of temporal aspects. By coining the proposed
advanced framework ‘Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information’ (VGDI), we attempt to lay the ground for
full conceptual and applied spatio-temporal integration. To illustrate that integrative approach of VGDI
and its beneﬁts, we describe the potential impact on the ﬁeld of dynamic population distribution modeling.
While traditional approaches in that domain rely on survey-based data and statistics as well as static geo-
graphic information, the use of VGDI enables a dynamic setup. Foursquare venue and user check-in data
are presented for a test site in Lisbon, Portugal. Two core modules of spatio-temporal population assess-
ment are thereby addressed, namely time use proﬁling and target zone characterization, motivated by the
potential integration in existing population dynamics frameworks such as the DynaPop model.

1 Introduction

Before the turn of the second millennium, when the ﬁeld of GIScience was far from being
established in its current sense, Gould (1999) stated that “there is a geographer in most peo-
ple” when anticipating the arrival of a “spatial century”. That vision by now has become
today’s socio-spatial reality. Along with technical advances and the emergence of easily and
all-round accessible mobile technology, spatial data acquisition and provision have moved on
institutions and formal criteria towards a notion of
from being constrained to ofﬁcial

Address for correspondence: Christoph Aubrecht, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology; Energy Department; Vienna, Austria. Email:
christoph.aubrecht@ait.ac.at
Acknowledgements: Parts of this study were carried out in the framework of the EU CRISMA project (http://www.crismaproject.eu).
CRISMA is funded from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement no.
284552. Approaches promoted in this article refer to the authors’ personal expertise and perspectives and do not necessarily reﬂect
views and/or policy of World Bank and/or European Commission and its afﬁliated organizations, or those of its Executive Directors or
the governments they represent.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12203

2

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

ubiquitous sensing (Gartner et al. 2007). Widespread participation and engagement of large
numbers of citizens in the voluntary creation of geographic information is no longer an
“exotic” prospect, as stated by Goodchild (2007) when ﬁrst introducing Volunteered Geo-
graphic Information (VGI) to the scientiﬁc community (Craglia et al. 2012, Elwood et al.
2012). Voluntary lay collection and compilation of spatial data is nothing really new and in
fact has a long tradition already, e.g. in ecological research, with the popular Christmas Bird
Count of the American National Audubon Society reaching back to the year 1900 (LeBaron
2007). However, such efforts often remained constrained to a limited number of enthusiasts.
In the 1990s, inclusion of the general public in GIS and mapping activities started being
actively promoted, coined Public Participation GIS (Obermeyer 1998, Craig and Elwood
1998). VGI spatial data frameworks, enabling technologies, and associated platforms have
been developed since and nowadays are at everybody’s ﬁngertips, packed in easy-to-use apps
running on mobile devices. Efforts at collective spatial data creation as well as associated col-
laborative mapping have consequently been identiﬁed as being on the rise (See et al. 2013).
Already foreseeing that development when formally introducing the concept, Goodchild
(2007) raised awareness that VGI in its collective ‘vastness’ may represent a “dramatic inno-
vation [. . . having] profound impacts on geographic information systems (GIS) and more gen-
erally on the discipline of geography and its relationship to the general public”. Nonetheless,
despite the well-documented and widely acknowledged explosive growth of VGI creating a
“massive data avalanche” and vast additional resource about human activities (Elwood et al.
2012, Miller 2010), the integration of VGI in scientiﬁc applications is still often regarded
with skepticism (Poore 2010, Marshall 2015).

The lack of formal acknowledgment of time as a speciﬁc variable is highlighted as an
important gap in the concept of VGI, limiting the full exploitation of VGI beneﬁts for advanc-
ing scientiﬁc applications. Time, in that context, is speciﬁcally considered in terms of VGI time-
liness as well as dynamics as compared with traditional geodata, often being infrequently
updated, quickly outdated, and mostly static. While these aspects can be of relevance at any
temporal scale, in this article we focus on the conceptualization and applicability of highly
dynamic VGI characteristics at the level of daily human activity. We show how full spatio-
temporal integration can beneﬁt one selected GI-application ﬁeld, i.e. the domain of dynamic
population distribution modeling. Taking it a step further, resulting data derivatives and infor-
mation products can serve as valuable resource for a broad range of applied scientiﬁc research
including disaster risk and crisis management, health and environmental policy modeling or
geomarketing purposes.

The main motivation of this article is grounded in the former application domain referring
to dynamic aspects of crisis management addressed in the CRISMA project framework (Havlik
et al. 2015). With time-speciﬁc situational analysis being one of the main components for the
developed crisis decision support system, we hereby aim at exploring the unique information
content of VGI to improve the assessment of dynamic population distribution and consequently
exposure patterns. Disaster risk and crisis management has probably been the most prominent
ﬁeld regarding the applied use of VGI in recent years. While Goodchild already mentioned the
potential relevance in 2007, the citizen science disaster response efforts to the 2010 Haiti earth-
quake can probably be considered the effective starting point when VGI began to be appreci-
ated as beneﬁcial for real-world action (Norheim-Hagtun and Meier 2010). Since then, the
‘crowd’ is increasingly considered a main data provider in immediate crisis management and
disaster response activities (Ostermann et al. 2010, Vieweg et al. 2010, Guan and Chen 2014,
Meier 2014). Speciﬁcally the temporal component is thereby highlighted again in being crucial
to VGI integration in real-time decision-making.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

3

2 Deconstructing VGI – What are We Really Talking About?

In the previous introductory section we brieﬂy outlined the ‘explosive growth’ (Elwood et al.
2012) in availability and rapidly increasing importance of VGI since the concept’s ﬁrst scientiﬁc
introduction and labeling just less than a decade ago. VGI clearly has the potential to make a
strong impact in multifold application domains with disaster management highlighted as spe-
ciﬁcally relevant. In order to get a structured understanding of the main points about volun-
teered geographic information and consequently advance to the next level, in the following
discussion we brieﬂy try to deconstruct the concept into its three main components V – G – I.
VGI has been comprehensively analyzed and described conceptually in the literature with
regard to its domains, user context, enabling technologies, and various other aspects (e.g.
Goodchild 2007, Craglia et al. 2012, Elwood et al. 2012). The idea for the following concep-
tual deconstruction was to go down to the basic cornerstones and shed some light on what we
are actually talking about when referring to VGI. This is then taken as the basis to highlight
conceptual gaps and propose an advanced scientiﬁc framework, speciﬁcally addressing beneﬁts
for population dynamics modeling. The provided elaborations and respective list of ‘items of
interest’ do not aim at being complete, but should rather stimulate discussion to further deepen
the concept.

2.1 The Way of Volunteering GI

Being referred to as a ‘special case of user-generated content (UGC)’ (Mooney and Winstanley
2015), the ‘V’ surely stands for the most distinct feature of VGI, i.e. its volunteered nature.
Intentional voluntary activity of individuals and/or groups regarding the acquisition and provi-
sion of geographic information deﬁnes VGI (e.g. Elwood et al. 2012). While acquisition and
provision are voluntary, it may obviously be the case that location-based social media users are
not actually aware of follow-up use once their provided data have entered the public or private
domain. When referring to the voluntary nature of VGI in this article we thus consider the data
creation and provision perspective and do not extend this concept to application aspects. The
question that immediately comes up in that context is who may actually volunteer (e.g. Good-
child 2007). Haklay (2013) points out that at least a subset of VGI activities and practices falls
into the category of citizen science, i.e. “the involvement of non-professional scientists in data
collection and, to some extent, its analysis.” This aspect is often referred to when discussing
data quality as well as issues of representativeness of VGI. Analysis of social properties of users
and contributors has consequently been a focus of recent research (Golbeck 2015). It has been
suggested in that context that applying restrictions to the participant population, thus actively
inﬂuencing the contributor proﬁle, can serve to ensure adequate quality (Goodchild 2007).

After identifying who volunteers geographic information, the next question that emerges is
why people do that. Numerous studies have therefore been dealing with the motivational
aspects of VGI user and contributor activity (Coleman et al. 2009, Neis and Zipf 2012, Budha-
thoki and Haythornthwaite 2013), analyzing aspects such as self-promotion and exhibitionism
(e.g. Wang and Stefanone 2013), interaction and co-editing (e.g. Mooney and Corcoran 2014),
as well as additional incentivizing (e.g. Lindqvist et al. 2011).

Categorizing VGI speciﬁcally with regard to the volunteering aspect, researchers have pro-
posed a typology of active vs. passive sensing, or in other words distinguishing explicit and
implicit volunteering. While the explicit way is thereby described as ‘true VGI in the strictest
sense’ (i.e. explicit volunteering of explicit geographic content), implicitly volunteered informa-
tion refers to citizen-generated geographic content with no a priori guidelines (Craglia et al.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

4

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

2012). With this article aiming at improved spatio-temporal sensemaking using VGI in the con-
text of population dynamics mapping, we slightly transform that explicit-implicit understand-
ing and focus on the collectiveness of volunteered geoinformation and its inherent setup
principles.

2.1.1 ‘Unguided’ implicitly-collective information

Contributing persons provide certain pieces of information, but usually without the main inten-
tion of creating a ‘bigger picture’. A common way of volunteering in that context is the sharing
of one’s location or a certain experience/activity at a given location with friend-connections. A
rather broad list of location-sharing services have emerged over the years; the following three
highlighted services are considered most frequented in terms of actual extraction and use of
locational data for scientiﬁc purposes. For further information, Cramer et al. (2011) provide an
extensive discussion about the nature of such location-sharing services, including check-in func-
tionalities and user motivation.

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Foursquare, launched in 2009, is probably most ‘direct’ in that regard, requiring users to
check in at a certain location (providing real-time location sharing service to its users).
Facebook has a similar feature implemented - Facebook Places - following the Four-
square example just shortly after, in 2010 (Ortutay 2010).

(cid:129) Twitter, founded in 2006, does not have its main focus on spatial information collection.
However, recent research increasingly focuses on extracting locational information via
semantic textual analysis.

Compiling all those individual and initially-unrelated but inherently-connected (via spatial
proximity) data pieces, valuable additional context-speciﬁc content/information can material-
ize. In the application part of this article we will focus on the features of Foursquare in that
regard and present illustrative examples, but similar efforts are applicable considering other
location-sharing social media.

2.1.2 ‘Guided’ explicitly-collective information

This category could also be labeled intentional crowd-sourcing, thus an explicit way of using
collective volunteered input to achieve a bigger goal. With crowdsourcing on the rise (Howe
2006), in particular initiatives in the disaster risk and crisis management domain have evolved
in that context (Goodchild and Glennon 2010) supported by diffusion and enhanced capabil-
ities of the Internet, including e.g. the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap team (HOT), CrisisMap-
pers, Ushahidi, search for ﬂight MA-370, UNDP’s Threat and Risk Mapping Analysis (TRMA)
project in the Sudan, Google Person Finder, etc. Meier (2014) provocatively states “May the
crowd be with you” when referring to the increased digital voluntary activities in the humani-
tarian context in the last few years, supposedly leading toward a “new era of mass-sourcing”.
Activities in that regard often follow a two-level process with the main actions being: (1) data
collection; and (2) analysis of provided data. The second point refers to, for example, the provi-
sion of satellite data by a study director (e.g. pre- and post-disaster imagery) and the respective
collective analysis via the crowd (Vu 2013).

Cultural aspects mainly affect the contribution-level and user perspective in the ﬁrst
‘unguided’ category (e.g. referring to a ‘culture of sharing’ that is not uniform throughout the
world), whereas with explicit crowd-sourcing the ‘crowd sample’ can be directed. If the con-
tributor input, however, is supposed to be as large as possible then the same aspects apply as
for the ﬁrst category described in Section 2.1.1.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

5

2.2 The Spatial Component

While it is clearly the ‘V’ – the voluntary nature of VGI – that attracts most attention, also the
‘G’ – the geographic or spatial component – should be analyzed with regard to characteristics
that make VGI different from other types of geodata. It has been emphasized that VGI is a
highly localized phenomenon (Goodchild 2007; Elwood et al. 2012). This effect can, however,
again be seen at two different levels.

1. Regarding the above-described category 1 (‘unguided’ implicitly-collective information)
the geographic domain is theoretically non-focused. Contributors using location-based
social networks (LBSN) and location-sharing services (LSS) share their whereabouts at
any place, mostly providing data on their immediate surroundings and related activities.
Contributed data is consequently strongly localized at the individual level, matching
individuals’ mobility patterns (Cheng et al. 2011), but highly dispersed at the collective
level. Despite this overall collective dispersion, data contributions at the local
level
remain tightly correlated. This is due to the spatial commonality among the contributors
who, themselves, may not be personally connected.

2. Regarding the above-described category 2 (‘guided’ explicitly-collective information) the
geographic domain is usually strongly focused on a certain area of interest and often
pre-deﬁned externally. The Global Earth Observation Catastrophe Assessment Network
(GEO-CAN) serves as successful example, referring to guided crowd-sourced large satel-
lite data analysis following the earthquakes in Wenchuan, China, 2008 and Haiti, 2010
(Barrington et al. 2011; Ghosh et al. 2011). Exceptions in some sense are global initia-
tives like OpenStreetMap (OSM), Flickr, or Wikimapia which are to a certain extent
self-guided (i.e. not entirely pre-deﬁned) and spatially unlimited (i.e. in a way a spatial
equivalent to Wikipedia’s thematic ‘collective intelligence’). Initiatives like the Humani-
tarian OpenStreetMap team (HOT) use such existing frameworks and direct event-
speciﬁc, and thus location-speciﬁc, data collection. A recent example is the HOT
response to the April 2015 Nepal earthquake where collaborative mapping provided
substantial support for the disaster relief efforts (Poiani et al., 2016). Contributors in
that category may, but not necessarily, share data about their own surroundings, but
basically on any given location. The degree of localization in that context is commonly
determined by a study director who deﬁnes the area of interest and materializes most of
all at the collective level, as opposed to the individual focus outlined above in (1). Most
relevant for that kind of directed data compilation is the actual crowd setup. Thereby,
the crowd sample is selected either based on: (1) the crowd members’ ‘inherent’ location,
thus compiling local knowledge; or (2) the crowd members’ speciﬁc expertise, thus e.g.
having certain skills to derive information from provided data (e.g. digitizing from
maps/imagery). Also a combination of both could be favorable or required for certain
purposes.

2.3 The Type of Information Content

First, it should be clariﬁed that the ‘I’ in VGI can in fact be somewhat misleading. In many cases
it could be argued that the ‘I’ should rather be a ‘D’, standing for data that has not yet turned
into interpreted information. In Information Science (IS) the concepts of data and information
as well as knowledge have long been considered crucial for the overall understanding of the
ﬁeld with data appreciated as the “raw material for information” and information serving the

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

6

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

same function for knowledge (Zins 2007). In the Geographic Information Science community,
however, that discussion is not as elaborated and data and information are often used inter-
changeably (Mark 2004). In terms of VGI, theoretically, any type of data and/or information
can be provided voluntarily, e.g. referring to mere coordinates and mapped features as well as
space-related blogs, tweets, and Facebook sharings. When it comes to explicit spatial informa-
tion, however, certain categories can be introduced.

1. Regarding unguided implicitly-collective contributions, those can usually be classiﬁed
according to certain activity categories. Foursquare was ﬁrst to introduce an activity cat-
egory tree for its venue database. Also Facebook now provides the option of categorizing
a (spatially-explicit) entry according to activity/mood/etc. Twitter, by using hash tags,
basically does the same, even though not in an intentional spatially-focused sense, but
rather more theme-oriented. This type of voluntary contribution, at the individual level,
can most commonly be considered raw data, as speciﬁc context is still pending and the
contributions need to be interpreted at the collective level for information extraction and
knowledge building. This is particularly relevant when considering the integration of
VGI for modeling population distribution dynamics as outlined later on.

2. Regarding guided explicitly-collective contributions or crowd-sourcing, the resulting
information is usually speciﬁcally focused on one particular theme and thus already con-
infrastructure information in OSM, bird species counts in
textually pre-deﬁned, e.g.
eBird, certain disaster events in Ushahidi, etc. Broad categorizing is often not needed
here, even though of course within one speciﬁc theme different sub-aspects can be
relevant.

3 Advancing the Concept: From VGI Towards VGDI

After having highlighted the conceptual components of VGI, in the following paragraphs we
contrast its beneﬁts with the limitations and in the course of that discussion propose to extend
the spatial-dominated concept by adding temporal dynamics as an additional feature. Time as
a variable, or even more importantly integrated spatio-temporal aspects, are widely valued in
practice in state-of-the-art VGI applications. Conceptually, however, they are vastly underre-
presented and still underexplored by the GIScience research community, as conﬁrmed by a
recently published systematic literature review (Steiger et al. 2015).

3.1 What are the beneﬁts of VGI or rather what makes it distinctly valuable?

Referring to the above deconstructed components of VGI, it is clear that what makes VGI dis-
tinct from other spatially-explicit data is the ‘V’, i.e. the user contribution and the way that pro-
cess materializes. Focusing on the above-outlined ﬁrst category of
that V-component
(considered most relevant in the context of this article’s scope on population dynamics) –
labeled as ‘unguided implicitly-collective information’ – there are certain inherent aspects to
address. The location-sharing social media service Foursquare, for example, considers its most
important asset its venues database that has been user-generated in the ﬁrst place and is contin-
uously updated and validated by its users. Various third-party services such as Pinterest, Path,
Vine, Uber, and Flickr use Foursquare’s free API integration and expansive venues database to
power their location services (Carr 2014). A Foursquare venue is a georeferenced point location
where a user can check in. Such venues obviously do not just show the spatial location of a
user, but link a certain category to the user activity via a venue classiﬁcation tree. A venue can

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

7

for example be a restaurant, a private residence, or a supermarket; every individual venue is
recorded as separate entry in the database, even when spatially overlapping (as e.g. in large
apartment buildings featuring mixed use). Just considering the user-compiled venue informa-
tion could therefore be seen as a sort of continuously validated and updated – thus not only
spatially but also temporally explicit – source of land use information, as opposed to standard
data sets that commonly refer to one point in time (base data acquisition time). We will address
this point – or rather a proposed novel ﬁeld of research – in detail in the applications section.

Activity categories in VGI are themselves user-generated, which therefore allows individu-
alized and in a collective or clustered sense social and cultural patterns to materialize in
spatially-explicit form (Phithakkitnukoon and Olivier 2011; Arribas-Bel et al. 2013). This
includes region- and culture-speciﬁc differences that affect activity patterns not only spatially
but also and in particular temporally (Bauer et al. 2012). Weekends, as generalized in European
countries, are commonly understood to have different activity patterns from work days. This
pattern, however, goes much deeper. That behavior affects the temporal occurrence of shop-
ping as well as leisure activities, i.e. shopping in western countries is often focused on the
work-free Saturday while leisure activities are concentrated on Sunday when shops are closed
(Noulas et al. 2011). On the other hand, while Friday is the main ‘holy’ day in Islamic societies,
for Jewish communities it is Saturday and for Christians, Sunday, implying in a generalized
sense changing population concentrations in different areas.

In addition to offering the option of identifying human activity patterns in a spatio-
temporal manner (e.g. Grinberg 2013), i.e. sort of real-time time use proﬁling, VGI, through its
user-focused content generation, enables us to assess the frequency and intensity of use of cer-
tain venues, e.g. via aggregated user check-in counts. In a disaster risk scenario context (e.g.
earthquake, tsunami, explosion), certain activity clusters could provide indications not only of
absolute static exposure but also inherent characteristics and consequently context-speciﬁc vul-
nerabilities. Different response actions may be needed for different activity clusters when
affected by an event, e.g. referring to people attending cultural or/and religious activities in spe-
cial periods such as Easter or Ramadan; evacuation may be exacerbated due to narrow exit
routes, etc. The active use of VGI in real-time decision-making can prove crucial, e.g. for ﬁrst
responders to assess a situation and improve/adapt their response. VGI can offer more detailed
and more contextualized data than traditional static sources (Bakillah 2014). However, in par-
ticular the integration of spatially-explicit bottom-up created geographic information with top-
down processes offers great potential for additional context setting and knowledge extraction
(Elwood et al. 2012).

3.2 What are the limitations of all that ‘hype’ and what could be a way forward?

It is evident that the V in VGI does make that kind of data signiﬁcantly distinctly valuable in
the spatial data domain, with related research activities ﬂourishing in the past couple of years.
There are, however, a set of limitations that have to be considered and explicitly highlighted.
That includes issues of representativeness, in(consistency), user-bias, accuracy issues, and
others, that can put overall credibility of VGI into question (Flanagin and Metzger 2008; Spiel-
man 2014). It is widely acknowledged that quality control measures in the VGI domain should
be taken from an entirely different angle than those used for traditionally produced geographic
information (Elwood et al. 2012). In fact, certain critical aspects such as unintentionally intro-
duced errors and inaccuracies due to lay and/or untrained contributor actions can be to some
extent self-controlled and self-adjusted in VGI creation via multiple user input redundancies.
The number of voluntary contributors or in other words the size of the crowd is therefore

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

8

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

considered an important variable in VGI and crowd-sourced data quality assessment, applying
Linus’ law as used in the Open Source software community instead of traditional top-down-
imposed authority-based control mechanisms (Haklay et al. 2010; Elwood et al. 2012). Issues
of VGI data quality are increasingly outlined and described in the scientiﬁc literature. In
applied communities, however, available data is often implemented unscrutinized and without
taking into account its inherent characteristics and limitations. This also applies to the ﬁeld of
population mapping and speciﬁcally population dynamics mapping, where the use of VGI loca-
tion data as a direct one-to-one proxy measure for population distribution patterns has become
a rather wide-spread testing ﬁeld.

Following up on the above-listed elaborations and considering Goodchild’s (2007) initial
introduction of VGI as being “timely”, one fundamental question emerges as a consequence:
Where is the T in VGI? (Aubrecht et al. 2014a). Conceptually there is very little focus (yet) on
the temporal aspect of VGI. Basically it is inherently considered within the spatial component,
i.e. something happens somewhere at a certain point in time. As outlined above, the temporal
component should be considered one (if not the main) added value of VGI compared to stand-
ard ‘static’ data sources. In VGI applications spatio-temporal aspects and patterns have been
highlighted and examined for a couple of years (e.g. Shaw 2010, Li and Goodchild 2011, Pele-
chrinis and Krishnamurthy 2012), including accounting for the speciﬁcs regarding related qual-
ity metrics (Roick et al. 2012). It may now be appropriate to stress that factor also
conceptually in the general framework, introducing spatial dynamics into VGI and advancing
the concept to Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI).

4 Beneﬁts of VGDI for Advanced Population Dynamics Modeling

By conceptually introducing time as an explicit variable into the basic VGI framework, we
have now set the path for this article to discuss the inherent value of volunteered spatio-
temporal information for dynamic population distribution modeling. Generally speaking, the
main objective of population dynamics models lies on the temporal reﬁnement of traditional
‘static’ representations of residential distribution patterns. While there are several approaches
described in the literature such as agent-based (e.g. Benenson 1999) and spatial interaction
models (Wesolowski et al. 2015) as well as network theory and activity space models, all aimed
at uncovering population dynamics and mobility patterns (e.g. Schneider et al. 2013; Perkins
et al. 2014), in this article we focus on modeling on the basis of spatio-temporal disaggregation
techniques. If one considers the daily temporal cycle, current existing approaches can thereby
be broadly categorized in: (1) models applying simpliﬁed binary distinction between daytime
and nighttime (e.g. McPherson and Brown 2004, Bhaduri et al. 2007, Freire and Aubrecht
2012, Freire et al. 2015); and (2) multiple time-slice models that try to account for the continu-
ous variation in human activities occurring in particular during the daytime period (e.g. Leung
et al. 2010; Martin et al. 2015). While the ﬁrst category typically refers to commuting and
work statistics to identify basic daytime patterns, the second category additionally considers
time use statistics showing more reﬁned activity patterns and their evolution during the day.
The CRISMA DynaPop model framework which we intend to improve with the concepts intro-
duced in this article falls into that latter category (Aubrecht et al. 2014b). In addition to these
two approaches, there is a third category of models that, however, follow an entirely different
approach in a sense that high-frequency distribution patterns are analyzed with only minor sta-
tistical inference techniques. The most direct approach in that context is the compilation of
spatial footprints of cell phone data logs. While successfully implemented for local-level case

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

9

studies (Sevtsuk 2008; Loibl and Peters-Anders 2012) and already tested at the national level as
well (Deville et al. 2014), that approach is still signiﬁcantly constrained for wide-scale imple-
mentation due to inherent privacy issues and restricted data availability. Cell phone tracking
data has also been used to predict mobility patterns by analyzing local mobility decisions (Sim-
ini et al. 2012). As another source, LBSN user activity has been analyzed evaluating direct cor-
relation patterns to daytime population distribution (e.g. Aubrecht et al. 2011; Toepke and
Starsman 2015). The latter approach of direct VGI correlation has, however, proven inad-
equate in a sense that no absolute all-encompassing population distribution maps can be gener-
ated but rather user-biased activity heat maps picturing patterns of certain speciﬁc crowd
samples.

In this article we present Foursquare check-in data, highlighting how VGDI can beneﬁt the
above-listed population dynamics modeling approaches. We speciﬁcally focus on potential
advancements to the statistics-based approaches, whereas directly correlated readout of popu-
lation patterns from VGI is not further discussed here. We use Foursquare as it is considered
the most straightforward spatially-explicit and focused information source in the domain of
unguided implicitly-collective VGI. Due to its popularity and consequently produced large data
volume Twitter has so far probably been the most analyzed VGDI source regarding human
activity modeling (e.g. Hawelka et al. 2014; Lin and Cromley 2015) despite not having its pri-
mary focus on the collection of spatial information. Foursquare has also already been widely
referred to in the same context (e.g. Cheng et al. 2011; Noulas et al. 2012), as well as other
social networks with geolocation sharing capability such as Facebook Places, Gowalla, and
Brightkite (Scellato et al. 2011; Lichman and Smyth 2014) and most recently also Instagram
(Toepke and Starsman 2015).

There are several factors incorporated in VGDI that can be useful for mapping population
dynamics. In the following we describe two speciﬁc aspects that are considered most relevant.
These are: (1) time use proﬁling through analysis of temporal patterns of VGDI (in our case
Foursquare) user activity; and (2) dynamic characterization of target zones for spatial disaggre-
gation via the Foursquare venue database.

4.1 Human Activity Analysis and Time Use Proﬁling

Activity-speciﬁc time proﬁles as derived from classical time use surveys have been applied in
the setup of multiple time-slice approaches to map population dynamics including DynaPop as
mentioned above. It is, however, a more recent development to analyze additional sources rep-
resenting such human activity patterns for integration in population models. Due to the rapid
increase in volume and spatio-temporal density of VGDI data in recent years, there are now
ﬁrst attempts to use empirically-derived activity diagrams and facility occupancy curves from
micro-blogging services and LBSN data for characterizing local-scale population dynamics
(Rush and Kwan 2011; Grinberg et al. 2013; Bhaduri et al. 2014). The idea of characterizing
spatio-temporal patterns of collective user activity is not entirely new, but earlier studies often
struggled with limited data densities particularly outside the ‘densely monitored regions’ that
are foremost in the US (R€osling and Liebig 2013) and consequently issues of representativeness.
It therefore proved beneﬁcial to aggregate data tied to venue and thus activity categories (e.g.
Noulas et al. 2011) which provides an excellent basis for linking to target zones in population
disaggregation models such as DynaPop (Aubrecht et al. 2014b) as we will elaborate later on.
Representativeness still remains an issue nonetheless when dealing with VGDI and Foursquare
in particular, as user demographics associated with an extracted Foursquare venue and check-
in dataset are generally not disclosed and thus not accessible for user proﬁle analysis at the local

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

10

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

scale. Recent reports (Golbeck 2015; Landau 2013) indicate that Foursquare users are more
likely male (60% compared to 40% female) with 80% of the user base rather evenly distrib-
uted between age classes 18-29 and 30-42 and educational levels slightly biased towards college
graduates (just 40% without any college education). Other statistics report differently, though,
when normalizing Foursquare users by the overall relevant Internet population, showing for
example a female surplus (>60%) as well as a disproportionate contribution in the 35-49 age
class and Asian population (Rogers 2010). Penetration rates vary signiﬁcantly by geographical
region, with Portugal (the application test site described in Section 5) having a 5% share when
globally normalized for a country’s population. Against the widespread assumption that LBSN
like Foursquare are most commonly used in high-income developed countries, normalized
national penetration rates are very high in low and middle income developing countries like
Venezuela (20% share), Azerbaijan (12% share), and Turkey (9% share) whereas the US shows
a comparatively low penetration rate having a normalized global share of below 6% (Landau
2013). This is a particularly interesting ﬁnding in the context of this article, as developing coun-
tries often lack updated population statistics and thus VGDI could have an increased relevance
as alternative input for population dynamics mapping.

Relative venue category-speciﬁc time use proﬁles (or occupancy curves) as derived from
VGDI could theoretically be applied directly in the course of the disaggregation process to
account for spatio-temporal human activity variations. Given the spatial focus and timeliness
of the extracted information as compared with the commonly decennially-compiled country-
wide time use surveys, that already represents an immense improvement of spatial and tempo-
ral input characteristics. Nonetheless this should be considered very carefully, paying attention
to the user check-in density and user proﬁle (if accessible) in the study area. In particular for
smaller study areas, despite aggregating venue information to activity categories, issues of lim-
ited representativeness are expected when aiming to approximate a total population proﬁle.

Another interesting option is therefore to apply the Foursquare activity proﬁles to calibrate
or couple with existing survey-based time use statistics. For example, one factor that quickly
becomes obvious refers to the characterization and representation of ‘dinner time’. While clas-
sical survey-based TUS show the relative number of a population sample that has dinner at a
certain time, there may be no indication on the spatial location. While on working days lunch
is commonly taken in restaurants (nearby the work place), many people prefer to have dinner
at home. The Foursquare venue category-based proﬁles clearly show that distinction and there-
fore represent a signiﬁcantly improved basis for the population disaggregation.

As mentioned above, due to the inherent nature of VGI data, only relative numbers of
Foursquare user activities are considered directly applicable for time use proﬁling in population
dynamics mapping. Therefore it seems most feasible to focus on ‘mobile’ population, thus
mainly people that are out for work and study, rather easily identiﬁable via commuting, work,
and education statistics. Not considering permanent resident population (such as the elderly) is
also in line with the overall user proﬁle of any kind of social network and consequently
improves the representativeness of the data sample. In the context of proﬁling daytime mobile
population it is crucial to account for study area-speciﬁc characteristics in terms of regular
working hours, e.g. in Portugal indicating a two-hour lunch break between around 12 a.m. and
2 p.m. That kind of information can also help to elucidate and potentially calibrate Foursquare
data-inherent temporal shifts and uncertainties that are due to irregular check-in dynamics (e.g.
a user may check in at the lunch place when he or she is actually already leaving and not check
in back at work afterwards).

The above-outlined aspects refer to total time use proﬁling featuring relative shares of
activity categories based on aggregated venue data. Additionally, individual activity class

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

11

occupancy curves can be derived, as well as looking at individual venues to create separate pro-
ﬁles for those. Individual category-speciﬁc occupancy curves would, for example, match the
required input of the Pop 24/7 disaggregation approach (Martin et al. 2015).

4.1 Dynamic Characterization of Disaggregation Target Zones

In addition to time use proﬁling, there is another facet in unguided implicitly-collective VGDI
that can be highly beneﬁcial to improve the temporal dimension and accuracy of dynamic pop-
ulation models. While in a spatio-temporal population disaggregation framework like Dyna-
Pop the temporal repetitive sequences of human activities (e.g. diurnal, weekly) are commonly
described in the mentioned time use proﬁles, the spatial patterns of those activities are repre-
sented in functional land use classes. More speciﬁcally, these are locations or areas where cer-
tain human activities take place, which are used as target zones for population disaggregation
or reallocation. For each activity, thus, one target zone layer needs to be identiﬁed in a spatial
and potentially temporal manner. The main activities typically considered in the most basic
population dynamics models (binary daytime-nighttime) including home, work and commuting
are related to general land use categories such as residential areas, commercial/business/indus-
trial zones and transport networks. While information on such broad land use characteristics
can be derived from remote sensing and/or open geodata (e.g. integrated in the NDPop model
of Freire et al. 2015) more thematically detailed land use activities such as ‘shopping’, ‘eating
out’ or ‘event participation’ require more detailed location information that is usually not avail-
able in those mentioned data sources. VGI, however, can bridge this gap as it prevalently refers
to and focuses on exactly those kinds of leisure time activities. Corresponding detailed spatial
information on respective required target zones can therefore be extracted from the locational
and activity-speciﬁc user check-in data. An additionally promising factor in that context is the
absolute number of user check-ins per venue. Those could provide an indication on the relative
‘importance’ of a venue within a certain activity category, thus potentially approximating the
housing density parameter that commonly serves as proxy for residential population density in
dasymetric mapping approaches. Target zones can hereby even be deﬁned in spatially and tem-
porally overlapping fashion, thus for example certain event locations showing higher distribu-
tional drawing power during daytime and others during nighttime (e.g. lunchtime restaurants
or arts venues vs. nightlife spots).

This described improvement of target zone characterization with regard to integrating
more detailed activity- and thus time-sensitivity bears great beneﬁts for spatio-temporal disag-
gregation. Further stressing the dynamic aspects, VGDI – as with the time use proﬁling – also
provides timeliness as a crucial factor as opposed to irregularly and often not frequently
updated static land use maps.

5 Illustrating the concepts

To illustrate the above-outlined derivatives of VGDI that have been described as potentially rel-
evant for population dynamics mapping, we now present venue and corresponding user check-
in data extracted via the Foursquare API for one selected study area. The Greater Lisbon area
in Portugal has served as the main long-term test site for our explorative VGDI research since
2011. Then, when ﬁrst elaborating on the idea of integrating VGI for population distribution
mapping (Aubrecht et al. 2011), we extracted hourly data for one week in May for approxi-
mately 19,000 venues in the study area. To further test the conceptual ideas outlined above, a
more recent data sample was compiled in 2014. In order to guarantee the best possible

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

12

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

Figure 1 Increase in Foursquare venue locations in the Greater Lisbon area from 2011 to 2014

comparability to the 2011 data, again one week in May was extracted for the exact same study
area, then resulting in a venue database of more than 43,000 places (see the comparative illus-
tration in Figure 1) where approximately 27,000 check-ins were recorded in the week of
extraction.

Work days as well as the weekend are thereby covered in these samples, which allows
deriving differentiated time proﬁles accounting for variations going beyond the standard work-
ing day patterns. Extraction request frequency via the Foursquare API was eventually set to one
hour intervals. While one reason to do this was to ensure smooth performance of the crawling
process, it does in fact provide full compatibility with the required temporal scale of the multi-
ple time-slice population dynamics models described earlier on. The 43,000 venues were even-
tually narrowed down to only those locations where at least one check-in was recorded. On
average, users checked in 2,674 times per day at 2,300 unique venues respectively, whereby
week days and weekend show similar patterns in check-in behavior.

5.1 Time Use Proﬁling

Traditional time use data is derived via surveys representative of the total resident population
of a country. Taking the Portuguese situation as the reference scenario – with the most recent
survey carried out in 1999 (INE 2000) – perfectly illustrates the need for additional and/or
alternative sources to describe and extract human activity patterns as needed for population
dynamics modeling. While indeed a broad wealth of data for a statistically representative sam-
ple of a country’s total population is collected via such surveys, the results are often not fully
accessible and become quickly outdated. The part of the Portuguese data that is publicly acces-
sible online does not allow detailed activity classiﬁcations, as multiple spatially-explicit activ-
ities are thematically pre-aggregated before provision (e.g. shopping/housework or commuting/
professional work). Furthermore, when stepping up in terms of the spatial scale level (as usually
required for population dynamics mapping), the sample size obviously quickly decreases and
representativeness for a certain speciﬁc area can become a critical issue. Referring to our study
area, the 1999 INE time use survey has included a sample of approximately 1,850 persons in
the Lisbon Metropolitan Area (Correia et al. 2002). It is rarely the case even to have access to
that kind of statistical sample size and even then it is not possible to extract that spatially-

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

13

Figure 2 Time use proﬁle based on 1999 Portuguese time use survey (INE 2000)

speciﬁc sample from the publicly accessible dataset. Therefore the extent to which time usage
in the study area would differ from the reported national average cannot be evaluated.

Figure 2 shows a broad categorization distinguishing work/study, home, leisure, and meal
activities. There are several sub-categories available in the accessible data, however, that do not
vary spatially from their parent category (e.g. ‘hygiene’, ‘sleep’, ‘watch TV’, all related to
‘home’) The most stand-out feature is the lunch-time peak between 12 and 2p.m. as well as the
dinner peak around 8p.m. While that kind of data allows basic modeling of daily work patterns
(8:30 a.m. to 12 noon and 2-6:30 p.m.) and, to a certain extent, external leisure activities,
more detailed elaborations on time-consuming and spatially-diverse daily tasks such as shop-
ping, going out, etc. are not possible in a spatio-temporally explicit manner.

Extracting same-style, i.e. total, time use statistics from the compiled 2014 Foursquare
data shows a much more differentiated picture than the survey-based aggregated data (see Fig-
ure 3). In terms of the thematic detail it basically resembles the content variety of the raw but
(for Portugal) inaccessible survey data. While the full range of activity categories could be inte-
grated via the Foursquare venue classiﬁcation hierarchy1 (Figure 3 just illustrates aggregated
categories for comparative purposes), certain aspects clearly need further consideration in the
analysis.

Comparing the Foursquare-based time use proﬁle to the survey-based proﬁle the most evi-
dent difference is the extremely limited share of the ‘home’ category that never even reaches the
10% mark throughout the day. A widely stated assumption is thereby conﬁrmed, concerning
the main limitation or rather one of the main features of VGDI, i.e. lack of ‘total population’
representativeness. To a limited extent this also seems to affect the ‘work’ category where user
check-ins signiﬁcantly drop in the afternoon, whereas the survey-based proﬁle shows two
almost symmetrical peaks. While this suggests that the full VGDI time use proﬁle cannot or
should not be used as it stands as a one-to-one substitute of survey-based data for integration
in population dynamics models, it takes us back to the earlier statement that it seems most fea-
sible to focus on the ‘mobile’ population. With the share of the mobile population exceeding
the day, VGDI data can provide continuously updated
50% through large parts of

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

14

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

Figure 3 Time use proﬁle based on Foursquare venue and associated user check-in data extracted for
the Greater Lisbon area in May 2014

Figure 4 Hybrid time use proﬁles integrating survey-based data and Foursquare user check-in data

unprecedented insight into spatio-temporal activity patterns. One option could therefore be to
create hybrid proﬁles, e.g. taking the home share as given from the survey-based data and refer-
ring to the VGDI activity ratios for the mobile activities. In addition, also the work share could
be ﬁxed, to address the decreased afternoon check-in activity in that category.

Figure 4 illustrates that hybrid proﬁling, with the left graph (Hybrid 1) showing just the
home category substituted and the right graph (Hybrid 2) having both home and work

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

15

Figure 5 Occupancy curve for venues in the ‘food’ category based on Foursquare user check-in
data

categories ﬁxed to the INE time use survey (TUS) proﬁle. It should be noted here, though, that
this only serves as a conceptual example. In the available and publicly accessible Portuguese
time use survey data the ‘meal’ category does not indicate whether that activity takes place at
home or externally. The illustrative hybrid proﬁles, therefore, include the assumption that all
eating activities would take place outside of the home, which is certainly incorrect. While the
hybrid proﬁling approach is thus not appropriate for the presented Portuguese case, it can cer-
tainly work for other countries where better spatially differentiated data is collected in time use
surveys (e.g. France, Italy).

In addition to the described comprehensive time use proﬁles that attempt to cover the
activity shares of the entire population, occupancy curves for individual activity classes can be
derived as conceptually outlined above. Figure 5 shows such a curve for the food category as
extracted from the Foursquare venue and associate user check-in data for the Greater Lisbon
area. Several relevant aspects can be described on that basis. With regard to the shape of the
curve, two clear peaks indicate lunch and dinner time respectively. It is interesting to observe
the substantially lower peak at dinner time which may indicate more people having dinner at
home as opposed to lunch time when people may favor staying close to their work places. That
kind of spatio-temporal differentiation is not possible from the survey-based proﬁle as illus-
trated in Figure 2 where both peaks in the meal category show similar shares, since in this
region typically all people have lunch and dinner. One other feature that becomes evident is the
temporal shifting in the Foursquare-based occupancy curve. While the lunch and dinner peaks
are around 1 and 8:30 p.m. respectively in the survey-based proﬁle, they show at around 3 and
11 p.m. in the VGDI occupancy curve. This roughly two hour shift which was observed consis-
tently in both the 2011 and 2014 data extracts could potentially be explained by VGDI user
behavior (i.e. people often actually checking in at a location when leaving the place rather than
when entering) or user demographics (i.e. a biased sample of younger smartphone owners who

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

16

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

go out to restaurants later than the typical population). More detailed investigations would be
needed for comprehensive explanation with restricted access to such data characteristics obvi-
ously being the main issue of concern. In any case, the occupancy curve could be temporally
calibrated via the survey-based proﬁle (i.e. shifting the curve two hours forward to match
expected meal time slots), while still using the VGDI data to locate the venues where the activ-
ity takes place.

5.2 Target Zone Classiﬁcation

In the following few paragraphs we illustrate some of the concepts introduced earlier regarding
dynamic characterization of population disaggregation target zones, focusing on the city of Lis-
bon within the above-outlined Greater Lisbon area as a sample case study site. We use this
smaller centrally-located study area for this purpose as the Foursquare venue point density is
highest there, thus providing the best test ﬁeld for illustration.

Figure 6 shows category-speciﬁc activity density grids at a 100 m spatial resolution as
derived from the Foursquare venue database using Kernel density estimation. The heat map
style illustrations refer to the categories ‘event’, ‘shop’, ‘work’ and ‘university’ as well as ‘lei-
sure’ and ‘home’. The ‘event’ category is thus an aggregation of underlying classes related to
arts and entertainment, restaurants, cafes, and bars, and nightlife spots, thus matching disag-
gregation target zone classiﬁcation of the DynaPop population dynamics framework. The Ker-
nel density technique calculates the density of venue locations around each output grid cell. A
smoothly curved surface is ﬁtted over each venue location whereby the surface value is highest
at the location of the point and diminishes with increasing distance from the point. The volume
under the surface equals the selected user count value for the respective point. That value
stands for the absolute number of users who ever checked in at that location, thus serving as a
proxy measure for the relative importance of that location as compared with other locations
within the same activity category. The density at each output grid cell is eventually calculated
by summing the values of all overlapping kernel surfaces at that location. A 500 m neighbor-
hood around each point is considered for the kernel density curve ﬁtting and grid creation. The
smooth surface appearance for the four grids illustrated at the top of Figure 6 is a result of sufﬁ-
cient distributional input point density for the respective activity categories. Those four grids
show clear spatially different distributed clusters of activity. Activities associated with the
‘event’ category, for example, also take place along the S and SW riverfront areas of Lisbon,
whereas shopping activities are very limited in those areas. Such grids could serve as direct
input for disaggregation target zone characterization in population dynamics models. A certain
share of the total population associated with a speciﬁc activity type as derived from time use
data would thus be spatially reallocated using the respective grid values as weighting factor.

The two maps at the bottom of Figure 6 show density grids for the activity categories ‘lei-
sure’ and ‘home’. The ball-like scattered pattern of the activity clusters in those grids is a result
of much lower distributional input point density than the other grids. While for the leisure loca-
tions the distribution is still considered reasonably dense accounting for the nature of that
activity category, the loosely distributed home venue patterns can clearly not be representative
for the residential areas of Lisbon. This conﬁrms the picture observed in the setup of the time
use proﬁles where the relative share of home check-ins does not exceed the 10% mark through-
out the course of a day, thus excessively under-representing that activity class.

The above-presented density grids represent a timely situational picture of human activity
patterns in the study area and can thus be considered a valuable alternative to traditional land
use data sets as input for dynamic population modeling, since those land use maps are mostly

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

17

Figure 6 Category-speciﬁc activity density grids as derived from Foursquare venue data for the
City of Lisbon (OpenStreetMap roads providing contextual background)

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

18

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

Figure 7 Spatio-temporal distinction of diurnal activity patterns in the ‘event’ category and related
density grids as derived from Foursquare venue data for the City of Lisbon (OpenStreetMap roads
providing contextual background)

irregularly updated and often become quickly outdated. Furthermore, activity classes such as
‘event’ and ‘shopping’ can usually not be identiﬁed in such land use data sets in the same spa-
tially explicit manner as on the basis of the Foursquare venue data when deriving disaggrega-
tion target zones.

In order to further illustrate the temporal component in VGDI in the context of target zone
characterization, we go one step further and distinguish spatio-temporally variable patterns
within a certain activity category, taking the ‘event’ class as an example. Figure 7 illustrates the
point patterns for nightlife event venue locations as compared with other event venue locations
where activity takes place during the day (such as museums and other arts and entertainment

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

19

locations). Point size is mapped corresponding to the point location’s user count which also
serves as a weighting determinant for the density surface creation. The density grids using the
same 500 m kernel search radius as above are displayed in the lower part of the ﬁgure. It is evi-
dent that nightlife is clustered in the southern parts of the city along the riverfront, while loca-
tions hosting daytime activities also spread out further north. For integration in population
dynamics modeling these two grids could serve as input for time-speciﬁc disaggregation target
zone identiﬁcation, thus using a different target zone layer for different times of the day. Con-
sidering all those aspects the full potential of VGDI for population dynamics modeling is
revealed in terms of both timeliness and inherent spatio-temporal ﬁne-scale granularity.

6 Discussion, Conclusions and Outlook

We started this article by decomposing the individual components of VGI and thereby high-
lighted the lack of ‘time’ as a distinctly valuable factor, speciﬁcally when putting VGI in the
context of integrative population distribution modeling. Following up on that conceptual gap,
as well as earlier reference in related literature to timeliness and spatio temporal detail as cru-
cial characteristics of VGI, we introduce VGDI (Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information) as an
advanced conceptual framework. Appreciating the temporal factor nested as an integral com-
ponent within the spatial-oriented framework reveals crucial beneﬁts for mapping population
dynamics. We discuss two aspects of VGDI that are considered directly applicable to popula-
tion modeling (thus providing a potential advancement to existing frameworks such as
CRISMA DynaPop) and illustrate the implementation using Foursquare venue and associated
user check-in data. One module thereby refers to time use proﬁling considering the near-real
time data ﬂow of VGDI for detailed human activity analysis and the other module describes
dynamic target zone classiﬁcation for spatio-temporal population disaggregation and associ-
ated dasymetric mapping efforts.

It has been repeatedly stated in the literature in recent years that new spatio-temporal ana-
lytics and data mining techniques are needed to make proper use of the massive georeferenced
spatial and temporal databases emerging in the VGI domain ( (cid:2)Alvarez et al. 2008). Foursquare,
the LBSN used in this study, serves as a perfect example for that massive data increase and
associated challenges. Being launched in 2009, Foursquare reported around 8 million users in
2011 when we extracted the ﬁrst data sample for the Lisbon study area. In May 2014, when
we ran the second round of data extraction, that number had increased to over 50 million users
globally. The latest published numbers (as of July 2015) conﬁrm the previous growth trend,
now standing at more than 55 million users worldwide who checked in over 7 billion times at
more than 65 million places around the world. 2014 marked a structural change in the Four-
square app as the check-in functionality was separated from the core and re-launched under the
new label ‘Swarm’ (Summers 2014), one of the reasons being better structured usage focus
given the substantially increased user base.

However, collecting VGDI/LBSN data for research is not without challenges. Due to the
associated signiﬁcant increase of venue numbers over the years as illustrated for the Greater
Lisbon area, several adjustments had to be applied to the data extraction approach in our latest
efforts in order to guarantee full coverage and assimilation. The Foursquare API limits requests
to 5,000 points per developer account with each request point identifying the respective 30
nearest venues. In performance testing using optimized hierarchical hexagonal request grids,
that maximum number of 5,000 requests took less than 30 minutes to be completed during
peak periods. During extended crawling, however, only around 2,000 requests could be

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

20

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

successfully executed per hour. Parallel multiple user requesting did not increase performance.
Neither does computing hardware nor Internet bandwidth seem to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
the response times. Checking further, it is likely that the Foursquare API limits response feed-
back per IP address, not per developer account. In any case, in order to match the required 1
hour interval temporal scale level for the activity time proﬁling, request frequency was thus set
to 1 hour, which eventually proved adequate regarding full spatio temporal assimilation of the
venue locations in the study area.

In addition to these required improvements in data extraction there are other data mining
aspects coming up that show the different nature of VGDI as compared with traditionally
acquired human activity data (e.g. from surveys). One factor of static survey data described as
crucial for assessing quality and representativeness is the data sample size. To begin with, Four-
square and other LBSN data contributions are inherently constrained to smartphone users and
thus limited to a subset of the total population that may furthermore be biased in terms of dem-
ographics and spatial distribution. According to the ‘Our Mobile Planet’ smartphone adoption
and consumer usage study (Ipsos MediaCT and Google 2013), the smartphone penetration rate
in Portugal was still comparatively low at 32% in 2013; however, having increased vastly from
18% since the previous year. As of March 2014 Statista reports a usage rate of 44% (Statista
2015). With similar yearly increase rates, Portugal by now is likely to have joined the growing
list of countries where more than half of the population is smartphone owners. More than
70% of the Portuguese smartphone owners reportedly live in urban areas and the vast majority
(almost 90%) is below 45 years of age and well-educated (more than 55% have some kind of
university degree). Eighty-ﬁve percent of the smartphone owners use social networks on their
devices. While this gives an indication of the potential total sample size and demographic com-
position at the national level, quantifying the actual user samples for a compiled VGDI data set
is challenging. While the number of venues registering at least one check-in per day can be
extracted, unique user IDs are often not accessible due to privacy constraints. That means that
the number of check-ins per day does not necessarily give an indication of the number of active
users during that time span. It could theoretically be that every hour different users check in at
certain locations. It is more likely though that individual users check in continuously at differ-
ent places during the course of the day. In fact, one user may even check in at several venues
within one hour, which would consequently imply double-counting given the above-described
one hour data extraction interval.

The main motivational factor for the development of the concepts described and illustrated
in this article has been potential integration in the recently designed DynaPop modeling
approach (Aubrecht et al. 2014b). As mentioned earlier on, the DynaPop framework has been
developed in the context of the EU-funded CRISMA project (http://www.crismaproject.eu)
where detailed population distribution data is required as input for dynamic exposure analysis
and subsequent crisis management measures (including time-dependent evacuation planning
and casualty assessment). As part of DynaPop beta implementation efforts, Foursquare data
was extracted for the initial DynaPop test site in Baden, Austria, using the same extraction
method as described for Lisbon in this article. Foursquare venue data was then used for target
zone characterization, speciﬁcally producing density grids for the activity categories ‘shopping’,
‘outdoor activities’, ‘transport’ and ‘event’. While the focus of this article was exclusively on
the potential use of VGDI data, in the Austrian test case the data was complemented with other
data sources such as OSM point data. Further testing is required to evaluate the integration
potential and associated implications. The presented time use proﬁling method is yet to be inte-
grated in DynaPop where traditional survey data has been used to date. Next steps therefore
include eventual integration of both activity proﬁling and target zone characterization for a

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

21

prototype dynamic distribution model for the Greater Lisbon area and subsequent DynaPop
implementation for CRISMA pilot study sites in France and Italy. Another option is the explo-
ration of possibilities to integrate the presented concepts in other dynamic population distribu-
tion models such as NDPop (potential integration of dynamic target zones) and Pop 24/7
(potential integration of activity-speciﬁc time use proﬁles). The introduced framework of
VGDI is considered to be picked up by the scientiﬁc and applied spatial modeling and analytics
community and should surely prove beneﬁcial for further developments reaching beyond the
domain of population dynamics addressed in this article.

1 Foursquare Category Hierarchy, https://developer.foursquare.com/categorytree (accessed 4 October

Note

2015).

References

(cid:2)Alvarez M, Pan A, Raposo J, Bellas F, and Cacheda F 2008 Extracting lists of data records from semi-structured

web pages. Data and Knowledge Engineering 64: 491-509

Arribas-Bel D, Kourtit K, and Nijkamp P 2013 Socio-cultural Diversity and Urban Buzz. Amsterdam, The Neth-

erlands, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper No. 110/VIII

Aubrecht C, Ungar J, and Freire S 2011 Exploring the potential of volunteered geographic information for model-
ing spatio-temporal characteristics of urban population: A case study for Lisbon Metro using Foursquare
check-in data. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Virtual Cities and Territories, Lis-
bon, Portugal: 57-60

Aubrecht C and €Ozceylan Aubrecht D 2014a VGI dynamics and user aspects put in a disaster context for further
discussion. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Geographic Information Science Role
of Volunteered Geographic Information in Advancing Science, Vienna, Austria

Aubrecht C, Steinnocher K, and Huber H 2014b DynaPop: Population distribution dynamics as basis for social
impact evaluation in crisis management. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Infor-
mation Systems for Crisis Response and Management, State College, Pennsylvania: 319-23

Bakillah M, Lauer J, Liang S, Zipf A, Jokar Arsanjani J, Loos L, and Mobasheri A 2014 Exploiting big VGI to
improve routing and navigation services. In Karimi H A (ed) Big Data Techniques and Technologies in Geo-
informatics. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 177-92

Barrington L, Ghosh S, Greene M, Har-Noy S, Berger J, Gill S, Lin A Y-M, and Huyck C 2011 Crowdsourcing

earthquake damage assessment using remote sensing imagery. Annals of Geophysics 54: 680-87

Bauer S, Noulas A, (cid:2)O S(cid:2)eaghdha D, Clark S, and Mascolo C 2012 Talking places: Modelling and analysing lin-
guistic content in Foursquare. In Proceedings of the ASE/IEEE International Conferences on Social Com-
puting and Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust, Amsterdam, the Netherlands: 348-57

Benenson I 1999 Modeling population dynamics in the city: From a regional to a multi-agent approach. Discrete

Dynamics in Nature and Society 3: 149-70

Bhaduri B, Bright E, Coleman P, and Urban M 2007 LandScan USA: A high-resolution geospatial and temporal

modeling approach for population distribution and dynamics. GeoJournal 69: 103-17

Bhaduri B, Bright E, Rose A N, Urban M, and Cheriyadat A 2014 Occupancy curves for characterizing popula-
tion dynamics. Unpublished paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association of American Geogra-
phers, Tampa, Florida

Budhathoki N R and Haythornthwaite C 2013 Motivation for open collaboration: Crowd and community mod-

els and the case of OpenStreetMap. American Behavioral Scientist 57: 548-75

Carr A 2014 Instagram Testing Facebook Places Integration To Replace Foursquare. WWW document, http://
www.fastcompany.com/3028166/instagram-testing-facebook-places-integration-to-replace-foursquare
Cheng Z, Caverlee J, Lee K, and Sui D Z 2011 Exploring millions of footprints in location sharing services. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Barcelona, Spain
Coleman D J, Georgiadou Y, and Labonte J 2009 Volunteered geographic information: The nature and motiva-

tion of producers. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research 4: 332-58

Correia L, Lopes G, and Coelho E 2002 The Portuguese Time Use Survey: Methodology. In Proceedings of the

Annual Conference of the International Association for Time Use Research, Lisbon, Portugal

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

22

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

137-48

Elsevier

837-50

Craglia M, Ostermann F, and Spinsanti L 2012 Digital Earth from vision to practice: Making sense of citizen-gen-

erated content. International Journal of Digital Earth 5: 398-416

Craig W J and Elwood S A 1998 How and why community groups use maps and geographic information. Cartog-

raphy and Geographic Information Systems 25: 95-104

Deville P, Linard C, Martin S, Gilbert M, Stevens F R, Gaughan A E, Blondel V D, and Tatem A 2014 Dynamic
population mapping using mobile phone data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 201:
408-39

Elwood S, Goodchild M F, and Sui D Z 2012 Researching volunteered geographic information: Spatial data,
geographic research, and new social practice. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102:
571-90

Flanagin A J and Metzger M J 2008 The credibility of volunteered geographic information. GeoJournal 72:

Freire S and Aubrecht C 2012 Integrating population dynamics into mapping human exposure to seismic hazard.

Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 12: 3533-43

Freire S, Florczyk A, and Ferri S 2015 Modeling day- and night-time population exposure at high resolution:
Application to volcanic risk assessment in Campi Flegrei. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Con-
ference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, Kristiansand, Norway

Gartner G, Bennett D A, and Morita T 2007 Towards ubiquitous cartography. Cartography and Geographic

Information Science 34: 247-57

Ghosh S, Huyck C K, Greene M, Gill S P, Bevington J, Svekla W, DesRoches R, and Eguchi R T 2011 Crowd-
sourcing for rapid damage assessment: The Global Earth Observation Catastrophe Assessment Network
(GEO-CAN). Earthquake Spectra 27(S1): 179-98

Golbeck J 2015 Introduction to Social Media Investigation: A Hands-on Approach. Waltham, MA, Syngress/

Goodchild M F 2007 Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal 69: 211-21
Goodchild M F and Glennon J A 2010 Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster response: A research

frontier. International Journal of Digital Earth 3: 231-41

Gould P 1999 Becoming a Geographer. Syracuse, NY, Syracuse University Press
Grinberg N, Naaman M, Shaw B, and Lotan G 2013 Extracting diurnal patterns of real-world activity from
social media. In Proceedings of the Seventh International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Guan X and Chen C 2014 Using social media data to understand and assess disasters. Natural Hazards 74:

Haklay M 2013 Citizen science and volunteered geographic information: Overview and typology of participa-
tion. In Sui D, Elwood S, and Goodchild M F (eds) Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge. Berlin, Springer:
105-22

Haklay M, Basiouka S, Antoniou V, and Ather A 2010 How many volunteers does it take to map an area well?

The validity of Linus’ Law to volunteered geographic information. Cartographic Journal 47: 315-22

Havlik D, Dih(cid:2)e P, Frings S, Steinnocher K and Aubrecht C 2015 Catalogue of CRISMA Decision Support Appli-
cations, Framework Building Block Speciﬁcations and Software Implementations. WWW document, https://
crisma-cat.ait.ac.at/content/crisma-catalogue-book

Hawelka B, Sitko I, Beinat E, Sobolevsky S, Kazakopoulos P, and Ratti C 2014 Geo-located Twitter as proxy for

global mobility patterns. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 41: 260-71

Howe J 2006 The rise of crowdsourcing. Wired Magazine 14.06: 5
Ipsos MediaCT and Google 2013 Our Mobile Planet: Understanding the mobile consumer, Portugal Country

Report. WWW document, http://think.withgoogle.com/mobileplanet/en/

Landau V 2013 Foursquare user demographics. WWW document, https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-demo-

graphics-of-Foursquare-users

LeBaron G 2007 Audubon’s Christmas bird count: From 19th century conservation action to 21st century citizen

science. In Proceedings of the Citizen Science Toolkit Conference, Ithaca, New York

Leung S, Martin D, and Cockings S 2010 Linking UK public geospatial data to build 24/7 space-time speciﬁc pop-
ulation surface models. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Geographic Information
Science, Zurich, Switzerland

Li L and Goodchild M F 2011 The spatio-temporal patterns of VGI. Unpublished paper presented at the Annual

Meeting of the Association of American Geographers, Seattle, Washington

Lichman M and Smyth P 2014 Modeling human location data with mixtures of kernel densities. In Proceedings
of the Twentieth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
New York, New York: 35-44

Lin J and Cromley R G 2015 Evaluating geo-located Twitter data as a control layer for areal interpolation of pop-

ulation. Applied Geography 58: 41-7

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Volunteered Geo-Dynamic Information (VGDI)

23

Lindqvist J, Cranshaw J, Wiese J, Hong J, and Zimmermann J 2011 I’m the mayor of my house: Examining why
people use Foursquare, a social-driven location sharing application. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver, British Columbia

Loibl W and Peters-Anders J 2012 Mobile phone data as source to discover spatial activity and motion patterns.
In Jekel T, Car A, Strobl J, and Griesebner J (eds) GI_Forum 2012: Geovizualisation, Society and Learning.
Berlin, Herbert Wichmann: 524-33

Mark D M 2004 Geographic information science: Deﬁning the ﬁeld. In Duckham M, Goodchild M F, and Wor-

boys M (eds) Foundations of Geographic Information Science. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 1-17

Marshall A 2015 Why You Should Be Skeptical of Most Twitter Maps. WWW document, http://www.citylab.

com/housing/2015/03/why-most-twitter-maps-cant-be-trusted/388586/

Martin D, Cockings S, and Leung S 2015 Developing a ﬂexible framework for spatiotemporal population model-

ing. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105: 754-72

McPherson T N and Brown M J 2004 Estimating daytime and nighttime population distributions in U.S. cities
for emergency response activities. In Proceedings of the Eighty-fourth Annual Meeting of the American
Meteorological Society, Seattle, Washington

Meier P 2014 May the Crowd Be With You. WWW document (blog), http://irevolution.net/2014/09/30/may-the-

crowd-be-with-you/

Miller H J 2010 The data avalanche is here: Shouldn’t we be digging? Journal of Regional Science 50: 181-201
Mooney P and Corcoran P 2014 Analysis of interaction and co-editing patterns amongst OpenStreetMap contrib-

Mooney P and Winstanley A C 2015 Is VGI big data? In Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual GIS Research

utors. Transactions in GIS 18: 633-59

UK Conference, Leeds, United Kingdom

Neis P and Zipf A 2012 Analyzing the contributor activity of a volunteered geographic information project: The

case of OpenStreetMap. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 1: 146-65

Norheim-Hagtun I and Meier P 2010 Crowdsourcing for crisis mapping in Haiti. Innovations: Technology, Gov-

ernance, Globalization 5: 81-9

Noulas A, Scellato S, Mascolo C, and Pontil M 2011 An empirical study of geographic user activity patterns in
Foursquare. In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Bar-
celona, Spain

Noulas A, Scellato S, Lambiotte R, Pontil M, and Mascolo C 2012 A tale of many cities: Universal patterns in

human urban mobility. PLOS ONE 7(5): e37027

Obermeyer N J 1998 The evolution of Public Participation GIS. Cartography and Geographic Information Sys-

tems 25: 65-6

Ortutay B 2010 Facebook Checks In, Adding Location-based Features. WWW document, http://phys.org/news/

2010-08-facebook-adding-location-based-feature.html

Ostermann F, Spinsanti L, De Longueville B, and Craglia M 2010 User generated geographic information and
natural hazards: How volunteered geographic information can contribute to the risk analysis and impact
assessment of forest ﬁres. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Geographic Information
Science Workshop on the Role of Volunteered Geographic Information in Advancing Science, Zurich,
Switzerland

Pelechrinis K and Krishnamurthy P 2012 Location-based social network users through a lense: Examining tempo-

ral user patterns. In Proceedings of the AAAI Fall Symposium Series, Arlington, Virginia: 61-8

Perkins T A, Garcia A J, Paz-Sold(cid:2)an V A, Stoddard S T, Reiner R C, Vazquez-Prokopec G, Bisanzio D, Morrison
A C, Halsey E S, Kochel T J, Smith D L, Kitron U, Scott T W, and Tatem A J 2014 Theory and data for sim-
ulating ﬁne-scale human movement in an urban environment. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 11(99):
0642

Phithakkitnukoon S and Olivier P 2011 Sensing urban social geography using online social networking data. In

Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Social Mobile Web, Barcelona, Spain: 36-9

Poiani T H, Dos Santos Rocha R, Degrossi L, and Porto de Albuquere J 2016 Potential of collaborative mapping
for disaster relief: A case study of OpenStreetMap in the Nepal earthquake 2015. In Proceedings of the
Hawaiian International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, Hawaii

Poore B 2010 Mapping the unmappable: Is it possible, ethical, or even desirable to incorporate volunteered geo-
graphic information into scientiﬁc projects? In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Geo-
graphic Information Science Workshop on the Role of Volunteered Geographic Information in Advancing
Science, Zurich, Switzerland

Rogers M 2010 Foursquare Demographics: Age, Gender, Education. WWW document, http://alivewired.com/

foursquare-demographics-age-gender/

Roick O, Loos L, and Zipf A 2012 A technical framework for visualizing spatio-temporal quality metrics of vol-
unteered geographic information. In L€owner M-O, Hillen F, and Wohlfahrt R (eds) Mobilit€at und Umwelt:
Geoinformatik 2012. Aachen, Germany: Shaker: 263-70

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

24

C Aubrecht, D €Ozceylan Aubrecht, J Ungar, S Freire and K Steinnocher

R€osler R and Liebig T 2013 Using data from location based social networks for urban activity clustering. In Van-
denbroucke D, Bucher B, and Crompvoets J (eds) Geographic Information Science at the Heart of Europe.
Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography: 55-72

Rush J and Kwan M-P 2011 Using volunteered geographic information to study population dynamics. In Pro-
ceedings of the Symposium on Space-Time Integration in Geography and GIScience, Annual Meeting of the
Association of American Geographers, Seattle, Washington

Scellato S, Noulas A, Lambiotte R, and Mascolo C 2011 Socio-spatial properties of online location-based social
networks. In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Barce-
lona, Spain

Schneider C M, Belik V, Couronn(cid:2)e T, Smoreda Z, and Gonz(cid:2)alez M C 2013. Unravelling daily human mobility

motifs. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10(84): 20130246

See L, Fritz S, and de Leeuw J 2013 The rise of collaborative mapping: Trends and future directions. ISPRS Inter-

national Journal of Geo-Information 2: 955-58

Shaw S-L 2010 Managing and exploring spatiotemporal volunteered geographic information. In Proceedings of
the Sixth International Conference on Geographic Information Science Workshop on the Role of Volun-
teered Geographic Information in Advancing Science, Zurich, Switzerland

Simini F, Gonz(cid:2)alez M C, Maritan A, and Barb(cid:2)asi A-L 2012. A universal model for mobility and migration pat-

terns. Nature 484: 96-100

Spielman S E 2014 Spatial collective intelligence? Credibility, accuracy, and volunteered geographic information.

Cartography and Geographic Information Science 41: 115-24

Statista 2015 Connected Device Usage Rate in Portugal in 2014, By Device. WWW document, http://www.sta-

tista.com/statistics/347175/connected-device-usage-portugal/

Steiger E, de Albuquerque J P, and Zipf A 2015 An advanced systematic literature review on spatiotemporal anal-

yses of Twitter data. Transactions in GIS 19: 809-34

Summers N 2014 Back to Basics: Swarm Redeﬁnes the Foursquare Check-in to Help You Meet Nearby Friends.
WWW document, http://thenextweb.com/apps/2014/05/15/can-foursquares-new-swarm-app-save-check/
Sevtsuk A 2008 Explorations into Urban Mobility Patterns Using Aggregated Mobile Network Data. Cambridge,

MA, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT-Portugal Working Paper

Toepke S L and Starsman R S 2015 Population distribution estimation of an urban area using crowd sourced data
for disaster response. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Information Systems for
Crisis Response and Management, Kristiansand, Norway

Vieweg S, Hughes A, Starbird K, and Palen L 2010 Microblogging during two natural hazards events: What Twit-
ter may contribute to situational awareness. In Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth ACM International Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Atlanta, Georgia: 1079-88

Vu T T 2013 Geospatial technology uses in post-disaster response: The power of the crowd. Disaster Advances

6(4): 1-3

Wang S S and Stefanone M A 2013 Showing Off? Human mobility and the interplay of traits, self-disclosure, and

Facebook check-ins. Social Science Computer Review 31: 437-57

Wesolowski A, O’Meara W P, Eagle N, Tatem A J, and Buckee C O 2015 Evaluating spatial interaction models

for regional mobility in Sub-Saharan Africa. PLOS Computational Biology 11(7): e1004267

Zins C 2007 Conceptual approaches for deﬁning data, information, and knowledge. Journal of the American

Society for Information Science and Technology 58: 479-93

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

