This article was downloaded by: [University of Connecticut]
On: 15 August 2013, At: 04:36
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

The design and implementation of
SPIRIT: a spatially aware search engine
for information retrieval on the
Internet
Ross S. Purves a , Paul Clough b , Christopher B. Jones c , Avi
Arampatzis d f , Benedicte Bucher e , David Finch c g , Gaihua Fu c
h , Hideo Joho b i , Awase Khirni Syed a j , Subodh Vaid c & Bisheng
Yang a
a Department of Geography, University of Zurich, Switzerland
b Department of Information Studies, University of Sheffield, UK
c School of Computer Science, Cardiff University, UK
d Institute of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht
University, Netherlands
e Laboratoire COGIT ‐ Institut Géographique National, France
f Now at: Archives and Information Studies ‐ Faculty of Humanities
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
g Now at: Environment Agency, Bath, UK
h Now at: School of Computing, University of Leeds, UK
i Now at: Department of Computing Science, University of
Glasgow, UK
j Now at: Center for Spatial Information Sciences, International
Institute of Information Technology, India
Published online: 14 Jun 2007.

To cite this article: Ross S. Purves , Paul Clough , Christopher B. Jones , Avi Arampatzis , Benedicte
Bucher , David Finch , Gaihua Fu , Hideo Joho , Awase Khirni Syed , Subodh Vaid & Bisheng Yang
(2007) The design and implementation of SPIRIT: a spatially aware search engine for information
retrieval on the Internet, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 21:7, 717-745,
DOI: 10.1080/13658810601169840

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810601169840

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 21, No. 7, August 2007, 717–745

Research Article

The design and implementation of SPIRIT: a spatially aware search
engine for information retrieval on the Internet

ROSS S. PURVES*{, PAUL CLOUGH{, CHRISTOPHER B. JONES§,
AVI ARAMPATZIS"{{, BENEDICTE BUCHERI, DAVID FINCH§{{,
GAIHUA FU§§§, HIDEO JOHO{"", AWASE KHIRNI SYED{II,
SUBODH VAID§ and BISHENG YANG{
{Department of Geography, University of Zurich, Switzerland
{Department of Information Studies, University of Sheffield, UK
§School of Computer Science, Cardiff University, UK
"Institute of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, Netherlands
ILaboratoire COGIT - Institut Ge´ographique National, France
{{Now at: Archives and Information Studies - Faculty of Humanities University of
Amsterdam, Netherlands
{{Now at: Environment Agency, Bath, UK
§§Now at: School of Computing, University of Leeds, UK
""Now at: Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, UK
IINow at: Center for Spatial Information Sciences, International Institute of
Information Technology, India

(Received 5 May 2006; in final form 24 November 2006 )

Much of the information stored on the web contains geographical context, but
current search engines treat such context in the same way as all other content. In
this paper we describe the design, implementation and evaluation of a spatially
aware search engine which is capable of handling queries in the form of the triplet
of <theme><spatial relationship><location>. The process of
identifying
geographic references in documents and assigning appropriate footprints to
documents, to be stored together with document terms in an appropriate
indexing structure allowing real-time search, is described. Methods allowing
users to query and explore results which have been relevance-ranked in terms of
both thematic and spatial relevance have been implanted and a usability study
indicates that users are happy with the range of spatial relationships available
and intuitively understand how to use such a search engine. Normalised precision
for 38 queries, containing four types of spatial relationships, is significantly
higher (p,0.001) for searches exploiting spatial
information than pure text
search.

Keywords: Geographical information retrieval; Geographical ontology; Spatial
indexing; Spatial relevance ranking; Information retrieval

1.

Introduction

As the web has grown, so has the realisation that locating information through
traditional search engines is inadequate since the semantics of information are, in

*Corresponding author. Email: rsp@geo.unizh.ch

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2007 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810601169840

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 718

R. S. Purves et al.

general, discarded and instead treated as a ‘bag of words’ with meaning attached to
individual terms through, for example, their scarcity, but not their context. Thus a
‘man biting a dog’ is no more or less special than a ‘dog biting a man’. The semantic
web (Berners-Lee et al. 2001) aims to address this limitation by allowing machine-
readable tagging to attach semantics to terms. In the paper from Berners-Lee et al. it
is notable that many of the examples of such semantics relate to locations and
relationships between them, for example the notion that ‘a Cornell University
address, being in Ithaca, must be in New York State which is in the U.S.’.

This is perhaps unsurprising, especially to GIScientists, since almost everything
that we do can be regarded as having some form of geographical context, and
therefore many information resources refer in some way to location. This
importance of geographic context is reflected by resources on the web, many of
which contain some reference to location, through for example a place name,
address, or less directly a telephone number. McCurley (2001) estimated that around
10% of web documents referred to a US Zip code or telephone number, with a
considerably larger number referring in some other way to place—for instance in
this study, from a sample of some 20,000 web pages identified as having being
related to the UK on the basis of IP address, around 85% contained a reference to a
UK place name. In a similar study, Himmelstein (2005) found at least 20% of web
pages included one or more easily recognisable and unambiguous geographic
identifiers, such as a postal address. Since location is a common element of
information on the web, queries submitted to search engines also often contain a
reference to location—a study by Zhang et al. (2006) found that some 12.7% of four
million queries sampled contained a place name. However, such geographic terms
are treated by conventional search engines in the same way as other terms and thus
important semantic information is potentially discarded.

search engine,

this query was

submitted to a conventional

Egenhofer (2002) in his description of a potential ‘Semantic Geospatial web’
describes some typical issues through the example of the query ‘lakes in Maine’.
If
the spatial
relationship ‘in’ would generally be treated as a stop word and discarded from
the search. As a further example, Egenhofer (2002) suggests that it is possible
that data describing such lakes might be available, but described only in
documents which name counties in Maine, but not Maine itself. Thus, some form
of spatial join must be made between data describing the lakes and counties (and
their geometry) and counties and the state of Maine (and its geometry). Egenhofer
suggests that a central challenge for a geospatial web is therefore that it ‘captures,
analyses and tailors geospatial information, much beyond the purely lexical and
syntactic level.’

Geographic search can therefore be seen as a key element of a semantic web, since
geography is perhaps one of the most familiar and common means by which we
ascribe context to information. In turn, as described above, since conventional
search engines lack the ability to consider semantics, geographic qualifiers
describing spatial relationships such as inside, north of or near are not treated
geographically. Equally, geographic terms which may be shared between locations—
for example, there are literally hundreds of Newports—are not disambiguated, and
thus the user is unlikely to find relevant results for a small hamlet called Newport.
Documents relating to somewhere inside a large place, such as London, may contain
no mention of that place name, but refer instead to a district (e.g. Westminster)
inside London and thus may not be located by a search for ‘cathedrals in London’.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

719

Equally geographic names may be different in different languages (e.g. Geneva,
Genf and Gene`ve) or be used in a non-geographic context (e.g. Jack London). These
and other limitations can only be addressed if geographic information is treated
differently, and in particular if spatial relationships can be in some way stored and
used in analysis of the results of a query.

1.1 Related work

Recent years have seen an increase in research dedicated to geographical
information retrieval. The detection of geographic content is of much interest and
as Himmelstein (2005, p. 29) states, retrieval of this kind of information has
generated much interest in both research and commerce. Research has addressed a
wide range of relevant areas such as the building of geographical ontologies, spatial
indexing and storage of documents, geographical relevance ranking, the extraction
and resolution of geographical references, determining the geographical scope (or
focus) of web documents, methods for the formulation of spatial queries and
interaction with the results of geographic search. Many of these research areas are
directly related to providing geographical web search. Wang et al. (2005) classify the
identifying and
areas of
disambiguating place names, developing effective computational approaches to
handle geographic information and exploiting various geographic information
sources. We do not set out to review each area here, but rather focus on research
projects dedicated to geographical information retrieval.

research in this area into three major aspects:

Ding et al. (2000) described an experimental web search facility that used a
gazetteer to analyse the presence of geographic references, including their frequency
of occurrence, and hence to index the content of online newspapers. Techniques for
georeferencing web documents with respect to their originators were described by
Buyukokkten et al. (1999), who derived addresses associated with web sites
following analysis of IP addresses. The prototype system defines a geographical
scope for a US web page based on the geographical distribution of web pages linking
to it. The extent of a page is then computed as a circle, the radius defined by the
distribution of geo-referenced links to the page and visualised on a map.

McCurley (2001) described an experimental system for web navigation that
employed a number of methods for analysing the geographic context of web pages
and allowed the user to find web sites related geographically to a currently retrieved
web site. An experimental geographic web search facility, employing a map interface
for specification of the area to be searched, based on the city of Kyoto has been
presented by Lee et al. (2003) called KyotoSEARCH.

The GeoSearcher project (Watters and Amoudi 2002) has experimented with
location-based ranking of search engine results by analysis of the URLs of retrieved
web pages. The prototype provides an alternative ranking order for results returned
by search engines in response to users’ queries related to physical locations and
distances. As an add-on to an existing search engine, search results were re-ranked
based on distance between the query and scope of retrieved document determined by
grounding the URL of a page to longitude/latitude.

Rauch et al. (2003) describe their approach for incorporating geography into web
search which is being developed commercially by MetaCarta (http://www.metacarta.
com). Their approach computes a geographical focus for each web page which is
used to restrict results to a specific region and display results on a map. A

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 720

R. S. Purves et al.

disambiguation method involving a confidence-based framework is used to model
the probability that a given name refers to a given place. An additional stage during
the extraction of locations also attempts to understand grammatical expressions
which define some kind of relative positioning such as ‘15 miles north of
Washington’.

Markowetz et al. (2004) described aspects of an experimental geographic web
search engine that is similar in intent to the search engine described in this paper,
with its emphasis upon general web search. They describe methods for determining
the geographical scope of web pages based on multiple sources of evidence including
the WHOIS directory and the text content of the web pages. For each web page a
geographic footprint is created consisting of a set of grid cells recording the degree
of spatial relevance of the document for each cell. Their approach does not include
interpretation of spatial relationships that relate the subject of interest to a
particular place, other than distance, and no evaluation of their methods is
described.

Amitay et al. (2004) describe a system for geotagging web content called Web-a-
Where that is able to associate locations to pages with the aim of applying this to
location-based applications. The
system extracts and grounds geographic
references found in web pages and uses these to compute a focus for the page—
a locality the page is assumed to refer to as a whole. The authors distinguish
between two types of location: source and target. The former has to do with the
origin of the page (e.g. the physical location of the server hosting the page); the
latter reflects the coverage of a page’s content. The authors showed how the Web-
a-Where system could be integrated into an existing data-mining framework to
geotag web pages gathered from a web crawl and thereby enable geographic
search. Similarly, Wang et al. (2005) investigated the detection of geographic
locations from web pages through the assignment of a single geographic scope. In
they categorised geographic references into three types: provider
particular,
location, content location and serving location to reflect the observation that
various types of location can coexist in a single source. Provider location identifies
the physical location of the provider who owns the web resource (e.g. derived from
Yellow Page addresses), content location refers to the location that the content of
a web resource describes, and serving location defines the geographic scope that a
page can reach (e.g. through analysis of usage logs or links pointing to the web
resource).

Silva et al. (2006) describe the GREASE (Geographic REasoning in Search
Engines) project in which a prototype system called Geotumba (http://local.tum-
ba.pt) has been created to demonstrate the capabilities of geographic web search for
a subset of documents written in Portuguese. The architecture developed is modular
and incorporates components that include: a Portuguese geographic ontology, a
module for extracting geographic entities from Portuguese web pages and assigning
them to entities in the ontology, an indexing and ranking module and a component
that deals with user interaction. The approach makes use of a graph-ranking method
to assign a single scope to each web document.

Not all approaches to geographic search include explicit representation of
locations through geocoding. For example, Delboni et al. (2005) reported on the
development of a relatively simple system which, through analysis of spatial
relationships found in unstructured text documents, textually expands queries with
spatially related terms. Graupmann and Schenkel (2006) present a further example

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

721

of a system, GeoSphereSearch, which does not explicitly represent footprints, but
which rather treats documents as a bag of words, maintaining document structure in
a graph-based representation which includes an encoding of the type of term (e.g.
a location and its coordinates). GeoSphereSearch is reported to be capable of
dealing with vague queries by interactive redefinement of an appropriate search
radius.

In addition to research projects, a large number of commercial geosearch facilities
have been developed by some of the largest commercial web search engine providers
(for example, Google, Yahoo and Microsoft). Himmelstein (2005) suggests that
information on the web can be used to provide local service support and a number
of local search services have been introduced to address this emerging need of web
users. Local services like Yellow Pages, Yahoo! Local and Google Local have all
been working towards meeting the challenge of providing spatial information to
users. At present these facilities provide limited geographic search as they appear to
be seeded through Yellow Pages or other business directories, thus limiting their
content to entities found in commercial listings. Furthermore, they do not have
geographic intelligence in interpreting spatial relationships and appear to treat the
geometry of all locations as points.

In this paper we set out a description of the design,

implementation and
evaluation of a complete solution to geographic information retrieval developed in
the context of the SPIRIT (Spatially aware Information Retrieval on the Internet)
project (Jones et al. 2002). The implemented search engine utilises a footprint-based
solution to the problem of document retrieval for unstructured text such as that
to SPIRIT’s aims were the
commonly found in web documents. Central
interpretation of spatial relationships in query formulation, search and the ranking
of relevant documents enabling us to test the fundamental hypothesis underlying all
of the research described here on geographic information retrieval—namely that
search techniques which take explicit account of geographic content and spatial
relationships will provide more accurate results than pure text search for queries
which include geographic content. Although many of the works described above
address a part of this problem, arguably none introduce a holistic and evaluated
solution.

The paper is set out as follows. First, the collection of requirements on which
the architecture is based is presented, before an introduction to the basic
architecture implemented is given. Next, pre-processing steps necessary to identify
geographic footprints in unstructured text, and methods for indexing these
footprints together with document terms are set out. The components required to
for run-time search, including the user interface, core search engine and relevance
ranking are then described. An evaluation of the system, first examining the
accuracy of search results for spatial and non-spatial search in terms of standard IR
metrics is then presented, before presentation of some results from a study of the
systems overall usability. Finally, the extent to which these results have met the
needs specified initially in the paper, and areas where further research is required are
discussed.

2. Gathering requirements for spatially aware search

An early stage in the development of any system’s architecture is the collection of
requirements from both a system perspective, defining the goals that a system must

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 722

R. S. Purves et al.

achieve, and a user’s perspective focusing on the needs and context of use of a
typical user (Nielsen 1993).

The basic methodology to analyse the requirements for SPIRIT was twofold. A
set of mock-ups together with scenarios for their use were developed by the project
team. These were presented to potential user groups, and semi-structured interviews
were used to collect information about users’ views on potential interactions and
functionalities of the system. An analysis of existing web-based systems that
provided some of the required search and mapping functionalities was also carried
out. For instance, we analysed the way in which users specify place through textual
input and interactive maps in applications such as MultiMap (www.multimap.com).
Both the analysis of user’s needs and the shortcomings identified in the existing
applications resulted in a set of functionalities and characteristics that required
innovative solutions from the SPIRIT project.

2.1 Analysis of requirements

The requirements-gathering process produced a wide-ranging set of goals, some of
which fitted within the programme of work in SPIRIT, and some which could be
considered to be outside the scope of the project for reasons of resource or focus. A
core list, which formed both the requirements on which the architecture was based
and goals against which the implementation of the system must be measured
against,
into three broad categories—
requirements for the formulation of queries, requirements for the nature of results
from a spatially aware system and requirements for the user interface for such a
system.

is given here. These requirements fall

uated.

whose boundaries are imprecise.

N The system should support geographical query expansion to allow exhaustive
retrieval of relevant documents in a specified area (e.g. a query for documents
in Scotland should retrieve documents with respect to Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Dundee and other Scottish towns and cities).
N Place names should be automatically identified, and interactively disambig-
N Users should be able to query for geographical areas such as Central London
N Spatial concepts relating different geographic entities should be represented,
N The system should support the use of multiple place names for the same
N It should be possible for users to specify the area of interest on a map.
N Users should be able to view query results on a map, and these results should
N Documents should be ranked differently with respect to the relevant spatial
N Document ranking should combine both spatial and thematic aspects of

location, and handle multiple instances in search.

be linked to relevant web documents.

e.g. beaches outside Nice.

relation.

document relevance.

These requirements can be decomposed into several specific functionalities which
a GIR system must support and forms the basis of the system described below. In
summary, the first step in the search process is the specification of a query which
takes the form of a triplet containing a thematic component, a geographic (place

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

723

name) component and some form of spatial relationship that links them, e.g.
<theme><relationship><location>. The system must interpret and disambiguate
the user’s specification of a place name, and provide mechanisms to deal with
potentially ambiguous place names (e.g. London, UK vs. London, Ontario) or
imprecise regions, such as the south of England (Purves et al. 2005). Having
interpreted a query, it must be submitted to a search engine which incorporates
techniques to deal with the thematic and geographic aspects of the query and
provide ranked results to a user (Kreveld et al. 2005). Users working through
scenarios made clear the importance of displaying results on a map, especially in
cases where the spatial relevance of a document with respect to a query is unclear to
the user. This typically happens when the user does not have detailed local
knowledge of the area under query.

Cartographic representation of the query area and the retrieved document’s
locations should allow users to make some assessment of the spatial relevance of
the query results, such as adjacency or containment relationships between a
document location and a specific place the user is familiar with. Linking of the
geographic footprints of the retrieved documents with the content of the documents
themselves further allows the user to assess the thematic and geographic relevance of
the query. The possibility of the user using the interface to redefine their search, for
example through selection of the most relevant documents or (re)specification of the
query region, allows some form of relevance feedback between the user and the
system.

3. Overview of SPIRIT architecture

A working prototype of the SPIRIT system has been developed, which comprises a
number of components
responsible for key spatial-awareness functionalities
(figure 1) based on the user requirements expressed above.

Figure 1. SPIRIT architecture showing run-time and pre-processing components and
linkages.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 724

R. S. Purves et al.

SPIRIT has a multimodal interface, allowing both textual and graphical query
formulation, together with results presentation and a mapping backdrop. A
geographical ontology acts as a repository of knowledge about place names, and
relationships between them, for the regions covered by the search engine. Data in
this repository are used to recognise the presence of place names in web resources
and hence to ‘ground’ the web resources to geographic locations, a process referred
to as geo-tagging (Clough 2005). The geographic ontology is also used to
disambiguate place names in a user query and to generate a query footprint that
reflects the region of space to which the query refers. The query footprint is a
geometric interpretation of the place name and the spatial relationship employed in
the query.

The web data collection is a set of geo-tagged web resources that have been
extracted from a one terabyte collection of approximately 94 million web pages
resulting from a crawl of the web (Joho and Sanderson 2004).

A metadata component attempts to associate the documents from the original
web crawl with one or more footprints representing the regions of space to
which individual documents relate. The resulting geo-tagged collection consists
of about 900,000 documents that refer to parts of the UK, France, Germany
and Switzerland. This is used in generation of a spatial index and in spatially
indexing by
aware
associating documents with one or more cells of a subdivision of geographic
space.

indexing supplements

ranking. Spatial

relevance

text

The search engine provides the core information retrieval (IR) functionality of
the system, accessing the pre-processed indexes to obtain matches to user
queries. The retrieved documents are scored initially only on the basis of textual
matching. The geographically specialised relevance-ranking component provides
a number of configurable methods for ranking of retrieved web resources. This
includes integrating different types of spatial relevance scores with a textual
relevance score and a distributed ranking method that avoids clustering of
retrieved documents that are very similar to each other. In order to facilitate
experimental comparisons,
the SPIRIT prototype can also be configured to
employ a pure text index for comparison with traditional, non-spatial, search
engines.

These components were deployed in a distributed architecture using SOAP
(Simple Object Access Protocol), with components existing on remote sites
allowed the
and communicating via defined functional
components
to be developed and maintained from individual project
consortium partner sites. The components are connected through the use of
a central, broker component, which acts as a session manager, controlling
and scheduling the information flow through the system as well as enabling
the recording of all steps involved in processing a query for monitoring and
evaluation purposes.

interfaces. This

Box 1 illustrates formally how for a given document collection, D, the set of
documents R which are relevant to a query Q can be returned, given a suitable
interface allowing a user access to the system. In the following,
the steps
involved in pre-processing the document collection to create searchable indexes,
search these indexes and rank the documents returned are detailed, together
with the elements of the system dealing with query specification and results
presentation.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

725

For a document collection D there exist n documents di such that

and each document also contains terms tdi , such that

di[D

tdi ~ t1 . . . :tm

f

g

where m is the number of terms in document i.
Each document di also has footprints f di where
(cid:2)

(cid:1)
f di ~ f1 . . . fj

i.e. where j is the total number of footprints in a document, which may be 0.
Now, given a query Q, we define our query as Q5{T, FQ} where T is the
thematic element of the query

tk[T

i.e. where tk are individual thematic query terms and FQ describes the spatial
extent of the query footprint derived from the spatial relationship and location,
then the document set R returned will be defined as follows:

(cid:1)
R~ dl[D,

f

tk[dl

g ^ F Q\fk

(cid:3)

(cid:4), fk[f dl

(cid:2)

Box 1. Set theoretic description of footprint-based spatial search.

4. Functionality of the spatially aware search engine components

4.1 Pre-processing the document collection

The architecture of SPIRIT is based on web documents which have been pre-
processed and assigned spatial footprints to be stored within a spatial index. The
documents themselves are not altered in this process, but rather metadata describing
both terms within documents (the traditional bag of words) and spatial footprints
are assigned and represented in text and spatial indexes which support the search
functionality of SPIRIT.

4.1.1 Assigning spatial footprints to web documents. Given a set of web pages, we
must identify geographical references and assign them to spatial coordinates (Hill et
al. 1999). These two tasks are commonly referred to as geoparsing and geocoding,
respectively (Larson 1996, McCurley 2001). Geoparsing is performed using the
GATE (General Architecture for Text Engineering) Information Extraction (IE)
system (Cunningham et al. 2002). Candidate terms are identified using a
combination of lists of known locations, organisations and people derived from
gazetteers, together with rules which capture elements of the surrounding context.
Gazetteer lookup is simple, language-independent and often effective (Mikheev et
al. 1999), but alone is unable to identify locations not found in the list and
distinguish between locations not used in a geographical context (e.g. Chicago can
represent the US city, the name of a pop group, or the internal name for Windows
95 (McCurley 2001)). To identify locations in a feasible time, we used a simple
gazetteer lookup approach but also applied context rules and additional name lists

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 726

R. S. Purves et al.

(proper names and commonly occurring terms) to filter out names in the gazetteer
lists most likely used in a non-geographical sense.

For gazetteer lookup, the geo-ontology was used (described in section 4.2.2) and
was populated with two main sources of data (although only one of these was
applicable outside of the UK)—the SABE (Seamless Administrative Boundaries of
Europe) data set and the Ordnance Survey 1:50,000 Scale Gazetteer. These two data
sets contain, for the UK, a total of around 270,000 locations of which about 10% are
ambiguous (i.e. not unique entries). Locations include regions such as villages,
towns, cities, counties and places of interest represented spatially as points and
polygons. Based on empirical evaluation (Clough 2005), our approach using
gazetteer lookup with additional context rules gave an accuracy of around 72% and
25% false positives for all annotations found.

When geocoding we can either apply multiple locations to a single reference in
these ambiguous cases (called referent ambiguity), or define a default location
associated with location metadata. A default location can be determined using, for
example,
the most commonly occurring place (Smith and Mann 2003), by
population of the place name (Rauch et al. 2003) or by semi-automatic extraction
from the web (Li et al. 2003). We used a default sense approach and global
geographical world knowledge to resolve ambiguity based on features from the
geographical resources available to us. Again, based on the evaluation described in
Clough (2005), we were able to ground correctly around 89% of all place names.
Locations were assigned an appropriate bounding box, representing a spatial extent
derived from polygonal data stored in the geo-ontology, since the overheads
associated with passing polygons through the system were too high.

Based on the geo-parsing stage, 885,502 web pages were finally included in the
collection used in the SPIRIT prototype. This is less than the total number in the
original Terabyte collection because many files either contained no locations, or
contained locations which could not be grounded. Table 1 provides some analysis of
the SPIRIT collection based on the number of spatial footprints (or Unique IDs
(UIDs)) extracted from the processed web pages. The number of UIDs indicates the
total number of unique locations identified in the collection. For example, 25,841
UIDs within the UK were identified within the collection. Within the document
collection a total of around 1.5 million references to UK place names were found
and, given that around 340,000 pages referred to a UK place name the average
number of UIDs per document was about 4. It is important to note that these
grounded UIDs include falsely grounded place names (e.g. misidentified instances of
place names, such as Jack London) and that the distribution of place names is likely
to be strongly biased towards a much smaller subset of locations—the most striking
example of this bias is London, which occurs in 112,477 documents in the
collection—that is to say that around one-third of the documents in the UK

Table 1. Summary of footprints (UIDs) identified by geoparsing for SPIRIT collection.

No.
documents

339,819
363,183
79,491
87,009

Unique
UIDs

25,841
7504
2648
5832

UK
France
Germany
Switzerland

Unique UID
occurrences

Average UIDs
per document

1,541,442
959,104
321,362
258,188

3.97
2.61
2.85
3.10

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

727

collection have a reference to London (as well as potentially other place names).
This result is in itself not surprising, since many administrative organisations in the
UK are based in or near London.

4.1.2 Building document indexes. As the intention of the SPIRIT project was to
retrieve text documents with respect to geographic context, the need arose to index
on the basis of both text and location. Text indexes are generally maintained as an
inverted file structure (Salton and McGill 1983), and here use was made of the
GLASS search engine (for more details, see http://dis.shef.ac.uk/mark/glass/).
Spatial access methods (Rigaux et al. 2002, Samet 1990) can be used for performing
point, range and interval queries. Examples of spatial access methods include
regular grids, quadtrees, R-trees, etc., and any one of these could be used in
conjunction with the inverted file structure to provide a hybrid indexing structure
for addressing spatial queries. For SPIRIT, experiments have been confined to a
regular grid-based spatial indexing scheme. This index divides the entire footprint
coverage of the document collection into a grid of rows and columns. For each cell
of the grid, a list of document IDs was constructed, using the document footprints
which resulted from the geo-tagging process. The next section briefly discusses the
design choices for combining textual and spatial indexing.

The simplest extension to a text-based IR system is to retrieve all documents that
match the concept terms of the query and perform a subsequent filter step that
returns only those documents that intersect the geographical scope of the place
name in the query (the query footprint). This approach was implemented here using
a spatial index of document footprints that is used to match the results of the first
step with those documents that intersect the query footprint. The scheme is referred
to as ‘T’. In a more integrated approach, referred to as ST, an individual text index,
is
referring to documents whose footprints lie within the respective grid cell,
associated with each of the cells of the spatial index grid. At search time the cells that
intersect the query footprint are determined and then only the corresponding text
indexes are searched. The final output is a merged and sorted list of the higher
ranked documents from each of the intersecting cells. Because the initial step is
essentially spatial, ST is regarded as a space-primary indexing method. The third
type of scheme that was implemented is text-primary and referred to as TS. Here the
inverted list of the text index is extended so that for each term the associated
documents (containing the term) are grouped according to the spatial index cells to
which they relate, as determined by intersection of their document footprints with
the cell. Thus a form of spatial index is built for each list of documents for each
term.

In both the ST and TS approaches, there is a penalty of multiple copies of indexes
(multiple text for ST and multiple spatial for TS). The overhead increases with the
number of footprints that are selected during geo-tagging and subsequently in the
creation of the spatial index. This combined effect of multiple cells and footprints
per document constrains the index structure to coarse grid resolutions as the amount
of total disk space in storing indexes for our IR system with ST and TS becomes
very high. In our experiments to compare ST and TS it was found that TS indexing
required slightly more space than ST but exhibited better query response times. In
contrast, the T scheme resulted in longer query times (up to double) but with very
little storage overhead (Vaid et al. 2005).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 728

R. S. Purves et al.

4.2 Main components for run-time operation

4.2.1 Query interface. The query interface is a bridge connecting users and a
software system, the aim of which is to interpret and convey the user’s requirements
to the system. The SPIRIT query interface encompasses two sub-components,
namely a text-based query interface and graphical query interface. These two
interfaces provide users with the possibility of interacting with the system in
different ways. The text-based interface supports text input in a structured form (e.g.
a triplet of <theme><relationship><location>) to implement a query. This interface
is a simple extension of that provided by most web search engines and designed to
make it easy and fast for a new user of the system to formulate a query. The
graphical interface, through the use of a map backdrop and basic interactivity,
provides a user unfamiliar with an area with a means of specifying a query (for
example, a user who is not familiar with local place names can draw a polygon
approximating to a region of interest) and also allows an expert user to specify
multiple locations for search (figure 2).

Underlying the query interface is the broker component, which is a middle tier
connecting the query interface and other components. The broker component
produces and interprets SOAP requests for transmission between the different
interactions allowing
system components described in section 3 and logs all
developers to trace bugs in different system components, monitor system usage and
allow evaluation experiments.

search,

4.2.2 Geographic ontology (query disambiguation and expansion). To support
the SPIRIT system employs a geographical ontology (or
spatial
geo-ontology), which provides knowledge of places within the geographic coverage
of the search engine. For each place, the geo-ontology maintains all of the names
that a place is known by, the place types with which it can be categorised, the
footprints which indicate its spatial extent, and its topological
geographical
relationships (such as part_of and containing) with other places. The actual design
and structure of this geo-ontology and issues with populating it are described in
more detail elsewhere (Abdelmoty et al. 2005, Fu et al. 2005).

As well as representing places for which the spatial extent is well defined, the
geographic ontology also contains a small number of so-called imprecise regions,
referring to places such as the British Midlands, the Swiss Mittelland or the
American Midwest. The boundaries of these regions were derived by first mining the
web for documents mentioning such regions, then geoparsing and georeferencing
occurrences of other places names in such documents—based on the assumption
that occurrences of place names
in documents are likely to be spatially
autocorrelated. By performing such operations for many documents, and thus
identifying a large pool of candidate locations for the imprecise region, boundaries
for the regions could be derived using a variety of techniques (Arampatzis et al.
2006, Purves et al. 2005). The regions themselves are represented in the ontology by
a spatial extent and place name, as with all other locations.

The geo-ontology is used both at the pre-processing stage and query time to
support spatial search. At pre-processing, the geo-ontology helps primarily in geo-
parsing of web documents and organisation of spatial indexes. At query time, the
ontology helps disambiguate place names in the query, spatially expand the query,
and provide data to enable ranking of retrieved documents. How the geo-ontology
helps with geo-parsing, spatial indexing and spatial relevance ranking is elaborated

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

729

Figure 2. SPIRIT textual query interface showing a structured query with triplet of
<theme><spatial relationship><location> and graphical query interface where the region is
graphically specified on a background map.

on in other parts of this paper. The following focuses on how the geographical
ontology performs spatial query disambiguation and expansion to assist spatial
search.

Spatial query disambiguation is necessary because many of the place names which
may appear in a query can be shared by multiple places (e.g. there are a number of
places named Newport in the UK). The geo-ontology helps the user to resolve these
ambiguous place names by providing them with the broader spatial contexts of the
place, by utilising the containment (part_of) relationships encoded between places.
For example, for a query involving Newport, a user will be prompted to select which
Newport is intended from a menu of hierarchy information obtained from the geo-
ontology:

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 730

R. S. Purves et al.

UK, Wales, Newport
UK, England, Essex, Uttlesford, Newport
UK, England, Leicestershire, Melton, Newport
UK, England, Devon, North Devon, Newport

Spatial query expansion is the process where spatial query terms are expanded to
generate a geometric footprint that can be employed by further spatial processing
within the SPIRIT prototype. The footprint generated is dependent not only on the
footprint of the place name mentioned in the query, but also on the spatial
relationship used. A challenge in dealing with spatial query expansion is that a
spatial relationship such as near is vague. Its interpretation can vary with respect to
different users’ intentions, as well as depending on the types of spatial and non-
spatial terms involved in a query. In Fu et al. (2005) a method was proposed for
intelligent treatment of spatial query terms whereby the process of query footprint
generation is able to take account of the potential for vagueness in the spatial
operator. The range of spatial operators currently supported include in, near,
outside, north, south, east, west and within distance of.

4.2.3 Core search engine. Given the generation of spatial and textual indexes, the
core search engine retrieves a set of initial documents in response to a query Q sent
from the user interface. In practise, thematic terms are first stemmed by a Porter
stemmer (Porter 1980), and stopwords (e.g. of, the, he, that) are removed. The
retrieval of documents then involves matching terms in the query to the document
collection and ranking of the matched documents. The initial ranking of matched
documents in the system is based on a probabilistic IR model using the BM25
weighting function (Robertson et al. 1998). BM25 is based on three sources of
weighting which have been shown empirically to be useful for different retrieval
tasks (Sparck Jones and Willet 1997):

more useful than terms appearing in many.

N Document frequency—terms occurring in only a few documents are likely to be
N Term frequency—the more frequently a term appears in a document the more
N Document length—a term occurring the same number of times in a short
document than a longer one is likely to be more important in the shorter one.

important it is likely to be for that document.

A set of candidate documents R are retrieved by the intersection of the set of
documents which lie within the query footprint and those which contain the
thematic terms matched as described above. The particular order of
these
calculations depends on whether T, ST or TS indexing is used. Having retrieved a
candidate set of up to 1000 documents with the core search engine, these are
forwarded to the relevance ranking component for geographic relevance-based re-
ranking.

4.2.4 Relevance-ranking. Web documents identified by the search engine are
ranked according to both textual and spatial relevance. From a geo-spatial
perspective, each document in the web document collection is represented by a bag
of footprints following the grounding of web locations to places, and a query is also
represented as a footprint. Depending on the spatial relationship used in the original
query, different formulae are used to calculate footprint similarity scores between
query and document footprints. When all footprints in a document are assigned a
similarity score with respect to the query footprint, a document spatial similarity

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

731

score for the document can be calculated. The relevance-ranking component
combines the spatial and textual document scores to generate a single ranking. A
number of different options for score combination have been investigated and
compared with purely textual scoring (solely BM25).

Thus, in order to produce a relevance-ranking of documents with respect to a

query, the following steps are taken:

respect to the query footprint and connector.

N For every document footprint, a footprint similarity score is produced with
N For every document, a document spatial similarity score is produced based on
the footprint similarity scores of all the footprints contained in the document.
N Document spatial similarity scores are usually combined with textual BM25
N Documents are ranked in descending order of their document similarity scores.
The formula used to calculate footprint similarity scores is dependent on the

scores into a document similarity score.

spatial relationship in the original query, i.e.

document’s footprint
containment.

N inside: Binary operator defined between a query’s bounding-box and a
(MBR or centroid). Coordinates are checked for
N near: near(a,b)5exp(2L * D(a,b)), where a and b are the centroids of a query’s
and a document’s footprint, D(a,b) is their Euclidian distance. Thus, proximity
scores decay exponentially from 1 to 0 with increasing distance. L controls the
rate of decay, or, in real-world terms, ‘how far is far’, and can for example be a
function of the query footprint—thus, for example, near things can be further
from large objects.
N north-of, south-of, east-of, west-of: Assuming that a and b are the centroids of a
document footprint and a query footprint, respectively, and that psi is the angle
of the vector ba from the positive x-axis with the origin assumed on point b.
For north-of, if psi.5180 or psi,50 then north-of(a,b)50, otherwise north-
of(a,b)512|902psi|/90. The other directional operators are calculated in a
similar manner. Proximity is also taken into account, so to obtain the final
score they are multiplied with near(a,b).

For the SPIRIT prototype the ‘best-match’ approach is followed to determine
document spatial relevance, i.e. a document’s spatial similarity score is the highest
footprint similarity score of the footprints it contains. Initial experiments with a few
other approaches that use partial score contributions from all document’s footprints
did not appear promising; they tend to reduce effectiveness returning dubious results
for some queries.

Before multiple textual and spatial scores are combined, they first have to be
normalised into the range [0,1]. BM25 scores can be quite unpredictable in their
range and they are currently normalised linearly by dividing with the highest
document score for the query.

Figure 3 depicts eight documents which have both a spatial and a BM25 score for
which a number of methods have been trialled to combine these two scores into one.
The non-distributed method ranks the documents in ascending order of their
Euclidian distance from point (1,1) that is assumed to be the most relevant possible
document. The distributed method tries to de-cluster documents that have almost
the same score components. In figure 3, ranking is according to a distributed

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 732

R. S. Purves et al.

Figure 3. Plot of BM25 (textual) against spatial document scores and associated ranking for
a distributed method.

method. Thus, note that although 4 is further from (1,1) it is ranked above 5. Two
variations of the distributed method exist, one based on the angle of a yet unranked
point to the already ranked, and one based on its distance from the already ranked.
The exact details of the algorithms are reported elsewhere (Kreveld et al. 2005).

4.2.5 Results display. The results returned from the relevance ranking component
are a ranked collection of pointers to web documents, a variety of ranking scores
and a set of document footprints. The display component of the search engine uses
this information to ease the user’s task in sorting relevant from irrelevant data. We
display search results using a map backdrop generated from standard web mapping
components. The results interface only displays document footprints which have
been identified as being relevant to the query in question—that is not every
document footprint from every document is displayed. Locations are displayed as
points on the map, enhanced through the use of brushing and linking, allowing the
user to quickly and simply associate web documents with locations. Footprints
which are shared between documents are displayed as stacks, with all documents
related to a stack revealed through mouseover.

A further issue in dealing with the results of any search engine, including a
spatially aware one, is to provide users with a means to visualise the potentially very
large numbers of documents returned. In SPIRIT, we provide users with a simple,
map-based interface on which only the 10 documents are displayed at a time
(figure 4) and a set of more complex set of visualisations which allow users to view a
variety of representations of larger numbers of document (figure 5). These include
the use of density surfaces, cartograms and a filtering mechanism based on footprint
size and the number of shared footprints at a location (Yang et al. 2006).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

733

Figure 4. SPIRIT results display for a structured query—elements on the map and in the
documents list are linked and locations with multiple documents are displayed as columns—
with a list of documents at the location displayed on mouseover.

5. Evaluation

In this paper we concentrate on the holistic evaluation of the SPIRIT prototype—
the majority of individual components have also been evaluated separately (e.g.
Clough 2005, Vaid et al. 2005).

To date, few GIR systems based on querying of unstructured text exist, and thus,
to our knowledge, limited evaluation has so far been performed of such systems,
although various proposals have been made for the evaluation of specific
components of systems (e.g. Leidner 2006, Martins et al. 2005). The GeoCLEF
evaluation campaign (Gey et al. 2005) addresses some of the issues concerning
system evaluation. By contrast, in IR a long tradition of evaluation exists. In most
cases, an IR system is used to assist with finding answers (in the form of documents)
to a user’s information needs (Mizzaro 1997). How well a system meets those needs
can be evaluated along a number of dimensions. For example, two predominant
evaluation strategies have emerged from IR evaluation: those which are system-
focused; and those which are user-centred (Spark Jones and Willett 1997). In the

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 7
3
4

R

.

S

.

P
u
r
v
e
s

e
t

a
l
.

Figure 5. Advanced results display in SPIRIT—here document footprints (bounding boxes) for all relevant documents are shown and can be interactively
filtered by spatial extent (as shown) or by the number of shared documents at a location.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

735

former, the goal of evaluation is to measure system accuracy, e.g. to compare and
rank different IR systems or components of the same IR system. This approach
typically uses an established benchmark to simulate retrieval tasks without requiring
involvement of end users. The latter strategy—user-centred evaluation—aims to
evaluate IR systems with respect to usability (e.g. assessing the suitability of an IR
system interface or some feature of interface design through a task-based user
study), requiring that the IR system has an interface through which users can
interact and upon which observations can be made.

In this paper we present results from both system- and user-centred evaluations.
Our initial approach to performing system-centred evaluation was based around
standard IR notions and involved the creation of a test collection which provides the
necessary resources and framework in which to assess the system (Bucher et al.
2005). A typical IR test collection consists of the following: a set of documents
representative of a selected domain, a set of typical user information needs based on
the document collection (queries) and a list of which documents are relevant to each
query. The document collection should fairly represent the search domain and the
topics should balance between representing realistic user requests and providing
controlled queries (Peters and Braschler 2001), and relevance assessments should be
as complete as possible (which can be difficult in large document collections).
However, we encountered significant difficulties with this approach. Crucially, we
considered that document relevance should be measured with respect to two
dimensions—spatial and thematic relevance. Experiments revealed that thematic
relevance (i.e. is this document about castles) was easier to assess than spatial
relevance (i.e. is this document about somewhere to the east of Edinburgh). A
description of some of our experiments with different relevance schemes and the
importance of spatial and thematic dimensions of relevance can be found in Clough
et al. (2006) and Purves and Clough (2006). These difficulties in assessing spatial
relevance meant that when we performed automated tests on a set of queries, many
documents appeared whose relevance had not been judged.

Our second approach to system-centred relevance judgement was to assess the
relevance of the top ranked documents retrieved by spatially aware search, and
documents retrived from the same document collection using purely textual search
with BM25 ranking. For this second case we concatenated the triplet of
<theme><spatial relationship><location> into a query which was submitted to
the search engine.

The spatial and thematic relevance of the top ten documents for spatial and text
search were then assessed independently by two assessors. This approach allowed us
to measure normalised precision (the proportion of relevant documents returned
where the maximum number of documents returned was 10 per search). For spatial
search, the experiments described here are for text primary indices which provided a
more rapid query response (section 4.1.2), and non-distributed ranking (section
4.2.4), which appeared in preliminary experiments to give best results. Although
assessing the accuracy of the system, particularly with other ranking methods would
be of interest, in practise it was not feasible to both judge large numbers of queries
and do this for multiple ranking methods.

Judgements were made for a total of 38 queries covering the range of spatial
relationships handled by SPIRIT and with locations of differing granularities. The
queries and values of normalised precision are shown in table 2. Thematic and
spatial relevance were assessed on a binary scale, where thematic relevance was

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Table 2. Thematic, spatial and combined normalised precision for documents retrieved for 38 queries from the SPIRIT collection using textual search
(BM25 ranking) and spatial search with T-index and non-distributed ranking (ND means no documents returned/judged).

Query

<beaches><in><east lothian>
<camping><in><highland>
<mountaineering><in><scotland>
<oil industry><in><aberdeen>
<pubs><in><edinburgh>
<walking><in><fife>
<art festivals><in><edinburgh>
<beaches><in><highland>
<museums><in><switzerland>
<museums><in><zurich>

<red kites><near><munlochy>
<canals><near><glasgow>
<walking><near><beauly>
<climbing><near><aviemore>
<skiing><near><glencoe>
<beaches><near><portree>
<skiing><near><bern>
<mountains><near><zurich>
<walking><near><luzern>
<camping><near><zurich>

Annotator 1, BM25

Annotator 2, BM25

Annotator 1, Spatial

Annotator 2, Spatial

Th
(Pn)

0.40
0.80
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.00
0.80
0.22
0.33
0.30

0.00
0.10
0.30
0.50
0.40
0.10
0.00
0.20
0.00
0.20

Sp
(Pn)

0.40
0.20
0.60
0.40
0.80
0.25
0.50
0.11
0.78
0.20

0.00
0.10
0.50
0.50
0.40
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.00
0.20

Com.
(Pn)

0.20
0.10
0.50
0.30
0.70
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.33
0.10

0.00
0.10
0.10
0.50
0.40
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.20

Th
(Pn)

0.40
0.50
0.40
0.60
0.30
0.00
0.90
0.20
0.30
0.40

0.00
0.10
0.10
0.40
0.30
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.00

Sp
(Pn)

0.30
0.10
0.40
0.40
0.60
0.00
0.40
0.20
0.50
0.30

0.00
0.10
0.20
0.40
0.40
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.00

Com.
(Pn)

0.20
0.10
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.00
0.40
0.20
0.22
0.20

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.30
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.00

Th
(Pn)

0.67
0.50
1.00
0.80
0.50
0.67
0.60
0.50
0.89
1.00

0.57
0.70
0.70
0.50
0.70
0.57
0.50
0.70
0.70
0.33

Sp
(Pn)

0.00
0.30
0.90
0.40
0.70
0.17
0.70
1.00
0.78
0.44

0.43
0.40
0.60
0.70
0.70
0.43
0.60
0.50
0.60
0.22

Com.
(Pn)

0.00
0.20
0.90
0.20
0.50
0.00
0.40
0.50
0.78
0.44

0.43
0.20
0.50
0.40
0.40
0.43
0.30
0.30
0.40
0.00

Th
(Pn)

0.67
0.20
1.00
0.60
0.50
0.67
0.50
0.50
0.80
0.90

0.43
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.70
0.43
0.50
0.40
0.60
0.20

Sp
(Pn)

0.00
0.10
0.90
0.30
0.40
0.17
0.50
1.00
0.70
0.40

0.43
0.30
0.40
0.40
0.70
0.43
0.30
0.30
0.50
0.10

Com.
(Pn)

0.00
0.10
0.90
0.30
0.40
0.17
0.40
0.50
0.70
0.40

0.29
0.30
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.43
0.30
0.30
0.50
0.00

7
3
6

R

.

S

.

P
u
r
v
e
s

e
t

a
l
.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Query

<castles><east><edinburgh>
<camping><west><fort william>
<islands><north><inverness>
<camping><north><inverness>
<cottages><north><ullapool>
<walking><north><dunfermline>
<hotels><north><ullapool>
<beaches><east><dingwall>
<climbing><south><aviemore>
<skiing><east><zurich>

<cottages><within 15km of><portree>
<skiing><within 20km of><fort william>
<skiing><within 100km of><glasgow>
<museums><within 50km of><musselburgh>
<hotels><within 20km of><stirling>
<sailing><within 40km of><grangemouth>
<music><within 50km of><horgen>
<walking><within 50km of><zurich>

Table 2. (Continued.).

Annotator 1, BM25

Annotator 2, BM25

Annotator 1, Spatial

Annotator 2, Spatial

Th
(Pn)

0.20
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.40
0.11
0.50
0.20
0.50
0.50

ND
0.29
0.00
ND
0.00
ND
ND
0.00

Sp
(Pn)

0.20
0.10
0.00
0.22
0.50
0.22
0.20
0.20
0.10
0.40

ND
0.00
0.00
ND
0.00
ND
ND
0.00

Com.
(Pn)

0.00
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.20
0.11
0.00
0.20
0.10
0.30

ND
0.00
0.00
ND
0.00
ND
ND
0.00

Th
(Pn)

0.20
0.10
0.30
0.10
0.70
0.20
0.60
0.00
0.30
0.70

ND
0.29
0.00
ND
0.00
ND
ND
0.00

Sp
(Pn)

0.10
0.00
0.30
0.00
0.20
0.20
0.40
0.10
0.10
0.50

ND
0.00
0.00
ND
0.00
ND
ND
0.00

Com.
(Pn)

0.20
0.00
0.30
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.40
0.00
0.00
0.50

ND
0.00
0.00
ND
0.00
ND
ND
0.00

Th
(Pn)

0.70
ND
0.57
0.00
0.67
0.67
1.00
0.56
0.67
0.30

0.80
0.70
0.70
0.90
0.80
0.40
1.00
0.56

Sp
(Pn)

0.50
ND
0.14
0.00
0.67
0.67
0.33
0.44
0.22
0.10

0.30
0.90
0.00
0.20
0.30
0.30
0.56
0.78

Com.
(Pn)

0.50
ND
0.14
0.00
0.67
0.67
0.33
0.44
0.22
0.10

0.20
0.60
0.00
0.20
0.30
0.20
0.56
0.44

Th
(Pn)

0.60
ND
0.29
0.00
ND
ND
1.00
0.44
0.67
0.20

0.80
0.60
0.50
0.90
0.80
0.40
0.90
0.44

Sp
(Pn)

0.40
ND
0.29
0.00
ND
ND
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.10

0.30
0.60
0.00
0.10
0.30
0.30
0.50
0.89

Com.
(Pn)

0.40
ND
0.29
0.00
ND
ND
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.10

0.30
0.50
0.00
0.10
0.30
0.30
0.50
0.44

D
e
s
i
g
n

a
n
d

i

m
p
l
e
m
e
n
t
a
t
i
o
n

o
f

S
P
I
R
I
T

7
3
7

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 738

R. S. Purves et al.

defined as a document which had some significant relevance to the theme and to be
spatial relevant a document had to have a footprint which was considered to be
similar to the query footprint, and importantly, not of a much coarser granularity.
Thus, for example, a document about distilleries in Scotland would not be
considered relevant to a query for distilleries in the north of Scotland. Inter-
annotator agreement, in terms of the number of judgements for which the two
annotators agreed, was 82% (BM25) and 81% (Spatial) for thematic relevance and
84% (BM25) and 74% (Spatial) for spatial relevance. It is important to note that,
particularly in the case of spatial relevance for BM25 search, the high inter-
annotator agreement is partially due to the very low numbers of spatially relevant
documents.

In order for a document to be considered relevant to the query, it had to be both
thematically and spatially relevant. Thus, the most important value in table 2 is the
combined relevance. In general, it is clear from table 2 that combined relevance
values are lower for BM25 than spatial search, and furthermore t-tests showed that
for both annotators the distributions of combined relevance are significantly
different (p,0.001 in both cases). Overall, for both annotators combined relevance
is better for spatial search for 27 out of 38 queries, and BM25 outperforms spatial
search for only 7 and 4 queries for annotators 1 and 2, respectively.

In table 3, summary statistics for the four different spatial relationship types for
BM25 and spatial search are presented. In general, it is clear that spatial search
returns more relevant results than BM25 search for all categories of relevance.
Furthermore, the difference in relevance is considerably more marked for spatial
relationships other than inside. This suggests that an underlying hypothesis—that
pure text search cannot deal with the semantics relating spatial relationships to
themes—is correct. The poorer performance of BM25 search in terms of thematic
relevance is however, at first glance, surprising. We believe this is a result of the
concatenation of the query, which in turn will result in a downweighting of the
thematic component of the query in the ranking (as it is no longer the only term in
use in the textual ranking).

The key result here is that spatially aware search outperformed text-only search.
However, care is required in considering this result. Mean normalised precision is
never more than 0.4 and thus the system’s overall precision could be considered as
rather low. The primary reason is simple—the number of georeferenced documents
is relatively small—the SPIRIT collection for the whole of the UK, for example,
consists of only around 340,000 documents. Further, as discussed in Clough (2005),

Table 3. Mean thematic, spatial and combined normalised precision for spatial relationship
types using textual search (BM25 ranking) and spatial search with T-index and non-
distributed ranking.

Annotator 1,
BM25

Annotator 2,
BM25

Annotator 1,
Spatial

Annotator 2, Spatial

Th
(Pn)
0.50
0.18
0.27
0.07

Sp
(Pn)
0.42
0.20
0.21
0.00

Com.
(Pn)
0.27
0.14
0.10
0.00

Th
(Pn)
0.40
0.10
0.32
0.07

Sp
(Pn)
0.32
0.12
0.19
0.00

Com.
(Pn)
0.22
0.06
0.17
0.00

Th
(Pn)
0.71
0.60
0.57
0.73

Sp
(Pn)
0.54
0.52
0.34
0.42

Com.
(Pn)
0.39
0.34
0.34
0.31

Th
(Pn)
0.63
0.48
0.46
0.67

Sp
(Pn)
0.45
0.39
0.26
0.37

Com.
(Pn)
0.39
0.30
0.26
0.31

Spatial
relationship
Inside
Near
Directional
Within
distance of

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

739

not all documents are correctly georeferenced (around 90% in the experiments
reported by Clough).

In the SPIRIT project user-centred evaluation focused on assessing the more
general usability of the system. This evaluation was carried out as part of a larger
study of the success of a range of different visualisation methods for query results,
such as maps, cartograms and density surfaces (Yang et al. 2006) which will be
reported in a forthcoming paper. A range of questions, focused on the interface, but
also providing some information about the system overall, were posed to 50
participants in this evaluation. Participants used the SPIRIT system to explore a
number of queries which were designed to assess some of the different system
capabilities
(e.g. geographical query
expansion, place name identification and the use of spatial relationships). The data
gathered include information on the usability and performance of the system, thus
allowing a user-centred assessment of document relevance to be made. Figure 6
shows the answers to a subset of questions from this study, illustrating aspects of the
usability of the system in terms of basic usability, query formulation, the use of
spatial relationships and the ability of users to associate documents with locations
on the map as shown in figure 4. These results show that most users in this sample
were happy with the scope of the spatial relationships presented and had no
problems in formulating a query.

identified in the requirements analysis

As well as quantitative data on the usability and effectiveness of SPIRIT,
qualitative information about user experiences was gathered during the evaluation
process. Perhaps the most commonly repeated remark from users concerned the
speed of the system—many users commented on the sluggishness of the system,
particularly in comparison to commercial search engines such as Google. However,

Figure 6. Selected results from a usability of SPIRIT focussing on the ability of users to
understand the options presented and relate the results displayed on the map to the list of
documents displayed—these results are for simple query interface (figure 4).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 740

R. S. Purves et al.

it was also apparent that users were stimulated to experiment in building relatively
complex queries which could not be served by current commercially available search
engines, although because of the small sample data set available in SPIRIT, these
queries were not always successful.

6. Discussion

This paper sets out the architecture for a geographic information retrieval system,
and reports on the components necessary to pre-process documents for spatial
search and further, to index and retrieve these documents using both spatial and
geographic information. The architecture itself was set out in the context of a set of
requirements for spatially aware search and we now consider how well these
requirements have been met.

The geographical ontology is a central component of the SPIRIT search engine,
and was crucial in meeting several of the requirements set out. Through the user
interface, users are able to identify place names and interactively disambiguate such
place names where more than one instance of the name exists. Disambiguation is
further assisted by the use of graphical query techniques. This is particularly
important where users are unfamiliar with a region, since textual disambiguation
assumes that users are familiar with administrative names within regions. Since the
geographic ontology contains knowledge of the relationships between locations, a
disambiguation approach based not on the administrative region to which an area
belongs, but rather well-known ‘nearby’ locations may be worthy of investigation. A
similar approach has been shown by Naaman et al. (2006) to be an effective in
assigning textual names to images. Furthermore, methods were developed here to
enhance the ontology with imprecise regions that might be employed in natural
language.

The results of system-centred and user-centred evaluations show that

the
implemented architecture successfully expands queries and locates documents which
do not mention the place name specified in the query. This functionality depends
upon a combination of spatial and textual indexing methods. Initial experiments
found that a text-primary indexing scheme gave the best results but at the cost of
high storage overheads. Response times were not at the levels which users’
experiences of commercial search engines leads them to expect. The main reason for
this is the fact that the SPIRIT prototype uses disk-based indexing methods in
contrast to the very much faster main memory methods of commercial systems. It
may well be that the combination of spatial and textual indexing that gave the
lowest storage overheads (method ‘T’) could be viable in a main memory indexing
environment. The primary reason for overheads in data volume of the integrated
spatial and textual
indexing methods is that many documents have multiple
references to locations, with an average of around four locations per document in
the UK. Moreover, the relatively low precision of the system is partly attributable to
many of these locations not being relevant to the document’s theme, or having a
very coarse granularity which is not relevant to many geographically specific
queries. Further work on associating ‘dominant’ locations with web pages (e.g.
Amitay et al. 2004, Wang et al. 2005) should reduce the number of terms referenced
per web page, thus increasing precision and reducing the size of spatial indexes with
a corresponding improvement in performance times.

The system, as implemented, supports a number of spatial relationships through a
simple structured interface. These relationships are used to generate a query

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

741

footprint based on the geometry of the query location and the relationship in
question. The paper illustrates a number of queries which make use of such spatial
relationships. The user study showed that users were both happy with the list of
relationships provided and confident that they understood the purpose of the
different elements of the structured query.

The system-centred evaluation concentrated on comparing the normalised
precision of spatial search with pure BM25 search. Spatially aware ranking methods
were shown to have better precision than for pure text search, where no query
expansion through geometry takes place. Only a single relevance ranking scheme
(non-distributed ranking) was tested. However, since the aim of the different
ranking methods is to return more useful collections of documents—and the
usefulness of a collection is not measured by precision, measure other than precision
would be required to carry out a useful evaluation of ranking methods. Ongoing
research will attempt a qualitative assessment of such properties. As has been shown
in IR, such test collections can only be built by large cooperative projects such as the
Text REtrieval Conference (Voorhees and Harman 2000), and the emergence of
initiatives which have some parallels, such as Geo-CLEF (Gey et al. 2005) is
therefore to be welcomed.

the building of

The main reason for the relatively small sub-sample of queries and documents
used in the system-centred part of the evaluation lies in the difficulty of building a
test collection for GIR. As is well recognised in the information retrieval
community,
consuming task.
Furthermore, our research (Bucher et al. 2005, Clough et al. 2006, Purves and
Clough 2006) suggests that evaluating geographic relevance is more difficult than
thematic relevance—in other words, it is easier, for example, to say if a document is
about castles than if it is about a castle that is near Leeds without local knowledge of
Leeds. Further work is ongoing to collect larger test collections suitable for the
evaluation of GIR systems and forms an important component of the research
necessary to improve quantitative evaluation of such systems.

is a time

collections

test

Finally, the user requirements stressed the importance of providing a map-based
interface. User experiments reinforced this conclusion, with the majority of users
happy with the interface functionality and agreeing that the display of results on a
map made it easier to judge the relevance of retrieved documents.

7. Conclusions and further work

This paper describes a unified approach for introducing spatial awareness into
search-engine technology and the architecture used to enable this. A prototype
system has demonstrated the effectiveness of a strategy based on indexing and
querying spatial footprints found in web documents. This system provides a
complete solution to the problem of geographical IR, from the processing of web
resources for spatially aware search, to all the components necessary for managing
this type of information at run-time. The processing of web resources is key to the
success of this approach and involves a preliminary stage of analysis to identify
geographical content. This process of geographical categorisation of documents
supports many of the essential aspects of the spatially aware search engine. In
particular, it allows documents to be indexed spatially as well as thematically which
in turn enables a full set of geographical query operators, graphical query
formulation, the ranking of results according to conceptual as well as spatial match
to the original query, and the graphical display of search results.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 742

R. S. Purves et al.

The analysis and use of geographical content from web resources is currently an
area of increased interest and research (from both the academic and commercial
sectors). Given that a large proportion of what people do is based around location,
and that many web resources contain some kind of geographical context, then the
potential benefits of projects such as SPIRIT are obvious. Exploiting geography to
enhance the user’s experience for web search has enormous potential, but most
research has shown that the handling and processing of web content is non-trivial
and requires much more attention (especially if the objectives of the semantic web
are ever to be realised). The SPIRIT project has demonstrated that retrieval from
web resources can be improved by making search spatially aware. Although several
projects have addressed this, SPIRIT is unique in that the whole lifecycle of
providing geographic retrieval has been addressed from finding out what users
actually want from such systems (and using these to influence and guide the design),
to considering user interaction and more importantly, to thinking about how we can
evaluate such systems (which is certainly different from how we evaluate traditional
IR systems).

In the future, there are a number of areas which we plan to explore to further
improve the system. This includes improving the geotagging stages through the use
of adaptive information extraction techniques to learn automatically context rules
for identifying potential locations (e.g. using linguistic clues, punctuation, HTML
tags, hyperlinks and other named entities), rather than using rules which are defined
by hand. We plan to explore the assignment of a geographic scope to web resources,
rather than using individual scopes for all locations found in a web page. We believe
this will help improve the precision of the search results. Further work is also
required to evaluate both effectiveness of different relevant spatial ranking methods
both in terms of metrics such as precision and their usability in a more holistic sense
(for example, are a set of results as returned by distributed ranking more different
from one another, and thus more interesting to a user, than results ranked by using
non-distributed ranking as evaluated in this paper. Equally, work is ongoing to
evaluate the effectiveness of a range of techniques to visualise large document sets
resulting from geographic search.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the EU-IST Project No. IST-2001-35047 (SPIRIT)
and the Swiss BBW (01.0501). We would like to thank all those who took part in
requirements and usability studies, and all members of the SPIRIT consortium for a
constructive and profitable relationship. The constructive comments of
two
anonymous referees helped to significantly improve this paper.

References
ABDELMOTY, A.I., SMART, P.D., JONES, C.B., FU, G. and FINCH, D., 2005, A critical
evaluation of ontology languages for geographic information retrieval on the Internet.
Journal of Visual Languages & Computing, 16(4), pp. 331–358.

AMITAY, E., HAR’EL, N., SIVAN, R. and SOFFER, A., 2004, Web-a-where: geotagging web
content. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual International Vonference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR04), Sheffield UK, 2004, pp. 273–280
(New York: ACM Press).

ARAMPATZIS, A., VAN KREVELD, M., REINBACHER, I., JONES, C.B., VAID, S., CLOUGH, P.,
JOHO, H. and SANDERSON, M., 2006, Web-based delineation of imprecise regions.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 30(4), pp. 436–459.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

743

BERNERS-LEE, T., HEDLER, J. and MILLER, E., 2001, The semantic web. Scientific American,

284(5), pp. 35–49.

BUCHER, B., CLOUGH, P., JOHO, H., PURVES, R.S. and SYED, A.K., 2005, Geographic IR
systems: requirements and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Cartographic Conference, A Corun˜ a, Spain, CD-ROM.

BUYUKOKKTEN, O., CHO, J., GARCIA-MOLINA, H., GRAVANO, L. and SHIVAKUMAR, N., 1999,
location information of web pages. In Proceedings of

Exploiting geographical
Workshop on Web Databases (WebDB’99) (New York: ACM Press).

CLOUGH, P., 2005, Extracting metadata for spatially aware information retrieval on the
internet. In Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval,
Bremen, Germany, pp. 25–30 (New York: ACM Press).

CLOUGH, P.D., JOHO, H. and PURVES, R.S., 2006, Judging the spatial relevance of documents
for GIR. In Proceedings of the 28th European Conference on IR Research (ECIR’06),
London, UK, April 2006 LNCS Volume 3936, pp. 548–552 (Berlin: Springer).
CUNNINGHAM, H., MAYNARD, D., BONTCHEVA, K. and TABLAN, V., 2002, GATE: a
framework and graphical development environment for robust NLP tools and
applications. In Proceedings of the 40th Anniversary Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL’02), Philadelphia, July 2002.

DELBONI, T.M., BORGES, K.A.V. and LAENDER, A.F., 2005, Geographic web search based on
the 2005 Workshop on Geographic

positioning expressions. In Proceedings of
Information Retrieval, Bremen, Germany, pp. 61–64 (New York: ACM Press).
DING, J., GRAVANO, L. and SHIVAKUMAR, N., 2000, Computing geographical scopes of web
resources. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Very Large
Databases (VLDB ’00), pp. 546–556 (New York: ACM Press).

EGENHOFER, M.J., 2002, Toward the semantic geospatial web. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM International Symposium In Geographic Information Systems (New York: ACM
Press), pp. 1–4.

FU, G., JONES, C.B. and ABDELMOTY, A.I., 2005, Building a geographical ontology for
intelligent spatial retrieval on the web. In Proceedings of IASTED International
Conference on Databases and Applications (DBA2005), Innsbruck, Austria.
GEY, F., LARSON, R., SANDERSON, M., JOHO, H. and CLOUGH, P., 2005, GeoCLEF: the
CLEF 2005 cross-language geographic information retrieval track. In Working Notes
for the Workshop on the Cross Language Evaluation Forum 2005, CD-ROM.
GRAUPMANN, J. and SCHENKEL, R., 2006, GeoSphereSearch: context-aware geographic web
search. In Proceedings of the 2006 Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval,
Seattle, USA, pp. 64–67 (New York: ACM Press).

HILL, L.L., FREW, J. and ZHENG, Q., 1999, Geographic names. The implementation of a

gazetteer in a georeferenced digital library. Digital Library, 5(1).

HIMMELSTEIN, M., 2005, Local search: the internet is the Yellow Pages. IEEE Computer

Society Journal, 0018-9162/05, 38(2), pp. 26–34.

JOHO, H. and SANDERSON, M., 2004, The SPIRIT collection: an overview of a large web

collection. SIGIR Forum, 38(2), pp. 57–61.

JONES, C.B., PURVES, R.S., RUAS, A., SANDERSON, M., SESTER, M., VAN KREVELD, M. and
information retrieval and geographical ontologies: an
WEIBEL, R., 2002, Spatial
overview of the SPIRIT project. In Proceedings of SIGIR-02, the 25th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pp. 387–388 (New York: ACM Press).

KREVELD, M. van., REINBACHER, I., ARAMPATZIS, A. and ZWOL, R. VAN, 2005, Multi-
for geographic information retrieval.

scattered ranking methods

dimensional
Geoinformatica, 9(1), pp. 61–84.

LARSON, R., 1996, Geographic information retrieval and spatial browsing. In GIS and
Libraries: Patrons, Maps and Spatial Information, L. Smith and M. Gluck (Eds)
(Illinois: University of Illinois).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 744

R. S. Purves et al.

LEE, R., SHIINA, H., TAKAKURA, H. and KAMBAYASHI, Y., 2003, Map-based web
indexing and range query processing for geographic web search systems. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Internet Information Retrieval 2003,
Koyang, Korea.

LEIDNER, J.L., 2006, An evaluation dataset for the toponym resolution task. Computers,

Environment and Urban Systems, 30(4), pp. 400–417.

LI, H., SRIHARI, K.R., NIU, C. and NLI, W., 2003, InfoXtract location normalization: a
hybrid approach to geographic references in information extraction. In Proceedings of
the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Analysis of Geographic References, Alberta,
Canada, A. Kornai and B. Sundheim (Eds), pp. 39–44 (Morrisstown, NJ: ACL).

MARKOWETZ, A., BRINKHOFF, T. and SEEGER, B., 2004, Exploiting the internet as a geospatial
database. In Post-Workshop Book of International Workshop on Next Generation
Geospatial Information, Cambridge, MA, 2003.

MARTINS, B., SILVA, M.J. and CHAVES, M.S., 2005, Challenges and resources for evaluating
geographical IR. In Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on Geographic Information
Retrieval, Bremen, Germany. pp. 65–69 (New York: ACM Press).

MCCURLEY, S.K., 2001, Geospatial mapping and navigation of the web. In Proceedings of the
10th International WWW Conference, Hong Kong, 1–5 May, pp. 221–229 (New York:
ACM Press).

MIKHEEV, A., MOENS, M. and GROVER, C., 1999, Named entity recognition without
gazetteers. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the European Association for
Computational Linguistics EACL’99, Bergen, Norway, pp. 1–8 (Morrisstown, NJ:
ACL).

MIZZARO, S., 1997, Relevance: the whole history. Journal of the American Society for

Information Science, 48(9), pp. 810–832.

NAAMAN, M., SONG, Y.J., PAEPCKE, A. and GARCIA-MOLINA, H., 2006, Assigning textual
names to sets of geographic coordinates. Computers, Environment, and Urban
Systems, 30(4), pp. 418–435.

NIELSEN, J., 1993, Usability Engineering (Boston: Academic Press).
PETERS, C. and BRASCHLER, M., 2001, Cross-language system evaluation: the CLEF
campaigns. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
52(12), pp. 1067–1072.

information retrieval,

PORTER, M.F., 1980, An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program, 14(3), pp. 130–137.
PURVES, R.S. and CLOUGH, P., 2006, Judging spatial relevance and document location for
In Proceedings of 4th
geographic
International Conference on Geographic Information Science (GIScience 2006),
Mu¨ nster, Germany, September 2006, pp. 159–164 (Muenster, Germany: IfGI Prints).
PURVES, R.S., CLOUGH, P. and JOHO, H., 2005, Identifying imprecise regions for geographic
information retrieval using the web. In Proceedings of the GIS RESEARCH UK 13th
Annual Conference, Glasgow, UK, R. Billen, J. Drummond, D. Forrest and E. Joa˜ o
(Eds), pp. 313–318 (Glasgow: University of Glasgow).

extended abstract.

RAUCH, E., BUKATIN, M. and BAKER, K., 2003, A confidence-based framework for
disambiguating geographic terms. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop
on Analysis of Geographic References, Alberta, Canada A. Kornai and B. Sundheim
(Eds), 50–54 (Morrisstown, NJ: ACL).

RIGAUX, P., SCHOLL, M. and VOISARD, A., 2002, Spatial Databases With Application to GIS

(San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann).

ROBERTSON, S.E., WALKER, S. and BEAULIEU, M., 1998, Okapi at TREC-7: automatic ad hoc,
filtering, VLC and interactive track. In NIST Special Publication 500–242: The 7th
Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-7), Gaithersburg, MD E.M. Voorheer and D.K.
Harman (Eds) (Gaithersburg, MD: NIST), pp. 253–264.

SALTON, G. and MCGILL, M., 1983, Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval (New York:

McGraw-Hill).

SAMET, H., 1990, Applications of Spatial Data Structures (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 Design and implementation of SPIRIT

745

SILVA, M., MARTINS, B., CHAVES, M., CARDOSO, N. and AFONSO, A.P., 2006, Adding
geographic scopes to web resources. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 30,
pp. 378–399.

SMITH, D.A. and MANN, G.S., 2003, Bootstrapping toponym classifiers. In Proceedings of the
HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Analysis of Geographic References, Alberta,
Canada, A. Kornai and B. Sundheim (Eds), pp. 45–49 (Morrisstown, NJ: ACL).

SPARCK JONES, K., and WILLETT, P. (Eds), 1997, Readings in Information Retrieval (San

Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann).

VAID, S., JONES, C.B., JOHO, H. and SANDERSON, M., 2005, Spatio-textual indexing for
geographical search on the web. In Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on
Spatial and Temporal Databases, Angra dos Reis, Brazil, pp. 218–235 (Berlin:
Springer).

VOORHEES, E.M. and HARMAN, D., 2000, Overview of the sixth Text REtrieval Conference

(TREC-6). Information Processing and Management, 36(1), pp. 3–35.

WANG, C., XIE, X., WANG, L., LU, Y. and MA, W., 2005, Detecting geographic locations
from web resources. In Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on Geographic Information
Retrieval, Bremen, Germany, pp. 17–24 (New York: ACM Press).

WATTERS, C. and AMOUDI, G., 2002, GeoSearcher: location-based ranking of search engine
results. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 54(2),
pp. 140–151.

YANG, B., PURVES, R.S., SYED, A.K. and WEIBEL, R., 2006, Web-based visualisation tools for
spatial information retrieval. In Proceedings of the GIS RESEARCH UK 14th Annual
Conference, Nottingham, UK, G. Preistnall and P. Aplin (Eds), pp. 263–267
(Nottingham: University of Nottingham).

ZHANG, V.W., REY, B., STIPP, E. and JONES, R., 2006, Geomodification in query rewriting. In
Proceedings of the 2006 Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval, Seattle, USA,
pp. 23–27. Available online at http://www.geo.unizh.ch/,rsp/gir06/papers/individual/
zhang_jones.pdf.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 04:36 15 August 2013 