G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

                                                          EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
                             ON WEB MAPPING AND THE
                             GEOSPATIAL WEB

Emmanuel Stefanakis
Department of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering, University of New Brunswick,
Fredericton, NB, Canada

This paper presents the content of two courses on Web mapping and the geospatial Web for geogra-
phers and geoscientists, formulated after a continuous development and delivery in several European and
Canadian  institutes  since  2007.  The  author  wishes  to  share  the  challenges  and  opportunities  as  well  as 
the experiences and perspectives with educators around the globe who either consider the introduction of 
a relevant course to their institute curriculum or offer relevant courses and seek ideas for revision of content
and teaching practices.

Cet article présente le contenu de deux cours sur la cartographie en ligne et les services géospatiaux
en  ligne  pour  les  géographes  et  les  géoscientifiques,  rédigés  suite  à  un  développement  et  une  mise  en 
application  continuels  dans  plusieurs  institutions  européennes  et  canadiennes  depuis  2007.  L’auteur
souhaite  partager  les  défis  auxquels  il  a  fait  face  et  les  occasions  qui  se  sont  présentées,  ainsi  que  ses
expériences  et  ses  perspectives,  avec  les  enseignants  autour  du  monde  qui  considèrent  l’introduction 
d’un  cours  pertinent  au  curriculum  de  leur  institution  ou  qui  offrent  des  cours  pertinents  et  qui  sont  à 
la recherche d’idées pour la révision du contenu et des pratiques d’enseignement.

Emmanuel Stefanakis
estef@unb.ca

1. Introduction 

Unwin  et  al

Geographic information science and technology
(GIS&T)  education  has  evolved  drastically  over 
the  last  thirty  years.  The  complex  and  dynamic
interaction  between  technology,  the  GIS  industry,
and  academia  [
.  2012b]  transformed 
the  niche  courses  in  a  small  number  of  academic
departments of the ’80s into the ubiquitous GIS&T
courses of today, that are offered in almost all geog-
raphy and environmental studies programs, as well
as many other disciplines in social studies, human-
ities, education and business [
2009;
Sinton
2012].  The  GIS&T  Body  of  Knowledge
DiBiase et al
[
. 2006] is one of the most significant
achievements  in  GIS&T  education. It  provides  a
systematic  thematic  catalogue  with  the  learning
outcomes  for  the  discipline,  and  can  support  the 
development of sound curricula. On the other hand,
the great breadth of the GIS&T Body of Knowledge
makes it difficult to know what to include in a partic-
Foote
ular course or module [

Tate and Unwin

2012].

DiBiase et

reflected in GIS&T Body of Knowledge [
al
. 2006] and further elaborated in GIS&T version 2
Ahearn et al
[
. 2013]. At the same time, the emerging
need  for  education  and  training  of  students  and 
professionals in this area over the last decade, has led
to the development and delivery of relevant courses
worldwide (e.g., 

PennState

[2012]).

This paper summarizes the challenges, practices
and  outcomes  of  a  seven-year  experience  in  the
education  and  training  of  senior  undergraduate 
and graduate geography and geomatics students in
European and Canadian institutes in web mapping
and the geospatial Web. This includes the develop-
ment and delivery of multiple courses in both class-
based  and  online  mode,  which  were  recently 
formulated  into  the  syllabus  of  two  courses:  an
introductory  and  an  advanced  course.  Lately,  the
introductory  course  has  also  been  transformed 
into online mode.

The  challenge  in  teaching  a  web  technology
course  to  students  with  limited  skills  in  program-
ming  and  computer  networks  has  been  alleviated
by  applying  various  innovating  developments  in

Web mapping and the geospatial Web is a fast
evolving  area  in  cartography  and  geomatics.  The
concepts  associated  with  this  area  were  already
                                                                                              dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2015-202

GEOMATICA  

Vol. 69, No. 2, 2015, pp. 145 to 160

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

2012; 

Schultz

teaching,  such  as  open  educational  resources, 
web-based  instructional  materials,  and  active 
Balram  and
pedagogy  techniques  [
Dragicevic

2008].  Enthusiasm  overwhelms  the 
students,  within  the  first  couple  of  weeks  in  the
introductory course, when they realize that building
web  applications  is  feasible  even  with  limited 
computer programming background. Upon comple-
tion of the course(s), students recognize the value 
and  declare  willingness  to  deepen  their  technical
knowledge  into  advanced  topics  on  web  mapping
and the geospatial Web. As for the instructor, it is
encouraging to see the students building neat web
applications,  and  kindly  competing  for  the  best 
outcome, often including methods and tools never
taught in class to enhance functionality.

This paper is structured as following. Section 2
presents the challenges and opportunities in develop-
ing and delivering courses on web mapping and the
geospatial Web. Section 3 and 4 portray the syllabus
of  the  introductory  and  advanced  courses,  respec-
tively.  Section  5  presents  the  online  version  of  the
introductory  course,  which  was  recently  released.
Section 6 comments on the learning paradigms used
and highlights the experiences gained after teaching
these  courses.  Finally,  Section  7  concludes  the 
discussion and presents the author’s future plans.

2. Challenges and
Opportunities

The design of a web course for geography and
geoscience  students  has  many  challenges  as  they
usually have limited programming skills. However,
there  are  exceptions  as  most  students  have  taken 
at least one introductory course in programming or
are familiar with GIS and Remote Sensing software
packages,  in  combination  with  being  advanced
Internet users. In addition, they are acquainted with 
the spatial dimension, the spatial reference and pro-
jection systems as well as the spatial data sources
available on the Web. 

The  development  of  applications  on  the  Web
requires  some  basic  knowledge  in  computer  net-
work infrastructures as well as programming skills
in script languages. One of the main challenges is
that  there  is  not  enough  time  and  space  for  the
teacher to initiate the students into these technolo-
gies. On the other hand, web technology, although
sophisticated, has some features that ease its under-
standing by non-experts in computer science. 

For instance, XML-based languages are human
readable  and  built  on  top  of  constructs  that  are 

few  and  simple  (i.e.,  element  and  attribute).  In 
addition,  script  programming  (e.g.,  JavaScript) 
is  easy  to  understand  and  portable  from  one 
application  to  another.  The  option  to  browse  the
source  code  behind  the  web  pages  also  helps 
non-programmers  to  catch  up  on  missing  knowl-
edge  when  trying  to  build  their  own  web  maps.
Apparently,  the  fascinating  tutorials  and  example
pages  built  for  developers  (e.g.,  Google  and
OpenLayers  Development  Examples)  encourage
non-programmers  to  improve  their  skills  in 
building advanced web mapping applications. 

All  these  tools  and  resources  have  been 
incorporated  in  the  course  content  (in  both  the 
lectures  and  labs)  to  support  a  blended  learning
approach  [
2004].  These  practices  turned 
out  to  be  very  efficient  and  led  to  rather  positive
experiences as is explained in Section 6.

Bersin

The following assumptions have been made in

the development of the courses:

a)

b)

c)

d)

senior undergraduate and graduate students
with a major in geography, geomatics or a
relevant subject take the course;
students have limited or no experience in
programming,  markup  languages,  com-
puter networking and web technologies;
each  course  will  consist  of  a  dozen  of 
lectures and lab sessions as a regular term-
long course; and 
each  course  will  be  implemented  in  free
and open source tools, so that there is no
need for purchasing any software.

Regarding  the  latter  assumption,  it  is  impor-
tant  to  note  the  risk  of  disservice  to  students  by
excluding proprietary software. To remedy this, the
instructor should clearly explain to the students that
proprietary  software  provides  advanced  solutions
and support to the development of geospatial web
applications. Links to proprietary software resources
and  example  solutions  must  be  provided  to  the 
students throughout the courses. 

The  course  syllabuses  presented  in  the  next
sections  are  the  outcome  of  an  evolution  from  a
series  of  courses,  tutorials  and  seminars  delivered
by  the  author  in  several  European  and  Canadian
institutes,  mostly  to  geography  and  geomatics 
students,  since  2007.  Specifically,  the  author  has
taught:

a)

a  senior  undergraduate  course  entitled 
“Special  Studies  in  Digital  Mapping,” 
in  the  Department  of  Geography  at
Harokopio University of Athens (2007–11,
annually);

146

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Services,”  can  be  summarized  in  the  following
lines,  which  are  aligned  to  the  GIS&T  BoK
DiBiase  et  al
.  2006]  learning  objectives:  “The
[
course focuses on both the theoretical and practical
issues  related  to  the  dissemination  of  mapping/
geographic  content  on  the  Web  and  the  develop-
ment of map mashups and geospatial web services.
Students  will  learn  how  to  design  and  implement
advanced web mapping applications and geospatial
web  services  using  free  software  tools.  Special
attention  will  be  given  to  the  recent  technological
developments and research directions.”

As  for  the  structure,  the  course  consists  of 
two  parts:  (Part  I)  Lectures:  a  series  of  presen-
tations  on  the  basic  theoretical  issues  related  to 
web  mapping  and  the  geospatial  web  services; 
and  (Part  II)  Lab  Sessions:  a  series  of  exercises 
focusing  on  the  practical  issues  related  to  the 
dissemination  of  mapping/geographic  content  on
the  Web  and  the  implementation  of  geospatial 
web  services.  After  each  lecture/lab  session, 
students  will  be  receiving  an  assignment  to  get
acquainted  with  the  methods  and  tools  taught  in 
the classes and labs alike.
3.1 Hardware, Software and Data
Requirements

Regarding  the  hardware  requirements,  the
instructor needs to have access to a computer with
an  Internet  connection  and  the  ability  to  install 
free software, including web server software (e.g.,
Apache)  and  ftp  server  software  (e.g.,  Filezilla).
Similarly, the students also need to have access to 
a  computer  (a  regular  PC  or  laptop)  with  both  an
Internet  connection  and  the  ability  to  install  free
software.

Table 1 summarizes the software requirements
for  instructor  and  students  in  the  introductory
course. All software components are free and most
of them are open source [

OSGeo

2014].

Table 1: Software requirements for the introductory course.

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)

i)

a graduate course entitled “Web Mapping
and  Spatial  Data  Infrastructures”  in  the
Department  of  Geography  at  Harokopio
University of Athens (2007–11, annually);
a  graduate  seminar  on  Geospatial  Web 
in  the  Department  of  Informatics  at  the
University of Piraeus (2007–11; twice);
a graduate seminar on Web Mapping and
Map  Mashups  in  the  Department  of
Geography  at  the  University  of  Aegean
(2009; once);
a  graduate  seminar  on  Geospatial  Web 
in  the  School  of  Rural  and  Surveying
Engineering  at  the  National  Technical
University of Athens (2010; once);
a  module  on  Web  Services  as  part  of  a 
distance-learning course entitled “Advanced
Geographic Databases” at the BW Munich
and  University  of  Nova  Lisbon  under
eduGI  program  [eduGI  2007]  of  eduGI
network (2007–14; annually);
a  tutorial  entitled  “Web  Services  for
Mapping”  in  the  3rd  International  Con-
ference on Internet and Web Applications
and Services [
a  technical  elective  course  (addressed 
to  senior  undergraduate  and  graduate 
students)  entitled  “Web  Mapping  and
Geospatial  Web”  in  the  Department  of
Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering at the
University  of  New  Brunswick  (2011–13;
annually); and 
a  graduate  course  entitled  “Geospatial
Web”  in  the  Department  of  Geodesy  and
Geomatics  Engineering  at  the  University
of New Brunswick (2013–15; annually).

Stefanakis

2008];

The most recent proposal of the author for the
education  and  training  of  web  mapping  and  the
Stefanakis
geospatial Web has been formulated to [
2013a,b]:

a)

b)

an  introductory  course  entitled  “Web
Mapping  and  Geospatial  Web  Services;”
and
an  advanced  (follow  up)  course  entitled
“Geospatial Web.”

The  next  two  sections  present  the  syllabus  of

these two courses.

3. Introductory Course

The  objectives  of  the  introductory  course  are
the  following: Web  Mapping  and  Geospatial Web

147

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

MapTools

An  easy  solution  for  an  instructor  with  a 
Windows  PC  is  to  install  the  ms4w  (MapServer 
for Windows) available at 
[2014]. This is
a  no  fuss  installer,  which  quickly  installs  a  work-
ing  environment  for  Apache  (web  server),  php
processor  (server-side  compiler),  and  MapServer
(map  server  software).  In  addition,  the  instructor
needs  to  install  Filezilla  (FTP  server),  Geo-
Networks  (catalog  server)  and  GeoServer  (map
server; usually installed along with GeoNetworks).
Optionally, 
install
ProstgreSQL/PostGIS (geographic database server)
and  download  the  OpenLayers  Javascript  library
(Map API library). 

instructor  may  also 

the 

The  students  need  to  install  only  Quantum 
GIS and Google Earth (desktop clients), as well as
Kernow  software  (XSLT  transformer).  Optionally,
they  can  install  Filezilla  (FTP  client),  as  alterna-
tively they may ftp their files to the server through
any  file  manager.  Apparently,  a  web  browser  is
already available in their computer. If the browser
does  not  support  SVG  (latest  versions  do),  a  free

SVG  viewer  (e.g.,  from  Adobe)  needs  to  be
installed as well.

Figure 1 shows the framework of the student’s
interaction  with  the  course  server.  Each  student 
is allocated some disk space on the server side. The
student  is  then  able  to  upload  data  and  applica-
tions  on  the  server  through  the  ftp  protocol.  The
uploaded content can be accessed through the HTTP
protocol  as  well.  Hence,  all  functionality  of  the
server  software  can  be  exploited  by  the  student.
Figure  2  shows  the  location  of  the  students’  disk
space on the course server for an installation with
ms4w on Windows operating system.

In  regards  to  the  data  requirements,  the 
students need a few shapefiles of the same region
(e.g.,  road  network,  towns  and  counties  of  a
province)  in  order  to  complete  their  assignments.
Similarly, the instructor also needs a few shapefiles
for running the labs. If shapefiles are not available,
they can be downloaded from some public servers
http://www.geobase.ca
/  for  Canadian
(e.g.,  Geobase: 
data).  Optionally,  the  instructor  may  have  some

Figure 1: Student’s interaction with the course server.

Figure 2: The student has access to allocated space on server disk through ftp and http
protocols.

148

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

layers  available  in  a  PostgreSQL/PostGIS  data-
base and show the students how various methods in
web  mapping  and  web  mapping  services  can
retrieve  and  disseminate  content  that  resides  in  a
geographic  database.  Most  of  the  Lab  sessions 
and  assignments  make  use  of  data  available  in
Earth browsers (e.g., Google Maps, OSM) or raster
image  providers  (e.g.,  GeoBase  Landsat  images
repository).

topics of the 11 week block (Table 2). The sessions
may  be  grouped  into  two  parts.  Part  I  includes
weeks  1–6  and  mostly  focuses  on  web  mapping
languages,  methods,  and  tools.  Part  II  includes
weeks 7–11 and proceeds to more advanced topics
on the geospatial Web including spatial data infra-
structures and web services for mapping.

3.2.1 Web Mapping: Weeks 1 to 6

3.2 Course Content

The introductory course content is summarized
in  Table  2.  The  topics  have  been  organized  in  a
block  of  11  sessions,  which  fits  well  in  a  regular
term  (a  term  usually  has  up  to  13  sessions)  and
gives  room  for  a  couple  of  sessions  for  course
overview, midterm, review and tutoring, if needed.
As mentioned previously, each session consists of a
lecture and a lab; and concludes with an assignment
to the students, which is due at the next session.

Weekly sessions of 3 hours duration each com-
bining  lecture  and  lab  are  recommended.  Each 
session  should  begin  with  the  presentation  of  the
students’  work  on  the  assignment  of  the  previous
session,  followed  by  the  lecture  and  lab  of  the
week.  The  following  subsections  highlight  the 

The scope of the first part (Part I) of the course
is  to  get  the  students  acquainted  with  the  basic 
technologies  involved  in  web  mapping  applica-
tions.  A  series  of  web  languages,  methods,  and
tools are explained to the students in simple terms
and  through  a  series  of  examples.  The  following
paragraphs briefly describe each session (week) in
terms  of  lecture  content,  lab  exercise  and  assign-
ment to the students. 

The first session of the course (week 1) begins
with an introductory presentation on web mapping
and the geospatial web services. The basic concepts
of client-server architecture, computer networking,
web communication, TCP/IP and HTTP protocols,
and  HTML  language  are  also  discussed  using 
simple terms and various examples. The lab session
focuses on the basic constructs of HTML language.

Table 2: Lecture/Lab Sessions and Assignments of the introductory course.

149

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

The  source  code  of  a  simple  HTML  page  with  a
head  and  a  body,  including  title,  headers,  para-
graphs,  images,  internal  and  external  hyperlinks,
lists,  tables  and  simple  styling  tags  (CSS)  is
explained to the students. Furthermore, it is shown
how HTML supports hyperlinks on top of images
and  maps  (clickable  areas),  in  addition  to  some
example  HTML  scripts  used  to  create  buttons
(radio or clickable) with actions attached to them.
The  students  are  exposed  to  the  HTML  specifica-
tion and some representative tutorials on the Web.
In  addition,  an  HTML  authoring  tool  is  presented 
to  them  (e.g.,  MS  Expression  Web  4;  currently
available  for  free),  to  make  them  aware  of  the 
technology. The assignment of this session focuses
on HTML. Students are asked to create an HTML
page,  presenting  a  site  (e.g.,  a  university  campus, 
a touristic resort, or their home town) with various
components  (e.g.,  paragraphs,  hyperlinks,  tables,
buttons,  etc.),  and  a  map  with  clickable  areas.
Although  rarely  done  in  practice,  students  are
encouraged  to  use  a  simple  text  editor  (e.g.,  MS
Notepad  or  Notepad++)  and  compose  the  HTML
source  code  manually,  to  get  acquainted  with  the
HTML language.

The  second  session  (week  2)  provides  an 
introduction  to  XML  language  and  family  of 
technologies.  The  complementary  role  of  XML
(content)  and  HTML  (presentation)  languages  is
highlighted.  In  simple  terms  and  through  a  series 
of  examples,  the  basic  constructs  and  concepts  of
XML  (element,  attribute,  idref  and  nesting)  are
explained  to  the  students.  The  discussion  also
includes  the  concept  of  self-description  and  the 
role  of  XML-schemas  (DTD,  XSD  and  Applica-
tion  Schema  in  GML). Then,  various  XML  query
languages  and  the  XSLT  transformation  are
described.  The  need  for  XML2XML  and  XML2-
HTML  transformations  is  highlighted,  moving 
the  discussion  forward  to  XML  languages  for 
geography.  These  include  three  common  (Geo-
XML)  languages:  GML,  SVG  and  KML.  The
schema  and  expressive  power  of  these  languages
are  described  briefly.  The  lab  focuses  on  the 
three  Geo-XML  languages.  Several  examples  are 
shown  to  the  students,  while  they  are  briefly
exposed to the specifications and some representa-
tive  tutorials  on  the  Web.  Kernow  open  source 
system  is  introduced  to  the  students  for  XML2-
XML  and  XML2HTML  transformations.  The
assignment  focuses  on  SVG  and  KML  languages,
as  GML  will  be  used  later  in  the  Web  Services
Session  (WFS).  The  students  are  asked  to  enrich
the  page  of  assignment  1  with  an  SVG  script, 
representing  the  site  chosen  with  vector  (points,

lines  and  polygons)  items,  plus  the  movement  of 
a visitor to the site (use of SVG animate method).
In  addition,  students  are  asked  to  transform  a
shapefile  to  KML  format  using  Quantum  GIS 
plugin, examine the outcome of the transformation,
and  visualize  it  on  Google  Earth.  This  raises  an
interesting  discussion  on  the  spatial  reference 
system  of  the  source  and  target  (WGS’84)  files.
Students  will  experiment  XSLT  transformation  in
the next session. 

The  third  session  (week  3)  focuses  on  web
feeds  and  the  two  popular  standards:  RSS  and
Atom. The  need  for  web  feeds  is  highlighted  and
the use of web feeds in smartphones is demonstrat-
ed.  Surprisingly,  most  students  have  never  used
web  feeds  before.  The  discussion  moves  forward
to  geographically  tagged  feeds  and  specifically  to
GeoRSS.  The  two  versions  of  GeoRSS  are 
discussed: simple and GML. The lecture concludes
with  an  introduction  to  mashups,  including  the
mashup  categories  (not  only  map  mashups)  and
several  representative  applications  for  each  cate-
gory. The lab focuses on the creation of a GeoRSS
feed  and  its  visualization  on  a  GeoRSS  visualizer
(implemented  in  OpenLayers).  The  assignment
requires the composition of a GeoRSS feed and its
transformation to KML, so that it can be visualized
on  top  of  Google  Maps.  This  is  an  XML2XML
transformation, which will be executed in Kernow
software that was introduced the previous session. 
The  fourth  session  (week  4)  focuses  on  map
mashups. After a demonstration of some represen-
tative examples, the API technology is introduced.
Then, Google Maps API is presented. The students
are  given  a  short  introduction  to  JavaScript  and
exposed  to  the  Google  Maps  Developers’  code
examples.  Through  these  examples,  students  can
realize  how  both  JavaScript  and  Google  Maps 
API work. The lab focuses on a series of example
HTML  pages  integrating  GMAP  API  JavaScript 
to  include  Google  Maps  and  add  content  and 
functionality on top of these maps. The assignment
asks  for  the  creation  of  a  visualizer  in  HTML  for
GeoRSS  and  KML  files  on  top  of  Google  Maps,
using the Google Maps API. 

Next session (week 5) sets off with a distinc-
tion between client-side and server-side processing.
Php  (server-side)  processor  and  language  is 
introduced  and  compared  to  JavaScripts. A  series 
of  representative  web  mapping  applications,  built
using  merely  either  JavaScripts  or  php  as  well  as 
a  combination  of  these  two,  are  demonstrated  to 
the  students.  The  lab  presents  some  simple  php
scripts fed by HTML forms to the students. Some
basic  php  processing  functions  as  well  as  HTTP

150

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

GET and POST methods are explained. The option
of  combining  php  scripts  with  Google  Maps
JavaScript in web mapping are highlighted through
simple  example  pages.  The  assignment  of  this 
session  asks  for  the  creation  of  an  HTML  form
where  a  user  can  type  the  values  for  some  para-
meters, such as a KML file name or the coordinates
(X, Y) of a location. The values are posted to a php
script  running  on  the  server  to  generate  an 
HTML page with Google Maps API JavaScript.

The  sixth  session  (week  6)  proceeds  further 
to  the  use  of  php  scripts  in  the  creation  of  web 
services. The lecture starts off with an introduction
to  web  services.  GeoNames  server  is  used  as  an
example server with rich content and an extended
list  of  services.  The  discussion  proceeds  to  the 
use of php in the creation of web services. Finally,
a novel web service for data management, provided
by Google and named Fusion Tables (available in
Google  Drive),  is  introduced  to  the  students.  The
lab presents a series of example php scripts imple-
menting  various  services,  such  as  computing  the
distance of two points or reporting the population
of  a  town.  The  content  (if  any)  of  the  service
resides  in  either  the  script  itself  or  the  tables  of  a
PostgreSQL/PostGIS database. The php methods to
access  and  query  the  database  are  also  described
and  the  input  parameters  to  the  php  script  are
passed through an unclear URL. The output of all
services is always served in XML format. The lab
also  includes  an  introduction  to  Fusion  Tables 

with  instructions  to  import,  query  and  visualize
CSV  and  KML  data. The  assignment  requires  the
creation  of  a  service  in  php  to  respond  to  unclear
URL  requests  and  perform  some  kind  of  calcula-
tion. In addition, the students are asked to create a
Fusion  Tables  database  and  visualize  its  content
using customized HTML pages with the correspon-
ding  Google  Maps  API  JavaScripts  in  order  to
access the Fusion Tables.

3.2.2 Geospatial Web: Weeks 7 to 11

In the first six sessions (Table 2), the students
have  already  built  up  a  foundational  knowledge 
of  client  and  server-side  processing,  languages 
and  protocols  used  in  web  mapping  as  well  as 
web  services.  Hence,  they  can  proceed  to  more
advanced  topics  on  the  geospatial  Web,  including
spatial  data  infrastructures  and  web  services  for
mapping.

Ticheler

Figure  3  shows  an  example  architecture  of  a
spatial  data  infrastructure  (SDI). This  architecture
is  compatible  with  the  proposal  for  GeoFOSS 
2007],  and  it  has  been  adopted  in 
SDI  [
Stefanakis 
the  development  of  SDIs  in  the  past  [
and  Prastacos

2008a,b].  At  the  bottom  layer, 
reside  the  SDI  repositories.  The  geospatial  layers
can  be  available  in  shapefiles,  geotiff  images  or
Postgresql/PostGIS  tables.  In  the  middle  layer
(middleware), reside all the services that assist the
accessibility  to  the  data  repositories.  The  SDI 

Figure 3: Example architecture for a spatial data infrastructure.

151

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

has two main servers, i.e., the map server and the
catalog  server.  These  two  servers  provide  (serve)
the  geospatial  content  on  the  Web,  based  on 
standard  interfaces  (e.g.,  WMS,  WFS,  WCS,
CSW–ISO19115/139). At the top layer (the client),
reside  the  users  and  applications.  The  access  to 
the  SDI  geospatial  content  is  possible  through
either  a  desktop  (thick)  or  a  web  (thin)  client. 
These  clients  and  the  corresponding  visualization
capabilities are accessible by the SDI users.

The  main  scope  of  the  next  few  sessions  is 
to  let  the  students  become  acquainted  with  the 
technological aspects of an SDI (basically, dissem-
inate geographic content on the Web using widely
accepted  standards)  through  the  development  of  a
framework  with  an  architecture  similar  to  the  one
shown in Figure 3.

Specifically,  the  seventh  session  (week  7)
focuses  on  the  generation  of  web  services  for 
mapping. Students already know how to implement
a  service,  and  can  therefore  readily  realize  that  to
query  a  service,  some  knowledge  of  the  service
structure  is  required.  The  lecture  highlights  this
issue, and makes clear the need for standardization
of requests to map services. OGC standards for web
services (WMS, WFS and WCS) are described. The
corresponding  requests  per  service  (GetCapabili-
ties, GetMap,  GetFeature,  GetCoverage  and  Get-
FeatureInfo) are explained. The students are exposed
to  example  web  services  for  mapping  (e.g.,
GeoBase  server).  The  lab  session  makes  use  of
MapServer software to implement the WMS, WFS
and WCS interfaces in Figure 3 for a set of shape-
Stefanakis and Prastacos
files and PostGIS tables [
2008a].  The  structure  of  the  Mapfile  used  in
MapServer to implement the services is described.
The  response  of  requests  is  visualized  in  the  web
browser  (as  image  or  GML  file)  and  in  a  desktop
(thick) client (e.g., Quantum GIS). The assignment
of this session asks the students to create the WMS,
WFS  and  WCS  services  for  a  set  of  shapefiles
using MapServer (which is available at the course
server).

The  eighth  session  (week  8)  introduces  the 
thin web clients and a JavaScript library to imple-
ment  them.  The  lecture  makes  a  clear  distinction
between  thick  (desktop)  and  thin  (web  browser)
clients  and  highlights  their  advantages  and  disad-
vantages.  Then  it  introduces  the  OpenLayers
JavaScript  library  and  examines  closely  some 
representative example codes. The lab presents the
implementation of a thin web client with multiple
base  (Google  Maps,  Satellite,  OSM,  etc.)  and 
overlay  (GeoBase;  or  WMS,  WFS  and  WCS 
services  implemented  in  session  7)  layers.  The

assignment requires the creation of a thin web client
on top of the web services developed in the previ-
ous  session  using  OpenLayers  and  including 
multiple  base  layers  from  various  Earth  providers
(Google Maps, OSM, etc.).

Next  session  (week  9)  introduces  the  spatial
data  infrastructures  (SDI)  and  focuses  on  the 
metadata  items  and  geoportals.  Specifically,  the
lecture sets off with the description of an SDI and
its architecture (Figure 3). The students realise that
they  have  already  built  part  of  an  SDI  in  the 
previous  two  sessions.  The  discussion  proceeds 
to  the  need  for  metadata,  catalog  servers,  and 
geoportals in an SDI. The basic metadata standards
(DC, ISO19139, FGDC) are introduced. Then, OGC
catalog  service  for  the  Web  (CSW)  is  described.
The lab presents GeoNetwork Opensource software
and  shows  how  a  catalog  server  and  the  corres-
ponding  CSW  services  can  be  implemented  for  a 
couple of layers and services used in the previous
sessions.  The  assignment  asks  the  students  to 
create metadata items for their layers and services
implemented  in  the  previous  sessions.  Then  they
need  to  create  an  interface  to  access  the  catalog
though CSW requests.

The  last  two  sessions  (weeks  10  and  11)  are
reserved for some advanced and/or relevant topics
as  well  as  some  recent  developments  in  the  geo-
spatial  web  industry.  The  content  of  these  two 
sessions is dynamic and depends on the availability
of  time  in  the  term.  The  following  topics  are  of 
high priority (Table 2): OGC WPS Service, JSON
and  GeoJSON  languages,  AJAX  model,  ArcGIS
Online,  Google  Maps  API  Web  Services,  Bing 
Map App  SDK,  and  OpenStreetMap  collaborative 
project. These topics are accompanied by lab exer-
cises and relevant assignments (Table 2).

4. Advanced Course

The content of the advanced course— entitled:
“Geospatial Web”—is summarized in Table 3. This
course  was  designed  with  the  assumption  that  the
introductory  course  (Section  3)  be  a  prerequisite.
Hence, students taking the advanced course have a
good background on web mapping and the geospa-
tial web services, as of Table 2. 

The content of the advanced course is focused
on the key methods and technologies that turn the
traditional  Web  into  an  interoperable  framework,
easily  interpreted  by  machines  and  software 
components.  Through  this  content,  students  get  a
deeper understanding of the web mapping services
and tools that comprise the geospatial Web.

152

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Table 3: Lecture/lab sessions and assignments of the advanced course.

The settings of the course are similar to those
of  the  introductory  one.  Each  session  (week)
includes:

a)

b)

c)

a  lecture  on  the  technical  foundations,
enabling technologies and research direc-
tions of the geospatial Web; 
a lab focusing on the practical aspects of
the corresponding lecture; and 
an assignment to the students on the ses-
sion (lecture and lab) content.

All  software  components  used  are  free  or 
open source tools. In addition to those used in the
introductory  course  (Table  1),  students  need  to
install into their computer the following packages:
Protégé  Ontology  Editor  and  Knowledge  Acqui-
sition  System,  the  SketchUp  by  Trimble,  and  a
CityGML  plugin  for  SketchUp.  A  series  of  web
accessible  tools  are  also  used  in  the  course,  such 
as  W3C  RDF  validator,  KONA  GeoSPARQL 
editor,  XPATH  Editor,  etc.  Students’  deliverables
are  uploaded  through  the  ftp  protocol  to  the 
course  server  and  are  accessible  for  the  instructor
and all students through the Web (Figure 2).  

The  course  content  consists  of  three  parts
(Table 3). Part 1 (weeks 1–3) offers a deep under-
standing  on  interoperability  issues,  the  role  of 
standards,  and  the  work  undertaken  by  the  Open

Geospatial  Consortium  (OGC)  and  the  Inter-
national  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO).
Geography  Markup  Language  (GML)  and  OGC
Web Services, discussed already in the introductory
course, are revisited and examined closely. The lab
sessions  include  the  WMS-time  service,  CSV  to
GML conversion, GML validation, CityGML appli-
cation  schema,  and  a  two-way  conversion  among
all three SketchUp files, KMZ, and CityGML.

Part  2  (weeks  4–7)  introduces  the  semantic
web concepts and technologies and their geospatial
web  dimension.  Students  get  familiar  with  the 
basic semantic web languages, i.e., RDF and OWL,
as  well  as  some  well-established  vocabularies 
and  ontologies  such  as  FOAF,  DublinCore,  and
GeoNames. The lab sessions include the compila-
tion,  validation,  and  visualization  of  RDF  files  in
triples and graphs, the extension of existing vocab-
ularies  to  describe  the  semantics  of  a  geospatial
domain  on  the  Web,  the  definition  and  extension 
of  ontologies  in  Protégé,  and  the  inference  of
knowledge  by  applying  appropriate  reasoners.  In
addition,  the  XPATH  (for  XML  files)  and  SPAR-
QL/GeoSPARQL  (for  RDF  files)  languages  are
examined closely.

Part  III  (weeks  8–10)  covers  some  advanced
topics  on  the  geospatial  Web.  Among  them  are
geolocation services, crowd maps and services, and
WebGL  graphics  library.  A  series  of  labs  have 

153

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

been  developed  to  get  the  students  acquainted 
with  these  topics  and  the  representative  systems
(Ushahidi)  and  services  (Swift  River).  Obviously,
there  is  much  more  that  could  be  included  into 
Part 3, such as geosensor web standards, as well as
new  technologies  that  are  being  developed  in  this
rapidly-evolved  area.  These  can  be  considered  in
future versions of the course.

5. Online Course

Due  to  the  increasing  demand  for  online 
courses in academia and the nature of the topic, the
development of an online course on web mapping
and  the  geospatial  Web  has  always  been  a  main 
goal of the author. Recently (as of December 2014),
the  development  of  an  online  course—mostly
based on the content of the introductory course—
has been concluded. 

The  course  is  designed  for  students  with 
previous  experience  in  geographic  data  handling
using  Geographic  Information  Systems  (GIS)  and
other mapping tools but limited skills in computer
programming and networks. The potential students
include senior undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as professionals with expertise in geomatics,
geography, forestry, earth sciences, geology, educa-
tion,  archaeology,  history,  etc.,  and  an  interest  in
building  web  applications  and/or  disseminating
geographic and map data on the Web.

GGE5403

The course is being delivered as an open entry
course  through  UNB  College  of  Extended  Learn-
ing,  since  January  2015  [
2015].  It  is
offered as a university-wide course at various UNB
faculties  (e.g.,  Engineering,  Forest  and  Environ-
mental  Management,  Earth  Sciences,  Business,
Biology, Education). In addition, the course is also
open  to  non-UNB  students  through  the  Canadian
Virtual University (CVU) network.

The  instructor  offers  a  welcome  session  in 
synchronized mode (using UNB Elluminate online
training  platform)  within  the  first  week  of  each
month.  The  scope  of  this  “personal  contact”  is  to
motivate the students as well as to provide guidance
on  how  to  use  the  online  material  and  study  for 
the  course.  If  a  student  is  unable  to  attend  the 
synchronized  session,  s/he  is  able  to  watch  a
recorded session.

The course content is organized in 10 sessions
(or modules) (Table 4). Each session corresponds to
a  10-day  workload  of  a  regular  3ch  course.  Each
session consists of (a) recorded lectures (slides and
audio),  (b)  recorded  labs  (slides  and  audio),  (c)
tutorials  and  other  reading  material,  and  (d)  an
assignment.  All  teaching  material  is  delivered
through  UNB  Desire2Learn  learning  management
system  platform.  Students  will  have  access  to  a
course  server  with  a  configuration  similar  to  the
one described in Section 3 (Figures 1 and 2).

After the submission of an assignment, the stu-
dent gets access to the next session. The instructor

Table 4: Content and learning objectives of the online course.

154

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 4a: Course content in the Learning Management System platform (UNB Desire2Learn).

Figure 4b: Overview—Content and learning objectives.

evaluates  and  scores  any  submitted  assignment
within 7 days. The instructor provides assistance to
the students throughout the course via email com-
munication. A written or oral exam takes place after
completion of the 10 sessions. 

Table 4 summarizes the content of the 10 ses-
sions along with the learning objectives per session.
Figure  4  shows  the  structure  of  Session  1  in  the

learning  management  system  platform  (Desire2-
Learn).  The  content  of  each  session  is  organized
into four sections (Figure 4a): 

a) Content and Learning Objectives (4b);
b) Documents, which also include four 

subsections (4c): slide presentations, lab 
examples, tutorials and further reading;

155

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 4c: Documents and its subsections: slide presentations, lab examples, tutorials and
further reading.

Figure 4d: Video lectures.

156

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 4e: Assignments.

c) Video Lectures; and
d) Assignment.

6. Practices and Experiences

As explained in Section 2, the main challenge
in  running  a  web  mapping  and  geospatial  web
course is how to make the students acquainted with
the  technology  and  the  tools,  while  at  the  same 
time avoid spending time in teaching fundamentals
in  informatics,  such  as  programming  techniques,
computer  networking,  communication  protocols,
etc. There are some contradictory facts in order to
achieve this. On one hand, the students have limit-
ed background in informatics, which seemingly is a
barrier in teaching them such a course. On the other
hand, the course content is wide and should fit in a
term, consisting of a limited number of sessions.

Bersin

Although  it  sounds  unattainable,  the  blended
learning  approach  followed  in  the  design  and 
delivery  of  the  courses  turned  out  to  be  rather 
successful.  Blended  learning  [
2004]  is  an 
education  basis  in  which  the  student’s  training
combines  delivery  of  content  and  instruction  via
digital  and  online  media  along  with  classroom
(face-to-face)  teaching  (Figure  5a). This  approach
allows time for deeper class discussions and allevi-
ates the content versus time limitations mentioned
in the previous paragraph. 

Various  blended  learning  strategies  have 
been applied in the two class-based courses. Each
course  session  (week)  includes  both  a  lecture  and
lab  session.  The  lecture  focuses  on  the  concepts 
and objectives of each method or tool taught, while
the  lab  highlights  these  through  examples.  Then,
students  are  encouraged,  through  an  assignment, 
to  experiment  and  learn  based  on  active  training. 
In addition, innovative open educational resources
and web-based instructional materials (e.g., online
tutorials,  code  playgrounds,  and  developers’  code
examples)  are  used  to  assist  the  students  in  the
learning  process.  All  teaching  material  (presenta-
tion  slides,  sample  assignments,  quizzes,  practice
tests,  program  codes,  examples,  etc.)  and  links  to
relevant resources (web and library resources) are
available  a  week  ahead  (via  UNB  Desire2Learn
learning  management  system  platform)  so  that 
students  can  prepare  before  the  class  as  well  as
elaborate  and  extend  the  learning  process  after 
the class (through further reading and work on the
corresponding assignment).

Another  practice  applied  in  the  courses  and
proven very effective, is the posting of the students’
deliverables to the course server, in a space which
is visible by all course participants, followed by a
presentation  in  the  class  (in  a  weekly  basis). This
helps them to strengthen their skills and confidence
in web application development. It is awesome for
the instructor to realize that within the first couple

157

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 5a: The blended learning paradigm.

Figure 5b: Components of the online learning basis.

weeks  of  each  course,  a  significant  number  of 
students  (an  average  of  30%  each  year)  produce
deliverables  of  quality  and  kindly  compete  with
each other for the best outcome. 

A  total  of  150  students  (80  senior  under-
graduate  and  70  graduate  students)  have  taken 
the  introductory  course  as  taught  at  Harokopio
University  of  Athens,  UN  Lisbon,  BW  Munich, 
and the University of New Brunswick (Section 2),
since  2007.  With  minor  exceptions,  the  students
assessed the course with a top mark for all aspects.
Many  of  them  stated  that  they  really  enjoyed  the
course,  primarily  because  it  helped  them  become
familiar  with  the  web  mapping  technology  and
strengthen  their  skills  in  web  mapping  program-
ming. The instructor has taken care to collect their
comments for improvements systematically, through-
out  the  last  six  years.  The  students’  comments 
were considered carefully and helped the instructor
to  evolve  both  the  course  content  and  teaching
practices.  The  course  syllabus,  as  summarized  in
Table 2, incorporates most of these comments.

The  advanced  course  was  taught  twice  so  far
and  the  results  of  the  student  opinion  surveys 
were  similar  to  those  of  the  introductory  course.
The course has been taken by 25 graduate students
(course  and  research-based  Masters)  from  the
Department  of  Geodesy  and  Geomatics  Engineer-
ing.  The  instructor  has  received  (verbally)  very
positive comments for this course from the majority
of the students. Students expressed clearly that the
advanced course offered them a better understand-
ing of the geospatial web concepts and technology,
while  after  completion  they  felt  more  confident
about their web programming skills. 

The  online  course  is  being  delivered  since
January  2015.  Student  assessments  are  not  avail-
able yet. However, the first five students currently

(as of February 2015) enrolled in the course have
already expressed many positive comments regard-
ing  both  the  course  content  and  advantages  of
online learning. The online learning basis combines
the instruction using various electronic (web-based)
approaches  with  an  active  teacher/student  interac-
tion  (Figure  5b).  The  latter  can  be  synchronous 
or  asynchronous.  As  explained  in  Section  5,  the
welcome session is offered in synchronized mode.
The  communication  is  then  supported  mainly
through  emails  as  well  as  blogs  (asynchronous
mode). Students can enjoy the self-paced learning
(Figure  5b),  which  is  limited  to  a  maximum 
duration  of  six  months  (as  of  UNB/CEL  regula-
tions) to avoid any abuse. 

In  online  learning,  it  has  been  observed  that
almost  40%  of  the  students  taking  a  given  course
fall  behind  on  the  material  and  as  a  result  “they
watch  several  weeks’  worth  of  videos  in  one  sit-
2001]. To prevent that, students need
ting” [
to  submit  an  assignment  for  each  session  (week),
and  it  is  only  after  submission  that  they  have 
access to the next session (Section 5). 

Mayer

The  fast  changes  in  technology  remain  a  real
challenge  in  running  the  courses,  an  issue  which
should  be  reflected  in  the  syllabus  as  soon  as 
possible.  In  the  introductory  course,  two  sessions
(weeks 10 and 11) have been reserved to accommo-
date new developments and tools. In the advanced
course, a similar approach applies for the last three
sessions (weeks 8 to 10). 

Obviously, the instructor must be checking the
availability  of  web  resources  used  in  the  courses,
on a regular basis, as their providers might decide
to cancel them at any time. This has happened quite
a few times since 2007 for the material used in the
introductory course. Some representative examples
are:

158

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

a)

b)

c)

the NASA JPL WMS service, which was
not supported for a period in 2010, while
currently it provides limited functionality;
the  Integrated  CEOS  European  Data
Server  (ICEDS),  which  was  suddenly
ceased in the summer of 2012; and
the  Google  Playground  which  has  not
been available since August 2014. 

It  is  interesting  to  mention  that  case  (b)  hap-
pened  while  a  course  session  on  web  services  for
mapping  was  running  and  the  author  was  then
forced to urgently change a series of examples built
on  top  of  ICEDS  server  to  an  alternative  one
(GeoBase server). As for the recent case of Google
Playground,  students  are  currently  pointed  to
Google developers’ examples.  

7. Conclusion

Stefanakis and Prastacos

The  syllabuses  of  both  an  introductory  and
advanced course on web mapping and the geospa-
tial  Web,  as  evolved  over  a  seven-year  period, 
are  introduced  in  this  paper.  The  courses  have 
been  taught  by  the  author  in  several  European 
and  Canadian  institutes  and  were  addressed 
mostly  to  geography  and  geomatics  students  at 
both  a  senior  undergraduate  and  graduate  level. 
At  the  same  time,  the  author  had  active  research 
[2008],
in the area (e.g., 
Stefanakis
Tienaah
and  Stefanakis
Gupta  et  al

.  [2013], 
.  [2014]) and  a  clear  understanding  of
the  technology  as  well  as  the  learning  objectives 
of  such  courses.  The  assessments  (verbal  and/
or  those  of  student  opinion  surveys)  of  over 
200  students  have  been  very  positive  and  the 
experiences gained by the author very encouraging.
An  online  course  was  recently  released,  with 
content  mostly  based  on  that  of  the  introductory
course. 

Muthu  et  al

Pelekis  et  al.

[2014], 

[2012], 

[2012], 

The short-term goals for the future include:

a)

b)

c)

a  continuous  improvement  and  update  of
the content and teaching practices; 
the compilation of the teaching materials,
lab  exercises  and  assignments  in  a  form
that  can  be  released  to  others  as  a  sound
educational resource; and 
the delivery, collection of student evalua-
tions,  and  improvement  of  the  online
course. 

The long-term goals include: 

a)

the  authoring  of  an  up-to-date  text  book 

b)

c)

Stefanakis

Stefanakis

2009; 

in  the  topic  [
2008]; 
the  development  and  delivery  of  the
advanced  course  and  the  corresponding
teaching materials in online mode; and
the  incorporation  of  teaching  modules 
on  industry—standard  proprietary  soft-
[2015])  in
[2015], 
ware  (e.g., 
the  courses  to  provide  the  students  a
spherical training on web mapping and the
geospatial web technology.

Caris

Esri

Acknowledgments

The author wishes to thank the guest editor and
the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their  valuable  com-
ments on the initial manuscript. 

References

Ahearn, S.C., I. Icke, R. Datta, M.N. DeMers, B. Plewe,
and  A.  Skupin.  2013.  Re-Engineering  the  GIS&T
International Journal of Geo-
Body of Knowledge. 
graphical Information Science

. 27(11): 2227–2245.
Balram S., and S. Dragicevic. 2008. Collaborative spaces
for  GIS-based  multimedia  cartography  in  blended
environments. 
.  50(1):
371–385.
Bersin,  J.  2004. 

The  Blended  Learning  Book:  Best
Practices,  Proven  Methodologies,  and  Lessons
Learned

Computers  &  Education

. Pfeiffer Pub: 352.

Caris.  2015.  Caris:  Spatial  Fusion  Enterprise.  [Viewed
Feb. 10, 2015: http://www.caris.com/products/sfe/]
DiBiase,  D.,  M.  DeMers,  A.  Johnson,  K.  Kemp,  A.T.
Luck,  B.  Plewe,  and  E.  Wentz  (Eds).  2006. 
Geographic  Information  Science  and  Technology
(GIS&T) Body of Knowledge

. AAG and UCGIS. 

eduGI. 2007. Reuse and sharing of e-learning courses in
GI science education (2006–07). [Viewed Nov. 14,
2012: http://edugi.uni-muenster.de/eduGI/]

eduGI Network. 2003. International Network for Educa-
tion  in  Geographic  Information  Science  [Viewed
Nov. 14, 2012: http://edugi.uni-muenster.de/]
Esri.  2015.  Environmental  Systems  Research  Institute:
Web  GIS.  [Viewed  Feb.  10,  2015:  http://www.
esri.com/products/arcgis-capabilities/web-gis]
Foote,  K.E.  2012.  Issues  in  curriculum  and  course
Unwin  et  al
.,

design:  discussion  and  prospect.  In 
2012: 159–164.

GGE5403.  2015.  Web  mapping  and  geospatial  Web 
services. Online Course. UNB College of Extended
Learning.  [Viewed  Feb.  10,  2015:  http://www.
unb.ca/cel/online/courses-programs/open-entry/
gge5403.html]

Gupta, S., T. Tienaah, and E. Stefanakis. 2014. Examin-
ing map projection distortions using geospatial web

159

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

In  the  Proceedings  of  the  ISPRS  Archives.
tools. 
Joint International Conference on Geospatial Theory,
Processing,  Modelling  and  Applications

.  Toronto,

Canada.

MapTools.  2014.  Resource  of  Open  Source  Mapping
[Viewed Nov. 14, 2012: http://www.maptools.org/] 
Mayer,  R.E.  2001.  Multimedia  Learning.  Cambridge

University Press.

Muthu,  S.S.,  E.  Gkadolou,  and  E.  Stefanakis.  2013.
Historical  map  collections  on  geospatial  Web.
Geomatica

. 67(3): 279–290.

OSGeo. 2014. The Open Source Geospatial Consortium.

[Accessed: Nov. 14, 2012: http://www.osgeo.org/]

Pelekis,  N.,  E.  Stefanakis,  I.  Kopanakis,  C.  Zotali, 
M.  Vodas,  and Y.  Theodoridis.  2011.  Chronos.org: 
A  GeoPortal  for  movement  data  and  processes.  In
Proceedings  of  the  Conference  on  Spatial
the 
Information Theory (COSIT 2011)

. Belfast, Maine,

USA, Sept. 12–16, 2011.

PennState. 2012. GEOG 863: Mashups. Online Course.
PennState  University.  Department  of  Geography.
[Accessed:  Nov.  14,  2012:  https://gis.e-education
.psu.edu/ gis/geog863_overview]

Schultz,  R.B.  2012. Active  pedagogy  leading  to  deeper
learning:  fostering  metagognition  and  infusing
Unwin
active learning into the GIS&T classroom. In 
et al.

, 2012: 133–145.

Tutorial

Sinton, D.S. 2012. Making the case for GIS&T in higher

education. In 

, 2012: 17–36.

Unwin et al.

services

Stefanakis, E. 2008. Web services for mapping. 

.
The  3rd  International  Conference  on  Internet  and
Web  Applications  and  Services  (ICIW  2008).
Athens, Greece.
Stefanakis,  E.  2009. 

Web  mapping  and  web  mapping

. New Technologies Publ.: 220 [In Greek].
Stefanakis,  E.  2012.  Map  mashups  and APIs  in  educa-
Online Maps with APIs

tion. In: Peterson, M. (Ed.). 
and Map Services
. Springer.
Stefanakis, E. 2013a. Web mapping and geospatial web:
an  introductory  course  for  geographers  and  geo-
Proceedings  of  the  16th  AGILE
scientists.  In  the 
Conference  on  Geographical  Information  Science
.

Leuven, Belgium.

Stefanakis,  E.  2013b.  Introducing  geographers  to  web
Proceedings 

mapping  and  geospatial  Web.  In  the 

of  the  Annual  Canadian  Institute  of  Geomatics
Conference

. Toronto, Canada.

Stefanakis, E., and P. Prastacos. 2008a. Development of
an  open  source  based  spatial  data  infrastructure.
Applied GIS Journal
, 4(4): 1–26. [Viewed Nov. 14,
2012:  http://arrow.monash.edu.au/vital/access/man
ager/Repository/monash:7759]

Stefanakis, E., and P. Prastacos. 2008b. Development of 
Proceedings
a coastal SDI using GeoFOSS. In the 
of  the  11th  AGILE  Conference  on  Geographical
Information Science

. Girona, Spain, May 5–8, 2008.
Tate,  N.J.,  and  D.J.  Unwin.  2009.  Teaching  GIS&T.
in  Higher  Educa-

Journal  of  Geography 
tion

. 25(1): 37–52. 

Ticheler,  J.  2007.  What  are  SDI,  OpenSDI  and
GeoFOSS?  GeoNetwork  OpenSource  Community
Website. [Viewed Nov. 1, 2007: http://geonetwork-
opensource.org/documentation/  faq/foss-sdi-and-
opensdi].

Tienaah,  T.,  and  E.  Stefanakis.  2014.  “Troy  is  ours—
how  on  earth  could  Clytaemnestra  know  so  fast?” 
Proceedings  of  the  17th  AGILE  Conference
In  the 
on  Geographical  Information  Science

.  Castellon,

Spain.

Unwin,  D.J.,  K.E.  Foote,  N.J.  Tate,  and  D.  DiBiase
Teaching  Geographic  Information
(eds.).  2012a. 
Science  and  Technology  in  Higher  Education

.

Willey-Blackwell.  

Unwin,  D.J.,  K.E.  Foote,  N.J.  Tate,  and  D.  DiBiase.
2012b.  GIS&T  in  higher  education:  challenges  for
Unwin et
educators, opportunities for education. In 
al

., 2011: 3–15.

Author

Emmanuel  Stefanakis

,  PhD,  PEng,  is  an
Associate Professor in the Department of Geodesy
and  Geomatics  Engineering  at  University  of 
New Brunswick. His research is currently focused
on  Geographic  Knowledge  Discovery,  Flood
Mapping,  and  Geospatial  Web.  He  has  over  80 
articles  published  in  international  journals  and 
conferences in Geomatics. 

q

160

Geomatica 2015.69:145-160.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by UNIV OF FLORIDA on 01/09/19. For personal use only.