bs_bs_banner

Research Article
Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5): 694–715
Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129)): (cid:129)(cid:129)–(cid:129)(cid:129)

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event
Localization using Flickr and Twitter

George Panteras, Sarah Wise, Xu Lu, Arie Croitoru, Andrew Crooks and
Anthony Stefanidis

George Mason University

Abstract
The analysis of social media content for the extraction of geospatial information and event-related knowl-
edge has recently received substantial attention. In this article we present an approach that leverages the
complementary nature of social multimedia content by utilizing heterogeneous sources of social media
feeds to assess the impact area of a natural disaster. More speciﬁcally, we introduce a novel social multi-
media triangulation process that uses both Twitter and Flickr content in an integrated two-step process:
Twitter content is used to identify toponym references associated with a disaster; this information is then
used to provide approximate orientation for the associated Flickr imagery, allowing us to delineate the
impact area as the overlap of multiple view footprints. In this approach, we practically crowdsource
approximate orientations from Twitter content and use this information to orient Flickr imagery accord-
ingly and identify the impact area through viewshed analysis and viewpoint integration. This approach
enables us to avoid computationally intensive image analysis tasks associated with traditional image ori-
entation, while allowing us to triangulate numerous images by having them pointed towards the
crowdsourced toponym location. The article presents our approach and demonstrates its performance
using a real-world wildﬁre event as a representative application case study.

1 Introduction

Fostered by Web 2.0, ubiquitous computing, and corresponding technological advancements,
social media have become massively popular during the last decade. The term social media
refers to a wide spectrum of digital interaction and information exchange platforms, ranging
from blogs and micro-blogs (e.g. Twitter, Tumblr, and Weibo), to social networking services
(e.g. Facebook), and multimedia content sharing services (e.g. Flickr and YouTube). Regardless
of the particularities of each platform, these social media services share the common goal of
enabling the general public to contribute, disseminate, and exchange information (Kaplan and
Haenlein 2010). Traditional web-accessible information has always been rich in geographic
content (Silva et al. 2006), and this of course remains true for social media content. But in
addition to geographical references within the data, social media is also becoming increasingly
geotagged as a result of the proliferation of location-aware devices (Hurst et al. 2007, Valli
and Hannay 2010, MacEachren et al. 2011; Stefanidis et al. 2013b). Accordingly, social media
content is emerging as a rich source of geospatial information, presenting our community with
many opportunities and challenges (Sui and Goodchild 2011). The opportunities are primarily
associated with the potential of these crowdsourced data to complement authoritative datasets
by contributing timely information (e.g. Gao et al. 2011). The challenges are reﬂections of the
very nature of these datasets: diverse data structures and formats, and variations in quality and
accuracy (Agichtein et al. 2008).

Address for correspondence: Dr. Arie Croitor, George Mason University Center for Geospatial Intelligence, 4400 University Drive, MS
6C3 Fairfax, VA 22030, USA. E-mail: acroitor@gmu.edu

VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12122
doi: 10.1111/tgis.12122

2 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

695

Driven by the allure of opportunity, the geographical community has been experimenting
over the past few years with harvesting geospatial information from social media content. For
example, studies addressed the use of Twitter reports to gain knowledge regarding the break-
ing and progression of natural disasters such as wildﬁres (De Longueville et al. 2009), earth-
quakes (Crooks et al. 2013) and ﬂooding (Fuchs et al. 2013). The spatiotemporal analysis of
Twitter content has also been used to track disease outbreaks (Signorini et al. 2011;
Sugumaran and Voss 2012), or to identify the formation of international communities and the
communication of information during political crises (Stefanidis et al. 2013a). While these
studies are advancing our ability to understand the geospatial content of social media and the
manner in which they are used to communicate various forms of information, they were pri-
marily focused on just a portion of social media content: text. However, social media content
information is not just textual. Flickr and Instagram offer massive records of imagery, and
YouTube videos are rich in visual content, providing an additional dimension through which
information is communicated. Some early attempts to exploit the content of these additional
services have primarily focused on the analysis of point patterns. For instance, Li and
Goodchild (2012) studied point patterns of georeferenced Flickr imagery in conjunction with
toponyms in their metadata to identify places through user references to them. Other efforts
attempt to recognize activity and behavioral patterns by analyzing these spatiotemporal points
of geotagged entries, such as identifying attractive destinations (Kisilevich et al. 2010) or con-
structing travel itineraries (De Choudhury et al. 2010).

Despite these efforts, the multimedia content of social media remains underexplored. In
this article we contribute towards bridging this research gap by examining the beneﬁts of the
complementary use of heterogeneous sources of social multimedia feeds to assess the impact of
a natural disaster. More speciﬁcally, we are introducing a novel social multimedia triangulation
process that uses collaboratively Twitter and Flickr content in a two-step integrated process:
Twitter content is used to identify toponym references associated with a disaster; this informa-
tion is then used to provide approximate orientation for the associated Flickr imagery, allow-
ing us to delineate the impact area as the overlap of multiple view footprints. In this approach,
we practically crowdsource approximate orientations from Twitter content and use this infor-
mation to orient Flickr imagery and identify the impact area through viewshed analysis and
viewpoint integration. This approach allows us to triangulate numerous images by having
them pointed towards the crowdsourced toponym location while avoiding computationally
intensive image analysis tasks associated with image orientation (e.g. the identiﬁcation of con-
jugate features). In this article we present our approach and demonstrate its performance using
a wildﬁre event as a representative application. The remainder of the article is structured as
follows. In Section 2 we discuss the use of social media content in crises. In Section 3 we
describe the proposed integrated methodology. In Section 4 we present the results of the pro-
posed methodology using as a test case a wildﬁre in the central US, and in Section 5 we con-
clude with an outlook.

2 Social Media and Crowdsourced Crisis Information

With the general public nowadays having at its ﬁngertips technology that a few years ago was
available only to advanced computing laboratories, it is only natural that the amount of
crowdsourced information of computational merit is rapidly growing, with volunteered geo-
graphical information (VGI) being a large portion of this content (Goodchild 2007). Both
domain experts and amateurs alike can now generate and disseminate geospatial content

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

696 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

3

through collaborative web mapping services such as Google Map Maker, OpenStreetMap, or
WikiMapia (Rouse et al. 2007, Haklay et al. 2008), or pursue novel visual exploration prac-
tices through map mashups (Wood et al. 2007). Furthermore, enhanced open-source solutions
(e.g. QGIS and R) support more complicated data analysis tasks, with capabilities often com-
parable to dedicated geographical information software. These capabilities have been put to
use in crisis situations, with ad-hoc communities of neocartographers emerging to provide
timely updates of geospatial datasets (Liu and Palen 2010). The post-earthquake mapping of
Haiti in 2010 is a representative example of a very successful use of the crowd to capture and
disseminate information that outperformed authoritative alternatives (e.g. Norheim-Hagtun
and Meier 2010, Zook et al. 2010).

While such efforts represent explicit contributions of geospatial content, the same Web 2.0
technological advances have also led to the substantial growth of implicit geospatial content
that is contributed by the crowd, especially through social media outlets (Stefanidis et al.
2013b). As public participation in social media is rapidly increasing, the information published
through such sites is becoming a new type of big geospatial data (Croitoru et al. 2014). For
example, in 2012 Twitter users were posting nearly 400 million tweets daily, or over 275,000
tweets per minute (Forbes 2012), doubling the corresponding rates of 2011 (Twitter 2011). At
the same time, 100 million active users are uploading daily an estimated 40 million images in
Instagram (2014). Furthermore, every minute, Flickr users upload in excess of 3,000 images
(Sapiro 2011), and YouTube (2013) users upload approximately 72 hours of video. Due to
their nature, social media are well-suited to communicate information about rapidly evolving
situations, ranging from civil unrest in the streets of Cairo during the Arab Spring events
(Christensen 2011) or New York during Occupy Wall Street (Wayant et al. 2012), to reporting
natural or anthropogenic disasters like wildﬁres (De Longueville et al. 2009), earthquakes
(Crooks et al. 2013), ﬂooding (Vieweg et al. 2010, Triglav-Cˇ ekada and Radovan 2013, Fuchs
et al. 2013), or nuclear accidents (Fontugne et al. 2011, Utz et al. 2013).

Social media content is often geotagged, either in the form of precise coordinates of the
location from where these feeds were contributed, or as toponyms of these locations. Studies
have highlighted how the percentage of precisely geolocated (i.e. GPS-derived coordinates)
tweets may vary depending on the event and location, ranging approximately from 0.5% to
5.0% of the total data corpus (Mahmud et al. 2012, Stefanidis et al. 2013a). This rate may be
higher depending on the area of study, the thematic content, and the underlying conditions.
For example, a dataset collected from Japan following the Fukushima disaster reﬂected a data
corpus where 16% of the tweets were precisely geolocated (Stefanidis et al. 2013b). This spike
is attributed to the fact that the dataset from Japan reﬂected a technologically-advanced com-
munity that was on the move (following the tsunami and subsequent nuclear accident), so that
users were tweeting using primarily their mobile devices. Both of these situations, namely the
proliferation of technology in a society and an increased use of mobile (and other location-
aware) devices to post tweets, are conditions that tend to produce higher rates of geotagged
content in social media. In addition to precisely geotagged tweets, we have observed that
approximately 40% to 70% of tweets come with a descriptive toponym related to the location
of the user. Regarding imagery and video contributed as part of social media, a recent study
has indicated that approximately 4.5% of Flickr and 3% of YouTube content is geotagged
(Friedland and Sommer 2010).

The geographic content of social media feeds represents a new type of geographic infor-
mation.
the established geospatial community deﬁnitions of
crowdsourcing (Fritz et al. 2009) or VGI, as it is not the product of a process through which
citizens explicitly and purposefully contribute geographic information to update or expand

It does not

fall under

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

4 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

697

geographic databases. Instead, the type of geographic information that can be harvested
from social media feeds can be referred to as Ambient Geographic Information (AGI)
(Stefanidis et al. 2013b); it is embedded in the content of these feeds, often across the content
of numerous entries rather than within a single one, and has to be somehow extracted.
Nevertheless, it is of great importance as it communicates instantaneously information about
emerging issues.

through map mashups

focusing mainly on visualizing diverse datasets

Recognizing the potential of this emerging trend, the term crisis informatics has been
introduced to describe the analysis of the responses of the crowd during disasters as they are
captured through Web 2.0 enabled applications (Hagar and Haythornthwaite 2005, Palen
et al. 2007). This has empowered our community to advance from early endeavours, which
were
(e.g.
Hudson-Smith et al. 2009), to more advanced analytical approaches. Several studies have
addressed particular applications that relate to crisis informatics using social media content.
For example, Sakaki et al. (2010) presented a probabilistic spatiotemporal model that uses
Twitter responses to detect the epicenter and trajectory of earthquake waves. Crooks et al.
(2013) extended this line of work, arguing that Twitter feeds resemble a hybrid form of a
sensor system that enables the identiﬁcation and localization of the impact area of the event.
They showcased the use of this approach to quickly locate the epicentre of a large earthquake
at an accuracy that is comparable to authoritative systems (such as the US Geological Survey
“Did You Feel It” website). Moving from earthquakes to forest ﬁres, De Longueville et al.
(2009) examined the use of location-based social networks as a source of information during
crises. Starbird and Palen (2011) highlighted the self-organizing nature of the emergency
response from Twitter users during the Haiti earthquake. They showed that digital volunteers
are inclined to contribute valuable information during the occurrence of sudden and tragic
events. These studies have primarily addressed text and accompanying geospatial information,
using primarily geotagged tweets as the information source. These studies are prototypical
highlights of the value of harvesting social media content to gain situational awareness and
understand how such events unfold and impact the population.

Other efforts have also explored patterns of contributions of imagery in social media, to
extract meaningful geospatial information from it. For example, Liu et al. (2008) conducted a
correlational qualitative study to examine if and how disaster-related Flickr activity evolved
for six major disasters between December 2004 and October 2007. This study provided an
extensive discussion about the formulation of norms and practices around the contribution of
photographic content during disaster response and recovery efforts. The behaviour of Flickr
users has also been examined by Fontugne et al. (2011) as an indicator of major event occur-
rences (e.g. in the form of contribution bursts at speciﬁc locations), using as case studies the
Tuscaloosa tornado and Tohoku earthquake. Pohl et al. (2012) also utilized the visual content
of both Flickr and YouTube to extract crisis sub-events based on images, metadata and videos.
However, these efforts have focused primarily on the location of the contributions, rather than
attempting to delineate the spatial footprint of the affected area.

While some efforts have addressed the geographical analysis of Twitter content, and other
efforts have addressed the analysis of contribution patterns in Flickr (e.g. Senaratne et al.
2013), the challenge of combining these diverse sources of social multimedia information in
order to derive event knowledge still remains. This is the challenge that this article addresses.
More speciﬁcally, we introduce in Section 3 a novel approach that mines Twitter content for
extracting toponym references associated with crisis events, and subsequently uses this infor-
mation to guide a hybrid triangulation of Flickr imagery in order to delineate the event foot-
print. The aggregate use of these two different social media sources outperforms the potential

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

698 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

5

provided by each one individually, thus rendering such cross-source analysis particularly valu-
able for the better exploitation of the wealth of information conveyed through various social
media platforms.

3 A Cross-Source Triangulation Framework

As discussed above, our main objective is to integrate social media content referring to an
event (e.g. a natural or anthropogenic disaster) across sources in order to advance our capabil-
ity to geolocate this event and delineate its footprint. In order to meet this objective we intro-
duce a novel multimedia triangulation framework. Through this framework, contribution
patterns are extended from simple point clouds (indicating the location of the contributors) to
become the equivalent of views of a particular event (which involve an understanding of the
relationship between the contributor and the event). These views can then be synthesized to
delineate the event footprint via viewshed analysis. We accomplish this goal through the two-
step process that is summarized in Figure 1. The ﬁrst component of our approach entails
Twitter content analysis for the identiﬁcation of toponym references associated with the event
of interest (presented in Section 3.1). Using this information we then harvest Flickr imagery
using geolocation and tag constraints: we query the Flickr Application Programing Interface
(API) to retrieve images from the broader vicinity of the toponym, and with tags that are
related to it as well. These images are then oriented using the toponym information as a refer-
ence point, and their viewable area footprints are integrated via viewshed analysis in order to
derive an estimate of the event footprint (as a probability map), as presented in Section 3.2.

Figure 1 The cross-source triangulation framework

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

6 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

699

The underlying assumption in our approach is that tweets contain references to the location of
the event, whereas Flickr contributions provide views of it. This methodology represents a
cross-platform social multimedia analysis approach for event triangulation.

While Twitter is utilized in this framework to derive the approximate location of a given
event (which can then be further reﬁned using Flickr), it should be noted that other sources
may also be exploited for the extraction of such information. For example, a toponym refer-
ence can be extracted from other communication avenues, such as news media feeds or blogs,
which could substitute the Twitter reference point extraction process in Figure 1. Another
source of such information may very well be Flickr itself, as image annotations may contain
toponym references. However, such annotations in Flickr tend to vary in terms of their fre-
quency (Ames and Naaman 2007, Nitta et al. 2014), thus potentially limiting the suitability of
Flickr annotations alone for this purpose. This is further attenuated if we consider the data
volume differences between Twitter and Flickr. For example in this particular study, the
number of Flickr contributions is roughly 0.5% of the number of tweets reporting the same
event. This is consistent with the reports of overall data trafﬁc associated with these two social
media services (Croitoru et al. 2013).

3.1 Event Localization using Toponym References in Twitter

In order to best communicate how the various components of our framework are operating
and integrated, we use the 2012 wildﬁre of Waldo Canyon in Colorado Springs (Colorado,
USA) as a case study. The wildﬁre started in June 23, 2012 and was not fully contained until
July 12, 2012 (the study period), which is used as the study period in this article. During that
time, the wildﬁre consumed a total area of 74 km2, and was considered the most destructive
wildﬁre in Colorado’s history at the time, based on the extent of damage to property (McGhee
2013). Figure 2 provides an overview of study area, showing Waldo Canyon to the northwest
of Colorado Springs, with the actual wildﬁre area overlaid along with the location of
geolocated Flickr images during the event.

We collected relevant Twitter data from the Twitter API using the keyword “Fire” over the
study period, resulting in a corpus of 97,866 tweets among which 41.4% are retweets. It is
worth noting that as we analyze the content of tweets rather than their spatial distribution, the
presence of relatively high retweet levels is likely to contribute to the emergence of toponyms
in our data corpus, thus further facilitating the detection of the relevant toponyms. We there-
fore view retweeting as a crowd-sourced curation process, whereby the general public weighs
upon twitter content and assigns gravity to it in a variety of ways, with retweeting being the
most prominent (e.g. Boyd et al. 2010).

The content of the tweets corpus was analyzed in order to generate the word-cloud shown
in Figure 3. This entailed parsing the text to remove all non-hashtag punctuation (e.g.
emoticons), removing articles, and converting all text to lowercase. The word-cloud visualizes
the frequency of individual words in our Twitter data corpus, with larger words being those
encountered more frequently. It is easy to observe that, after the word ﬁre (which was the
keyword used to query the Twitter API for this study) the predominant terms that emerge are
geographical in nature, with “Waldo” being the dominant among them – either by itself or as
a part of a compound hashtag. This heavy use of geographical references in social media
narrative when reporting natural disasters has also been noted in other natural disaster
studies. Vieweg et al. (2010) stated that in their studies toponym references were present in as
many as 40% of tweets reporting wildﬁres and 18% of tweets reporting ﬂooding. This is also

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

700 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

7

Figure 2 Overview of the study area

Figure 3 Word-cloud of Tweeter most frequent terms and hashtags during the wildﬁre

consistent with studies addressing the broad presence of toponyms in reporting various types
of breaking news (Lieberman and Samet 2011, Stefanidis et al. 2013a).

The Twitter data corpus was then converted to lowercase and ﬁltered to extract all
hashtags. Figure 4 shows the frequency over time of the 10 most popular hashtags for the
duration of the wildﬁre event. As can be seen from it, “#waldocanyonﬁre” has emerged as the
top hashtag associated with this event, a term which encompasses both the nature of the event
and the location of it. The emergence of hashtags like this through a bottom-up process, from

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

8 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

701

Figure 4 Usage of most frequently adopted hashtags over the wildﬁre period

the crowd and adopted by the crowd, serves as further indication for the value that the public
places on the locational information when referring to major events such as this. In fact, all 10
most popular hashtags were of the form {“#’,<location>,<event>}.

Similar to Figure 4, in Figure 5 we show the frequency of the 10 most popular toponym
references in the Twitter narrative associated with the event. The results conﬁrm the popularity
of Waldo Canyon, while also suggesting the emergence of a hierarchical structure in the
toponym references, with the State (Colorado) leading, and the particular area within it
(Waldo) following. The remaining toponym references relate to the areas that were secondarily
affected by the wildﬁre event, e.g. Flagstaff Mountain, and the smaller towns of Manitou and
Estes. In our case we selected the toponyms manually for quality control purposes; however,
this process can be automated using a gazetteer. Using Waldo Canyon as the prominent loca-
tion in the Twitter corpus, we retrieved the point location of this toponym from a gazetteer
(Google Geocoder), and used it as the reference point of the event in subsequent analysis.
Once the approximate geolocation of the event is determined through the analysis of Twitter
content (toponyms and hashtags) we proceed with the analysis of Flickr contributions to delin-
eate the impact area of this event, as described in Section 3.2 below.

3.2 Impact Area Delineation through Viewshed Analysis of Flickr Contributions

While Twitter provides textural information of the event, Flickr provides us with visual evi-
dence of the event in the form of images. Such information is often accompanied with

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

702 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

9

Figure 5 Usage of most frequently adopted toponym terms over the wildﬁre period

geolocation information either as exact geographical coordinates (via metadata), manual
placement of the image on a map (via the Flickr map interface), or as an approximate location
(via geographically relevant keywords, i.e. toponyms). In our study we utilize the imagery
metadata, which is provided in the Exchangeable Image File (Exif). Exif data provides a range
of metadata about the contributed image, including detailed information about the date and
time, focal length (fc), image dimensions (L) and shutter speed. In addition, information about
the model and the make of the sensor can be found. Based on such information, all the camera
speciﬁcations can be retrieved from existing online databases. Finally, in some cases informa-
tion concerning the direction of view of the image can be found under various Exif ﬁelds, for
example the “GPS Direction” which is provided when the camera device is equipped with
either GPS or an electronic compass. However, such information is often lacking.

Flickr data can be retrieved through a dedicated API (http://www.ﬂickr.com/services/api/
ﬂickr.photos.search.html), similarly to Twitter, which supports the user-deﬁned queries. For
our study we retrieved data based on a number of query parameters: (1) photos must be
geotagged (i.e. has_geo=1); (2) photos must have the tags wildﬁre and Colorado (i.e.
tags=“wildﬁre,colorado”, tag_mode=“all”); (3) photos must have the title or description that
contains Waldo Canyon Fire (i.e. text=“Waldo Canyon Fire”); (4) photos must be within a
bbox=“-105.316,38.523,
bounding
-104.291,39.224”); and (5) the time stamp of the photo must be in the time period of the
study (i.e. min_taken_date=“2012-06-24”, max_taken_date=“2012-07-04”). Using these

deﬁned

(bbox)

study

area

box

(i.e.

the

by

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

10 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

703

parameters a total of 427 images were retrieved of which only 191 (less than 50%) had Exif
information. However, while for some of these images the angle of view (AOV) can be derived
from Exif information, none of these images included the observer’s orientation (i.e. azimuth).
This fact, which appears to be frequent in Flickr data (Wueller and Fageth 2008), serves as one
of the primary motivations for developing our viewshed analysis methodology. As a result, we
use the coordinates of the toponyms and the Exif information to derive both the direction of
view (as estimated by the azimuth) and the AOV (as estimated from the focal length and the
image size), which we turn to next.

As expected, the contributions in this case are consistent with observed social media and
blogosphere patterns (e.g. Stefanidis et al.
(2007) respectively):
approaching a power law distribution, with few users contributing large portions of the data,
and a majority of users making minimal contributions. In our case study the 427 Flickr images
that were retrieved were contributed by 38 distinct users, with the median contribution per
user being one photo (compared to the average of 11). This deviation between the median and
the average values is indicative of the degree of skewness of the contributions among users.

(2013b) and Shi et al.

3.2.1 Azimuth and angle of view calculation

The purpose of estimating the azimuth and the AOV is to orient and constrain the extent
of the view from each image location as shown in Figure 6. For this purpose, we ﬁrst establish
the AOV using the sensor parameters (i.e. focal length and image dimensions as provided by
the image Exif ﬁle), and then orient the AOV by calculating the azimuth between the observer
location and the event reference point. Generally, three AOVs can be calculated for a given
image: the horizontal, the vertical, and the diagonal. As our objective is to establish the extent
of the footprint of the event (i.e. wildﬁre), we utilize the horizontal AOV, which is calculated
as:

ϕAOV

=

−

1

2

tan

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞
⎠⎟

L
2
f

c

(1)

where L is the image width and fc is the sensor focal length. Using Equation (1), the AOV has
been calculated for the 191 images for which an Exif ﬁle was available. For the remaining 236
images that did not include Exif metadata, the average of the 191 AOVs that were calculated
using the Exif data was used as an approximation. Considering that Flickr imagery is increas-
ingly contributed by mobile devices with relatively similar camera characteristics (https://
www.ﬂickr.com/cameras), the use of an average value for imagery lacking AOV information is
a reasonable approximation (Singla and Weber 2011).

In order to orient the AOVs, we calculated the azimuth between each image location and
the event reference point (as described in Section 3.1). More speciﬁcally, the calculation of the
azimuth for every image was based on the geodetic azimuth using the following formula (Yang
et al. 1999):

⎛
⎝⎜

(
) −

sin
(
ϕ
2

λ λ
−
1
(
ϕ
1

)
)

cos
cos

(
ϕ
2
(
ϕ
2

)
)

=

θ

−
tan 1

cos

(
ϕ
1

2
sin
where φ1, λ1 and φ2, λ2 are the geographical coordinates of the Flickr image location (or the
observer) and the event reference point, respectively. As a result of this calculation, each Flickr
image is now associated with a geographic location and an oriented AOV from which a
viewshed analysis can be carried out in order to delineate the footprint of the event.

cos

sin

(2)

λ
2

λ1

−−

(

)

)

⎞
⎠⎟

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

704 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

11

Figure 6 The AOV and azimuth of a given Flickr image

3.2.2 Viewshed analysis

The information extracted in the previous section (i.e. the event reference point, and the
azimuth and AOV of each image) can be utilized for estimating the footprint of the event we
analyze. The underlying principle of this estimation process is that observers who contribute
images related to the event are doing so from locations at which the event is visible. It should
be noted that here we do not assume that the viewable area of all images is identical, but that
these viewable areas share one or more common areas that are of interest. Based on this, we
apply a crowdsourcing approach for estimating the footprint of the event: while each observa-
tion may cover a different viewable area and a corresponding footprint on the ground, by
superimposing all footprints we can derive an estimation of the event footprint. This process
can also be seen as a spatial voting process, where each observer – through the contributed
Flickr image – casts a vote on the location of the event in the form of a viewable area. The
accumulation of these votes, as measured per unit area in the form of a heat map, can then
lead to “hotspots” in which the event is most likely to be found.

In order to estimate the footprint of the event through the superimposition of the foot-
prints of individual views, we must ﬁrst calculate the footprint of each view separately. Given a
viewer location, an AOV and a view direction, the problem of estimating the footprint can be
transformed into a viewshed analysis problem. In this problem setting, the viewer parameters
are used together with a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of the area for ﬁnding the visible

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

12 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

705

areas of a surface from a given observer location. Viewshed analysis is a well-established tech-
nique, which spans across various application areas, from navigation and site selection to
landscape planning and telecommunication systems (e.g. Nagy 1994, Fisher 1995, De Floriani
and Magillo 2003, Sander and Manson 2007). In our framework, viewshed analysis is utilized
to calculate the viewable areas (or cells in the case of a raster grid) between observer and
points in the study area, given the reference point of interest (i.e. the event reference point)
based on the elevation difference between these points. By systematically applying this calcula-
tion to all cells in the study area, we generate a binary map showing the viewable area for each
observer. The superimposition of all binary maps for all observers then results in a heat map,
where each cell in the map accumulates the number of times the cell was ﬂagged as viewable.
It should be noted that while here we assign the same weight to each binary viewshed map
during the superimposition process, other weighting schemes could be applied in order to
enhance the heat map ﬁdelity for a speciﬁc purpose. For example, given a time interval,
viewshed maps may be weighted according to their timestamp in order to generate a heat map
that highlights the extent of the wildﬁre during that time interval. However, as in this case
study we aim to explore the full extent of the ﬁre, this option was not pursued.

The implementation of the viewshed analysis was carried out in the ArcGIS environment
through a workﬂow consisting of a set of python scripts. This workﬂow, which systematically
applies the viewshed calculation for each image in our data set, provides the ability to control
the calculation parameters used. In particular, for each image we set the angular limits of the
viewshed calculation as the left and right azimuths of the AOV of the image (which can
be derived from the AOV and the azimuth of each image), and set a minimum and a
maximum range parameter (measured from the viewer’s location) to limit the distances from
the viewer for which the viewshed calculation is carried out. The values of these range param-
eters are set as a function of the average distance between the event reference point and
the location of each Flickr image. It is worth noting that in our experiments we utilized
the National Elevation Data (NED) data, a 10 m resolution DEM that is available through the
US Geological Survey (USGS). The ﬁnal step of our viewshed analysis includes the
superimposition of all viewshed raster grids, resulting in a heat map. Cells having high values
in this heat map indicate locations that have been visible more in Flickr imagery in relation to
the event, while cells having low or zero values indicate locations that have not been visible in
such imagery. Based on these values, we can then analyze hotspots the heat map in order to
identify highly visible locations, i.e. locations that were of interest to many viewers on the
ground.

3.2.3 Hotspot detection

In the ﬁnal step of our framework we utilize the heat map that was generated in order to iden-
tify hotspots and delineate their extent as an approximation for the footprint of the wildﬁre
event. Here, we refer to a hotspot as a spatial cluster of cells for which high heat map values
exist, i.e. clusters that are highly visible to observers in the viewshed analysis. Several well-
studied spatial analysis methods exist for the detection of hotspots, among which are Kernel
Density Estimation (KDE), Moran’s I, and Getis-Ord (Gi*) (Kuo et al. 2012). KDE, which is
based on a spatial ﬁltering process, produces a smooth density surface by estimating the
surface density (Silverman 1986, Xie and Yan 2008). However, a key difﬁculty in implement-
ing KDE is the ﬁlter bandwidth as well as the ability to test the statistical signiﬁcance of the
results.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

706 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

13

Another possible measure is Moran’s I, which estimates spatial autocorrelation among
similar (low or high) values. While Moran’s I could be used for detecting hotspots, its inability
to automatically distinguish between high or low hotspots (Grifﬁth 1987) limits its usability
for our purpose. In view of these limitations, we utilize the Getis-Ord Gi* statistic (Ord and
Getis 1995; De Smith et al. 2007), which enables one to identify statistically signiﬁcant spatial
clusters of both high cell values (“hotspots”) and low cell values (“cold spots”) in the heat
map. A key advantage of the Gi* statistic is that it allows testing the results for statistical sig-
niﬁcance using easily calculated z-scores (Burt et al. 2009). In order to identify hotspots in the
viewshed heat map we applied the Gi* statistic to the heat map, calculated the corresponding
z-scores, and used them to generate four classes according to the following p-value thresholds:
90% signiﬁcant (z-score ≥1.645), 95% signiﬁcant (z-score ≥1.960), 99% signiﬁcant (z-score
≥2.576), 99.9% signiﬁcant (z-score ≥3.291). All non-signiﬁcant cells were grouped in a ﬁfth
class. It should be noted that by overlaying two or more signiﬁcant level heat maps, it is pos-
sible to generate a heat map of signiﬁcance level ranges. For example, overlaying the 95% sig-
niﬁcance heat map on top of the 90% signiﬁcance level would result in three types of pixels,
namely pixels below 90%, between 90% and 95%, and above 95%.

4 Case Study: The Waldo Canyon Wildﬁre

In order to showcase the utility of our approach in a real-world crisis setting, we applied it to
the 2012 Waldo Canyon wildﬁre. For this purpose we collected both Twitter and Flickr data,
as discussed in Section 3.1, and applied the proposed analysis framework in order to delineate
the impact area of the ﬁre using our cross-sourced triangulation approach. To demonstrate the
beneﬁt of using cross-sourced social media in the triangulation process we applied three modes
of the analysis:

• Mode 1: the impact area was estimated as the overlap of all viewsheds that were generated
from all Flickr contribution locations without calculating a reference point or evaluating
the AOV for each image. Accordingly, in this mode, we use only Flickr data, without con-
straining the viewshed analysis with any AOV information.

• Mode 2: the impact area was estimated by using the centroid of the locations of all Flickr
contributions as the reference point for the AOV calculation, followed by a viewshed
analysis of each image. Accordingly, in this mode we use only Flickr data, ignoring any
toponym information from Twitter.

• Mode 3: the impact area was estimated by using the toponym reference, as derived from
Twitter, as the reference point for the AOV calculation, followed by a viewshed analysis of
each image. Accordingly, in this mode we use Twitter content to orient Flickr data and
guide the viewshed analysis.

The results of analysis modes 1, 2, and 3 are shown in Figures 7, 8, and 9, respectively. In
each of these ﬁgures we present for each signiﬁcance level range (as discussed in Section 3.2.3)
the resulting impact area of the wildﬁre as an overlaid raster heat-map as well as the known
wildﬁre impact area as provided by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA 2013) following the event. In order to estimate the accuracy of the analysis results
with respect to the known wildﬁre impact area and examine the beneﬁt of using social multi-
media for our analysis approach we calculated a confusion matrix for each analysis mode. For
this purpose every heat map cell p at location (x,y) was labeled as belonging to one of four

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

14 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

707

Figure 7 Wildﬁre location assessment as derived by analysis mode 1

classes according to a statistical signiﬁcance condition and a spatial condition as shown in
Table 1.

In this table, C is the user-deﬁned conﬁdence levels, S() is the signiﬁcance level operator
which assigns a signiﬁcance level for a given cell p, and Aﬁre is the known wildﬁre impact area.
Based on these results we then calculated the rate of each class (e.g. True Positive rate) by
dividing the area covered by each class by the corresponding reference area. For example, the
TP rate was calculated as the ratio between the total area that was detected as ﬁre through our
analysis method and the known wildﬁre area. The results of this labeling process for analysis
modes 1, 2, and 3 are summarized in Tables 2, 3, and 4, respectively.

Comparing the accuracy analysis results of the three analysis modes highlights the beneﬁt
of using our cross-source viewshed analysis: while the TP rate is only 29% at 95% conﬁdence
level when no reference point is used (analysis mode 1), this rate increases to 61% when a ref-
erence point is derived using only Flickr data (analysis mode 2), and reaches 75% when both
Twitter and Flickr data are used (analysis mode 3). It is worth noting that in our accuracy
analysis the TN rate for all three analysis modes remained approximately the same (between
79% and 87%), the false detection rates were reduced from 79% for FP and 90% for FN in
analysis mode 1 to 68% and 25% for FP and FN, respectively in analysis mode 3. These
results demonstrate that by combining crowdsourced data from both Flickr and Twitter in the
viewshed analysis we are able to improve not only the detection accuracy but also the false
detection accuracy. A three-dimensional rendering of the results obtained from the analysis in

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

708 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

15

Figure 8 Wildﬁre location assessment as derived by analysis mode 2

Table 1 Heat map cell labeling according to signiﬁcance and spatial conditions

Class

Conﬁdence Level Condition

Spatial Condition

True Positive (TP)
True Negative (TN)
False Positive (FP)
False Negative (FP)

S(p) ≥ C
S(p) < C
S(p) ≥ C
S(p) < C

p ∈ Aﬁre
p ∉ Aﬁre
p ∉ Aﬁre
p ∈ Aﬁre

mode 3 is given in Figure 10, showing the topography of the case study area as well as the
known extent of the wildﬁre. As can be seen, the pattern of contributions is driven by the
terrain conditions and population distribution: while we have numerous contributions from
the semi-urban area southeast of the wildﬁre, we have practically no contributions from the
mountainous rural areas to the northwest of the event.

5 Conclusions and Outlook

The analysis of social media content to extract geospatial information and event knowledge
from such crowd-contributed data has become the subject of substantial research activities. In

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

16 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

709

Table 2 Accuracy assessment for the results of analysis mode 1

Table 3 Accuracy assessment for the results of analysis mode 2

Conﬁdence Level

90.0%
95.0%
99.0%
99.9%

90.0%
95.0%
99.0%
99.9%

90.0%
95.0%
99.0%
99.9%

Conﬁdence Level

Conﬁdence Level

TP

92%
29%
0%
0%

TP

100%
61%
49%
35%

TP

92%
75%
69%
49%

Class

Class

Class

FP

88%
90%
100%
100%

FP

88%
71%
70%
70%

FP

80%
68%
66%
65%

TN

45%
79%
93%
97%

TN

52%
87%
90%
93%

TN

70%
87%
89%
92%

FN

63%
71%
100%
100%

FN

39%
39%
51%
65%

FN

18%
25%
31%
51%

Table 4 Accuracy assessment for the results of analysis mode 3

this article we presented an approach that makes use of the multimedia nature of social media
content by examining the beneﬁts of the complementary use of heterogeneous sources of social
multimedia feeds in order to assess the impact of a natural disaster. More speciﬁcally, we intro-
duced a novel social multimedia triangulation process that uses collaboratively Twitter
and Flickr content
In this approach, we practically
crowdsource approximate orientations from Twitter content and use this information to
orient accordingly Flickr imagery and identify the impact area through viewshed analysis and
viewpoint integration.

in a two-step integrated process.

To demonstrate how our approach leverages multimedia content from social media
in order to locate events, we used as a representative case study a natural disaster event,

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

710 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

17

Figure 9 Wildﬁre location assessment as derived by analysis mode 3

namely the 2012 wildﬁre of Waldo Canyon in Colorado Springs. For our study we
collected relevant Twitter data from the Twitter API using the keyword “ﬁre”, resulting
in a corpus of 97,866 tweets (of which 5.57% were precisely geolocated) referring to
the ﬁre. We also collected 427 geolocated images contributed to Flickr during the event
with “wildﬁre” as a tag. Combined, these datasets comprise multimedia crowd contribut-
ions communicating the event, and complement each other with respect to their thematic
content.

Our objective was to pursue an innovative solution that harnesses these diverse crowd
contributions in order to delineate the impact area of this particular event. The two-step
approach that we introduced here proceeded by ﬁrst using Twitter content to identify
toponym references associated with a disaster. This information was then used to provide
approximate orientation for the associated Flickr imagery, allowing us to delineate the
impact area as the overlap of multiple view footprints. This is a two-step crowdsourc-
ing process that crosses platforms and media in order to delineate an event: we use the
text in Twitter to crowdsource a compass,
in the form of a reference viewpoint, and
then use this information to aggregate the views of another crowdsourced dataset, namely
Flickr imagery. In essence, this extends the scope of VGI, in that crowdsourced content
is not limited to the datasets, but also extends to harvesting information that is critical
for
to bypass computat-
these datasets. This approach allows us
ionally intensive image analysis tasks associated with traditional image orientation (e.g. the

the analysis of

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

18 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

711

Figure 10 A three-dimensional perspective of wildﬁre location assessment as derived by analysis
mode 3

identiﬁcation of conjugate features), yet supports the aggregation of multiple image views in
order to delineate the impact area as the aggregate of multiple views. The results of our
analysis show the improvements in delineating the impact area through the introduction of
such information.

As we are moving towards a wider adoption of crowdsourced content, we have to con-
tinue being aware that such content is the outcome of a geosocial process: the level of partici-
pation, and the patterns of contributions are driven by the particularities of the corresponding
physical and social environments. In our particular case, contributions were primarily made
from south and southeast areas, not only due to the presence of urban areas in them, but also
due to accessibility issues and the nature of the event itself. Having had a more broad distribu-
tion of contributions around the impact area would have resulted in further improvements.
However, even for such adverse conditions as the ones we encountered in this case study we
showed that at a conﬁdence level of 95% we can raise the true positive (TP) rate to 75% when
we use our two-step triangulation process, in contrast to a TP rate of only 29% when no ref-
erence point was extracted from Twitter. This supports the argument that by harvesting
various types of information from diverse crowdsourced content we can better infer event-
speciﬁc information from these citizen contributions. Attempting to consider this problem
from the point of view of a decision maker, it may be considered advantageous to have a high
TP level, even at the cost for a relatively high (but manageable) FP level, as this will likely raise
awareness and preparedness levels among the potentially affected population. Furthermore, FP
they
levels

carry a particular value of

their own, as

situations

in these

crisis

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

712 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

19

can be viewed as capturing the public’s perception of the potential threat from their respective
locations.

One thing to consider in conjunction with the abovementioned levels of accuracy
is that they would be affected by the granularity of the reference point. For example, if
people were referring to the “Colorado wildﬁres”, our approach would not be able to gen-
erate meaningful results. Generally, one would reasonably expect a link between the granu-
larity level of event references, as they emerge through public discourse, and the type of the
corresponding event. While some events have a rather localized footprint (e.g. wildﬁres),
others have a broader impact (e.g. hurricanes). This can be viewed as an extension of
the problem of geo-parsing text at global- and local-scales (Leidner and Lieberman
2011). Furthermore, the dynamicity of an event may impact the analysis: a ﬁre is a very
dynamic event, but was (in this case) still spatially contained. If it were to be spreading
across large areas our analysis would have to be segmented across temporal intervals, within
which the event would be mapped at distinct instances, and its evolution tracked accord-
ingly. Presumably, this could also lead to the emergence of sequences of toponyms for the
same event.

It is worth noting that rather than focusing on ﬁne-tuning the accuracy of the outcome
of the analysis, our main objective in this article was to demonstrate the feasibility of our
approach in the context of a rapid assessment of the impact area of an event, given non-
curated data corpus such as the one presented here. As we have shown above, even with
certain approximations, e.g. using average camera model values for images without Exif
information, we are able to assess the impact area quite well. Such approximations could be
further improved and reﬁned by using techniques for estimating missing camera parameters,
e.g. Bujnak et al. (2010) or De Oliveira Costa et al. (2014). Similarly, the viewshed analysis
can be reﬁned to account for the combined effects of the accuracy of the DEM, e.g.
Oksanen and Sarjakoski (2006), as well as the accuracy of the technique used to calculate it,
e.g. Fisher (1993).

Nevertheless, we need to remain aware that the particular nature of social media contribu-
tions may result in biases in their patterns of contribution. For example, Li et al. (2013)
focused on social media usage in Twitter and Flickr, ﬁnding a relationship between Twitter
usage and well-educated high-income people, particularly white and Asian populations. More
relevant to this work, Kent and Capello (2013) studied the use of social media during a crisis
situation (a wildﬁre). Their analysis showed that demographic characteristics of the area
impacted by the emergency situation could be used to reveal the propensity of its population
to contribute information in social media during such a crisis. These works reveal some of the
intrinsic nature of social media contributions as they relate to geospatial information, warrant-
ing the further study of such activities in order to gain a better understanding of the value and
quality of this crowdsourced content.

In order to overcome the demographics-related limitations (and the resulting biases) it is
possible to consider active social media approaches, whereby requests for contributions are
issued for locations that are underrepresented in the harvested data. This nevertheless would
not address the limitations of population gaps, where low population density results in lack of
data (thus limiting the accuracy of the analysis). Towards that end, one could consider the
integration of social media feeds with traditional geosensor networks, in order to collect from
the latter focused information in response to the breaking events that are detected in the
former. While such integration still remains largely unexplored, it clearly emerges as a promis-
ing future direction due to the substantial advancements in social media harvesting and
processing.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

20 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

713

References

Agichtein E, Castillo C, Donato D, Gionis A, and Mishne G 2008 Finding high quality content in social media.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining, Stanford, California:
183–94

Ames M and Naaman M 2007 Why we tag: Motivations for annotation in mobile and online media. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, California:
971–80

Boyd D, Golder S, and Lotan G 2010 Tweet, tweet, retweet: conversational aspects of retweeting on Twitter. In
Proceedings of the Forty-third IEEE Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, Hawaii:
1–10

Bujnak M, Kukelova Z, and Pajdla T 2010 Robust focal length estimation by voting in multi-view scene recon-
struction. In Zha H, Taniguchi R, and Maybank S (eds) Computer Vision: ACCV 2009. Berlin, Springer:
13–24

Burt J, Barber G, and Rigby R 2009 Elementary Statistics for Geographers (Third edition). New York, Guilford
Christensen C 2011 Twitter revolutions? Addressing social media and dissent. Communication Review 14:

155–57

Croitoru A, Crooks A T, Radzikowski J, and Stefanidis A 2013 GeoSocial gauge: A system prototype for knowl-
edge discovery from geosocial media. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 27: 2483–
508

Croitoru A, Crooks A T, Radzikowski J, Stefanidis A, Vatsavai R R, and Wayant N 2014 Geoinformatics and
social media: A new big data challenge. In Karimi H A (ed) Big Data Techniques and Technologies in
Geoinformatics. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press: 207–32

Crooks A T, Croitoru A, Stefanidis A, and Radzikowski J 2013 #Earthquake: Twitter as a distributed sensor

system. Transactions in GIS 17: 124–47

De Choudhury M, Feldman M, Amer-Yahia S, Golbandi N, Lempel R, and Yu C 2010 Constructing travel itin-
eraries from tagged geo-temporal breadcrumbs. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference
on World Wide Web, Raleigh, North Carolina: 1083–84

De Floriani L and Magillo P 2003 Algorithms for visibility computation on terrains: A survey. Environment and

Planning B 30: 709–28

De Longueville B, Smith R S, and Luraschi G 2009 OMG, from here, I can see the ﬂames!: A use case of mining
location-based social networks to acquire spatiotemporal data on forest ﬁres. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Workshop on Location Based Social Networks, Seattle, Washington: 73–80

De Oliveira Costa F, Silva E, Eckmann M, Scheirer W J, and Rocha A 2014 Open set source camera attribution

and device linking. Pattern Recognition Letters 39: 92–101

De Smith M J, Goodchild M F, and Longley P A 2007 Geospatial Analysis: A Comprehensive Guide to Princi-

ples, Techniques and Software Tools (Second edition), The Winchelsea Press, Winchelsea, UK

Fisher P F 1993 Algorithm and implementation uncertainty in viewshed analysis. International Journal of Geo-

Fisher P F 1995 An exploration of probable viewsheds in landscape planning. Environment and Planning B 22:

graphical Information Systems 7: 331–47

527–46

Fontugne R, Cho K, Won Y, and Fukuda K 2011 Disasters seen through Flickr cameras. In Proceedings of the

Special Workshop on Internet and Disasters, Tokyo, Japan

Forbes 2012 Twitter’s Dick Costolo: Twitter Mobile Ad Revenue Beats Desktop on Some Days. WWW docu-

ment, http://onforb.es/KgTWYP

Friedland G and Sommer R 2010 Cybercasing the joint: On the privacy implications of geotagging.

In Proceedings of the Fifth USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Security (HotSec 10), Washington, DC

Fritz S, MacCallum I, Schill C, Perger C, Grillmayer R, Achard F, Kraxner F, and Obersteiner M
land cover. Remote Sensing 1:

2009 Geo-Wiki.Org: The use of crowdsourcing to improve global
345–54

Fuchs G, Andrienko N, Andrienko G, Bothe S, and Stange H 2013 Tracing the German centennial ﬂood in the
stream of tweets: First lessons learned. In Proceedings of the Second ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Workshop on Crowdsourced and Volunteered Geographic Information, Orlando, Florida: 31–38

Gao H, Barbier G, and Goolsby R 2011 Harnessing the crowdsourcing power of social media for disaster relief.

IEEE Intelligent Systems 26(3): 10–14

Goodchild M F 2007 Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal 69: 211–21
Grifﬁth D A 1987 Spatial Autocorrelation: A Primer. Washington, DC, Association of American Geographers
Hagar C and Haythornthwaite C 2005 Crisis, farming and community. Journal of Community Informatics 1:

41–52

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

714 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

21

Haklay M, Singleton A, and Parker C 2008 Web Mapping 2.0: The neogeography of the GeoWeb. Geography

Compass 2: 2011–39

Hudson-Smith A, Crooks A T, Gibin M, Milton R, and Batty M 2009 Neogeography and Web 2.0: Concepts,

tools and applications. Journal of Location Based Services 3: 118–45

Hurst M, Siegler M, and Glance N S 2007 On estimating the geographic distribution of social media. In Pro-

ceedings AAAI International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Boulder, Colorado

Instagram 2014, Available at http://instagram.com/press/ [Accessed 3rd April 2014].
Kaplan A M and Haenlein M 2010 Users of the world unite!: The challenges and opportunities of social media.

Business Horizons 53: 59–68

Kent J D and Capello H T 2013 Spatial patterns and demographic indicators of effective social media content
during the Horsethief Canyon ﬁre of 2012. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 40(2): 78–89
Kisilevich S, Krstajic M, Keim D, Andrienko N, and Andrienko G 2010 Event-based analysis of people’s activ-
ities and behavior using Flickr and Panoramio geotagged photo collections. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth International Conference of Information Visualisation, London, UK: 289–96

Kuo P F, Zeng X, and Lord D 2012 Guidelines for choosing hot-spot analysis tools based on data characteris-
tics, network restrictions, and time distributions. In Proceedings of the Ninety-ﬁrst Annual Meeting of the
Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC: 22–26

Leidner J L and Lieberman M D 2011 Detecting geographical references in the form of place names and associ-

ated spatial natural language. SIGSPATIAL Special 3(2): 5–11

Li L and Goodchild M F 2012 Constructing places from spatial footprints. In Proceedings of the First ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Crowdsourced and Volunteered Geographic Information,
Redondo Beach, California: 15–21

Li L, Goodchild M F, and Xu B 2013 Spatial, temporal, and socioeconomic patterns in the use of Twitter and

Flickr. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 40: 61–77

Lieberman M D and Samet H 2011 Multifaceted toponym recognition for streaming news. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-fourth International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Beijing, China: 843–52

Liu S B and Palen L 2010 The new cartographers: Crisis map mashups and the emergence of neogeographic

practice. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 37: 69–90

Liu S B, Palen L, Sutton J, Hughes A L, and Vieweg S 2008 In search of the bigger picture: The emergent role of
online photo sharing in times of disaster. In Proceedings of the Information Systems for Crisis Response
and Management Conference, Washington, DC

MacEachren A M, Jaiswal A, Robinson A C, Pezanowski S, Savelyev A, Mitra P, and Blanford J 2011
Senseplace2: Geotwitter analytics support for situational awareness. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence in Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), Providence, Rhode Island: 181–90

Mahmud J, Nichols J, and Drews C 2012 Where is this tweet from?: Inferring home locations of Twitter users.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Dublin, Ireland
McGhee T 2013 4,167 Colorado Wildﬁres Caused Record Losses of $538 Million in 2012. Denver Post (1/17)
(available at http://www.denverpost.com/ci_22396611/4–167-colorado-wildﬁres-caused-record-losses-538)

Nagy G 1994 Terrain visibility. Computers and Graphics 18: 763–73
Nitta N, Kumihashi Y, Kato T, and Babaguchi N 2014 Real-world event detection using Flickr images. In
Gurrin C, Hopfgartner F, Hurst W, Johansen H, Lee H, and O’Connor N (eds) Multimedia Modeling.
New York, Springer: 307–14

NOAA 2013 National Weather Service Weather Forecast Ofﬁce (Waldo Canyon Wildﬁre dss). WWW docu-

ment, http://www.crh.noaa.gov/pub/?n=waldocanyonwildﬁredss

Norheim-Hagtun I and Meier P 2010 Crowdsourcing for crisis mapping in Haiti. Innovations: Technology,

Governance 5(4): 81–9

Oksanen J and Sarjakoski T 2006 Uncovering the statistical and spatial characteristics of ﬁne toposcale DEM

error. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 20: 345–69

Ord J K and Getis A 1995 Local spatial autocorrelation statistics: Distributional issues and an application. Geo-

graphical Analysis 27: 286–306

Palen L, Vieweg S, Sutton J, Liu S B, and Hughes A L 2007 Crisis informatics: Studying crisis in a networked
world. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on E-Social Science, Ann Arbor, Michigan
Pohl D, Bouchachia A, and Hellwagner H 2012 Automatic sub-event detection in emergency management using
social media. In Proceedings of the Twenty-ﬁrst International Conference Companion on World Wide Web,
Lyon, France: 683–86

Rouse L J, Bergeron S J, and Harris T M 2007 Participating in the Geospatial Web: Collaborative mapping,
social networks and participatory GIS. In Scharl A and Tochtermann K (eds) The Geospatial Web: How
Geobrowsers, Social Software and the Web 2.0 are Shaping the Network Society. London, Springer:
153–58

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

22 G Panteras, S Wise, X Lu, A Croitoru, A Crooks and A Stefanidis

Triangulating Social Multimedia Content for Event Localization

715

Sakaki T, Okazaki M, and Matsuo Y 2010 Earthquake shakes Twitter users: Real-time event detection by social
sensors. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on World Wide Web, Raleigh, North
Carolina: 851–60

Sander H A and Manson S M 2007 Heights and locations of artiﬁcial structures in viewshed calculation: How

close is close enough? Landscape and Urban Planning 82: 257–70

Sapiro G 2011 Images everywhere: looking for models: technical perspective. Communications of the ACM

54(5): 108–18

Senaratne H, Bröring A, and Schreck T 2013 Using reverse viewshed analysis to assess the location correctness

of visually generated VGI. Transactions in GIS 17: 369–86

Shi X, Tseng B, and Adamic L A 2007 Looking at the blogosphere topology through different lenses. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM 2007), Boulder, Colorado
Signorini A, Segre A M, and Polgreen P M 2011 The use of Twitter to track levels of disease activity and public

concern in the US during the inﬂuenza A H1N1 pandemic. PloS One 6(5): e19467

Silva M J, Martins B, Chaves M, Afonso A P, and Cardoso N 2006 Adding geographic scopes to Web resources.

Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 30: 378–99

Silverman B W 1986 Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press
Singla A and Weber I 2011 Camera brand congruence and camera model propagation in the Flickr social graph.

ACM Transactions on the Web 5(4): 20

Starbird K and Palen L 2011 Voluntweeters: Self-organizing by digital volunteers in times of crisis. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver, British Columbia:
1071–80

Stefanidis A, Cotnoir A, Croitoru A, Crooks A T, Radzikowski J, and Rice M 2013a Statehood 2.0: Mapping
nation-states and their satellite communities through social media content. Cartography and Geographic
Information Science 40: 116–29

Stefanidis T, Crooks A T, and Radzikowski J 2013b Harvesting ambient geospatial information from social

media feeds. GeoJournal 78: 319–38

Sugumaran R and Voss J 2012 Real-time spatio-temporal analysis of West Nile virus using Twitter data. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Conference on Computing for Geospatial Research and Applications,
Washington, DC

Sui D and Goodchild M F 2011 The convergence of GIS and social media: Challenges for GIScience. Interna-

tional Journal of Geographical Information Science 25: 1737–48

Triglav-Cˇ ekada M and Radovan D 2013 Using volunteered geographical information to map the November

2012 ﬂoods in Slovenia. Natural Hazards and Earth System Science 13(11): 2753–62

Twitter 2011 200 Million Tweets per Day. WWW document, http://bit.ly/laY1Jx
Utz S, Schultz F, and Glocka S 2013 Crisis communication online: How medium, crisis type and
emotions affected public reactions in the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. Public Relations Review 39:
40–6

Valli C and Hannay P 2010 Geotagging where cyberspace comes to your place. In Proceedings of the 2010

International Conference on Security and Management, Las Vegas, Nevada: 627–32

Vieweg S, Hughes A L, Starbird K, and Palen L 2010 Microblogging during two natural hazards events: What
Twitter may contribute to situational awareness. In Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth International Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Atlanta, Georgia: 1079–88

Wayant N, Crooks A T, Stefanidis A, Croitoru A, Radzikowski J, Stahl J, and Shine J 2012 Spatiotemporal clus-
tering of social media feeds for activity summarization. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Confer-
ence for Geographical Information Science, Columbus, Ohios

Wood J, Dykes J, Slingsby A, and Clarke K 2007 Interactive visual exploration of a large spatio-temporal
dataset: Reﬂections on a geovisualization mashup. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13: 1176–83

Wueller D and Fageth R 2008 Statistic analysis of millions of digital photos. In Proceedings of the International

Society for Optics and Photonics on Electronic Imaging, San Jose, California

Xie Z and Yan J 2008 Kernel density estimation of trafﬁc accidents in a network space. Computers, Environ-

Yang Q, Snyder J, and Tobler W 1999 Map Projection Transformation: Principles and Applications. Boca

ment and Urban Systems 32: 396–406

Raton, FL, CRC Press

YouTube 2013 YouTube Pressroom Statistics. WWW document, http://bit.ly/gzYBVx
Zook M, Graham M, Shelton T, and Gorman S 2010 Volunteered geographic information and crowdsourcing

disaster relief: A case study of the Haitian earthquake. World Medical and Health Policy 2: 2

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(5)

