GeoInformatica 9:3, 237–252, 2005
# 2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc. Manufactured in The Netherlands.

Controlled Line Smoothing by Snakes

DIRK BURGHARDT
Department of Geography, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstr. 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
E-mail: burg@geo.unizh.ch

Received May 2, 2003; Revised October 22, 2004; Accepted March 8, 2005

Abstract

A major focus of research in recent years has been the development of algorithms for automated line
smoothing. However, combination of the algorithms with other generalization operators is a challenging
problem. In this research a key aim was to extend a snakes optimization approach, allowing displacement of
lines, to also be used for line smoothing. Furthermore, automated selection of control parameters is important
for fully automated solutions. An existing approach based on line segmentation was used to control the
selection of smoothing parameters dependent on object characteristics. Additionally a new typiﬁcation routine
is presented, which uses the same preprocessed analysis for the segmentation of lines to ﬁnd suitable candidates
from curve bends. The typiﬁcation is realized by deleting undersized bends and emphasizing the remaining
curve bends. The main results of this research are two new algorithms for line generalization, where the
importance of the line smoothing algorithm lies in the usage of a optimization approach which can also be used
for line displacement.

Keywords:

automated generalization, smoothing, typiﬁcation, optimization, energy minimization, snakes

1.

Introduction

Line generalization applies to different types of cartographic objects, such as angular
lines (e.g., canals, buildings), sinuous lines (e.g., hydrography), as well as the depiction
of 2.5-D continua (e.g., relief) by contours. Line generalization, just like any other
generalization operation, has to observe and preserve the particular characteristics of
cartographic objects in the generalization process. Hence, different operators are
available for the overall task of line simpliﬁcation. Angular lines are dealt with by line
simpliﬁcation operators that often rely on a procedure that reduces the number of original
points on the line. Line smoothing, on the other hand, is often used for one-dimensional
generalization of sinuous lines by Fironing_ away small crenulations [17].

The approach presented here focuses on the generalization of sinuous lines. As Figure 1
shows, an approach that was purely based on simpliﬁcation (i.e., weeding) and
smoothing operators, respectively, would not be sufﬁcient, for two major reasons. First,
the transitions between angular and sinuous parts of a line are often not distinct. For
instance, a border line might contain both angular and sinuous sections, depending on
whether it follows survey markers or the centerline of a river. Second, mere point
weeding or smoothing simply focuses on single vertices of a line, rather than identifying

238

BURGHARDT

Figure 1. Levels of detail for a line object at different scales, after To¨pfer [29].

compound shapes on the line (e.g., bends) and generalizing these shapes [19]. Plazanet
et al. [22] have presented several algorithms to deal with shape-based generalization of
roads. In this article, a method is proposed that is based on an energy minimizing
optimization technique, called snakes, that allows to apply controlled line smoothing,
while at the same time taking into account the overall shape of the line as well as
allowing to integrate different generalization operations.

Because the generalization process follows as a combination of different basic gen-
eralization operations, it is always a compromise. In this sense the cartographic solution
is generally not unique, but satisﬁes the different cartographic requirements in a better
or worse way. As shown earlier, the use of optimization techniques seems to be suitable
for both the combination of different basic generalization operations as well as the
control of varying constraints of one generalization operation [7].

The use of optimization techniques in the ﬁeld of automated generalization has been
proposed by a number of authors (e.g., [5]; Højholt 1998). Such techniques are primarily
applied to the displacement of line objects by means of different approachesVenergy
minimization methods such as snakes [4], [7] and beams [2] and least squares adjustment
[13], [27]. Sester shows also how to apply optimization techniques for other gen-
eralization operations, such as simpliﬁcation of buildings.

Harrie [12] extended the least square adjustment approach by inclusion of additional
constraint types. The aim of his simultaneous graphic generalization was to have one
method for solving different generalization operations in a single optimization step. The
new constraint types were concerned with simpliﬁcation, smoothing and exaggeration.
These constraints were based upon pre-computed point movements. For smoothing, he
used a Gaussian smoothing approach.

Even though different optimization techniques from several disciplines have been
adapted for tasks of cartographic generalization, the resulting linear vector equations
after variation or Taylor expansion are all quite similar. Following that, similar methods
are used for solving such equations and existing difﬁculties also are comparable. On the
one hand, there is the computational effort required for solving the large equation

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

239

systems. On the other hand, there are the difﬁculties to ﬁnd suitable weights and para-
meters. Harrie [12] investigates different strategies (empiricism, machine learning,
constraint violation and variance component estimation) with one important restriction:
weights have to be determined independently of the shape of objects. This assumption is
acceptable only for certain types of constraints, for others, such as curvature constraints,
it is important to have different weights for objects of the same type, depending on their
shape.

In this paper, a line smoothing approach that is fully integrated with the energy
minimization method is ﬁrst presented. Following that, it is shown how the analysis of
shape can help in selecting suitable parameter values for smoothing. An automated
controlled line smoothing algorithm is then derived. The same preprocessed analysis is
also used to ﬁnd suitable candidates for typiﬁcation of curve bends. To improve the
recognition of generalized lines a typiﬁcation procedure with a geometrical basis is
suggested.

2. Energy minimization for smoothing of line objects

The snakes optimization technique used here allows the consideration of different, partly
contradictory, generalization constraints. In automated displacement such constraints are
the maintenance of minimal distances between objects with correctly represented relative
positions and the preservation of typical shapes. Snakes can model these constraints with
the help of an energy function consisting of internal and external energies. The internal
energy is used to describe the cartographic object’s shape and structure. Conﬂicts, such
as distances to other objects that are too small, are calculated by the external energy. In
this paper, the snakes model is extended from that originally developed for cartographic
object displacement by Burghardt and Meier [7] by smoothing the shape of line objects,
in addition to the internal energy. In this case energy correlates to the degree of detail of
the line: the smoother the line the less energy it contains. In combination with automated
displacement it would be possible to have one common solution for the generalization of
line objects their selection and symbolization. The control of optimization is intuitive,
because the external energy refers to other objects, whereas the internal energy describes
the line itself.

In this paper the snakes approach will be used in the original form, proposed by Kass
et al. [15]. Snakes are energy minimizing splines which adapt their shape and position
under the inﬂuence of an energy functional. Representing the position of snake param-
etrically by d(s) = (x(s), y(s))T with arc length s, s 2 ½0,l (cid:1), the energy functional can be
written as

E dð Þ :¼

Z

(cid:1)

Eint þ Eext

(cid:2) : ds

ð1Þ

Z

(cid:5)

¼

1
2

(cid:3)
(cid:1) sð Þ : d0 sð Þ
j

j2 þ (cid:2) sð Þ : d00 sð Þ

j

j2

(cid:4)

þ Eext

(cid:6) : ds

240

BURGHARDT

The snake represents a line l which has to be generalized and the energies are used to
model the constraints for generalization. While internal energy Eint has an inﬂuence on
the shape of the line, the Eext describes conﬂicts with objects of the neighborhood. Such
conﬂicts could arise as a result of symbolization, when distances between signatures fall
below a minimal distance threshold or overlap each other. There are different require-
ments for line shape preservation during generalization operations. While displacement
should not change too much the shape of the line, smoothing operations may intentionally
modify the shape of lines for better visualization quality. With internal energy these
different aspects can both be taken into consideration.

For displacement internal energy calculates differences in shape between the original
and the displaced line, so minimal internal energy implies minimal deformation of the
line. The shape modiﬁcation is measured by changes of the differences of the ﬁrst and
second derivatives of the original and the displaced line. In case of smoothing internal
energy is used to simplify the line. Therefore, ﬁrst and second derivatives of the line are
minimized, resulting in shorter distances between points of vector d and minimized
curvature of the spline curve. The internal energy terms used for displacement and
smoothing, respectively, are formally equal. The differences depend on the deﬁnition of
vector d, which contains the coordinates of the altered line in the case of smoothing
(2a). For displacement (2b), the differences between the initial and the derived line are
used.

dsmooth sð Þ ¼ x sð Þ; y sð Þ

ð

ÞT

ddispl sð Þ ¼ x sð Þ (cid:2) x0 sð Þ; y sð Þ (cid:2) y0 sð Þ

(cid:1)

(cid:2)T

ð2aÞ

ð2bÞ

To ﬁnd the stable state of the snake the functional E(d) has to be minimized (see
Appendix). The variation of E(d) with constant user-deﬁnable parameters (cid:1) and (cid:2) leads
to the Eulerian equations, which are solved by discretization in time [2], [6]. The
differences in the ﬁnal formulae between displacement (3a,b) and smoothing (4a,b) are
straightforward. For smoothing of line objects no external forces are modeled, so the
derivatives of external energy (Eext ) in x- and y-direction are zero.
(cid:2) ¼ (cid:3) xt (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) x0
(cid:2) ¼ (cid:3) yt (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) y0

(cid:1)
xt (cid:2) 1; yt (cid:2) 1
(cid:1)

(cid:2) (cid:2) Eext
(cid:2) (cid:2) Eext

xt (cid:2) 1; yt (cid:2) 1

A þ (cid:3)I
ð

A þ (cid:3)I
ð

ð3bÞ

ð3aÞ

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

x

y

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Þ : xt (cid:2) x0
(cid:1)
Þ : yt (cid:2) y0
(cid:1)
Þ : xt ¼ (cid:3)xt (cid:2) 1
Þ : yt ¼ (cid:3)yt (cid:2) 1
" 2(cid:1) þ 6(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)

A þ (cid:3)I
ð

A þ (cid:3)I
ð

(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2) 2(cid:1) þ 6(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)

(cid:2)

0
(cid:2)

0
0
(cid:2)

A ¼

(cid:2)
0
0
0

(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2) 2(cid:1) þ 6(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)
(cid:2)
0

2(cid:1) þ 6(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
0
0

2(cid:1) þ 6(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)
2(cid:1) (cid:2) 6(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2)

ð4aÞ

ð4bÞ

ð5Þ

#

0
0
0
(cid:2)

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

241

Figure 2. Excessive shifting of end points of line objects depending on the degree of smoothing.

3. Automated control of parameter selection

Depending on the degree of smoothing and the distance between points, the end points of
the lines are shifted away from their initial position (see Figure 2). Higher values of (cid:1)
produce a stronger minimization of the ﬁrst term of the internal energy and hence a
stronger smoothing and end point shifting (cf. Equation 1).

To overcome the problem of end point shift there are several counter-measures. One
possibility is to include the ﬁrst and last point of the line multiple times in vector d. The
points which are added before will be deleted after smoothing. This procedure results in
forcing the smoothed line through the end points (see Figure 3). As a result of internal
energy also the curvature at both ends of line are inﬂuced. The line becomes quite
straight at their ends because of multiple adding of the same point.

That’s why a second version of extending the original line was investigated. The idea
is to duplicate the segments at either end of the line rotated by 180-. Instead of using the

Figure 3. Forced ﬁxed boundary points as a result of introducing multiple end points.

242

BURGHARDT

Figure 4. Forced ﬁxed boundary points as a result of using a number of duplicated points at the line end
rotated by 180- around the crossroads (left). Resulting lines after smoothing (right).

last point multiple times, now some more points at the line end used twice. Thus, the char-
acter of the lines is better represented (Figure 4).

An important question for any automated solution is the number of additional
duplicated points required for bounding the solution. One possible approach which was
used here consists in smoothing the line without additional end points and subsequently
analyzing the shifted points. After counting the points for which the distance between the
original and smoothed line falls below a threshold value the remaining points up to
the end of the line then determine the number of additional end points. Figure 5 shows
the distance between the original and the smoothed line for every point on a sample line.

Figure 5. Calculation of number of duplicated points depending on distances between original and smoothed
line to achieve ﬁxed boundaries.

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

243

In the diagram the distance for the point with Id 24 falls below the threshold value 1.0.
That means 23 vertices up to the end of the line were shifted too far. This value will then
be increased by 20%, to make sure that the shift affects only the additional points. So, it
is recomputed with 23 plus 5 additional end point coordinates. Note that only a fraction
of the original line is displayed in the diagram of Figure 5; most of the points stay within
the threshold distance, as can be seen from the buffer display in the top part of Figure 5.
Before smoothing the line objects a segmentation is necessary to determine the
smoothing parameters (cid:1) and (cid:2) of Eint. With the help of the segmentation the lines can be
subdivided into smaller segments of different sinuosity. One possibility for segmentation
is to smooth the original lines twice, ﬁrst to determine the characteristics and second
with adapted parameter values. The intersection points between the original and the
smoothed line correlate with the degree of sinuosity of the original curve. In Figure
6(left) the arrows show the intersection points between original and smoothed line. A
measure is obtained by counting the intersection points with reference to segment length
(Figure 6(right)). In case the distance between two points of intersection is less than a
given threshold value the segment is deﬁned as being sinuous. Note that Plazanet et al.
[22] proposed a similar approach based on the detection of vertices and the subsequent
analysis of the distances between these points to segment the original line. The advantage
of the snakes smoothing approach is that it can stay within the same methodological
context of energy minimizing optimization techniques. Hence, it does not have to Fpiece
together_ different methodological approaches into one framework (see also [28]).

Because the sinuousity attribute can change quite often between segments, the next
step is to concatenate segments until a user-deﬁned minimal length of line parts is
reached. It is necessary to start the procedure with the shortest segments (Figure 7b). If
there are adjacent segments with different sinuosity, the longer one determines the value
of the sinuosity attribute (Figure 7c). At the last step in Figure 7d the scattered line part
keeps the attribute Bnot sinuous^ if the length is longer then the minimal length of line

Figure 6. Segmentation based on intersection points between original and smoothed line, arrows show the
intersection points (left). The number of intersection points related to segment length is used as measure of
sinuosity (right).

244

BURGHARDT

Figure 7. Concatenation of segments with different sinuousity attribute. a Determination of intersection points
between the original and the smoothed line. b Identiﬁcation of the shortest segment. c Concatenation of
segments until a user-deﬁned minimal length of line parts is reached. d Final result of a segmented line in
sinuous and not sinuous line parts.

parts deﬁned by the user. In cases where the minimal length is not reached, the scattered
line parts take the attribute Bsinuous,^ because the concatenated segments with attribute
Bsinuous^ are longer.

After segmentation detection the lines are subdivided into the segments and each of
them is smoothed with different parameter values for (cid:1) and (cid:2) of the internal energy.
Figure 8 shows an example in which different parameter values were applied to the
segmented lines. Hence, lines which are sinuous were smoothed more to eliminate the
high frequency bends. The less sinuous lines, on the other hand, were less strongly
smoothed and the large bends were preserved. However, from a cartographic point of
view, this approach can be improved. In order to maintain the more sinuous parts it is
necessary to apply typiﬁcation rules which are described in the next section.

The presented algorithm is integrated in a cartographic production system. The system
is used by cartographic experts to create high quality topographic maps. Through the

Figure 8. An example of the use of snakes for line smoothing. Smoothing was applied after line segmentation.

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

245

Table 1. Methodical overview of smoothing approaches.

Local

Global

Spatial domain

Frequency domain

& Epsilon ﬁlteringVPerkal [20]
& Gaussian smoothingVBadaud et al. [1]
& Sliding averageVMcMaster [16]
& PlasterVFritsch [10]
Raster:
& Morphological operationsVSchweinfurth [26]
Vector:
& Snakes (as presented in this paper)

Wavelets
& Fritsch and Lagrange [11]
& Balboa and Lopez [3]
& Saux [24]
Fourier series
& Clarke et al. [8]
& Schwarzbach [25]
& Fritsch and Lagrange [11]

extension of automated parameterization the line smoothing could be carried out also by
non-experts, nevertheless the operator would need to decide which classes the smoothing
should be applied to and which other generalization operators were needed. Runtime
for line smoothing with snakes is much faster than the line displacement, particularly
after subdividing the line in several segments. A disadvantage of the presented approach
might be the effort required to implement the matrix equations (2a,b), which can be
justiﬁed, if a line displacement is also carried out, with the same optimization approach.
The differences between snakes smoothing and other smoothing approaches can be
shown on a methodical level (Table 1). One classiﬁcation is made by the ﬁlter theory,
which uses transformations between spatial and frequency domain. Smoothing after
transforming into the frequency domain is realized by frequency ﬁlters, e.g., low-pass
ﬁlters which allows low frequencies to pass. Smoothing within the spatial domain can
also be interpreted as ﬁlter operations, applied on coordinates instead of frequencies.
Detailed analyses of ﬁlter characterization for snakes is published by Meier [18]. A
second way of classiﬁcation is by distinguishing between local and global effects of the
smoothing algorithms. In the frequency domain algorithms using a Fourier series ap-
proach inﬂuence the whole line, while Wavelets have a localising component based on
their restricted basis functions. Fritsch and Lagrange [11] have shown that wavelet
coefﬁcients are appropriate to characterise the local shape of a curve.

In the spatial domain several smoothing algorithms suggested, which have a local
focus. For instance the smoothing approach suggested by McMaster [16] considers two
or four surrounding points and calculates a straight arithmetic average. In a second step,
the actual point is displaced towards the calculated coordinates. Until now smoothing
algorithm in the spatial domain with a global focus have only been available for raster
data, e.g. the morphological operations [26]. Snakes smoothing ﬁlls this gap with their
global matrix calculation. The advantage of a global approach is it better preserves the
main characteristic of a line, while local adjustment is missing. To obtain a compromise
between global and local approaches the automated line segmentation was suggested for
controlling the selection of smoothing parameters dependent on object characteristics.
While the lines are subdivided into segments of comparable characteristics the approach
shifts its focus from a global to a local perspective.

246

BURGHARDT

Figure 9. Calculation of vertices (white) and intersection points (gray).

4. Typiﬁcation

The aim of typiﬁcation is to visualize line characteristics even though there are
limitations on resolution. For strong sinuous parts this could be achieved by deleting
undersized bends and emphasizing the retained or reconstructed ones. To ﬁnd small
bends smoothing is applied the same way as in the ﬁrst step for segmentation (cf. pre-
ceding section). Short segments between intersection points of original and smoothed line
indicate undersized bends. For typiﬁcation the intersection points and vertices of the
original line have to be calculated. There is one vertex (white) for every bend and every
bend is delimited by two intersection points (gray), see Figure 9. The vertex of one bend is
the point with the maximal distance between the original (black) and the smoothed line
(dashed).

Starting with the vertex (i) of the undersized bend, all line vertices between the
previous (i j 1) and following vertex (i + 1) of the original line are deleted (Figure 10a).
The vertices of the adjacent bend sides, between vertex i j 1 and i j 2 as well as i + 1
and i + 2, respectively, are moved for the construction of the new, typiﬁed bend. Its
direction and length are calculated from the connection of intersection points between the
original and the smoothed line. The translation leads in the direction of the deleted bend
with a value of half the intersection point distance. The dotted gray lines in Figure 10b
show the intermediate step.

An exaggeration of the newly constructed bends is also possible with a distance de-
pendent stretching of line vertices perpendicular to the connecting segment between
intersection points. The solid black lines in Figure 10b show the exaggerated bends. Fi-
nally, the original line with its constructed new bends is smoothed by energy minimization.
The second term of the internal energy guarantees the continuity of the smoothed line.
Also, the distance between vertices of the line becomes approximately equidistant as a
result of the ﬁrst term of internal energy.

Figure 10. Construction of new curve bends through translation and exaggeration.

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

247

Figure 11. Typiﬁcation examples of roads (to compare the manual generalized topographic maps are shown in
the backgroundV* 2004 swisstopo (BA046257)).

Figure 11 shows two examples of typiﬁcation of line objects from VECTOR251 road
network. The road network of VECTOR25 was digitized on the basis of topographic
maps with scale 1:25,000. The aim for this example was to generalize the road network
for a smaller scale 1:500,000. In the background of road objects the corresponding
manual generlized topographic map with scale 1:500,000 is shown. On the left side you
can see the situation before on the ride side after typiﬁcation.

The circles bring out the results of typiﬁcation of object class BMain road,^ which are
in the second example very similar to the manual solution. More examples are shown in
Figure 12 for another object class BRoad open to trafﬁc^ of road network. It can be seen
that not all sinuous line segments would be typiﬁed (double encircled curve sequence).
The main reason is that calculation of vertices and intersection points is dependent on
preprocessed smoothing. In this example the preprocessed smoothing was stronger, so in
the double encircled area no intersection points are calculated between original and
smoothed line.

To overcome this problem a strategy could be used which implies a frequency
dependent typiﬁcation. If preprocessed smoothing is not so strong, only smaller bend
sequences are typiﬁed (Figure 13b), if a stronger preprocessed smoothing is used the

248

BURGHARDT

Figure 12. Typiﬁcation and smoothing of road network.

longer bends (relating to long wavelength) will be typiﬁed (Figure 13c). In general an
iterative typiﬁcation with different amounts of preprocessed smoothing could be applied.
An alternative to this typiﬁcation approach is the Accordion algorithm suggested by
Plazanet [21]. This algorithm aims to enlarge a bend or bend series to remove the bends
that coalesce. The central inﬂexion point of the line has to be ﬁxed and all the others
points are moved away from it, speciﬁc to every bend, in the orthogonal direction of each
bend axis. The main difﬁculty of this approach is to avoid creating new conﬂicts when
solving the initial ones. Further research [9], [23] has been introduced micro and meso
Agents to overcome this side effects.

Compared with the Accordion algorithm, the typiﬁcation presented her approach has
the advantage that no side effects were produced, because bends will be removed instead

Figure 13. Frequency dependent typiﬁcation with different amounts of preprocessed smoothing.

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

249

of displaced. A negative consequence is that less information will be visualized in the
map. In this sense the typiﬁcation approach suggested here can be used as a
complementary procedure to the Accordion algorithm. If the local situation allows
visualizing of all curve bends, the Accordion algorithm makes sure that the bends do not
overlap and if to much side effect occurs then our typiﬁcation approach can be used to
reduce the number of curve bends.

5. Conclusions

The results of the research presented here are two new algorithms for line smoothing
and typiﬁcation. Advantages of line smoothing with snakes are discussed from a
methodical and a practical point of view. Snakes smoothing ﬁlls the gap of smoothing
operators with global focus in the spatial domain. The advantage of a global approach
is the better preservation of the main characteristic of a line. From a practical point
of view the snakes approach uses an optimization approach which can also be used for
line displacement. The advantage of the snakes model is the simple combination of
several constraints with the help of different energies. External energy describes conﬂicts
with other map objects, while internal energy models the shape constraints of car-
tographic lines. The main difference of using snakes for displacement or smoothing,
respectively, depends on the deﬁnition of the internal energy. While the shapes of lines
should be preserved during displacement, smoothing implies more considerable
deformations.

To improve the results of smoothing, the lines can be smoothed twice. A ﬁrst pass is
executed with default parameters for (cid:1) and (cid:2), independently of line characteristics. The
resulting line crosses the original line and the density of intersection points between the
two lines provides a measure of sinuosity. A subsequent segmentation helps to determine
parts of the line with similar characteristics. For the second smoothing pass the
parameters (cid:1) and (cid:2) can then be selected in relation to the line shape established
previously. For instance, lines which are more sinuous can be smoothed more strongly to
eliminate high frequency bends. The reason for using one common approach for
smoothing and displacement is the easier control of the interaction between displacement
and smoothing. Additionally, it is faster to apply smoothing and displacement together
then one after another. Further work should investigate smoothing with position
dependent parameter (cid:1) = (cid:1)(s) and (cid:2) = (cid:2)(s),
to achieve a more local control of
smoothing.

Additionally, a typiﬁcation routine with a geometrical basis is suggested. Comparing
with other algorithm the approach has the advantage that no side effects were produced.
It is well suited for greater scale transitions and can be used as supplementation for
Accordion algorithm. In general the algorithm works well, but depending on the degree
of the preprocessed smoothing different curve bends for typiﬁcation are selected. The
consequence is that not all curve bends are typiﬁed in one step and an iterative process
has to be applied, which leads to a frequency dependent typiﬁcation.

250

Appendix

BURGHARDT

To ﬁnd a minimum of the following energy integral

I x sð Þ; y sð Þ
½

(cid:1) ¼

Eges x; xs; xss; y; ys; yss

ð

Þds ¼

(cid:1)

Eext þ Eint

(cid:2)ds

Z 1

0

the variation in x- and y-direction should be zero

(cid:4)I x þ (cid:4)x; y

½

(cid:1) ¼ 0

(cid:4)I x; y þ (cid:4)y

½

(cid:1) ¼ 0:

The variation in x-direction

(cid:4)I x þ (cid:4)x; y

½

(cid:1) ¼

ds : (cid:4)E x; xs; xss; y; ys; yss

ð

Þ

Z 1

0

Z 1

0

Z 1

0
Z 1

0
Z 1

0
Z 1

0

¼

¼

¼

¼

(cid:4)x þ

(cid:5)
ds : @E
@x

@E
@E
@xs
@xss
ds : Ex(cid:4)x þ Exs (cid:4)xs þ Exss(cid:4)xss

(cid:4)xs þ

ð

Þ

(cid:6)

(cid:4)xss

(cid:5)

ds : Ex(cid:4)x þ Exs

d
ds

(cid:4)x þ Exss

(cid:6)

d2
ds2 (cid:4)x

(cid:5)
ds : Ex (cid:2)

(cid:6)

dExs
ds

þ

d2Exss
ds2

(cid:4)x ¼ 0

leads to two independent Eulerian equations

(cid:2) (cid:1) xss þ (cid:2) xssss ¼ 0

(cid:2) (cid:1) yss þ (cid:2) yssss ¼ 0:

@Eext
@x

@Eext
@y

@Eext
@xi

Approximating the derivatives with ﬁnite differences

(cid:2) (cid:1) xi (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) xi

f

ð

Þ (cid:2) xi (cid:2) xi þ 1

ð

Þ
g

þ (cid:2)f xi (cid:2) 2 (cid:2) 2xi (cid:2) 1 þ xi

ð

Þ (cid:2) 2 xi (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) 2xi þ xi þ 1

ð

Þ

þ xi (cid:2) 2xi þ 1 þ xi þ 2

ð

Þg ¼ 0

ð6Þ

ð7aÞ

ð7bÞ

ð8aÞ

ð8bÞ

ð8cÞ

ð8dÞ

ð8eÞ

ð9aÞ

ð9bÞ

ð10Þ

0

B
B
B
@

Note

References

CONTROLLED LINE SMOOTHING BY SNAKES

251

and converting to matrix notation

(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2) 2(cid:1) þ 6(cid:2)

(cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) 4(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)

¼ 0

ð11Þ

.
..

.
..

1

C
C
C
A

1

C
C
C
C
A

0

:
xi (cid:2) 2
B
xi (cid:2) 1
B
xi
B
B
xi þ 1
@
xi þ 2
:

þ

@Eext
@xi

gives ﬁnal equations, which can be solved iteratively.

1. VECTOR25 deﬁnes the digital landscape model by Swiss Federal Ofﬁce of Topography

1. J. Badaud, A.P. Witkin, and R.O. Duda, BUniqueness of the Gaussian Kernel for scale-space ﬁltering,’’

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Image Processing, Vol. 8(1):183Y193, 1986.

2. M. Bader. Energy Minimization Methods for Feature Displacement in Map Generalization. Ph.D. thesis,

Department of Geography, University of Zurich, 2001.

3. J. Balboa and F. Lopez BFrequency ﬁltering of linear features by means of wavelets: A method and an

example,’’ Cartographic Journal, Vol. 37(1):39Y49, 2000.

4. M. Barrault, M. Bader and R. Weibel. Topology Preserving Conﬂict Removal between Symbolized Roads in

Cartographic Generalization: Extending Snakes Methods. in Abstract for GIScience2000, 2000.

5. J. Bobrich. Ein neuer Ansatz zur kartographischen Verdra¨ngung auf der Grundlage eines mechanischen

Federmodells. Ph.D. thesis, Deutsche Geoda¨tische Kommission, Mu¨nchen Reihe C, H. 455, 1996.

6. D. Burghardt. Automatisierung der kartographischen Verdra¨ngung mittels Energieminimierung. Ph.D.

thesis, Deutsche Geoda¨tische Kommission, Mu¨nchen Reihe C, H. 536, 2000.

7. D. Burghardt and S. Meier. BCartographic displacement using the snakes concept,^ in W. Foerstner and
L. Pluemer (Eds.), Semantic Modeling for the Acquisition of Topograﬁc Information from Images and
Maps, Birkhaeuser-Verlag: Basel, 1997.

8. K.C. Clarke, P. Cippoletti and G. Olsen. BEmpirical comparison of two line enhancement methods,’’

Proceedings of AUTO-CARTO 11, 1993.

9. C. Ducheˆne. BRoad generalisation using agents,’’ Proceedings of the GIS Research UK, 9th Annual

Conference, University of Glamorgan Wales, pp. 325Y328, 2001.

10. E. Fritsch. BUtilisation de la coubure pour la ge´ne´ralisation du line´aire routier,’’ Bulletin d’Information

n.66, IGN, France, 1997.

11. E. Fritsch and J.P. Lagrange. BSpectral representation of linear features for generalisation,’’ Proceedings of

COSIT’95, pp. 157Y171, Austria, Springer Verlag, 1995.

12. L. Harrie. An Optimisation Approach to Cartographic Generalisation. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Tech-

nology and Society, Lund University, 2001.

13. L. Harrie and T. Sarjakoski. BGeneralisation of vector data sets by simultaneous least squares adjustment,’’
International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Vol. XXXIII, Part A4, Amsterdam,
pp. 340Y347, 2000.

14. P. Højholt. BSolving local and global space conﬂicts in map generalization using a ﬁnite element method
adapted from structural mechanics,’’ in Proceedings 8th International Symposium on Spatial Data
Handling, pp. 679Y689. Vancouver, Canada, 1998.

252

BURGHARDT

15. M. Kass, A. Witkin and D. Terzopoulos. BSnakes: Active contour models,’’ in Proceedings of the First

International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 259Y268, 1987.

16. R.B. McMaster. BThe integration of simpliﬁcation and smoothing algorithms in line generalization,^

Cartographica, Vol. 26:100Y121, 1989.

17. R.B. McMaster and K.S. Shea. BGeneralization in Digital Cartography,’’ (Resource Publications in

Geography). Washington, D.C.: Association of American Geographers, 1992.

18. S. Meier. BZur qualita¨t snakes-approximierter ho¨henproﬁle mit diskontinuita¨ten,^ Photogrammetrie

Fernerkundung Geoinformation, Vol. 6:399Y409, 2000.

19. B. Nakos and V. Miropoulos. BLocal length ratio as a measure of critical points detection for line
simpliﬁcation,’’ Fifth Workshop on Progress in Automated Map Generalization, Paris, France, 2003.
20. Perkal. BAn attempt at objective generalization,’’ in Michigan Inter-University Community of Mathematical

Geographers, Discussion Paper 10, University of Michigan, 1966.

21. C. Plazanet. Enrichissement des bases donne´es ge´eographiques: Analyse dela ge´ometrie des objets
line´aires pour la ge´ne´ralisation cartographique (application aux routes). Ph.D. thesis of Marne la Valle´e
University, 1996.

22. C. Plazanet, N.M. Bigolin and A. Ruas. BExperiments with Learning Techniques for Spatial Model

Enrichment and Line Generalization,^ GeoInformatica, Vol. 2(4):315Y333, 1998.

23. A. Ruas. BThe role of meso objects for generalisation,’’ Proceedings of the International Symposium on

Spatial Data Handling, Beijing, 3b.50, 2000.

24. E. Saux. BB-spline Functions and Wavelets for Cartographic Line Generalization,^ Cartography and

Geographic Information Science, Vol. 30(1):33Y50, 2003.

25. F. Schwarzbach. BUntersuchungen zur rechnergestu¨tzten Liniengla¨ttung,’’ Ph.D. thesis, Kartographische

Bausteine 10, Department of Cartography, University of Dresden, 1995.

26. G. Schweinfurth. Ho¨henliniengeneralisierung mit Methoden der digitalen Bildverarbeitung. Deutsche

Geoda¨tische Kommission, Reihe C, No. 291, 1984.

27. M. Sester. BGeneralization based on least squares adjustment,’’ International Archives of Photogrammetry

and Remote Sensing, Vol. XXXIII, Part B4, Amsterdam, pp. 931Y938, 2000.

28. S. Steiniger and S. Meier. BSnakes: A technique for line smoothing and displacement

in map

generalisation,’’ Sixth Workshop on Progress in Automated Map Generalization, Leicester, UK, 2004.
29. F. To¨pfer. Kartographische Generalisierung, Erga¨nzungsheft Nr. 276 zu Geographische Mitteilungen. VEB

Hermann Haack, Geographisch-Kartographische Anstalt Gotha/Leipzig, 1974.

received his Ph.D. in geoscience from Dresden University in 2000, on the topic of
Dirk Burghardt
automated generalization. Later he worked as a developer and product manager for a cartographic production
company. Currently he is research associate at the Department of Geography at the University of Zurich. His
research interests include cartographic visualization, mobile information systems and automated cartographic
generalization.

