bs_bs_banner

Research Article
Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4): 563–581
Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129)): (cid:129)(cid:129)–(cid:129)(cid:129)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

Marieke van Erp,* Robert Hensel,* Davide Ceolin* and
Marian van der Meij†

*The Network Institute, VU University Amsterdam
†Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden

Abstract
For biodiversity research, the ﬁeld of study that is concerned with the richness of species of our planet, it
is of the utmost importance that the location of an animal specimen ﬁnd is known with high precision.
Due to specimens often having been collected over the course of many years, their accompanying geo-
graphical data is often ambiguous or may be very imprecise. In this article, we detail an approach that uti-
lizes reasoning and external sources to improve the geographical information of animal ﬁnds. Our main
contribution is to show that adding external domain knowledge improves the ability to georeference loca-
tions over traditional methods that focus solely on analyzing geographical information. Additionally, our
system is able to output the conﬁdence it has in its decisions through a conﬁdence measure based on the
difﬁculty of the instance and the steps undertaken to disambiguate it. Our results show that adding
domain knowledge to the georeferencing process increases the accuracy @5km from 38.9% to 61.7% and
from 47.0% to 74.5% @25km. Furthermore, we reduce the mean distance by more than half, from
251.1km to 114.5km, and decrease the number of records for which no reference can be found from
26.2% to 7.4%.

1 Introduction

Natural history museums, such as the Netherlands Centre for Biodiversity Naturalis
(Naturalis) (http://www.naturalis.nl), harbour vast collections of biodiversity specimens col-
lected from all around the world and their accompanying data. These collections encompass
an enormous amount of information about the biodiversity of our planet, but institutions are
in the process of unlocking their potential through digitization of their collection
still
metadata. An important aspect of biodiversity data is the location of the specimen ﬁnd;
without it, researchers cannot track species’ geographical distribution over time, model the
effects of environmental changes on species or try to predict how changes in the environment
inﬂuence biodiversity in certain regions. The lack of precise geographical information presents
a major problem in the efﬁcient use of the collection metadata. Recently, Naturalis and the
Computer Science department at VU University Amsterdam have teamed up to develop a solu-
tion to aid biologists in georeferencing their collections.

Most of the objects in the collection were collected a long time ago, often in countries
that were previously colonies of the Netherlands. These specimens (or parts of them) are
preserved in various ways. Invertebrates can be kept dried or preserved in alcohol, verte-
brates are often kept dried and mounted or in drawers, and the entomology collection is

Address for correspondence: Marieke van Erp, VU University, The Network Institute, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, Noord-
Holland, Netherlands. E-mail: marieke.van.erp@vu.nl
Acknowledgments: This work was funded by NWO in the CATCH programme, grant 640.004.801 and by the European Union’s 7th
Framework Programme via the NewsReader project (ICT-316404).

VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12110
doi: 10.1111/tgis.12110

564 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
2 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

often pinned or kept in bags. All specimens are kept in a secure climatized storage facility.
These specimens are used by researchers from all over the world, for example to investigate
the geographical spread and evolution of species and to classify and describe different
species. As the oldest parts of the Naturalis collection date back to the 18th century, most
geographical information in the collection records is captured in a textual description indi-
cating location(s) and offset(s) such as “Anti-Atlas, 10–20 km S. Ait-Baha, Morocco” rather
than precise geographical coordinates. The investigated databases at Naturalis contain ﬁelds
that describe the geographical information: country, province, town, location, coordinates
and altitude. See Van Erp (2010) for an overview of the database ﬁelds and statistics on how
many of the ﬁelds are ﬁlled. With semi-automatic approaches such as the MaPSteDI method
(Murphey et al. 2004) georeferencing a record reportedly takes approximately ﬁve minutes
per record. As Naturalis harbours 37 million objects with each their own record, manually
georeferencing each record would be time-consuming and costly. Crowdsourcing this task is
not an option as most of the data is domain speciﬁc, delicate or cannot be made public.
However, there is a large amount of biodiversity knowledge being made available online
which, when integrated with geographical resources can be put to use in a knowledge-driven
georeferencing approach.

To address this challenge, we have developed an automatic georeferencing approach that
uses domain knowledge about species geographical distribution from the online Global Biodi-
versity Information Facility (http://www.gbif.org).

This approach has been realized in a prototype currently being tested at Naturalis. The

contributions of our work are three-fold:

1. The ﬁrst knowledge-driven approach for automated georeferencing in the biology domain.
2. A novel automatic conﬁdence measure for georeferenced records to help curators pinpoint

difﬁcult records whilst handling, easier more certain records automatically.

3. A systematic evaluation that shows how a knowledge driven approach improves geo-
graphical information in a major biodiversity facility while limiting the need for input by
domain experts.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the chal-
lenges in georeferencing biodiversity data. Previous work is covered in Section 3. In Section 4,
we describe the datasets we used. Our georeferencing approach is described in Section 5, fol-
lowed by the results in Section 7. Our conﬁdence measure is described in Section 8. The proto-
type demonstrator is described in Section 9. Conclusions and future work are discussed in
Section 10.

2 Challenges

The problem of georeferencing natural history collections is not new: the different types of
challenges have been categorized and described by Beaman and Conn (2003). In Table 1, we
illustrate each of the challenges with an example from the Naturalis collection.1 It is not pos-
sible to georeference all types of localities with equal precision. Vague localities, such as
“Southeast Michigan”, simply contain too little information to pinpoint a spot within a small
range (<5 km) of the actual ﬁnding location and are thus considered outside the scope of this
article, but for localities containing for example distance measurements, such as “16 km N of
Murtoa”, georeferencing is feasible.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

3
565

Table 1 Georeferencing challenges and examples from the Naturalis collection

Challenge posed

Example textual locality

A1. Two or more locations that share

Amsterdam

the same name
A2. Vague localities
B1. Linear feature measurement
C1. Two or more location descriptors
C2. Topological nesting
C3. Linear ambiguity
D1. Complex interpretative description
E1. Political borders change over time
E2. Historical place-names

Southeast Michigan
16 km (by road) N of Murtoa
Wakarusa, 24 mi WSW of Lawrence
Moccasin Creek on Hog Island
On the road between Sydney and Bathurst
Bupo [?Buso] River, 15 miles [24 km] E of Lae
Yugoslavia
British North Borneo

3 Related Work

There is a fair body of research on georeferencing both outside and inside the domain of
natural history. Within the natural language processing community georeferencing is treated as
a follow-up task to named entity recognition (Leidner and Lieberman 2011; Loureiro et al.
2011), or possibly as complementary to it (Godoy et al. 2011). There are also several open
source tools available such as OpenSextant (http://opensextant.github.io) and CLAVIN (http://
clavin.bericotechnologies.com). However, these approaches assume full text, whereas the
datasets in the natural history domain are part of structured database records, making them
suboptimal for this domain.

Most approaches for structured data use some sort of gazetteers combined with some
form of reasoning to disambiguate and ground location names (Kauppinen et al. 2008;
Leidner et al. 2003; Li et al. 2003). These assume that the location names have been identiﬁed,
skipping the step of recognizing the location name and possible extra locality information.
Other approaches disambiguate toponyms from combining the analysis of events with a gazet-
teer (Roberts et al. 2010). In our case study, we do not have event descriptions at our disposal.
However, the procedure of information extraction, gazetteer lookup and geodisambiguation is
very similar to the one described in Roberts et al. (2010).

Another emerging relevant research thread regards the use of crowdsourcing to acquire
useful information for georeferencing (Deng et al. 2012; Karam and Melchiori 2013). These
approaches are complementary to the procedure described in our article,
since the
crowdsourced information might help in improving the disambiguation heuristics. This is
beyond the scope of this article, but would be a very interesting avenue of research for future
work.

Within the natural history domain, several attempts have been undertaken to automati-
cally assign coordinates to textual descriptions of locations in specimen datasets, with
BioGeoMancer as
its most well-known application (http://bg.berkeley.edu/ and http://
sourceforge.net/projects/BioGeoMancer/) [Beaman and Conn 2003; Guralnick et al. 2006).

BioGeoMancer provides an application for text processing, interpreting, gazetteer query-
ing (using a variety of sources – see http://www.biogeomancer.org/metadata.html for addi-
intersecting spatial descriptions and as a result returning a standardized
tional details),

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

566 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
4 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

geographical reference including uncertainty levels. The initial version of BioGeoMancer sup-
ported interpretation of localities in English, Spanish and Portuguese. However, the latest
available version of BioGeoMancer supports English queries only.

Also developed for georeferencing natural history data is GeoLocate

(http://
www.museum.tulane.edu/geolocate/) (Rios and Bart 2014). It uses similar gazetteer data as the
BioGeoMancer project,2 but GeoLocate uses different georeferencing heuristics as well as addi-
tional linear features to its gazetteer such as rivers, road, legal land descriptions and river
miles. These additional information sources can lead to more accurate results, but are only
available for the US, Canada, and Mexico. A comparison of automated georeferencing tools
found that, at the time, GeoLocate was the best software tool to efﬁciently georeference large
datasets (Murphey et al. 2004).

Although both focused on the biology domain, neither BioGeoMancer nor GeoLocate
makes use of domain-speciﬁc knowledge, such as species occurrence data. Also neither can
deal with non-English data.

4 Data

In this section, we describe our primary dataset as well as the resources used for
georeferencing and the development of the gold standard.

4.1 Reptiles and Amphibians Database

Several large datasets of animal specimen datasets are maintained at Naturalis. The informa-
tion in these datasets comes from the ﬁeld logs and registers in which the biologists who made
these ﬁnds recorded them manually, usually during expeditions. Part of the information from
these sources has been converted to electronic datasets over the course of time by many differ-
ent biologists working with the specimens. Creating these databases was not a top-down
organized undertaking, but rather taken up by the researchers themselves to improve their
own access to the data. As such the structure of these databases differs, and currently initia-
tives are underway to standardize the electronic data recording process.

For our case study, we used the reptiles and amphibians database containing 29,752
records, each referring to a speciﬁc animal’s ﬁnd. Among the information in these records, one
typically ﬁnds locality information indicating where these specimens were found, its species,
the name of the collector, information about when it was entered into the database and by
whom it was entered into the database. The location ﬁnd information is divided over several
different database ﬁelds, namely “Town/City”, “Province/State”, “Country”, “Location”,3
“Altitude”, and “Coordinates” (only ﬁlled in for 3.4% of the records). In this article, we shall
mostly focus on the information from the Town/City, Province/State, Country and Location
ﬁelds. The records also contain some additional notes describing the circumstances under
which the specimen was found or any other unusual information about the specimen. The data
is mostly in Dutch and English, but Spanish, Portuguese and German are also present. Foreign
languages are found in particular in local abbreviations or terms. Some examples of this are
the use of “Municipio” (Spanish for municipality) instead of municipality or “Est.” as abbre-
viation for “Estado” (Spanish for state). For the work presented in this article we focus on
Dutch data records as this is the main language of the database.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

5
567

Table 2 Categories for different types of textual descriptions

Category

Example

No. in gold
standard

A. Single Place
B. Single Place with offset
C. Two or more places
D. Two or more places

“Maastricht”
“18 mls. E. of Kumasi”
“Sibil, Sterrengebergte”
“Alachua Co., 10 mi S. Gainesville

90 (45%)
20 (10%)
62 (31%)
28 (14%)

with offset

Total

on Wachahoota rd.”

-

200

25,119

No. in full set

10,750 (42,7%)
2,363 (9.4%)
9,150 (36.4%)
2,856 (11.3%)

4.2 Gold Standard

To test our system, we created a gold standard consisting of 200 records. 50 records were used
to develop and tune our system, for example to check if the offset calculations performed as
expected. 150 records were set aside for ﬁnal testing. Records were selected randomly but with
two aspects in mind: common challenges and internal representativeness. The ﬁrst aspect
ensures that the different types of locality information present in the database are represented
in the gold standard. The second aspect compensates for the fact that some types of locality
descriptions are more frequent than others.

Due to the limited resources for annotating the gold standard dataset, we decided to
focus on those categories from the initial nine categories in Table 1 (presented in Section 2)
that contained vagueness or linear feature measurements. We collapsed the categories that
are closely related by means of challenges posed to our system, as indicated by the letters in
Table 1. As there are no high quality resources available currently that delineate political
borders over time, or provide accurate information about historical place-names, we dis-
carded categories E1 and E2 for this article. In Table 2, we show our categories, as well as
an example, the distribution of records pertaining to this category in the gold standard and
in the entire database.4

Manually adding geographical coordinates to the 200 records for our gold standard was
accomplished by two annotators using agreed guidelines based on the MaNIS/HerpNet/ORNIS
Georeferencing Guidelines (http://manisnet.org/GeorefGuide.html). These guidelines outline a
cascading approach in which annotators will ﬁrst try to look up place-names in a gazetteer, after
which they address offsets or other complex features of the locality to be georeferenced. Further-
more, annotators were asked to indicate records that were difﬁcult to georeference with an extra
tag “PRECISION=LOW”. Both annotators georeferenced 120 records, of which 40 were com-
pared to determine inter-annotator agreement. It took both annotators about two afternoons to
complete this task. Despite the guidelines, there was a fairly large disagreement indicating the
difﬁculty of the georeferencing task. Of the 40 records that were annotated twice, initially 60%
were an exact match or did not differ more than 1 km, 65% were correct within 10 km, and
85% were correct within 100 km. Records differed due to differences in interpretation of the
offset, the use of different information sources (often resulting in minor differences) or selecting
different places from the gazetteers. The annotators discussed the differing records and reached
an agreement in a post-annotation adjudication step.

Common sources of disagreement were the distinction between administrative areas (such
as provinces and states) and actual populated places, and choosing different paths when calcu-

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

568 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
6 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

lating offsets (such as “18 mls. E. of Kumasi”). If there is more than one linear feature (linear
features include roads, streams, railways, etc.) going east out of a town, it is up to the annota-
tor to make an educated guess as to which of these has to be followed.

4.3 Gazetteers and Biodiversity Resources

Two geographical gazetteers were used to look up place-names: GeoNames
(http://
www.geonames.org) and Google Maps (http://maps.google.com). GeoNames contains about
10 million place-names and information about those places, such as coordinates, alternative
names, elevation levels and population numbers. Its scope is global, although it contains more
information about highly populated areas. In the context of this research, this may be an
obstacle, as much of the specimen ﬁnds are outside populated areas.

We prefer to use GeoNames because of its rich structured information about its location,
but in cases where we cannot ﬁnd a location in the GeoNames database, we fall back on
Google Maps. Because of its built-in ranking mechanism, it will return more important places
ﬁrst which is information that can be used to conﬁrm or deny conﬁdence in results retrieved
from the GeoNames.

For biodiversity background data, we use The Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF; http://www.gbif.org) is the largest online portal for biodiversity data. As of November
2011, the portal contains 312 million records, of which 271 million also contain coordinates
(86.86%). These records come from the combination of many individual datasets provided by
institutions from around the world. A study on the accuracy of geographical data in GBIF
records (Yesson et al. 2007) showed that the majority of the records were annotated with
correct coordinates (83%), but the relatively large amount of incorrectly georeferenced records
is something that has to be taken into account when using this data. In our approach we there-
fore do not use GBIF as a gold standard to derive exact coordinates from, but we use it to
ﬁlter out outliers (see Subsection 6.3).

5 Knowledge-Driven Georeferencing Approach

Our georeferencing approach consists of ﬁve rule-based modules that form the pipeline
through which each of the 150 evaluation records from the gold standard is processed. All
modules are automatic and implemented in Perl. However,
the
georeferencing approach is presented to a researcher who needs to check the systems result
before it is included in the database. A schematic overview of the system is presented in
Figure 1.

result of

the ﬁnal

1. Record Filter This module ﬁlters the database record to include only those database ﬁelds
used by the system (“Town/City”, “Province/State”, “Country”, “Location”, “Altitude”,
“Collection Date”, “Genus”, and “Species”)

2. Text Parsing In the parsing module, sentences are split and tokenized. Then tokens are
matched against patterns and keywords to recognize indicators for offsets (such as cardi-
nal directions and units of measurement), place-names and common words in Dutch and
English.

3. Gazetteer Lookup Identiﬁed location name candidates from the text parsing module are

looked up in GeoNames and Google Maps.

4. Offset Calculation If an offset, such as “112 km S El Dorado” is encountered, coordinates
retrieved from the gazetteer for the place of reference (“El Dorado”) need to be combined

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

7
569

Figure 1 Schematic overview of the Knowledge-driven Georeferencing Approach. The Conﬁdence
Measure module will be discussed in Section 8

Figure 2 Visualization of an offset from a named place

with the offset (“112 km South”) to calculate the ﬁnal coordinates. For the calculations of
the coordinates we use the Perl Geo::Calc (http://search.cpan.org/ asp/Geo-Calc-0.11/lib/
Geo/Calc.pm) module. An example is shown in Figure 2.

5. Disambiguation Heuristics As many place-names share the same name (“Amsterdam,
Netherlands” vs. “Amsterdam, MO, US”) or similar names (“York, UK” vs. “New York,
US”) several disambiguation heuristics were selected to disambiguate location names.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

570 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
8 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

6 Disambiguation Heuristics

In this section, we will detail each of our disambiguation heuristics.

6.1 Spatial Minimality

The spatial minimality heuristic is a fairly standard statistic in georeferencing and relies on
co-occurrence of geographic entities within the same discourse. This heuristic assumes that, in
a text which mentions more than one location, the cluster of physical locations in the world
that are most closely related by distance are the most likely candidates to be actually referred
to. For example, if “Amsterdam” and “Utrecht” are mentioned in the same text it is assumed
that Amsterdam refers to “Amsterdam, NH, Netherlands” whereas if “Amsterdam” is men-
tioned together with “Albany”, it is more likely to refer to “Amsterdam, NY, United States”.
Li et al. (2003) use a maximum weight spanning tree (MST) to determine the best candidate
based on its closest mentioned neighbours. Leidner et al. (2003) use an approach based on
ﬁnding the smallest polygon that binds a set of candidates to achieve a similar result. We
follow the more common approach from Leidner et al. (2003) and compute polygons that
span each combination of potential candidates for a location name, and select the smallest
polygon. We start with a list of potential candidates for each place name and their correspond-
ing coordinates and match each candidate to every possible combination of candidates from
the other place-names. For each of these combinations the system creates a polygon that
encloses these candidates. The system selects the smallest polygon, and the set of candidates
used to create that polygon are seen as the most likely candidates.

6.2 Expedition Clusters

The spatial minimality heuristic uses only information from within individual records.
However, specimen database records are not independent. The Expedition Clusters heuristic
assumes that information from similar records can be used to aid georeferencing. Work on this
same dataset described by Van Erp (2007) shows that it is possible to use information avail-
able in the dataset to rediscover expeditions from a dataset. Information about which expedi-
tion a record belongs to is only explicitly available in a small number of records, but it is “re-
discovered” by using data such as collection date and country. Enriching the data in such a
way enables comparison between records which would otherwise not be possible. For
example, it is very unlikely that two records from the same expedition are in entirely different
locations. An example expedition plot is shown in Figure 3. Thus, if such an anomaly was to
be detected it would be a clear signal that one of the records is incorrectly georeferenced.
Furthermore, the information can be used for disambiguation of place-names as also suggested
in the work of Guo et al. (2008), and increase conﬁdence in the outcome of the georeferencing
process.

Van Erp (2007) found that grouping records by collection dates alone was very efﬁcient
already (0.83 F-Measure). We also added country information to maximize precision. Before
implementation, the date ﬁeld in the dataset was standardized to the format “YYYY-MM-
DD” and the retrieved records were subsequently ordered by date and country. Records with
incorrect or incomplete collection dates (e.g. “30-02-1960” and “1960”), as well as records
without country information were not processed in this heuristic. A candidate for a place
name that is close to the previous georeferenced location record (if that record belongs to the
same expedition) will be assigned a higher conﬁdence measure.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

9
571

Figure 3 Automatically georeferenced cluster of locations belonging to an expedition on the right

6.3 Species Occurrence Data

Occurrence data from existing specimen ﬁnds can be used to check whether new data ﬁts the
currently known locations for species. In the current implementation, this data is retrieved
solely from GBIF as, at the time of writing, this is the only openly available resource contain-
ing such information. This information is used to disambiguate location descriptions and vali-
date results in much the same way as the expedition heuristic. By querying GBIF data,
coordinates are retrieved for all currently known ﬁnds of the species in the record. Each coor-
dinate for a previously found specimen ﬁnd is then compared with each place candidate, and
based on the closest specimen ﬁnd to a candidate, a conﬁdence measure is assigned to the can-
didate; the smaller the distance to a candidate the higher the conﬁdence. The conﬁdence
measure is detailed in Section 8. A visual representation of the GBIF disambiguation heuristic
is shown in Figure 4.

7 Results and Discussion

All presented results are measured by applying the heuristics in our knowledge-driven
georeferencing approach to the 150 evaluation records that were manually georeferenced for
the gold standard (see Subsection 4.2). We computed a baseline score to compare our
approach with a simple look-up approach by retrieving the coordinates of the ﬁrst location
name found in the record, looking up this name in the GeoNames gazetteer, ﬁltering by
country and province and returning coordinates of the ﬁrst candidate. Table 3 presents the
accuracy results of the different modules on the test set. As this table shows, the number of

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

572 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
10 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

Figure 4 Visualization of the GBIF disambiguation heuristic: (a) the GeoNames gazetteer candi-
dates; (b) the GBIF occurrence data; and (c) the search space (red box) after combining the
GeoNames candidates with the GBIF occurrence data

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets
Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

11
573

Table 3 Accuracy of the georeferencing heuristics within 5, 25 and 100 km of the gold standard
coordinates, compared to baseline in percentages. The table also shows the mean distance the dif-
ferent heuristics were off, as well as the percentage of cases for which no coordinates were found
by the system

Correct
@5 km

Correct
@25 km

Correct
@100 km

Mean
distance off

Not
Found

Baseline
+Google Maps & Fuzzy match
+Spatial Heuristics
+Expeditions
+GBIF

38.9
53.0
59.1
59.1
61.7

47.0
65.1
71.8
71.8
74.5

58.4
74.5
77.2
77.2
79.9

251.1 km
244.1 km
171.1 km
171.1 km
114.5 km

26.2
8.7
7.4
7.4
7.4

Table 4 Precision, recall and F-measure of the different heuristics at 25km from the coordinates in
the gold standard

Precision

Recall

baseline
+Google Maps & Fuzzy match
+Spatial Heuristics
+Expeditions
+GBIF

0.64
0.71
0.78
0.78
0.80

0.47
0.65
0.72
0.72
0.74

F1

0.54
0.68
0.75
0.75
0.77

records for which a correct match is found within 5 km goes up from 38.9% in the baseline
system to 61.7% in the full system. This is an improvement of 22.8%. Similar improvements
are observed for the within 25 and 100 km measures (from 47.0% to 74.5% (= 27.5%) and
from 58.4% to 79.9% (= 21.5%) respectively). This brings down the number of records for
which no reference could be found to less than 10% (from 26.2%) and the number of incor-
rectly referenced records from 91 for the baseline system to 57 within the 5 km range, from 80
to 112 within the 25 km range, and from 62 to 30 within the 100 km range. Table 4 presents
the precision (percentage of correctly georeferenced records), recall (percentage of records for
which the system suggested coordinates) and F-measure (the harmonic mean of precision and
recall) of the best system at 25 km. Application of the t-test shows that all modules provide
signiﬁcant improvement over the baseline at p < 0.005.

The spatial minimality heuristic improves results for records that contain more than one
place name (which is the case for around 50% of the records in our gold standard), but with
some caveats. The ﬁrst implementation included each location found in the record (Place,
Location and Province/State). However, because the location ﬁeld is a free text ﬁeld, it contains
long sentences in a number of records, negatively affecting the rule-based system for recogniz-
ing location names. However, in many other cases, the location ﬁeld does contain useful infor-
mation, so it was decided to not parse any location ﬁelds with a length exceeding 60
characters. The spatial minimality heuristic performs better if the Province/State ﬁeld is not
included in this heuristic. Provinces and states generally cover larger areas but the gazetteer

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

574 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
12 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

Table 5 Results split out per category based on best results from Table 3 (GeoNames + Google
Maps + fuzzy search + spatial heuristics + expeditions + GBIF). The numbers behind the categories
indicate the number of records in that category

Category

5 km 25 km 100 km

Mean distance
Off

No Result

A: Single Location (67)
B: Single Location + offset (15)
C: Multiple Locations (46)
D: Multiple Locations + offset(s) (21)

58.2
86.7
60.9
57.1

64.7
100

73.9
85.7

68.7
100

82.6
95.2

140.1
1.7
146.4
54.9

16.4
0
0
0

will return only one single point that does not represent this fact. As such, these points do not
add much information on a smaller scale and pollute the created polygons. Since the country is
almost always known, this already dramatically decreases the area that has to be searched. As
a result, the heuristic mainly improves results that were not too far off to begin with.

As our data is in Dutch, we could not run our data in BioGeoMancer and GeoLocate. For
GeoLocate it is also the case that only georeferencing in the US is supported. We could also not
get hold of the data they tested their systems with, therefore an exact comparison of our
system to BioGeoMancer and GeoLocate is not possible, but we have striven to set up our
experiments in similar fashion. We therefore assume that our results for the spatial heuristics
are in the same ballpark as those reported in the work of Murphey et al. (2004).

Although the results in Tables 3 and 4 seem to indicate that the expedition heuristic does
not improve the results, manual inspection of the records showed that the heuristic does add
valuable information. For now this information mostly affects the conﬁdence score (see Section
8), and we attribute the lack of improved scores to the conﬁguration of our gold standard
dataset. As our gold standard contains a sample of random records from across the entire
dataset, the number of records belonging to the same expedition in this sample is small, and as
such these small clusters add little evidence to support the disambiguation process.

The use of GBIF Species Occurrence Data is especially useful in situations for disambigua-
tion of location names in a large geographical area (notice that is why the mean distance off
improves more than the percentages of correctly georeferenced localities). If a specimen ﬁnd is
only annotated with the place name “Sibil”, a list of 20 possible candidates would be retrieved
from the GeoNames gazetteer in different continents. By cross-referencing these candidates
with existing ﬁnds of the species (“Sphenomorphus schultzei”), only two likely candidates
remain: “Ok Sibil, Papua, ID” and “Sibil, Papua New Guinea”, greatly decreasing the search
space.

Care needs to be taken, however, that on a smaller scale, the heuristic should not be used
too rigorously, since it will only favour locations that ﬁt within the existing data model and
many species occurrences are spread out across an area. Furthermore, a signiﬁcant part (16%)
of the geographical data in GBIF records was found to contain errors, as demonstrated by
Yesson et al. (2007). Species occurrence records for “Sphenomorphus schultzei” show that the
species was found on multiple locations across the island “New Guinea”, in an area of almost
600,000 km2. In this case, the occurrence data should not be used for disambiguation of the
two remaining candidates on this island.

The results for different categories presented in Table 5 show that records that are anno-

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets
Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

13
575

tated with one single location name and an offset (category B) are georeferenced with a
much higher accuracy than other categories. Obviously, the textual complexity of these
records is limited but there are two other points of interest. In each of these cases, there is
no problem with the distinction between administrative areas (provinces, states) and popu-
lated places (cities, villages) since it is obvious that an offset will always be from a populated
place and not from a province. Secondly, the offsets usually appear to be from a well-known
(or important) place. A major difﬁculty in geo-referencing biological collections is the use of
place-names that are only locally known. The location of place-names such as “Meyers’
farm” or “Base Bivouac” might be very well known during expeditions and to local inhab-
itants. However, it is nearly impossible to use this information on its own without the use of
very speciﬁc information sources such as the ﬁeld logs and maps created for speciﬁc expedi-
tions. In speciﬁc implementations, one could consider manually creating an additional gazet-
teer for such places.

As can be seen in the third column, the other categories (A, C and D) have an almost
similar score for correct matches within 5 km. However, results for single location names (cat-
egory A) show that the number of additional places found within 25 or 100 km is limited,
whereas records with more than one location show improvements. Records that are annotated
with more than one location beneﬁt the georeferencing process by adding contextual informa-
tion. For example, when encountering a description such as “Lake Jaroe, Kampong Gariau,
Indonesia”, “Lake Jaroe” does not occur in any generic gazetteer. However, the record can still
be georeferenced using the more generic location “Kampong Gariau”. However, this means
records are georeferenced to locations several kilometers away from the correct location,
decreasing accuracy.

8 Measuring Conﬁdence

There is much potential uncertainty in the georeferencing process. This stems from the data
itself, from the external data sources used, and from the process of linking data to these exter-
nal sources. It is important that these sources of uncertainty are identiﬁed and recorded to be
able to calculate a conﬁdence score for the resulting georeferenced locality. Although Graham
et al. (2008) found that “species distribution modeling approaches in general are fairly robust
to locational error”, not having information about the uncertainty of georeferenced localities
makes it impossible to know if this geospatial data is suitable for a speciﬁc purpose and it may
thus be of little use as also suggested in the work of Wieczorek et al. (2004) and Guo et al.
(2008).

Inspired by a basic manual conﬁdence value system used in the MaPSteDI method
(Murphey et al. 2004), a scale from −12 to 12 is used to automatically indicate the conﬁdence
in a georeferenced locality (12 indicating the highest degree of conﬁdence, 0 the average, and
−12 lowest). This automatic measure represents the conﬁdence that the returned coordinates
for a georeferenced location are accurate. The conﬁdence measure is based on several different
indicators presented in Table 6. Each indicator contributes to the ﬁnal conﬁdence score with a
different value. These values have been determined through manual adjustment based on the
development dataset. We will investigate the automated computation of the conﬁdence scores
in depth in the future.

The most important component of the conﬁdence score is the amount of information
available in a record. A single place name with structured additional information about the
province and country such as “Santa Bárbara, Amazonas, Brazil” can usually be retrieved with

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

576 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
14 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

Table 6 Calculation of the Conﬁdence Score. SM denotes the spatial minimality heuristic, EXP
denotes the expedition heuristic, and OD indicates the use of species occurrence data. In some
cases, a range of values can be deducted or added. The Fuzzy string search fail heuristic means that
when the fuzzy string search in GeoNames does not produce a meaningful result, the conﬁdence
score is penalized. Likewise, when the georefenced value corresponds to an administrative area
(rather than to a speciﬁc geographic point), the conﬁdence score is decreased. If the georeferenced
entry corresponds to the ﬁrst candidate result returned by a GeoNames query, then the conﬁdence
score is increased

Level

Indicator

Record
Record
Record
GeoNames Result
GeoNames Result
Candidate
Candidate
Candidate
Candidate
Candidate
Candidate
Candidate

Country known
Province known
Unknown parts in description
Place not part of province
Fuzzy string search fail
(SM) Close together
(OD) Close to GBIF
(EXP) Close to previous ﬁnd
GeoNames Candidate very close to Google Maps
Only found on Google Maps
GeoNames ﬁrst candidate
Administrative area

Points

+2
+1
−1
−1
−3
+x, x ∈ [0, 2]
+x, x ∈ [−1, 2]
+x, x ∈ [−2, 2]
+x, x ∈ [0, 2]
−3
+1
−1

a higher conﬁdence than a single description such as “Forest between 20–10 km from
Ambohaobe”. Therefore the latter record receives a lower Conﬁdence Score based on absence
of country and province information. Secondly, it is based on the consistency and type of input
data from gazetteers and biodiversity resource. For example, if no direct match in a gazetteer
is found but a result is found using fuzzy matching, that result will still used but it decreases
the conﬁdence. If a georeferenced location is consistent with existing occurrence data from
GBIF, this will increase the conﬁdence.

Each heuristic can increase or decrease the conﬁdence. For example, based on the spatial
minimality heuristic, the conﬁdence will be increased if the polygon describing the area of
co-occurring place-names is very small. If a record belonging to the same expedition is
georeferenced to a location close to other specimen ﬁnds from that same expedition, the conﬁ-
dence is also increased. For instance, in our dataset we have a record for which: the country is
known (+2), the province is unknown (0), the location description contains unknown words
(−1), the georeferenced location is close to an existing occurrence in GBF (+1), but a fuzzy
search in the gazetteers does not return a positive result (−3), the place description is found
only in Google Maps (−3), and all the other heuristics do not apply (and, hence, produce a 0
value), gets a conﬁdence score of −4. The fact that the distance of the georeferenced location of
this entry from its actual location is approximatively 1,204.72 m, conﬁrms the indication
given by the low conﬁdence score.

The extent to which certain variables inﬂuence the accuracy cannot always be determined
and as such make the method not infallible. In some cases, there is simply not enough informa-
tion to determine an indicative conﬁdence measure. To estimate the reliability of our conﬁ-
the
dence measure, we treat

it as an estimated observation about

the correctness of

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets
Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

15
577

corresponding georeferenced entry. Similarly to the works of Jøsang (2001) and Ceolin et al.
(2011), this estimated evidence is used to build a Beta probability distribution that describes
the probability of each conﬁdence score in the interval [0, 1] to represent the trustworthiness
of the entry.

In more detail, each heuristic is utilized as evidence for the correctness of the estimate:
when the heuristic provides a positive value (e.g. the country of a record is known), this counts
as positive evidence; when the heuristic provides a negative score (e.g. in case of unknown
parts in the record), this counts as negative evidence. In fact, each heuristic can be seen as an
indication of the possibility to correctly georeference the record. The more heuristics positively
indicate the possibility to correctly geolocate, the more conﬁdent we will be about the
geolocation. We aggregate all heuristics (per record) by building a Beta probability distribu-
tion. This distribution is shaped by two parameters, corresponding to the amount of positive
and negative evidence (each plus one). For a comprehensive list of positive and negative values
of the heuristics, we refer the reader to Table 6. The values contributed by each heuristic are
aggregated in positive and negative evidence counts as follows: if a heuristic ranges between −2
and 2 and the value of that heuristic is −1, we count 1 positive piece of evidence and 3 nega-
tive ones. So, if max is the upper bound of a heuristic (e.g. 2) and min its lower bound (e.g.
−2), given the value h of the heuristic, we compute the corresponding positive and negative
evidence p and n as follows:

= −

p h min

=

n max h

−

(1)

(2)

We aggregate all the evidence for all the heuristics, and then we compute the expected
value of the resulting Beta distribution. The Beta distribution is a probability distribution that
ranges between 0 and 1 and we use it to estimate the probability of each value in the [0, 1]
interval to represent the probability for the georeferencing to be correct. If the heuristics
provide a fair amount of negative evidence, the expected value of the Beta distribution will be
close to zero, and vice-versa. Also, the variance of the distribution measures the uncertainty in
this estimate, and it is therefore smaller when we are more certain about our estimate, i.e.
when more heuristics are available.

A Shapiro-Wilk normality test at the 95% conﬁdence level shows that both the error in
the georeferencing process and the expected values of the Beta distributions computed using
the heuristics are not normally distributed, hence we use a Spearman’s rank correlation test
(Spearman 1904) at 95% conﬁdence level to check the existence of a linear correlation
between the two series of values. In particular, since the Spearman’s test compares the rank
between values (without taking into account their differences), we standardize the distances
and we round them (to seven decimal digits) because we do not expect our conﬁdence scores
to be extremely precise; rather they should help us to distinguish between good and bad
georeferences. The test results in a weak negative correlation (−0.22), as shown in Figure 5.
This suggests that the procedure is sometimes able to compute a conﬁdence score that resem-
bles the real trustworthiness of the result of the georeferencing process, but there is still room
for improvement. Also, another Spearman correlation test at the 95% conﬁdence level shows a
weak positive correlation (0.21) between the variance of the Beta distribution based on the
heuristics and the error of the georeferencing process, indicating that the more certain the
score is, the lower the error.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

578 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
16 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

Figure 5 Distribution of conﬁdence scores for georeferenced locations of the gold standard. The
colored bars indicate the relative distribution of occurrences (left axis scale), while the black line
displays the absolute number of occurrences in each category (right axis scale)

9 GeoImp Demonstrator

As a proof of the concept for biologists who need to georeference their datasets, we built an
online demo GeoImp.5 This front-end can be used to georeference a single instance, or batch-
reference multiple records using the CSV mode. A user can enter query terms in one or more
ﬁelds in the interface after which the system will try to return a georeferenced location visual-
ized on a map along with the conﬁdence it has in its decision. Entering more information into
the system decreases the ambiguity in the process. The results are shown on a map, and as
coordinates together with the calculated conﬁdence score. Currently, only Dutch and English
are supported and only a limited number of records can be parsed at once; additional input
methods and integration with the Naturalis collection registration system will be provided in
the future. A screenshot can be found in Figure 6.

10 Conclusions and Future Work

We have presented a method to automate georeferencing of records in animal specimen
datasets that utilizes the spirit semantic web technology by integrating different types of infor-
mation to form a richer knowledge base. Several heuristics for the disambiguation of location
names that use domain knowledge from external resources and reasoning were implemented
and tested. In addition, the method produces a conﬁdence score to indicate how certain the
system is of its decisions to help curators select records to inspect manually. Using our proto-
type, experiments using a manually created gold standard were carried out to test the impact
of the heuristics on the georeferencing process. We have shown that domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edge such as occurrence data from a biodiversity resource contributes to more accurate results.
The complexity of the georeferencing task is high. A substantial amount of specimen ﬁnds
are not annotated with enough information to return accurate coordinates, and generic gazet-
teers are only partially suited for the natural history domain as they often lack information on
location names mentioned in locality descriptions. However, our conﬁdence measure proves
useful in these cases, pointing experts in Naturalis to these records so they can focus their
attention on those cases that require input from a human expert. The effectiveness of our con-

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets
Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

17
579

Figure 6 Screenshot of the GeoImp Demonstrator

ﬁdence measure in correctly representing the precision of the georeferencing process with
respect to each entry has been demonstrated by means of a statistical test.

We are of the opinion that our approach will translate well to domains other than the
biology domain. As more and more structured data becomes available, for example through
the Linked Open Data cloud, integration of data becomes more feasible. Furthermore, many
institutions struggle with a lack of resources to manually georeference their data, for which an
approach that can resolve simpler cases automatically and pinpoints the cases where human
knowledge is required would be useful. We have shown in previous work that such a semi-
automatic system works well for other tasks too, such as data cleaning (Van den Bosch et al.
2009).

In future research, we will investigate incorporating additional resources to cope with
location names described in different languages such as “Midden Java” (Dutch for “Central
Java”) and places that would not occur in generic gazetteers (such as historic names or base
camps for expeditions which are recorded at the institution). We will also look into incorpo-
rating linear feature types such as rivers and roads in our offset calculations. The geographical
resources that we used did not speciﬁcally record such features, but other resources such as
Open Street Map (http://www.openstreetmap.org/) could help resolve this. When we have
access to linear features, the text parsing module can also be expanded as currently the system
cannot accurately interpret “On the road between place X and Y”. Furthermore, the expedi-
tion heuristic shows interesting possibilities for new research, as it utilizes the fact that individ-
ual records in a database are dependent on each other. To further test this feature, we intend to
use a slightly different experimental setup with a less random data sample, to make sure we
have enough instances belonging to an expedition to test our assumption that the interdepend-
ence of records may aid the disambiguation process. Also, when the system is integrated in the
workﬂow, researchers will continuously update the database with georeferenced records which
will grow the gold standard dataset, enabling expanding to different subdomains within

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

580 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij
18 M van Erp, R Hensel, D Ceolin and M van der Meij

biology and further ﬁne tuning of the system. We will also systematically investigate the inﬂu-
ence of the different modules by extending our experiments with different parameters, such as
changing the ranking given back by the gazetteer lookup modules and orderings of the
modules in our pipeline. In particular, we will further investigate the deﬁnition and the imple-
mentation of automatic conﬁdence scores, possibly employing linear regression or more
reﬁned techniques to automatically learning the weights for the heuristics and combining them
in an optimized manner.

Our results presented here show that there is still much to be gained by combining domain

speciﬁc knowledge for georeferencing.

Notes

records.

1 All examples provided in this article are translations of location mentions found in Dutch database

2 Since 2006, GeoLocate has been part of the BioGeoMancer Workbench, but the current status of the

integration of the projects is unclear.

3 This sometimes contains the town or city value, but more often it is used to describe offsets or particu-

larities of the ﬁnd, such as that the specimen was found under a branch or in a puddle.

4 Estimate based on an automated categorization script.
5 GeoImp stands for Georeference Improver and can be found at: http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/geoimp.

References

Telopea 10(1): 43–52

Beaman R and Conn B 2003 Automated geoparsing and georeferencing of malesian collection locality data.

Ceolin D, van Hage W R, Fokkink W, and Schreiber G 2011 Estimating uncertainty of categorical web data. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Uncertainty Reasoning for the Semantic Web
(URSW 2011), Bonn, Germany: 15–26

Deng D-P, Chuang T-R, Shao K-T, Mai G-S, Lin T-E, Lemmens R, Hsu C-H, Lin H-H, and Kraak M-J 2012
Using social media for collaborative species identiﬁcation and occurrence: issues, methods, and tools. In
Proceedings of the First ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Crowdsourced and Volunteered
Geographic Information, Redondo Beach, California: 22–9

Godoy J, Atkinson J, and Rodriguez A 2011 Geo-referencing with semi-automatic gazetteer expansion using
lexico-syntactical patterns and co-reference analysis. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science 25: 149–70

Graham C, Elith J, Heijmans R J, Guisan A, Townsend Peterson A, and Loiselle B 2008 The inﬂuence of spatial
errors in species occurrence data used in distribution models. Journal of Applied Ecology 45: 239–47
Guo Q, Liu Y, and Wieczorek. J 2008 Georeferencing locality descriptions and computing associated uncer-
tainty using a probabilistic approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 22:
1067–90

Guralnick R P, Wieczorek J, Beaman R, and Heijmans R J 2006 BioGeomancer: Automated georeferencing to

map the world’s biodiversity data. PLoS Biology 4: 1908–09

Jøsang A 2001 A logic for uncertain probabilities. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and

Knowledge-Based Systems 9: 279–311

Karam R and Melchiori M 2013 Improving geo-spatial linked data with the wisdom of the crowds. In Proceed-

ings of the Joint EDBT/ICDT 2013 Workshops, Genoa, Italy: 68–74

Kauppinen T, Henriksson R, Sinkkilä R, Lindroos R, Väatäinen J, and Hyvönen E 2008 Ontology-based disam-
biguation of spatiotemporal locations. In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Identity and
Reference on the Semantic Web, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain

Leidner J L and Lieberman M D 2011 Detecting geographical references in the form of place names and associ-

ated spatial natural language. SIGSPATIAL Special 3(2): 5–11

Leidner J L, Sinclair G, and Webber B 2003 Grounding spatial named entities for information extraction and
question answering. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Analysis of Geographic Refer-
ences (HLT-NAACL-GEOREF ’03), Edmonton, Alberta: 31–8

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets
Georeferencing Animal Specimen Datasets

19
581

Li H, Srihari R K, Niu C, and Li W 2003 InfoXtract location normalization: A hybrid approach to geographic
references in information extraction. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Analysis of
Geographic References (HLT-NAACL-GEOREF ’03), Edmonton, Alberta: 39–44

Loureiro V, Anastácio I, and Martins B 2011 Learning to resolve geographical and temporal references in text.
In Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois: 349–52

Murphey P C, Guralnick R P, Glaubitz R, Neuﬁeld D, and Ryan J A 2004 Georeferencing of museum collec-
tions: A review of the problems and automated tools, and the methodology developed by the mountain and
plains spatial-temporal database-informatics initiative (MaPSTeDI). Phyloinformatics 1: 1–29

Rios N E and Bart H L Jr. 2014 Geolocate Users’s Manual. WWW document, http://www.museum.tulane.edu/

geolocate/standalone/manual_ver2_0.pdf

Roberts K, Bejan C A, and Harabagiu S M 2010 Toponym disambiguation using events. In Proceedings of the

Twenty-third Florida Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Society Conference, Daytona Beach, Florida

Spearman C 1904 The proof and measurement of association between two things. American Journal of Psychol-

ogy 15: 88–103

gent Systems 24(2): 54–63

Van den Bosch A, Van Erp M, and Sporleder C 2009 Making a clean sweep of cultural heritage. IEEE Intelli-

Van Erp M 2007 Retrieving lost information from textual databases: Rediscovering expeditions from an animal
specimen database. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data
(LaTeCH 2007), Prague, Czech Republic

Van Erp M 2010 Accessing Natural History: Discoveries in Data Cleaning, Structuring, and Retrieval. Unpub-

lished PhD Dissertation, Tilburg University

Wieczorek J, Guo Q, and Heijmans R J 2004 The point-radius method for georeferencing locality descriptions
and calculating associated uncertainty. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 18:
745–68

Yesson C, Brewer P W, Sutton T, Caithness N, Pahwa J S, Burgess M, Gray W A, White R J, Jones A C,

Bisby F A, and Culham A 2007 How global is the global biodiversity information facility? PLoS One 2: 11

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
VC 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2014, (cid:129)(cid:129)((cid:129)(cid:129))
Transactions in GIS, 2015, 19(4)

