The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 51 No. 4

pp. 301–312 November 2014

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Exhibiting the Exhibitors: Spatial Visualization for
Heterogeneous Cinema Venue Data

Colin Arrowsmith1, Deb Verhoeven2 and Alwyn Davidson2

1School of Mathematical and Geospatial Sciences, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University), GPO
Box 2476, Melbourne, Vic. 3001, Australia. 2School of Communication and Creative Arts, Deakin University, 221
Burwood Highway, Burwood, Vic. 3125, Australia
Email: colin.arrowsmith@rmit.edu.au

Cinema data is characteristically complex, heterogeneous and interlinked. Rather than relying on simple information
retrieval techniques, researchers are increasingly turning to the creative exploration and reapplication of data in order to
more fully explore the meaning of newly available and diverse data sets. In this context, the cinema historian becomes the
creator of visual texts which can be assessed for both their interpretive insight and their aesthetic qualities. This paper
presents four research projects that use different spatio-temporal visualization techniques to understand the industrial
dynamics of post-war film exhibition and distribution in Australia. The research integrates work by a group of inter-
disciplinary investigators into the effectiveness of techniques such as dendritic mapping, Circos circular visualizations,
animation, cartogram mapping, and multivariate visualization for the study of cinema circuits and operations at a number
of scales.

Keywords: Geovisualization, australian cinema, cartograms, historic data

INTRODUCTION

Working with information that is historical, geographical,
and cinematic in focus creates opportunities for new and
interesting interdisciplinary research. Changing the focus of
cinema studies to concepts of geographical inﬂuence, spatial
analysis, and data visualization can lead to new insights and
creative investigative methods.

Recent developments within the broad framework of the
humanities have encouraged such collaborations by embra-
in technology, methodological
cing the vast changes
frameworks, and research sources and scope. Increases in
the adoption of the use of data to lead evidence based
research and to explore previously ignored areas of research
has in turn created an environment in which the humanities
are also turning digital. To work with data you need ways of
collecting data, storing data, accessing and analysing data,
and interpreting and ﬁnding outcomes with data.
Developments in the humanities have therefore manifested
into databases, statistical analysis, data mining, big data,
visual analytics, and visualization; all with a cultural focus.
Humanities data within a spatial context requires the
application of geospatial technologies and mapping. Whilst
traditionally used in the physical sciences, more recently
non-traditional disciplines largely embedded in the huma-
nities have seen the beneﬁts that arise from investigating

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000096

geographic patterns in their data such as literature (Moretti,
2007; Piatti et al., 2008; Roberts, 2012), and the social
sciences (DeBats, 2008; Donahue, 2008; Gregory and
Henneberg, 2010; Knowles and Healey, 2006; Skinner
et al., 2000) in a move sometimes described as the ‘Spatial
Turn’.

For cinema studies, this ‘turn’ has found its place in a
range of academic practices such as the study of map use in
ﬁlms
(Caquard and Taylor, 2009; Lukinbeal, 2004a;
Conley, 2007), the representation of locations (Arrows-
mith et al., 2010; Klenotic, 1998, 2001; Dibbets, 2010;
Maltby and Walsh, 2011; Verhoeven and Arrowsmith,
2013; Verhoeven et al., 2009), mapping ﬁlm diffusion
(Verhoeven et al., 2013), and in the analysis of geographical
patterns of cinema operation and inﬂuence (for example see
Caquard, 2009, Caquard and Fiset, 2013; Verhoeven et al.
2009). It is particularly within this last topic that the
application of spatial
technologies and techniques has
played a big role; developing new approaches to collabora-
tive research and new ways of analyzing and communicating
information and results.

This paper extends this work and will focus on a number
of recent studies which look at cinema from an inter-
disciplinary perspective, one that considers the role of
geovisualization of the geographical distribution of cinema
(2004b),
venues. Whilst Klenotic

(2011), Lukinbeal

302

The Cartographic Journal

Hallam (2014) and Caquard et al. (2014) consider the
other facets of ﬁlm and cinema–going such as audience, ﬁlm
content and venue location, we extend some of that work in
presenting alternative geovisualization methods for repre-
senting cinema venue activity. In this respect we focus on
what Roberts and Hallam (2014) identify as the theme of
‘mapping of ﬁlm production and consumption’ and in
particular the complex spatial and temporal dimensions of
ﬁlm diffusion. This
falls within Roberts and
‘spatial historiography’,
Hallam’s three ‘orientations’ of
where spatial methods are used to ‘explore the historical
geographies of ﬁlm production and exhibition’ and also
touches on the ‘spatial ontologies’ of spatial data querying
and analyses (Roberts and Hallam, 2014, p. 8).

interest

CINEMA AND VISUAL REPRESENTATION

and time

techniques beyond conventional

It has been noted that humanities data is characterized as
being highly complex, heterogeneous,
interlinked, and
often incomplete and imprecise (Verhoeven, 2012). Film
distribution data is particularly rich and multifaceted. As
Verhoeven has noted, ﬁlms only exist in order to be
to audiences
transported through space
(Verhoeven, 2011). With the added complexity of spatial
and temporal components, humanities data cannot always
be handled by the more conventional cartographic techni-
ques as these are not always the best solution for under-
standing or interpreting ﬁndings within the data. Instead,
working with such data has led to the adaption of other
analytic
cartographic
methods. The research presented here has developed over
interdisciplinary
a number of years, evolving as our
experience grows, and with the capacity and willingness to
take advantage of the new opportunities presented by these
developments. The questions that we ask of the sources
collected cannot be addressed simply by interrogating lists
of data; the data needs to be in a format that is accessible
and approachable at any scale. Visualizing the data enables
us to explore the data that is hidden away in tables and
records, and also allows us to incorporate the spatial
in such datasets. All
element
approaches and subsequent visualizations handle the spatial,
historical, and cinematic aspects differently. As the ques-
tions we ask for each project and the nature of the data
investigated are different, each approach in terms of
method, analysis, and visualization needs to be tailored to
the individual project.

is often inherent

that

Each project will be brieﬂy outlined, highlighting the
ways in which data is accessed and outcomes of applying
such methods and visualizations.

Film movement
‘Are there spatial patterns of ﬁlm movement from one venue
to the next for Greek cinema in Australia’.

Greek cinema developed in Australia in the post-war
period, coinciding with signiﬁcant Greek immigration into
Australian cities and changes in both the Australian and
Greek ﬁlm industries (Verhoeven, 2007). It has been
anecdotally noted that the patterns of movement of ﬁlms
within the Greek cinema circuit during this period were

determined by the provenance of the ﬁlms, in particular the
identity of the production company (Verhoeven et al.,
2009). Was this in fact the case? We have adopted several
methods for analyzing and displaying patterns of physical
ﬁlm movement from one venue to the next. The data
collected included ﬁlm title, production company, date of
screenings, venue name, and address,
including city of
venue. Data was sourced from archival newspaper and oral
history research as well as government records, including
censorship documents, and theatre licence and company
records. Not only is it important for the data to capture ﬁlm
movement,
it is also important that a time proﬁle for
movements are also incorporated to give an indication as to
the frequency of movement for speciﬁc ﬁlms.

For the purposes of pattern extraction we adopted a
statistical process referred to as Markov Chain Analysis
(Kemeny and Snell, 1976). Markov Chains provide a
powerful technique for analyzing time series events where
an initial condition results in a number of alternative
outcomes (see Arrowsmith and Verhoeven, 2011). For this
particular case study we restricted our research period to the
years between 1956 and 1963, and two particularly well-
known and popular Greek ﬁlm production companies,
Finos and Anzervos Films. Each cinema venue was assigned
a letter and each ﬁlm investigated for sequence patterns was
given a number. By looking at the sequence of time and
venue that these ﬁlms were shown it was possible to identify
a number of patterns which can then be mapped in the form
of a tree-graph as shown in Figures 1 and 2. For each of the
movements a probability was calculated.

The graphic representation of ﬁlm distribution as a
Markov Chain demonstrates spatial discontinuities through
individual venues, the production of temporal divergence,
emphasizing the passage of time between screenings, and
the multiplicity of
simultaneous events, emphasizing
synchronous releases. Using Markov Chains we can see
how ﬁlm diffusion and therefore ﬁlm history moves both
forwards and sideways at once from a singular point of
origin (Moretti, 2007).

in parenthesis

Figures 1 and 2 show portions of pathways for the
sequence of movements of a ﬁlm from one venue to the
next. Each ﬁlm is shown as a four digit number. The
numbers
indicate the number of ﬁlms
following a particular pathway, whilst the decimal numbers
beneath the venue code gives the conditional probability of
following a path to that venue. From Figures 1 and 2, it can
be seen that the key difference between pathway patterns
for Anzervos and Finos ﬁlms is in the number of cinemas
that ﬁlms were shown at, which is generally greater for
Finos (29 ﬁlms screening at 18 different venues) than for
Anzervos (24 ﬁlms at 16 venues). The number of different
venues at which ﬁlms were permitted to launch was also
greater for Finos (8) than for Anzervos (6). In addition,
there are many more ‘bifurcations’ for the Finos ‘trees’
which indicates that these ﬁlms were more likely to screen at
a greater number of cinemas through the course of their
release whilst for Anzervos these movements are generally
more linear and do not persist throughout a ‘circuit’ to the
the maximum number of
same degree. For example,
alternative pathways a single circuit can move is three for
Anzervos, where the ﬁlm circuit BCBCA can move in one

Spatial Visualization for Heterogeneous Cinema Venue Data

303

Figure 1. Portion of sequence of movements for Anzervos Films 1956–1963

of three ways. For Finos circuits, a maximum of six alternate
pathways can be taken for the circuit commencing BC. This
bifurcation also occurs much earlier in the circuit indicating
that more current ﬁlms were shown more extensively
throughout
the
distributors of Finos Films had working relationships with
a greater number of ﬁlm venues.

the Greek cinema network and that

Another approach was to look at this question through a
technique known as Circos diagrams (see Figure 3). Circos
is one of a number of visualization software packages that
can be used to show relationships in a circular layout
(http://circos.ca/). Circos was developed originally for
identifying and analyzing similarities and differences in
genome structure and the sequencing of multiple genomes

Figure 2. Portion of sequence of movements for Finos Films 1956–1963

304

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3.
and Pride and (d) Finos Films – Astero

(a) Anzervos Films – Ali Pasha and Mrs Frossini, (b) Anzervos Films – The Fort of Freedom, (c) Finos Films – Music, Poverty

(Krzywinski et al., 2009). These circular visualizations show
how ﬁlms moved from one venue to the next, and enable us
to estimate the proportion of discrete movements made.
For example, ‘The Fort of Freedom’ (Figure 3b), whilst
making a number of moves from venue B to venue C, the
vast majority of screenings occurred at venue B (that is

indicating a sequence or ‘movement from B to B). Finos
Films (Figure 3c and d), although demonstrating a similar
B to B screening sequence, show a number of other
apparently more specialized moves, say from J to F or B to J
for Astero or C to P or G to A for Music, Poverty and Pride.
Hence it could be concluded that Finos Films had a much

Spatial Visualization for Heterogeneous Cinema Venue Data

305

Figure 4. Snapshot of Greek Cinema Animation

broader, or eclectic, venue repertoire than did Anzervos,
who were more constrained to venues A, B and C.

Cinema and demographics
‘What is the relationship between cinema location and target
audience location?’

This study focuses again on Greek cinema using the same
set of data collected for the Markov Chain analysis
described in the previous example, this time concentrating
on the city of Melbourne. The primary focus of this study
was to address the question of how a migrant venue
operation supports the immediate surrounding popula-
tion. Were Greek cinema venues found in areas where the
Greek migrant population was also high or was it that the
venue pre-dated the Greek population? By combining
demographic and cinema venue data it was possible to
assess this relationship (Figure 4). Greek population data
was taken from the Australian national census starting in
1947 through to 1981; a total of seven census collection
dates within this period. Data concerning the operation of
Greek cinema venues in Melbourne were collected using
dates of screenings and cinema venue ownership – such
data was sourced from archival newspapers and magazines,

government records, and theatre licence and company
records.

When this data is combined within a GIS in order to map
the results, the temporal nature of the data is lost in a series
of static census deﬁned images. Creating an animation of
interpolated years from the data for each year between 1947
and 1981 it was possible to change our understanding of
the relationship between population and cinema operation.
Examining this animation revealed a number of points that
were previously hidden in tables, lists, and static images.

The most signiﬁcant ﬁnding from the animation was that
Greek cinema venues predated the Greek population and
perhaps acted as a catalyst for growth in the immigrant
population.

Dynamics of cinema venue operation
‘What was the impact of the introduction of television on
cinema venue openings and closures?’

In this project we investigated changes evident in the
cinema industry in the period following the Second World
War.

This was a period of signiﬁcant change in the Australian
cinema industry. In the lead up to television, there were

306

The Cartographic Journal

both social and economic shifts driven by post-war
suburbanization, immigration and consumerism. With the
introduction of home-based technologies such as television
in Australia in 1956, initially into Sydney and Melbourne,
and later into Adelaide in 1959, this research sought to
identify the spatial differences that emanated from that
introduction. The objectives of this study were to investigate
the ways in which the cinema industry responded to
demographic, social and cultural changes in the study period,
and to develop geospatial methods to build digital historical
maps to help explain cinema survival and closure.

Using GIS, a geodatabase of cinema venues for the time
period from 1948 through to 1971 was constructed. Data
was sourced from the ‘Film Weekly’ summaries that were
scanned and digitized. Data attributes collected from this
source included cinema location, the town name, theatre
name, exhibitor and seating capacity. Cartograms were
created where a thematic variable, in this case changes in
cinema numbers for each state, are substituted for land area
(see Figure 5).

These cartograms were based on changes in cinema
venue numbers by state, where relative changes for the
period were used as a factor for enlarging or reducing the
area for each state. Therefore what can be seen in Figure 5,
is that relatively large numbers of openings in Queensland
and New South Wales during the period 1948–1953, were
essentially offset by widespread closures throughout the
period 1958 to 1968. During 1968–1971 the enlargement
of Queensland is associated with relatively large numbers of
closures, compared to the rest of Australia. Whilst the
eastern states of New South Wales and Victoria have the
larger number of cinema venues it can be seen from
Figure 5 that their reductions in numbers were greatest
during the period from 1963 through to 1968 before
ﬁnding a small resurgence in 1971. In Figure 6, the
numbers of country cinemas, deﬁned as more than 20 km
lost or gained, by postcode, using
from a major city,
conventional choropleth maps is shown.

One important consideration in reviewing these maps is
to consider the size of the postcode area. For example, in
rural regions towards the centre of the continent, very few
cinemas exist and those that do service a large geographic
area. Any change in cinema venue numbers will result in
large scale areal changes on the map and these changes
could be construed to show more signiﬁcant change that
what is actually taking place. However, from Figure 6, it
can be seen that there appear to be spatial clusters of
closures through the study period. For example during
the periods from 1958 to 1963 and 1963 to 1968 some
clustering can be detected in northern Victoria and rural
NSW, towards the south-eastern coast.

Spatial clustering can also be investigated using Moran’s
Index. Moran’s Index or Moran’s I, is a measure of spatial
autocorrelation based on feature locations and attribute
values (Lloyd, 2010; Longley et al., 2011). Moran’s I
examines whether or not values of similar values occur close
to each other, or whether features with similar values are
randomly dispersed. Rather than using postcode polygon
areas to show change, the use of point symbols to represent
venue change across an area of variable population density
gives a less biased picture.

In Figure 7, a ‘hot-spot’ analysis based on the Getis-Ord
method (Getis and Ord, 1992) shows regions of change
both in colour and size. In these maps data have been
normalized to show change for ﬁve year periods from 1948
through to 1971, proportional to the starting number of
venues for each postcode.

In Figure 7 the Z-scores, equal to the numbers of
standard deviations above or below the mean in change in
venue numbers are displayed, where large blue points
indicate values less than 2.58 times the standard deviation,
and large red points indicate values greater than 2.58 times
the standard deviation at the 95% conﬁdence level for that
period. These could be regarded then, as hot spots of red
where a greater number of venues were opened (or less
numbers of closures
took place where only closures
occurred), or cold spots of blue where there was a greater
number of closures (or less than the average number of
openings took place).

Therefore Figure 7 shows across Victoria, southern New
South Wales and into South Australia there were fewer
openings of venues during 1948 to 1953 and again in 1958
to 1963. This pattern extends into northern New South
Wales in 1963 to 1968. What is evident is that change
occurs across state boundaries in a regional, rather than a
state constrained pattern.

Exploring spatial aspects of cinema businesses
‘How successful were large cinema companies between 1946
and 1986 in Melbourne, and what were the characteristic,
spatial, and temporal differences between the different
companies’

Whilst some of the techniques demonstrated here have
challenged the epistemic and methodological precepts of
humanities research, they have not necessarily extended or
challenged cartographic techniques themselves. The follow-
is an innovative approach to
ing technique however,
handling spatial data that has a strong temporal aspect as
well as multiple variables that change over time. Creative
visualizations, called Petal diagrams were produced in order
to explore and analyze historical, multivariate, and spatial
data in a single view.

The visualizations were developed in order to understand
the relative importance of the many factors affecting cinema
sustainability during a period of
intense technological,
commercial and social disruption. The post-war period in
Australia witnessed the closure of large numbers of cinemas
and the emergence of new business models for the ﬁlm
industry. The two major players in the cinema industry in
the 1950s in Melbourne were Hoyts Theatres and Greater
Union Theatres, originally starting in 1909 and 1911
respectively (Bertrand, 1987). Our analysis found that
during this time there was also a strong presence of
Cosmopolitan Theatres, Kirby’s Theatres, and a number
owned by Robert McLeish Theatres. The majority of cinema
venues, especially in the suburbs, were under independent
control; however these large cinema chains still dominated
the industry and owned or built the majority of prominent
cinema venues in Melbourne. In 1954, Village Cinemas was
founded and would go on to become a dominant chain in
the cinema industry of Melbourne (Village Roadshow,
2013).

Spatial Visualization for Heterogeneous Cinema Venue Data

307

Figure 5. Cartograms based on cinema numbers by state from 1948 through to 1971: (a) 1948 to 1953, (b) 1953 to 1958, (c) 1958 to
1963, (d) 1963 to 1968, (e) 1968 to 1971, (f) Legend

308

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. Cinema changes by postcode for rural south-eastern Australia: (a) 1948 to 1953, (b) 1953 to 1958, (c) 1958 to 1963, (d) 1963
to 1968, (e) 1968 to 1971, (f) Legend

Spatial Visualization for Heterogeneous Cinema Venue Data

309

Figure 7. Getis-Ord hot spot analysis: (a) 1948 to 1953, (b) 1953 to 1958, (c) 1958 to 1963, (d) 1963 to 1968, (e) 1968 to 1971, (f) Legend

Data came from the Cinema and Audiences in Australia
Research Project (CAARP) database (Verhoeven, 2013).
This consisted of all known venues that screened ﬁlms along

with their spatial location (address and latitude and long-
itude), in addition associated variables of name, opening
seating capacity, management and
and closing dates,

310

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 8. Visualizing Large Cinema Companies in Melbourne, Australia

ownership, primary purpose, and screen numbers. The
online database is event driven, and therefore considers each
change in a cinema venue to be an event and attributes a
time stamp for each change to a cinema variable so the

dynamics of cinema venue operation can be captured. This
data is complex not only because of the large number of
records, but because it encompasses a large spatial scale, has
multiple venue variables, and includes an important

Spatial Visualization for Heterogeneous Cinema Venue Data

311

temporal aspect. The temporal aspect is important for two
main reasons: one, the geographic distribution of cinema
venues changes dramatically over time as new one open and
others close; and two, cinema venues variables such as
seating capacity and ownership often change many times
during a cinema’s operation. The challenge therefore is to
combine data that is historical, geographic, and thematically
changing in an approach to visual representation that could
aid in exploring and understanding the relationships
between different variables both geographically and over
time (see Davidson et al., 2011 for a full description).

Figure 8 shows a visualization technique designed to
handle such data; a Petal diagram. The visualization is a
ﬂexible structure where the temporal period, number of
cinema venues, and associated variables can be selected by
the user and displayed using choice of visual variables. The
ﬂexibility of the visualization is important as it can then be
used as a tool for exploration of the data. Within this one
image it is possible to visually analyze the operation of the
large cinema venue chains in Melbourne, dating from 1946
to 1986, based on geography,
including distance and
direction from the centre of Melbourne, the name of the
cinema chain, the number of changes that occurred to each
cinema in this period, and whether it was owned, managed,
or leased by the chain (for a full scale version of the
visualization see Davidson, 2013).

From Figure 8, it can be seen that from the sheer number
of closures of venues since 1946 that had occurred; only a
handful of these venues lasted past 1986. Clusters of new
venues opening between 1965 and 1975 have occurred,
distributed mainly in the east and north of the city. The lack
of new cinemas opening in the west outside of the city
centre is clearly shown. In fact, there are no large cinema
chains operating in this area past 1975. The dominance of
the blue curves is indicative of the dominance of Hoyts
cinema venues. The large numbers of Hoyts cinemas are
found throughout Melbourne and at varying distances from
the centre of the city. However, the majority of these
cinemas do not survive past 1970, and those that do
experience some form of change indicated by the width of
the line. This suggests that a Hoyts cinema operating in
1946 would most likely not remain open after 1970 unless
they made adjustments to their cinema such as adding
another screen or decreasing seating capacity.

Comparisons between certain attributes can be made
more effectively with the use of the selection/querying
capabilities within the visualization technique. This can be
useful simply in eliminating unwanted information. For
example, comparing results from two particular classes of
distance is possible by placing two snapshots side by side or
by only including the relevant information in the one
visualization. By eliminating all other venues, this approach
ensures that the focus can be given to the relevant data and
comparisons can be made more readily.

CONCLUSION

What we have established in our ongoing research is that
cinema data, whilst linked by location,
is complex and
heterogeneous. This collection of studies has shown that

data relating to cinema comes from multiple sources. Often
these sources are digital, but, and particularly so for historic
data, are in hardcopy format. Whilst this presents many
issues and obstacles, it also presents many opportunities for
interesting and interdisciplinary research. Visualizations of
such data take sources from tables, lists, and narrative text,
and transforms them to a format that is interrogative and
insightful for historical and cultural analysis. Without this
mode of communication, these ﬁndings would not have
been possible.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

is
Colin Arrowsmith
Associate Professor
in
the School of Mathe-
matical and Geospatial
Sciences at RMIT Uni-
versity. He holds
a
Doctor of Philosophy
from RMIT as well as
two masters’ degrees
and a bachelor’s degree
from the University of
Melbourne, and a Gra-
duate Diploma of Edu-
cation from Hawthorn
Institute of Education.
authored
Colin
more than 40 refereed publications and 6 book chapters
in the ﬁelds of geographic information systems (GIS),
research
tourism analysis and in ﬁlm studies. Colin’s
interests include the application of geospatial information
systems,
science education,
investigating the impact of tourism on nature-based tourist
destinations, tourist behaviour, as well as investigating the
issue of managing micro-historical data within GIS utilizing
cinema data.

including GIS, geospatial

has

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research presented in this paper was supported by the
Australian Research Council (ARC) projects DP0879695
and DP120101940.

REFERENCES

Arrowsmith, C., Verhoeven, D., Maltby, R. and Walsh, M. (2010).
‘Media geographies: a geographic study of cinema in Australia for
the period 1948–1971’. Paper presented to Royal Geographical
Society/Institute of British Geographers Conference, London,
Sep 1–3.

Arrowsmith, C. and Verhoeven, D. (2011).

‘Visual methods for
showing cinema circuits at varying temporal and spatial scales’,
Proceedings of the Geospatial Science Research_1 Symposium,
Geospatial Science Research Group, RMIT University, ed. by
Arrowsmith, C., Bellman, C., Cartwright, W., Jones, S. and Shortis,
M., Melbourne, Dec 12–14, CD ROM.

Bertrand, I. (1987). ‘David and Goliath: the grand theatre company
and the national exhibition chains’, in History on/and/in Film,

312

The Cartographic Journal

ed. by O’Regan, T. and Shoesmith, B., pp. 106–109, History &
Film Association of Australia, Perth.

Caquard, S. (2009). ‘Foreshadowing contemporary digital cartogra-
in films’, The

review of cinematic maps

phy: a historical
Cartographic Journal, 46(1), pp. 46–55.

Caquard, S. and Fiset, J. P. (2013). ‘How can we map stories? A
cybercartographic application for narrative cartography’, The
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
Journal
10.1080/17445647.2013.847387#.Ulc4vTAyZ8F (accessed 11
October 2013).

of Maps,

in multicultural Canada:

Caquard, S., Naud, D. and Wright, B. (2014).

‘Mapping film
from the
audiences
Cybercartographic Atlas of Canadian Cinema’, in Locating the
Moving Image: New Approaches to Film and Place, ed. by
Hallam, J. and Roberts, L., pp. 130–149, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, IN.

examples

Caquard, S. and Taylor, D. R. F. (2009). ‘Editorial: what is cinematic

cartography’, The Cartographic Journal, 46(1), pp. 5–8.

Conley, T. (2007). Cartographic Cinema, University of Minnesota

Press, Minneapolis, MN.

Davidson, A. Arrowsmith, C. and Verhoeven, D. (2011). ‘A method
for the visual representation of historic multivariate point data’, in
Advances in Cartography and GIScience, Vol. 2, Selection from
ICC 2011 Paris, ed. by Ruas, A., Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

in Melbourne,

Davidson, A. (2013). Visualising the openings and closures of historical
figshare, http://dx.doi.org/

cinema venues
10.6084/m9.figshare.155810 (accessed 17 September 2013).
DeBats, D. A. (2008). ‘A tale of two cities: using tax records to develop
GIS files for mapping and understanding nineteenth-century US
cities’, Historical Methods, 41(1), pp. 17–38.

Dibbets, K. (2010). ‘Cinema context and the genes of film history’,
New Review of Film and Television Studies, 8(3), pp. 331–342.
Donahue, B. (2008). ‘Mapping husbandry in concord: GIS as a tool
in Placing History: How Maps,
for environmental history’,
Spatial Data, and GIS Are Changing Historical Scholarship,
ed. by Knowles, A. K., ESRI Press, Redlands, CA.

Getis, A. and Ord, J. K. (1992). ‘The analysis of spatial association by
use of distance statistics’, Geographical Analysis, 24, pp. 188–
205.

Gregory, I. N. and Henneberg, J. M. (2010).

‘The railways,
urbanization, and local demography in England and Wales,
1825–1911’, Social Science History, 34(2), pp. 199–228.

Hallam, J. (2014). ‘Mapping the ‘City’ Film 1930–1980’, in Locating
the Moving Image: New Approaches to Film and Place, ed. by
Hallam, J. and Roberts, L., pp. 173–196, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, IN.

Kemeny, J. G. and Snell, J. L. (1976). Finite Markov Chains,

Springer-Verlag, New York.

Klenotic, J. (1998). ‘Class makers in the mass movie audience: a case
geography of moviegoing’, The

cultural
study
Communication Review, 2(4), pp. 461–495.

in the

Klenotic, J. (2001). ‘Like nickels in a slot: children of the American
working classes at the neighborhood movie house’, The Velvet
Light Trap, 48, pp. 20–33.

Klenotic, J. (2011). ‘Putting cinema history on the map: using GIS to
explore the spatiality of cinema’, in Explorations in New Cinema
History: Approaches and Case Studies, ed. by Maltby, R.,
Biltereyst, D. and Meers, P., pp. 58–84, Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester,
UK.

Knowles, A. K. and Healey, R. G. (2006). ‘Geography, timing, and
technology: a GIS-based analysis of Pennsylvania’s iron industry,

1825–1875’, The Journal of Economic History, 66(3), pp. 608–
634.

Krzywinski, M., Schein E. J., Birol, I., Connors, J., Gascoyne, R.,
‘Circos: an
comparative genomics’, Genome

Horsman, D., Jones, S. and Marra, M. (2009).
information aesthetic
for
Research, 19(9), pp. 1639–1645.

Lloyd, C. (2010). Spatial Data Analysis: An Introduction for GIS

Users, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Longley, P. A., Goodchild, M. F., Maguire, D. J. and Rhind, D. W.
(2011). Geographic Information Systems and Science, (3rd
edition), Wiley, New York.

Lukinbeal, C. (2004a). ‘The map that precedes the territory: An
introduction to essays in cinematic geography’, GeoJournal, 59(4),
pp. 247–251.

Lukinbeal, C. (2004b). ‘The rise of regional film production centers in
North America, 1984–1997’, GeoJournal, 59(4), pp. 307–321.
Maltby, R. and Walsh, M. (2011). Australian Cinemas Map, http://

auscinemas.flinders.edu.au/ (accessed 20 January 2013).

Moretti, F. (2007). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a

Literary History, Verso, London.

Piatti, B., Bar, H., Reuschel, A., Hurni, L. and Cartwright, W. (2008).
‘Mapping literature:
fiction’. Paper
presented to Cartography and Art – Art and Cartography
Conference, Vienna, Vienna, Feb 1–2.

towards a geography of

Roberts, L. (ed.) (2012). Mapping Cultures: Place, Practice,

Performance. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.

Roberts, L. and Hallam, J. (2014). ‘Film and spatiality: outline of a
new empiricism’,
in Locating the Moving Image: New
Approaches to Film and Place, ed. by Hallam, J. and Roberts,
L., pp. 1–30, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.

Skinner, G. W., Henderson, M. and Jianhua, Y. (2000). ‘China’s
fertility transition through regional space: using GIS and census
data for a spatial analysis of historical demography’, Social Science
History, 24(3), pp. 614–652.

Verhoeven, D. (2007). ‘Twice born: dionysos films and the establish-
ment of a greek film circuit in Australia’, Studies in Australasian
Cinema, 1(3), pp. 275–298.

Verhoeven, D. (2011). ‘Film distribution in the diaspora: Temporality,
community and national cinema’, in Explorations in New Cinema
History: Approaches and Case Studies, ed. by Maltby, R. et al.,
pp. 243–260, Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ.

Verhoeven, D. (2012). ‘New cinema history and the computational
turn’, Beyond Art, Beyond Humanities, Beyond Technology : A
New Creativity, Proceedings of
the World Congress of
Communication and the Arts Conference, Braga, Apr 15–18.
Verhoeven, D. (2013), CAARP, http://caarp.edu.au (accessed 12

March 2014).

Verhoeven, D. and Arrowsmith, C.

‘Mapping the ill
disciplined? spatial analyses and historical change in the post-war
film industry’, in Locating the Moving Image: New Approaches
to Film and Place, ed. by Hallam, J. and Roberts, L., Indiana
University Press, Bloomington, IN.

(2013).

Verhoeven, D., Bowles, K. and Arrowsmith, C. (2009). ‘Mapping the
movies: reflections on the use of geospatial technologies for
historical cinema audience research’, in Digital Tools in Media
Studies: Analysis and Research an Overview, ed. by Ross, M.,
Grauer, M. and Freisleben, B., transcript Verlag, Bielefeld.

Verhoeven, D., Arrowsmith, C., Coate, B. and Davidson, A. (2013).
Kinomatics, http://kinomatics.com (accessed 12 March 2014).
Village Roadshow. (2013). Village Roadshow Limited – Company
Profile, http://www.villageroadshow.com.au/Company-Profile/
Company-History.htm (accessed 12 October 2013).

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

