GeoInformatica 9:3, 269–287, 2005
# 2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc. Manufactured in The Netherlands.

Classiﬁcation of Spatial Properties for Spatial
Allocation Modeling

TAKESHI SHIRABE
Institute for Geoinformation, Technical University of Vienna, Gusshausstr 27Y29, 1040 Vienna, Austria
E-mail: shirabe@geoinfo.tuwien.ac.at

Received November 20, 2003; Revised February 8, 2005; Accepted March 8, 2005

Abstract

Given a set of spatial units, such as land parcels and grid cells, how to allocate subsets of it to activities of
interest while satisfying certain criteria? Such a decision process is here called spatial allocation. Though many
problems of spatial allocation share this generic construct, each may have a quite unique set of criteria and
interpret even the same criteria in its own way. Such diversity makes it difﬁcult to model spatial allocation
problems in unambiguous terms that are amenable to algorithmic solution. This paper proposes a classiﬁcation
scheme for spatial properties that helps to address a variety of spatial properties in establishing spatial allocation
criteria. The implication of the paper is that a number of spatial properties and spatial allocation criteria can be
decomposed into a few kinds of primitive spatial properties and their relations.

Key Words: spatial properties, spatial allocation, mathematical programming

1.

Introduction

Efﬁcient use of limited resources of space is a common interest for almost all who live
on the earth. Farmers look for suitable sites for growing particular types of crops.
Planners spend countless hours and meetings to design zoning plans for their
jurisdictions. A politician may be interested in Bgerrymandering’’ [50], i.e., redrawing
boundaries of voting districts in favor of herself or against her opponents. With the
continuing growth of computer technology and information science, these problems are
now more efﬁciently tackled than before. In order for digital devices such as geographic
information systems (GIS) to handle the inﬁnite continuous nature of spatial variation,
however, space must be discretized into a manageable number of elements [24]. This
representation of space enables us to generalize the problems described above to what we
call Bspatial allocation:’’ the grouping of discrete spatial units into larger clusters
according to speciﬁed criteria. Spatial units involved in spatial allocation may be socio-
economic ones such as counties, Zip-code areas, census tracts, and land parcels [17], or
results of systematic sampling such as pixels and grid cells [45]. There are different
terms for clusters to which spatial units are allocated, such as Bzones’’ [45], Bregions’’
[6], Bdistricts’’ [28], Bterritories’’ [27], and Bturfs’’ [38] depending on context. They are
herein referred to as Bobjects’’ for generality. Since such objects are not natural ones but
products of human mental acts, they should be regarded as ﬁat in terms of Smith [42].

270

SHIRABE

Spatial allocation encompasses a wide variety of applications ranging from school
districting [4], [19], [53] and political districting [21], [28], [29], [36], to market analysis
[18], [27], [34], [38], [39], [47], [54], to land use planning [13], [14], [46] and site
selection [5], [6], [12], [22], [52]. While required criteria vary from one application to
another, they tend to relate to spatial properties such as population Bsize,’’ compact
Bshape,’’ and distant Bspatial relation.’’ Nevertheless, such spatial properties, too, seem
too diverse to handle in a systematic manner.

This paper then attempts to classify spatial properties in a way that facilitates mathe-
matical modeling of spatial allocation criteria. The same topic was partially addressed by
Shirabe and Tomlin’s Decomposing Integer Programming Models for Spatial Allocation
[41]. It was mainly concerned with implementation issues including a prototype
language for spatial allocation modeling within a GIS environment. The present paper
modiﬁes it to place emphasis more on theoretical aspects, that is, how spatial properties
are classiﬁed, formulated, and combined based on an assumption that some spatial
properties are more primitive than others. In addition, this paper discusses a possible
extension of the proposed scheme to handle spatial allocation with temporal consid-
erations. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the diversity
of spatial properties, which discourages a uniﬁed modeling approach. Section 3 discusses
the complexity of existing models of spatial properties, which makes the models un-
suitableVnot easy to be invertedVfor spatial allocation purposes. To (at least partially)
resolve these issues, Section 4 decomposes spatial allocation models into two basic
components: data and variables. Section 5 introduces and formulates four classes of
spatial properties we consider primitive. As illustrated in Section 6, these primitives can
be combined for complex spatial properties in establishing spatial allocation criteria.
Section 7 summarizes the paper and suggests an agenda for future research.

2. Spatial properties

Spatial properties, as opposed to non-spatial counterparts (e.g., name, color, and texture),
depend on where and how objects are situated in space. They are often informally and
intuitively characterized in terms of size, shape, and spatial relation. As illustrated below,
however, it is virtually impossible to enumerate, much less formulate, all conceivable
such properties.

2.1.

Size

Spatial properties relating to size are relatively easy to articulate. In many cases the size
of an object refers to geometric quantity such as length, area, and volume. When an
object is situated in a heterogeneous background like geographic space, however, a va-
riety of Bnon-geometric’’ size properties arise. Take a city as an example. Its size may
refer to its population, tax base, municipal waste production, vacant lot acreage, and so
on. Furthermore, even the same attribute can be summarized differently to meet different
purposes and contexts. For instance, the value of the most affordable real estate may

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

271

characterize the city’s livability better than the total value of all real estates or the average
of them. As such, an object in geographic space has a virtually unlimited number of size-
related properties depending on how and what attribute to summarize.

2.2.

Shape

Shape is more difﬁcult to express mathematically [48]. Though there were some early
efforts for general description of shape [8], [10], most attempts have been directed
toward the measurement of only selected aspects of shape. This is because no one
parameter [32] or set of parameters [20] serves to describe all possible shapes. White and
Renner [49] identiﬁed ﬁve types of shape properties, namely, compactness, attenuation
(or elongation), proruption (or indentation), fragmentation, and perforation (or punctuated-
ness). Frolov [20] regarded compactness,
indentation, and dissection as three key
independent aspects of shape. Wentz [48] deﬁned shape by three independent elements
of edge, perforation, and elongation.

Obviously different applications are concerned with different properties of shape, but
compactness Bhas been given the greatest attention due to its potential applicability to a
broad range of geographic problem’’ [33] and may well be seen as Bthe most important
single property of shape’’ [7] in the geographic context. In fact, a number of seemingly
different shapes share the most compact shape (e.g., a circle or a square) as their extreme
case (see Figure 1).

Compactness is a relatively simple concept. It can be intuitively understood as Bcon-
solidated rather than spread out’’ [28], Bgrouped or packed around its central point’’ [7],
or Bround in shape rather than long or thin’’ [26]. It is not difﬁcult for the human eye to
tell which of two objects is more compact than the other. Nonetheless, there is no uni-
versally-accepted description or measure of compactness.

Perhaps the simplest measure of compactness is based on the comparison between the
area and the perimeter of an object. It may take on several variations such as area/
=perimeter; and area/( perimeter)2. These values are easy to compute
perimeter,
and interpret, but their insufﬁcient accuracy in representing compactness has been
pointed out by many researchers [20], [33], [48].

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
area

p

Figure 1. Four types of shape divergence from compactness. Source: P. J. Taylor’s Distances within Shapes:
An Introduction to a Family of Finite Frequency Distributions [43], [44]. With permissions from the University
of Iowa’s Department of Geography and Blackwell Publishing.

272

SHIRABE

Moment of inertia [7], [26]Y[28], [35] is often considered as one of the most accurate
compactness measures [20], [33]. The moment of inertia of a body, in the physical sense,
represents the degree of dispersion of the body’s mass. As a measure of compactness,
smaller values indicate more compact shapes. When an object is seen as a ﬁnite set of
discrete spatial units, its moment of inertia, I, is formulated as:

I ¼

X

i 2 I

aid2
i

where

I is the set of spatial units constituting the object of interest,
ai is the area of spatial unit i, and
di is the distance from the object’s gravity center to spatial unit i.

There may be cases where this basic model needs modiﬁcation. To neutralize its inherent
scale dependence (i.e., the larger an object is, the greater its moment of inertia is),
moment of inertia may be divided by area. Also, when emphasizing a functional meaning
of compactness rather than a geometric one, one may want to replace the area of each
spatial unit with another attribute (e.g., population [26]) of that unit.

Though moment of inertia is generally a useful concept for modeling compactness, it is
possible to think of a more comprehensive alternative. According to Taylor’s observation,
Bany areal shape will have associated with it a frequency distribution of distances between
all points within its boundaries’’ [43], [44], compactness can be evaluated in terms of
such parameters as the total, average, and maximum distances between all pairs of spatial
units. An advantage of this concept is that no spatial unit needs to be specially designated
as the object center, as all spatial units are equally taken into account.

ContiguityVthe quality of being connectedVis another key aspect of shape, since
many other shape properties assume objects to be contiguous. Again, the human eye is
generally good to discern this binary property. For the sake of formal modeling, however,
it would be useful to adopt a graph-theoretic deﬁnition of contiguity or Bconnectedness’’
[2]. That is, by equating each spatial unit with a vertex and each adjacency relationship
between a pair of units with an edge, a set of spatial units is said to be contiguous if
there is a path between any two vertices. Contiguity, too, has variations depending on
the nature of the adjacency relationship. While some are due to the difference in mathe-
matical deﬁnitionVe.g., two spatial units are adjacent if they share a certain geometric
element such as an edge or a vertex, others are due to the difference in practical inter-
pretationVe.g., two spatial units are adjacent if they share a certain geographic feature
such as a water body or a forest patch.

2.3.

Spatial relation

Properties concerning spatial relation are not attributed to individual objects, but to pairs
(or groups) of objects. They are generally classiﬁed into two kinds: topological and

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

273

metric. Topological relations are preserved under topological transformations such as
translation, rotation, and scaling [16], while metric relations do not survive them.
Egenhofer and Franzosa [15] showed that any two simply-connected 2-dimensional
objects embedded in 2-dimensional space has one (and only one) of the following
topological relations: Bdisjoint,’’ Bmeet,’’ Bcontains,’’ Bcovers,’’ Bequal,’’ Boverlap,’’
Binside,’’ and BcoveredBy’’ (Figure 2).

Metric relations tend to involve measures of distance or direction, and thus tend to be
readily quantiﬁable. Apart from difference in unit of measurement (e.g., meter vs. foot
and degree vs. radian), distances and directions between points in Euclidean space can in
fact be expressed in terms that are universally accepted. Even such straightforward
concepts, however, can be ambiguous in two ways. First, distance, as a degree of
geographic separation, can be evaluated in terms of various attributes such as time, cost,
and utility. Second, distance measurement can involve different functions. For example,
the distance between two objects, which consist of multiple spatial units, may refer to the
distance between their nearest spatial units, that between their central spatial units, or
that between their farthest spatial units. The same idea applies to direction, as well as
other metric relations such as inter-visibility (i.e., the extent to which two objects can see
each other). The differentiation is again due to how and what attribute to process.

3. Prescriptive modeling of spatial properties

The models described above are primarily for describing spatial properties of existing
objects, and it is generally not easy to construct new objects of speciﬁed spatial properties.
Nonetheless, it is the latter Bprescriptive’’ [45] task that spatial allocation needs to address.
In modeling such a problem, what properties to be realized are often speciﬁed by
narratives such as Bthe proposed site is compact’’ at the outset, but ultimately must be

Figure 2. Topological relations between a pair of simply-connected 2-D objects [16].

274

SHIRABE

expressed as a set of mathematical equations for systematic solution. These equations are
then collectively and simultaneously inverted to solve for the unknowns. There exist
general techniques for such inversion, of which mixed integer programming (MIP) is
particularly useful for the problem under consideration. A MIP model consists only of
linear functions with integer and continuous variables, and thus can effectively represent
the process that involves indivisible, discrete spatial units. MIP models can be solved
exactly by existing tools such as branch-and-bound algorithms, if they are not exceedingly
large-scale. Alternatively spatial allocation problems may be approached by heuristic
methods, which are designed to ﬁnd approximate solutions [1], [9], [14]. These methods
are often used when MIP modeling would require nonlinear functions and/or a large
number of variables. They do not, however, guarantee to ﬁnd best possible solutions and
may not even tell how good /poor obtained solutions are. Thus, if heuristic solutions need
to be correctly evaluated, an exact problem formulation like MIP model is still important.
Among the aforementioned three kinds of spatial properties, size seems relatively
amenable to MIP formulation. For example, the geometric area of an object is the
summation of the areas of each spatial unit within the object. On the contrary, while
extensive research on shape description has been done, relatively little progress has been
made in prescriptive modeling of shape. For instance, until recently a seemingly simple
shape, contiguity, has been unable to be expressed in MIP terms [51], unless it is linked
to other conditions such as compactness or a ﬁxed object center or root [12], [36], [54].
As to spatial relations, they tend not to be given much attention in spatial allocation.
Obviously, no spatial relation is relevant to a problem concerning a single object such as
facility siting. Even in the case of multiple-object allocation like school/political
districting, the non-overlap (or disjoint) relation seems to be the only frequent spatial
relation explicitly taken into account. Yet, as problems involve more complex processes,
however, other spatial relations can play equally important roles.

It seems that

the complexity and the diversity of spatial properties are rather
unmanageable in spatial allocation modeling. One possible remedy is to abstract a
relatively few basic spatial properties from complex spatial properties and then to
formulate each of such primitive properties in a way that they can be recombined into
complex ones associated with speciﬁc spatial allocation criteria. To do so, we ﬁrst
identify building blocks of spatial allocation models.

4. Elements of spatial allocation models

As with other prescriptive models, spatial allocation models contain givens and un-
knowns. We call the former Bdata’’ and the latter Bvariables.’’

4.1. Data

Data in a spatial allocation model represent the condition of a discretized space. The
smallest entities of space are referred to as spatial units. Unlike Frank et al. [17], this

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

275

paper assumes that spatial units do not change their identity, location, or attribute during
the allocation process. Each spatial unit is herein denoted by i 2 I where I is a set of
all spatial units. When two different units need to be referred to, one is denoted by i
and the other by j. Each spatial unit is characterized by one or more attributes. Attributes
may be size, distance to a particular target, acquisition cost, suitability for a land use,
and so on.

While spatial units are the most fundamental entities of a spatial allocation model, it is
convenient to regard pairs of spatial units (or spatial unit pairs) as another type of basic
entity as Goodchild [23] originally proposed. Spatial unit pairs, too, can have attributes.
Examples include distance, direction, and adjacency. It is certainly possible to think of
attributes pertaining to three or more spatial units. This is conceptually trivial, but
computationally problematic since higher levels of combination would result
in
exceedingly large volume of data.

To distinguish attributes for individual spatial units from those for spatial unit
pairs, we call the former B1-unit attributes’’ and the latter B2-unit attributes.’’ Each 1-unit
attribute is herein denoted by k 2 K where K is a set of all l-unit attributes, and the
value of l-unit attribute k for unit i is denoted by aik. Meanwhile, each 2-unit attribute is
herein denoted by l 2 L where L is a set of all 2-unit attributes, and the value of 2-unit
attribute l for the pair of spatial units i and j is denoted by lijl. For simplicity, the present
paper assumes that 2-unit attributes are symmetrical for each of a spatial unit pair,
i.e., rijl = rjil; so that asymmetrical attributes such as direction is not considered in the
rest of the paper.

4.2. Variables

Variables in a spatial allocation model concern objects (i.e., sets of spatial units). More
precisely, a variable corresponds to a decision whether a certain spatial unit is allocated
to a certain object. Each object is herein denoted by m 2 M. When two different objects
need to be referred to, one is denoted by m and the other by n. Note that since the present
scheme does not presuppose objects are mutually exclusive, a spatial unit may be
allocated to two objects.

Similarly to spatial units, objects can be paired for an object pair. This pairing is useful
when spatial properties are not attributed to individual objects but to relations between
two objects. Again, an object grouping is limited to no more than two to keep models
small enough to be practically solvable.

Objects and object pairs are determined by the following variables:

xim : equal to 1 if unit i is allocated to object m, 0 otherwise
ximn : equal to 1 if unit i is allocated to objects m and n, 0 otherwise
yijm : equal to 1 if units i and j are allocated to object m, 0 otherwise
yijmn: equal to 1 if units i and j are allocated to objects m and n, respectively, 0

otherwise

276

SHIRABE

These variables are subject to the following constraints.

xim 2 0; 1f

g

8i; 2 I; m 2 M

ximn 2 0; 1f

g

8i 2 I; m; n 2 Mjm 6¼ n

yijm 2 0; 1f

g

8i; j 2 Ij i 6¼ j; m 2 M

yijmn 2 0; 1f

g

8i; j 2 I i 6¼ j; m; n 2 M

j

jm 6¼ n

ximn (cid:1) xim þ xin (cid:2) 1

8i 2 I; m; n 2 Mj m 6¼ n

yijm (cid:1) xim þ xjm (cid:2) 1

8i; j 2 Iji

6¼ j; m 2 M

8i 2 I; m; n 2 Mj m 6¼ n

8i 2 I; m; n 2 Mj m 6¼ n

8i; j 2 Iji

6¼ j; m 2 M

8i; j 2 Iji

6¼ j; m 2 M

yijmn (cid:1) xim þ xjn (cid:2) 1

8i; j 2 I i 6¼ j; m; n 2 M

j

jm 6¼ n

8i; j 2 I i 6¼ j; m; n 2 M

j

jm 6¼ n

8i; j 2 I i 6¼ j; m; n 2 M

j

jm 6¼ n

ximn (cid:3) xim

ximn (cid:3) xin

yijm (cid:3) xim

yijm (cid:3) xjn

yijmn (cid:3) xim

yijmn (cid:3) xjn

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

ð4Þ

ð5Þ

ð6Þ

ð7Þ

ð8Þ

ð9Þ

ð10Þ

ð11Þ

ð12Þ

ð13Þ

Constraints (1)Y(4) reﬂect the fact that all the variables are associated with binary
decisions. The value 0 indicates Bno’’ or Bfalse,’’ while the value 1 indicates Byes’’ or
Btrue.’’ Constraints (5)Y(7) together set ximn = 1 when unit i is allocated to objects m and
n, and 0 otherwise. Constraints (8)Y(10) together set yijm = 1 when units i and j are
allocated to object m, and 0 otherwise. Constraints (11)Y(13) together set yijmn = 1 when
units i and j are allocated to objects m and n, respectively, and 0 otherwise. Because
constraints (1) and (5)Y(13) always guarantee ximn, yijm, and yijmn to be integer, constraints
(2)Y(4) can be replaced with those that simply bound the variables between 0 and 1
inclusive. Note that the relations between the variables could be formulated in quadratic
terms, e.g., yijmn = xim xjn. This, however, would make a nonlinear MIP model, which is
generally considered as a difﬁcult class of mathematical programming model to solve.

5. Primitive spatial properties

In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne what we consider primitive spatial properties and propose
a systematic scheme for classifying them, and then formulate them in linear algebraic
terms. A primitive spatial property in the scheme is merely a function, which takes
attribute values of spatial units as input. Each such primitive by itself does not
necessarily correspond to a spatial property one might be interested in, but can be
combined with other primitives to represent a complex spatial property.

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

277

5.1. Classiﬁcation

A primitive spatial property is deﬁned as a single value as a function of the values of one
l-unit (or 2-unit) attribute from all spatial units associated with one object (or object
pair). Four classes of such properties are then possible, which are named: 1-unit 1-object,
2-unit 1-object, l-unit 2-object, and 2-unit 2-object. They are abstract quantities and
independent of what they might indicate in speciﬁc applications.

A 1-unit 1-object property is returned by a function of the values of a 1-unit attribute
from all spatial units belonging to an object. A 2-unit 1-object property is returned by a
function of the values of a 2-unit attribute from all spatial unit pairs belonging to an
object. A 1-unit 2-object property is returned by a function of the values of a 1-unit
attribute from all spatial units belonging to both of an object pair. A 2-unit 2-object
property is returned by a function of the values of a 2-unit attribute from all spatial unit
pairs, one of which belongs to one of an object pair, the other to the other object. See
Figure 3 for illustration.

We currently consider three functions shared by all classes of primitive properties as

follows:

Y sum function that returns the summation of all input values
Y max function that returns the maximum of all input values
Y min function that returns the minimum of all input values

Additionally, the following function is used for a 2-unit 1-object property, contiguity,
which cannot be realized by any combination of the preceding functions:

Y con function that returns a Boolean value of TRUE (or 1) if an object is contiguous (or
connected) in terms of the values of a 2-unit attribute that represent the adjacency

Figure 3. Four classes of primitive spatial properties. Each small square represents a spatial unit, each dot
enclosed by a square represents an attribute of the corresponding spatial unit, and each dot bridging two squares
(not all are shown) represents an attribute of the corresponding spatial unit pair. Each large polygon represents
an object, each dot enclosed by a polygon represents a property of the corresponding object, and each dot
bridging two polygons represents a property of the corresponding object pair.

278

SHIRABE

relationships of all spatial unit pairs within the object, and a Boolean value of FALSE
(or 0) otherwise.

This set of functions seems fairly general and versatile. It, however, should be con-
sidered an arbitrary choice, since the present paper does not intend to ﬁnd a complete set of
primitive functions but demonstrate the expressiveness of our modeling approach. In
theory, a spatial property could be designated as a primitive property if it is found not
decomposable into any combination of other functions.

5.2. Formulation

The four functions described above can be formulated in terms that lend themselves to
MIP models. The sum, max, and min functions are here only associated with 1-unit
1-object properties, while the con function is by deﬁnition a 2-unit 1-object property.
Formations for other types of properties are easily derived by changing variables and
attributes. In the following, to facilitate our discussions, we employ a uniﬁed notation for
all primitive property functions such that:

function attribute; object pair

ð

ð

Þ

Þ

Examples are sum(k, m), con(l, m), max(k, m, n), and min(l, m, n).
The sum function for a 1-unit 1-object property is formulated as:

The max function for a l-unit l-object property is formulated as:

sum k; mð

Þ ¼

aikxim

X

i 2 I

max k; mð

Þ ¼

X

i 2 I

aikxmax
imk

subject to

X

i 2 I

xmax
imk ¼ 1

x max
imk (cid:3) xim

ð

8i 2 I

Þ

x max
imk 2 0; 1f

g

ð8i 2 IÞ

where

max k; mð

Þ (cid:1) aik xim þ M 1 (cid:2) xim

ð

Þ

ð

8i 2 I

Þ

ð13Þ

ð14Þ

ð15Þ

ð16Þ

ð17Þ

ð18Þ

ð19Þ

max is a variable. It is equal to 1 if unit i has the maximum value of attribute k, 0
ximk
otherwise.
M is a given number smaller than any aik.

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

279

As you can see,

the formulation of this function relies on several constraints.
Constraints (16) ensure that the maximum value of the attribute in the object is greater
than or equal to any other value in the object. Constraint (17) designates one and only
one spatial unit as the carrier of the maximum value. Thus if more than one spatial units
share the maximum value in the object, only one will be arbitrarily chosen. Constraints
(18) demand that the spatial unit with the maximum value belongs to the object.

The min function for a l-unit l-object property is formulated as:

Þ (cid:3) aik xim þ M 1 (cid:2) xim

ð

Þ

ð

8i 2 I

Þ

min k; mð

Þ ¼

X

i 2 I

aik x min
imk

subject to

min k; mð
X

x min
imk ¼ 1

i 2 I

x min
imk (cid:3) xim
x min
imk 2 0; 1f

g

ð

8i 2 I

Þ

8i 2 I
ð

Þ

where

min is a variable. If it is equal to 1, unit i has the minimum value of attribute k, 0
ximk
otherwise.
M is a given number greater than any aik.

Again, the formulation of this function relies on several constraints. Constraints (21)
ensure that the minimum value of the attribute in the object is smaller than or equal to
any other value in the object. Constraint (22) designates one and only one spatial unit as
the carrier of the minimum value. Thus if more than one spatial units share the minimum
value in the object, only one will be arbitrarily chosen. Constraints (23) demand that the
spatial unit with the minimum value belongs to the object.

The con function is here designed to be callable when enforcing contiguity on an
object. Thus it can be used only in the form of Bcon(l, m) = 1,’’ which is formulated as
the following set of equations:

X

fijm (cid:2)

X

Þ 2 A

g

f

j j

ð

j; i

Þ 2 A

g

fjim (cid:1) xim (cid:2) Nwim

ð

8i 2 I

Þ

j j i; j
ð
f
X

i 2 I

wim ¼ 1

fijm (cid:1) 0

wim 2 0; 1f

g

fjim (cid:3) N (cid:2) 1
ð

Þxim

ð

8i 2 I; j 2 Ai

Þ

ð20Þ

ð21Þ

ð22Þ

ð23Þ

ð24Þ

ð25Þ

ð26Þ

ð27Þ

ð28Þ

ð29Þ

280

where

SHIRABE

ð29Þ

ð30Þ

is a set of spatial units adjacent to unit i indicated by 2-unit attribute l.

Ail
N is the cardinality of I.
fijm is a variable indicating the amount of ﬂow (see below) from unit i to unit j in

object m.

wim is a variable, equal to 1 if unit i is object m’s sink (see below), 0 otherwise.

This formulation is based on the observation that if a contiguous subset of spatial units is
represented by a network in which one and only one unit serves as a sink and all other
units are sources supplying one (or more) piece while no inﬂow is allowed to those units
outside the network, then every piece of supply must ultimately reach the sink. The
interested reader may see [40] for details of this formulation, and [51] for an alternative
formulation.

It is important to note that some of the above formulations may be able to be
simpliﬁed depending on how they are desired to be controlled. For example, if a max
function is to be minimized, its simpler equivalent is:

minimized sum k; mð

Þ

subject to

where

sum k; mð

Þ (cid:1) aikxim þ M 1 (cid:2) xim

ð

Þ

ð

8i 2 I

Þ

M is a given number smaller than any aik.

Note that if all aik’s are nonnegative, the second terms on the right-hand side may be
dropped.

6. Primitive spatial properties to complex spatial properties

The utility of the present scheme lies in the ability to address a variety of spatial
properties in establishing spatial allocation criteria. To illustrate this, we analyze selected
properties from the literature, which are commonly referred to as size, shape, or spatial
relation, in terms of our primitive properties. This section relies on the following
notation.

: another object of interest

m : object of interest (e.g., sales territory)
n
m : set of all spatial units that do not belong to m (called m’s complement)
mn : set of all spatial units that do not belong to m or n
ks

: 1-unit attribute indicating the sales potential of each spatial unit

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

281

kd : 1-unit attribute indicating the area-weighted squared distance from a given center

kl : 1-unit attribute equal to one for every spatial unit
ld : 2-unit attribute indicating the distance between each spatial unit pair
la : 2-unit attribute indicating the adjacency of each spatial unit pair in the form of

of m

0Y1 value

6.1.

Size

Size properties often involve 1-unit 1-object properties only. Still, many different size
properties can be speciﬁed simply by applying different 1-unit attributes to different
functions. Likewise, spatial allocation criteria concerning size properties, too, can be
varied depending on how and what primitive properties are related. For example, the
following statement demand that object m be at least c times larger in terms of sales
potential than object n:

sum ks; mð

Þ (cid:1) c(cid:4)sum ks; n

ð

Þ

6.2.

Shape

Shape properties tend to be modeled in a more complex manner than size properties. Of
White and Renner’s ﬁve shapes [50], compactness, fragmentation, perforation and
elongation are formulated below.

Compactness in terms of moment of inertia is related to a 1-unit 1-object property. To

achieve a certain degree of compactness, object m’s moment of inertia is minimized:

minimize sum kd; m
Þ

ð

or limited to a speciﬁc value, d:

sum kd; mð

Þ (cid:3) d

minimize max ld; mð

Þ

m, which is formulated as follows:

sum la; mð

Þ ¼ 0

maximize sum k; mð
Þ
con la; mð

Þ ¼ 1

If there is no ﬁxed object center, a 2-unit 1-object property may be used. The following
statement, for instance, will drive the object compact:

Fragmentation is attained by excluding all adjacent spatial unit pairs from an object,

Elongation can be seen as a combination of two primitive properties: one for

stretching an object out and the other for keeping it contiguous. For example,

ð31Þ

ð31Þ

ð31Þ

ð31Þ

ð31Þ

ð31Þ

282

SHIRABE

Perforation is not straightforward to model. The following statement, which enforces

contiguity on both object m and its complement m; prevents holes:

con la; mð
con la; mð

Þ ¼ 1
Þ ¼ 1

Indentation, however, does not seem to be able to be modeled by the present scheme. It
may be worthwhile to explore whether this property results from an overlooked
combination of our primitive properties; and if not, whether (and how) it can be formulated
independently. Certainly there are more shapes that cannot be covered by the present
scheme. In general, the more speciﬁc a shape description is, the more difﬁcult it is to
model. For example, a star-shaped object is harder (if not impossible) to model than a
round-shaped object.

6.3.

Spatial relation

As for topological relations, Egenhofer and Franzosa’s eight topological relations (see
Figure 2) are formulated below. Each formulation examines the number of spatial units
shared by two objects and/or the number of adjacent spatial unit pairs linking two objects.

Objects m and n are disjoint:
sum(k1, m, n) = 0
sum(la, m, n) = 0
Objects m and n meet:
sum(k1, m, n) = 0
sum(la, m, n) Q 1
Object m contains object n:
sum(k1, m, n) = sum(k1, n)
sum(la, n, mn ) = 0
Object m covers object n:
sum(k1, m, n) = sum(k1, n)
sum(la, n, mn ) Q 1
Objects m and n are equal
sum(k1, m, n) = sum(k1, m)
sum(k1, m, n) = sum(k1, n)
Objects m and n overlap
sum(k1, m, n) Q 1
sum(k1, m, n) e sum(k1, m)
sum(k1, m, n) e sum(k1, n)
Object m is inside of object n:
sum(k1, m, n) = sum(k1, m)
sum(la, m, mn ) = 0

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

283

Object m is covered by object n:
sum(k1, m, n) = sum(k1, m)
sum(la, m, mn ) Q 1

Metric relations often involve 2-unit 2-object properties concerning distance attribute.
Since distance is not necessarily measured in Euclidean terms, various metric relations
can be addressed by coupling different 2-unit attributes with different functions. Here we
only give one example, which states that the shortest distance between objects m and n
must be greater than or equal to d:

min ld; m; n

ð

Þ (cid:1) d

7. Conclusion

Spatial allocationVallocation of discrete spatial units to objects of interestVis a difﬁcult
process to model. It is partly because there is no common approach to formulating spatial
allocation criteria that involve a literally countless number of complex spatial properties.
To evade this difﬁculty, we have assumed that some spatial properties are more primitive
than others and shown that various spatial properties can be decomposed into four types
of primitive properties: one concerning individual spatial units and a single object, one
concerning spatial unit pairs and a single object, individual spatial units and an object
pair, and spatial unit pairs and an object pair. This simpliﬁcation enables one to express
spatial allocation criteria in a clear and open-ended manner.

The present scheme is not ready to be incorporated in any computer system, though
general-purpose spatial allocation systems may sound appealing. The major obstacle is
that such systems would allow (or even encourage) users to build MIP models too large
to be solved in reasonable time. This seems an inherent problem in the integration of
mathematical programming models and GIS (see, e.g., [11]).

The present scheme can be extended at least in two ways: three dimensional (e.g., ore
mining) and temporal (e.g., timber harvesting). The three-dimensional extension seems
relatively straightforward since the primitive properties presented here are not associated
with any particular dimension. The temporal extension, on the other hand, is more
complicated, as it involves two types of unknowns: where to do something and when to
do it. A typical example is a timber harvesting problem, where a series of harvesting
decisions are to be made while forests grow over time. To model this kind of decision
process, it might be useful to picture space and time as a three-dimensional space with
two horizontal spatial dimensions and one vertical temporal dimension (see, e.g., [25]),
and discretize it into a ﬁnite set of Bspatio-temporal units’’ deﬁned by a spatial extent and
a temporal interval (see, e.g., [30]). In this setting, we can cast spatial allocation with
time considerations as what might be called Bspatio-temporal allocation’’Vaggregation
of spatio-temporal units into clusters or Bspatio-temporal objects’’ according to speciﬁc
criteria. It, however, does not resemble spatial allocation any further for at least two
reasons. First, distance in space and interval in time do not share the same unit of

284

SHIRABE

measurement. Second,
the temporal dimension is asymmetric as time goes in one
directionVfrom the past to the future. As a result, properties in a spatio-temporal context
cannot be evaluated in the same way as in a spatial context. To see this, imagine two
objects in space and time. Which is bigger? Is one object more compact than the other?
Are they both contiguous? How far are they from each other? These questions are
ambiguous (if not meaningless) because properties associated with spatio-temporal
objects are not correctly speciﬁed. This kind of issue arises not only in evaluating spatio-
temporal patterns, but
in establishing spatio-temporal allocation criteria. As such,
analyses of spatio-temporal properties should be approached from both descriptive and
prescriptive perspectives. A preliminary research is underway to answer the following
questions: what kinds of problems are concerned with spatio-temporal allocation, what
kinds of criteria they require, and whether those criteria are expressed in terms of
relationships between the present primitive spatial properties. What will follow is to
identify typical properties in spatio-temporal contexts and to decompose them into
primitive properties. An ultimate goal is to design a general approach to spatio-temporal
allocation modeling with these primitives. A crucial factor to be addressed elsewhere is
the development of quality spatio-temporal databases (see, e.g., [3], [31], [37] for
overviews), since no model of spatio-temporal allocation would be useful unless data on
space and time are correctly represented.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank C. Dana Tomlin for his guidance and stimulating discussions at the
University of Pennsylvania, Andrew U. Frank for his constructive critique and advice,
and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on an earlier draft of the
paper. This research was partially supported by the University of Pennsylvania’s GSFA
Grosser Research Fund.

References

1. J.C.J.H. Aerts and G.B.M. Heuvelink. BUsing simulated annealing for resource allocation,^ International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, Vol. 16:571Y587, 2002.

2. R.K. Ahuja, T.L. Magnanti, and J.B. Orlin. Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Prentice

3. K.K. Al-Taha and R. Barrera. BTemporal data and GIS: An overview,^ in Proc. of GIS/LIS ‘90, pp.

Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.

244Y254, 1990.

Research, Vol. 20:619Y628, 1972.

Vol. 8:145Y152, 1991.

4. P.C. Belford and H.D. Ratliff. BA network-ﬂow model for racially balancing schools,^ Operations

5. S. Benabdallah and J.R. Wright. BShape considerations in spatial optimization,^ Civil Engineering Systems,

6. S. Benabdallah and J.R. Wright. BMultiple subregion allocation models,^ ASCE Journal of Urban Planning

and Development, Vol. 118:24Y40, 1992.

7. D.J. Blair and T.H. Bliss. BThe measurement of shape in geography: An appraisal of methods and

techniques,^ Bulletin of Quantitative Data for Geographers, No. 11, 1967.

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

285

8. R.B. Boyce and W.A.V. Clark. BThe concept of shape in geography,^ Geographical Review, Vol.

54:561Y572, 1964.

9. C.J. Brookes. BA parameterized region-growing programme for region allocation on raster suitability

maps,^ International Journal of Geographical Information Science, Vol. 11:375Y396, 1997.

10. W. Bunge. Theoretical Geography, Lund Studies in Geography, Series C, General and Mathematical

Geography, No. 1. Gleerup: Lund, 1966.

11. R.L. Church. BLocation modelling and GIS,^ in P.A. Longley, M.F. Goodchild, D.J. Maguire, and D.W.
Rhind (Eds.), Geographical Information Systems, Vol. I, Principles and Technical Issues, 2nd edition. John
Wiley & Sons: New York, 293Y303, 1999.

12. T.J. Cova and R.L. Church. BContiguity constraints for single-region site search problems,^ Geographical

Analysis, Vol. 32:306Y329, 2000.

13. S.C. Crema. BA comparison between linear programming and a choice heuristic approach to multi-objective

decision making using GIS,^ in Proc. of GIS/LIS ’96, pp. 954Y963, 1996.

14. J.R. Eastman, P.A.K. Kyem, and J. Toledano. BA procedure for multi-objective decision making in GIS

under conditions of conﬂicting objectives,^ in Proc. of EGIS F93, pp. 438Y447, 1993.

topological spatial relations,^ International Journal of

15. M. Egenhofer and R. Franzosa. BPoint-set

Geographical Information Systems, Vol. 5:161Y174, 1991.

16. M.J. Egenhofer and J.R. Herring. BCategorizing binary topological relations between regions, lines, and
points in geographic databases,^ Technical Report, Department of Surveying Engineering, University of
Maine, Orono, ME, 1990.

17. A. Frank, J. Raper, and J.P. Cheylan. Life and Motion of Socio-Economic Units. Taylor & Francis: London,

2001.

18. B. Fleischmann and J.N. Paraschis. BSolving a large scale districting problem: A case report,^ Computers

and Operations Research, Vol. 15:521Y533, 1988.

19. A.D. Franklin and E. Koenigsberg. BComputed school assignments in a large district,^ Operations

Research, Vol. 21:413Y426, 1973.

20. Y. Frolov. BMeasuring the shape of geographical phenomena: A history of the issue,^ Soviet Geography:

21. R.S. Garﬁnkel and G.L. Nemhauser. BOptimal political districting by implicit enumeration techniques,^

Review and Translation, Vol. 16:676Y687, 1974.

Management Science, Vol. 16:B495YB508, 1970.

22. K.C. Gilbert, D.D. Holmes, and R.E. Rosenthal. BA multiobjective discrete optimization model for land

allocation,^ Management Science, Vol. 31:1509Y1522, 1985.

23. M.F. Goodchild, BTowards an enumeration and classiﬁcation of GIS functions,^ in Proc. of International
Geographic Information Systems (IGIS) Symposium: The Research Agenda, NASA, Washington,
Vol. 2:67Y77, 1988.

24. M.F. Goodchild. BGeographical data modeling,^ Computers & Geosciences, Vol. 18:401Y408, 1992.
25. T. Ha¨gerstrand. BWhat about people in regional science?^ Papers of the regional Science Association, Vol.

24:7Y21, 1970.

26. S.W. Hess. BCompactness-what shape and size? Conﬂicts among possible criteria for rational districting,^

National Municipal League, 15Y23, 1969.

27. S.W. Hess and S.A. Samuels. BExperiences with a sales districting model: Criteria and implementation,^

Management Science, Vol. 18(No. 4, Part II):41Y54, 1971.

28. S.W. Hess, J.B. Weaver, H.J. Siegfeldt, J.N. Whelan, and P.A. Zitlau, BNonpartisan political redistricting

by computer,^ Operations Research, Vol. 13:998Y1006, 1965.

29. M. Hojati. BOptimal political districting,^ Computers & Operations Research, Vol. 23:1147Y1161, 1996.
30. M. Kavouras. BUnderstanding and modeling spatial change,^ in A. Frank, J. Raper, and J.P. Cheylan (Eds.),

Life and Motion of Socio-Economic Units. Taylor & Francis: London, 2001.

31. G. Langran. Time in Geographic Information Systems. Taylor & Francis: London, 1992.
32. D.R. Lee and G.T. Sallee. BA method of measuring shape,^ Geographical Review, Vol. 60:555Y563, 1970.
33. A.M. MacEachren. BCompactness of geographic shape: Comparison and evaluation of measures,^

34. P.G. Marlin. BApplication of the transportation model to a large-scale Bdistricting^ problem,^ Computers

Geograﬁska Annaler, Vol. 67B:53Y67, 1985.

and Operations Research, Vol. 8:83Y96, 1981.

286

SHIRABE

35. B.H. Massam and M.F. Goodchild. BTemporal trends in the spatial organization of a service agency,^

36. A. Mehrotra, E.L. Johnson, and G.L. Nemhauser. BAn optimization based heuristic for political districting,^

Canadian Geographer, Vol. 15:193Y206, 197l.

Management Science, Vol. 44:1100Y1114, 1998.

37. D.J. Peuquet. BTime in GIS and geographical databases,^ in P.A. Longley, M.F. Goodchild, D.J. Maguire,
and D.W. Rhind (Eds.), Geographical Information Systems, Vol. I, Principles and Technical Issues, 2nd
edition. John Wiley & Sons: New York, pp. 91Y103, 1999.

38. M. Segal and D.B. Weinberger. BTurting,^ Operations Research, Vol. 25:367Y386, 1977.
39. R.J. Shanker, R.E. Turner, and A.A. Zoltners. BSales territory design: An integrated approach,^

Management Science, Vol. 22:309Y320, 1975.

40. T. Shirabe. BA model of contiguity for spatial unit allocation,^ in revision.
41. T. Shirabe and C.D. Tomlin. BDecomposing integer programming models for spatial allocation,^ in M.J.
Egenhofer and D.M. Mark (Eds.), Geographic Information Science, Proc. of GIScience 2002, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 2478:300Y312, 2002.

42. B. Smith. BOn drawing lines on a map,^ in A.U. Frank and W. Kuhn (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory,

Proc. of COSIT ’95, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 988:475Y484, 1995.

43. P.J. Taylor. BDistances within shapes: An introduction to a family of ﬁnite frequency distributions,^

Discussion Paper, No. 16, University of Iowa, 1Y20, 1970.

44. P.J. Taylor. BDistances within shapes: An introduction to a family of ﬁnite frequency distributions,^

45. C.D. Tomlin. Geographic Information Systems and Cartographic Modeling. Prentice Hall: Englewood

Geograﬁska Annaler, Vol. 53B(1):1971.

Cliffs, NJ, 1990.

46. C.D. Tomlin and K.M. Johnston. BAn experiment in land-use allocation with a geographic information
system,^ in D.J. Peuquet and D.F. Marble (Eds.), Introductory Readings in Geographic Information
Systems. Taylor & Francis: London, 159Y169, 1990.

47. M.L. Vidale. BA graphical solution of the transportation problem,^ Operations Research, Vol.

48. E.A. Wentz. BA shape deﬁnition for geographic applications based on edge, elongation, and perforation,^

Geographical Analysis, Vol. 32:95Y112, 2000.

49. C.L. White and G.T. Renner. College Geography: Natural Environment and Human Society. New York,

4:193Y203,1956.

pp. 590Y599, 1957.

50. J.C. Williams. BPolitical districting: A review. Papers in regional science,^ Papers in Regional Science: The

Journal of the Regional Science Association International, Vol. 74:13Y40, 1995.

51. J.C. Williams, BA zeroYone programming model for contiguous land acquisition,^ Geographical Analysis,

Vol. 34:330Y349, 2002.

52. J. Wright, C. ReVelle, and J. Cohon. BA multiple objective integer programming model for the land

acquisition problem,^ Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 13:31Y53, 1983.

53. M. Yeates. BHinterland Delimitation: A distance minimizing approach,^ The Professional Geographer,

54. A.A. Zoltners and P. Sinha, BSales territory alignment: A review and Model,^ Management Science, Vol.

Vol. 15(No. 6):7Y10, 1963.

29:1237Y1256, 1983.

SPATIAL PROPERTIES FOR SPATIAL ALLOCATION MODELING

287

Takeshi Shirabe
is a university assistant in the Institute for Geoinformation and Cartography at the Technical
University of Vienna. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania in Summer 2003. His research
and publication have focused on optimization models in discrete space and their application to geographic
information systems. His most recent projects are on a temporal extension of map algebra and spatial opti-
mization problems in dynamic environments.

