The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 3

pp. 159–161 UKCC National Report to ICA 2011-Special Issue August 2011

Editorial
British National Report to the International Cartographic
Association for the Period 2007–2011

Every 4 years, member nations of the International
Cartographic Association (ICA) provide a report on the
cartographic activities of their country to the General
Assembly. The last report of the activities in the UK was
published as a special issue of The Cartographic Journal
(Volume 44, No. 2). Continuing in the style that has
been well received, this special issue covers the key events
in UK cartography over the last 4 years and gives all
contributors to the UK cartography scene an opportu-
nity to make a statement about their activities.

is

The report

the responsibility of

the United
Kingdom Cartography Committee (UKCC). A sub-
committee of the British Cartographic Society (BCS),
the UKCC, is chaired by a member of BCS Council and
reports to Council. The membership is not limited to
BCS members and aims
to be representative of
cartographic interests in the UK. As well as representa-
tives from government agencies, commercial compa-
nies,
and other UK-based cartographic
societies, UK-based ICA Executive committee members
and Commission chairs are also invited to join the
UKCC. The current membership is
listed below.
Through the UKCC, the BCS retains close ties with
the Royal Society who share the ICA membership fee
and who continue to support our involvement in ICA
activities.

academia

The UKCC meets twice a year, normally in May and
December. Meetings focus on the ICA matters and
ensuring that the UK has a voice in ICA activities. More
general issues of UK cartography may also be discussed,
particularly any related to the UK’s
international
contribution to cartography. The UKCC arranges the
local competition for
ICA Petchenik
Children’s Map Competition, organized in 2011 by
Angela Baker of ESRI-UK, and the UK entries to the
international map exhibition held in conjunction with
International Cartographic Conferences. This map
exhibition gives UK map producers on opportunity to
display their wares on an international stage.

the biennial

The UK continues to be heavily involved in the
operation of the ICA. Dr David Fairbairn has served for
the last 4 years as Secretary-General and Treasurer and
is the sole nomination for the next 4-year period. The
UKCC are grateful to David for taking on this role
which does much to raise the proﬁle of the UK in the
international cartographic community. Three ICA

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13045143289694

editor of The Cartographic

Commissions currently have UK chairs or co-chairs as
does one Working Group. Many other Commissions
have very active UK members and generally the UK is a
major contributor to the work of the ICA. At the 2011
General Assembly, the UK will propose Chris Perkins
for a second term as Chair of the Commission on Maps
and Society. We have proposed three new Com-
missions and their chairs: Map Design, chaired by
Ken Field,
Journal;
Neocartography, chaired by Steve Chilton, Chairman
of the Society of Cartographers; and Open Source
Geospatial Technologies (currently a Working Group),
chaired by Suchith Anand of Nottingham University.
Jason Dykes of City University and William Mackaness
of University of Edinburgh, currently co-chairs of the
Commission on Geovisualisation and Commission on
Generalisation and Multiple Representations, will be
supported to continue in these roles, but these Com-
missions have been formally proposed by other mem-
ber nations.

Commissions are at the core of the work of the
ICA; they are where the scientiﬁc contribution of the
Association is based and where activity is
focused
between General Assemblies. The commitment of UK-
based scientists to these Commissions is signiﬁcant and
ensures that the UK is well represented in the interna-
tional cartographic research community. The UKCC
thank those willing to standing for ofﬁce as Commission
chairs, but also the many others who contribute as vice-
chairs, organizers of Commission meetings and active
participants in Commission activity. We encourage UK
cartographers to become involved in the international
cartographic community by attending an International
Cartographic Conference (Dresden is the destination for
2013) and by participating in Commission activity.
Further details of the wide range of Commissions can be
found on the ICA website: http://www.icaci.org. Most
Commissions have open membership policies and
welcome new members.

Following the style of the previous reports, the 2011
National Report has several sections. First, there is a
collection of short essays. In the ﬁrst essay, providing a
connection to the 50th anniversary of the founding of
the ICA celebrated in 2009 and the 50th anniversary of
the ﬁrst international cartographic conference held in
Paris in 1961, Chris Board OBE, former long serving

160

The Cartographic Journal

chair of the UK Cartography Committee, describes the
history and development of an independent body to
represent cartographic interests within the UK Sci-
entiﬁc community and what is now the UK Car-
tography Committee. He takes the story up to the
1991 landmark of the UK hosting the International
Cartographic Conference and ICA General Assembly
in Bournemouth.

If the ﬁrst paper looks to the past, the remaining essays
are very much focused on contemporary activities. Robin
McLaren and Robin Waters provide a very useful
summary of the UK Location Strategy, which reﬂects
both the current aims of government in improving
integration and use of geographic information, and
forms the backbone of the UK compliance with the
EU’s INSPIRE Regulations. Anyone in the UK involved
information is likely to see some
in using geospatial
impact of these developments.

Closely related to the above initiative, in November
2009, on the eve of Vanessa Lawrence, Director
General of the Ordnance Survey, delivering a keynote
address to the International Cartographic Conference,
then Prime Minister Gordon Brown announced that
much Ordnance Survey data would be released for free
use and that copyright restrictions on its use in other
products would be removed. This quickly became a
talking point at the conference, certainly among the
British contingent, but more widely as the impact of
this major reversal of policy by one of the staunchest
protectors of intellectual property rights was seen to
have repercussions in the thinking of other national
mapping agencies, particularly in Europe. Bob Lilley of
Ordnance Survey sets out
the background to OS
OpenData. The story is progressed by Steve Chilton
who looks at the potential impact of this free OS data
on the existing UK open data community, particularly
OpenStreetMap. We planned to include a commercial
viewpoint, but unfortunately, copy was not available
when the report went to press. While overall the UK
geospatial community is likely to beneﬁt from the
release of OS data both in the short term and the long
term, there is no doubt that there are some negative
impacts on the industry in the short term, particularly
on those who had invested heavily in producing
commercially competitive data products. In its response
to government consultation, the BCS highlighted these
issues and the potential negative impact on the
cartographic industry of releasing high-quality print-
ready cartographic products. We argued that releasing
raw data (especially vector data) would encourage use of
contemporary data rather than historical, out-of-copy-
right,
sources and would potentially stimulate the
cartographic industry to exploit this data to produce
bespoke mapping for customers.

The ﬁnal essay recounts a major initiative by the BCS
to improve the quality of maps produced by users of

GIS. As Mary Spence explains, this ‘Better Mapping
Campaign’ has exposed many GIS users with no
previous cartographic training to the basic principles of
good map design. Most of the participants in the
workshops, jointly organized with the Association for
Geographic Information, do not see themselves as
cartographers, and if
the BCS,
probably saw it as an organisation of dedicated profes-
sional cartographic designers and map publishers who
had little relevance to their primary day-to-day task. The
BCS is to be applauded for this highly successful
outreach activity.

they had heard of

The remainder of the report covers the cartographic
and geospatial information activities in the UK over the
last 4 years. Contributions were invited from over 250
organisations, indicating the breadth of involvement in
UK cartography. Section 2, the largest part of this issue,
has brief reports from a wide range of government
agencies and commercial businesses involved in carto-
graphy in some way. Section 3 reports on activities of
societies with a focus on mapping and geographic
information, and the ﬁnal section reports on recent
educational activities. We have encouraged contributors
to submit an appropriate image or map extract after
feedback from previous reports indicated that readers
are keen to see a wide range of examples of British
mapping.

We have tried to be comprehensive in our coverage,
based on a list of contacts compiled by the BCS in
recent years and postings on appropriate e-mail lists.
We are very keen to include as many as possible on our
contact list for future reports, so if your organisation
is not represented here, please get in touch with the
BCS.

UKCC membership and afﬁliation 2007–2011
David Forrest: Chair, British Cartographic Society
Council
Suchith Anand: Chair, ICA Working Group on Open
Geospatial Technologies (from 2010)
Mick Ashworth: Harper-Collins/Ashworth Maps (to
2009)
Ken Atherton: Secretary, British Cartographic Society
Council
Chris Board OBE: The Charles Close Society
Richard Carpenter: UK Hydrographic Ofﬁce (from
2010)
Steve Chilton: Chairman, The Society of Cartographers
Jason Dykes: Co-chair, ICA Commission on
Geovisualisation
David Fairbairn: ICA Secretary-General and Treasurer
Peter Jolly: International Map Trade Association,
ESRI (UK) and BCS President
Alex Kent: Canterbury Christ Church University
(from 2010)
Bob Lilley: Ordnance Survey and BCS President
2008–2010

Editorial

161

William Mackaness: Co-chair, ICA Commission on
Generalisation and Multiple Representation
Elizabeth Manterﬁeld: Defence Geographic Centre
Valerie Miskimmon MBE: Northern Ireland Land and
Property Services (formerly OSNI)
John Pepper: UK Hydrographic Ofﬁce (until 2009)
Chris Perkins: Chair, ICA Commission on Maps and
Society
Mary Spence MBE: Global Mapping and BCS
President (to 2008)
Anne Taylor: Cambridge University Library
Rosemary Tuhey: UK Hydrographic Ofﬁce (2009–
2010)
Mike Wood: former ICA President (corresponding
member)

David Forrest FBCart.S
Chair, UK Cartography Committee

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

David Forrest PhD, FB-
Cart.S is senior lecturer in
Geomatics at the Univer-
sity of Glasgow, where he
has
taught cartography
for 20 years. He is a
member of BCS Council,
and was BCS President in
2000-02. He is currently
chair of the UK Carto-
graphy Committee and
ICA
vice-chair of
Commission on Use &
Issues. Research
User
interests include topographic map design, application of
knowledge based systems to mapping with GIS, and the
design and use of maps for public information.

the

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

