The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2011

Vol. 48 No. 3

pp. 162–171 UKCC National Report to ICA 2011-Special Issue August 2011

O B S E R V A T I O N S

British Cartography: Its Emergence as a Distinct Discipline
from the Science of Geography with Emphasis on the Period
from 1951 to 1991

Christopher Board

36 Wakefield Gardens, London SE19 2NR, UK
Email: c.board@macace.net

How British cartography, conventionally regarded as an integral aspect of British Geography, became a distinct discipline.
The role of military officers and academic geographer/cartographers in this process is discussed in this paper.

Keywords: institutionalisation, UK National Committee, geography, cartography, The Royal Geographical Society,
The Royal Society, International Cartographical Association

INTRODUCTION

Before the 1960s, cartography was largely regarded as map
production. Surveyors dealt with the collection of data for
compiling maps. Professionals in ofﬁcial agencies such as the
Ordnance Survey turned the data into paper maps. A few
academic geographers either used maps or studied their history.
Geographers mainly after the First World War treated map work
as an essential tool for regional studies and taught topographic
map interpretation, but also employed special purpose maps to
illustrate books and articles. They also edited and made
extensive use of atlases. Some who had acquired considerable
experience of map making on expeditions in the ﬁeld taught
university courses which touched on map projections and
simple surveying, for example, Frank Debenham at Cambridge
University. Economic historians such as Hoskins and historical
geographers such as Clifford Darby made much use of maps as
sources of information or as tools to investigate locational
issues/situations. However, it was mainly within the ﬁeld of
academic geography that the use of maps and hence the need to
understand how they worked was of paramount importance. In
the twenty-ﬁrst century, this is no longer true as academic
geography has adopted a dynamic and process-orientated
approach where geographical space or location is either taken
as read or is not of prime signiﬁcance. While academic
geography was concerned with regional description and analysis,
its interests lay close to those of the explorers and travellers who
were strongly represented in the Royal Geographical Society
(RGS) and the Scottish Geographical Society (RSGS). Hence, it
was natural for them to belong to such bodies and to write for
their journals. Much early research which ﬁtted this descriptive
paradigm was undertaken by scientists who had little or no
formal training in geography. One may detect geographers who

DOI: 10.1179/000870411X13044121958740

chose to advance their understanding of speciﬁc issues such as
population distribution or land use making intensive use of
maps as tools rather than as illustrations congregating in the
RGS when maps were the subject of lectures. One such on
population maps was opened by a leading academic geographer
at an afternoon meeting in 1934 was published with
illustrations1. Another on lettering on maps was opened by
Captain Withycombe of the Ordnance Survey in 19282. The
RGS also provided opportunities for the work of Stamp’s Land
Utilisation Survey to be better known. A paper on land use
change by Willatts (1933) set a standard for historical
geographers and cartographers early in the history of that
remarkable project founded in November 1930. By the end of
that decade, Stamp read a paper to the RGS which demon-
strated the value of what had originally been an educational
project to map the use of every acre in Britain not just for future
planning but as a tool for the urgent need to maximize
agricultural production in the ﬁrst year of the Second World
War (Stamp, 1940). Stamp’s organisation at the London
School of Economics had published over a hundred 1-inch
maps and were producing maps at 10 miles to 1 inch
(1 : 633 600) to provide a national picture of land use, types
of farming and land classiﬁcation. Such records became national
planning tools and were effectively taken over by the Ministry
of Agriculture soon afterwards. Willatts was soon to be work-
ing for government departments concerned with post-war
reconstruction.

MOVES TOWARDS A NATIONAL ATLAS OF BRITAIN

Only a month later than Stamp’s paper, the redoubtable
Professor Eva G. R. Taylor, introduced a discussion on a

British Cartography

163

to promote Planning of

proposed British national atlas (Taylor, 1940). Much of the
preliminary work had been conducted in the British
Association which had set up a National Atlas Committee.
Geographers were well represented on that committee, but
Taylor was well known for her contributions to discussions in
the RGS more particularly for her research on the history of
cartography and navigation. She with Stamp was on the 1940
Council: a council
the Social
Environment and were soon to be members of an Advisory
Panel to the War Cabinet’s Advisory Committee on Re-
construction of Town and Country chaired by Lord Reith.
Taylor was able to send him the polemic paper, with another
from Nature and a letter to The Times, all promoting a national
atlas. She was eventually appointed to the panel, where she
joined Stamp. Fortunately, a leading planner supported the
concept of the national atlas and together they convinced Lord
Reith of the value of maps for post-war reconstruction.
Unfortunately, it was harder to convince the Royal Society’s
National Committee for Geography to support the scheme. By
the spring of 1941, a research section had been created in the
Ministry of Works staffed by Willatts and cartographers, so that
work on ofﬁcial planning maps (alias a national atlas) could
begin (Hellyer, 1992)3. Taylor was able to revive the British
Association’s national atlas scheme after the Second World War
and secured the support of the RGS, RSGS and even the Royal
Society, but could not secure ﬁnances to back up the scheme.
Its major achievement had been to give birth to a research
maps ofﬁce in a government department and the powerful
advocacy of thematic mapping among geographers both in the
civil service and in academia.

A MODERN ASSESSMENT

In a recent review, Kain and Delano-Smith (2003) sum up
the relationship between geography and cartography in the
twentieth century in this way4. Maps ‘were crucial adjuncts
to geographical thinking [in 1900] and central for the next
ﬁve decades in regional geography’. But by the end of the
twentieth century,
‘most geographers had vacated the
territory of the study of maps and their making, which
they had so prominently occupied through its ﬁrst
50 years’. My review examines the ways in which inﬂuential
geographers in the mid-twentieth century weaned nascent
cartographers and guided them towards a more profes-
sional, specialist cartography. This nevertheless still relied
on fundamental geographical principles. In the ﬁrst decade
of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the UK has seen the emergence
of the UKGeoforum, an umbrella organisation of some 16
societies all concerned with geographical information. Their
common subject matter underlies the various ways in which
they deal with such information. Not all of the societies can
be described as cartographic, but those which are, tend to
have been established more recently. Barriers between the
several societies can be partially surmounted by cooperation
and exchanges of information.

Faced by a growing separation between geography and
cartography, I have in this paper attempted to explore this
relationship at a time when cartography began to see itself
as a distinct discipline. First, I shall examine how the RGS
dealt with cartographic matters.

THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY’S INVOLVEMENT
IN CARTOGRAPHY

the congresses of

Examination of the indexes in The Geographical Journal
reveals that cartographic matters were considered under
Maps or Cartography – general or historical. There were
regular contributions of a cartographic nature in the form of
papers. Partly hidden in ‘The Record’ there can be found
much information about new maps and atlases and of
the
such as
international meetings,
International Geographical Union which had a cartographic
section. Notable among these were news of the International
Map of the World at 1 : 1 000 000. The RGS was involved in
the coordination of British exhibitions of maps for the IGU
meetings in Washington (1952), Rio de Janeiro (1956) and
Stockholm (1960). Indeed the report on the former in The
Geographical Journal considered that the exhibition in 1952
was ‘the most comprehensive British cartographical display
so far organized’. This was conﬁned practically to maps from
the Ordnance Survey, Directorate of Military Survey,
Directorate of Colonial Survey, Ministry of Housing and
Local Government and the Air Ministry. In a report of the
proceedings of
that conference under cartography by
Norman Pye and R. A. Skelton, the ﬁrst session was devoted
to historical cartography, the second and third to modern
cartography, which were followed by sessions on the
Bibliography of Ancient Maps (before 1700) and the
International Map of the World which seemed destined to
be taken up by UNESCO. Unfortunately, the items in ‘The
Record’ are included almost at random. They are often sent
in unbidden by a wide variety of contributors. Subjects are
sometimes only remotely of geographical
interest or
importance. Nevertheless, it is clear that the RGS published
reviews of most books on cartography and map reading
including some in French and German. They also regularly
published reviews of new atlases and maps. Full articles are
relatively rare, but tend to reﬂect an in-built involvement in
the work of the Ordnance Survey of Great Britain or the
interests of the curators of major collections.

THE EMERGENCE OF ORGANIZED CARTOGRAPHY OUT
OF AN ALLOY OF GEOGRAPHY AND CARTOGRAPHY

We have seen how cartographic topics existed within
geography before the Second World War. That war saw
both in the UK and in the USA dramatic growth in the use
of maps and employment of geographers. In the immediate
post-war period, it was accepted that a degree or school
certiﬁcate in geography required map work. Map making
dealt with the creation of topographic and general purpose
base maps, but in simpliﬁed form was employed to illustrate
geographical arguments, generally in thematic or special
purpose mapping. The value of
for
agricultural and regional planning had been demonstrated
in the UK by the ﬁrst Land Utilisation Survey organized by
L. D. Stamp and E. C. Willatts between 1930 and 1938.
Both Stamp and Willatts attended congresses of IGU after
the war and were well-known by ofﬁcial map makers in
Britain such as the Directors General of the Ordnance
Survey. Such contacts had created considerable mutual
respect at a time when mapping expertise was vital to war

land use maps

164

The Cartographic Journal

scholars

effort and post-war reconstruction. It comes as no surprise
therefore to see that both Stamp and Willatts sat on the
British National Committee for Geography (BNCG) with
representatives of ofﬁcial map making agencies, and
(Steers and
academic geographers and other
Stamp, 1957)5. This committee had been established by
the Royal Society in 1922 and looked at ﬁrst to the RGS for
initial advice. The BNCG had invited the IGU to
Cambridge for a congress in 1928 and could draw on
some funding for scholarly activity. One of the BNCG’s
activities was to contribute to map exhibitions at the IGU’s
congresses. It was often G. R. Crone, the Librarian and
Map Curator of the RGS who undertook to organize the
British component of those exhibitions. In 1960, The
Geographical Journal published a report on British or UK
Geography in the previous 4 years, on behalf of the BNCG.
In that year, the IGU Congress was held in Stockholm,
allowing relatively easy access from the UK.

RISING INTEREST IN CARTOGRAPHY AS A DISTINCT
DISCIPLINE 1956–1960

resolution in favour of

A series of meetings attracting map makers and publishers
were organized ﬁrst by the ﬁrm Esselte in 1956 in Sweden.
From this emerged a ‘Committee of Six’ charged with
broadcasting a
creating an
International Society of Cartography in 1958 (Ormeling,
1984)6. Criticism arising from experience of setting up a
cartography division of the American Congress of Surveying
and Mapping was generated. Similarly, West Germany
favoured ﬁrst establishing a European cartographic society.
An approach by the Six to A˚ hlmann, the president of IGU
found him sympathetic to an association under the aegis of
the IGU. Another conference was arranged by Rand
McNally in Chicago in 1958 to further the plans with tacit
support from American cartographers. Growing interest by
ofﬁcial mapping agencies, saw Brigadier Harris representing
the Ordnance Survey of Great Britain7. That conference
called another, of national representatives this time, to
convene at Mainz in November 1958. The agenda was to
concern the creation of an international cartographic
institution to be founded at a fourth meeting in Berne in
the summer of 1959. Harris next set out to establish a
British cartographic organisation, which was representative
of ofﬁcial mapping, commercial publishing and academic
geographers, with the full support of his Director General.
It was natural to employ the structure of the BNCG and its
parent the Royal Society to respond to those international
moves. Preparations were laid during the autumn of 1958
involving inﬂuential members of the BNCG. It is arguable
that these led separately to moves among those who
regarded themselves as cartographers to consider setting up
a learned society (Mumford, 1964) and another
for
practising cartographic illustrators.

PREPARATIONS FOR THE MAINZ AND BERNE
MEETINGS 1958–1959
In August 1958, Major General Carey and Brigadier Hotine8
learned that Dr Gigas of IFAG9 invitation to Great Britain

would be addressed to the Royal Society’s National
Committee for Geodesy and Geophysics. General Carey
sought support from Professor L. D. Stamp, a former
President of the IGU and a Vice-President of the RGS for his
wish to see the cartographic section of the IGU ‘blown up
into an international association for cartographic techniques
under the IGU umbrella’10. He urged the Royal Society to
allow the British National Committee for Geography to
respond to Gigas’s invitation. The Royal Society responded
by seeking the views of other members of BNCG. General
Carey put forward Brigadier L. J. Harris, who had attended
the meeting in Chicago in 1958, to attend the Mainz
meeting. Although he had not intended to send someone
from Ordnance Survey, he now thought that ‘Dr Gigas
should be given some guidance as to our views on inter-
national cooperation in the ﬁeld of applied cartography
within the I.G.U.’11.

A NATIONAL VIEW ON CARTOGRAPHY FOR THE MAINZ
MEETING NOVEMBER 1958

The minutes and papers of the (BNCG reveal how an alliance
of ofﬁcial mapping agencies and academic geographers helped
to organize a fully international cartographic association. It
will be seen that a national body to represent cartographers
was essential to push forward the case for the international
body. Temporarily the cartographers on the BNCG collabo-
rated until they were able to persuade the Royal Society to
create a subordinate body to handle cartographic matters. In
canvassing views of
the National Committee, Hotine’s
comments are particularly insightful12. First, he writes that
the National Committee for Geography are prepared to brief
Brig. Harris to steer any resulting any international organisa-
tion towards the IGU rather than in the direction of a separate
organisation. He continues ‘the moving spirits behind this
Mainz meeting will almost certainly set up some form of
international organisation which may well to a large extent
degenerate into a trade association unless some steps are taken
to bring it within the fold of one of the existing unions’. It
would be expensive to set up a new organisation inside or
outside an existing union ‘when there is an obvious niche for
cartography within the existing union for Geography. The
geographers cannot afford to let go of cartography alto-
gether’. He was not persuaded that geographers are not
competent or interested in detailed technical processes of
cartography. The IGU faces two alternatives: to expand and
provide a forum for cartographers through a cartographic
association within IGU; or, they can have all cartographic
interests drained away to a separate organisation. A third
alternative – to do nothing about it ‘but bask in an exhibition
of maps provided for them by cartographers – will not exist
much longer’. He did not think that the ﬁrst alternative would
remain open much longer. The other members of the
Committee gave silent approval or generally agreed that a
delegate should be sent from Ordnance Survey, as proposed
by Carey, if he were persuaded to depute someone from his
staff.

Thus with the support of three major map-making
agencies and that of the academic geographers from the
RGS and the Institute of British Geographers (IBG), the

British Cartography

165

scene was set for the formal involvement of the cartographic
community in the UK in the international cartographic
community, with the support of the Royal Society. Stamp’s
position in the IGU helped the ﬂedgling ICA to ﬁnd a
home in the IGU.

associated catalogue organized by a sub-committee of the
BNCG14. In November 1960, a cartographic section of the
Royal Scottish Geographical Society was formed15.

BNCG SUPPORT FOR BRIGADIER HARRIS

Harris was duly nominated the British delegate to the
Mainz meeting and authorized to vote for any international
cartographic organisation formed to afﬁliate with the IGU.
His report on the Mainz meeting which had considered
options says that there was support, not unanimous, for the
British view that a cartographic association should be
formed ‘under the umbrella’ of the IGU. Some of the
delegates feared that cartographers would be swamped by a
growing number of IGU commissions. They also favoured
a regional organisation rather than a global one, but that
would have led to political difﬁculties in Europe. Delegates
were sent away to return to a formal meeting scheduled for
June 1959 at which decisions would be taken on what kind
of relationship would be sought with the IGU as no one
was in favour of a completely independent organisation.
The next meeting was to be held in Berne on 9–10 June
1959, for which Harris was briefed by a small group chosen
from the BNCG on 4 June 195913. Much of that meeting
was concerned with overcoming the reluctance of IGU to
change its statutes to create a special commission to
accommodate the international cartographic organisation.
Contacts between the cartographers and the geographers
overcame the objections of Boesch, the IGU secretary-
general. The way was clear for drafting a timetable to create
the ICA as an afﬁliate to IGU, culminating in changing the
latter’s statutes at the Stockholm Congress in 1960, which
allowed the formal establishment of the ICA at a special
meeting in Paris in June 1961. Its statutes would not be
ratiﬁed until the second general assembly to be held
coordinated with the IGU meeting in London in July
1964. As ICA 1959–1984 points out, the only serious
objection to the afﬁliation from the IGU was from the
Soviet Union which regarded geography as a science, but
cartography as a technical discipline as had been shown by
the two commercially sponsored conferences in Sweden and
Chicago. Objections were overcome once it became clear
that ICA welcomed as a member any nation with an
independent cartographic activity.

STRENGTHENING THE CARTOGRAPHIC ELEMENT IN
ORGANIZED GEOGRAPHY

The IGU met in Stockholm in 1960. There, a British
exhibit of thematic maps and atlases was displayed for the
BNCG for which G. R. Crone compiled an illustrated
catalogue. It was Crone who had instituted from June 1960
shorter cartographic items
formerly included in ‘The
Record’, gathered into a new section ‘Cartographical
Progress’ This also appeared separately in pamphlet form.
This innovation was in the spirit of a new focus on
cartography which was then still seen as one of the roles of
the RGS. This was one of the last exhibitions with an

GEOGRAPHERS AND CARTOGRAPHERS PROGRESS
TOGETHER LED BY BRIGADIER HARRIS

An informal meeting was held in August 1960 during the
IGU meeting in Stockholm to discuss a proposal to create a
national sub-committee for cartography16. The ICA had
applied to IGU for afﬁliation. So far the BNCG had dealt
with this matter as it had affected Great Britain. Brig. Harris
had been the BNCG representative and was also on the
Executive Committee of the ICA. He stated that there were
three reasons for setting up a sub-committee. The ﬁrst was
to help him to cope with all the many references to Great
Britain. Secondly, the BNCG was not sufﬁciently represen-
tative of British cartographic organisations. A sub-commit-
tee would allow representation for government, university
and professional societies. Thirdly, a competent body was
needed to keep under review the increasing interest by
[cartographic] technicians. Harris carefully avoided calling
the BNCG not competent – he wanted their support. He
may well have envisaged the creation of
the British
Cartographic Society (BCS). If agreed, this proposal would
be submitted to the Royal Society before the end of 1960.
Representatives would be obtained from the Royal Society,
the RGS,
the Admiralty
Hydrographic Ofﬁce, Ordnance Survey, Directorate of
Survey War Ofﬁce, the Air ministry and the Directorate of
Overseas Survey. Commercial cartography could not be
included in such a sub-committee, but representatives from
the universities and Professional Societies would provide
adequate representation. He intended the proposal to be
considered by an informal meeting of the BNC on 10
August in Stockholm. A later minute of the BNCG17
records that the proposal ﬁrst outlined in August had been
recommended to the Council of the Royal Society. By
December 1960, the sub-committee with power to co-opt
had been set up by the Council.

the universities,

the RSGS,

THE CARTOGRAPHY SUB-COMMITTEE BEGINS ITS
WORK

the sub-
Brigadier Harris was appointed chairman of
committee whose members were representative of ofﬁcial
and private mapping agencies and societies interested in the
production, use and conservation of maps, and of university
geography departments. Its role was to advise the BNCG
on all cartographic matters. It hoped that the RGS and the
Royal Scottish Geographical Societies, which had both
published cartographic articles, would continue to do so.
An account of the sub-committee’s ﬁrst year of work18
in January dealing with
reveals that it met four times:
membership, its aims and objects and preparatory work on
the ﬁrst formal congress of the ICA to be held in the
summer of 1961. In April, the sub-committee concerned
itself with a report on cartographic activity in Great Britain
to be submitted to the 1961 General Assembly19. It also
began discussing bringing the ICA to join the IGU which

166

The Cartographic Journal

in
would hold its Twentieth Geographical Congress
London in 1964. That would provide an opportunity to
convene the ICA’s ﬁrst technical conference in Edinburgh,
to follow the IGU. To facilitate arrangements, Brigadier
Harris, the sub-committee’s chairman, was invited to join
the Executive Committee for the London Congress. The
November meeting considered IBG participation in
Ordnance Survey (OS)
seminars, and intriguingly a
proposal for a Cartographic Institute to coordinate carto-
graphic activity in a university for research and teaching.
While ﬁnding support in principle, further deliberation was
put off. Perhaps the moves to create a learned society, which
gained momentum at
the Edinburgh symposium on
cartography in 1962 and culminated in the foundation of
the BCS at another such meeting in Leicester in 1963,
proved to be a viable alternative (Mumford, 1964)20.

Crone, who had been part of the UK delegation to the
Paris meeting in 1959, naturally became a founding
member of the sub-committee. He reported in February
1961 that he had undertaken to organize the British
contribution to the exhibition ‘Relief
in Cartography’
mounted in Paris in conjunction with the ﬁrst formal
meeting of the ICA in May 196121. The comparatively
small group of individuals who spoke for cartography then
issued an invitation to anyone outside the intended search
for those who were involved in any cartographic activities.
The Royal Society now coordinated the responses with the
advice of the new sub-committee. It also advised on any
ﬁnancial support for those interested in attending ICA
conferences. But for the most part, those were supported by
the government agencies which formed the nucleus of the
sub-committee. Meanwhile, the sub-committee itself was
monitoring UK cartography,
issuing a report on carto-
graphic activity for the period 1961–1964. It is unfortunate
that
the background and
personnel involved in such a crucial period. Fortunately,
the regular reports published by the RGS and RSGS enable
us to ﬁll some of the gaps. However, some emphasis is given
to British involvement in ICA work, such as setting up
working parties by the Sub-committee on problems of
the training of cartographers, standardisation of carto-
graphic terms and automation in cartography. It also
selected national representatives to international carto-
graphic meetings.

little detail about

there is

INCREASED COLLABORATION BETWEEN ICA AND IGU
1960–1964

The IGU Newsletter before 1960 had carried only a few
items of cartographic interest such as the fact that the
IGU had supported the Bibliographie Cartographique
Internationale22. The same number carried a proposal for
an International Cartographic Competition by A. Libault.
in
He suggested that
cartography should enter this with a cartographic repre-
sentation of a physical or a human problem at world-wide
scale23. After
its
from the Secretary, Hans
Newsletter carried a report
Boesch, of the collaboration between IGU and ICA. He
stressed the links between them, contacts having been

the Stockholm conference of IGU,

specialized studies

students of

established from 1958. Considering afﬁliation of ICA to
IGU, the latter had to create a mechanism not yet in its
Statutes. The cartographers were still uncertain whether
they wished to retain absolutely independent status, or to
afﬁliate with IGU or some other Union (Boesch, 1961).
The solution was to establish a Special Commission on
Cartography, as a link between the IGU and the infant ICA.
Its terms of reference were criticized as vague by the USSR
delegate but were a way of exploring the best possible way
of cooperation between the two bodies, e.g. by organizing
meetings such as those which had taken place in 1957 and
1958 (Boesch, 1961)24. To prepare for the revision of IGU
Statutes in 1964, a Statute Committee included Dudley
Stamp as the chairman. Stamp’s reputation and interna-
tional renown was invaluable in such circumstances and, as
has already been noted, was a key link between geographers
and cartographers with whom he had great afﬁnity
(Buchanan, 1968).

THE CARTOGRAPHY SUB-COMMITTEE ESTABLISHES A
ROUTINE

Its ﬁrst report described cartographic activity before the
sub-committee was set up. It was effectively the basis on
which the BNCG approached the Royal Society to
recognize an identiﬁable sub-discipline. It was tabled at
the ICA’s ﬁrst General Assembly, 50 years ago, in June
1961. It marked the formal beginning of an ofﬁcial British
view of cartography in dealings with the international
association. It also provided a template for several future
reports required of member countries of the ICA every
the
4 years. At
Ordnance Survey convened in 1962 the ﬁrst of what
became an annual conference of map users. These were
soon followed by other meetings held in universities at
Edinburgh in 1962 and in Leicester in 1963. A 2-day
conference on Experimental Cartography was organized by
the Cartographic Department of the Clarendon Press in
Oxford in 196325. The emphasis was at that stage on
technical aspects, especially of production of both topo-
graphic and thematic maps and atlases.

the suggestion of the sub-committee,

IDENTIFYING BRITISH CARTOGRAPHERS AND THEIR
ACTIVITIES

In July 1961, bodies represented on the Sub-Committee
were sent a press release outlining its aims, its membership
and an invitation from experienced cartographers who are
or have been engaged in map compilation and production,
in research or teaching in cartography. They should be
prepared to take part in scientiﬁc discussions, contribute
technical papers, or give lectures on cartography. Kirwan,
the RGS Director,
from the
Executive Secretary of the Royal Society with a covering
note that it was wished that it be given wide circulation26. It
was decided that Brigadier Harris should have exclusive
access to the names of those engaged in cartographic
activities. He later wrote the ﬁrst paper of a set of four,
titled British Map Making and Cartographic Activities
(Harris, 1964)27. He was at pains to point out that his

received the document

British Cartography

167

paper was not the ofﬁcial report: that would be prepared by
the National Sub-committee for Cartography of the Royal
Society28. It followed a pattern which lasted until 1984.
There were three sections: general, which covered carto-
graphic meetings, learned societies catering for cartography,
and cartographic teaching (pp. 3–5); technical develop-
ments (pp. 5–6); and production (pp. 6–13). Neither this
second, nor the ﬁrst report, contains the names of those in
the Sub-Committee.

The third report (1965–1968) published by the Royal
Society demonstrates successful widening of the scope of
institutions, organisations and individuals engaging in
cartography. Of course a main raison d’eˆtre for the sub-
committee’s existence was the preparation of an up-to-date
national report for the forthcoming ICA congress which was
to follow the IGU congress in London in July 1964. Not
only were university geographers involved in many of the
activities required for the IGU conference, but those with
cartographic proclivities were persuaded to organize exhibi-
tions. The sub-committee also seized the opportunity to
arrange another technical conference in Edinburgh as one of
the Symposia of the IGU conference. The summaries from
the Edinburgh conference were included in the Volume of
Abstracts. 1964 then may have marked the apogee of
inﬂuence of established geographical cartography. The sub-
committee commented that the BCS was well established
and provided ‘a recognized forum for the discussion of
cartographic problems within the United Kingdom’. Many
papers from the annual symposia had been published by The
Cartographic Journal which had gained ‘a high reputation
for the quality of its content and presentation’. The Society
of University Cartographers (SUC)29 added another level of
activity, resulting in an association of independent profes-
sional cartographers. Two other strands of cartographic
activity appear in this third report – history of cartography
and map curating. The former topic was the subject of a
meeting convened at the RGS in 1967. Map curators had
established a group within the BCS in 1966, convened by Dr
Helen Wallis.

With an eye on their international role vis a` vis the ICA,
the sub-committee’s working parties had been active. A
glossary of cartographic terms in English was published by
the Royal Society (1966). The Royal Society and the
Institute of Electrical Engineers brought together carto-
graphers and electronic experts to study problems in
automated cartography before the Amsterdam technical
conference of ICA in 1967. Finally, a conference on
Education in Cartography at which 60 different British
organisations took part at the Royal Society in 1968.

At that time, it became evident that many government
departments and agencies not closely associated with the
academic world or
learned societies were also major
cartographic players. An impressive list of publications and
work in progress
from government and commercial
publishers is listed. One by-product of the expanded list
of contacts was seen in the richness of material offered for
exhibitions, particularly at ICA meetings. By 1968, when
the ICA met after the New Delhi conference of the IGU,
the 22-strong sub-committee was
the membership of
chaired by W. D. C. Wiggins, a senior director of the
Directorate of Overseas Surveys. A third of the members

were recognisably graduate geographers, although some
were not in university posts.

CONSOLIDATION IN REPORTING CARTOGRAPHIC
ACTIVITY

By the late 1960s, the Sub-committee had established a
pattern for reporting cartographic activity to ICA con-
fourth report (1968–1971)30 stressed the
gresses. Its
continued growth of interest in cartography; its place ‘in
the communications systems available to man to be better
understood’ (p. 7) seems to be a veiled reference to the
emergence of the communication paradigm. It highlighted
the introduction of national qualiﬁcations in cartography
and gave details (pp. 6–7) linked to ICA speciﬁcations. The
role of geography departments was still highly signiﬁcant as
they acted as midwives for education and training and in
nurturing BCS and other symposia or conferences. The
Department of Education and Science established a joint
committee to administer new National Certiﬁcates at
ordinary and higher levels. This included geographers such
as W. Kirk and cartographers such as E. C. Willatts.
Expansion of specialized higher qualiﬁcations and options
in geography honours degree courses was building on
pioneer efforts. Early experiments in automating map
production at agencies such as the Ordnance Survey, the
Department of the Environment and the Experimental
Cartography Unit (NERC)31 were warmly welcomed. A
second conference on the history of cartography in Britain
(Edinburgh 1971) followed one held in Brussels. These
grew into a regular series meeting in different countries
under an independent management. Regular exhibitions of
maps sent to ICA meetings at Stresa (1970) and Ottawa
(1972) were also shown (from duplicates) at the RGS. This
practice later passed to the BCS annual symposia where
results of map design competitions were also displayed.

The ﬁfth report32 covers a period of continued growth
and progress despite some severe economic problems which
had hit smaller ﬁrms. Metrication featured strongly as did
standards for bibliographic references to maps and charts.
BCS activity and that of SUC ‘the second specialist society’
whose links with BCS were said to be close were followed
by a report on the sixth conference on the history of
cartography at Greenwich was organized by the Imago
Mundi editors and the National Maritime Museum. The
general section was concluded by mentions of publications
by geographical societies and map exhibitions including the
now customary displays of duplicates of those sent to ICA
conferences at Madrid (1974) and Moscow (1976). The
Sub-committee was now chaired by Brigadier Gardiner and
included 24 members many of whom were founder ﬁgures
of the BCS. This report also includes the UK membership
of ICA Commissions and Working Groups.

Education featured in eight short reports. Technical
developments mostly from government departments were
more detailed concentrating on methods of mapping, while
the next section was devoted to production by ofﬁcial
institutions, commercial ﬁrms and academic establishments.
The ﬁnal section on cartographic publications is innovative
listing a selection of monographs, and serial publications.

168

The Cartographic Journal

The latter included the well-established Cartographical
Survey extracted from The Geographical Journal and items
from the Map Collectors’ Circle. The Cartographic Journal’s
ﬁrst index, of the ﬁrst eight volumes, answered the need for a
guide to the growing volume of cartographic literature.

LAST OF THE ‘OLD GUARD’

By 1978, the chairmanship of the Sub-committee had
passed to Professor Eila Campbell, Brigadier Gardiner
having retired to join the RGS as Keeper in October 1966.
The 17 members were drawn from the large government
agencies, universities and commercial ﬁrms33. The BCS and
the SUC continued to grow and diversify. Apart from
cartographic articles in long established geographical serials,
two new ones began publication in Britain – The Map
Collector and Imago Mundi, which was devoted to the
history of cartography. The section on education was much
expanded to eight entries plus one on the School of Military
Survey. Technical developments in the major agencies
reﬂect experiments with digitisation of production and
compilation, the use of remote-sensing data and map
ﬁnding and retrieval assisted by computer. Accounts of
production ranged from that of the principal government
or ofﬁcial agencies to smaller research-based operations,
including innovative manipulation of population census
data and their display in conventional paper format, as well
as the more traditional mapping for special purposes.
Comparatively little detail
follows on commercial ﬁrms
and their publications. There is now a much enlarged
section on cartographic publications in book and serial
form. This was the last report issued by the Royal Society in
A5 format, as henceforth the sub-committee arranged to
publish its report to the ICA in The Cartographic Journal,
supplying offprints to delegates at the Perth Congress of
ICA in 1984. This neatly avoided the special cost previously
borne by the Royal Society.

GAINING SELF-CONFIDENCE: ICA SLIPS AWAY FROM
THE TUTELAGE OF IGU

In 1981,
the 17 representatives comprising the sub-
committee were replaced by 12 individuals chosen on a
personal basis. For their seventh national report of 22 pages
in the June issue of The Cartographic Journal in 1984,
contributions were invited by the secretariat of the Royal
Society in the usual way. The content was rearranged by the
new editor into seven distinct parts. A general section
highlighted trends in a period of economic problems
affecting the Ordnance Survey,
the Serpell Review
Committee and the national organisation of cartography.
Secondly, organized cartography covered BCS and SUC and
the new Charles Close Society. Section 3, Cartographic
Production, was divided into three: large agencies primarily
producing maps; hybrid agencies where establishments
carried out considerable research, not all of which were
government bodies; smaller map-producing agencies con-
ducting comparatively little research. For completeness, a list
of those bodies publishing maps in the UK was appended.
The fourth section comprised research organisations. Fifthly,

under research and training, seven universities and seven
other institutions of higher or further education provide a
the spread of cartographic courses and the
record of
they were currently using34. Sixthly, map
equipment
curating concentrates on two of the legal deposit map
libraries and Middlesex Polytechnic. Finally, British publica-
tions about cartography are divided into serial and other
works. The previous record of the publication of individual
parts of serials is abandoned as it added little but an
impression of volume of publication.

Exceptionally, only 3 years elapsed between the seventh
and eighth reports as the ICA altered its schedule to align
itself more with sister societies dealing with collection and
processing of spatial information. At the same time, a break
with the IGU, which had occurred when ICA met in
Western Australia and the IGU met in France in 1984,
became permanent35. To some extent, international carto-
graphers were determined to be seen as detached from their
geographical progenitors. An unfortunate consequence was
the creation of a new clash between the International
Conferences on the History of Cartography (ICHC) and
ICA. They met in the same year, but often far apart36.

This eighth report was issued at ﬁrst separately from the
version in The Cartographic Journal whose publication date
was December 1987. A Royal Society cover and indepen-
dent pagination characterize the report to delegates at the
Morelia ICA meeting in October37. Arrangement is similar
to that of 1984, but there are now more universities and
other institutions involved in research and training. Fewer
hybrid agencies engaged in research are in the list, possibly
due to the earlier deadline imposed on respondents to the
usual survey. As in previous years a general survey noted
that
in a period of economic recovery, government
expenditure had been tightly controlled. The Directorate
of Overseas Surveys had been absorbed by the OS, which
was being expected to increase cost-recovery. Digital
handling of geographical data was becoming an all-
consuming goal. A major government committee of
enquiry into the handling of geographical data pointed
the way to a digital future for much cartographic activity38.
Reference was made to an innovative project to create an
interactive data base to describe the entire country to
celebrate 900 years
since William the Conqueror had
instigated the Domesday Survey of his newly acquired
kingdom. The BBC has now put these data on its website at
BBC.co.uk/domesday.

ABOLITION OF ROYAL SOCIETY NATIONAL
COMMITTEES; AND SUB-COMMITTEES

In 1987, at the ICA congress held in Morelia, Mexico, the
UK advanced a bid to invite the ICA to hold its next congress
in Bournemouth in England. One crucial aspect of the
the
timing was the celebration of
Ordnance Survey in 1991. Once more the invitation was
made under the aegis of the Cartography Sub-committee
and the British National Committee for Geography. The bid
was successful so that activities planned before 1987 could be
put into effect. However, The Royal Society had decided to
abolish its structure of National Committees which gave

the bicentenary of

British Cartography

169

advice on subject areas usually reﬂected in RS adherence to
an international body, such as the IGU or the ICA. The
Royal Society felt that learned societies in speciﬁc subject
areas were quite capable of dealing with the responsibility
and duties of representing geography and cartography in the
UK with respect to international bodies. With regard to the
ICA, links would be more direct and there were to be savings
in expenditure for the Royal Society, which agreed to
continue some ﬁnancial support. Independently, the Charles
Close Society arranged to hold an exhibition in the RGS
house devoted to the 1-inch to 1-mile map39.

One element of the BCS becoming the UK’s adhering
body for ICA shifted editorial control over the national
report to the BCS. The special number of The Cartographic
Journal40 comprised a series of commissioned articles
featuring in more detail aspects of cartography in the UK
in addition to the more formal report which summarized
governmental, commercial, academic and other cartographic
activities. By including other material such as obituaries,
reviews and recent literature, this number is a hybrid
production which remained to be reﬁned in later years.
The precedent for a National Report to appear in a special
number of The Cartographic Journal was set for the next two
decades. Major players in three sectors of activity: govern-
ment, commercial and academic, occupy pride of place. They
are the window to the wealth of UK cartography. Other
cartographic activity, similarly subdivided, begins with the
introduction, but has to urge readers to
usual general
integrate it with the foregoing reports. In retrospect, this
device appears clumsy, but in the round this special number
with its extensive use of colour is a comprehensive bench-
mark for reviewing later national reports.

CONCLUSION

It is ﬁtting to be reminded of Brigadier Thackwell’s paper in
the IGU Newsletter in 1965 (Thackwell, 1965). He had
been elected the Second President of ICA and was also
chairing the BCS. Reﬂecting on the collaboration between
geographers and cartographers, he stressed that geographers
needed from the outset to consult cartographers whose basic
problem was to show the results of geographical study ‘in
pictorial form’. Although many geographers seem rarely to
use or need maps, professional cartographers are constantly
solving the problem of how to depict geographical data.
Increasingly, the data are digital in the widest sense. As a
geographer and cartographer, I suggest that in the last two
decades, UK cartography has more sharply focused on its
activities, which are much the same as those of the founders
of the BCS. If anything UK geography has changed its
objectives. A study of the national reports to the IGU which
were published in The Geographical Journal (Edwards and
Crone, 196041; Cooke and Robson, 1976; Munton and
Goudie, 1984; Bennett and Thornes, 1988) reveals a
progressive decline in references to cartography from 1976
onwards. Quantitative methods, geographical data and
computerisation generate some references to publication
of a broadly cartographic nature. One notable mention in
the geographical report for 1976 is the geo-coding of the
1971 census (Cooke and Robson, 1976)42. Of course,

cartographers were increasingly publishing in cartographic
journals, rather than maintaining their visibility in geogra-
phical journals.

Discussing the deep and long connections between
geography and cartography, Ron Johnston cites the involve-
ment of ﬁrms such as Bartholomew of Edinburgh in the
development of geography as a discipline (Johnston,
2003)43. He concluded that ‘by the end of the twentieth
century cartography had become a separate technical activity,
linked to geography through research interests in remote
sensing and GIS’. He continued ‘most geographical interest
was in the history of cartography with very little research –
unlike the situation in the United States – on map
interpretation and use’. He was of course
construction,
commenting on geography
than cartography.
Commenting on the general association of geography with
maps in the public mind, even this is muted. He noted that
the British Library’s exhibition ‘The Lie of the Land’ in 2001
attracted three articles in The Times when it opened ‘with
none mentioning geography!’. His conclusion is
that
geography lacks a clear public constituency, has no profes-
sional career path and no public proﬁle. I suspect that these
views would not be universally accepted in the UK44.

rather

tomes with exhaustive

By contrast, it is evident that cartographic activity in the
UK is enriched by the emergence of several cartographic
institutions, the BCS and the Society of Cartographers both
approach their half-century vigorously publishing on a wide
range of cartographic topics to suit their rather different
memberships. The Charles Close Society is devoted to
publishing a range of work on Ordnance Survey mapping
from general guides and popular introductory accounts to
reference
carto-bibliographies.
Libraries and museums ﬁnd that exhibitions featuring maps
are popular. There have also been several radio and television
series sometimes connected to those exhibitions. Books
about maps, whether in those exhibitions or not seem to
have caught a mood. The recent announcement of the
London Mapping Festival45 to run from 2012 the year when
the Olympic Games return to London serves to underline an
enthusiasm for mapping and cartography. At the same time,
the UKGeoforum operates as coordinator for its member
societies. It embraces all the institutions which collect, use,
display and manipulate geographical data46.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Christopher
Board,
OBE, an Honorary Fellow
and President of the Society,
is a former Chairman of the
Cartography Sub-committee
of
the British National
Committee for Geography.
As such, he was the UK
delegate to ICA congresses
from 1984 to 2005. He was
a university teacher in geo-
graphy at Cambridge and
the London School of
Economics. He began to
work on deﬁning technical

170

terms in cartography for the ICA in 1963. He subsequently
served on several commissions (communication and map use)
and is currently engaged on a study of South African mapping
in the ICA Commission on the History of Cartography.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to thank Professor M. J. Wise and
Mr C. I. M. O’Brien who made helpful suggestions which
have been incorporated in this final version.

NOTES

1 Contributors to discussion were: C. F. Close; H. St. J.
L. Winterbotham; H. J. Fleure; E. G. R. Taylor; B. C.
Wallis; A. C. O’Dell; A. R. Hinks; M. Aurousseau;
G. Harold-Smith; A. Tammekann.

2 Contributions were made by senior OS ﬁgures and by
cartographers at the RGS and by the Secretary, A. R. Hinks
as well as C. B. Fawcett Professor of Geography at
University College, London.

3 For a summary of these developments, see Hellyer
(1992). He also draws on the present author’s E. G. R.
Taylor Lecture to the RGS 29 November 1989.

4 The quotation is from p. 413. The second quotation

comes from p. 414.

5 See the Appendix to a paper by Steers and Stamp
(1957). It explained to the The Cartographic Journal
readership the relationship between the Society,
the
BNCG and the Royal Society, which adhered to the IGU.
6 ICA 1959–1984. Comprising: Carl Mannerfelt (Swe-
den), Chairman, Erwin Gigas (FDR), S. de Brommer
(France), D. Chervet (Switzerland), D. Fitchet (USA) and
K. Bland who represented the Ordnance Survey (Great
Britain). See Ormeling (1984).

7 Brigadier L. J. Harris (1910–2001) was then the
Director of Map Production and Director of Field Survey.
Memoir, in Royal Engineers Journal, 115, pp. 130–131.
8 Major General L. F. de V. Carey: Director General,
Ordnance Survey, 1957–1961; Brigadier M. Hotine,
Director of Overseas Surveys.

9 IFAG: Institut fu¨r Angewandte Geodesie, Frankfurt,

Germany.

10 Copy of letter Carey to Stamp, with Minutes of BNCG
NG7{58) in RGS Director’s Correspondence National
Committee for Geography.

11 Copy of a letter dated 10 October 1958 from
the Director-General of Ordnance Survey to Professor
L. Dudley Stamp. Royal Society BNCG, ICA 23 October
1958. Paper NG/7(58).

12 Royal Society, BNCG, Opinions of members.…. Paper
NG/7a(58). This illustrates how a national consensus was
reached among ofﬁcial map makers and academic geographers.
13 Royal Society, BNCG. Paper NG9(59). Brieﬁng of UK
delegate
to meeting in Berne on the prooposed
International Cartographic Association. The group com-
prised Carey (Chairman), Dowson (DMS), Harris (OS),
Kirwan (RGS), Wiggins (DOS for Hotine). Stamp was
invited, but unable to attend.

The Cartographic Journal

14 However, in 1963 with less than a year to the IGU
meeting in London,
asked to organize the
International Exhibition of Thematic Maps, mounted in
the hall of the Royal College of Art, London, July 1964.

I was

15 A report on cartographic activity in Great Britain, to the
First General Assembly of the International Cartographic
Association, 1961. The Royal Society. This was almost
certainly compiled by Harris. See note 19.

16 Typescript headed ‘A proposal for a British National
Sub-Committee for Cartography’. Written in the third
person probably by Brigadier Harris. It was copied to the
following: Alice Garnett, Lord Nathan, General de Vic
Carey, Professor Edwards, Professor O’Dell, Professor
Stamp, Professor Steel, Dr Willatts, Mr Wiggins, Col.
Gardiner, Brig. Harris. Addressed to those who were
attending the IGU congress in Stockholm.

17 BNCG. Meeting on 18 November 1960. In Director’s

Correspondence 1960–1961 RGS Archives.

18 International Cartographic Association. A duplicated
typescript signed by E. G. Godfrey, the representative of the
Institute of British Geographers. In RGS Archives, Crone
Correspondence 1961–1966. Annotated in ms January
1962 probably by G. R. Crone, the representative of the
RGS.

19 This must be Cartographic Activity in Great Britain,
Report No. 1, 1961. A copy of this report has been found
in RGS Archives, Director’s Correspondence, 1961–1962.
It has seven pages of text.

20 See Mumford (1964), p. 3. Mumford points to the
post-war atmosphere of increasing interest in and use of
cartography manifested internationally in the Esselte,
Sweden and the USA meetings sponsored by commercial
map-makers.

21 See The Geographical Journal, 1961, 127, pp. 379–

382.

22 IGU Newsletter, 2, (1), pp. 15–16.
23 IGU Newsletter, 2, (1), p. 19. I have not found any

evidence that this was ever put into effect.

24 Boesch (1961). After some discussion, as no decision
requiring a vote was necessary, the topic was regarded as for
information.

25 D. P. Bickmore, a member of the Sub-Committee
instigated this conference, whose title was objected to by
other members, without effect.

26 CS4(61) amended second draft, 28 July 1961. See
The Geographical Journal, 1961, 127, pp. 379–380,
which asks those who read the Journal, if they possessed the
‘necessary qualiﬁcations or attributes’ to send personal and
professional details to the Royal Society. This is heavily
edited and does not list all the members of the Sub-
Committee.

27 Harris (1964). This is part I and follows papers by
G. R. Crone on British Geography in the twentieth century
and another by L. P. Kirwan on recent trends in British
exploration. The other three papers addressed ground
survey, photogrammetry and hydrography by leading
experts.

28 The Royal Society British National Committee for
Geography, Cartographic Activity in Great Britain. Report
No. 2. 1964, 13 pp. The title on p. 3 adds 1961 to 1964.
Note that Northern Ireland is apparently excluded,

British Cartography

171

although the Royal Society effectively adhered to the ICA
on behalf of the UK.

29 SUC, now called the Society of Cartographers, was
founded in 1964 to provide a forum for the exchange of
information for the many small cartographic units serving
mostly university Geography Departments.

30 Cartographic Activities in the United Kingdom 1968–
1971. Report No. 4. Cartography Sub-committee (of the
Royal Society’s British National Committee for Geography).
London, The Royal Society, 23 pp.

31 NERC: Natural Environment Research Council.
32 Cartographic Activities in the United Kingdom. Report
No. 5, Cartography Sub-committee (of the Royal Society’s
British National Committee for Geography). The Royal
Society, 1976. 30 pp.

33 Cartographic Activities in the United Kingdom 1976–
1979. Report No. 6. Cartography Sub-committee (of the
Royal Society’s British National Committee for Geography).
The Royal Society, 1980. 39 pp.

34 The absence of Aberdeen and others can be explained
only by their failure to submit reports in time. Such
omissions happen in every year, making it hard to draw
deﬁnite conclusions. The reader is encouraged to ﬁll gaps
by resorting to university calendars or other serials.

35 This

separation was

some as unexpected as
for
unwanted. Brigadier Thackwell, the second President of
the ICA, had assumed that the intimate relations of the
geographical and cartographic disciplines were mutually
advantageous. IGU Newsletter, 1965, 16, (2), pp. 58.

36 From 1987 to the present, ICHC and ICA have met

on different continents on six occasions out of 12.

37 Report No. 8 published in The Cartographic Journal,

1987, 24, pp. 97–116.

38 Department of the Environment, 1987. Handling
Geographic Information: Report to the Secretary of State
for the Environment of the Committee into the Handling
of Geographic Information. Chairman, Lord Chorley.

39 See catalogue of An Inch to the Mile. The Ordnance
Survey One-inch Map 1805–1974, edited by Yolande
Hodson. 1991. Charles Close Society.

40 The Cartographic Journal, 1991, 28, (1). It happens to
include an appreciation of Brigadier Denys Thackwell who
had exerted considerable inﬂuence both in British cartography
in the 1960s and in the foundation of the British Cartographic
Society. But see p. 126 which erroneously states that he was
once Chairman of the Cartography Sub-Committee.

41 Edwards and Crone (1960). A disappointing section
on cartography on p. 436. For 1960–1964, see note 28
above. No report was commissioned for the period 1964–
1968.

42 Cooke and Robson, 1976, p. 83. Their footnote 44.
People in Britain (HMSO) is a census atlas with a unique set
of maps of Great Britain, some of which show aspects of
population by 161 km squares. Unaccountably,
the

national report on cartography makes no mention of this
signiﬁcant experiment by the Ofﬁce of Population, Censuees
and Surveys.

43 Johnston (2003). See their footnotes 72 and 73.
44 See, for example, ‘Going Places with Geography’ sub-
titled Progression and careers using geography. Cartography
and maps feature strongly under Geographical Techniques.
The Royal Geographical Society (with the IBG), 2011.

45 London Mapping Festival, http://www.londonmap

pingfestival.org

46 UKGeoforum, http://www.ukgeoforum.org

REFERENCES

Bennett, R. J. and Thornes, J. B. (1988). ‘Geography in the United
Kingdom 1984–88’, The Geographical Journal, 154, pp. 23–
48.

Boesch, H. (1961). ‘Report read to Extraordinary Session of the IGU
General Assembly 7 August 1960’, IGU Newsletter, 12, p. 7.
Cooke, R. U. and Robson, B. T. (1976). ‘Geography in the United
Kingdom 1972–76’, The Geographical Journal, 142, pp. 81–100.
Buchanan, R. O. (1968). ‘The man and his work’, in Land Use and
Resources: Studies in Applied Geography. A Memorial Volume
to Sir Dudley Stamp, ed. by Embleton, C., pp. 3–11, Institute of
British Geographers, London.

Edwards, K. C. and Crone, G. R. (1960). ‘Geography in Great Britain,

1956–60’, The Geographical Journal, 126, pp. 427–441.

Fawcett, C. B. (1935). ‘Population maps’, The Geographical Journal,

85, pp. 142–159.

Harris, L. J. (1964). ‘British maps and charts: a survey of develop-

ment’, The Geographical Journal, 130, pp. 226–240.

Hellyer, R. (1992). The ‘Ten-Mile’ Maps of the Ordnance Surveys,

pp. 100–105, Charles Close Society, London.

Johnston, R. J. (2003). ‘The institutionalisation of geography as an
academic discipline’, in A Century of British Geography, ed. by
Johnston, R. and Williams, M., Chapter 2, pp. 45–90, Oxford
University Press for the British Academy, Oxford.

Kain, R. and Delano-Smith, C. (2003). ‘Geography displayed: maps
and mapping’,
in A Century of British Geography, ed. by
Johnston, R. and Williams, M., pp. 371–427, Oxford University
Press for the British Academy, Oxford.

‘The Society Record’, The Cartographic

Mumford, I. (1964).
Journal, 1, pp. 3–4.

Munton, R. J. C. and Goudie, A. S. (1984). ‘Geography in the United
Kingdom 1980–84’, The Geographical Journal, 150, pp. 27–47.
Ormeling, F. J. (1984). ICA 1959–1984: The First Twenty-five
International Cartographic Association,

years
International Cartographic Association, Bern.

the

of

Stamp, L. D. (1940). ‘Fertility: productivity, and classification of land

in Britain’. The Geographical Journal, 96, pp. 389–412.

Steers, J. A. and Stamp, L. D. (1957). ‘South American prospect’, The

Geographical Journal, 123, pp. 329–343.

Taylor, E. G. R. (1940). ‘Plans for a national atlas’. The Geographical

Journal, 95, pp. 96–98.

Thackwell, B. D. (1965). IGU Newsletter, 16, p. 58.
Willatts, E. C. (1933). ‘Changes in land utilization in the south-west of
the London Basin, 1840–1932’, The Geographical Journal, 82,
pp. 515–528.

Withycombe, J. G. (1929). ‘Lettering on maps’, The Geographical

Journal, 73, pp. 429–446.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

