Transactions in GIS, 1999, 3(2): 175–186

Review Paper

What Does ‘GIS’ Mean?

Nicholas R Chrisman
Department of Geography
University of Washington

Abstract
Many definitions of ‘GIS’ have been proposed, but they are rarely discussed in the
peer-reviewed literature. Most definitions in active use have serious limitations.
Recent literature includes a variety of proposals to redefine GIS by changing the
third word. This paper proposes an extended definition accompanied by a
condensed form that contains the key concepts:

‘Geographic Information System (GIS) – Organized activity by which people
measure
then transform these
geographic phenomena
representations into other forms while interacting with social structures.’

and represent

1 Purpose

Writing a definition is at once trivial and deep. To some extent, each writer can simply
attach meaning to a particular term as needed for a limited purpose. Lewis Carroll,
with his training as a mathematician, had Humpty Dumpty say ‘When I use a word, it
means what I choose it to mean – neither more nor less’ (Carroll 1872/1987, p 106).
While written as a deliberately extreme notion, this position has become commonplace
in the artificial languages used to program computers. However, in more constructive
circumstances, definitions can attempt to encapsulate whole bodies of knowledge and
to build a common ground of shared understanding. To succeed in such a role,
definitions must be written as self-contained units, because they will be quoted and
reused without the prior paragraph of explanations. They become, in fact, an element
of technology in a broad sense. Though a definition may seem a pedantic exercise, it
can become a routine part of instruction and outreach. It can make a difference in
communicating among disciplines, professions, and citizen groups.

The GIS literature is replete with definitions of the term ‘GIS’, but at the same
time, there is remarkably little reflection about these definitions. This article will

Address for correspondence: Nicholas R Chrisman, Department of Geography, Box 353550,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. Email: chrisman@u.washington.edu

(cid:223) 1999 Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

176

Nicholas R Chrisman

review a sampling of definitions of the term and the literature that discusses them. In
place of some of the earlier criteria for definitions, this paper offers some grammatical
and content goals. It presents a longer and a shorter definition that attempt to live up to
these goals, and defends the proposed phrasing. Before performing these tasks, a
theoretical basis for this enterprise will be developed by examining how definitions
work and how they are adopted.

1.1 How Definitions Work

There are many approaches to words and language that extend far beyond the modest
intentions of this paper. However, it is important to note that dictionaries can be
written using a whole spectrum of approaches along at least one dominant axis. At one
end, there is a normative belief that a word should have a stable meaning. For example,
the French language is officially entrusted to the Acade´ mie Franc¸ aise, whose
‘immortals’ sit in judgement over definitions of words. Science has also established
such deliberative bodies for certain roles. For example, the process of naming a new
species of plant or animal
involves a highly ritualized international scientific
establishment. Such a formalized method attempts to purify the distinction between
signifier and signified. The language attempts to model some abstract world of Platonic
forms that can be held separate from the specifics of expression and usage or other
messy consequences of change. Such dualism has deep philosophical roots, but is often
difficult to operate in practice.

At the other extreme, other dictionaries adopt a laissez-faire approach, attempting
to reflect the shifting shades of meaning that evolve through usage. Dictionaries of the
English language, following the lead of the Oxford English Dictionary, have tended to
follow an ethnographic method, using ‘historical principles’ to chronicle the evolution
of meaning. This process expects a form of collective unconscious to develop new
meanings, not overt and official acts. In this view, a word is not independent of its
context; the dualistic model must be abandoned.

In addition to the axis between formalism and historicism, definitions also play a
role in non-linguistic confrontations;
they are far from neutral. Since they set
boundaries, they can be used to claim territory by being inclusive, or to exclude some
elements. In the interdisciplinary circumstances of ‘GIS’, a definition must be analyzed
as political statement. It must be read as much for what it does not say and what it does
not contain as for what it actively asserts. Definition-writing is not some meta-activity
conducted outside of the rest of discourse. Unlike coordinate measurements that can be
tested against the world, words connect to reality through a complex cultural pathway.
Language is used to reshape the world, to make others see the world from one’s
perspective. This article adopts its theoretical framework from the literature on the
social construction of scientific knowledge (Barnes 1974; Bloor 1976; Latour and
Woolgar 1986; Latour 1993). Specifically, a definition of a specialization like GIS serves
as a major ‘boundary object’ – an entity about which various groups agree to disagree
(Harvey 1997a; Harvey and Chrisman 1998). Definitions of a term like GIS do matter
because they play a role in negotiating agreements between the diverse actors required
to make a GIS operate.

In such a complex arena, it may seem futile to attempt to write a new definition.
The formalists and the historicists seem to have left little room for individual initiative.
Yet, one of the most insidious elements that unifies these extremes is a belief in a form

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

What Does ‘GIS’ Mean?

177

of legal stare decis (the principle that a matter once decided should not be revisited).
Tired old definitions, like some form of resilient genetic material, can propagate
themselves, moving from one author’s work to another. When they are accepted
without thought, they are perhaps at their most dangerous. I believe that the current
state of the definition of ‘GIS’ is in such a situation. The term is taken for granted,
understood without being explicitly put into words. Thus, the definition reflects an
earlier world, one where ‘GIS’ was a dream, not a gigantic industry, a fact-on-the-
ground. I believe that a reformulated definition can help the community realize its
ability to reshape these seemingly uncontrollable forces through everyday practices.

2

State of the Definition

The term ‘GIS’ has come to symbolize a technology, an industry, a way of doing work.
To some it has come to promise a new world of disciplinary and professional renewal,
flowing from the expansion of information technology. As a buzzword, ‘GIS’ can be as
shallow as any computer acronym. Yet, the buzzword is so powerful that it has become
a word (pronounced ‘jees’) in professional circles in France, that bastion of linguistic
purity (despite official attempts to use SIG for Syste` mes d’Information Ge´ ographiques).
One purpose of producing a definition is to tie the buzzword to some solid foundation.
‘GIS’ has a few variant origins or interpretations. Among many British authors, the
term is spelled out as ‘Geographical Information Systems’; Burrough (1986, p 6) even
places the Latin sic next to ‘Geographic Information Systems’. The second spelling has
clearer historical precedent; it was after all the Canada Geographic Information System
(Tomlinson 1966, 1967) that first used the term. This paper will use the North
American variant, in consonance with the editorial policy (Wilson et al 1996) of this
British-based journal.

While definitions pop up everywhere, there is remarkably little attention given to
comparing definitions and to evaluating them. Cowen (1988) provided some review of
the principles of definitions, giving four approaches to a definition: process-oriented,
application, toolbox, and database. Maguire (1991) provided a more complete review
of selected definitions and described the approach to GIS from three viewpoints: the
map view, the database view, and the spatial analysis view. Burrough’s second edition
(Burrough and McDonnell 1998, p 11) groups definitions into tool-box based,
database, and organization based, while adopting a primary definition classed as ‘tool-
base’ (sic). This article will merge these taxonomies to provide a sampling of each kind
of definition extant. Although divisions of definitions occur in the literature, in practice
it is rather arbitrary to assign a particular definition to just one approach. Some of the
definitions reported come from the traditional literature sources, but some are drawn
from the World-Wide Web, a forum of increasing importance for the description of the
field and its promotion to newcomers.

2.1

Systems Flow Approach

From the very start, GIS practice emphasized the S word: systems – perhaps the most
pervasive metaphor for the twentieth century (Harvey 1997b). Operations research,
developed as a distinct practice during World War II, provided a technique of ‘systems
analysis’ that helped bring the computer into nearly every part of modern life. GIS was

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

178

Nicholas R Chrisman

not alone in being conceived as a series of procedures that lead from input to output;
from data sources through processing to displays. While the systems concept included
feedback in its original conception, the presentation of systems usually emphasized the
main linear sequence. The most prevalent form of a GIS definition follows this
sequence, for example the one adopted by the Chorley Report for the UK:

GIS a system for capturing, storing, checking, manipulating, analysing and
displaying data which are spatially referenced to the Earth (Department of the
Environment 1987, p 132).

This definition, with the somewhat novel addition of ‘checking’, bears a direct
relationship to the earlier work of the IGU Commission (Calkins and Tomlinson 1977).
This has been termed the process approach by Cowen, but the process seems restricted
to a work-flow concept with an emphasis on systems terminology. Variants of this text
reappear without citation in textbooks, policy documents, and user manuals. Marble
(1990, p 20) elaborated this flow-based definition in more expansive form by detailing
four ‘subsystems’:

1. A data input subsystem which collects and/or processes spatial data derived from

existing maps, remote sensors, etc.

2. A data storage and retrieval subsystem which organizes the spatial data in a form
which permits it to be quickly retrieved by the user for subsequent analysis, as well
as permitting rapid and accurate updates and corrections to be made to the spatial
database.

3. A data manipulation and analysis subsystem which performs a variety of tasks
such as changing the form of the data through user-defined aggregation rules or
producing estimates of parameters and constraints for various space-time
optimization or simulation models.

4. A data reporting subsystem which is capable of displaying all or part of the
original database as well as manipulated data and the output from spatial models
in tabular or map form. The creation of these map displays involves what is called
digital or computer cartography. This is an area which represents a considerable
traditional cartographic approaches as well as a
conceptual expansion of
substantial change in the tools utilized in creating the cartographic displays.

This definition offers a sense of the stages of operation, but little about the
internals. The adjectives ‘quickly’, ‘rapid’ and ‘accurate’ tell us little about the means of
organization. The definition of one system as a set of four ‘subsystems’, arranged in
linear sequence, adopts a recursive strategy in which systems are explained by more
systems.

While the basic system flow definition continues to be used, as the widespread
adoption of GIS began in the 1980s, there was a sense that the definition was overly
technical (Rhind 1996). One of the most commonly cited alternatives was developed by
a Delphi panel of thirty specialists, including the author of this paper:

Geographic Information System – A system of hardware, software, data, people,
organizations and institutional arrangements for collecting, storing, analyzing and
disseminating information about areas of the earth (Dueker and Kjerne 1989, p 7–
8).

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

What Does ‘GIS’ Mean?

179

This definition encompasses all of Marble’s subsystems, with a massive expansion
of the actors involved. No longer is this just the software and hardware, this view of
the definition carefully
GIS includes various social elements. Notice also that
distinguishes between the data in the system and the information that results from
the system. Each of
the Delphi
participants, reflecting the experience of implementation. While the Delphi process
does help ensure agreement, it also has all the disadvantages of writing by committee.
The resulting definition is still firmly in the tradition of the system flow approach.

these improvements reflects the consensus of

Systems flow definitions spend little time excluding others; they concentrate on a

positive message of internal functions and a systems metaphor.

2.2 Content: Maps and Databases

In contrast to the system flow approach, a content approach defines the GIS by what it
information systems or as an
contains, either as a special case of more general
amalgamation of more specific uses. Geographers often define a GIS with focus on the
particular nature of spatial data.

An information system that is designed to work with data referenced by spatial or
geographic coordinates. In other words, a GIS is both a database system with
specific capabilities for spatially-referenced data, as well as a set of operations for
working with the data (Star and Estes 1990, p 2–3).

The US Geological Survey, in its web pages, expands a systems flow definition with a
quite loose content component (italics inserted to highlight this component):

In the strictest sense, a GIS is a computer system capable of assembling, storing,
manipulating, and displaying geographically referenced information,
i.e. data
identified according to their locations. Practitioners also regard the total GIS as
including operating personnel and the data that go into the system (US Geological
Survey 1997).

In some related disciplines, such a forestry, the special content is called ‘maps’:

A form of MIS [Management Information System] that allows map display of the
general information (Devine and Field 1986, p 18).

The content approach amplifies the reference to geographic content visible in the
systems flow definitions, but elevates content to become almost an exclusionary filter.
In addition, a definition that relies solely on database content gives very little guidance
to what a GIS does.

Another content approach is to list potential uses of a GIS, to work by inclusion,
not exclusion. Any attempt to list all the potential uses of a GIS is clearly doomed to
failure. When a list is offered, it is usually presented with wonder at the diversity of
disciplines involved. Maguire strikes this tone: ‘The link between these apparently
disparate intellectual areas is that they share common technology and methods’
(Maguire 1991, p 11). Indeed, the network of technical linkages in modern society links
virtually every component with every other one. The black boxes in a laboratory
contain any number of distinct disciplines, distilled into a reliable and indisputable fact,
then promptly ignored (Latour 1987). The attempt to place GIS at the center of the
universe (or at least as the intersection of four Venn-diagram rings [Computer

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

180

Nicholas R Chrisman

Table 1

List of GIS application areas from Maguire (1991, p 12).

Cadastral information system
Image based information system
Land data system
Land information system
Geographically referenced information system
Natural resource management information system
Market analysis information system
Multipurpose cadastre
Planning information system
Property information system
Soil information system
Spatial information system
Spatial decision support system
Urban information system

cartography, Remote sensing, Computer-aided design, and Database management] in
Maguire’s Figure 1.1) is not very convincing. Maguire’s list of fourteen information
systems (Table 1) is a hodge-podge of overlapping disciplines and vague assemblages
like ‘Spatial information systems’, not a term in any regular use. This list attempts to
include diverse application efforts in GIS, the caption states:

‘Example types of GIS classified according to the application area addressed. It is
also possible to consider these as alternative names for GIS (Maguire 1991, p 12).
Whether attempting to exclude others or to include a multitude, a definition based

on content of GIS is a risky endeavor.

2.3 Toolkit Approach

In search of the distinctive characteristic of a GIS, Cowen (1988) singled out polygon
overlay, and integration of different sources more generally, as the key element that
distinguished a GIS software package from competing software systems. Although
Cowen eventually crafted a definition based on decision support systems, the article
spent most of its time defending the boundaries and erecting barriers to entry. The title
of his paper catches the spirit of the time: ‘GIS versus CAD versus DBMS: What are the
differences?’. He was not alone at that time in wanting to distinguish the drafting
approach of CAD technology from the analytical approach of GIS. In another example,
the Technology Exchange Working Group of the early federal coordinating committee
prepared a checklist of GIS functions that spanned eight pages (Guptill 1988, p 30–8).
The ESRI web pages also address the special nature of the software toolkit, an

entirely predictable approach from a major software vendor:

A geographic information system (GIS) is a computer-based tool for mapping and
analyzing things that exist and events that happen on Earth. GIS technology
integrates common database operations such as query and statistical analysis with
the unique visualization and geographic analysis benefits offered by maps. These

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

What Does ‘GIS’ Mean?

181

abilities distinguish GIS from other information systems and make it valuable to a
wide range of public and private enterprises for explaining events, predicting
outcomes, and planning strategies (ESRI 1997).

Curiously, the special nature of GIS tools seems to draw more from the map display (as
in the previous section) than in the ‘analytical’ tools found critical in other versions.
Rhind (1996, p 3), as a preamble to an article on policy issues adopts a ‘catholic’
definition based on the simplest merger of content and toolkit approaches:

any system capable of coping with georeferenced data and permitting some form of
geospatial selection or query.

His reasoning is that the lines between GIS and other forms of information technology
are no longer as strict as they were to Cowen in 1988. In his attempt to be universal,
Rhind offers a definition that is so loose that the address book function of a hand-held
pocket planner is indistinguishable from a full-function GIS workstation. The
approach to list the toolkit of a GIS is difficult because there are many different
kinds of tools. It is hard to select which ones are necessary and sufficient, or even
distinctive. The idea of polygon overlay as the indicator might have been relevant ten
years ago, but no single tool can serve as indicator for current GIS. Rhind may be on
the right track in making the toolkit so loose, but his tactic defeats the goal of using the
toolkit to define GIS.

2.4 Changing the Subject

More recently, there has been a substantial effort to shift the emphasis by declaring
that GIS should stand for ‘Geographic Information Science’
(Goodchild 1992).
Goodchild’s original intent was neatly summarized in his unapologetic chapter in
Ground Truth:

GIS . . . has done much to remove the traditional
isolation between photo-
grammetry, remote sensing, geodesy, cartography, surveying, and geography (one
could add to this list computer science, operations research, spatial statistics,
cognitive science, behavioral psychology, and any other discipline with interests in
the generic issues of spatial data). In an earlier paper, I argued that these were the
disciplines of geographic information science, and that it made more sense for the
research community to decode the GIS acronym in this way, focusing on the
generic issues of spatial data, rather than on the limited solutions offered by
today’s geographic information system products (Goodchild 1995, p 42 emphasis
in original).

This is a manoeuvre in the politics of disciplines, a manoeuvre that has worked in the
intended and limited research arena. One major
journal has been renamed;
organizations have taken up the GI Science label. GI Science shifts attention towards
core concepts, away from their particular implementations. Yet, this proto-discipline
did not arise solely from its academic virtues or even from the charisma of its original
proponent. This ‘science’ is an attempt to reorient the energy created by the messy
confluence of tool, practice, and competing disciplines. GI Science consciously plays

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

182

Nicholas R Chrisman

with the meaning of the acronym, and thus minimizes the linkage to the expanding
world of practical application. In a simpler age, the academic research community
played a central role in creating and proselytizing GIS. By claiming that the high-
minded side of GIS is GI Science, it gives a space for the research community to control
on its own. But all of this is a way of changing the subject. The bulk of the GIS
community uses the tools, instead of building them. Declaring a GI Science still
requires the research community to consider what it is that the users are doing. We still
need to define GI Systems.

In one recent paper, Wright et al (1997) attempt to draw grand conclusions about
GIS as tool or as Science from a few days postings on GIS-L. Pickles’ (1997) reply also
misses the point that tool and science are not divided by a simple semiotic gesture. The
line between tool and science is not simple. Science is constructed by a series of long-
term processes that turn speculative and unproven work into firmly established facts
that eventually disappear inside black boxes (Latour 1987). Each scientific instrument,
such as the hand-held GPS, the wetland coding standard, or the polygon overlay
algorithm, was once a subject of research without a preordained answer. Any use of
these research-stage proto-tools would have to be specific about the version used and
the circumstances of use. When sufficiently accepted, the research result becomes
packaged into a larger and larger system that needs no further introduction. Science
does not float above this process in some ethereal plane of ideas and concepts. The
world of science is firmly tied to choices of data and method.

No matter how carefully packaged, no tool

is perfectly neutral. Each GIS
implementation selects from the toolkit available and fits it to the circumstance with
substantial tailoring. Tools emerge from a social and historical context to respond to
changing needs, but tools also alter their users and their surroundings. The set of black
boxes available around a laboratory record the intellectual history of the whole culture,
putting physics, chemistry, and mathematics together to serve goals never imagined
when originally conceived. Latour and Woolgar (1986) describe the equipment in a
microbiology lab at the Salk Institute as mute emissaries from past research projects in
other disciplines.

The GI Science proposal is not the only attempt to change the subject. Forer and
Unwin (1999) have recently proposed ‘Geographic Information Studies’ as a means to
treat ‘the considerable social, legal and ethical issues’. Their article deals largely with
the educational community, where studies might seem much more attractive. But, as
the definition efforts of Dueker and Kjerne demonstrate, there is no inhibition to
broadening the view of systems to include all the components of social, cultural,
economic and ethical issues (see Chrisman 1987, for another example). Burrough’s
second edition (Burrough and McDonnell 1998) goes even farther, in titling the first
chapter ‘Geographical Information: Society, Science and Systems’. The ‘Society’
component is not given a definition, but it corresponds to an interest in the breadth of
social and institutional factors discussed by Forer and Unwin. The concept of a GI
Society seems like an attempt to invest ‘GIS’ as the inheritor of the ‘cartographic
enterprise’ that Barbara Petchenik used as the introduction to the proposed National
Spatial Data Infrastructure (Mapping Sciences Committee 1990). To some extent, the
creation of separate spheres for users, scientists, and ‘studiers’ diminishes the
opportunity to make the social issues the central focus. Dispute over the term ‘GIS’
signals that there is some inherent value in the acronym, no matter how it is spelled
out. The attempt to change the subject seems to be motivated by a search for

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

What Does ‘GIS’ Mean?

183

intellectual high ground, rather than an attempt to build a more coherent connection
between the world of practice and the research community.

3

Some Criteria for Definitions

The current definitions of GIS deserve re-examination. Adopting a few elements of
effective writing could help set a higher standard. Dictionary entries can be sentence
fragments, but complex relationships may require sentence form. The passive voice
hides the agent of an action. For clarity, a definition should use clear subjects, active
verbs and specific objects.

In addition to using more effective writing, the content of a definition should avoid
the exclusionary approach. A positively phrased definition can set an exacting
standard, without becoming as quickly dated. The pace of change is often used as a
reason to generate new definitions (see Rhind 1996, for example), but careful attention
to the principle of Tobler’s (1976) half-life concepts can produce definitions that
survive through changes in the technology.

4 A New Proposal

For years, I resisted definitions of GIS. The committee process of Dueker and Kjerne
was not particularly satisfying and the epic committee meeting of the National
Committee for Digital Cartographic Data Standards made all hopes of collective
action seem totally impossible. When I sat down to write a textbook (which became
Exploring GIS (Chrisman 1997)), I skirted around writing a definition. I had adopted a
sequence for the book that originated as my reply to the penetrating question one
brave student asked me in the sixth week ‘What is this course all about?’ I had replied
that the course was all about measurement, and then it was all about representation,
then it dealt with transformations, but it was always all about why people wanted you
to do the analysis in the first place; a series of issues that I arranged in rings on the
blackboard. The current, somewhat simplified, version of these rings appears in Figure
1. As I prepared to send the final manuscript back, I translated these rings into a
definition. I sent out a draft to some colleagues and their assistance helped craft this
text:

‘Geographic Information System (GIS) – The organized activity by which people

(cid:224) measure aspects of geographic phenomena and processes;
(cid:224)

represent these measurements, usually in the form of a computer database, to
emphasize spatial themes, entities, and relationships;

(cid:224) operate upon these representations to produce more measurements and to

(cid:224)

discover new relationships by integrating disparate sources; and
transform these representations to conform to other frameworks of entities and
relationships.

These activities reflect the larger context (institutions and cultures) in which these
people carry out their work. In turn, the GIS may influence these structures’
(Chrisman 1997, p 5).

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

184

Nicholas R Chrisman

Figure 1 Nested rings that embed the decisions involved in operating a geographic
information system. Each ring encapsulates the more technical decisions inside, mobilizing
them in a more complex structure. Simplified from Figure P-1 (Chrisman 1997, p vii).

Of course, a paragraph of 84 words can say more than the typical length of a
definition, but my proposed definition is still less than half the length of Marble’s
subsystems text. This length permits some deliberate inclusion of terms that signal
extensions to temporal data (processes as well as phenomena), to relationships as well
as themes and entities. I believe that it places the GIS in the rigorous mode that the GI
Science approach wishes to promote. It also gives a substantial role to the social
component sought by the GI Studies proposal.

This proposed definition can be visualized as a series of nested rings (see Figure 1).
Unlike the black boxes of the subsystem flow approach, the rings imply connection and
interaction. The four inner rings were designed to present the GIS operations by expanding
the transformational approach to cartography originally conceived by Tobler (1979).

At the innermost ring, the process of geographic measurement requires choices that
can be organized as measurement frameworks. Differences in these measurement
frameworks best explain the technical choices of representation for geographic
in turn, strongly influence the
information; measurement and representation,
operations which can be performed with the information. Finally, transformations
can convert from one measurement framework to another. Thus, each ring builds
upon decisions made at the simpler levels (Chrisman 1997, p 1).

These technical components do not operate in a vacuum. The measurements,
representations and transformations all serve the goals of institutions, and these, in
turn, serve larger social goals. But the information system is not simply a passive
player, responding dutifully to social demands. The availability of information shapes
social expectations and the cultural expectations of professions and disciplines shape
the choices of measurement and representation. The new technology triggers new
demands as much as it fulfills unmet demands. So, the social and institutional context
of the outer rings provides goals for the system, and it provides the cultural meaning of

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

What Does ‘GIS’ Mean?

185

the worldviews that motivate measurement and representation. In the long run, the
rings define a circular process of interdependency, not a linear throughput.

If pressed, I would collapse this definition to the length normally allotted (in fact

one word shorter than Dueker and Kjerne):

Geographic Information System (GIS) – Organized activity by which people
transform these
measure
representations into other forms while interacting with social structures.

phenomena

geographic

represent

then

and

5 Conclusions

Eventually, any definition will be judged by the community. If this article inspires some
critical attention to the definitions we use, it may score a modest success. If the
proposed definition replaces the ‘systems flow’ definitions that pervade the discipline, it
should help move towards a broader vision of GIS. The community needs to recognize
the power of words to shape the environment. No definition should become so
accepted that we do not question it.

The definition presented here was developed with the assistance of my long-term
colleagues Denis White and Geoffrey Dutton and my doctoral students Daniel Karnes,
Francis Harvey and Ilya Zaslavsky.

Acknowledgements

References Cited

Barnes B 1974 Scientific Knowledge and Sociological Theory. London, Routledge & Kegan Paul
Bloor D 1976 Knowledge and Social Imagery. London, Routledge & Kegan Paul
Burrough P A 1986 Principles of Geographical

Information Systems for Land Resource

Burrough P A and McDonnell R A 1998 Principles of Geographic Information Systems (2nd

Assessment. Oxford, Clarendon Press

edition). Oxford, Oxford University Press

Calkins H W and Tomlinson R F 1977 Geographic Information Systems: Methods and
Equipment for Land Use Planning. Ottawa, International Geographic Union Commission
on Geographical Data Sensing and Processing

Carroll L 1872/1987 Through the Looking Glass and what Alice found there. New York,

Chrisman N R 1987 Design of information systems based on social and cultural goals.

Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 53: 1367–70

Chrisman N R 1997. Exploring Geographic Information Systems. New York, John Wiley and

Cowen D J 1988 GIS versus CAD versus DBMS: What are the differences? Photogrammetric

Engineering and Remote Sensing 54: 1551–5

Department of the Environment 1987 Handling Geographic Information. London, Her Majesty’s

Schoken Books

Sons

Stationery Office

Devine H A and Field R C 1986 The gist of GIS. Journal of Forestry 8: 17–22
Dueker K J and Kjerne D 1989 Multipurpose Cadastre: Terms and Definitions. Falls Church VA,
American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing and American Congress on
Surveying and Mapping

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

186

Nicholas R Chrisman

ESRI 1997 About GIS. WWW document, http://www.esri.com/base/about.html
Forer P and Unwin D 1999 Enabling progress in GIS and education. In Longley P A, Goodchild
M F, Maguire D J, and Rhind D W (eds) Geographical Information Systems: Management
Issues and Applications. New York, John Wiley and Sons: 747–56

Goodchild M F 1992 Geographical information science. International Journal of Geographical

Information Systems 6: 31–45

Goodchild, M. F. 1995 Geographic information systems and geographic research. In J Pickles

(ed) Ground Truth. New York, Guilford: 31–50

Guptill S C 1988 A Process for Evaluating Geographic Information Systems. Washington DC,
Technology Exchange Working Group, Federal Interagency Coordinating Committee on
Digital Cartography, US Geological Survey Open File Report 88–105

Harvey F 1997a Agreeing to disagree: The social construction of geographic information
technology. In Proceedings GIS/LIS ’97 (volume 1), Falls Church, VA, American Congress
on Surveying and Mapping: 808–15

Harvey F 1997b From geographic wholism to geographic information system. Professional

Geographer 49: 77–85

Harvey F and Chrisman N R 1998 Boundary objects and the social construction of GIS

technology. Environment and Planning A 30: 1683–94

Latour B 1987 Science in Action. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press
Latour B 1993 We Never Were Modern. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press
Latour B and Woolgar S 1986. Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts (2nd

edition). Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press

Maguire D J 1991 An overview and definition of GIS. In Maguire D J, Goodchild M F and Rhind
D W (eds) Geographical Information Systems: Overview, Principles and Applications
(volume 1). Harlow, Longmans: 9–20

Mapping Sciences Committee 1990 Spatial Data Needs: The Future of the National Mapping

Program. Washington DC, National Academy Press

Marble D F 1990 Geographic information systems: An overview. In Peuquet D and Marble D

(eds) Basic Readings in GIS. London, Taylor and Francis: 8–17

Pickles J 1997 Tool or science? GIS, technoscience and the theoretical turn. Annals of the

Association of American Geographers 87: 363–72

Rhind D W 1996 Economic, legal, and public policy issues influencing the creation, accessibility,

and use of GIS databases. Transactions in GIS 1: 3–12

Star J and Estes J 1990 Geographic Information Systems: An Introduction. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,

Prentice Hall

Tobler W 1976 Analytical cartography. The American Cartographer 3: 21–31
Tobler W 1979 A transformational view of cartography. The American Cartographer 6: 101–6
Tomlinson R F 1966 A geographic information system for regional planning. In Stewart G A (ed)

Land Evaluation. Melbourne, Macmillan: 200–10

Tomlinson R F 1967 An Introduction to the Geographic Information System of the Canada Land

Inventory. Ottawa, Department of Forestry and Rural Development

US Geological Survey 1997 About GIS. WWW document, http://www.usgs.gov/research/gis
Wilson J P, Forer P, Fotheringham A S 1996 Editorial. Transactions in GIS 1: 2
Wright D J, Goodchild M F, Proctor J 1997 Demystifying the persistent ambiguity of GIS as
‘tool’ versus ‘science’. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 87: 346–62

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1999

