International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Stability of the surface generated from distributed
points of uncertain location

Yukio Sadahiro

To cite this article: Yukio Sadahiro (2003) Stability of the surface generated from distributed
points of uncertain location, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17:2,
139-156, DOI: 10.1080/713811751

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/713811751

Published online: 03 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 51

View related articles 

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [University of Georgia]

Date: 05 June 2016, At: 18:47

. .   , 2003
. 17, . 2, 139–156

Research Article

Stability of the surface generated from distributed points of
uncertain location

YUKIO SADAHIRO
Department of Urban Engineering, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan; e-mail: sada@okabe.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

(Received 18 June 2001; accepted 29 April 2002)

Abstract. Conversion of a point distribution into a surface is one of the spatial
operations used in GIS. This supports the visual analysis of point patterns, which
is usually followed by more sophisticated statistical and mathematical analysis.
If the location of points is uncertain, however, the surface obtained becomes
unstable and consequently the results of analysis may be unreliable. Though
unavoidable in spatial data, locational uncertainty has been rather neglected in
the context of spatial analysis. To ﬁll this gap, this paper proposes a method for
representing and analysing the stability of the surface generated from an uncertain
point distribution. The surface stability is represented by a scalar function called
the slope stability function. Its deﬁnition, calculation procedure, visualization
method, and summary indices are proposed. The method is evaluated through
an empirical study, and some ﬁndings are shown which help us understand the
eﬀect of the smoothing parameter, locational uncertainty, and spatial pattern of
points on the stability of a surface.

1.

Introduction
In point pattern analysis, the ﬁrst step of exploration is to visualize the distribu-
tion of points (Slocum 1999). The map visually reveals the spatial structure of a
point distribution, and may suggest underlying factors to an investigator. Visual-
ization of a point distribution greatly helps its further analysis such as statistical
analysis and mathematical modelling.

If we have only a small number of points, they are represented and visualized as
point objects in a GIS; it is easy to understand their spatial structure by looking at
their spatial distribution directly. However, if a large number of points are visualized,
say, a thousand or a million points, it becomes quite diﬃcult to ﬁnd spatial patterns
in the point distribution. The points are then converted into a surface by the kernel
method (Silverman 1986, Scott, 1992), quadrat method (Upton and Fingleton 1985,
Cressie 1993), or other methods (Bailey 1994, Bonham-Carter 1994, Bailey and
Gatrell 1995). The kernel method, for instance, has been applied to the distributions
of crimes (Goldsmith et al. 2000), volcanic craters (Bailey and Gatrell 1995), red-
woods (Fotheringham et al. 2000), population (Bracken and Martin 1989, Martin
and Bracken 1991, Bracken 1993) and retail stores (Sadahiro 2001). The quadrat

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1365881022000015921

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 140

Y. Sadahiro

method has also been frequently used in ecology (Pielou 1977), criminology
(Brantingham and Brantingham 1981) and epidemiology (Alexander and Boyle
1996). Both methods are used for not only the visualization of point distributions
but also in statistical analysis and modelling. In visualization, however, the kernel
method is preferred because, unlike the quadrat method, it generates a ’smooth’
surface from a point distribution.

One important view, that has been rather neglected in spatial analysis including
the conversion of a point distribution into a surface, is locational uncertainty in
spatial data. If the location of points is uncertain, the surface generated from the
points is inevitably uncertain and unstable. Spatial data are usually inaccurate to
some extent (Goodchild and Gopal 1989, Burrough and Frank 1996, Heuvelink
1998), and thus uncertainty is unavoidable in spatial analysis. Though this fact is
widely recognized in the GIS community, it is often implicitly assumed that spatial
data are accurate and the result of analysis is reliable. This is usually not the case.
Recently, eﬀort has been made to analyse the eﬀect of uncertainty in spatial
operations. Leung and Yan (1997), for instance, discussed how the locational uncer-
tainty aﬀects the point-in-polygon operation. Error propagation in spatial operations
such as spatial interpolation, spatial smoothing, overlay and buﬀer operations has
been studied by statistical models and empirical studies (Veregin 1994, Davis and
Keller 1997, Hunter and Goodchild 1997, Heuvelink 1998). Jacquez (1996) proposed
statistical tests for uncertain spatio-temporal point distributions. Sadahiro (2002)
analyzed cluster detection in uncertain point distributions. However, conversion of
a point distribution into a surface has not yet been discussed in terms of locational
uncertainty in the point data.

To ﬁll the gap in the research, this paper proposes a method for representing
and analysing the stability of the surface generated from a distribution of uncertainly
located points. We focus on the kernel smoothing method because it is suitable for
visual analysis of point distributions, the ﬁrst step of exploratory spatial analysis. In
§2, we outline kernel smoothing and propose a scalar function called the slope
function that describes the spatial structure of the surface generated from the distribu-
tion of certain points. In §3, extending the method proposed in §2, we propose a
method for representing and analysing the stability of the surface generated from
the distribution of uncertain points. To represent the surface stability, we introduce
a scalar function called the slope stability function. The section describes its calcula-
tion and visualization, and summary indices. To test the validity of the method, we
perform an empirical study in § 4. Section 5 provides a concluding discussion.

2. Surface under certainty
2.1. Kernel smoothing

are denoted by P
the kernel smoothing is

i

i

Suppose there are n points in a region S. The ith point and its locational vector
, respectively. The surface value at a location x given by

and z

∑

k(|x−z

|)

i

i

k(|y−z

|)dy

f (x)=

i

P

yµS

∑

j

(1)

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

141

where k( ) is the kernel function. A typical choice for k( ) is the bivariate normal
distribution

k(u)=

exp(−a|u|2)

a
p

where a is the smoothing parameter (Silverman 1986). A small value of a generates
a smooth surface, while a large a yields a rough surface which emphasizes large local
variations in point density. In the following we use the bivariate normal distribution
as the kernel function. Figure 1 shows an example of kernel smoothing using the
bivariate normal distribution.

2.2. Representation of surface under certainty

In point pattern analysis, we are interested in the spatial structure of points
characterized by point clusters, spatial variation of point density and so forth. When
a point distribution is converted into a surface, the structure of the original distribu-
tion is transferred to the resultant surface. Therefore, it is useful to examine the
surface generated from a point distribution as well as to analyse the point distribution
directly, in order to understand its spatial structure. To this end, we propose a binary
function representing a surface with emphasis on its spatial structure.

Let v(h) be the unit vector of angle h measured counterclockwise from the x-axis
(0∏h<2p). The gradient of the surface function f (x) at x in direction h is given by
the directed diﬀerentiation of f (x):

Using f ∞(x, h), we deﬁne a binary function s(x, h; f ) by

f ∞(x, h)=(f (x) · v(h)

s(x, h; f )=G1

0

if f ∞(x, h)(cid:4)0
otherwise

(2)

(3)

(4)

and call it the slope function. This function indicates the surface gradient as a binary
variable: if the surface ascends at a location x in direction h, the slope function

Figure 1. Kernel smoothing. (a) A point distribution, (b) a surface generated by the kernel
smoothing (a=0.001).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 142

Y. Sadahiro

becomes one; otherwise, it becomes zero. Figure 2 shows the slope function of the
surface in ﬁgure 1(b).

The slope function has two values of h where it discretely changes between one
and zero, which agrees with the direction of contour lines of the surface. Therefore,
the slope function also shows the distribution of the surface aspect, and consequently,
gives us the outline of the spatial structure of points. For instance, ﬁgure 2 roughly
tells us the location of point clusters and spatial variation of point density. The
slope function is a summary of the original surface function, emphasizing its spatial
structure.

3. Surface under uncertainty

If the location of points is certain, the surface generated by the kernel smoothing
can be either visualized as it is or outlined by the slope function proposed in the
previous section. If their location is uncertain, however, the surface obtained becomes
unstable and can be represented by neither the simple surface function nor the slope
function. To solve this problem, this section extends the slope function so that it
represents the stability of a surface instead of the surface itself.

3.1. Representation of locational uncertainty of points

Representation of locational uncertainty in spatial data is a controversial research
topic in GIS (Goodchild 1989, Burrough and Frank 1996, Burrough and McDonnell
1998); at least two methods exist for representing locational uncertainty in terms
of spatial analysis. One uses a continuous function such as the fuzzy membership
function (Burrough and McDonnell 1998) and the probability density function (Shi
1998). The other deﬁnes the region of a deterministic boundary within which a
spatial object is possibly located (Perkal 1966, Chrisman 1982a, 1982b, Dunn et al.
1990, Sadahiro 2002). This paper follows the latter representation of locational
uncertainty; we are certain that a spatial object is located in a bounded region called
the error zone but we do not know its exact location. This is a key to calculating
the surface stability; it gives us high tractability in computation of the slope function
and its extension as shown later. The deterministic boundary approach is reasonable

Figure 2. The slope function of the surface shown in ﬁgure 1(b).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

143

when the point location is represented by a higher level of address system such as
blocks and cities, and it gives a good approximation to continuous functions—we
can determine a threshold of uncertainty or probability to deﬁne the boundary of
error zones.

In this paper we assume that error zones are represented as polygons, which also
be the error zone of

approximate spatial objects with curved boundaries. Let Q
point P

in S. The set of error zones {Q

i
} is denoted by V.

, ..., Q

, Q

i

1

2

n

3.2. Representation of surface under uncertainty

Uncertainty in the location of points yields instability of the surface generated
by the kernel smoothing; the surface ﬂuctuates according to the location of points.
Its global structure, however, is usually robust against uncertainty. Remember the
point distribution and its surface representation shown in ﬁgure 1. We intuitively
believe that the global structure of the surface would not drastically change even if
a little uncertainty exists in the location of points; there are two peaks in the region,
one around the centre and the other in the south of the region. Though it depends
on the degree of smoothing determined by the parameter a (equation (2)), there
often exists a stable structure in an unstable surface and we may detect it by
visual analysis.

This intuitive discussion can be described by the behaviour of the slope function
under uncertainty. If there is only a small locational uncertainty the slope function
is likely to be stable almost everywhere. On the other hand, if the location of points
is quite uncertain, the slope function may become unstable.

To treat the surface stability formally, we introduce the slope stability function

deﬁned by

l(x, h; V)=G1

0

if Y P

µQ

, s(x, h; f )=1

i

i

otherwise

(5)

If the surface ascends at x in direction h for any possible location of points, the slope
stability function l(x, h; V) becomes one. Otherwise,
if the surface can descend
according to the location of points, the function becomes zero. The slope stability
function shows the possible surface gradient as a binary variable, and consequently,
the stability of a surface.

Figure 3 shows an example of the slope stability function generated on the
assumption that a certain amount of uncertainty exists in the locations of points
shown in ﬁgure 1. The fan-shaped ﬁgures indicate the direction in which the surface
ascends for any possible location of points. Around the largest point cluster (see also
ﬁgure 1) the ﬁgures face in the direction to the centre of the cluster. This indicates
that the surface tends to ascend to the cluster centre, even if the location of points
fan-shaped ﬁgures indicates the stability of a surface.
is uncertain. The size of
Therefore, ﬁgure 3 shows that the surface is not stable around the centre of the
cluster, while it is stable on the periphery, facing in the direction to the cluster centre.
Comparing ﬁgures 2 and 3, we notice that the slope function and the slope
stability function are quite similar. It is reasonable because the latter is an extension
of the former. For instance, if the point location is certain, the slope stability function
is equivalent to the slope function; the range of h where the slope stability function is
equal to one reduces with an increase of uncertainty. In addition, both functions
outline the spatial structure of points. Figures 2 and 3 roughly indicate the location

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 144

Y. Sadahiro

Figure 3. An example of the slope stability function.

of point clusters, the spatial variation of point density, and so forth. We can under-
stand the spatial structure of points from the slope stability function even if the point
location is uncertain. From this we can say that the slope stability function shows
the structural stability of a surface, and consequently, that of its original point
distribution. This is one advantage of the surface stability function.

The slope stability function indicates the aspects that the surface can take accord-
ing to the location of points. Therefore, we can evaluate the surface stability at x by
integrating the slope stability function by h. For instance, if the point location is
certain, then the aspect of the surface is ﬁxed, which results in

If the point location is so uncertain that the surface can take any aspect at x

according to the location of points, then we have

P 2p

0

P 2p

0

l(x, h; V)dh=p

l(x, h; V)dh=0

3.3. Computational procedure for calculating the slope stability function

Evaluation of the slope stability function is based on the calculation of the
minimum gradient of the surface at every location. To this end, we consider the
kernel functions of individual points separately. The kernel function for the point P
is
(x)=exp(−a|x−z

i
(8)
. For the sake of simplicity, we omit the coeﬃcient a/p in equation (2)
where z
without the loss of generality. The gradient of the kernel function at x in direction
h is given by

µQ

|)

k

i

i

i

i

(recall equation (3)). Let k∞

(x)·v(h)

(x, h)=(k

k∞
i
i
(x, h) be the minimum of k∞
i,min
i
k∞
i,min

(x, h)= min
µQ

(x, h)

k∞
i

P

i

i

(x, h):

(6)

(7)

(9)

(10)

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

145

Since the surface function is the sum of the individual kernel functions (equation
(1)), the minimum gradient of the surface is given by the sum of the minimum
gradient of kernel functions, that is, S

(x, h).

The slope stability function becomes one if the surface ascends at a location x in

k∞
i,min

i

direction h for any possible location of points. Therefore, equation (5) becomes

l(x, h; V)=G1

0

if S

k∞
i,min

i

(x, h)(cid:4)0

otherwise

(11)

(12)

(13)

To calculate equation (11), we consider two points at x and x+dx denoted by
A and A∞, respectively. Let ds be the distance between the points, that is, ds=|dx|.
Then we have

dx=(ds cosh, ds sinh)

Substituting equation (12) into equation (10), we obtain

k∞
i,min

(x, h)= min
µQ

lim
ds(cid:2)0

k

i

(x+dx)−k
ds

i

(x)

P
i
For the sake of simplicity, we translate and rotate A, A∞, and Q

so that A is at
the origin of the coordinate system and A∞ is on the positive side of the x-axis
(ﬁgure 4). New coordinates of the points A and A∞ are denoted by (0, 0) and (ds, 0),
respectively. The coordinate of P
is given by (l cosQ, l sinQ), where the angle Q is
measured counterclockwise from the x-axis (0∏Q<2p). Equation (13) then becomes

i

i

i

k∞
i,min

(x, h)=min
l,Q

lim
ds(cid:2)0

exp(−a{(l cosQ−ds)2+l2 sin2Q})−exp(−al2)
ds

=min
l,Q

exp(−al2) lim
ds(cid:2)0

exp(−ads2)exp(2aldscosQ)−1
ds

(14)

To solve the right side of equation (14), we ﬁrst ﬁx the variable l and minimize
(x, h) with respect to

(x, h) with respect to Q, which is equivalent to minimizing k∞
i

k∞
i

Figure 4. The coordinate system for calculation of the slope stability function.

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 146

Y. Sadahiro

cosQ. Let D(Q; l) be the domain of the variable Q for a given l. We can obtain it by
that approximates the circle of radius l centred
overlaying a regular polygon on Q
i
at the origin and calculate their intersections (ﬁgure 5). If pµD(Q; l), then k∞
(x, h) is
i
minimized when Q=p. Otherwise, k∞
(x, h) is minimized when Q is located exactly on
i
one of the boundaries of D(Q; l).

We then minimize k∞
i

the minimum and maximum distances from the origin to Q
from its minimum in D(l), we obtain k∞
l(x, h; V) using equation (11).

(x, h) with respect to l. Let D(l) be the domain of l given by
. Gradually increasing l
(x, h) and ﬁnally the slope stability function

i,min

i

3.4. Unstable regions

In analysis of surfaces, critical points, that is, peaks, bottoms, and cols (saddle
points) play a crucial role (Warntz 1966, Warntz and Waters 1975, Okabe and
Masuda 1984, Iri et al. 2000, Sadahiro 2001). They are deﬁned by the locational
vector x satisfying

d f (x)
dx

=0

(15)

and describe the spatial structure of a surface in a simple but eﬃcient way.

Similar concepts can be deﬁned for uncertain surfaces. As mentioned earlier,
there may be regions in S where the surface can take any aspect according to the
location of points (equation (7)). We call them unstable regions. Stable regions, on
the other hand, are the regions in which every location has at least one aspect not
taken by the surface.

Unstable regions are further classiﬁed into three types: peak regions, bottom
regions, and neutral regions. If the surface always ascends in a certain direction into

Figure 5. Calculation of the domain D(Q; l).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

147

an unstable region everywhere on its boundary, the region contains at least one
peak independently of the location of points. We thus call it a peak region. If the
surface always ascends out of an unstable region, the region contains at least one
bottom and we call it a bottom region. Unstable regions classiﬁed into neither of
them are called neutral regions. Stable regions do not contain either peaks or bottoms.
Figure 6 shows an example of unstable regions.

Unstable regions, as well as the slope stability function, show the structure of an
uncertain surface and its stability against the locational uncertainty of points. They
are in a sense substitutes for critical points in surface analysis.

3.5. V isualization and evaluation of surface stability

Having obtained the slope stability function and unstable regions, we visualize
them to understand the structural stability of a surface, and consequently, that of its
original point distribution. A simple but useful visualizing method is to use the fan-
shaped ﬁgures shown in ﬁgure 6. Using the centroid of error zones, we can also
calculate an ‘average’ surface function which helps our interpretation of the slope
stability function. Figure 7 shows an example of the visualization of the stability of
the surface generated from an uncertain point distribution.

In ﬁgure 7(c) we notice that the peak at the centre of the region (ﬁgure 7(b)) is
stable against data uncertainty; there exists at least one peak in that region independ-
ently of the location of points in error zones. The peak in the south, on the other
hand, is in the neutral region, which implies that the peak may disappear according
to the location of points.

To evaluate the overall stability of a surface quantitatively, we propose two
indices: the stable region ratio (SRR) and the stability ratio (SR). Let d(x; V) be a
binary function representing stable regions:

The SRR is the ratio of the area of stable regions to that of the region S:

d(x; V)=G1

0

if P 2p

0

l(x, h; V)dh>0

otherwise

P

SRR=

xµS

d(x; V)dx

P

dx

xµS

l(x, h; V)dhdx

P

SR=

xµS

P 2p
pP

0

dx

(16)

(17)

(18)

xµS
Either index shows a large value if the surface is stable against locational uncer-

The SR is an extension of the SRR weighted by the slope stability function:

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 148

Y. Sadahiro

Figure 6. Unstable regions.

Figure 7. Visualization of the stability of the surface generated from an uncertain point
distribution. (a) Error zones, (b) a surface generated by the kernel smoothing (a=
0.001, the points are located at the centroid of error zones), (c) the slope stability
function and unstable regions.

tainty of points. A small value indicates that the surface is unstable and attention
should be paid to its visual analysis. From the deﬁnitions they satisfy

0∏SRR, SR∏1

(19)

The SR and SRR can be used to evaluate not only the stability of the surface
but also the smoothing parameter a in terms of the surface stability. If the surface

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

149

is extremely unstable, the slope stability function gives us little information about
the spatial structure of points. Therefore, to perform a meaningful analysis of a point
distribution, we should apply a values that keep the surface stability above a certain
level. Whether an a value is acceptable can be judged by calculating the SR or SRR
value and comparing it with its desirable level determined by analysts.

4. Empirical study

This section empirically analyses the stability of the surface generated from a
point distribution, in order to test the validity of the method proposed in the previous
section. We also discuss the eﬀect of the smoothing parameter, locational uncertainty
of points, and spatial pattern of points on the surface stability in a practical setting.
Point data used in the analysis are based on the list of retail stores and restaurants
in the NT T telephone directory published monthly. Among 1670 categories we chose
coﬀee shops, clothing shops, and convenience stores in the Shinjuku area in Tokyo,
Japan (ﬁgure 8). The numbers of shops are 689, 555, and 145, respectively. We
extracted their addresses in September 1999 in ASCII format, and converted them
into point data by geocoding.

The locational data obtained by geocoding are highly accurate; their locational
error is usually kept below 10 m, especially in the central area of Tokyo. We thus
considered hypothetical error zones of points represented by the circle of radius r,
which was set to 50, 100, and 150 m, successively. Figure 9 shows the error zones of
radius 100 m assumed for the distribution of coﬀee shops.

We then calculated the slope stability function and unstable regions, following
the procedure simply illustrated in ﬁgure 10. We overlaid a lattice of side 10 m over
the study region, and calculated the slope stability function at each lattice node
and the middle point of each edge by the procedure shown in the previous section.
The slope stability function calculated on edges was used for detection of unstable
regions. The smoothing parameter a (equation (2)), which reﬂects the scale of spatial
analysis, was set to 0.001, 0.01, and 0.1, successively.

The results are shown in table 1 and ﬁgure 11. In table 1 we notice that the
surface stability decreases as uncertainty of point location increases; both the SRR

Figure 8. Shinjuku area in Tokyo, Japan.

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 150

Y. Sadahiro

Figure 9. Error zones of radius 100 m assumed for the distribution of coﬀee shops.

Figure 10. Calculation of the slope stability function and unstable regions. (a) The slope
stability function at lattice points, (b) the slope stability function calculated on edges
(an arrow indicates that the surface always ascends in its direction), (c) unstable regions
detected by the result shown in (b).

and SR monotonically decrease with an increase of r. Similarly, the stability decreases
with an increase of the smoothing parameter a. When a=0.001, the surface is quite
smooth and the SRR shows large values over 98%. As a increases, however, the
stability monotonically decreases in all cases. This implies that enlargement of the
scale of analysis, say, transition from global to local analysis, reduces the reliability
of the result. From this we obtain one obvious solution to uncertainty in spatial
analysis; we should analyse spatial phenomena at a scale small enough to keep the
reliability of the result at a certain level.

The SRR and SR seem to be closely related with each other. In fact, Pearson’s
correlation coeﬃcient of these indices is 0.954, a large value indicating that they are
highly correlated with each other.

Figure 11 shows that the unstable region increase mainly at the expense of the

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

151

Table 1. The stable region ratio (SRR) and stability ratio (SR) (percentage). The variable r
is the radius of the circles that represent the hypothetical error zones, and a is the
smoothing parameter used in equation (2).

r: 50 m

r: 100 m

r: 150 m

SRR

SR

SRR

SR

SRR

SR

(a) Coﬀee shop
a: 0.001
a: 0.01
a: 0.1

(b) Clothing shop
a: 0.001
a: 0.01
a: 0.1

(c) Convenience store
a: 0.001
a: 0.01
a: 0.1

99.99
96.39
68.96

99.81
96.93
80.20

99.90
89.03
81.18

79.01
58.42
35.02

79.29
62.38
44.72

78.15
51.57
46.44

99.86
78.32
36.31

99.49
84.55
50.77

99.58
66.13
51.06

75.49
34.91
15.75

74.88
42.30
22.28

72.09
31.06
24.09

99.67
50.53
22.69

98.85
63.78
33.29

98.99
46.67
34.91

71.06
17.75
8.68

71.05
26.28
13.14

61.14
18.60
14.01

neutral region. When a=0.1, for instance, the neutral region accounts for at least
four-ﬁfths of the unstable region in all cases. This implies that an increase of a and
r reduces the relative amount of information that we obtain from the unstable region.
Among three types of unstable regions, the peak and bottom regions assure the
existence of at least one peak and bottom, respectively. On the other hand, the
neutral region does not provide any information about the existence of critical points,
and thus is less informative than the peak and bottom regions.

Let us then discuss the eﬀect of point pattern on the surface stability, comparing
the results of three categories of shops. They have diﬀerent spatial patterns. Coﬀee
shops are strongly clustered around Shinjuku station. Clothing shops also show a
clustered pattern, but they have two clusters: one around Shinjuku station, and the
other near Harajuku station. Unlike these categories, convenience stores are widely
dispersed in the study region as shown in ﬁgure 11(c). This is because convenience
stores are quite similar to each other so that they receive little additional proﬁt by
agglomeration and travel distances are generally low for non-luxury items.

Table 1 shows that the results are quite similar among the three categories when
a=0.001. A diﬀerence arises with an increase of a. When a=0.01, the clothing shops
have the largest SRR and SR values among the three categories, which implies that
the surface generated from the distribution of clothing shops is the most robust
against locational uncertainty. On the other hand, the convenience stores yield the
worst result—the smallest SRR and SR values. When a=0.1, however, the conveni-
ence stores become the best and the coﬀee shop the worst. The order of the three
categories in terms of the surface stability is independent of the radius of error zones.
The order of these categories is closely related to the spatial pattern of shops,
and it can be explained by the separability of points as follows. Consider two
uncertain points in a one-dimensional region represented by error zones (ﬁgure 12(a)).
In this case there are three unstable regions: two exactly coincide with the error
zones, and one is in the middle of the error zones (ﬁgure 12(b)). If the points are
closer as shown in ﬁgure 12(c), the middle unstable region expands (ﬁgure 12(d)).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 152

Y. Sadahiro

Figure 11. Results of analysis. (a) The coﬀee shop, (b) clothing shop, (c) convenience store.
The ﬁrst column shows the centroid of error zones. The second column is the surface
generated from the points located at the centroid of error zones. The third, fourth,
and ﬁfth columns show the slope stability function (the fan-shaped ﬁgure) and unstable
regions (the grey area indicates the neutral region, and the areas enclosed by the solid
and broken lines indicate the peak and bottom regions, respectively).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

153

Figure 11(c).

However, if the points get much closer (ﬁgure 12(e)), the unstable regions are merged
into smaller one (ﬁgure 12( f )). To sum up, when two uncertain points get closer, the
surface stability ﬁrst decreases and then increases.

The above observation indicates that the surface stability is greatly aﬀected by the
separability of points determined by the distance between error zones and the shape
of the kernel function. The unstable region is small when either error zones are almost
separable with respect to the kernel function (ﬁgure 12(b)) or they are too close to
distinguish (ﬁgure 12( f )). Instability arises when error zones are neither separable nor
indistinguishable. In our example, it seems that coﬀee shops become indistinguishable
when a decreases from 0.1 to 0.01. Convenience shops, on the other hand, experience
it when a decreases from 0.01 to 0.001. This is understandable because the convenience
stores are more dispersed than the coﬀee shops as mentioned earlier.

The above discussion suggests that, given a point distribution, a parameter value
of a exists that minimizes SRR and SR, and consequently, generates the most unstable
surface from the distribution. In our empirical study, however, we did not see such
a case where the stability reaches its minimum in terms of SRR and SR. It seems to
appear when a>0.1, but such a steep kernel function is not meaningful in point
pattern analysis because the surface obtained is almost equivalent to the distribution
of error zones itself.

5. Concluding discussion

In this paper we have developed a method for representing and analysing the
surface generated from an uncertain point distribution. We proposed the slope
stability function to evaluate the surface stability quantitatively. It also enables us
to understand the spatial structure of a surface, and consequently, that of its original
point distribution, even if the point location is uncertain. Visualization of the slope
stability function and unstable regions outlines the structural stability of an uncertain

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 154

Y. Sadahiro

Figure 12. Relationship between the point distribution and the surface stability. (a) (c) (e) Two
points in a one-dimensional region (solid and broken lines represent the error zones
of the points), (b) (d) ( f ) kernel functions (solid and broken lines) and unstable regions
(black rectangles).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

155

point distribution. The overall stability of a surface is quantitatively evaluated by
two indices, the SRR and SR. They also serve as criteria for evaluating the smoothing
parameter a in terms of the surface stability. To test the validity of the method, we
analysed the stability of surfaces generated from the point data of retail stores and
restaurants in Tokyo, Japan. The empirical study yielded some interesting ﬁndings
that help us understand the nature of surface stability such as the eﬀect of the
smoothing parameter, locational uncertainty of points, and spatial pattern of points.
We ﬁnally discuss some limitations of our method for further research. First, we
have assumed discrete representation of locational uncertainty, which may be called
the ‘epsilon band approach’ (Perkal 1966, Chrisman 1982a, 1982b). One of the
advantages of this approach is high tractability in computation of the slope stability
function. However, this representation is not the only way to treat uncertainty;
representation of locational uncertainty in spatial data is a research topic in progress
as mentioned in §3. If the locational uncertainty of points is represented by a
continuous function, one practical solution is to determine a threshold of uncertainty
or probability and use it to deﬁne the boundary of error zones. This enables us to
calculate the slope stability function and to evaluate the stability of the surface
generated from the points. Otherwise, we may have to calculate the joint probability
distribution of the surface function directly from the probability distributions of
points. Though this is an important and challenging research topic, we leave it for
future research. Second, we have used the bivariate normal distribution as the kernel
function throughout this paper. This is because the bivariate normal distribution is
most widely used in GIS and spatial analysis. However, there are many other kernel
functions such as the Epanechnikov kernel, triangular kernel, and so forth (Silverman
1986). When a kernel other than the bivariate normal distribution is used, calculation
of the slope stability function requires a diﬀerent computational procedure because
equation (14) takes a diﬀerent form. A new computational procedure with wider
applicability should be developed to treat a variety of kernel functions. Third, we
have discussed the eﬀect of locational uncertainty in a rather limited context: conver-
sion of a point distribution into a surface. As discussed in the introductory section,
however, uncertainty aﬀects the results of a wide range of spatial operations and
analysis including spatial statistics, spatial optimization, and spatial decision making.
It is necessary to discuss the eﬀect of uncertainty in a broader context, and to
establish a common methodology of handling uncertainty in these spatial procedures.

References
A, F. E., and B, P., 1996, Methods for Investigating L ocalized Clustering of

Disease (Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer).

B, T. C., 1994, A review of statistical spatial analysis in geographical information systems.
In Spatial Analysis and GIS, edited by S. Fotheringham and P. Rogerson (London:
Taylor & Francis), 13–44.

B, T. C., and G, A. C., 1995, Interactive Spatial Data Analysis (London: Taylor

& Francis).

Pergamon).

B-C, G. F., 1994, Geographic Information Systems for Geoscientists (Oxford:

B, I., 1993, An extensive surface model database for population-related information:

concept and application. Environment and Planning B, 20, 13–27.

B, I., and M, D., 1989, The generation of spatial population distributions from

Census centroid data. Environment and Planning A, 21, 537–543.

B, P. J., and B, P. L., 1981, Environmental Criminology (Prospect

Heights, Illinois: Waveland Press).

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 156

Stability of surface generated from uncertain points

B, P. A., and F, A. U., 1996, Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries

(London: Taylor & Francis).

B, P. A., and MD, R. A., 1998, Principles of Geographical Information Systems

(New York: Oxford University Press).

C, N. R. 1982a, Methods of Spatial Analysis Based on Error in Categorical Maps.

PhD thesis, University of Bristol.

C, N. R., 1982b, A theory of cartographic error and its measurement in digital data
bases. In Proceedings of AUT O-CART O (Falls Church, VA: American Congress on
Surveying and Mapping) 5, pp. 159–168.

C, N., 1993, Statistics for Spatial Data (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
D, T. J., and K, C. P., 1997, Modelling and visualizing multiple spatial uncertainties.

Computers & Geosciences, 23, 397–408.

D, R., H, A. R., and W, J. C., 1990, Positional accuracy and measurement
error in digital databases of land use: an empirical study. International Journal of
Geographical Information Systems, 4, 385–398.

F, A. S., B, C., and C, M., 2000, Quantitative Geography

(London: Sage).

G, V., MG, P. G., M, J. H., and R, T. A., 2000, Analyzing Crime

Patterns (Thousand Oaks: Sage).

G, M. F., 1989, Modeling error in objects and ﬁelds. In Accuracy of Spatial Databases,

edited by M. Goodchild and S. Gopal (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 107–113.

G, M., and G, S., 1989, T he Accuracy of Spatial Databases (London: Taylor

& Francis).

& Francis).

H, G. B. M., 1998, Error Propagation in Environmental Modelling (London: Taylor

H, G. J., and G, M. F., 1997, Modelling the uncertainty of slope gradient and

aspect estimates in spatial databases. Geographical Analysis, 29, 35–49.

I, M., S, Y., and N, T., 2000, Extraction of invariants from digital elevation
data with application to terrain topography. Proceedings of the Symposium on
Integrated Geographical Information Systems, 5, 33–46 (in Japanese).

J, G. M., 1996, Disease cluster statistics for imprecise space-time locations. Statistics

L, Y., and Y, J., 1997, Point-in-polygon analysis under certainty and uncertainty.

in Medicine, 15, 873–885.

GeoInformatica, 1, 93–114.

M, D., and B, I., 1991, Techniques for modelling population-related raster data-

bases. Environment and Planning A, 23, 1069–1075.

O, A., and M, S., 1984, Qualitative analysis of two-dimensional urban population

distribution in Japan. Geographical Analysis, 16, 301–312.

P, J., 1966, On the length of empirical curves. Discussion Paper, 10, Ann Arbor Michigan

Inter-University Community of Mathematical Geographers.
P, E. C., 1977, Mathematical Ecology (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
S, Y., 2001, Analysis of surface changes using primitive events International Journal

of Geographical Information Science, 15, 523–538.

S, Y., 2002, Cluster detection in uncertain point distributions: a comparison of four

methods. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, to appear.

S, D. W., 1992, Multivariate Density Estimation (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
S, W., 1998, A generic statistical approach for modelling error of geometric features in GIS.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, 131–143.

S, B. W., 1986, Density Estimation (London: Chapman & Hall).
S, T. A., 1999, T hematic Cartography and V isualization (Upper Saddle River, New

U, G., and F, B., 1985, Spatial Data Analysis with Example (Chichester: John

Jersey: Prentice Hall).

Wiley & Sons).

V, H., 1994, Integration of simulation modeling and error propagation for the buﬀer

operation in GIS. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 60, 427–435.

W, W., 1966, The topology of a socioeconomic terrain and spatial ﬂows. Papers of the

Regional Science Association, 17, 47–61.

W, W., and W, N., 1975, Network representations of critical elements of pressure

surface. Geographical Review, 65, 476–492.

Downloaded by [University of Georgia] at 18:47 05 June 2016 