The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 51 No. 4

pp. 343–359 November 2014

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Becksploitation: The Over-use of a Cartographic Icon

Kenneth Field1 and William Cartwright AM 2

1Esri Inc., 380 New York Street, Redlands, CA 92373, USA. 2Geospatial Science, RMIT University, Melbourne,
Victoria 3001, Australia
Email: kfield@esri.com

When one thinks of a map depicting London, generally the image that appears is that of the map designed by Henry
(Harry) Beck (1902–1974). It has become a design icon despite the fact that it eschews topography (other than the River
Thames) and focuses on the simplified depiction of the topology of the Underground rail network. Beck’s map, designed in
1931, and first made available to London commuters in 1933, has become the image of the geography of London and,
generally, the mental map that defines how London ‘works’. Station names have become synonymous with the above-
ground landscape and the network is such that most of London’s landmarks can be readily located through the map.
Navigating between them is a simple process and while the city above is a socio-economic and cultural soup, the simplicity
of the map brings a sense of order, structure and sensibility. It is a perfect counterpoint to the chaos at street level.
In cartographic terms, Beck’s map works and marries form with function perfectly. It retains the status of ‘the’ map of
London and manages to simplify the network, be harmonious, coherent, balanced and all with minimal topographic
distortion. The symbols are clear and well crafted; the composition and layout, though somewhat challenged by network
changes since 1933, remains useful; and the design has remained relatively unchanged over the last 80 years which creates
stability in appearance and breeds confidence in its use. However, this paper asserts that Beck’s map is over-used in
myriad ways beyond the reason for its invention. The effect of such abuse has perhaps been to dilute its own place in
cartographic history. There have been many official iterations that have not always successfully married Beck’s design
ideas with network changes; other metro maps have often tried to imitate but with mediocre success; and the map is
perpetually used as a template for mimics and alternatives. The map has become a model for parody which we assert is bad
for the map and potentially damaging for cartography.

Keywords: Map Design, Schematic, Beck, Tube map

INTRODUCTION

2013 marked the 150th Anniversary of
the London
Underground and the 80th Anniversary of the publication
of Henry (Harry) Beck’s famous map. The London Under-
ground map, or schematic diagram, was ﬁrst conceived in
1931 when he was a temporarily employed engineering
draughtsman, and published in 1933 and has gone on to
receive widespread critical acclaim as a design classic (BBC,
1987; Garland, 1994; Dobbin, 2011; Cartwright and Field,
2013; Field and Cartwright, 2013). Beck took a tangle of
geographically muddled lines and names of the underground
rail network and sought to improve for the information
provided to passengers of the London Passenger Transport
Board. The map is a cartographic icon and undeniably useful
for navigation and wayﬁnding (BBC, 1987; Tufte, 2002;
Vertesi, 2008).

The map is still used as the basis for London’s transport
mapping and has inspired many other versions for metro
systems worldwide (Ovenden, 2003, 2007; Roberts, 2012). It

DOI: 10.1179/0008704114Z.000000000150

has also spawned countless imitations and been used as a basis
for a wide array of artistic re-imaginations, depicting phenom-
ena that range from popular personalities to the human body.
This paper provides a brief background to Beck and his
London Underground map and the possible design cues he
took from earlier maps of rail networks. We consider in
what ways the map can be considered a design icon and
review the characteristics that make it both cartographically
functional and aesthetically appealing. We then speciﬁcally
address the use and mis-use of Beck’s design and focus on
the imitations and the way in which this trend might be to
the detriment of the map and to cartography. Finally, we
offer a satirical swipe at the mimics by creating our own
Beck inspired map parody.

BECK’S MAP

Henry Charles ‘Harry’ Beck (Figure 1) is responsible for
designing one of the most iconic maps ever produced. Beck

344

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Black and white hand-drawn prepublication drawing,
1931 (source: http://bit.ly/1r4GH2A)

in the documentary ‘The London Underground Map’
(BBC, 1987) that Beck’s wife told him that Beck was
obsessed with the development of his map, an she would
ﬁnd pieces of scrap paper, with design developments on
them, scattered throughout the house.

Beck’s obsessiveness was not just related to the design of
the map, but also to getting his map published. He needed
to convince The London Passenger Board’s public relations
ofﬁcer, Frank Pick (1878–1941), who later became
managing director in 1928, and chairman of the London
Passenger Transport Board in 1933 (Gießmann, 2014),
that his design accorded with the graphics communication
concepts championed by Pick. Pick guided the overall
public ‘look’ of The London Passenger Transport Board,
and what he chose had to reﬂect ‘the new’, Modernism and
the avant-garde.

Beck tidied the map for a hand drawn black and white
prepublication drawing (Figure 3) and then a coloured
version (Figure 4) where the principle of coloured lines and
blobs to denote different lines became ﬁrmly established.
though Finsbury Park is
Rings denote interchanges

Figure 1. Harry Beck in 1965 (age 63) holding the exercise book
sketch made in 1931 (source: http://bit.ly/1r4CRXl)

worked as an Engineering Draughtsman in the London
Underground Signals Ofﬁce at the London Passenger
Transport Board.

Beck’s map is applied cartography at its best. He did not
wait around endlessly debating the conceptual framework
or philosophical approach; he was not even a cartographer,
but he was not afraid to get his hands dirty and get a pencil
out to begin work (Figure 2). He turned his design ideas
into a physical process and laid his ideas out. Ken Garland,
who wrote an excellent book on Beck’s map: Mr. Beck’s
Underground Map: A History (1994), said in an interview

Figure 2. Beck’s original 1931 sketch. Pencil and ink in a
notebook, 7.569.5 in. Victoria
and Albert Museum London,
no. E.814-1979 (source: http://bit.ly/1yAnQ8c)

Figure 4. Colour hand-drawn prepublication drawing, 1931
(source: http://bit.ly/1p9Qzsd)

Becksploitation

345

Figure 5. Beck’s ﬁrst issue pocket underground map, 1933 (source: author’s private collection)

symbolized with diamonds…merely to illustrate a different
design treatment as Beck experimented with alternative
stylistic treatments.

In 1933, a trial print run of Beck’s map was produced
despite some hesitancy (Figure 5). It was a success with the
public and Beck’s ideas became a signiﬁcant contribution to
the design of subway, metro and transport maps. The map
was so obviously useful, helpful and publicly appreciated in
part because its designer was himself an ordinary, tube
travelling commuter concerned for their information needs
and not for novelty for its own sake. Here then we see the
importance of the designer truly understanding the user’s
need and using that
to inform a design that works
functionally as well as aesthetically.

The ﬁrst issue of the map used diamonds for interchanges,
but these were replaced by circular symbols for the second,
much larger and subsequent print runs in 1933. He also
replaced the large station blobs with less overbearing ticks for
stations which have remained up until the present day.

The commercial value of Beck’s design to London
Transport and the rest of the world is immeasurable. He
was paid 10 guineas (£ 10.50 – in £ and ‘New Pence’
…which at today’s prices would be about $350), probably
about 2 weeks wages in those days. The treatment of Beck
by London Transport in the following years has been
detailed elsewhere (Garland, 1994; Roberts, 2005; Dobbin,

2011), sufﬁce to say that many others tried to develop
Beck’s ideas and promote alternative versions in an often
underhand way but none were able to capture the purity of
Beck’s design. The map itself was hailed as a British design
classic in March 2006, when viewers of BBC2’s The
Culture Show and visitors to London’s Design Museum
voted Harry Beck’s Tube map as their second-favourite
British design of the twentieth century in the Great British
Design Quest (the winner was the Concorde aircraft). It
was also commemorated by Royal Mail in a 2009 series of
the
postage stamps alongside the Routemaster bus,
anglepoise lamp, Concorde, a Mary Quaint miniskirt, the
Submarine Spitﬁre, the original Mini, the K2 telephone
kiosk, a polypropelene chair and Penguin books.

MAPS BEFORE BECK

While the design of Beck’s map is rightly lauded as
encompassing a strong sense of form and function, clarity
and innovation, was it really as original as many believe?

What can be assumed that, in this era of limited travel to
Continental Europe, Beck had never seen the Berlin S-Bahn
(Stadtschnellbahn) representation of 1931 (Figure 6). This
map used similar concepts to Beck, and it was a schematic map
of the whole Berlin system. The 1931 representation used the

346

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. The Berlin S Bahn representation, 1931 (designer
unknown) (source: http://bit.ly/1sE3U0J)

central ‘ring’ diagram to link the core stations. It had a number
of similarities to Beck’s map: geography above ground was
limited to station names and the radiating lines were depicted
using lines that were horizontal, vertical or at 45u. And, this
representation replaced the earlier, less formal representation of
the Berlin U-Bahn (Untergrundbahn) of 1930.

With regard to maps of the London railways, Figures 7–
17 show an array of pre-Beck maps of parts of the London
underground network. London Transport’s 1874 map
retains geography but uses simple blobs for stations and
only a minimal amount of above-ground surface detail
(Figure 7). An 1889 guidebook entitled: ‘London and its
Environs: Handbook for Travellers’ by Leipsic Karl Baede-
ker clearly shows the District Railway and Metropolitan
Lines and their completed Circle Line, opened in 1884
using two colours on an overprinted street map. Again,
geography is preserved (Figure 8).

In 1905, Sampson Low, Marston & Company produced
a map in the same style as Britain’s railway maps of the
1840s though the clutter they generated by overprinting on
a detailed topographic basemap makes it hard to see the
detail (Figure 9). This map is a late example of how the
earlier underground maps looked from 1863, when the ﬁrst

Figure 8.
Leipsic Karl Baedeker, 1889 (source: http://bit.ly/1trOejl)

‘London and its Environs: Handbook for Travellers’ by

underground railway was opened, until around 1906. Lines
for the District trains in red where other lines are in blue.
Stations for steam trains are rectangular and those served by
electric trains are shown with circles.

Figure 10 shows one of the ﬁrst pocket sized maps of the
network which began to appear in 1906 and saw the ﬁrst
map of the combined Underground railway companies.

Here we are beginning to see geographical accuracy give
way to some schematicized elements and some cartographic
license. The Metropolitan route from West Hampstead in
the top left of the map is distorted to run due west to allow
space for the legend. So some 23 years before Beck’s
diagram, we see the straightening out of a route into a
line. While this does not necessarily set
horizontal
precedent for Beck’s work,
it indicates a tolerance for
geographical inaccuracy in favour of clarity and efﬁciency in

Figure 7. London Transport, 1874 (source: http://bit.ly/1u1T0hP)

Figure 9. Sampson Low, Marston & Company, 1905 (source:
http://bit.ly/1o9uKxX)

Becksploitation

347

Figure 10. First map of combined Underground railway compa-
nies, 1906 (source: http://bit.ly/1u1UDMA)

Figure 12.
1EVa023)

Johnson Riddle & Co, 1911 (source: http://bit.ly/

the map product. We also see the principle of using
lines and
different colours (hues) to denote different
though topographic detail is included, it is printed faintly,
so the bright colours of the network lines are clearly seen.
Coloured blobs symbolize stations and interchanges.

A 1907 London Evening News map (Figure 11) also
takes a similar approach but modiﬁes the symbols used for
single line stations and interchanges. The idea of straigh-
tening out the route to show merely connections was also a
way of advertising the route at stations but of course this
only illustrated one line and connectors between stations on
different lines.

The 1911 version by Johnson Riddle & Co (Figure 12)
also incorporates the geographical distortion in the North
West of the map, similar to that on the 1908 map, which
ﬂattens out and moves the Metropolitan Line. It also uses
simpliﬁed straight lines and limited curves between loca-
tions and although the geography of the underlying map is

planimetrically accurate, the network of underground line
symbols is becoming highly generalized and continues the
trend of a diagrammatic approach to mapping the network.
In 1919, a map with less geographical information is
released (Figure 13). Here, with just the Thames River as
the only ‘above ground’ feature shown. By the time we
reach the 1920s, the functionality of rail network maps is
beginning to exhibit signs of a consideration for the
aesthetic quality. The 1921 Pocket map by MacDonald
Gill is designed in an attractive and individual style. It is
more than just an illustration of lines and has a composed
layout and unique border to frame the map (Figure 14).

There is no background detail but Gill retained the
underlying geographical layout. Interchange station sym-
bols are shown with white centres and the lines are heavily
generalized with simple, ﬂowing curves. White line
connectors can also be seen at Baker Street, Kings Cross

Figure 11. London Evening News, 1907 (source: http://bit.ly/
1p9VlpD)

Figure 13. 1919 map (source: http://dailym.ai/1w71AAl)

348

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 14. Pocket map by MacDonald Gill, 1921 (source: http://
bit.ly/1Dakgld)

and Camden Town stations. Gill’s map was a major new
step towards simplifying the understanding of the under-
ground network for the travelling public.

Of course, the London Underground network was not
the only rail network being mapped and in 1929, George
Dow designed and drew a map for the London & North
Eastern Railway (LNER) that displays a range of design
ideas which have become synonymous with Beck’s map
(Figure 15).

Dow straightened out the tangled geographical lines to
allow eyes to ﬂow effortlessly along each route on the map.
He also dispensed with background detail and used circles
of various designs for station symbols (Dow, 2005).

Finally, in our brief design review of pre-Beck maps, it is
worth reﬂecting on the maps by Fred Stingemore
(draughtsman for Underground organisation) who pro-
duced the pocket Underground maps from 1925 to 1932
and whose maps were the ﬁrst to be printed and distributed
on tri-folded card. His 1932 pocket map (Figure 16)
borrows heavily from the Gill map but, additionally, clearly
shows compression of the outlying lines in comparison to
the intricate and congested central area. It is still basically a
geographical layout, but he removes of all of the ground
level detail except the River Thames and uses highly
generalized lines with straight and gently curving segments.
It is worth noting that, in 1933, Stingemore re-visited his
map (Figure 17), and re-introduced above-ground geogra-

Figure 16. Pocket map by Fred Stingemore, 1932 (source:
http://bit.ly/1va3r7A)

phy. Both of Stingemore’s maps do, however, illustrate a
high cognitive load; that is, they contain superﬂuous detail
that isn’t a requirement for the wayﬁnding task at hand and
this is perhaps one of the reasons Beck’s new design was at
once both challenging for its geometric approach but
successful due to the lower cognitive load it demanded.

BECK’S UNINTENDED LEGACY

Beck made the map he wanted to make. He based his map
on his knowledge and experience. He made a map using
techniques he knew and was not swayed by calls to make the
map a particular way. We make maps because they help us
tell a story, share ideas and describe to people something
about geography that would be difﬁcult to communicate
using any other mechanism. We also gain pleasure in the act

Figure 15. London & North Eastern Railway (LNER) by George
Dow, 1929 (source: http://bit.ly/1p9WQnz)

Figure 17. Stingemore’s 1933 map (source: http://dailym.ai/
1z8xIYc)

Becksploitation

349

Figure 18. The Great Bear by Simon Patterson (source: http://bit.ly/1nl6isK)

of making a map based on design ideas we like. Beck was
most likely inﬂuenced by many maps, as the proceeding
section explored, but he pushed the boundaries and created
something different, innovative and experimental. It was
the function of navigating the network that remained
central to his design (Hadlaw, 2003).

The legacy of Beck’s map is used in three principle ways.
Firstly, it is retained and iterated by Transport for London
who have used the basic design since its inception (not
always successfully; Roberts, 2005; Daily Mail Australia,
2014). The ideas behind Beck’s map live on in the current
design but, of course, the network has grown immeasurably
since 1931 and many changes have had to be incorporated
to reﬂect the complexity of the system. There is certainly
some question as to whether Beck would have approached
today’s system with the same design and it has been
revisited by many other designers to explore alternatives.

Secondly, Beck’s work has been used a basis for other
metro mapping in perhaps the same way that Beck himself
took ideas from previous work. Following the success of
this new design, other maps were developed along the lines

to Beck’s design. Of

of Beck’s map. For instance, the ‘Sydney Suburban and City
Underground Railway map’ (Commissioner for Railways,
New South Wales) of 1939 used similar design principles as
Beck’s representation (Dobbin, 2011). And, Beck’s design
inﬂuenced George Salomon’s New York City Transit
Authority (NYCTA) map, 1958, Massimo Vignelli’s 1972
NCTA New York Subway Map and Berlin’s current U and
S-Bahn maps, designed by Erik Spiekermann. They have
obvious underlying links
this,
Spiekermann has said: ‘My Berlin transit diagram owes a
lot to Beck. … It works very well for the Tube. It never pretends
to work for other types of journeys. The only reason people are
using it for everything else is that is appears to be so simple,
hiding the whole complexity of London underneath those few
lines and angles ’ (The Independent, 2011). Most other
major cities with metros use a modiﬁed version of Beck’s
ideas. Some work very well and have spawned good maps in
their own right, but others have perhaps been less successful
because the local geography is not necessarily suited to the
design rules Beck developed. Others experiment (e.g. with
different angles of line) and some just fail due to poor

350

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 19. Stop adapting this map by Jamie Quinn, 2013 (source: http://bit.ly/1va7oZK)

application of the technique or an ill-ﬁtting approach to
their own speciﬁc network.

Finally, Beck’s map has been used as a design template for
pastiche…which we’ve termed ‘Becksploitation’. Beck’s
map has been used to serve the need for recognition and
as a vehicle to tell a story using a familiar metaphor. People
build Beck-style maps because they can (software supports
it) but not necessarily because their geography or theme
needs the same treatment. Beck’s map is so iconic and
widely known that it immediately generates interest when
others base their own work on the same design ideas.
Imitation is often considered the sincerest form of ﬂattery
but the sense is that some are perhaps trying to gain a head
start in trying to get their own work seem – a short cut to
recognition and success. Simon Patterson began the trend
with his 1992 art print ‘The Great Bear’ (Figure 18) in
which he used the framework of Beck’s map but replaced
stations on each line with the names of famous people, with
each line dedicated to a particular group – footballers,
scientists, actors, philosophers, engineers and so on.

Nearly 25 years on, Patterson’s original idea of taking
Beck’s map as a starting point has become a pattern, often
replicated to the point that drove Jamie Quinn to produce
his own angst-driven reaction (Figure 19).

Creativity is a cornerstone in cartography but what we are
seeing with many of the derivative maps is that the theme

being mapped doesn’t necessarily ﬁt with the tube map
metaphor. There has to be a purpose to any map (even
whimsical maps) yet a failure to match the form with the
function immediately creates a tension. Juxtaposing the
tube map with any random theme can exacerbate that
tension. Derivative work never really captures the craft of
making an original map. It often appears unstructured and
lacking in thought. It is essentially a short-cut approach that
rides on the success of someone else’s hard work, perhaps
with the principle aim of getting a job done rapidly.

In assessing the number, type and variety of derivative
works of the ‘Becksploitation’ type, we have undertaken a
wide-ranging survey of resources and have identiﬁed some
205 (and counting) maps that show a clear lineage to Beck’s
work. This is by no means a complete list, but in the
remainder of this paper, we will explore some of these
examples and explore their impact on design in cartogra-
phy.

INFORMATION DESIGN AND REDESIGN

The key to Beck’s
the graphic allowed
success was
passengers to move rapidly because the map did not
complicate or confuse their journey despite the labyrinth
of tunnels under the streets of London. The message the
map imparted was one of simplicity and this translated well

Becksploitation

351

to people’s ability to get from A to B. Beck’s map might
also be seen as an early pioneer of corporate identity since it
brought together the complex network in a uniﬁed design,
marrying it with the modern Johnston’s sans serif typeface
(ﬁrst used in 1916) and the roundel (ﬁrst used in 1919).
Beck’s map ended a period in which there was little
coordinated design for the map, signage or publicity of the
network. Beck’s map ushered in a modernist style that
brought together many of the needs of the network under
one style. The map’s bold and straight lines and geometrical
form at least riffed off modernist ideas and symbolism. The
network wanted to be seen as progressive, to encourage
passengers to want to use it. It needed to be seen as fast and
simple to negotiate. Beck’s map encouraged this and spoke
to the needs of the company as well as allaying the fears of
the travelling public of the time. Newer destinations around
London were connected and these needed to be seen as
reachable…and fast. Beck seemed to capture this require-
ment either by design or through good fortune and his map
was very much of the time.

Beck’s map carried clear design elements. He omitted
detail and distorted scale which meant that there was no
longer the need to include street detail which was hard to
reproduce on small tri-fold maps. The omission of detail
also meant it was less of a distraction when lines and
locations were distorted to enhance the central area. He
colour-coded the lines, which latterly gave a strong design
cue that was reﬂected in line style, symbology and signage
itself. Originally, colours denoted ownership but they soon
became synonymous with particular routes and encouraged
a design that was systematic and easily followed. The
distortions Beck applied to the lines were also a function of
the need to make space on a small format publication. The
intricate turns of the actual rail network did not need to be
illustrated and in fact made such a tangled mess; there was
very little white space for station names. Curves of lines
were produced in a consistently tight radius and station
names almost never placed anywhere other than along
straight line segments.

Beck’s design was as much a practical outcome as a
brilliant design statement. Straight lines also convey the
impression of speed and efﬁciency. His bringing together of
disconnected materials into a uniform framework placed the
map at the cusp of the modernist movement. He was the
right man in the right place at the right time.

Beck’s map was a hobby…he was experimenting with
ideas and out of his ideas and inﬂuences was born a
cartographic icon. The point here, then, is whether he
recognized it or not, his map was a product of his time, a
product of many converging needs of the company and also
a change in design ideals and fashion as a response to the
Arts and Crafts movements and the onset of post-war
transition from Art Deco and Art Nouveau to Modernism.
Beck designed the map to ﬁt the times. This is not a
if any, of the
statement that can be made of many,
derivatives that have since spawned because times have
changed. We no longer live in a world that embraces
Modernism. We no longer have to consider the format of a
tri-fold piece of paper as underpinning major
small
graphical
limitations. We no longer have to attempt to
bring together disparate design ideas into a new framework.

This begs the question why original thinking is so often
displaced by simple redesign rather than the search for new
design.

Creative work comes from the marriage of our profes-
sional lives with our other passions and Beck’s map is a
model of this approach. Yet the slew of examples of
redesigned London underground maps come from a
predeﬁned starting point. Their starting point is not the
landscape and drivers that led him to his design. Their
starting point is Beck’s map itself and this entirely misses the
point of design. For instance, while many of Maxwell
Roberts re-drawn maps (Roberts, 2012) are well produced
in terms of their construction, there is very little that they
add in terms of design or even as a critique for transport
mapping. That said, Roberts at least recognizes that many
of his attempts are purely to test Beck’s ideas to destruction
or to create parody versions to acknowledge the clarity of
the original.

Figure 20 shows one of Roberts’ more contentious
creations, a map based on concentric circles. There is even
an attempt to reconcile the roundel design into the map
itself yet the map suffers because neither the real geography
nor the underground geography is concentric or, even,
circular. The awkward angles of many of the lines as they
veer from their spoke-like form to join a concentric circle
create a displeasing shape and a lack of uniformity. There is
little sense of the scale between an enlarged central area and
the outward zones and the lack of structure in no way
supports people’s understanding of the network’s geogra-
phy. Beck’s idea of using the Central line as a horizontal
visual anchor for the map is no more.

Roberts has designed dozens of different versions of the
map, but his search for a design that dramatically improves
on Beck appears futile. Ever more fantastical or stylized
versions of the map do one thing, and that is, reinforce the
idea that Beck got it right ﬁrst time around. Even the
massively expanded underground network seems to sit
much more comfortably inside Beck’s original schema than
many of the redesigns achieve, despite more than 100 new
stations and numerous lines being added to the system. The
big picture that is missing from many redesigns is that they
are working at a different time, in a different space and with
different
re-imagine the
period in which Beck was working and so, new imaginations
of the network might be better if they start from the
perspective of the current, not the past. It is not simply
about reconﬁguring Beck’s lines.

fashions. Redesigners cannot

Roberts

is by no means

the only person to have
attempted redesigns of the London Underground map.
Many people have proposed an alternative but even if their
version has merit there’s a major hurdle to overcome to
have a new design accepted. Beck’s map has become
synonymous with London. For many people, it is London
and represents not only the map that gets them around but
their map of the structure and layout of the city. Its status as
a cartographic icon is matched by its intrinsic relationship
with the city it maps. So much of London’s tourism is also
based on the map and it now serves a purpose far wider than
its original function. Roberts himself recognizes that there
are strong expectations of what the underground map of
London should look like and despite proving that 60u

352

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 20. Concentric circles by Maxwell Roberts, 2013 (source: http://bit.ly/1gSatHy)

angles work very well (possibly better than 45u angles) and
which also create pleasing equilateral triangles of white
space, it is unlikely such a change will occur because there is
no fundamental need for a redesign (Roberts, 2012).

Mark Noad’s redesign in 2011 is perhaps the most
accomplished of redesigns (Figure 21). Noad takes parti-
cular issue with the lack of respect Beck’s map gives to the
above ground geography in the sense that his exaggerations
and distortions are to his mind unnecessary. With more
than double the number of lines, Beck had to consider,
London is now a more complicated network. The new lines
almost certainly reduce the emphasis that Beck placed on
the Circle line and, of course, today’s map is perhaps just as
likely to be viewed on a mobile device (which supports pan
and zoom) as it is a free tri-fold map; and by many visitors
from outside London. Noad attempts to maintain the
location of stations in roughly their true position and his
only compromise is to reduce distance to outer geogra-
phies. The River Thames is consequently drawn accurately
and relative positions are maintained. As a result, Beck’s use
of only three angles of line is dispensed with, yet the map is
clean and functions just as well.

Noad’s map attempts a purposeful redesign, arguing that
the strict three-angled approach by Beck is no longer the

most important characteristic to maintain. He attempts to
break free of many of Beck’s enduring design principles.
Maintaining the relative position is perhaps more important
even though above ground geography is still omitted.
Certainly, given the modern complexity of the network, the
question of whether Beck’s design in pure terms is a good
ﬁt is posed and would this map be a more useful map of
London for many is open to question. It is hard to argue
that Noad’s map is not a sensible approach that also marries
form and function though because it is up against an icon
with a familiar look and feel, it also suffers from being
regarded as an unnecessary re-working. It certainly caused
controversy in terms of challenging the status quo of Beck’s
design (Pavlus, 2011).

What Noad does do, though, is at least recognize that the
environment, culture and conditions of use have changed.
His map is available digitally as well as in static form and
presents a variety of detail across different versions. His use
of a different medium affords him an opportunity to use
different user interface designs, which are more suited to
mobile devices than a static, but slippy, map. However, it
remains impossible to stray away from the now ubiquitous
and deeply engrained design schema adopted by London
underground and he has had little choice but to persevere

Becksploitation

353

Figure 21. London-Tubemap by Mark Noad, 2011 (source: http://bit.ly/1sdwvsn)

with the colour-coding and the omission of above ground
detail. The map departs from Beck’s in a sensible and well
framed manner but without being so fantastical that it
immediately causes consternation. He successfully provides
a way for us to re-think the underground map of London in
a way that the more grotesque re-designs of many others do
not. Noad attempts to make a map with the user in mind
and of the time, rather than simply applying a different
graphical treatment to the lines without really understanding
how it is to function. This at least encourages us to
reconsider some of the basic tenets of information design
and to acknowledge the importance of wider situations and
impacts on design. Simply taking a map made some 80 years
ago and expecting it to work in the current day as a template
for new work is likely not to be a good starting point.

THE IMPACT OF THE INTERNET

When Beck ﬁrst made his map, it was rejected. He tried
again and it was published as an attempt to show him it
would not satisfy demand…but here was a formal process to
publication and acceptance using a trial run of only 500
prints. The world has changed though. The Internet makes
it relatively easy to publish anything, frequently for testing
or just to launch a map into the world. Self-promotion is
rife and maps that go viral are often considered to be the
equivalent of ‘success’. There is very little critique of such

work, but published work does not equate to being good
work just because you can reach a massive audience online,
though clearly the opportunity to publicize good work has
never been greater. It took Beck considerable time to make
his map and to see it become successful. In an era when
trying out new ideas should be far simpler, it is fascinating
that so many people resort to using his ideas instead of
prototyping their own.

Beck probably had not travelled much or seen many maps
other than those that might have inﬂuenced him locally.
His geography was the one he knew in his local environ-
ment. He was a product of his local geography and wanted
to be able to navigate it more clearly. He mapped what he
knew and he was inﬂuenced by what he saw locally albeit
that he dispensed with geography in the map itself. Today,
we live in a digital world where we have instant access to an
almost inﬁnite number and type of maps and data and we
can make a map of anywhere. So with all this amazing
material at our disposal, we would question why so many
maps go straight for the Beck approach.

Globalisation,

increased travel and opportunity and
information technology have made the world a much
smaller place than when Beck made his map. Whereas his
audience and pilot study was a relatively small set of people
they were focussed users. The world has shrunk and it is full
of map-makers with niche interests, but when it comes to
the tube map virtually, everyone likes it. On the Internet,
the chances of use and re-use are high and the same

354

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 22. Underground by Francisco Dans, 2011 (source: http://bit.ly/1sICkkl)

opinions tend to form. True innovation is less likely as a
result and so we see many more Beck style maps as a result.
In fact, maps that go viral are usually conferred that status
by thousands of people who know little about the subject
matter or the mapping technique. They simply click a ‘like’
button and that equates to a general purpose acceptance.
The number of experts who may have genuine or legitimate
criticisms becomes drowned out by the many. For instance,
Figure 22 shows a modern take on the tube map by
Francisco Dans. It was designed as a piece of abstract
curvature and an artistic commentary on the regularity of
the map including a square logo to emphasize the opposing
approach.

Dans’ map was generally disliked across social media, but
then it perhaps was not intended as a genuine alternative to
Beck’s map in the same way that Roberts or Noad intended.
Opinions become polarized in a shared, online space and
our disembodied blogs and tweets are often knee-jerk
responses to the latest example of ‘Becksploitation’. Perhaps
Dans’ effort was actually too similar
to the graphic
treatment of the original to be seen as a piece of artistic
commentary in its own right. Contrast Dans’ work with the
artistic expression used by the Tate Gallery
earlier
to advertise the Tate
(Figure 23). The 1987 poster

Gallery used the tube map as a piece of art. The use of
the map is clear and unambiguous. It is not intended as a
challenge to the design but, rather, is a reuse of the map as a
metaphor for something entirely different. It works and,
generally, people enjoy the example.

Opinions of Beck map derivatives are reinforced in an
online space where commonality of opinion tends to build.
While Dans’ map is generally disregarded, Booth’s appears
widely and receives favourable comments. Perhaps in an
online world it is actually important to veer markedly from
the original in order to be seen as original. Dans suffers a
similar fate as many of Roberts’ maps, albeit that they are
designed for a different purpose.

A ﬁnal example of Becksploitation is by Sam Loman
(Figure 24). Loman is but one of over 200 examples of this
style of work where the tube map metaphor is used for
some other purpose. It is perhaps this use of Beck’s design
it is
ideas that is most damaging. On the one hand,
reasonable to claim that people enjoy this type of approach
and the evidence suggests that seeing a range of the weird
and wonderful presented as a tube map brings recognition
and sales. On the other hand, our thesis is that for each of
these examples, there is probably a more suitable and
improved way of representing the information. In Loman’s

Becksploitation

355

Figure 23. Tate Gallery by Tube by David Booth of Fine White
Line, 1987 (source: http://bit.ly/1z8EFZg)

work, the lines are tight with little whit space and as they
ignore the structure of Beck’s map we get a multilinear map
that lacks structure or coherence. In the most congested
parts of the body, Loman avoids exaggerating features to
create white space for body parts and labels because to do so
would create a heavily distorted human shape. He chooses
to preserve the human form and crowbar Beck’s design into
it rather than use Beck’s principles to reshape the human
body. Labels overlap lines, station ticks interrupt lines and
station interchange symbols are both awkwardly positioned
and have overprinted lines. While whimsical, the map lacks
balance and visual harmony.

There has become a tipping point of course. When
Patterson published The Great Bear it was an amusing
pastiche. The Internet (and tools that make it easy to
produce schematic artwork) means that new versions of the
tube map are produced with increasing frequency and
shared online. It becomes harder to summon the energy to
explore the rare great example amongst the morass so we
get tired of seeing the same ideas regurgitated. In design
terms the ideas and visual becomes stale. Perhaps that’s
partly why we enjoy Booth’s version since it’s had time to
mature in an environment that was not Internet-based. It
in its own right. Being
became a collectible poster
published recently, Dans’ map faced a tougher challenge.
It went straight online and had to contest with every other
map using the tube design. Roberts produces so many
variations it becomes difﬁcult to know what the point is and
Loman’s simply gets added to a list of countless other
unimaginative works. In this sense, the Internet becomes
overcrowded, tube map derivatives saturate our browsers
and can create an environment in which it becomes harder
to make your genuinely interesting and innovative work
seen. This is a shame because Booth, Roberts, Dans and
Loman are clearly talented designers.

Figure 24. Underskin by Sam Loman, 2012 (source: http://bit.ly/
ZCMRkd)

THE DEATH OF CREATIVITY

By all accounts, Beck was fairly reserved but his interests in
engineering, while considered boring to some,
led to
creativity…proving you can get creativity out of anything
you are passionate about. Yet being boring might be
considered exactly what many are doing in taking his ideas
and using them. Are we bereft of ideas and other inﬂuences?
Would Roberts, Dans, Loman and others ﬁnd more success if
they had not used Beck’s map as a starting point?

Beck applied some of the basic rules of cartographic
communication to perfection…he simpliﬁed, omitted and
generalized to perfection. His creativity was in large part
due to the subtraction of all superﬂuous geographies. He in
fact subtracted geography from his map. He created a
perfect approach to support mediation between the user of
the underground and the complex socio-technological
system of the city above. The map conveyed structure and
established clear points of interaction that enabled people in
their journey needs. While Beck’s creativity was in support
of navigation and wayﬁnding, the subway map genre he
unintentionally developed has also become a way of

356

The Cartographic Journal

representing the city itself even though it did not originally
pretend to do so. The map becomes a graphical user
interface for the city and allows people to make sense of it in
ways that a conventional
topographic map does not.
Perhaps this is the reason so many use the template of
a subway map: to codify their own subject matter through a
simple graphical user interface. It perhaps works on a
transient level, but rarely invites deeper exploration. Unlike
Beck’s map and relationship to the city and people’s view of
the city, it is uncertain whether this is actually achieved with
the Beck-esque derivatives. They have their own unique
geographies and narratives and without a systematic
understanding and application of
the original design
requirements, the Beck interface may very well simply be
a mask to the story they are attempting to communicate.

Beck’s creativity challenged the normal and the way in
which representations of networks were constructed. The
map may very well fail as an accurate representation of
London above-ground and it is this that perhaps makes it so
distinct. What cartographers choose to leave out is often the
most important component of a great map. The ﬁne
balance of Beck’s success was evidenced when Transport for
London removed The River Thames in 2009 as part of a
redesign. The river on the London Underground map is a
key feature and a visual anchor. In some respects, it is the
single feature that makes the map what it is because it
becomes uniquely London. The Mayor of London, Boris
Johnson, ordered the map to be re-drawn with the Thames
reinstated, but as the removal of The Thames proves, there
is actually very little left to subtract from the map. In
creative terms, if you take Beck’s map as a starting point,
then you are starting with something universally considered
as embodying great design. If you then take things away
from it or change it, it becomes debatable whether such
changes are improvements. In the context of this discus-
sion, the notion of starting a creative process with a design
icon might be limiting. Instead, starting with a blank page
may lead to some alternative creative process and possibly
some design and product that achieves greatness without
reliance.

Beck’s map has become the supporting structure for the
city itself. It is the steel skeleton of lines that supports the
physicality of London itself. As Board (Barber and Board,
1993, p. 151) notes: ‘Indeed it has virtually replaced the
true-to-scale maps, which can be found in most Underground
stations, as the correct map because the latter look unfamiliar
and therefore suspect, even wrong ’. This structure does not
necessarily support other
themes and beginning with
someone else’s blueprint or framework will not necessarily
provide adequate support for a wholly different theme.

It was Pablo Picasso who said ‘Lesser artists copy, great
artists steal’ and this is perhaps a key observation when it
comes to the overuse and exploitation of Beck’s map.
Copying a map looks clumsy. It degrades the original and
imitation in this respect might not be considered the
sincerest form of ﬂattery. Instead, a great artist may steal
elements, perhaps to honour previous work with a nod to a
particular aspect of the design. Creating new work from a
single map may be a quick approach but studying multiple
works and stealing from many will at the very least make
idea
your work more rounded and considered. This

Figure 25. The New York City subway system map by Massimo
Vignelli, 1972 (source: http://bit.ly/1oJJIH7)

translates across all manner of work as Steve Jobs
recognized in his own company when explaining at Apple
‘we have always been shameless about stealing great ideas’
(Jobs, 1996).

Clever stealing was also the key that made Massimo
Vignelli’s 1972 map of the New York City subway system
(Figure 25) so similar to Beck yet fundamentally different at
the same time. Vignelli brought a new aesthetic to his map,
yet crucially the map was never considered a success by a
critical public. The problem, perhaps, lay not with the map,
but with the map users. While the London public grew to
understand that Harry Beck’s map was grossly distorted yet
a perfect solution to navigate from A to B, New Yorker’s
simply did not appreciate the same approach. Despite the
clean, modern lines that connected unique subway lines
through stations with multiple markers and fresh colours
that departed from Beck, the map was replaced in 1979
after only 7 years of use.

Vignelli himself explained the issue at a conference in
2010: ‘I think the real reason is space. But not because
Manhattan is too small, it’s because they want to put too much
information that doesn’t belong in the diagram. That’s why.
All of a sudden there is …and there is no reason. I mean, all
you want to know is [how] to go from A to B’.

Like Beck’s map, Vignelli’s was geographically inaccurate
by design. Above ground detail was omitted. It was a
schematic diagram to support ease of travel through a
complex network. Vignelli had been tasked with streamlin-
ing the wayﬁnding task and bringing New York into the
future (a key tenet to the success of Beck’s map). He
succeeded in meeting the design brief yet people eventually
reacted by demanding a ‘map’ as they perceived it in the

Becksploitation

357

more traditional sense. The replacement, far from being the
simpliﬁed classic created by Vignelli, attempted to overlay
multiple disparate layers of information creating a frag-
mented and unpleasant version. Vignelli’s map was abstract
yet provided clear information for the single task at hand. A
classic of cartographic design certainly, yet also a classic case
of transposing an approach to a new environment and a set
of new users less inclined to be accepting. Ensuring that a
map’s user is satisﬁed might be considered paramount and
so on this basis, Vignelli’s map has remained controversial
and may even be considered a classic failure despite its
obvious beauty and his good intention.

As Vignelli admited, he stole the basis of his ideas from
Beck. Most cartographers and map-makers do the same
with their work. Nothing is entirely original and everything
we create is a function of a genealogy of ideas, experiences
and inﬂuences. Cartographers collect and take design cues
from many works to create new maps. Beck was a great
artist who likely stole ideas from previous rail network maps
and reworked them brilliantly with a touch of magic.
Vignelli brought a fresh approach to the basic ideas but
changed colours, structure, angles and format. Despite his
best intentions and what is, now, considered a design
classic, the map users of New York City were not prepared
for the change as Beck’s map readers were some 40 years
earlier. Maybe it was a reaction to the fact that New Yorkers
wanted their own map…not a map from another city. They
demanded a different, unique map to be different and to be
seen as different to the rest of the world. In some sense their
reaction shows parallels to the basic thesis of this paper as
most of the subsequent Beck inspired maps are not much
more than copies by lesser artists; poor fakes that have little
imagination; they neither improve upon the original or
offer much originality. We like them momentarily, but we
soon move on to something else. Ultimately, we reject
them in preference for original work and a demand for
creativity. The fact that Roberts has even gone so far as to
recreate the London Underground map in the style of
Vignelli (Figure 26) perhaps illustrates how far the process
of imitation has come. Do we really need our mapping to
regurgitate ideas in this way?

Beck’s map has longevity; it is a design classic. Most Beck
derivatives are transient and fail to hold our interest. They
drop off our radar rapidly and that in many ways is a
downside to Beck’s map holding such iconic value. It is
entirely possible that had any number of those who use
Beck’s map as a starting point taken a different path, then
the cartographic world may be richer.

In some senses, the way in which Beck’s map has been
used and mis-used offers parallels more generally with many
areas of cartographic practice that have suffered a death of
expertise. True originality is obscured by the plethora of
derivative maps we see and it is not restricted to Beck-esque
derivatives. Beck style maps are perhaps the most common
example but there are many others.

It is clear that what Beck achieved was to design a map
that embodied geometric simplicity yet achieved coherence,
harmony and balance. These are not necessarily attributes
of any map that can be quantiﬁed and subjectivity is as
much a part of our appreciation of the aesthetics of maps as
any other, more objective assessment. In expressing our

Figure 26. London Underground map in the style of Vignelli by
Maxwell Roberts, 2011 (source: http://bit.ly/ZCShfa)

perception that simply following Beck’s ideas leads in some
way to a death of creativity, we are suggesting that by
beginning with his map might be bypassing the map user’s
need of the new product. Beck’s design was a success, but
his approach may simply not work for something else
because the application of Beck’s methods cannot by
default lead to coherence, harmony and balance. Different
design rules will apply. The best designs succeed because
they form their own design rules that not only function
aesthetically and with a speciﬁc purpose, but they tap into a
time, a fashion and, possibly, some subconscious intangible
aspect that just makes a map ‘work’.

DRAWING A LINE

it

is

that

We suggest
time the mapping community
honoured Beck by bringing to a halt the ﬂagrant abuse of
his iconic map. Entirely tongue in cheek and as a parody of
a parody we have made our own pastiche which we would
like to propose as the ﬁnal word in tube maps. It is called
‘End of the Line: a tube map of tube maps’ and it is
designed to end all poorly conceived derivative tube maps
(Figure 27 and at http://bit.ly/1rtwo8j).

Figure 27. End of the Line: a tube map of tube maps (Field,
2013)

358

The Cartographic Journal

End of the Line exists as a web map that allows you to
click on various station names and be taken to one of the
205z Beck inspired maps we have uncovered in our survey
along with a link where possible and a short description. At
a basic level, it acts as a catalogue of Beck inspired maps, but
we intend it to be something more – a monument to all the
maps that have played on Beck’s map and slowly eroded its
value to cartography.

We assert that it is time to leave Beck’s map alone and
rather than basing your own work on it as a short-cut to
recognition and success, spend some time innovating and
designing new work. So…let this be the last Beck inspired
map…the end of the line! In an attempt to become as ironic
as possible, we have mapped the weird and wonderful onto
some tube lines and stations using the classic shape of the
network. We use the same tick marks and the same station
interchange symbols and the same colours (almost…using
the exact same colours would contravene copyright!). We
even include a pointless scale bar. The legend describes our
renamed lines with arbitrary terms to group maps that
advertise, or are metaphoric or attempt satire and while it is
perfectly possible for examples to ﬁt more than one
category, it would go against the principles of irony to
spend too much time properly classifying all these maps.
The categories are a haphazard attempt at making the maps
ﬁt the map which is precisely how many use Beck’s map in
their own misuse. You can also click the station names to go
to further details and see the examples more closely.

Whatever your view of our map, it lacks design. There
was no creative process. We simply stole an idea and draped
something onto the design rules Beck created. We have
simply proven that it is a simple and ineffective way to
approach the cartographic process. The map we have
produced gives little satisfaction and was a mechanical and
unimaginative process. Ultimately, it was unfulﬁlling and as
cartographers and designers, we yearn for something more.
We encourage others to yearn for something more too.
That said, because Beck’s map is a map that people like, it is
unsurprising that our effort has also been regarded
favourably by a general public whose appetite for Beck-
esque maps seems to remain. Irony indeed.

CONCLUSION

associated with over-use of Beck’s

together some ideas on the
This paper has brought
problems
iconic
London Underground map design. The notion that
cartographers and designers are over-reliant on one product
is to the disbeneﬁt of cartography. The Beck map has clearly
been tarnished by so much abuse and its place in
cartographic history arguably trivialized by over 200
derivatives. Yet more than that, maps themselves are
becoming derivative because of our tendency to rely on
third-party base maps, templates and other mechanisms that
do much of the work of technical construction and bypass
the thought process and the design process in cartography.

The design process is missing from much of what currently
exists and the story of the Beck map we tell here is simply a
statement on the way in which map-making is currently
headed. We are seeing an increased reliance on past work,
pre-prepared work and often-used design ideas. It is an
approach to stale mapping. Our own attempts to draw a line
under this sort of Becksploitation in this one small corner of
cartographic work are an attempt at satire by making a
graphical comment on misuse of cartographic icons more
generally. The bigger picture is of more general concern as
cartography deals with profound technological changes and
map-making becomes even more widespread.

Reuse of Beck’s map has gone far enough. The major issue
in design terms is that those who take this sort of route
inevitably skim over any of the complex issues of design that
would have to wrestle with in creating a new, original work
from scratch. The secondary problem is that Beck is now so
over-used as a template that the threshold of public acceptance
has increased. To use Beck’s map as a model or a metaphor to
tell your own story requires that you have an almost
uncontested reason to do so. Failure to consider design and
rely on someone else detailed consideration of a very speciﬁc
problem will most likely lead you down the wrong path. In
terms of the ﬁnished product, it will likely be inferior because
of the lack of original design thinking and will increasingly
meet with a muted reaction from an audience tired of seeing
every subject hung onto Beck’s classic structure.

We would like to encourage a return to thought,
experimentation, drawing and testing as a way of discovery
and the search for the next great map style. Beck made a
cartographic icon for one purpose – to navigate the London
Underground: a perfect map made at a perfect place and
time. We need new, fresh and challenging maps. Not copies.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Kenneth Field works
in Cartographic Research
and Development at Esri
Inc.
formerly
and was
and
Principal Lecturer
GIS Course Director at
Kingston University Lon-
don. He holds a PhD in
GIS from Leicester Uni-
versity and has presented
and published widely on
map design. He is a Fellow
of
the British Cartogra-
Royal
Society,
phic
Geographic Society and a
Geographer
Chartered
(GIS). He is also Chair of the ICA Commission on Map
Design (mapdesign.icaci.org), maintains a personal blog
(cartonerd.com) and tweets (@kennethﬁeld). He is about to
be the ex-Editor of The Cartographic Journal.

Becksploitation

359

Professor William Cartw-
right AM is Professor of
Cartography in the School
of Mathematical and Geo-
spatial Sciences at RMIT
University, Australia. He is
Chair of the Joint Board of
Geospatial Information So-
cieties and Immediate Past-
President of the International
Cartographic Association. He
joined the University after
spending a number of years
in both the government and private sectors of the mapping
industry. His major research interest is the application of
integrated media to cartography and the exploration of different
metaphorical approaches to the depiction of geographical
information. In 2013 was made a Member of the Order of Aus-
tralia for ‘signiﬁcant service to cartography and geospatial science
as an academic, researcher and educator’.

REFERENCES

Books, London.

Barber, P. and Board, C. (1993). Tales from the Map Room, BBC

British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). (1987). Design Classics: The
London Underground Map (29 June 1987) (television documen-
tary), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v51xmOpyv5NuI

Cartwright, W. and Field, K. S. (2013). ‘Beck to the Future: Time to Leave
It Alone’, in 26th International Cartographic Conference, Dresden,
August 25–30, http://icaci.org/files/documents/ICC_proceedings/
ICC2013/_extendedAbstract/439_proceeding.pdf

Daily Mail Australia. (2014). ‘Growing Underground! Remarkable maps
show how London’s Tube network has expanded and changed over
the past century’, Daily Mail Australia, 3 October 2012, http://
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2212174/Maps-Londons-Tube-
network-expanded-changed-past-century.html

Dobbin, C. (2011). London Underground Maps: Art, Design and

Cartography, Lund Humphries, Surrey.

Dow, A. (2005). Telling the Passenger Where to Get Off: George
Dow and the Evolution of the Railway Diagrammatic Map,
Capital Transport Publishing, Harrow.

Field, K. S. and Cartwright, W. (2013). ‘Leave It Alone: Use and Abuse
of Beck’s Tube Map’, in Association of American Geographers
Annual Meeting, Los Angeles, CA, Apr 9–13, http://meridian.aag.
org/callforpapers/program/AbstractDetail.cfm?AbstractID548436

Field, K. (2013). End of the Line, Esri, Redlands.
Garland, K. (1994). Mr Beck’s Underground Map, Capital Transport

Publishing, Harrow.

Hadlaw, J. (2003).

‘The London underground map:

imagining

modern time and space’, Design Issues, 19, pp. 25–35.

Jobs, S. (1996). Interview in Triumph of the Nerds, Channel 4/PBS,

dir by Paul Sen.

Lloyd, P. B. and Ovenden, M. (2012). Vignelli transit maps, Rit Cary

Graphic Arts Press, New York.

Gießmann, S. (2014). Henry Charles Beck, material culture and the
London Tube map of 1933, Amodern 2: Network Archaeology,
http://amodern.net/article/henry-c-beck-material-culture-and-
the-london-tube-map-of-1933/pdf/

Ovenden, M. (2003). Metro Maps of the World, Capital Transport

Publishing, Harrow.

London.

Ovenden, M. (2007). Transit Maps of the World, Penguin Books,

Pavlus, J. (2011). The London Tube Map, Redesigned for a Multiscreen
World, Co.DESIGN, http://www.fastcodesign.com/1664662/
the-london-tube-map-redesigned-for-a-multiscreenworld

Roberts, M. J. (2005). Underground Maps after Beck, Capital

Roberts, M. J. (2012). Underground Maps Unravelled, Maxwell

Transport Publishing, Harrow.

Roberts Publishing, Essex.

The Independent. (2011). ‘Rethinking the Tube map: a design for
strife - This Britain, UK’, The Independent, Monday, 15 August
2011,
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/
rethinking-the-tube-map-a-design-for-strife-2337609.html

Tufte, E. (2002). London Underground maps (z worldwide subway
maps), http://www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?ms
g_id500005W

Vertesi, J. (2008). ‘Mind the gap: The London underground map and
users’ representations of urban space’, Social Studies of Science,
38, pp. 7–33.

