The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Mapping Mount Kōya, one of Japan’s Most Revered
Pilgrimage Sites

Gabor Lukacs

To cite this article: Gabor Lukacs (2019) Mapping Mount Kōya, one of Japan’s Most Revered
Pilgrimage Sites, The Cartographic Journal, 56:1, 4-17, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1414105

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1414105

Published online: 19 Nov 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 80

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL
2019, VOL. 56, NO. 1, pp. 4–17
https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1414105

REFEREED PAPER

Mapping Mount Kōya, one of Japan’s Most Revered Pilgrimage Sites
Gabor Lukacs

22 Boulevard Kellermann, Paris 75013, France

ABSTRACT
This paper describes the earliest surviving hand-coloured manuscript maps as well as later
printed maps of Mount Kōya, (高野山, Kōyasan in Japanese), a UNESCO World Heritage site
and one of Japan’s most revered pilgrimage sites with several hundreds of temples. It was
founded 1200 years ago in 816 by the famous Buddhist monk Kūkai, 空海, 774–835, also
known as Kōbō Daishi, 弘法大師. Several exhibitions were held recently in Japan and many
books published to commemorate the anniversary.

KEYWORDS
Kūkai; Kōyasan; Pilgrimage;
Okunoin Cemetery; the
earliest surviving manuscript
map of Kōyasan; later printed
maps

The history of Japanese Buddhism, dealt with in great detail by many scholars, is beyond the scope of this paper.
Suﬃce it to write that Buddhism was introduced to Japan from Korea in the middle of the sixth century and was
oﬃcially adopted by the imperial court soon afterward. Prince Shōtoku, 聖徳太子, 572–622, actively promoted
Buddhism and ordered the construction of several temples. Buddhism and the construction of temples rapidly
spread from the capital to the outlying areas.

Since Kūkai’s life history has been the subject of innumerable books in many languages, this paper will be limited
to summarizing the essentials.1 The reader should be alerted to the fact that in the life history of religious saints,
such as in Kūkai’s, the separation between historical facts and legends is rather diﬃcult. According to tradition,
when he was 20 years old, he decided to enter the priesthood. Later, on the occasion of his full ordination
ceremony, he took the name Kūkai. The understanding of the original Sanskrit holy texts motivated his desire
to go to China. In 804, he received the oﬃcial permission to go abroad. Four months after setting foot on the
continent he arrived at Chang-an, the Tang Dynasty capital and was admitted as a student of the master of
esoteric Buddhism, Hui-guo, 惠果, 746–805. During the next eight months, Hui-guo instructed Kūkai in all the
essentials of esoteric Buddhist theory and practice.2 Shortly thereafter the master passed away and Kūkai
returned to Japan in 806 bringing with him the vast collection of texts accumulated in China. He eventually
received permission to found the Kōyasan temples and a few years later Emperor Saga, 嵯峨, 786–842,
entrusted him with the training of Shingon (真言, true words) priests in the capital. In selecting for teaching
and meditation the site of Kōyasan, at about 800–850 m above sea level, Kūkai was inﬂuenced by the site of the
holy Buddhist Mount Wutai, 五台山, the home of many of China’s most important monasteries and temples.
From the start, the monastery and its environs were likened to a mandala. Kūkai named the mountains
surrounding the ‘Vajra Peak’ temple Kongōbuji, after the eight petals of the lotus.3 Of the various monasteries
at which Kūkai lived and worked, none held as much signiﬁcance for him as Kongōbuji.4 The founding of the
Mount Kōya monastery and the centre of Shingon studies at Tō-ji (東寺) in Kyōto, an esoteric temple, were far
from completion and by no means fully functional during Kūkai’s lifetime. Nor did they enjoy religious
prestige, political inﬂuence or economic power comparable to that of the great monasteries of Nara.5 Before he
died, Kūkai had selected his nephew Shinzen, 真然, 804–891, for the task of carrying on the management and
continuing the construction of Kōyasan.

In 921 when Kūkai was posthumously elevated to the highest Buddhist rank of ‘Dharma Seal Great Master’ an
imperial envoy made the journey to Mount Kōya to stand before Kūkai’s tomb. Henceforth, Kūkai became known
as Kōbō Daishi, 弘法大師, The Grand Master who Propagated the Buddhist Teaching. Shortly afterward members
of the imperial family, of the nobility and the aristocracy, for example, Fujiwara Michinaga, 藤原道長, 966–1028,
the most powerful man in Japan, made a pilgrimage to Kōyasan.1

Drawn by the belief that it was a Buddhist paradise, pilgrims had begun making their way to Kōyasan already in
the late tenth century. However, the decisive event to make Kōyasan a major pilgrimage site was Emperor
Shirakawa’s, 白河天皇, visit in 1088. Shirakawa, the 72nd emperor in Japanese history, 1053–1129, (reigned
from 1073 to 1087) was the ﬁrst emperor to retire to a monastery. But, even during his reign, he was known to

CONTACT Gabor Lukacs
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.

gabor.kaitaishinsho2010@hotmail.com

© 2018 British Cartographic Society

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

5

have visited Shintō shrines and Buddhist temples at Mount Hiei. The medieval epic, Heike Monogatari, 平家物語,6
compiled long before 1330 about the struggle between the Taira, 平, and Minamoto, 源, clans for the control of
Japan at the end of the twelfth century, related that retired Emperor Shirakawa expressed the desire to embark
on his ultimate religious pilgrimage to India, the land where Buddha had preached. His adviser said to the emperor:

Your Majesty might undertake a less hazardous, but equally exalted destination. You may ﬁnd the incarnation of the
Great Sun Buddha on Mount Kōya, here in our country. Shãkamuni in India and Kōbō Daishi in Japan both
attained Buddhahood while still alive. Kōbō Daishi’s virtue gave light to darkness that had long ruled the world.
Even after his death he continues to sustain his ﬂesh on Kōyasan in wait for the appearance of the Buddha of the future
With a glittering retinue of nobles and courtiers, the emperor journeyed southward from Kyōto to Mount Kōya.
Near the mountain’s summit, he puriﬁed himself in the water of the Tamagawa river, 玉川, that ﬂows near Kōbō
Daishi’s tomb. He knelt at the door of the burial chamber and prayed to the still living saint. Upon returning to the
capital the ex-emperor donated funds for rebuilding the earlier devastated structures.7 The retired emperor’s
climbing the mountain was illustrated in the book of Kiinokuni Meishozue, 紀伊の国名所図絵,8 published in
the late Edo Period, 1603–1868, as well as in Kinoshita’s book.9

During the past centuries, many pilgrims travelled to Shikoku Island, Kōbō Daishi’s birthplace, to visit the
island’s 88 temples.10 This pilgrimage is also associated with the founder of Kōyasan who is believed to have
visited the sites of all those temples in person. Therefore, the pilgrims considered following in his footsteps and
the journey is made in the spiritual company of the saint. The Shikoku pilgrims were widely expected to pay a
visit to Kōyasan as well. Lying across the Inland Sea from Shikoku, Kōyasan could not be easily reached from
there until modern times. During the Edo Period, the movement of the ordinary people was strictly regulated.
Pilgrims were required to obtain travel permits, but those restrictions did not prevent hundreds of thousands of
people from travelling to Wakayama and climb the mountain. The restriction against women entering the
mountain was lifted as late as 1873. The Kōyasan stone marker path remains nowadays in very good condition
over a distance of 24 km. The path connects Jison-In temple, 慈尊院, in the town of Kudoyama at the foot and
north of the Kōya area to the mausoleum of Kōbō Daishi in the mountain.

Over the long history of Mount Kōya, more than 2000 temples once stood here in their grandeur. However, in
view of the frequent ﬁres and the destruction, relocation and reconstruction of many temples and the loss of written
records, the precise history of the evolution of the site appear practically an impossible task. For example, the
present building of the Kondō, 金堂, the central hall for religious ceremonies, completed in 1932, represents
the seventh reconstruction of the original. A census made in our time lists only 117 existing temples in Kōyasan.11
The Main Structures of the Kōyasan site12 (since they are described and extensively illustrated in a number of
books, only the names are given here in order to locate them on the various old maps of Kōyasan, the subject of our
paper). The Daimon, 大門, or the impressive 25.8 m high wooden Great Gate was originally the main entrance to
the mountain. The Garan, 伽藍, or Central Monastic Complex, marks the location of the ﬁrst buildings constructed
at Kōyasan. This extensive compound includes the following structures: (a) Daitō, 大塔, or Great Pagoda standing
48.5 m tall; (b) Kondō, 金堂, where Kōbō Daishi originally gave religious talks; (c) the western and eastern pagodas,
西塔 and 東塔; (d) a shrine for Myōjin, 明神, the local mountain deity; (e) Miedō, 影堂, the original residence of
Kōbō Daishi; (f) Junteidō, 准胝堂, the portrait hall; (g) Kujakudō, 孔雀堂, built in 1200 at the request of Emperor
Gotoba in return for the success of prayers oﬀered for rain by monks of the mountain13; (h) Sammaidō, 三昧堂, the
site of the oldest existing pagoda with a total height of 14.9 m; (i) Aizendō, 愛染堂, built in 1334, the main deity
enshrined holds a bow as if to shoot at the sky; (j) Daiedō, 大会堂; (k) Fudōdō, 不動堂, built in 1198; (l) the Bell
Tower, 大塔の鐘 and (m) the Hexagonal Scripture Storehouse, 六角経蔵. The Okunoin cemetery, 奧之院, is also
part of the main structures of Kōyasan.

The earliest surviving complete map of Kōyasan

The monumental colour-painted map on paper, (Figure 1) 353.7 × 152.0 cm, has been acquired only a few years
ago at an auction by Kōyasan University Library. It is in an excellent state of conservation, not signed, without
scale, but dated on its reverse side: 正保二年, (2nd year of the Shōhō Period, 1645), called hereafter ‘the Shōhō
map’. For this investigation, the library specially prepared a reduced size coloured photograph of the whole
map, 130 × 54 cm. A digital image of about 85% of the authentic map is also available on the internet: see, 高野
山之古絵図, Kōyasan no Koezu. A little section of the northern and western parts of the huge map, the
illustration of the Kinokawa river, 紀の川, (named 紀伊川 on the map as ﬂowing through the Kii Peninsula)
the Jizon-In temple, 慈尊院, and many inscriptions on the edge of the map are missing from the digital image.
Old maps in general and particularly that of Kōyasan are of considerable historical importance providing precise
information about the site and its evolution during the past centuries. The Shōhō map illustrates for the ﬁrst time in

6

G LUKACS

Figure 1. The earliest surviving map of Kōyasan, artist unknown, 353.7 cm × 152.0 cm, dated 正保二年, (2nd year of the Shōhō Period, 1645), courtesy of
Kōyasan University Library, Kōyasan, Wakayama, Japan.

great detail the location of the existing temples of the time, the names of the villages supplying food to the monks,
roads for access to the mountain, the distant Kinokawa river and Jizon-In temple, principal starting point to the
mountain for pilgrims. These features led Kōyasan University Library to invest a large amount of its budget to
acquire the map.

While from west to east the map in Figure 1 is rather accurate, illustrating an area corresponding to a distance of
about 5.6 km, 1 km = ca. 60 cm, in the south–north direction the map is inaccurate. This is due to its author’s desire
to also portray in the northern part of the map both the Kinokawa river and the Jizon-In temple. The Kinokawa
river is actually much farther north than shown on the map. Our statement is also substantiated by two
independent inscriptions on the map. Close to the northern edge of the map the names of two villages as well
as distances from them to Kōyasan are given: ‘九度村, 是ヨリ高野迄三里九町; from Kudomura to Kōya (the
distance) is 3 Ri and 9 Chō”, (ca. 12.9 km)14; and “三谷村, 是ヨリ高野迄四里廾町; from Mitanimura to Kōya
(the distance) is 4 Ri and 20 Chō” (ca. 16.2 km).

Main roads and access to Kōyasan from Jizon-In temple are illustrated with thick and smaller paths with thin
red lines. Shallow mountains and rolling hills with summits both north- and southward are illustrated in light or
dark grey. Except for a very few, temples are shown only with their names in Chinese ink rather than drawn in their
actual forms. Despite its over-reliance on inscription, the map is detailed in content and provides useful data for the
study of Mount Kōya. Village names around Kōyasan are within curves of varying size. A few very important spots,
such as the Kōyasan Great Gate, the Great Pagoda, Kōbō Daishi’s Mausoleum are schematically portrayed with
dark brownish roofs. The Kinokawa river, parallel with the map’s northern edge, actually much farther from
Kōyasan than shown on the authentic map, is illustrated in light yellow colour. From the much smaller sacred
Tamagawa or Jewel river, 玉川, only a short section is portrayed as ﬂowing under the Gobyōbashi bridge, 御廟
橋, in the Okunoin cemetery. The three mountains close to the Okunoin cemetery are named on the map:
north-east side, 摩尼山, Manizan, symbolizing Buddha’’s compassion, 1004 m; north-side, 揚柳山, Yōryūsan,
Willow Mountain, 877 m; north-west side, 傅軸山, Fujikusan, (nowadays called 転軸山, Tenjikusan after the
world’s cosmic central mountain, Mount Sumeru in northern India) 915 m. Based on the illustrations,
Yōryūsan appears to be the highest among them. Buddhist images enshrined on the summit of the three
mountains are also marked on the map: on Manizan the jewel-holding Nyoirin Kannon, on Yōryūsan the
Yōryū Kannon and on Tenjikusan the Buddha of the future, Miroku Bosatsu.15 Regretfully, the monumental
size of the map prevents an appreciation of its details on our illustration of Figure 1. As we will see later, the
Shōhō map had but a little inﬂuence on later maps of Kōyasan in terms of drawing methods, structure and style.
It is well known that by the middle of the seventeenth century more than two thousands tombs were already
present in the Okunoin cemetery.16 However, this historical fact is not reﬂected on the Shōhō map. In contrast
to the hundreds of temple names, the map illustrates only a small number of tombstones. The map also fails to
convey the majestic beauty, the secluded and serene atmosphere of the two-kilometre-long cemetery with its
huge cedar trees. From the Ichinohashi bridge, 一の橋, the starting point of the cemetery, on the way to the
intermediate bridge Nakanohashi, 中の橋, and further on to the Gobyōbashi, 御廟橋, the bridge leading to
Kōbō Daishi’s Mausoleum, the map portrays fewer than 30 tombstones or statues, some with a kind of small
roof. We made an attempt to decipher the names they bear and give here those that could be identiﬁed (from
west to east): 愛宕, Atago tomb; 天野, Amano tomb; 竹生嶋, Take Seishima tomb (?); 住吉, Sumiyoshi tomb;
八幡 Yahata tomb; 春日, Kasuga tomb; 伊勢, Ise tomb; 足蔵地蔵, Ashikura statue; 粉川, Kogawa tomb; 八祖,

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

7

Hasso tomb; 法然, Hōnen tomb17; 清水, Shimizu tomb. They are followed by a Buddhist rite of cedar-stick burning
place called Gomadō, 護摩堂, and by another place for oﬀerings, 御供所, Gokyōsho.

Kōbō Daishi’s Mausoleum is located at the highest spot of the cemetery. After crossing the Gobyōbashi bridge, the
map shows the Mirokuishi, 弥勒石 or Bodhisattva Stone (see endnote 15) and then the Tōrōdō, 燈籠堂, or “hall of
lamps’. This has more than 10,000 lanterns donated by worshippers and is kept eternally lit. Passing the lantern hall,
on its west-side is portrayed the Kotsudō, 骨堂, accumulating the deposited ashes and on its east-side, the map locates
two small buildings probably holding sacred scriptures and another one which might be a well.

Within the precinct of the mausoleum and on its east-side, the map shows two small Shintō shrines, 両大神社.
A huge forest of 1000 year old cedar trees confers upon an air of sublimity to the mausoleum. There is no end to the
worshippers who pray there.

Inscriptions on the Shōhō map

The map contains ﬁve types of inscriptions:18 (A) topographical texts giving the names of exactly seventy villages in
the surroundings of Kōyasan; (B) the names of the ten valleys within the site of Kōyasan; (C) names of hundreds of
temples of Kōyasan; (D) distances from speciﬁc areas within the map to villages, cities and various places more or
less distant from Kōyasan. Texts (D) are shown on the map in cursive writing style or ‘kuzushiji, 崩し字’,
frequently used in Japan during the Edo Period. (E) tombstone names in the Okunoin cemetery described as
above. Interestingly, historical explanatory notes about such and such a temple, typical of Chinese regional
maps,19 are absent from the map.

Names of the villages in the surroundings of Kōyasan

As a result of the uniﬁcation of several neighbouring villages since the middle of the seventeenth century, some of
the names shown on the Shōhō map cannot be found any longer on modern maps. Occasionally the following
terms are also found on the map next to some villages: 湯屋, (public bath) and 下馬, (horse block). In order to
convey to the reader a better idea of the beauty and importance of the Okunoin cemetery, where the
tombstones of many of the most illustrious persons of Japanese history are honoured, an image of part of the
cemetery from a later painted map of Mount Kōya is reproduced (Figure 2).

Names of the temples of Kōyasan

The map in Figures 1 and 2 is the earliest surviving map of the site of Kōyasan. Its unknown author must have been
an ambitious, highly educated monk living in one of the temples. In spite of the huge size of the map, the very high
number of temples allowed him only the schematic illustration of very few (Figures 1 and 3). Although he was
highly familiar with the site, he had great diﬃculty in accurately naming many temples. Hundreds of temples
are shown on the map with their names only. In many instances, we can ﬁnd only the following terms on the
map: 寺有, (there is a temple here), or 小坊有, (there is a small temple here), without naming the temples
themselves. The author does not tell us anything about whether the temple was inhabited, in good condition,
restored, reconstructed or perhaps in a state of ruin at the time of the drawing of the map. Owing to lightning,
earthquakes, typhoons and wars, Japanese Buddhist mountain temples were especially prone to devastation
during the past centuries. In winter, when primitive stoves were blazing in some temples and in summer when
the heat made wood tinder-dry a spark could create a catastrophe. Caught by the wind, ﬂames leaped from one
roof to the next reducing neighbouring temples to ashes. Conﬂagrations, devastating some of the magniﬁcent
wooden structures of Kōyasan have been recorded over the centuries. The most extensive conﬂagration in
Kōyasan’s history occurred in 1521, resulting in the loss of the Daitō, the spiritual heart of the site, as well as
the destruction of many of the most magniﬁcent buildings. The reconstructed Daitō was again the prey of blaze
in 1630. It is not diﬃcult to imagine how the site may have looked, with many very old temples probably in
ruin, at the time the drawing of the map was undertaken. Therefore, the temples portrayed on the map should
not reﬂect the actual situation in the middle of the seventeenth century.

Originally the Kongōbuji temple, 金剛峰寺, referred to the entire monastic community on top of Kōyasan.
Nowadays, Kongōbuji is the head temple of Kōyasan Shingon Buddhism resulting from the 1869 uniﬁcation of
two temples Kozanji, 興山寺, and Seiganji, 青巌寺. Seiganji temple was ﬁrst built in 1593 by Toyotomi
Hideyoshi, 豊臣秀吉, 1537–1598, one of the three so called ‘uniﬁers of Japan’. The map shows the temple
name Seiganji or Blue Rock Temple rather than Kongōbuji temple.

The question arises as to the source of the Shōhō map’s artist-author monk. While there were many provincial
and urban maps during the Tokugawa period,20 there were only a few maps about speciﬁc locations of pilgrimage

8

G LUKACS

Figure 2. The Okunoin cemetery with the Lantern Hall, the Columbarium, small buildings for the preservation of sacred scriptures, the Kōbō Daishi
Mausoleum, two small Shintō shrines and many tombs; detail from a unique highly artistic map of Mount Kōya, dated 寛政5年, 5th year of the Kansei
Period, 1793, reproduced in Hinonishi’s book,62 courtesy of Kōyasan University Library.

sites such as Mount Kōya.21 Was the monk inﬂuenced by them or by maps of Chinese pilgrimage sites? Based on
what follows, it is not possible to establish any relationship between the Shōhō map and any other temple or
provincial map of the time. The Imperial Court of Emperor Kōtoku, 孝徳天皇, ca. 597–654, put into execution

Figure 3. The North-Eastern part of the 1645 map of Kōyasan, shown in Figure 1, illustrating in the Okunoin cemetery the Lantern Hall, the Columbarium,
small buildings for the preservation of holy scriptures, the Kōbō Daishi Mausoleum, two small Shintō shrines, the three mountains Manizan, Yōryūsan and
Tenjikusan surrounding the mausoleum and the road leading to the mausoleum.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

9

a special land system and ordered each province to submit maps of their land holdings. This was considered the
ﬁrst attempt in Japan to draw accurate as opposed to representational landscape in picture maps. About a 1000 year
later, in 1644, the ﬁrst compilation of provincial maps of 1605 by the Tokugawa government was amended,
resulting in the series of maps called Shōhō kuni-ezu, 正保国絵図, provincial maps of the Shōhō Period. Basic
elements included the illustration of villages and their rice productivity. Topographic features were scrupulously
drawn from a bird’s-eye view. Natural features, as well as man-made works, were represented together with a
detailed description of rice-ﬁelds. The production of such maps was fuelled by government requirement to
assess lands for tax collection. At that time, units of measurements were not uniform across Japan, so that the
scale varied from map to map. These maps, submitted to the shōgun, were made in duplicate copies for
safekeeping in the libraries of the feudal lords. They were made simply in black ink, only occasionally using two
or three colours.22 They were too broad in width and impractical, but served as symbols of government control.
Since they were often viewed on the ﬂoor while the viewers sat around the map in a circle, many maps did not
have a uniﬁed orientation scheme.23

Japanese maps related to pilgrimage sites

Before the early Edo Period, only very few maps devoted to pilgrimage sites were drawn. Many itinerary maps,
illustrating the location of the 88 temples along the Shikoku pilgrimage were available. (See endnote 10.)24
they were inartistic route maps, rather than concentrating on one speciﬁc site and none is
However,
comparable in scope with the Shōhō map or later maps of the Kōya Mountain maps portrayed in this article.

Mount Hiei (Hieizan, 比叡山) is Kyōto’s most famous, most sacred, and second tallest, mountain (848 m) with
the eighth century founded Enryaku-ji temple, 延暦寺, on its summit. Only simple ascending and descending
route maps were at the pilgrims’ disposal without details about the temple complex. A map of Mount Murō, 室
生山, at about 25 km south-east of Nara, ink on paper, 30.9 × 34.0 cm, where the eighth century founded
Murōji temple is located, was available showing both a Mausoleum for the famous monk Shūen, 修圓, ca. 769–
835, main quarters of the monk and Kadomori Gongen, かどもり権現, fourteenth century.25

A ﬁne colour-painted map, drawn in 1331, about the Gion Shintō shrine (祇園神社), Kyōto, 167.0 × 107.5 cm,
was available. The shrine includes several buildings, including gates, a main hall and a stage. Emphasis on the
from a head-on
painting was placed on the buildings, which for the most part were two-dimensional
perspective. The map was oriented so as to be viewed from two directions.26 The same map, black and white,
was also shown by Fowler illustrating a late nineteenth-century small copperplate print in which the Gion
shrine appeared very diﬀerent from its much earlier picture.27 The early seventeenth-century image of Nachi
Sankei Mandara, 那智参詣曼荼羅, Wakayama prefecture, depicts the buildings in colourful settings,
ink,
colours and gold leaf on paper, mounted as a hanging scroll, 150.4 × 152.0 cm.28 The Ōsaka City Museum
preserves a pair of seventeenth-century made scrolls, known as the Kōyasan Shaji Sankei Mandara, 高野山社寺
参詣曼荼羅.29

Chinese maps related to pilgrimage sites

As shown below by a few examples, Chinese monks and artists began artistically illustrating the maps of their
sacred Buddhist mountains more than 1000 years ago. Most of those maps conform to the six principles of the
Western-Jin Dynasty cartographer Pei Xiu, 裴秀, 224–271. For a discussion of
the ‘six principles’ of
cartography of Pei Xiu, see Cordell D. K. Yee.30 Pei Xiu stressed that his six principles form a coherent whole.
Failure to observe one vitiates the quality of the map, no matter how scrupulously a cartographer had adhered
to the others. According to the ‘ﬁrst principle’, if a map is made without a proportional measure, it will not
distinguish between what is far and near. The second principle is related to directional orientation, preserving
the relative position of the portrayed items. According to Unno Kazutaka,31 the history of the Jin Dynasty, and
thus the ‘six principles’ of Pei Xiu, were available in Japan as early as the Heian Period, 794–1185, and they
were known to Japanese scholars. Since the Shōhō map does not conform to either the ﬁrst or the second
principle of Pei Xiu, no clear, obvious Chinese impact can be detected on its drawing method.

A coloured map, exquisitely painted during the Five Dynasties, 907–960, portrays a panoramic view of Mount
Wutai, 五台山, Shanxi, Northern China as a Buddhist shrine, size 460 × 1.300 cm.32 Two roads were drawn leading
to the mountain. Rivers drawn with double lines and peaks, temples, towns, villages were sketched using a method
that creates a three-dimensional eﬀect. Pilgrims and travellers depicted on the map add to the religious atmosphere
of the shrine. More than 100 inscriptions scattered over the picture cast light on the name of the buildings and
places.

10

G LUKACS

The rubbing of stone maps from the sacred mountains of China was also made. A Stone Map of Hua Shan, 华山,
Shaanxi, North-Western China, 1585, was made as an aid to visitors of the sacred mountain. The upper portion
contains a prayer to the god of the mountain.33 A Stone Map of Hua Shan, 1700, was made to commemorate a
Qing oﬃcial’s climb up the mountain.34 In the rubbing of a Stone Map of Tai Shan, 泰山, Shandong Province,
probably Qing Dynasty, the mountain and buildings are presented in elevation, while temple grounds and walls
are presented in plan, creating a multiplicity of ground planes. In addition to the variable perspective, the map
makes use of variable scale: the temple complex at the foot of the mountain is disproportionately large,
apparently to permit the buildings within it to be represented.35 A huge wall map (Figure 4) entitled 高野山壇
上寺中絵図, Illustration of the Platform of Kōyasan Temples, called hereafter the Genroku map, preserved in
the Hōju-In Temple, 宝寿院, Kōyasan, was exhibited in late 2015 at the Reihōkan Museum of Mont Kōya.

In contrast to the Shōhō map, the Genroku map has a great artistic appeal creating three-dimensional eﬀects.
Man-made structures are well represented. Although the Genroku map beautifully illustrates the western and the
central part of Kōyasan, the Okunoin cemetery is absent from the map. In Figure 5, a detail from the Genroku map
around the Great Pagoda and the Kondō, where the principal religious ceremonies are held, several smaller temples
and buildings, as well as the eastern pagoda, are ﬁnely portrayed in their actual form.

Printing Buddhist texts by the mountain monasteries is well documented and even bookshops were reported in
Kōyasan in the fourteenth century, presumably selling Shingon texts.36 However, life on the mountain was not only
devoted to teaching, religious and cultural activities. At the exhibition room of the museum, the map was
accompanied by an explanatory text that I reproduce here and provide its English translation. Although the
source of this text due to the research of a former keeper of the museum is unknown at present time, the text is
important since it clearly indicates the rivalry between diﬀerent groups of monks on the mountain:

元禄六年（一六九三）七月に作製された高野山の絵図である。前年に起こった「元禄聖裁」によっ
て高野山上の寺院配置が激変する、その直前に作成された絵図である。「元禄聖裁」とは、学侶方、
行人方の争いを幕府が裁定を下した事件である。これにより、約一四〇〇軒あった行人方の坊数が一
気に二〇〇軒ほどになった。また、空いた敷地に学侶方の寺院が移転することになった。そのため、
本図は現在の寺院配置になる以前の配置がわかる。

Translation of the above text: This map about Kōyasan was made during the 6th year of the 7th month of the
Genroku Period (1688–1704). It was made only one year after the ‘Genroku Seisai’, (元禄聖裁, wise judgement of
the Tokugawa government during the Genroku Period), but the map portrays the situation before the ‘Genroku
Seisai’. The incident dramatically changed the layout of the temples in Kōyasan. The ﬁght between the Gakuryo
group (学侶方)37 and the Gyōnin group (行人方)38 (went too far).

Therefore, a decisive judgement was made regarding that case by the Shōgunate (Edo government). As a
consequence of this settlement, the number of monks of the Gyōnin group dropped sharply from 1400 to 200.
Furthermore, (monks) from temples of the Gakuryo group moved to the land liberated (by the Gyōnin group).
Therefore, in this map, the spectator can see the layout of the temples before the incident.39

Figure 4. Illustration of the Platform of Kōyasan Temples; artist unknown, painted on silk, 340.0 cm × 183.0 cm, dated 元禄六年, (6th year of the Genroku
Period, 1693), Hōju-In Temple, Kōyasan, courtesy of the Reihōkan Museum.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

11

Figure 5. Detail from Figure 4, the Genroku map, with the Great Pagoda and the Kondō at its centre.

The ﬁrst printed map of Kōyasan

The eastward-oriented uncoloured printed map on paper is unsigned. It is dated 享保17年, year of the Rat, 1732,
45.5 × 73.3 cm, without scale, entitled 高野山之圖, Kōyasan no Zu, Map of Kōyasan (Figure 6).40 In its south-
western corner, there is an explanatory text in ‘kuzushiji’ indicating roads allowing access to Kōyasan, analysed
and translated here into English. Most other handwritten names on the map, also in kuzushiji, are unreadable,
however, based on the study of the above-described maps and being familiar both with the site and now with
the detailed content of the Shōhō and Genroku maps, it was possible to guess the unreadable temple, building,
village and valley names. The Great Gate, the Intermediate Gate, the Great Pagoda, the Tōrōdō, Kōbō Daishi’s
Mausoleum, and so on, are ﬁnely illustrated. Mountains are shown with their eastward-oriented summits. The
eastward presentation procedure allowed its author to place on top of the map the Okunoin cemetery. The
map, showing the Kinokawa river and Jison-In temple on the map’s western edge, is inaccurate. The river and
the temple are actually north rather than west of Kōyasan. As on the Shōhō map, between the Ichinohashi and
the Gobyōbashi bridges only about 30 schematically illustrated tombstones are portrayed. This printed map,
intended for substantial circulation, was made with a commercial motive. It was probably drawn by an
unidentiﬁed monk with deﬁnite artistic talent.

The kuzushiji text in the south-west corner of the map is expressed here in contemporary Japanese:
学文路より、神や、高野山奥の院への道筋、また、小田原より、ろく路峠へ向かう。花折坂上てよ
り、嶽弁財天大門よりろく路峠、それより大滝の道筋　大門より西口矢立より天野但慈尊院 への道
筋。享保十七子年天正月吉日。　

English translation of the above-shown text: (The road) starting from Kamuro, (学文路) goes through Kamiya
(神や) to Kōyasan Okunoin.41 From Odawara, it also goes to Rokuro – Tōge (ろく路峠). (The road) starting from
the higher place of Hanaori-zaka (花折坂) goes to Dakeno-benzaiten (嶽弁財天) and to the Great Gate.42 Then it
goes to the Great Fall (大滝).43 (The road) starting from the Large Gate goes westward and takes you to Yadate (矢
立) and Amano (天野).44 It also goes to Jison-In (Temple).

The seventeenth year of the Kyōhō Period, year of the Rat, (1732), the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst month, an auspicious

day.

12

G LUKACS

Figure 6. The ﬁrst printed map of Kōyasan, entitled 高野山之圖, Kōyasan no Zu, 45.5 cm × 73.3 cm, artist and publisher unknown, dated 享保17年, (17th
year of the Kyōhō Period, 1732), Inoue Collection, Japan, courtesy of Mr Tarui Toshinari, Ōsaka.

With the development of printing in the second part of the Edo Period and as travelling became easier, many
small size panoramic views rather than real maps and detailed description of temples became available to pilgrims.
Thus, during the late 1780s, the scholar Akisato Ritō, 秋里籬島, active 1776–1830, initiated the publication of a
series of books about the famous sites of Japan, called Meisho Zue, 名所図絵.45 Those books helped the
pilgrims to get a unique sense of the temples’ grandeur triggering in them a desire for a higher level of pictorial
veracity in images of famous places.

For example, the complex of over 40 buildings of the Miidera Temple, 三井寺, is located at the foot of Mt. Hiei.
The panoramic view and the labelling of the temple’s important buildings were portrayed in the book entitled
Tōkaidō Meisho Zue, 東海道名所図会, Illustrations of the Famous Sites on the Tōkaidō.46 Ukiyoe artists also
had great commercial success with print series of temples and shrines.47

Since pilgrims required easy access to Kōyasan maps, for the ﬁrst time a professional artist, Tachibana Kuniō, 橘
国雄, active ca. 1752–1785, was asked to draw a new large map of Mount Kōya. That map, dated 天明4年, 4th year
of the Tenmei Period, 1784, 540 × 1.205 cm, called hereafter the Tenmei map, is nowadays very rare. However, one

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

13

copy (Figure 7) is available at Leiden University Library.48 A few decades later, Tachibana Yasuharu, 橘保春, ca.
1750–1816, probably the son of Kuniō, drew a much larger map of Mount Kōya, 885 × 1.690 cm, dated 文化10年,
the 10th year of the Bunka Period, 1813, called hereafter the Bunka map (Figure 8) of which several hand-coloured
and uncoloured copies survived. The Tenmei and the Bunka maps are of very similar content and both are woodcut
prints, without scale. The Okunoin cemetery is shown with hundreds of tombstones and in a diﬀerent layout
compared to earlier maps.

The next map of Kōyasan, made by Okada Shuntōsai, 岡田春燈斎, (active 1832–1861) (Figure 9), called
hereafter the Ansei-map,49 was the ﬁrst map of the sacred mountain printed with the copper engraving
technique introduced from the West.50 In the middle of the eighteenth century the Kyōto artist Matsumoto
Yasuoki, 松本保居, 1786–1867, founder of the Gengendō school, 玄々堂,51 popularized images of temples and
shrines, published as very small copperplate prints. Artists of the school used a western style technique
emphasizing spatial recession.52 Many perspective pictures, inspired by western methods were made by the
Gengendō artists, associated more with an exaggerated sense of space rather than with scientiﬁc reality.53
including
in new modes of viewing,
Interest
various types of optical devices aimed at enhancing
depth
became
fashionable.54 A major change in etchings was
introduced in the 1880s consisting of illustrating in
the eye level which became much lower and tended
to abandon the bird’s-eye view.55 Okada Shuntōsai,
a proliﬁc copperplate artist56 also studied under
Matsumoto. Unlike many other etchers, Shuntōsai
seems to have travelled to diﬀerent parts of Japan
to make sketches and incorporate these into his
etchings. The Mount Kōya map, here presented
(Figure 9)57
journey to Ki
Province,
of modern
Wakayama Prefecture.

(Kishū, 紀州),

two-dimensional

from his

pictures,

results

part

in

The latest map of Kōyasan (Figure 10) was the
ﬁrst map of the sacred mountain, made after the
Meiji Restoration of 1868. It was printed with the
copper engraving technique by the little known
Izumi Rakuzan, 泉擽山.58 The large size of Figure
10, called hereafter
the Meiji map, 70.0 cm ×
41.0 cm, contrasts with the intimacy that the hand-
sized Gengendō school prints achieved. The outlay
of the map, dated 明治17年, the 17th year of the
Meiji Period,
strongly
inﬂuenced by the Bunka map as well as by western
illustration methods. The editor and the engraver
of the map must have been advised by some Dutch
or German specialists living in Japan during those
days.

appears

to be

1884,

A Chinese zodiac with the characters of the 12
animals and the four directions embellish the map.
Its central part, portraying the mountain itself
measures only 44.5 × 31.5 cm. The central part of
the map is surrounded by 14 diﬀerent pictures,
each of 11.0 × 8.0 cm, showing a large picture of
one of the structures of the sacred mountain. This
illustrating method recalls the most famous Dutch
cartographers of
the seventeenth century. The
structures thus portrayed are as follows ((a) left
column from top to bottom): 護摩堂, Gomadō,
Buddhist rite of cedar-stick burning place in the
Okunoin; 奧行大師堂, Okuyuki Taishidō; 水手向,
Mizutemuke, Water-covered Jizō Figures59; 汗かき

Figure 7. Eastward-oriented woodcut printed map of Kōyasan, artist 橘国
雄, Tachibana Kuniō, entitled 紀州高野山金剛峰寺細見絵圖, Kishū
Kōyasan Kongōbuji Saiken Zu, Reengraved Map of Kōyasan Kongōbuji in
Kishū (Province), 540 × 1.205 cm, dated 天明4年, (the fourth year of the
Tenmei Period, 1784), published by Shiki Ribei, Ōsaka and three other
editors; courtesy of the Leiden University Library, The Netherlands.

14

G LUKACS

Figure 8. Woodcut printed map of Kōyasan, artist 橘保春, Tachibana Yasuharu, entitled 高野山細見絵図, Kōyasan Saiken Ezu, Reengraved Map of
Kōyasan, 885 cm × 1.690 cm, dated 文化10年, (the 10th year of the Bunka Period, 1813), published by Okuya Matabei, Ōsaka and three other editors;
courtesy of Mr Tarui Toshinari, Ōsaka.

地蔵并姿見の弁, Asekaki Jizō Awase Sugata Mi no Ben; ((b) from left to right in horizontal direction): 中の橋,
Nakanohashi; 苅萱堂, Karukayadō; 一の橋, Ichinohashi; 六時鐘, Rokujishō, the Six O’clock Bell, located east of
the eastern pagoda; 善女龍王, Zennyo Ryūō; 塗橋, Nuribashi, located at the beginning of the Odawaradani; ((c)
right column from bottom to top): 女人堂, Nyonindō, there are many such Women’s Temples; 西塔, Saitō, located
north of the Kondō; 孔蕉堂, Kōshōdō, located west of the Kondō; 五鈷杉, Gokosugi.

Although the above-described 14 pictures are ﬁnely portrayed, they do not correspond to the main structures of
Mount Kōya. Their separate illustration was aimed at showing those smaller buildings, bridges, prayer places that
the map’s small size was unable to emphasize. Lack of space, unfortunately, prevents here their individual

Figure 9. View of Mount Kōya in Ki Province, 紀州高野山之図, etching by Okada Shuntōsai, 岡田春燈斎, 8.7 cm × 14.3 cm; courtesy of the National
Library of Scotland, Edinburgh.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

15

Figure 10. Copperplate printed map of Kōyasan, entitled 高野山一覧全圖, Kōyasan Ichiran Zenzu, 71.0 cm × 41.0 cm, dated 明治17年, (the seventeenth
year of the Meiji Period), 1884, engraved by Izumi Rakuzan, 泉擽山, published by Miyazaki Matsukichi and Okada Jinpei, Tōkyō, collection of the author.

representation. Their beauty can hardly be appreciated in Figure 10. On its margin, the price of the map is shown:
定價金二十銭, 20 Sen, which was one-ﬁfth of one Yen of the time.60

Conclusion

The drawing of the various maps portrayed in this article was aimed at facilitating the travel conditions for the ever-
increasing number of pilgrims visiting the sacred Buddhist Kōya Mountain. These maps result from the Japanese
people’s enduring fascination with the sacred site. This paper illustrates and analyses in great detail the earliest
extant map of Kōyasan, dated 正保二年, the 2nd year of the Shōhō Period, or 1645, as well as later maps of
the same site. Japanese scholars, cartographers and others were fascinated and considerably inﬂuenced by all
aspects of Chinese culture from the Tang Dynasty to the late nineteenth century. It is interesting to note in this
light that, as discussed above, the illustrated maps in this article do not respect the cartographic principles of
Pei Xiu. As a consequence, they do not show a clear, obvious Chinese impact. This observation is interesting
since most secular Japanese maps were strongly inﬂuenced by Chinese cartographic methods. A relationship
between the Shōhō map of Mount Kōya and the Japanese provincial maps of the same period could not be
demonstrated. Based on the various maps shown here, the readers of this work will appreciate the development
of Japanese temple cartography from the middle of the seventeenth century to the Meiji Restoration of the late
nineteenth century and the beginning of the Western inﬂuence on decorative copperplate Japanese map-making.61

Notes

1. Exhibition Catalogue (1988) Shingon, Die Kunst des Geheimen Buddhismus in Japan Museum für Ostasiatische Kunst
der Stadt Köln, Cologne; Abe, R. (1999) The Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist
Discourse New York: Columbia University Press; Shiba, R. (2003) Kūkai: The Universal Scenes from his life
New York: ICG Muse.

2. Nicoloﬀ, P.L. (2007) Sacred Kōyasan: A Pilgrimage to the Mountain Temple of Saint Kōbō Daishi and the Great Sun

Buddha New York: University of New York Press, pp.43–45.

3. Bogel, C.J. (2009) With a Single Glance, Buddhist Icons and Early Mikkyo Vision University of Washington Press, p.250.
(The term “Vajra Peak” derives from the Vajrasekhara Sūtra, in Japanese Kongōchō Kyō (金剛頂経), one of the
founding texts of the Japanese Buddhist Shingon school.)

4. Gardiner, D. (1992) Kōyasan, Japan, p.120, Head Temple Kongōbuji Printing Oﬃce of Kōyasan Shuppansha.
5. Abe, Ryūichi. (1999) op. cit., p.60.
6. Kitayama, H. and Tsuchida, B.T. (1975)(trans.) Heike Monogatari Tokyo: University of Tōkyō Press; Monogatari, H.

(1960) Nihon Koten Bungaku Taikei, vols. 32–33, Tōkyō: Iwanami Shoten.

7. Nicoloﬀ (2007) op. cit., p.xv.

16

G LUKACS

and Ueda Kōchō.

8. Takechi, S. (1812) Kiinokuni Meishozue, 紀伊の国名所図絵 (Famous Places in Kii Province), Ōsaka: Ono Hirotaka

9. Kinoshita, H. (2015) Kōyasan Chōsekidō Nyūmon, 高野山町石道入門, p.11, Tōkyō: Seluba.
10. Kouamé, N. (2001) Pélérinage et Société dans le Japon des Tokugawa: Le Pélérinage de Shikoku entre 1598 et 1868 Paris:

Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient; Pye, Michael. (2014) Japanese Buddhist Pilgrimage Sheﬃeld Equinox.

11. Oral communication by Kōyasan University Library.
12. Gardiner (1992) op. cit., p.26.
13. Gardiner (2002) op. cit., p.28.
14. Ri, 里 and Chō, 町, are distance units; 1 Ri = ca. 4 km; 1 Chō = 109.1 metres.
15. Inagaki, H. (1988) A Dictionary of Buddhist Terms Kyōto: Nagata Bunshodo.
16. Kinoshita, H. (2015) Kōyasan Okunoin no Sekitō Nyūmon, 高野山奥の院の石塔入門, p.27, Tōkyō: Seluba.
17. Hōnen, 1133–1212, was the reformer and founder of the ﬁrst independent branch of Japanese Pure Land Buddhism,

called Jōdo-shū, 浄土宗; his tombstone is illustrated in Kinoshita (2015) op. cit., p.38.

18. I have identiﬁed the names of all the villages, the ten valleys within the site of Kōyasan, most of the small temples of mid-
seventeenth century Kōyasan and studied in detail all the 12 ‘kuzushiji’ inscriptions on the Shōhō map about the nature
of the roads within the site whether available for horses or pedestrians only. Since those details might be of great interest
to Japanese cartography specialists, but of lesser interest to our readers, I will not reproduce them in this article.
However, upon request, I will be delighted to provide them to any interested reader.

19. Cao, Wanru, Zheng, Xihuang, Huang, Shengzhang. (1994) An Atlas of Ancient Maps of China Beijing: Cultural Relics
Publishing House; Chinese Academy of Surveying and Mapping. (1998) China in Ancient and Modern Maps London:
Sotheby’s; Yee, Cordell D.K. (2015) “Maps and Map-Making in China and Korea” In Parmentier, J. (Ed.) The World in a
Mirror. World Maps from the Middle Ages to the Present Day Kontich, Antwerp: BAI/MAS, pp.100–107.

20. Unno, K. (1994) ““Cartography in Japan” In Harley, J.B. and Woodward, D. (Eds) The History of Cartography (Volume
2) Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.346-477; Catalogue of the Kōbe City Museum. (2000); Yonemoto, M. (2003)
Mapping Early Modern Japan: Space, Place and Culture in the Tokugawa Period Berkeley: University of California Press;
Berry, M.E. (2006) Japan in Print: Information and Nation in the Early Modern Period University of Southern California
Press; Wigen, K., Sugimoto, F. and Karakas, C. (Eds) (2016) Cartographic Japan, A History in Maps Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

21. Fowler, S.D. (2008) “Views of Japanese Temples from Near and Far: Precinct Prints of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth

Centuries” Artibus Asiae 68 (2) pp.247–285.

22. Sugimoto, F. (2016)“Visualizing the Political World through Provincial Maps” pp.48–51, in Widen et al. (2016) op. cit.
23. Kawamura, H. (1987) Edo Bakufusen Kuniezu no Kenkyū, (Provincial Maps Compiled by the Tokugawa Shogunate in
Japan), Lecture presented at the 12th International Congress of the History of Cartography Paris, pp.1–7; Kawamura, H.
(1989) Edo Bakufusen Kuniezu no Kenkyū Tōkyō: Kokon Shoin.

24. Reader, I. (2005) Making Pilgrimages: Meaning and Practice in Shikoku Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
25. Fowler, S.D. (2005) Murōji: Rearranging Art and History of at a Japanese Buddhist Temple Honolulu: University of

Hawaii Press. Gongen (権現) means literally ‘incarnation’, it is believed to be the manifestation of a Buddha.

26. Harley, J.B. and Woodward, D. (Eds) (1994) The History of Cartography, vol.2, Plate 22. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press.

27. Fowler (2008) op. cit., p.250, ﬁgures 5 and 6.
28. Fowler (2008) op. cit., p.251, ﬁgure 7.
29. Kōyasan Shaji Sankei Mandara (1987) Ōsaka Shiritsu Hakubutsukan, n° 26, Tōkyō: Heibonsha.
30. Yee, C.D.K. (1994) “Taking the World’s Measure: Chinese Maps between Observation and Text” In Harley, J.B. and
Woodward, D. (Eds) The History of Cartography (Volume 2) Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, pp.110–113.

31. Unno (1994) op. cit., p.353.
32. Chinese Academy of Surveying and Mapping (1998) op. cit., p.40, No.20 and p.41, No.21.
33. Yee, C.D.K. (1994)“Reinterpreting Traditional Chinese Geographical Maps” In Harley, J.B. and Woodward D. (Eds),

The History of Cartography (Volume 2) p.66, Fig. 3.31.

34. Yee (1994) op. cit., p.67, Fig.3.32.
35. Yee, C.D.K. (1994)“Chinese Cartography among the Arts: Objectivity, Subjectivity, Representation” In Harley, J.B. and

Woodward, D. (Eds.) The History of Cartography (Volume 2) p.146, Fig.6.11.
36. Kornicki, P.F. (2001) The Book in Japan University of Hawai’i Press, p.170.
37. The Gakuryo was a speciﬁc group of monks giving lectures, producing doctrinal and ritual texts and participating in

debates.

38. The Gyōnin group of monks carried out various tasks for the livelihood of the temples.
39. The author would like to express his most sincere thanks to Piasu Junko and to Chammakhi Adel for their extraordinary
help during the conception, writing and practical preparation of this manuscript. Without their very generous
contribution, this paper would not have been completed. Piasu Junko helped to decipher many very intricate
Japanese texts and Chammakhi Adel provided his invaluable computer expertise for the illustration of the maps.
40. The author is pleased to thank Mr Tarui Toshinari, professional photographer, Ōsaka, for allowing us to study the

privately owned Kyōhō and Bunka maps.

41. The road from Kamuro, crossing Kamiya, was the former starting point to Kōyasan from Kyōto and Ōsaka.
42. As portrayed on earlier maps, the old Daimon (Great Gate) was built at a diﬀerent place when Kōyasan was founded. It
was a torii (shrine style gate) in Tsuzuraori valley, located more southward than its place nowadays. It was destroyed by
ﬁre and rebuilt in 1705, a few years before the present map was drawn. Dakeno-benzaiten is a small shrine on the top of
Benten-Dake (弁天岳) mountain on the north-side of the Great Gate.　

43. The large waterfall is located south of Kōyasan.

THE CARTOGRAPHIC JOURNAL

17

44. Yadate and Amano are unidentiﬁed place names.
45. Béranger, Véronique. (2002) Les Recueils Illustrés de Lieux Célèbres (meisho zue), Objets de Collection Ebisu, No.29,

pp.81–113.

46. Akisato, R. (1797) Tōkaidō Meisho Zue, 東海道名所図会, Illustrations of the Famous Sites on the Tōkaidō, Kobayashi

Shinbei, Edo. In the corrected modern edition (2002) pp.80–81, Gencho, Kyōto.

47. Fowler (2008) op. cit. p.254.
48. Kerlen, H. (1996) Catalogue of Pre-Meiji Japanese Books and Maps in Public Collections in the Netherlands, p. 410, no

960, J.C. Gieben, Amsterdam.

49. The undated map was probably etched during the last years of the Ansei Period, (November 1854–March 1860).
50. For the history of Japanese nineteenth-century etchings, see, Clark, J. (1994) “Japanese Nineteenth-Century Copperplate
Printes” British Museum Occassional Paper 84 pp.1-9; Tim Clark, London. John Clark investigated Japanese etchings
made in the period 1830–1860, preserved in four collections: (a) Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow; (b) National
Library of Scotland, Edinburgh; (c) British Museum, London and (d) Art Gallery of New South Wales, Australia.
51. The general Gengendō engraving technique was described in Nishimura’s book; see, Nishimura, Tei. (1982) Nihon

Dōbanga Shi Kyōto: Fujimori Shoten, pp.458–463.

52. Fowler (2008) op. cit., p. 273.
53. Screech, T. (1994) “The Meaning of Western Perspective in Edo Popular Culture” Archives of Asian Art 47 p.66.
54. Screech, T. (2002) The Lens Within the Heart: Western Scientiﬁc Gaze and Popular Imagery in Later Edo Japan

Richmond: Curzon Press, pp.94–132.

55. Clark (1994) op. cit., p.8.
56. Okada Shuntōsai, a Kyōto to etcher, was also a print seller. His full personal name was Gishichirō and he also used the
name Yoshifusa. Minamoto is found as a seal fairly commonly on Shuntōsai prints which may indicate his real name.
Clark (1994) op. cit., p.40.
57. Clark (1994) op. cit., Plate S-14.
58. According to the text within the map, its engraver (彫刻人) was 泉擽山, Izumi Rakuzan. However, the left part of the
second character of his name in the manuscript text was clearly written as ⺩ rather than 扌. In my Chinese and Japanese
dictionaries no Chinese character composed by ⺩ and 楽 is known. Therefore, I think that the mentioned character
might have been mistakenly written in the map and the correct character in the artist’s name was probably 擽.

59. Gardiner (1992) op. cit., p.60.
60. The new currency act of 1871 stipulated the adoption of the decimal accounting system with 1 Yen = 100 Sen, (100 銭).
See Anon. (n.d.) “History of the Japanese Yen” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_yen (Accessed 24th Auguest
2014); Piatt, A. (1904) “The End of the Mexican Dollar” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 18 (3) p.345.

61. The realization of our investigation was only made possible with the collaboration of Kōyasan University Library placing
at our disposal a specially prepared reduced size copy, 130.0 × 54.0 cm, of the Shōhō map. The reviewers deserve
recognition for graciously providing very helpful comments on various parts of this article.

62. Hinonishi, S. and collaborators. (1988) Kōyasan Koezu Shūsei, 高野山古絵図集成,(Collection of old maps of Kōyasan)
Ōsaka: Takarashashinseihan, pp.114–116; Hinonishi, S. and collaborators, (1988) Kōyasan Koezu Shūsei Kaisetsu
Sakuin, 高野山古絵図集成解説索引,
index) Ōsaka:
Takarashashinseihan, p.31.

of Kōyasan,

(Collection of

explanatory

old maps

Notes on contributor

Dr Gabor Lukacs is a retired scientist and Japanologist. He earned his PhD from Université de
Paris, Sorbonne in 1964. He is the author of about 160 scientiﬁc papers and four books about
Japanese medicine and cultural history: Kaitai Shinsho & Geka Sôden, HES & De GRAAF
Publishers, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2008; Extensive Marginalia in Old Japanese Medical
Books, Wayenborgh Publisher, Paraguay, 2010 (European and North American distributor:
Kugler Publications, Amsterdam, 2010, The Netherlands); Chinese Dermatology on a
Japanese Handscroll (with Dr Alain Briot), Wayenborgh Publisher, 2012; Hasshu Gafu, the
Japanese Edition of Bazhong Huapu, an Important Chinese Painting Manual (with Lauriane
in
Yiheng Luo), Wayenborgh Publisher, 2013. He has also published two papers
The Cartographic Journal (in 2014 and in 2016).

