The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Augmented Reality and Maps: New Possibilities for
Engaging with Geographic Data

Gabriel Henrique de Almeida Pereira, Kristin Stock, Luciene Stamato
Delazari & Jorge Antonio Silva Centeno

To cite this article: Gabriel Henrique de Almeida Pereira, Kristin Stock, Luciene Stamato
Delazari & Jorge Antonio Silva Centeno (2017) Augmented Reality and Maps: New Possibilities
for Engaging with Geographic Data, The Cartographic Journal, 54:4, 313-321, DOI:
10.1080/00087041.2017.1411417

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1411417

Published online: 19 Feb 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 54 No. 4
© The British Cartographic Society 2018

pp. 313–321

2017

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Augmented Reality and Maps: New Possibilities for
Engaging with Geographic Data

Gabriel Henrique de Almeida Pereira1, Kristin Stock2, Luciene Stamato Delazari1
and Jorge Antonio Silva Centeno1

1Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil. 2Massey University, Albany, New Zealand
Email: pereira.gha@hotmail.com

Among the systems that aim to help users to perform map reading tasks, augmented reality (AR) is one of the most promising.
However, the impact of this new technology in terms of acceptance, motivation and improvement of the learning process has still
not been sufficiently explored. This study aims to assess the contribution of an AR system for map reading and for improving
users’ understanding of geographic data. Landscape and census data from New Zealand were used to evaluate the
performance of an AR system in an experiment involving 60 participants. Differences in the participants’ backgrounds were
reflected in the way they completed the task for both printed maps and the AR system and 90% of the participants preferred to
work with the AR system rather than with traditional printed maps. Users that had previous experience of the geographical
dataset provided performed the task better using only the printed maps, while those without that experience performed better
with the AR system.

Keywords: geographical space; 3D relief; computer systems; mobile devices; teaching and learning process; interactive
environment; augmented reality

INTRODUCTION

Augmented reality (AR) is a technology that enhances the
perception of the real environment by adding virtual infor-
mation (Azuma, 1997). According to Bobrich and Otto
(2002), AR enhances users’ interaction and experience in
real and virtual environments, and the information trans-
mitted by the virtual objects can help the user to perform
real-world tasks. Olsson et al. (2012) state that AR is an
emerging interactive technology that has gained increasing
interest in recent years, making contextually relevant infor-
mation easily available and enabling new possibilities for
interaction with information.

Medicine, industry, entertainment, and other fields have
used AR in order to facilitate several tasks (Azuma, 1997;
Bobrich, 2003; Cheng and Tsai, 2013; Paelke and Sester,
2010). Yet Azuma’s (1997) assertion that the technology pre-
sents several challenges because of the many unexplored
options and new devices being developed still holds true
today.

Alternatively, there are printed maps, with which users can
interact intuitively and directly in a natural and familiar way,
in the same way as they do with other objects in a real
environment (Asai et al., 2008; Bobrich and Otto, 2002).
However, where printed maps are static and provide

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1411417

limited interactivity, virtual maps are easier to update, can
include dynamic content, and may be adapted to suit the
needs of particular users more easily. Virtual maps, therefore,
support analyses that are not possible with printed maps and
also provide advantages for visualization, allowing map users
to see more than the printed features (Paelke and Sester,
2010).

The integration of the properties of printed maps with
virtual information thus combines the best of both worlds
and can be highly attractive. AR enables user interaction
with the real environment – e.g. handling a printed map, a
smartphone or tablet, for example – and the potential of com-
puter processing in real time to interact with the virtual infor-
mation (Adithya et al., 2010; Bobrich, 2003). The dynamic
representation of 3D terrain, location of virtual objects, ani-
mations and interactivity are characteristics of the digital
world that can be superimposed on a printed map (Adithya
et al., 2010). Put another way, AR techniques can be used
to ‘boost’ paper maps digitally. As Reilly et al. (2006) have
asserted, enhancing paper maps by combining virtual data
is appealing because the maps by themselves are artefacts
from the real world that are already a source of information.
Paelke and Sester (2010) have also emphasized that using AR
and paper maps together show features in an interactive

314

The Cartographic Journal

visualization, and open up some interesting possibilities that
need to be further explored.

Azuma (1997) recognizes that AR is a promising field for
psychophysical studies and points out the need to conduct
psychological experiments that explore performance issues
concerning questions about perception. He also states that
enhancing a user’s understanding is the purpose to be
achieved by an AR system, but it is necessary to determine
whether AR is a truly cost-effective solution for a proposed
application (Azuma, 1997). Later, Azuma et al. (2001)
states that research concerning human factors – as well as
cognitive and perception studies – can help to guide the
development of AR systems and that the ultimate challenge
of an AR system is social acceptance, but less attention has
been paid to these fundamental issues. Indeed, concerning
user-testing and AR, Wang et al. (2013) provide a review
of the state-of-the-art of research published between 2005
and 2011, in a survey involving 120 papers. The authors
found, however, that only 22.5% (27 articles) involved a con-
siderable practical analysis of human factors.

In general, contributions such as Azuma (1997); Asai et al.
(2008); Bobrich and Otto (2002); Bobrich (2003); Paelke
and Sester (2010) and Adithya et al. (2010), argue that AR
contributes positively to user performance when dealing
with real situations. This paper addresses the question of
whether an AR application can help users during the map-
reading and data-learning process. The hypothesis is as
follows: if AR is a more effective visualization process, the
user will be able to solve map-reading tasks more easily and
with more interactivity and efficiency. A related question is
that of whether the user’s previous experience with geo-
graphic data influences in some way the contribution that
AR makes to the user’s experience. This study therefore
describes the construction and evaluation of an AR system
prototype for map-reading tasks to determine whether AR
provides any real improvement in helping users to solve geo-
graphical problems.

BACKGROUND

Milgram et al. (1994) explain that the transition from real to
virtual environments can be described as a continuum, where
AR is a part of mixed reality (MR) (see Figure 1). Virtual
Reality technologies completely immerse users inside a
virtual and synthetic environment, and, once immersed,
users cannot see the real world around them. In contrast,
AR systems enhance the real world with virtual objects, pro-
ducing a mixed scene where real world and virtual objects are
combined (Azuma et al., 2001). Or, as Nilsson and Johans-
son (2008) have stated, the main characteristic of AR inter-
faces is the ‘fusion of worlds’, in which virtual information
is added to the real world. The co-existence of virtual

Figure 1. The reality-virtuality continuum (Source: Milgram et al.,
1994)

objects and the real environment constitutes a MR, where
users can interact with the environment and virtual infor-
mation from appropriate systems and in real-time (Arvanitis
et al., 2009).

Huynh et al. (2009) state that, over the past few years,
advances in the capabilities of 3D graphics processing and
display technologies
in smartphones have made these
devices attractive platforms for mobile AR. Olsson and
Salo (2011) complement
this view, saying that mobile
devices such as smartphones and tablets are becoming
popular tools and are reasonably priced, and it is expected
that the number of potential uses of AR applications will
increase significantly over the next few years.

According to Ternier et al. (2012), the combination of
mobile AR resources and educational situations offer a
unique opportunity for joining experimental and practical
contexts in the real world. Arvanitis et al. (2009) report
that the current efforts of technology-enhanced learning, in
various fields of science, have improved the prospect of
understanding concepts amongst its users. In other words,
with the ability to infuse digital information in the real
world, AR could help to advance science education (Cheng
and Tsai, 2013).

By extension, the application of AR to mapping can
increase the interactivity of geographic visualization, since
the tool is able to provide a learning environment where
the user perceives virtual information overlaid on geographi-
cal areas. The combination of a printed map and computer
graphics creates a tool for an interactive learning environ-
ment, where the user sees enhanced geographical
infor-
mation mixed with the real map (Asai et al., 2008).

There are many examples of the combination of AR and
maps for both desktop or mobile platforms, including Bill-
inghurst et al. (2001), Bobrich and Otto (2002), Bobrich
(2003), Hedley (2003), Reitmayr et al. (2005), Reilly et al.
(2006), Schöning et al. (2006), Morrison et al. (2009),
Paelke and Sester (2010), Grammenos et al. (2011), Morri-
son et al. (2011) and Low and Lee (2014). More specifically,
the contribution of Halik and Medyńska-Gulij (2017)
focuses on graphic variables in AR, aiming to better under-
stand how the public (e.g. pedestrians in the city) perceive
cartographic symbols in a mobile AR system.

Although AR has been used with maps and geographic
data by these authors, sometimes to evaluate how much it
improves users’ ability to complete their tasks or the level
there
of
remain many questions to be answered in this emerging
field. Thus, in this paper we discuss the contribution of an
AR system from a map-reading point of view.

the users’ acceptance of

the new technology,

According to Board (1978) there are often mismatches
between the purposes for which a map was conceived and
how it is read. He describes the essential tasks needed to
enable a person to extract information from a spatial rep-
resentation of the environment (how to understand and to
create knowledge from this), and divides what he calls
map-reading tasks into three major segments: navigation,
measurement and visualization tasks. The first two segments
(navigation and measurement) are the best known. However,
individuals rely upon the visualization tasks in order to under-
stand geographic space and what is represented (Board,
1978; MacEachren, 1995; Ware, 2012). Therefore, this

Augmented Reality and Maps

315

Figure 2. Printed maps used. (a) Outline; (b) altimetry (SRTM); (c) number of inhabitants from the 2013 census

paper aims to investigate the extent to which AR facilitates
this map-reading and data-learning process, with especial
focus on the role of visualization.

METHODOLOGY

The AR system
The AR system proposed in this study consists of overlaying
virtual information over traditional, printed maps. A digital
camera is used to capture the real environment information
as an image, which is visualized on a screen. The system com-
putes the user’s orientation, movements and attitude relative
to the physical hardcopy of the printed map (using real-time
image processing) and superposes virtual data onto the image
of this hardcopy map.

One of the main issues in AR is computing the relative
position and attitude of the user within the real environment.
Positioning systems, such as a global navigation satellite
system (GNSS), gyroscopes, and/or image processing and
computer vision algorithms, have aided the AR system devel-
opers to process and overlap the information in real time.
GNSS and gyroscopes are normally used outdoors. Solutions
based on image processing and computer vision – which can
be used for indoor applications – compute the relative pos-
ition and attitude based on the recognition of features in
the real environment.

There are several image processing tools supporting the
development of AR systems, such as the ARToolKit, which
is a widely used library with rapid and relatively accurate
tracking (He et al., 2006). However, when using this
library, there is the need to add markers on the map, as per
Bobrich and Otto (2002), Bobrich (2003). These markers
are normally square patterns that are recognized by the
system and used to compute the user’s position and orien-
tation. As these markers are not natural elements of a map,
they can disrupt the reading of the map, or even disturb
the map’s layout.

One way to solve this problem is to use alternative
methods, where the map itself can be used as a known
pattern to support the computation of the position and orien-
tation of the user. For example, Qualcomm Vuforia is a
library that enables such an approach. The AR system used

in this study uses the Qualcomm Vuforia library in the
Unity3D environment.

For this experiment, three printed maps were used, as
shown in Figure 2. These printed maps comprise an outline
of New Zealand (Figure 2(a)), altimetry information
derived from Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM)
data (Figure 2(b)), and population data using the most
recent census (2013) of each territorial authority (Figure 2
(c)). New Zealand was chosen as the subject area because
one of the authors was very familiar with the datasets used
in the study and these were unfamiliar to the participants
interviewed, thereby avoiding the possibility of participants’
previous knowledge influencing the results. The maps used
are at 1:8,000,000 scale, which allows New Zealand to fit
onto an A4 format (210 × 297 mm).

The virtual information used and presented on the AR
system is shown in Figure 3. This comprises the terrain
model in 3D (Figure 3(a)), the map of the number of inhabi-
tants in 2D (Figure 3(b)), and the map of the number of
inhabitants on the terrain model in 3D (Figure 3(c)).

The interviews
ˇ
teˇrba et al. (2015), research into usability of
According to S
cartographic products may be divided into two main areas:
the usability of individual maps as forms of representation
and the usability of complex geographic information
systems; which include both cartographic representation
technological approach. The first area
and the overall
focuses on the evaluation of various cartographic methods
in terms of the purpose of the resulting visualizations (in
accordance with the context) and a target group of partici-
pants. The second area includes the usability of tools for
manipulation and interaction with cartographic products or
geographic information systems. Given that our focus is on
the way in which the user works with an AR system and
the functions and control tools she or he uses, this second
approach is adopted for this study.

Since we are conducting an evaluation to verify whether an
AR system facilitates map reading and data learning when
compared with a conventional map reading process, we
designed the experiment as a usability test. The reason for
this is that users are required to interact with the system in
order to accomplish the designated tasks. In usability

316

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Virtual information presented by the AR system: (a) 3D landscape; (b) number of inhabitants from the 2013 census 2013 in 2D; (c) the
number of inhabitants over the terrain, in 3D

experiments, a qualitative approach may be adopted, since we
are more interested in evaluating the use of the system and
how it can improve knowledge acquisition, rather than in
the evaluation of static maps. Usability studies typically
adopt a much smaller number of respondents than exper-
iments for more general purposes, and thus we limit our
sample size to a total of 60 (10 in each group), as 10 is a
reasonable number for usability studies (Preece et al.,
2015). This approach was also used by Behrens et al.
(2015) and Koletsis et al. (2017).

Interviews were conducted in order to ascertain the partici-
pants’ backgrounds in using AR and map-reading tasks. All
the participants were asked before the test
to provide
details of their academic degree and major subject and their
level of knowledge and experience in GIS and AR, all by
self-reporting and by a verbal description of their level of
experience. We considered pre-testing to establish GIS and
AR experience, but we preferred to use self-reporting in
order to avoid any potential influence of pre-tests on the
final results (since pre-tests would have resulted in respon-
dents gaining some experience).

cartography

A total of 60 people were interviewed, according to the fol-
lowing categories: 4 geoinformatics professors, 27 under-
graduate
graduate
students
geoinformatics students. The participants’ experience was as
follows:
. None of the undergraduate students had experience with
GIS or AR systems (students from the first year of a Car-
tographic Engineering programme);

. All professors had experience with GIS, and two of them

and

29

had experience with AR;

. Most of the graduate students had experience in using GIS
(26 of 29), and one of them had familiarity with AR (1 of
29).

For the study, the groups were separated according to their
GIS experience rather than their academic degree since the
latter alone could not accurately reflect the knowledge of
the participants’ skill in reading, using and understanding
the geographic data or maps. GIS experience, on the other
hand, might better reflect the abilities of the user with
maps and geographic data. It was found that some graduate
participants had no previous experience at all with GIS or

them had just
geographic data manipulation (some of
started their courses), which can cause them to be said to
have the same ability to read and understand the map or geo-
graphic data as the undergraduate students. Thus, the experi-
enced participants with GIS numbered 30, and those with no
experience with GIS, 30.

The main question that the participants were asked was
about the relationship between the landscape and the popu-
lation of New Zealand. They were also asked to identify
the location of the most populated districts and whether
there was any relationship between the population density
and the landscape. Specifically, the two questions were: (1)
‘What is the relationship between the landscape and the
population of New Zealand?’; and (2) ‘Can you identify
the locations of the most populated districts and whether
there is any relationship between these and the landscape?’.
We would consider correct any participants’ answer that
showed that they realized that the flat or coastal areas are
more populated in New Zealand. It is important to report
here that none of
the participants had been to New
Zealand before, or had prior knowledge of its population
density or New Zealand’s territorial authority divisions.

To answer the questions, the participants were randomly
divided into three scenarios, according to the available
material they were given. The first scenario (S01) had to
perform the task using only the printed maps (Figure 4(a)).
The second scenario (S02) was instructed to perform the
task using only the printed map with the outline of New
Zealand and the AR system (Figure 4(b)). The third scenario
(S03) could use the AR system and/or any physical printed
maps (Figure 4(c)). Thus:
. Scenario 01: Used only the physical printed maps;
. Scenario 02: Used only the outline map and the AR

. Scenario 03: Could use all the physical printed maps and

system;

the AR system.

The scenarios were therefore designed to allow a compari-
son of the different approaches. While the AR system offers
the option to see the layers separately or with overlaid terrain
and population information, the display of both datasets on
the same, flat paper map made interpretation very difficult,
as the shaded and coloured areas conflicted with one

Augmented Reality and Maps

317

Table 1. The number of participants in each scenario

Scenario

S01

S02

S03

Total

Experienced
Not experienced
Total

10
10
20

10
10
20

10
10
20

30
30
60

recorded in order to measure the time taken for each partici-
pant’s response, the subsequent verification of the response,
and the way that each participant chose to answer. The
recording of audio and video for the tests was made using a
smartphone.

The hardware that participants used to complete all tasks
was a Samsung Galaxy Tab4 (tablet). This device was selected
because it presents a good screen size (7′) and resolution
(1280 × 800 pixels) and has enough memory (1.5 GB
RAM) and processing capability (1.2 GHz, quad core) for
the AR application (app) to perform well. As the AR app
runs on any Android device (including smartphones),
further tests could be done in future using newer, faster or
bigger tablets, or on devices with smaller screen sizes.

After finishing the experiment, the tasks performed under
the other two scenarios were explained and presented to par-
ticipants, and they were asked whether they would prefer to
use the method of another scenario or if they thought that
another scenario had advantages in terms of the available
material.

RESULTS

Participants with GIS experience
First, we present an analysis of the time used to solve the task
amongst participants with GIS experience. It is important to
mention that, although the working time varied according to
the participant, all those with GIS experience answered the
question correctly. The variation in time taken to answer
the question of each scenario (S01, S02 and S03) was com-
puted and is shown in the whisker plot in Figure 5.

According to Figure 5, the participants with GIS experi-
ence that only used the printed maps (Scenario 01) were
faster than the others. Scenario 03, where participants were
allowed to use all the available information (i.e. AR system
and all printed maps), was slower. However, the fastest
answer was recorded in Scenario 02, just taking 9 s. This
can be explained by the fact that the participant that answered
faster than all the others was a professor with both GIS and
AR experience.

Although Scenarios 02 and 03 (i.e. those that used the
AR system) were slower, almost all participants preferred
to work in the AR scenarios, as shown in Table 2. Just
two participants preferred to work in the traditional way,
using the printed maps. Nine participants preferred Scen-
ario 03, saying that having more information available to
consult is better, even though a minority of the participants
in Scenario 03 had consulted the printed maps during the
task – normally the participants in Scenario 03 had just
consulted the AR system. Eleven participants preferred

Figure 4. Performing the tasks according to each scenario: (a) Scenario
01 (only the printed maps); (b) Scenario 02 (contour map and the AR
system); (c) Scenario 03 (all printed maps and the AR system)

another. Although this may have affected the results, since for
the paper maps people had to do more interpretation work
and so experienced a greater cognitive load than for the
AR, this does reflect the real situation when maps are used
rather than AR. It is more difficult to visualize complex
and overlapping data on flat paper maps. Furthermore, it
could also be argued that users of the AR system had a
greater cognitive load in that they had to learn to use a new
technology.

Hence, in this study, the participants were distinguished by
two groups (i.e. with or without experience in GIS) and
completed one of the three scenarios (S01, S02 or S03).
The participants were selected randomly for the scenarios,
with the same distribution between the groups. The
number of participants in each scenario can be seen in
Table 1 and an example of each scenario used in the test is pre-
sented in Figure 4.

The participants were not told that the time taken for them
to provide their answers would be recorded, in order to
ensure that they did not feel under pressure to respond
quickly or to make rapid decisions. All interactions were

318

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. The time taken to answer the question of each scenario for the participants with GIS experience

Table 2. Preference of scenario for the participants with GIS experience

Preference by participants with
experience with GIS

S01

S02

S03

Total

S02-
S03

Quantity

02

11

09

08

30

Scenario 02, saying that if they have the AR system, they
did not need additional information on the map. Eight par-
ticipants said that they preferred either of the scenarios that
uses the AR system.

Nevertheless, one participant reported the need of at least
one map, which could be the outline map, to serve as spatial
reference in the geographic space. They reported that the task
could not be achieved by using another symbol (represen-
tation) instead of the map. Therefore, if there is just one
symbol to be used by the AR system, such as a square, it
could make users lose their spatial reference. The background
map enables a geographic reference, which would not be
possible if just a marker or square were used.

Despite taking part in Scenario 03 (which provided the
AR system and all the printed maps) only one participant
used just the printed maps to solve the problem. Only after
finishing the test did they begin to play with the AR
system to see how it works. The participant stated that for
them it was easier to use the map because they had spent
many years working directly with maps.

It was also noted that some participants needed more time
when dealing with the AR system, because they were playing
with the system before answering the question, moving the
tablet to see the virtual model, walking around the printed
map, tilting the AR system almost 90° in relation to the
printed map just to see the landscape in perspective, or
taking the hardcopy maps off the tablet’s field of view to
see how the system would react. Also, some participants
were trying to understand how the system works – if the
virtual information were registered over the hardcopy maps
– before answering the question.

In summary, for this experiment, it is possible to see that
participants with GIS experience worked better with the tra-
ditional printed maps, although the majority preferred the
scenarios that could use the AR system.

Participants without GIS experience
The results were different for the class of participants without
GIS experience. Firstly, it is important to state that three par-
ticipants in this group did not answer the question or
answered it incorrectly. Given that one of these participants
was in each scenario, it is not possible to confirm whether
the AR system or the printed map was the source of difficulty
they encountered in solving the task. Their time was not
measured.

The variation in the time taken to answer the question in
each scenario for the group of participants without GIS
experience is presented in Figure 6. The slower scenario
was the one that used just the printed maps (Scenario 01).
Scenarios 02 and 03 performed very similarly, but Scenario
02 had the fastest answer of all.

For this group of participants and this experiment, it is
possible to see that using the printed maps required more
time because the participants had to interpret and combine
the information; an action that requires some cognitive pro-
cessing. On the other hand, when the participants used the
AR system, the information was easily available; especially
when they needed to combine the census data with the
relief. According to some participants, they ‘saw the infor-
mation in an easier way than merging the information of
the printed maps’. So, it is possible to conclude that using
the AR system reduced the participants’ effort to combine
the information from different maps, making the problem
easier to solve. Also, some participants reported that seeing
the information in 3D using the AR app (the terrain layer
and the census data over the terrain) helped them to under-
stand the relationship between these layers. One user
reported ‘by seeing the information in 3D, it was easier to
read and realize the data, which is more difficult to read
from a flat paper map.’

Regarding the preference of these participants, more than
90% of them preferred the scenarios that could use the AR
system. The results about the preference of the participants
are synthetized in Table 3. Just two participants preferred
working with the printed maps. Five preferred Scenario 02,
i.e. with the AR system and the outline map. Eight partici-
pants answered that they prefer any Scenario that includes
the AR system; they could therefore use just the outline
map to solve the problem.

Augmented Reality and Maps

319

Figure 6. The time taken to answer the question of each scenario for the participants with no GIS experience

Table 3. Preference of scenario for the participants with no GIS

experience

Preference by participants with
no experience with GIS

S01

S02

S03

Total

S02-
S03

Quantity

02

05

15

08

30

In addition, 15 participants said that they preferred to
work with all the information together, the AR system and
all the maps (Scenario 03). Nevertheless, in practice, almost
all of them used just the information in AR system, and
they used it over just one map (any map, normally the
closest one). Just a few participants in Scenario 03 consulted
the printed maps but most of them stayed with the AR
system. They used the printed map merely as a reference in
the real world, but they did not use the printed map as
source of information to get the answer. It is possible to
affirm that the behaviour of these participants was similar
to those in Scenario 02, who used just the outline of New
Zealand. They did not consult the maps as a source of infor-
mation to solve the question, just to register the virtual infor-
mation over a geographical reference.

used

positive

Several of the participants who did not have any GIS and
AR experience prior to the test showed enthusiasm when
the AR system was turned on. When they first realized that
the app responded to their movements they smiled and
some
and
expressions
‘Awesome!’). At the end of the test, a few of these participants
showed interest in discussing what else could be done with
AR and whether it could be applied in other fields, data,
formats, places, and so on. This response was unexpected
and thus was not included as a variable in the initial analysis,
but it was clear that they were more motivated when working
with the AR system.

‘Cool!’

(e.g.

Overview
In an overall analysis, it is therefore possible to conclude from
this study that the participants who had experience with maps
and geographic data (i.e. those with GIS experience) per-
formed the task faster using the printed maps, and those
ones without previous experience performed faster using

the AR system. However, we should point out that the par-
ticipants with GIS experience sometimes ‘lost’ time playing
with the system, trying to understand it more deeply before
answering the question, which may have artificially extended
the measured duration of the task. This interaction between
the users and the system should not be considered a ‘waste’
of time, as it indicates that participants were enjoying the
experience and trying to explore the map, data, and system.
Yet, as time was a variable analysed in this study, participants
took more time to answer the question, thus increasing the
overall time for their scenario.

With respect to the participants’ preferences, just four pre-
ferred to work with the printed maps (less than 10% of the
participants interviewed). More than 90% preferred to
work with the AR system over the printed maps.

Twenty-four participants reported that they would prefer to
work with all the maps and the AR system (Scenario 03),
explaining that they prefer the scenario with more infor-
mation. However, while some participants were working in
Scenario 03, they used just one printed map, only to support
the AR system. Therefore, it is possible to conclude that
while they liked to have many options to consult, they really
used only one map to act solely as a spatial reference. So, we
conclude that these participants could be added to those in
Scenario 02, since they would use AR to solve the proposed
problem using the printed map just as a spatial reference.

Sixteen participants preferred any Scenario that could use
the AR system. It is possible to assume that they are inter-
ested more in the virtual layers and possibilities of the AR
system rather than the printed map. Hence, these participants
probably would use the printed map just as a reference and
just the outline map would be enough. Moreover, some of
them preferred Scenario 02, saying that the outline map
could be enough as long as they have all the information
offered by the AR system.

Despite of

this comparison between the participants’
experience, the scenarios, AR system, and methodology pro-
posed, it is possible to claim that some of the results found in
this study are similar to those found by others. For example,
Grammenos et al. (2011) found similar evaluation results
with an AR prototype, where the overall opinion of the
users ranged from positive to enthusiastic. Also, McGee
et al. (2002) found that the participants preferred their

320

The Cartographic Journal

prototype to their paper maps because they gained access to
computing and did not have to give up what the paper maps
had to offer.

FUNDING

CONCLUSIONS

In this study, the performance of a sample of 60 participants
has been analysed to evaluate the contribution of the AR
system for reading and analysing maps and geographic
data. Content specific to New Zealand was adapted to the
platform, allowing participants to engage in visualizing and
analysing spatial variables of the country. The study shows
that the AR system helped participants to better understand
the local topography and statistical data.

A comparison between the maps and the AR system devel-
oped revealed that the people we tested preferred to use the
AR system to complete the task given. Those with some carto-
graphic background were more efficient in dealing with
printed maps, while those without previous experience were
faster with the AR system. A common observation was that
a base printed map is necessary and useful for orientation pur-
poses and to provide a spatial reference in the real world.

this

Although more tests should be done to evaluate the AR
system and users’ attitudes more deeply,
research
affirms that the AR system has clear efficiency benefits for
inexperienced map users. Furthermore, participants of the
test embraced it enthusiastically, with 93% preferring the
AR system over printed maps. Overall, it was noticed that
the AR system developed in this study helped the participants
to solve their tasks, especially for those with no background
in or experience with GIS and the professional manipulation
of maps. Further tests should be conducted to compare the
use of traditional printed maps, GIS, and AR systems as
well as other forms of geographic data visualization including
Virtual Reality and multimedia presentations, as well as to try
to measure the increase in motivation, efficiency, accuracy
and precision of users when dealing with these sources of
information or technologies.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Gabriel Henrique de Almeida Pereira
holds a degree in Environmental Engin-
eering from the Federal University of
Paraná (2009) and a degree in Technol-
ogy in Environmental Chemistry from
the Technological Federal University of
Paraná (2010). He also has a Master’s
degree in Water Resource and Environ-
mental Engineering from Federal University of Paraná
(2013) and a PhD in Geodetic Sciences from Federal Univer-
sity of Paraná. His main areas of research are Environmental
Monitoring, Geographic Information Systems, Remote
Sensing and Augmented Reality.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors would like to thank the participants that took
part in the experiments as anonymous users.

The authors would like to thank the financial support of
CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico
e Tecnológico)/Brazil – Process 459300/2014-8 (MCTI/
CNPQ/Universal 2014), 401264/2014-9 (MEC/MCTI/
CAPES/CNPQ/FAPS – Bolsa pesquisador visitante especial
– PVE – 2014) and 301980/2014-4.

REFERENCES

Adithya, C., Kowsik, K., Namrata, D., Nageli, V. S., Shrivastava, S. and
Rakshit, S. (2010). ‘Augmented Reality Approach for Paper Map
Visualization’, in Communication and Computational Intelligence
(INCOCCI), (pp. 352–356). IEEE.

Arvanitis, T. N., Petrou, A., Knight, J. F., Savas, S., Sotiriou, S.,
Gargalakos, M. and Gialouri, E. (2009). ‘Human factors and quali-
tative pedagogical evaluation of a mobile augmented reality system
for science education used by learners with physical disabilities’,
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 13(3), pp. 243–250.

Asai, K., Kondo, T., Kobayashi, H. and Mizuki, A. (2008). ‘A Geographic
Surface Browsing Tool Using Map-based Augmented Reality’,
in
Visualisation, 2008 International Conference (pp. 93–98). IEEE.

Azuma, R. T. (1997).

‘A survey of augmented reality’, Presence:

Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 6(4), pp. 355–385.
Azuma, R., Baillot, Y., Behringer, R., Feiner, S., Julier, S. and MacIntyre,
B. (2001). ‘Recent advances in augmented reality’, IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 21(6), pp. 34–47.

Behrens, J., van Elzakker, C. P. and Schmidt, M. (2015). ‘Testing the
usability of OpenStreetMap’s iD Tool’, The Cartographic Journal,
52(2), 177–184.

Billinghurst, M., Kato, H. and Poupyrev, I. (2001). ‘Collaboration with
Tangible Augmented Reality Interfaces’, in HCI International (Vol.
1, pp. 5–10).

Board, C. (1978). ‘Map reading tasks appropriate in experimental studies
in cartographic communication’, Cartographica: The International
Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization, 15(1),
pp. 1–12.

Bobrich, J. (2003). ‘An Immersive Environment Based on Paper Maps’,

in Proc. ICC.

Bobrich, J. and Otto, S. (2002).

‘Augmented maps’, International
of Photogrammetry Remote Sensing and Spatial

Archives
Information Sciences, 34(4), pp. 502–505.

Cheng, K. H. and Tsai, C. C. (2013). ‘Affordances of augmented reality
in science learning: suggestions for future research’, Journal of
Science Education and Technology, 22(4), pp. 449–462.

Grammenos, D., Zabulis, X., Michel, D. and Argyros, A. A. (2011).
‘Augmented reality interactive exhibits in cartographic heritage: an
implemented case-study open to the general public’, e-Perimetron,
6(2), pp. 57–67.

Halik, Ł., Medyńska-Gulij, B. (2017). ‘The differentiation of point
symbols using selected visual variables in the mobile augmented
reality system’, The Cartographic Journal, 54 (2), pp. 147–156.
He, Z., Xia, Z., Chang, Y., Chen, W., Hu, J. and Wei, X. (2006). ‘Research on
underground pipeline augmented reality system based on ARToolKit’,
Proceedings Volume 6421, Geoinformatics 2006: Geospatial Information
Technology 642112. doi:10.1117/12.713123.

Hedley, N. R. (2003). ‘Empirical Evidence for Advanced Geographic
in International Cartographic

Visualization Interface Use’,
Congress, Durban.

Huynh, D. N. T., Raveendran, K., Xu, Y., Spreen, K., Macintyre, B.
‘Art of Defense: A Collaborative Handheld Augmented
(2009).
Reality Board Game’, in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH
symposium on video games (pp. 135–142). ACM.

Koletsis, E., van Elzakker, C. P., Kraak, M. J., Cartwright, W.,
Arrowsmith, C. and Field, K. (2017). ‘An investigation into chal-
lenges experienced when route planning, navigating and wayfinding’,
International Journal of Cartography, 3(1), 1–15.

Low, C. G. and Lee, Y. L. (2014). ‘Sunmap+: an intelligent location-
based virtual indoor navigation system using augmented reality’.

MacEachren, A. M.

(1995). How Maps Work: Representation,

Visualization, and Design. New York: Guilford Press.

Augmented Reality and Maps

321

McGee, D. R., Cohen, P. R., Wesson, R. M. and Horman, S. (2002).
‘Comparing Paper and Tangible, Multimodal Tools’, in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (pp. 407–414). ACM.

Milgram, P., Takemura, H., Utsumi, A. and Kishino, F. (1994).
‘Augmented Reality: A Class of Displays on the Reality-virtuality
Continuum’, in Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies (Vol.
2351, 282–293). International Society for Optics and Photonics.
http://etclab.mie.utoronto.ca/publication/1994/Milgram_Takemura_
SPIE1994.pdf

Morrison, A., Mulloni, A., Lemmelä, S., Oulasvirta, A., Jacucci, G.,
(2011).
Peltonen, P.,
‘Collaborative use of mobile augmented reality with paper maps’,
Computers Graphics, 35(4), pp. 789–799.

Schmalstieg, D., Regenbrecht, H.

Morrison, A., Oulasvirta, A., Peltonen, P., Lemmela, S., Jacucci, G.,
Reitmayr, G., Näsänen, J., Juustila, A. (2009). ‘Like Bees around
the Hive: A Comparative Study of a Mobile Augmented Reality
Map’, in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (pp. 1889–1898). ACM.

Nilsson, S. and Johansson, B. (2008). ‘Acceptance of augmented reality
instructions in a real work setting’, in CHI’08 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2025–2032). ACM.
Olsson, T. and Salo, M. (2011). ‘Online User Survey on Current Mobile
Augmented Reality Applications’, in 2011 10th IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR),
(pp. 75–84). IEEE.

Olsson, T., Kärkkäinen, T., Lagerstam, E. and Ventä-Olkkonen, L.
(2012). ‘User evaluation of mobile augmented reality scenarios’,

Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, 4(1),
pp. 29–47.

Paelke, V. and Sester, M. (2010). ‘Augmented paper maps: exploring the
design space of a mixed reality system’, ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 65(3), pp. 256–265.

Preece, J., Sharp, H., and Rogers, Y. (2015). Interaction Design: Beyond

Human-Computer Interaction. 4th ed. Wiley, 584 pages.

Personal

Reilly, D., Rodgers, M., Argue, R., Nunes, M. and Inkpen, K. (2006).
‘Marked-up maps: combining paper maps and electronic information
resources’.
10(4),
pp. 215–226.

and Ubiquitous Computing,

Reitmayr, G., Eade, E. and Drummond, T. (2005). ‘Localisation and
Interaction for Augmented Maps’, in Proceedings of the 4th IEEE/
ACM international Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(pp. 120–129). IEEE Computer Society.

Schöning, J., Krüger, A. and Müller, H. J. (2006). ‘Interaction of Mobile

ˇ
ˇ
teˇrba, Z., S
S

Camera Devices with Physical Maps’ (pp. 121–124). na.

ˇ
ašinka, Č., Stachonˇ, Z., S

tampach, R. and Morong, K.
(2015). Selected Issues of Experimental Testing in Cartography.
Brno: Masaryk University.

Ternier, S., Klemke, R., Kalz, M., Van Ulzen, P. and Specht, M. (2012).
‘ARLearn: augmented reality meets augmented virtuality’, Journal of
Universal Computer Science, 18(15), pp. 2143–2164.

Wang, X., Kim, M. J., Love, P. E. and Kang, S. C. (2013). ‘Augmented
reality in built environment: classification and implications for future
research’, Automation in Construction, 32, pp. 1–13.

Ware, C. (2012). Information Visualization: Perception for Design,

Waltham, MA: Elsevier.

