This article was downloaded by: [University of Connecticut]
On: 09 October 2014, At: 05:57
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Developing a common
spatial data infrastructure
between State and Local
Government--an Australian
case study
Steve Jacoby , Jessica Smith , Lisa Ting & Ian
Williamson
Published online: 10 Nov 2010.

To cite this article: Steve Jacoby , Jessica Smith , Lisa Ting & Ian Williamson
(2002) Developing a common spatial data infrastructure between State and Local
Government--an Australian case study, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 16:4, 305-322, DOI: 10.1080/13658810110096001

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810110096001

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and

Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 4, 305± 322

Research Article

Developing a common spatial data infrastructure between State and
Local Government—an Australian case study

STEVE JACOBY1 , JESSICA SMITH2 , LISA TING2 and
IAN WILLIAMSON2
1 Land Information Group,Land Victoria, Department of Natural Resources &
Environment, PO Box 500, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia;
e-mail: steve.jacoby@nre.vic.gov.au
2Centre for Spatial Data Infrastructures and Land Administration, Department
of Geomatics, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia;
e-mail: jcsmith@sunrise.sli.unimelb.edu.au; ting@sunrise.sli.unimelb.edu.au;
ianpw@unimelb.edu.au

(Received 1 December 2000; accepted 14 May 2001)

Abstract. Over the last decade a number of countries and states have successfully
established complete spatial data infrastructures (SDIs) incorporating core digital
map bases such as the cadastre or land parcel layer, topography, hydrology, road
networks and administrative boundaries. These have usually been based on the
amalgamation of national or state mapping and cadastral or land registration
systems. At the same time many cities or Local Governments world-wide have
established their own SDIs although they are more commonly referred to as
geographical information systems. However in most cases the relationship between
the Local Government and the National or State systems is at best poor. The
result is that in many cases Local Government does not use the state SDI. This
presents many diYculties in establishing state or national data sets, particularly
where Local Government is responsible for controlling or maintaining the integ-
rity of speci(cid:142) c land related data in the state SDI. This paper describes the
successful establishment of a partnership between 78 Local Government authorit-
ies and a State Government in Australia. This successful partnership has resulted
in the State providing and updating the basic SDI for Local Government and
Local Government in turn providing land parcel and property data to the State
Government. This has resulted in signi(cid:142) cant improvements being made to the
core map bases in the State SDI (such as the increased integrity of the state street
address (cid:142) le), a marked reduction in duplicative mapbase maintenance activity
(particularly by Local Government) and increased adoption of GIS technologies
by Local Government with the beginnings of considerable (cid:143) ow-on bene(cid:142) ts to the
community being observed. The authors believe that this is a useful model which
facilitates the SDI concept becoming a reality and which has generic application
in many countries world-wide.

1.

Introduction
Over the last decade a number of countries and states have successfully established
complete spatial data infrastructures (SDIs) incorporating core digital map bases

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Informatio n Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110096001

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 306

S. Jacoby et al.

such as the cadastre or land parcel layer, topography , hydrology, road networks and
administrative boundaries. The major challenge in establishing these SDIs has been
the integration of the traditional national or state mapping systems with the spatial
cadastre or land parcel layer since these systems are usually based on diVerent
projections and administered in diVerent government departments (Mooney and
Grant 1997, Williamson et al. 1998). The integration of these two usually disparate
data sets at a state or national level continues to be a challenge in most countries
across Western Europe, many jurisdictions in North America, as well as many
countries world wide.

At the same time many cities or Local Governments world-wide have established
their own SDIs although they are more commonly referred to using the generic term
of geographical information systems (Suwanarat et al. 2000). Successful examples
are common, particularly in North America and are well documented in annual
conferences such as those organized by the North American Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association (URISA) and the Australasian Urban and Regional
Information Systems Association (AURISA). However in most cases the relationship
between the Local Government and the national or state systems is at best poor.
The result is that in many cases Local Government does not use the state SDI. This
presents a whole range of diYculties in establishing state or national data sets,
particularly where Local Government is responsible for controlling or maintaining
the integrity of many land related or property data sets. Important examples of this
Local Government data includes street addresses, land valuation or land tax data,
and proposed subdivisions of land. While the bene(cid:142) ts of a close working relationship
between state and Local Governments are recognised within the SDI concept (see
below), the number of successful partnerships between these two levels of government
is not common.

This paper describes the successful establishment of a partnership between 78
Local Government authorities and the State Government of Victoria in Australia
facilitated by the Property Information Project (PIP). This partnership has resulted
in the State providing and updating the basic SDI for Local Government and Local
Government
in turn providing land parcel and property data to the State
Government. This has resulted in signi(cid:142) cant improvements being made to the core
map bases in the State SDI (such as the increased integrity of the state street address
(cid:142) le), a marked reduction in duplicative mapbase maintenance activity (particularly
in Local Government ) and the increased adoption of GIS technologies by Local
Government, with the beginnings of considerable (cid:143) ow-on bene(cid:142) ts to the community
being observed.

The authors believe that a detailed review of the Property Information Project
is justi(cid:142) ed due to its success in bringing two levels of government into a cooperative
partnership in support of the establishment of a comprehensive State SDI. In order
to examine the PIP, the paper reviews general trends in SDI development and brie(cid:143) y
describes the SDI vision for the Victorian State Government. The success, bene(cid:142) ts
and future plans for PIP are outlined.

2. General trends in SDI development

Following the early activities in the 1990s of the US Federal Geographic Data
Committee, many countries throughout the world are recognising the importance of
spatial information and the related infrastructure required for its management to
ensure eVective decision making. Spatial data infrastructures (SDIs) consisting of

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

307

policies, standards and procedures aim to provide an environment that encourages
co-operation in data production and sharing (Federal Geographic Data Committee
2000, Rajabifard et al. 2000). The numerous political and administrative levels evident
in a single nation have resulted in the development of SDIs at a variety of scales
from corporate and Local Government levels through to State/Provincial and
National levels. On an even wider scale, a need has also been demonstrated for
regional (multi-national ) and global SDIs (Rajabifard et al. 2000 ).

Despite diVerences in scale, the underlying objective of SDIs is to ensure users
of spatial data will be able to acquire consistent datasets to meet their requirements.
In many instances, as is the case for the Australian SDI, the data will be collected
and maintained by a variety of authorities with the SDI itself being made up of data
held on independently maintained systems linked by common standards and policies
(AUSLIG 2000).

The diverse nature of the administrative distinctions between nations means that
there is not yet a clear agreement on what ‘spatial data infrastructure’ and ‘geograph-
ical information infrastructure’ eVorts should or should not include (Coleman and
McLaughlin 1998). Onsrud (1998) identi(cid:142) es that there are signi(cid:142) cant variations in
infrastructure developments particularly in regard to legal, economic, scale and
organizationa l considerations. Despite these variations, there are commonalities,
most evident in regard to metadata, core data, standards and clearinghouse concepts
which are recognised as constituent components of SDIs at a national level.

The structure of central (state and national) and Local Governments has a
profound impact on the distribution of responsibilities for the collection of geograph-
ical information and the attitudes towards access to public information (Masser
1998). However, often non-governmenta l groups are more closely involved in the
driving force behind SDI development. Thus the key features of the initiatives and
their status with respect to government need to be identi(cid:142) ed and the relationship
and responsibilities to government ascertained.

The development of an SDI as a networked, distributed enterprise requires new
relationships and partnerships among diVerent levels of government and between
public and private sector entities to be established. These partnerships allow and
require organizations to assume responsibilities that may diVer to those of the past
(Tosta 1997).

SDI activities in North America and Australia have focussed on encouraging
communication and partnerships among the diverse collectors and users of geospatial
data. The Victorian SDI is a useful working example of the communication strategies
required and is a good illustration of a strategy to involve Local Government as an
active partner in achieving a comprehensive state SDI.

3. The Victorian spatial data infrastructur e vision

As background, Australia consists of eight jurisdictions (six States and two
Territories), with Victoria being the smallest of the mainland States by area. At
227 420 km2 it accounts for only 3% of the country’s area, but with a population of
4.8 million is Australia’s second most populous State (see table 1).

OYcially settled in the mid 1830s, Victoria’s land administration system signi(cid:142) c-
antly bene(cid:142) ted from the introduction of the Torrens system of land title registration
(1862) which is still in force today. Land is broadly classed as freehold (in private
ownership) or Crown land (managed by the State). The latter includes National and
State parks, forests and a range of other reserves set aside for public purposes.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 308

S. Jacoby et al.

Table 1. Victoria—Australia comparisons (ABS 1999) .

Area (km2 ) Population

Dwellings†

Land
Local
parcels Properties Govt’s

Victoria
(% of total)
Australia

227 420
3%
7 692 030

4.8 M
25%
19 M

1.75M
25%
6.95 M

2.4 M

2.3 M

11 M

—

78

750

†Housing (separate houses, (cid:143) ats, apartments etc.).

Roads
( km)

155·079
19%
802·600

Approximately one third of Victoria’s area is Crown land, although this represents
only 70 000 of the 2.4 million land parcels in the State. Signi(cid:142) cant eVorts have been
made since the early 1980s towards modernization and automation of land adminis-
tration in the State with one of the most recent actions being the formation of Land
Victoria in 1996. This brought into one agency all mapping, surveying, land titling,
valuation and Crown land management services.

A key outcome from one of the largest geospatial information requirements
studies ever conducted by an Australian State Government was, in part, a description
and prioritization of the fundamental data sets essential to the establishment of a
Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) (OGDC 1993a) . A major challenge emerged from
the detailed speci(cid:142) cation of what the study determined to be the most critical data
set; the digital cadastral database. In order to ful(cid:142) ll the requirements of users, it was
recommended that the database must include a representation of all land properties
attributed by their ‘street address’ and ‘Council
(Local Government ) property
number’ and include proposed development applications to compliment the record
of approved land parcels as issued by the Titles OYce.

Whilst Land Victoria, the State Government agency responsible for this key
dataset, had ready access to approved legal land parcels via the Titles OYce, it did
not have access to proposed developments or authoritative information about proper-
ties including street addresses which are allocated by the State’s 78 Local
Governments. This need led to the development of the Property Information
Project (PIP).

PIP is an important part of Land Victoria’s vision: ‘By the year 2002 customers
will be able to point to a piece of land on an electronic map and have all the
information relevant to that piece of land at their (cid:142) ngertips’, ((cid:142) gure 1).

The establishment of a comprehensive Spatial Data Infrastructure is seen as the
key to realizing this goal. Land Victoria’s fourth geospatial strategic plan in the past
ten years (Land Victoria 1999), focuses on the development of eight fundamental
datasets in conjunction with a number of other targeted strategies. The fundamental
datasets identi(cid:142) ed by the strategy are: Geodetic Control; Cadastral; Address;
Administrative; Transportation; Elevation; Hydrology; and Imagery. Importantly,
levels of
this is an industry strategy involving not just Land Victoria but all
Government within Victoria, the private sector and academia.

The participation of Local Government is seen as particularly critical to the
success of the strategy. Local Government is a key user and producer of these
datasets, in its functions as strategic planners and providers of public amenities for
their local area, as well as to dialogue with the local community, private sector, state
and other local governments. For example, half of the fundamental datasets in the
State SDI are dependent upon Local Government as the responsible authority for

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

309

Figure 1. Schematic of Land Victoria’s ‘Point and Click’ vision.

the creation of land information (e.g. addresses, road names, suburb and locality
de(cid:142) nitions) or for the timely noti(cid:142) cation of approval s relating to the changing status
of land information (e.g. proposed land developments, approvals, certi(cid:142) cations, etc.,
in the cadastral theme). As a key user of all of the fundamental datasets identi(cid:142) ed
in the strategy, Local Government is also able to play a major role in shaping the
entire SDI and providing feed back on its eVectiveness.

Recognising the intrinsic value of Local Government’s participation in the cre-
ation and more importantly the on-going maintenance role of the State’s geospatial
infrastructure, Land Victoria conceived the Property Information Project (PIP)
based on a co-operative model and commenced implementation of its (cid:142) rst stages
in 1997.

In 1992, the State Government of Victoria commissioned Tomlinson Associates
Ltd to develop a strategic framework for GIS development in the State. Taking over
18 months, this study was the most signi(cid:142) cant conducted in Victoria and remains
one of the most comprehensive ‘whole-of-Government’ reviews ever undertaken
(OGDC 1993a) .

The Tomlinson review assessed 61 information products in State Government
made up of 270 datasets. The datasets were also assessed against a number of criteria
including their frequency of use and contribution to downstream bene(cid:142) ts. On virtu-
ally all measures the digital cadastral mapbase came through as the highest priority
geospatial dataset for the State (see table 2).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 310

S. Jacoby et al.

Table 2. Five highest priority geospatial datasets based upon frequency of use and aggregated
downstream bene(cid:142) ts (OGDC 1993a, Appendix 4.1).

Dataset

Use (as a %
of the sample)

Comparative
rank value

1. State digital cadastral mapbase
2. Digital road centreline network
3. Digital topographic mapbase (1:100 000 scale)
4. Planning zones and controls layer
5. Digital topographic mapbase (1:25 000 scale)

36
28
33
21
26

7.1
4.8
3.9
3.8
3.1

As early as 1993, a clear consensus was forming as to the content and quality
that would be required in a State-wide digital cadastral mapbase to support modern
land administration systems:

an authoritative State-wide coverage of the distribution of land units in the
State, with standards for accuracy, quality and data transfer;
clear, current, and correct identi(cid:142) cation of both parcel and property land units;
supporting land unit attributes, e.g. area and dimensions, with other attributes
accessible via linkages to various agency databases;
centralized data set maintenance and the communication of updates to land
unit boundaries, unit identi(cid:142) ers and related attributes;
support for the communication of land information between agencies;
the ability to perform topologic (spatial) analyses. (OGDC 1993b, pp. 45–6)

The obstacles to be overcome in achieving these goals may be broadly grouped
under the headings of custodianship, and outsourcing, re-engineering and on-going
maintenance. The single largest barrier to implementing the recommendations of the
Tomlinson report with respect to the cadastral mapbase in the early 1990s was that
there was not a single custodian responsible for this database. This was not resolved
until May 1994 when a negotiated agreement between the State and Melbourne
Water Corporation (MWC) placed the cadastral mapbase under the control of Land
Victoria. (Note: Numerous organizationa l reforms over the last (cid:142) ve years have seen
responsibility for the core geospatial datasets reside with a number of oYces in the
including Survey & Mapping Victoria, OYce of
Victorian State Government,
Geographic Data Co-ordination, Geographic Data Victoria, Geospatial Information
and the Land information Group. The umbrella agency for these groups became
Land Victoria which for simplicity will be used in this paper to describe the respons-
ible agency.) . Prior to this, cadastral mapping of the Melbourne metropolitan area
involving approximately 15 000 km2 and 1.5 million parcels of land had been per-
formed by MWC.

During the latter half of 1994, digital cadastral mapping of all rural areas
(approximatel y 0.9 million parcels) was completed. Victoria was the last Australian
State to achieve full digital cadastral coverage, primarily because it committed to
complete its cadastral mapping at reasonably large scales, a minimum of 1:2500 in
rural townships and 1:25 000 in all other areas including deserts and highlands.

In becoming custodian for the entire cadastral mapbase for the State, Land
Victoria faced a number of signi(cid:142) cant challenges. The State had been focused on its
task of completing the initial cadastral mapping of rural Victoria and had invested
little eVort into the on-going maintenance of this data set. It was now faced with

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

311

having to maintain 2.4 million land parcels and add to it at least 50 000 new parcels
each year.

Land Victoria assessed its existing operational capacity as being unable to meet
the demands of this new activity and a decision was made to outsource the manage-
ment and on-going maintenance of the cadastral map base to the private sector.
Land Victoria would remain as custodian and owner of all intellectual property. It
would play a key role in specifying the service and data quality standards required
to be met by the contractor but it would not prescribe speci(cid:142) c technology (especially
hardware and GIS software). Following an open public tender, an initial contract
for management and maintenance of the Melbourne metropolitan component of the
cadastral mapbase was let and after this successful trial the entire mapbase was
outsourced, again via public tender for a period of three years, with a further three
year option subject to satisfactory performance of the contract.

This outsourcing gave Land Victoria the opportunity to re-engineer critical
aspects of how the State’s digital cadastral data would be structured and to specify
new functional requirements. Major features to be provided for in the re-engineered
mapbase were:

All spatial data to be stored in a single database, not in a proprietary GIS;
Land parcels and properties were to be catered for, and their relationship
correctly modelled;
Proposed land parcels must also be catered for in the database;
The cadastral base must be topologically structured (polygonised );
All data must be uniquely identi(cid:142) ed and time stamped (data would be retired—
never deleted from the database) ;
The cadastral database must be capable of providing incremental or
‘change-only’ updates to users.

Of the technical reforms made to the cadastral mapbase, the introduction of
‘property’ and ‘parcel’ as entities and the establishment of three key linkages: street
address; Council (Local Government ) property number; and, a standard parcel
identi(cid:142) er have been signi(cid:142) cant. It is these linkages or ‘foreign keys’ that provide the
connectivity between the cadastral mapbase and ‘other’ databases as expressed in
Land Victoria’s vision (above). Ensuring that these linkages function correctly
requires the relationships between the main entities (parcel and property) to be
correctly understood and managed. The following brief description of land parcels
and properties expands on how this important inter-relationship operates in Victoria.

3.1. L and parcels

The land parcel in the Victorian cadastral system (as in most Torrens registration
of title systems) is typically the smallest land unit capable of transfer and is often
used as the basic spatial unit in land information systems. A signi(cid:142) cant advantage
in using the land parcel as the basic spatial unit is that they are usually very
accurately described through the cadastral survey requirements of the Torrens system
for the purposes of title registration.

Victoria’s land parcels are described by a lot number referenced to a plan (see
(cid:142) gure 2). Land is either freehold or Crown, with a land title typically referring to
one or more freehold land parcels.

Another major advantage in basing a land information system on land parcels
is that the Land Titles OYce becomes the primary source for virtually all changes

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 312

S. Jacoby et al.

Figure 2. Parcel and Property Information.

that occur in the system through the processes of subdivision and consolidation of
parcels. All Australian digital cadastral mapbases depend upon ready access to, and
supply of parcel change information from their respective Land Titles OYces. This
is essential to maintain the current status of the cadastral map.

3.2. Properties

A property describes land under common occupation particularly for the purposes
of rating, billing or habitation. Properties, rather than land parcels are used
predominantl y as the basic record by Local Governments, utilities (water, power,
telecommunications) , postal and electoral authorities.

Whilst there is a strong correlation between parcels and properties, the relation-
ship may be ‘many to many’. A typical urban con(cid:142) guration would see a direct
correlation between the parcel and property (in Victoria, with its highly urbanized
population approximately 75% of its land records would be in this ‘one to one’
form). A common example of where many parcels make up one property occurs in
more rural areas, typically with farms. The reverse (many properties on one parcel)
is a less frequent occurrence, an example may be a shopping complex owned by a
developer which has numerous tenants or occupants.

The importance of managing properties, as well as parcels, in the cadastral
mapbase emerged through analysis of the contents of the rural and metropolitan
land information through the Victorian
mapbases and by studying the (cid:143) ow of
cadastral system which was conducted as part of the re-engineering eVort. Examples
of key supporting evidence for the inclusion of property in the cadastral database
include:

The metropolitan mapbase was originally compiled by Melbourne Water
Corporation (MWC), one of the State’s largest utilities with extensive business
systems dependent upon high quality land information. The base record used
by MWC is the ‘street address’. In eVect the ‘basic spatial unit’
in the
metropolitan and urban areas was the property, not the parcel.
Since the late 1980s a number of local Governments have acquired a copy of
the digital cadastral mapbase under license from Land Victoria. Very few local

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

313

Governments have also taken up the maintenance service from Land Victoria
usually choosing to maintain a local copy of the mapbase themselves. A key
reason for this is the substantial eVort required to match the cadastral mapbase
with local Government’s property based information systems–resupply of the
cadastral mapbase as part of a maintenance service would necessitate constant
rematching.
Local Government, not State Government in Victoria (and most of Australia)
is the responsible authority for the allocation of street address information,
including house numbers, most road and suburb names. This key piece of
information is seen increasingly as fundamentally important to a range of
existing and new users, particularly those outside of the traditional land admin-
istration disciplines. If Land Victoria hopes to grow the number of users of its
cadastral data, particularly in the general and business community, it is essential
to secure a consisting supply of current State-wide property information.

By including ‘parcel’ and ‘property’ as entities in the cadastral mapbase and ensuring
the (sometimes complex) relationships that exist between them were able to be
managed, Land Victoria had signi(cid:142) cantly improved the database’s capability. But it
is important to note that this was only a technical reform which created an improved
data structure. The real challenge was how to populate that database with quality
parcel and property information and ensure its eVective maintenance. This resulted
in the Property Information Project.

4. The Property Information Project

The objectives of the Property Information Project (PIP) were to establish a
infrastructure between Local and State Government based
common geospatial
around the digital cadastral mapbase. The outcome planned from PIP was to map
completely for the (cid:142) rst time all of Victoria’s properties, to store these spatially in
the cadastral mapbase together with their relationships to land parcels. This would
be done in alliance with the State’s 78 Local Governments over an initial two-year
period. This establishment phase was planned as a transition into an on-going
maintenance regime, which would be secured by a data exchange agreement between
the State and each of the Local Governments.

Land Victoria’s proposal was a simple one: the State would provide funding
(approximatel y US$3m State-wide) to match or reconcile the Council’s rating data-
base with the cadastral mapbase –creating the property layer; each Council would
be allowed use of the mapbase at a frequency to be agreed. In return, each Council
was asked to agree to: adopt one version of the cadastral mapbase (Land Victoria’s);
allow key property information advice of all proposed plans of subdivision and
changes to property information (for example, new street addresses) to fuel the
maintenance process.

The most important characteristic of the project was that a Local Government’s
involvement is voluntary. From Land Victoria’s perspective, this was also PIP’s
greatest risk. Without legislative support the success of the project depended upon
Councils agreeing to join and remain in the project based solely on the project’s
merits.

4.1. Project stages

From the outset of PIP it was clear that eVective communications between Land
Victoria and the 78 Local Governments in the State would be essential to the

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 314

S. Jacoby et al.

project’s success. A major commitment was made to face-to-face meetings in the (cid:142) rst
few months of the project, following up on a letter of introduction and a project ‘kit’
sent to each Council’s Chief Executive OYcer. A formal presentation was made to
every Local Government in the State between July and December 1997. The objective
of this step was to establish a key contact in each Council and to seek Council’s
‘in-principle’ agreement to proceed to the next stage of the project (see (cid:142) gure 3).

A dedicated project team was established in Land Victoria and as each Council
came into the project a ‘liaison’ oYcer from Land Victoria was assigned. As questions
and issues began to emerge from the Councils about various aspects of the project,
these were documented in ‘Fact Sheets’ and a regular newsletter was established to
aid communications. A dedicated e-mail address was also established for PIP. The
high level of communication developed in this introductory period remains a feature
of the project today.

The (cid:142) rst few stages were designed to present the project as a very low-risk to
Councils and to engender their support for PIP. By ‘gating’ the project in this
manner, particularly in seeking ‘in-principle’ agreement at a very early stage the
objective was to gain senior endorsement as well as to highlight and address any
barriers or issues that a Council may have with the project.

In the third stage Land Victoria funded a brief fact-(cid:142) nding consultancy. This
con(cid:142) dential study was designed to identify the current status of each Council with
respect to its use of GIS and to try and ascertain its future directions. This analysis
took between two days and a week to perform. The outcome of the study demon-
strated a number of signi(cid:142) cant diVerences between Local Governments across the
State beyond the obvious variations of geography, population or land use. In

Figure 3. PIP stages.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

315

particular, major diVerences were found in the knowledge and understanding of GIS
technology and the extent to which Local Government saw GIS being utilised in its
future operations. An interesting example of these variations may be seen where
Local Governments choose to organizationally locate their GIS activities. Whilst
most saw GIS as an extension of its IT departments, there appears to be a trend to
establish ‘stand-alone’ GIS departments as corporate units. The more traditional
location of GIS activities was as an adjunct to engineering, planning or rating
functions ((cid:142) gure 4).

The analysis stage resulted in an excellent understanding of the priorities and
technical capability of each Council. This information was used to design a pro-
gramme of works. The main focus of the Works Programme was around the reconcili-
ation of property and parcel information. This task to establish the property layer
in the cadastral mapbase involves automatic matching of spatial records in the
Council’s rating database with attributes available in the cadastral mapbase. This
would usually generate a match rate of between 50% and 80%. Re(cid:142) ned automatic
matching and manual record reconciliation would follow. The available funding
typically enabled PIP to establish a 90% to 95% match rate at the end of the
contracted works stage. Data may remain unmatched for a number of reasons with
these unmatched records being identi(cid:142) ed as part of the PIP programme and priorit-
ized for further investigation. In many cases they may not be resolved without a title
search or (cid:142) eld examination which may be scheduled as part of Council’s other
activities or dealt with if and when they arose as part of on-going maintenance.

Data reconciliation was not the only task undertaken as part of the Works
Programme. Other activities that were undertaken include the allocation of addresses
to properties, the identi(cid:142) cation of Crown land and its inclusion in Council’s rating
database and the establishment of processes to aid the on-going maintenance of the
cadastral mapbase.

It was not unusual for there to be several iterations of the proposed Works
Programme between Land Victoria and a Council. The (cid:142) nal programme also details
the level of funding to be provided by Land Victoria and indicates how the works
are to be completed. In many instances, the Works Programmes were tailored to
compliment tasks already underway within Council. In many cases, Councils indi-
cated a preference to undertake aspects of the work themselves. Alternatively, Land
Victoria would tender the work to a panel of private sector providers especially
established as part of PIP.

Importantly, at this point, all works and their funding are speci(cid:142) ed in a contract
to be executed by the State and the Council. This agreement explicitly details each

Figure 4. Departmental location of GIS units in Local Government.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 316

S. Jacoby et al.

party’s tasks and responsibilities including the on-going supply of information from
Council to Land Victoria and Land Victoria’s provision of the updated cadastral
mapbase back to Council (schedules in the contract specify formats, frequencies,
etc.). The term of the agreement was three years. A number of Councils expressed
concern on this point and sought signi(cid:142) cantly longer terms. In recognition of this,
Land Victoria amended the agreement to a ‘rolling three year term’ to be renewed
every 12 months.

4.2. Progress to date

The focus of the project in the (cid:142) rst twelve months was clearly on the introductory
stage with 53 Councils agreeing ‘in-principle’ to enter PIP by June 1998 and all
Councils agreeing by December 1998 (see (cid:142) gure 5).

Contracts began being signed by Councils in the latter half of 1998 with 46 in
place by the end of that year. Upon signing, funding to commence work on the
agreed Works Programme became available, which in turn led to reconciled property
data being loaded into the cadastral mapbase, quality assured and (cid:142) nally a Council
entering the on-going maintenance phase.

As of August 2000, a total of 71 Councils had entered formal contracts with
Land Victoria, 58 Councils had completed data reconciliation activities and 53 had
entered the on-going maintenance phase.

4.3. L essons learnt

Local Government’s involvement in GIS and acceptance of the State’s previous
geospatial strategies has been mixed. Without legislative support requiring agencies
to adopt the State’s geospatial strategy, progress is dependent upon co-operation
between participants based upon mutual advantage . Clearly, unless participants
derive value or bene(cid:142) t from these initiatives there will be limited involvement and a
lack of commitment.

4.4. Bene(cid:142) ts of PIP to L ocal Government

The diversity of Local Government in Victoria with respect to GIS approach
and implementation which has been highlighted in this paper also results in a mix
of bene(cid:142) ts for respective Councils. Clearly there are direct bene(cid:142) ts for Local
Government in the project. The most obvious relate to licence fees, monetary assist-
ance with data reconciliation and on-going maintenance of the cadastral mapbase.
Prior to the PIP initiative, Local Government was treated identically to any

Figure 5. Progress of PIP—number of Local Governments reaching key milestones.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

317

other prospective user or licensee of the State’s cadastral mapbase. Licence fees for
initial access were charged and for an average sized Council these would be around
US$30 000. Approximately one third of the State’s Local Governments were not
utilising the mapbase in any form–the initial licence fees were a major barrier to
entry for many users. But there was also a degree of uncertainty amongst many
Local Governments about the best way to introduce GIS. PIP provided a structured
and well supported approach that was seen by Councils as vendor independent and
a lower risk path to GIS implementation.

PIP also brought some capital funding to assist mostly in the data reconciliation
stage which resulted in the establishment of the property layer. Based upon agreed
recommendations in the Works Programme between US$10 000 and US$25 000 was
made available to Councils for these tasks. One of the Councils which has completed
the reconciliation phase reported ‘(cid:142) nding’ 400 land parcels which were not included
in their property database, which when amended generated an additional US$65 000
pa income for that particular Council (increasing their annual budget by 3%).

Beyond the establishment phase and particularly for half of the State’s Local
Governments which were already involved in maintaining their own copy of the
cadastral mapbase the main bene(cid:142) t is in free on-going maintenance. Comparisons
are diYcult between Councils for reasons already cited, however, one metropolitan
Council reported to have had reduced the labour allocated to cadastral maintenance
by 30 hours per month following the introduction of the full PIP maintenance
regime. If the experience of that Council was averaged across Victoria the potential
saving in duplicated activity would be approximately 17 person years pa. Given the
higher degree of change in the urban compared with rural areas the project team
believes the savings from duplicated eVort would be around half of that (cid:142) gure, i.e. 8
person years pa.

Numerous bene(cid:142) ts were also identi(cid:142) ed during the consulting stage of PIP, which
into the general categories of administration, decision making, operations

fall
management and service delivery:

1. Administration

rates information is more complete and accurate through correct identi(cid:142) ca-
tion of all properties and land parcels within properly de(cid:142) ned Council
boundaries;
costs of acquiring and maintaining high quality property information are
minimal because of Land Victoria’s entry assistance to Councils and
on-going maintenance of integrated map data;
higher quality information creates possibilities for generating income
through selling information;
improved staV productivity and customer satisfaction due to quick access
to quality, electronic information;
comprehensive, quality information provides protection against loss of staV
with ‘local knowledge’;
all properties within the municipality are allotted street addresses, bene(cid:142) ting
a range of Council and general services from emergency response to
goods delivery;
all Crown land within a municipality is correctly de(cid:142) ned;
electronic, high quality map information provides consistent up-to-date
maps across the Council’s operation;

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 318

S. Jacoby et al.

electronic information minimises data duplication; and
contract management is made easier.

2. Decision making

produces better analysis of development applications; and
provides better response to potential business investors.

3. Operations management

assists in asset management and planning;
facilitates better development of tourism areas;
helps environment management;
helps align open spaces with resident needs; and
assists in achieving statutory compliance (to AAS27 standard) for asset
management and strategic asset planning.

4. Service delivery

quick access to quality, electronic information provides better responses to
enquiries and improved customer service;
electronic information can create opportunities for Councils to provide
remote access for information customers such as surveyors; and
higher quality information helps identify and track service levels, boosting
development of customer service charters (Land Victoria 1997).

4.5. Additional bene(cid:142) ts of PIP to State Government

In addition to PIP providing the means to populate the State’s re-engineered
cadastral mapbase and deliver a key component of Victoria’s SDI, there are numerous
other bene(cid:142) ts to the State that are emerging. There are presently over 500 agencies
and organizations using the State’s cadastral mapbase. Many of them have a critical
need for up-to-date property data, including planners, valuers, estate agents and
other land professionals. Perhaps the most critical users of all are the State’s emer-
gency services ((cid:142) re, police and ambulance) which utilise address data in their com-
puter aided dispatch system. Clearly all of these users will bene(cid:142) t signi(cid:142) cantly from
the current, secure, higher quality data generated through PIP.

By adopting a centralized data maintenance model in PIP, Land Victoria has
also been able to signi(cid:142) cantly decrease the amount of duplicative maintenance
activity that was occurring across Local Government and ensure that an agreed
standard of data quality is achieved (there are currently only four Councils
maintaining the mapbase by other means compared to 37 in 1997, see (cid:142) gure 6).

Whilst PIP cannot claim to be the sole factor in introducing digital mapping
and GIS to Local Government in the last two years, it has been a signi(cid:142) cant
contributor particularly in rural Victoria where communities tend to be more sparse,
widely dispersed and their local governments generally more poorly resourced. Also,
these rural communities often need the spatial data for better land management and
agri-business. This opportunity has proven to be of signi(cid:142) cant interest to the State’s
growing geospatial information industry keen to provide further value added services.
To date, this paper has discussed the Property Information Project’s primary
relationship between Local Government and the State Government (Land Victoria).
The successful completion of the project and establishment of a fully maintained
mapbase in conjunction with all Local Governments in the State provides an excellent
opportunity to leverage PIP into other areas and improve the (cid:143) ow of information

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

319

Figure 6. Change in Local Government’s utilisation of the cadastral mapbase 1997 to 2000.

to a wider group of stakeholders and investigate opportunities for broader scale
process re-engineering.

4.6. Future developments for the Property Information Project

The current forecasts for PIP plan to have signed agreements in place with all
78 Councils by February 2000 and for all to have entered on-going maintenance by
July 2001. This will remain the project’s highest priority, however, a number of other
developments are being pursued in parallel. By broadening the scope of PIP beyond
the immediate relationship between Local and State Government and mapping the
information (cid:143) ows through the land development cycle it is clear that there are
a number of other stakeholders that would bene(cid:142) t from a common geospatial
infrastructure being established (see (cid:142) gure 7).

These stakeholders include developers and survey consultants who frequently
collect digital data as part of their operations but are then required under existing
procedures to provide hardcopy plans and forms to Local Government. There is a
clear preference amongst survey consultants and Local Government for this informa-
tion to move around digitally according to a standard. As a consequence PIP has
identi(cid:142) ed a sub-project to establish a protocol for the transfer of digital spatial data
dealing with proposed plans of subdivision. It is proposed that this data, with
Council’s approval, could be submitted directly to Land Victoria for inclusion in the
cadastral mapbase (see (cid:142) gure 3—Step 3). Upon entering the data, Council and other
interested parties, particularly referral authorities such as Water Boards and other
utilities may be advised electronically of the development signi(cid:142) cantly shortening
the time involved in processing this information. A discussion paper on this subject
is currently being developed by Land Victoria and progress can be monitored on
our web site: http://www.land.vic.gov.au/SPEAR

Ultimately, PIP represents a fundamental institutional arrangement from which

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 320

S. Jacoby et al.

PIP Establishment Stage
A      Master copy of the State’s Digital Cadastral Mapbase
B      Duplicate or ‘Mirror’ copy of the Cadastral Mapbase held by Council
C      Key Linkages (Council Property Number) exist between the mapbase and Council’s Property or Rates

Database

Information Flows
1.     Land Developers in conjunction with Surveyors prepare Proposed Plan of Subdivision
2.     Proposed Plan of Subdivision in Digital Form (geometry only)
3.     PPS is transferred electronically  to Land Victoria for entry into the State’s Digital Cadastral Mapbase
4.     Local Government is noti(cid:142) ed of the Development Application electronically
5.     Referral  Authorities are noti(cid:142) ed of the Development Application electronically  (mapbase maintenance)
6.     Referral  Authorities provide Local Government with input on the Development Application
7.     Local Govt. Certi(cid:142) es the Development Application for lodgement electronically  at the Land Titles Of(cid:142) ce
8.     Plan is Registered at the Land Titles Of(cid:142) ce and all interested parties are noti(cid:142) ed electronically
9.     Other users of the Geospatial Infrastructure monitor, or are advised as changes/transactions occur

Figure 7. Property Information Project, stakeholders and information (cid:143) ows.

to build the vision of a spatial data infrastructure that will properly support the
complexity of decision-making demanded by the challenges that sustainable develop-
ment poses for dialogue between every level of community, private sector and
government.

5. Conclusions

A signi(cid:142) cant number of the general trends in SDI development are re(cid:143) ected in
the Victorian initiatives towards developing a common spatial data infrastructure
to better support public and private sector activities.

Land Victoria has as one of its goals the achievement of a high quality Spatial
Data Infrastructure for the State Government of Victoria. A major component of
that infrastructure is the digital cadastral mapbase, which has been consolidated and
updated. Another major component is the property information data, which was
dispersed among 78 Local Government authorities. Over the last (cid:142) ve years, Land
Victoria has managed to ensure a single custodian for the digital cadastral database
and re-engineer its technical content and structure through outsourcing. It has also,

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 Developing a common SDI between State and L ocal Government

321

through the Property Information Project achieved mutual institutional co-operation
with Local Government that in turn achieves a de(cid:142) nitive, secure and reliable source
of property information for the use of all Victorians.

The development of single custodianship has had signi(cid:142) cance from a technical
perspective in that this also paves the way for improved uniformity of standards of
metadata, fundamental datasets, administrative policies as well as accessibility issues.
Together, these aspects will form the foundations for the interoperability of datasets
and the healthy growth of the spatial data infrastructure.

Whilst much remains to be done (there is signi(cid:142) cant scope for improved processes
to be developed in related areas and the diversity of stakeholders expanded), the
basis of the project’s success will be the common SDI formed between State and
Local Government through a continued cooperative partnership approach.

In the (cid:142) nal analysis, the success of an initiative like PIP is essential to the
establishment of an eVective spatial data infrastructure. Together with progressive
legal and institutional infrastructure to assure equitable access, an eVective spatial
data infrastructure has the potential to form an important supportive pillar for good
governance and to facilitate the informed dialogue that is necessary for sustainable
development.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully wish to acknowledge the support of Land Victoria (LV)
in the preparation of this article. The authors
of the Victorian Government
also acknowledge the support of
(ARC)
the Australian Research Council
(Grants C19700324 and C49930403) in supporting the research mentioned in the
paper and the assistance provided by their colleagues at the Centre for Spatial Data
Infrastructure and Land Administration, Department of Geomatics, the University
of Melbourne in the preparation of the paper http://www.geom.unimelb.edu.au /
research/SDI_research/. However, the views expressed in the paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily re(cid:143) ect the views of LV and the ARC.

References
ABS, 1999, Pocket Year Book of Australia (Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statitistics).
AUSLIG, 2000, Australian Spatial Data Infrastructure <http://www.auslig.gov.au/asdi/ >

(12 August, 2000).

Coleman, D. J., and McLaughlin, J., 1998, De(cid:142) ning global geospatial data infrastructure

(GGDI): Components, stakeholders and interfaces. Geomatica, 52, 129–43.

Federal Geographic Data Committee, 2000, Federal Geographic Data Committee

<http://www.fgdc.gov/ > (3 August 2000).

Land Victoria, 1997, Property Information Project Fact Sheet No 1 (Land Victoria:

Department of Natural Resources and Environment).

Land Victoria, 1999, V ictorian Geospatial Information Strategy 2000 –2003 (Land Victoria:

Department of Natural Resources and Environment).

Masser, I., 1998, An International Overview of Geospatial Information Infrastructures:

Lessons to be Learnt for the NGDF
<http://www.ngdf.org.uk/Pubdocs/General/mass7.98.htm > (14 August 2000).
Mooney, J. D., and Grant, D. M., 1997, The Australian Spatial Data Infrastructure. In
(Cambridge: GeoInformation

the World, edited by D. Rhind.

Framework of
International ), pp. 187–201.

OGDC, 1993a, GIS Strategy Report 1993, State Government of Victoria Strategic Framework
for GIS Development ( Victoria, Australia: Tomlinson Associates Ltd, OYce of
Geographic Data Coordination, Department of Treasury and Finance).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 322

OGDC, 1993b,. Report No 2, GIS Planning, Land Status and Assets Management, State
Government of Victoria Strategic Framework for GIS Development
( Victoria,
Australia: Tomlinson Associates Ltd, OYce of Geographic Data Coordination,
Department of Treasury and Finance.

Onsrud, H. J., 1998, A global survey of national spatial data infrastructure activities

<http://www.spatial.maine.edu/~onsrud/gsdi/surveysum.htm > (2 August, 2000).

Rajabifard, A., Williamson, I., Holland, P., and Johnstone, G., 2000, From local to global
SDI initiatives: a pyramid to building blocks. In Proceedings of 4th Global Spatial
Data Infrastructure Conference, Cape T own, South Af rica, 13–15 March.

Suwarnarat, K., Karuppannan, S., Haider, W., Yaqub, H. W., Escobar, F. E., Bishop, I.,
Yates, P. M., and Williamson, I. P., 2000, Spatial data infrastructures for cities in
developing countries: lessons from the Bangkok Experience. Cities, 17, 85–96.
Tosta, N., 1997, Building national spatial data infrastructures: Roles and Responsibilities

<http://www.gisqatar.org.qa/conf97/links/g1.html > (17 February, 1999).

Williamson, I. P., Chan, T. O., and Effenberg, W. W., 1998, Development of spatial data
infrastructures–lessons learned from the Australian digital cadastral databases.
Geomatica, 52, 177–187.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 05:57 09 October 2014 