int. j. geographical information science, 2002
vol. 16, no. 6, 551± 569

Research Article

A data model for multi-dimensional transportation applications

NICHOLAS A. KONCZ
USDOT Eisenhower Fellow, Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2205 Engineering Hall, 1415
Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA;
e-mail: nakoncz@students.wisc.edu

and TERESA M. ADAMS
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 2208 Engineering Hall, 1415 Engineering Drive, Madison,
WI 53706, USA; e-mail: adams@engr.wisc.edu

(Received 13 July 2001; accepted 9 November 2001)

Abstract. The distinctive data management needs of transportation agencies in
developing transportation-based applications dictate the presence of essential
elements that are beyond existing transportation location referencing system data
models. These elements include multi-dimensional location referencing, multi-
scale representation, navigation, and temporal GIS. This paper looks at the
foundation for these elements, describes the characteristics of these elements and
oVers solutions through a transportation-based multi-dimensional data model.
By managing data expressed in one to four dimensions, the Multi-Dimensional
Location Referencing System (MDLRS) data model allows organizations to
implement improved solutions for transportation systems using advanced spatial
technologies (e.g. GPS).

1.

Introduction
The focus of state departments of transportatio n (DOT) is changing from distinct
facility planning, designing, building, and rebuilding phases to managing the entire
lifecycle of facilities. This new focus means that DOTs are taking on the role of
operating facilities. Consequently, the emerging data needs of DOTs not only include
facility inventory and condition assessment but also real-time data to support applica-
tions as intelligent transportatio n systems (ITS), incident management, and driver
information systems. With mandates for statewide planning and sharing of data
across levels of government, the scope of data requirements for these applications
are broadening to include multi-organizationa l considerations.

With spatial technologies such as Global Positioning System (GPS), transporta-
tion agencies are collecting three-dimensional measurements for transportation-base d
data such as incidents that were previously collected using linear location referencing
methods, such as milepoint. A linear referencing method is a mechanism for (cid:142) nding
and stating the location of an unknown point along a network by referencing it to

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Informatio n Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810210138724

552

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

a known point ( Vonderohe et al. 1997). However, once three-dimensional data is
collected, transportatio n agencies are left to deal with determining the relationship
of this data with existing linearly-referenced attribute data along with the associated
cartographic centerline in their spatial databases. Issues regarding the storage of
multi-dimensional data, inherent error in both GPS and linear measurements, and
the transformation of data from linear and non-linear coordinate systems become
legitimate.

Therefore, with the emergence of GPS and other spatial technologies in addition
to the changing role and focus of transportatio n agencies, there is a driving need for
a location referencing system that can accommodate and integrate data expressed
in one to four dimensions. Most transportatio n agencies currently manage data that
is referenced in one, two, three, and four dimensions. However, these data are usually
managed with databases and technologies that cannot be integrated due in part to
the lack of a comprehensive model for location referencing of the data.

A comprehensive location referencing system data model must encompass all the
elements and abstractions for the multi-dimensional representation of transportation -
based objects and events. The data model must be able to represent objects and
events in the form or dimension in which they occur in the real world, whether it is
one-dimensional (e.g. guard rail), two-dimensional (e.g. a parking lot), or three-
dimensional (e.g. an interchange) . However, in the real world, these dimensional
objects are dynamic, that is, they change in time and are referenced by their state in
time. Therefore, a true comprehensive location referencing system (LRS) data model
must incorporate the fourth dimension, time.

National Cooperative Highway Research Program Project 20-27(3) was initiated
to develop a comprehensive transportation location referencing system data model.
The goals of this project were to establish consensus-based functional requirements
for a transportation-base d multi-dimensional LRS data model, to develop an
improved LRS data model that met the functional requirements and to develop
guidelines to implement this improved LRS data model in transportatio n agencies.
This paper presents the consensus-base d functional requirements from that pro-
ject and how the resultant Multi-Dimensional Multi-Modal Location Referencing
System (MDLRS) data model satis(cid:142) es these functional requirements. In particular,
this paper hopes to provide a new level of understanding by focusing on the elements
of the MDLRS data model that are extensions beyond existing LRS data models.

2. Functional requirements for multi-dimensiona l data management

One of the (cid:142) rst steps in developing a comprehensive transportatio n LRS is to
identify the system’s functional requirements (i.e. what it is intended to do). A
workshop of 34 invited participants who contributed expertise in the areas of trans-
portation planning, highway construction, asset management, highway, safety and
incident management, traYc management, highway operations, transit facilities and
operation and commercial vehicles and (cid:143) eet management was convened in December
1998. The objective of the workshop was to identify and de(cid:142) ne functional require-
ments that must be supported by a comprehensive transportatio n LRS data model
for data management.

Ten core functional requirements were synthesized from the results of the stake-
holders’ workshop. These core functional requirements form the essence of a data
model required to accommodate a comprehensive transportation location referencing

A data model for MDL RS

553

system. Adams et al. (2000) provides a review of each of the functional requirements.
Each of the ten core functional requirements is stated below.

1. Spatial/T emporal Referencing Methods: A comprehensive location referencing
system data model supports the locate, place and position processes for
objects and events in three-dimensions and time.

2. T emporal Referencing System/T emporal Datum: A comprehensive location
referencing system data model accommodate s a temporal datum that relates
the database representation to the real world and provides the domain for
transformation s among temporal referencing methods.

3. T emporal T opology/L atency: A comprehensive location referencing system
data model supports temporal relationships among objects and events and
the latency of events (i.e. diVerence in time between scheduled and actual
events occurring at a particular location).

4. Historical Databases: A comprehensive location referencing system data
model supports regeneration of object and network states over time, and
maintains the network event history.

5. Dynamics: A comprehensive location referencing system data model supports
the navigation of objects, in near real-time and contingent upon various
criteria, along a traversal in a transportatio n network.

6. T ransformation of Data Sets: A comprehensive location referencing system
data model supports transformation between linear, nonlinear and temporal
referencing methods without loss of spatial/temporal accuracy, precision, and
resolution.

7. Multiple Cartographic/Spatial T opological Representations: A comprehen-
sive location referencing system data model supports multiple cartographic
and topological representations at both the same and varying levels of
generalization of transportatio n objects.

8. Resolution: A comprehensive location referencing system data model supports
the display and analysis of objects and events at multiple spatial and temporal
resolutions.

9. Object-L evel Metadata: A comprehensive location referencing system data
model stores and expresses object-level metadata to guide general data use.
10. Accuracy and Error Propagation: A comprehensive location referencing
system data model
error measures with
spatial/temporal data at the object-level and propagation of those errors
through analytical processes.

association of

supports

Several of

requirements

these core functional

form natural associations.
Requirements 1 to 4 deal with modelling the temporal element of data, while
requirement 5 focuses on use of the temporal element. Requirements 7 and 8 are
often dependent upon each other; a change in resolution may require a change in
representation of data. Requirement 10 is a natural extension of requirement 9 in
that accuracy is one of the elements of metadata.

In this paper the MDLRS conceptual data model is described using the Uni(cid:142) ed
Modelling Language (UML) speci(cid:142) cation (Booch et al. 1999), an accepted industry
object-oriented modelling notation for conceptual modelling. Implementation tools
(i.e. logical and physical data models such as entity-relationshi p diagrams) and a
thorough testing (e.g. functional requirement testing) of the MDLRS conceptual data

554

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

model were left to future eVorts. Figure 1 provides an overview of the UML notation.
Booch et al. (1999) provides a more complete description of the UML speci(cid:142) cation.

3. Foundation of a multi-dimensional data model

The Multi-Dimensional Location Referencing System (MDLRS) data model
provides a framework to support each of the functional requirements. While there
are other transportation-base d location referencing data models (e.g. Enterprise
GIS-T (Dueker and Butler 1998), NSDI (FGDC 2001), UNETRANS (Curtin et al.
2001), and GIS-T ISTEA PFS (Fletcher et al. 1995)), none of these models addresses
all ten functional requirements, including those requirements involving the temporal
dimension. This section provides an overview of the key elements of the MDLRS
data model.

Some multi-dimensional (i.e. spatio-tempora l) data models represent reality as
three domains: spatial, temporal and aspatial (e.g. the TRIAD model by Peuquet
and Qian, 1997, and the Three-Domain Model by Yuan 1997). These models separate
the ‘what’ (i.e. aspatial ), the ‘when’ (i.e. temporal ) and the ‘where’ (i.e. spatial). By
representing phenomena as separate domains, redundancy can be eliminated by
linking spatial objects with the same geographical meanings to one description (Yuan
1997). As shown by Yuan (1997 ) this type of model also allows for modelling of
dynamics (e.g. movement of storms and the spread of (cid:142) res) not possible in other
multi-dimensional data models.

The Multi-Dimensional Multi-Modal Transportation Location Referencing
System (MDLRS) data model adopts concepts from three-domain multi-dimensional
data models. Figure 2 provides a conceptual overview of the MDLRS data model.
‘what’) of phenomena is stored in the
In this (cid:142) gure the aspatial domain (i.e.

Figure 1. UML notation (after ISO 15046, 2000) .

A data model for MDL RS

555

Figure 2. UML conceptual view of MDLRS data model.

Transportation Feature object; the spatial domain (i.e.
SpatialObject and the temporal domain (‘when’) is stored in the TimeObject.

‘where’)

is stored in the

In the MDLRS data model Transportation Features

represent a non-
decomposable real world or virtual phenomenon in the transportatio n domain, such
as signs, pavements, highways, airports, interchanges, roadways, bridge elements,
reference objects and vehicles. Transportation Features contain aspatial attributes
that can be quantitative (e.g. pavement index, vehicular volume) or qualitative (e.g.
color of a sign).

SpatialObjects, in the MDLRS data model, provide the spatial characteristics
(i.e. ‘where’) of a Transportation Feature and is described by one or more Geometric
and/or TopologicObjects. Each instance of a SpatialObject has one coordinate
representation or
referenced
that
SpatialReferencingSystem.

consistent with its

storage

format

is

In the MDLRS data model, TimeObjects store the temporal element of phen-
omena and its behavior. The TimeObject provides the metric description by means
of temporal primitive and aggregate objects, of the temporal characteristics of
Transportation Features and Events. TimeObjects can represent a speci(cid:142) c or rela-
tive portion of a time line with an associated TemporalReferenceSystem object.

556

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

TimeObjects can be used to de(cid:142) ne temporal attributes of Transportation Features
(e.g. operating conditions of a High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lane, or a signal
timing sequence) and de(cid:142) ne validity periods (i.e. time of creation to time of retirement)
of aspatial attributes (e.g. the time period of a roadway volume count) and
SpatialObjects.

Langran (1992) asserts that there are at least three sorts of multi-dimensional
data in GIS: states, events and evidence. A version of what we know of an entity in
a speci(cid:142) ed moment in time is called a ‘state’. According to Langran (1992), the
moment (i.e. instant) when an occurrence takes place is an ‘event’. Events cause one
state to change to another. The discovery and measurement of changes in entities
are described by ‘evidence’. It provides the basis for updating a state (Wachowicz
1999). The combination of events, states, and evidence show, for example, what
roads have been in a region, what changes have occurred to those roads, and how
those changes occurred.

In the MDLRS data model Event and Experience objects ((cid:142) gure 2) represent
Langran’s (1992) concepts of event and evidence (with minor modi(cid:142) cations), respect-
ively. Event objects represent occurrences that change the state of Transportation
Features via attributes (i.e. spatial, aspatial, and temporal). Examples of Event objects
include incidents, construction, maintenance, planned activities, and transit schedules.
In the MDLRS data model, an Event object occurs at a time (e.g. an instant, period
or complex) de(cid:142) ned by a TimeObject and at a location de(cid:142) ned by a SpatialObject.
The changed attributes of Transportation Features result in diVerent versions of that
Transportation Feature. The evidence of spatial, aspatial, or temporal changes in a
speci(cid:142) c Transportation Feature caused by an Event object is registered in an
Experience object. The Experience object relates Event objects to Transportation
Features. The collection of Experiences that the Transportation Feature participated
in represents the history of the Transportation Feature (Fletcher et al. 1995 ).

4. Essential components in managing multi-dimensiona l data

The rest of this paper looks at the elements of the Multi-Dimensional Location
Referencing System (MDLRS) data model that are extensions beyond existing trans-
portation LRS data models. Those signi(cid:142) cant elements include temporal GIS-T,
navigation, multi-dimensional location referencing, and multi-scale representations.
For each element, we present motivational background along with an explanation
of how the MDLRS data model realizes the underlying functional requirement.
More details on how the MDLRS data model satis(cid:142) es each of the ten functional
requirements listed previously can be found in Adams et al. (2001 ).

4.1. T emporal GIS-T

All real-world objects are referenced by their state in time. An object may be
permanent, but its characteristics change with time and, therefore, the object evolves
with time. A comprehensive transportatio n LRS must facilitate the spectrum of
temporal-based business functions and applications for transportatio n agencies.
These applications can range from pavement management (for historical records) to
transit (for arrival times), to commercial vehicle operations (for vehicle tracking), to
congestion management (for dynamic network modelling).

Location in space does not exist without time. The position of any object is the
total region of space occupied by that object at a time (Galton 1997). The location
of that object is then referenced by the period of time that object existed, that is, if

A data model for MDL RS

557

I knew where an object was, I should know when the object was at that location,
and the converse is true. Both location and time are necessary to provide a complete
reference.

The requirement for GIS to represent the temporal dimension is not new.
Substantial research has occurred among those in the geographical informational
sciences area and in the computer sciences on the issues of incorporating time into
information systems. Abraham and Roddick (1999) provide a complete and recent
survey of multi-dimensional database research. Temporal research in the transporta-
tion community has lagged behind and has been sparse. However, the need for the
temporal element in GIS-T was identi(cid:142) ed by Spear (1994), Al-Taha and Abas (1994),
and Sutton (1994). Spear (1994) identi(cid:142) ed the provision of temporal display and
analysis capabilities as one of four most critical enhancements that will be needed
in the near future to address emerging GIS applications in urban transportation .

Therefore, the temporal dimension then becomes the context for location referen-
cing systems and its integration is critical to our understanding of the behaviour of
objects. Providing a framework for the integration of the temporal dimension with
geo-referenced data was a major goal of the MDLRS data model and is illustrated
by the (cid:142) rst four functional requirements: storage of temporal data, referencing of
temporal data, temporal relationships or reasoning among objects, and temporal
reasoning among states of an object. The following subsections discuss how the
MDLRS data model satis(cid:142) es these functional requirements.

4.1.1. T emporal storage

The storage of the temporal element of phenomena and its behaviour is repres-
ented in the MDLRS data model as a TimeObject ((cid:142) gure 3). TimeObjects (adopted
from the CGIS-SAIF, 1995 model) represent the temporal metrics of phenomena
and can accommodate absolute, relative and multi-dimensional time structures. It

Figure 3. Time object constructs.

558

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

can be represented as a timestamp, or a point on a time line (DateTime object). The
TimeObject can also be represented as a Duration object, where only temporal
length not position is given (e.g. 5 hours, Monday, January, etc). Also, the TimeObject
can be represented as an Interval object, where a segment of time is de(cid:142) ned by two
DateTime objects (e.g. date of creation and date of retirement) or one DateTime
object and a Duration. Finally,
the TimeObject can be represented as an
TimeAggregate object, the temporal equivalent of a GeometricComplex object. The
TimeAggregate object can represent temporal structures such as Cycles, Breaks,
Stages and Sequences.

The TimeObject primitives and aggregates record when an activity actually
occurred (i.e. ‘valid’ time). However, the time in which the activity was recorded in
the database may be diVerent from which it actually occurred. The time when the
activity was recorded in the database is called ‘transaction’ or ‘system’ time
(Snodgrass and Ahn 1987). In the MDLRS data model, transaction time is recorded
in the SourceMetadata object associated with a TimeObject.

4.1.2. T emporal referencing

The measurement of time, like space, implies a measurement scheme or a reference
system. Reference systems in the spatial domain are generally explicit, otherwise data
sets of that system become virtually useless. A temporal reference system is often
implicit. We often assume that everyone is using the same units of measure and are
calibrated to some external reference (e.g. an oYcial clock). However diVerences in
temporal data from time oVsets (e.g. zonal time, or slow/fast clocks), calendric oVsets
(e.g. a (cid:142) scal year), calendric metrics (e.g. Jewish calendar), and time metrics (e.g.
Julian date), give rise to the need for an explicit temporal reference system.

There exists a clear analogy between a spatial referencing system with many
spatial referencing methods (e.g. projections, grids) and a temporal reference system
(TRS) with many temporal referencing methods (TRM). A value in the time domain
is then a temporal position measured relative to a temporal reference system. By
adopting a common temporal reference system, time measurements can be compared
and mathematical operations, such as subtraction, become valid (Chrisman 1997).

The referencing of

the temporal element of phenomena is represented in
the MDLRS data model as a TemporalDatum object and one or more
TemporalReferencingMethod object(s) ((cid:142) gure 3). The TemporalReferencingMethod
object contains a TemporalReferenceEquation method, which is a derivable equation
that relates the temporal datum to the temporal referencing method. While the
MDLRS data model can accommodate various metrics and various temporal repres-
entations through the temporal reference equation, the data model concentrates on
those TRMs whose metrics are the same as the datum and assumes Universal Time
Coordinated (UTC) and the Gregorian calendar as the temporal datum.

4.1.3. T emporal relationships

Since all objects are de(cid:142) ned by their state in time and events are actions that
happen instantaneously in a point of time and change the state of objects (Rumbaugh
et al. 1991), temporal relationships exist among objects and events, producing a
temporal topology. Temporal topology has been studied in a number of (cid:142) elds
including philosophy, mathematics, linguistics, and arti(cid:142) cial intelligence (Allen 1984,
Shoham 1988, Davis 1990). Topological relations have been de(cid:142) ned by Peuquet and
Wentz (1994 ) as before, equal, meets, overlaps, during, starts and ends.

A data model for MDL RS

559

The provision of temporal topology is essential in examining temporal change,
temporal patterns, and retrieval of information based on temporal relationships.
Temporal topology allows for the complex interaction between time and space to
be visualized whereby patterns can be detected (e.g. the space-time association
between special events with incidents or 911 calls). With temporal topology, one can
perform spatial/temporal proximity (e.g. to schedule road striping quickly after
pavement is laid), temporal within (e.g. identify all projects concluding in the third
quarter of the year), spatial/temporal within (e.g. (cid:142) nd all accidents during a construc-
tion project within a construction boundary) , and temporal after (e.g. (cid:142) nd all acci-
dents that occurred after a project completion) (Adams et al. 2000). If consistent
temporal measurement is used, temporal relationships can be derived since temporal
measurement is numeric, but a set of explicit temporal operators needs to be de(cid:142) ned.
to perform multi-
dimensional queries. In the MDLRS data model, TemporalRelationships operate on
objects within a Transportation Feature (e.g. to (cid:142) nd the most recent SpatialObject )
and between Transportation Features (e.g. to determine if one Transportation Feature
was created before another Transportation Feature). There are two types of
TemporalRelationships: TemporalTopology and TemporalProximity (adopted from
the CGIS-SAIF 1995 model). The TemporalTopology relationship object models
relationships such as follows, during, and simultaneous. The TemporalProximity
relationship object is analogous to a temporal buVer operation.

relationships allow temporal metric objects

Temporal

4.1.4. T emporal histories

Explanation of geographical phenomena often involves the description of change.
The presence of change implies a history. Geographical phenomena can appear,
disappear, move, transform, or diVuse (Huber and Schneider 1999). A phenomenon
may change or vary aspatially (i.e. non-graphic attribute change), spatially (i.e.
geometric change), or both. The set of these changes or states forms the entity’s
temporal history. These changes are caused by events. For example, an event might
cause the creation of new objects or retirement of existing objects.

A requirement of a temporal model is an ability to represent and manage real-
world entities as they evolve over time and assume diVerent states (Goralwalla et al.
1998). The MDLRS data model supports the regeneration of object states over time
through use of the Event and Experience objects as well as the multiplicity of spatial
and aspatial attributes. Event and Experience objects in the MDLRS data
model are analogous respectively to the event and evidence classi(cid:142) cations of
multi-dimensional data used by Langran (1992).

With the incorporation of time within the MDLRS data model in the form of
an Event, and Experience objects, various historical and trend analyses can be
performed such as (Langran 1992, Peuquet 1994):

Simple Multi-dimensional queries: e.g. what is the state of an object, network,
or system at a particular time?
Multi-dimensional range queries: e.g. what are the experiences of an object,
network, or system over a given period?
Exploration: e.g. what patterns of land use change are evident when moving
through a sequence of photos taken from 1890 to 1990?
Explanation: e.g. what events would account for the change in land use
distribution between the photos?

560

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

Prediction: e.g. if a given tract of land is developed what changes in traYc
patterns will occur in 1 year, in 10 years, in 30 years?
Planning: e.g. what are the optimal land use densities in promoting growth
while preventing suburban sprawl, congestion and air pollution?

An Event object represents an occurrence that takes place in an instant or over
a period of time that changes the state of a Transportation Feature (after Fletcher
et al. 1995). The state of a Transportation Feature is de(cid:142) ned by constant attributes
(i.e. aspatial, spatial and temporal) over a time period. Events change or replace
these attributes with another version producing another ‘state’. Events represent the
endpoints of
‘states’ or constant attributes of Transportation Features. Figure 2
shows the Event object and its interaction with the Transportation Feature. The
MDLRS data model maintains the histories of events through a transaction log of
Event objects.

The registry in the Transportation Feature that indicates which Event objects
caused changes spatially, aspatially or temporally in that Transportation Feature is
called an Experience ((cid:142) gure 2). The Experience Object contains references to the
activating Event as well as references to the new or modi(cid:142) ed Transportation Feature.
By restricting the Experience Object to contain only references, historical queries
can be performed by tracing an Event to the aVected objects of a feature. Having
the Experience object contain references also works in reverse, i.e. tracing the aVected
objects of a feature to an Event through an Experience. Events are phenomena
external to objects, while experiences are phenomena tightly coupled with objects.
For the Transportation Feature, the Experience and its participatory Event form the
end or beginning of a new state, while states with no ending event are considered
current.

the event registry or the ‘container of memories’

Over time, the Transportation Feature participates in several Events producing
additional Experience Objects. These Experience Objects form a time-ordered linked
list and represent
for the
Transportation Feature. The life span of a Transportation Feature (i.e. the entire
time that the Transportation Feature is known to the database) is the time-ordered
sequence of all its Experiences (Fletcher et al. 1995). The collection of Experience
objects allows for the historical rollback of a Transportation Feature. An example
of the experiences that de(cid:142) ne the life span of a Transportation Feature is: A highway
is designed, constructed, maintained, and destroyed. Four experiences lead to (at
least) four states: in design, under construction, in service, and abandoned. The
transition from one state to another is marked by some event occurring at some
time. For example, the event ‘authorize construction’ marks the transition from in
design to under construction and the event ‘open to traYc’ marks the transition
from under construction to in service (Fletcher 2000).

4.2. Navigation

An application of dynamic databases in transportatio n is navigation (e.g. personal,
emergency, commercial ). Navigation can be de(cid:142) ned as the process of planning,
recording, or controlling the purposeful motion of a conveyance between an origin
state and a destination state through large-scale (geographic) space (Mark 1989,
Fletcher and Dean 1996). Navigation incorporates infrastructure elements (e.g. clear-
ances, crossings, road closures), traYc-related elements (congestion during peak
hours), demographic elements (schools, hospitals) , and path restrictions, as well as

A data model for MDL RS

561

pedestrian barriers (e.g. handicap access) based upon the dynamics of time, not
merely providing the shortest path under ideal conditions.

As shown in (cid:142) gure 4, a navigation system consists of two primary activities:
tracking and routing. Tracking involves a digital map database, positioning and map
matching, while routing involves route planning, route guidance and digital map
display functions (Zhao and Elbadrawi 1997). The navigational process begins by
using sensor outputs to determine the position of a vehicle (i.e. positioning). Next,
the position measured is matched to a position associated with a location on a
digital map (i.e. map matching). Then the digital map database is used along with
the vehicle location and real-time information to plan a route (i.e. route planning).
Next, the driver is guided along the planned route (i.e. route guidance). Route
guidance requires knowing the current vehicle position (i.e. positioning). Therefore,
the navigational process is a continuous loop from the beginning of a trip to its end.
The MDLRS data model satis(cid:142) es the requirement for real-time navigation of
conveyances through the use of Conveyance objects and the temporal attributes of
Events and Transportation Features. The MDLRS data model employs a ‘moving’
or a navigation object referred to as a ‘conveyance’. A Conveyance object represents
anything (usually a vehicle or a person) that moves in a spatial/temporal reference
frame and contains the navigational functions, Track and Route. The operation of
a Conveyance is shown in (cid:142) gure 5. In the Track function, the Conveyance transmits
to a ‘Dispatcher’ a sequence of time-dependent locations of the Conveyance, i.e.
positioning (indicated in (cid:142) gure 5 by the triangles) . The ‘Dispatcher’ then transforms
the conveyance locations into a chain of positions (i.e. the ‘Dispatcher’ snaps the
conveyance locations to the linear roadway network and obtains the traversal link
the conveyance is on—map matching). From the Route operator, the ‘Dispatcher’
performs routing—generate a path with linear tracks and a sequence of maneuvers,
and transmits the routing instructions to the Conveyance. The Conveyance then
follows the routing instructions and performs a tracking operation. The interaction

Figure 4. Components of navigation.

562

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

Figure 5. Example of navigation.

between the Conveyance and the Dispatcher through the tracking and routing
operations becomes cyclic. As the Conveyance is navigating towards its destination,
it is registering a traversal list or path composed of links the Conveyance has traveled
over (indicated in (cid:142) gure 5 by the Traversal list). From the Track operator, a time-
space diagram can be generated (shown to the left of the roadway network in
(cid:142) gure 5). The space-time function represents the location as a function of time for
the Conveyance and can be derived by connecting the dots of locational coordinates.
With the space-time diagram and the completed traversal, the locational history of
the conveyance can be regenerated.

4.3. Multi-dimensional location referencing

The majority of data managed by transportatio n agencies are linearly-referenced.
The NCHRP 20-27(2) linear location referencing system (LRS) data model was
developed in response to a growing awareness of the need to integrate increasing
amounts of
linearly-referenced data used by the transportatio n community
(Vonderohe et al. 1997 ). In the NCHRP 20-27(2) data model a linear datum
composed of anchor points and anchor sections supports multiple cartographic
representations and multiple network models supporting various purposes (e.g. infra-
structure management, hazardous waste routing and transit routing). Associated
with each network model may be a number of
linear referencing methods (e.g.
reference post, milepoint). Each linear referencing method then ties a collection of
attribute data (e.g. roadway signs, pavement markings, pavement types) to the model.
However, transportation agencies manage and share multi-dimensional data (e.g.
Global Positioning System coordinates) . Currently, there is no framework to integ-
rate and eVectively use data across one, two, three-, and four-dimensions and among
linear and non-linear referencing systems. NCHRP 20-27(2) provided linkages to
two-dimensional and three-dimensional GIS database s through the coordinate refer-
ences of cartographic representations. However, no further detail on data in higher

A data model for MDL RS

563

dimensions was provided beyond the lines
representation.

that make up a cartographic

for multi-dimensional

storage and integration is

In the MDLRS data model Transportation Features

Providing a framework for the integration of multi-dimensional referenced data
is indicated by the (cid:142) rst and sixth functional requirements. The (cid:142) rst functional
requirement calls for storage of multi-dimensional data (linear, non-linear, and
temporal), while the sixth functional requirement calls for multi-dimensional data
integration through transformations . The conceptual view of how the MDLRS data
model provides
shown in
to the
(cid:142) gure 6.
LinearReferenceMethod object composed of a collection of TraversalReferencePoints
and Traversals (i.e. de(cid:142) ned routes). Traversals are composed of TransportLinks
de(cid:142) ned by TransportNodes. A collection of TransportLinks and TransportNodes
represent a Network. TransportNode s are located on AnchorSections de(cid:142) ned
by AnchorPoints. A collection of AnchorPoints and AnchorSections de(cid:142) ne a
LinearDatum. In this model, TransportNodes, TransportLinks, AnchorPoints,
AnchorSections, and TraversalReferencePoints are all
types of Transportation
Features that can have spatial representations. In a linear location referencing system,
a cartographic representation (i.e. a GeometricObject) can be mapped to a linear
datum (i.e. AnchorSection object) via the ‘Represents’ relation. In non-linear spatial
referencing systems (e.g., geocentric, horizontal, cadastral), geographical features (i.e.
Transportation Features) have one or more cartographic representations (i.e.

refer

Figure 6. Conceptual data model of linear and non-linear datums.

564

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

(e.g. GPSSatellite, ControlStation, CornerPoint

GeometricObject), which reference a spatial referencing method, composed of
objects).
ReferenceObjects
These ReferenceObjects are tied to the datum through DatumObjects
(e.g.
3-DCartesianAxes, Ellipsoid, Corner objects). Transformations between non-linear
spatial datums are performed on GeometricObjects and their coordinates through
accepted mathematical functions. Data constructs are provided for the coordinates
of GeometricObjects that are consistent with its referenced location referencing
system (e.g. LinearCoordinate, GPSCoordinate, 3-DCoordinate) .

In the MDLRS data model, a cartographic representation is comprised of one
or more GeometricObjects referenced to a non-linear spatial datum. Cartographie s
are essentially collections of GeometricObjects. In order to transform data between
linear and non-linear systems, the linear datum (i.e. AnchorSection object) has to
know what GeometricObject it represents. Two coordinate pairs (i.e. from/to position
linear and non-linear coordinates) are needed to allow this type of transformation
to occur. In the MDLRS data model the coordinate pairs are stored in a relation
called ‘Represents’ between the Geometric and AnchorSection objects.

4.4. Multi-scale representation s

Characteristic scales de(cid:142) ne the space and time over which processes can be
detected, as well as the characteristic dimensions of geographical phenomena
(StaVord et al. 1994). A phenomenon can be represented cartographically as a point,
line, or area. For example, a divided roadway can be represented as a single area,
two areas, two lines or a single line dependent on the scale of a map. Therefore, the
shape and dimension of a geometric object representing a given entity is usually
made to be consistent with the degree of generalization or scale of the map.

Typical examples of applications that require multiple levels of abstraction are
cartographic map series at diVerent scales, zooming (Merrett and Shang 1994), and
car navigation systems (Egenhofer and Golledge 1994).

Multi-resolution modelling (i.e. multi-scale/multi-representationa l modelling) is
not a new problem and has been the subject of considerable research. Apart from
some hierarchical capabilities in raster modelling there is a lack of capabilities for
handling spatial data at diVerent resolutions in current GIS (DeFloriani et al. 1996 ).
Within current GIS models, an object or event has one topological representation:
a node, a link or a polygon. Generalization algorithms can change the object’s
cartographic representation but the topological representation remains constant. In
certain situations a user may desire distinct topologic and cartographic representa-
tions of a geographical feature. For example, a user may want to display a bridge
as an area but may want to use a single-line representation of that bridge for
path-(cid:142) nding. To facilitate multidimensional spatial operations in transportation
applications, a data model needs to support topological aliases of an object.

The MDLRS data model satis(cid:142) es the requirement for multiple cartographic/
topologic representations of phenomena through the multiplicity of SpatialObjects
and the constraints between these objects. A robust data model allows for multiple
cartographic and topological representations of an object and provides linkages
between representations so that changes in representations due to map scale or level
of generalization lead to references to the appropriate cartographi c or topological
representation. As shown in (cid:142) gure 7, a Transportation Feature can be associated
with one or more separate Topologic or GeometricObjects. Figure 7 also shows a
many-to-man y relationship between Geometric and Topologic Objects, so that each

A data model for MDL RS

565

Figure 7. Spatial object constraints.

geometric (i.e. cartographic ) representation may have zero or more associated topo-
logical representations and each topological representation may have zero or more
associated geometric representations of the same Transportation Feature. This rela-
tionship allows Transportation Features such as roadways to be represented topo-
logically as centrelines while cartographically displayed as two areas. However, the
associations are constrained by scale applicability and optionally, dimensionality. In
the MDLRS data model each SpatialObject is assigned an attribute of Scale
Applicability. Scale Applicability indicates for what scale range the object is valid.
The Scale Applicability Constraint allows scale-appropriat e objects to be associated
with each other. For example, a Curve geometric object representing a roadway may
have a scale applicability of 1:10 000 (meaning that the representation is valid for a
scale of 1:10 000 and greater). Associated with that Curve can be several topological
representations (from the many-to-man y relationship) . The Scale Applicability
Constraint allows only those topological representations with a scale applicability
of 1:10 000 or smaller (e.g. 1:100 000) to be associated with that Curve object. The
topological representation would be associated with a cartographic representation
of the same detail or greater. This constraint is due to cartographi c generalization
(e.g. in displaying a complete street network at a scale of 1:1 000 000, streets would
be displayed on top of each other).

is

on

An

the

relation

constraint

additional

and
GeometricObjects
the Dimensionality Association. The Dimensionality
Association is a set of business rules that further restricts the association of scale-
related objects by dimensionality consistency constraints. For example if a user is
supplied a Surface object (i.e. area) representing the extent of a city, that user should
be able to expect that a topological representation dimensionally consistent with the
Surface object, i.e. a Face object, would be available to be used for analysis.

between Topologic

Interchange s are fundamental entities for transportation-base d information sys-
the expression of an interchange, when
is that of a TransportationComplex. The interchange

tems. In the MDLRS data model,
topology,
given a full

566

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

TransportationComple x is made up of ramp and bridge Transportation Features.
These ramp and bridge Transportation Features contain scale-appropriat e carto-
graphic/topological representations. Viewing an interchange at diVerent levels of
abstraction requires that certain cartographic/topologic objects are used and others
drop out due to a change in Scale Applicability. For example, if given the full
cartography/topology of an interchange ((cid:142) gure 8), to produce an interchange at a
greater level of abstraction, certain cartographic/topologic objects drop out of the
data model due to Scale Applicability and the result is a new aggregation of
cartographic/topologic objects. Given a complete topology of an interchange, adding
turning movements or restrictions is not necessary since the topology de(cid:142) nes what
movements are possible.

5. Conclusions

A vital component of any data model that represents a geographical phenomenon
and its interactions with other phenomenon are the assumptions upon which
it is based. The Multi-Dimensional Transportation Location Referencing System
(MDLRS) data model was founded on the results of a workshop composed of

Figure 8. Multi-scale interchanges.

A data model for MDL RS

567

thirty-four participants representing various transportatio n stakeholder groups and
considered to be experts in their respective areas.

The MDLRS data model was developed to meet the emerging need of the
transportatio n community to integrate attribute data that are referenced to diverse
dimensional reference systems. Data integration is supported through transforma-
tions among linear methods through a ‘linear datum’, among non-linear methods
through mathematical equations, and among linear and non-linear methods through
the association of cartographic objects with the linear datum.

In addition to providing a datum hierarchy and details on the associations
between linear and non-linear datums, the MDLRS data model goes beyond existing
GIS-T LRS data models by providing a comprehensive view of the temporal element.
‘Time Objects’, which record when an activity occurred as well as when it was
temporal aspects of phenomena.
entered into the database, describe
Transformation and integration of temporally referenced data is supported through
a ‘temporal datum’. Temporal relationship operators de(cid:142) ne temporal reasoning
among entities and temporal histories through entity ‘Experiences’ provide temporal
reasoning among states of an object. These temporal data structures facilitate the
modelling of multiple transportatio n modes and the intermodal relationships between
modal networks needed for real-time navigation.

the

The MDLRS data model represents the ‘next step’ in providing a framework for
data management software development that addresses multi-dimensional location
referencing across the transportatio n community, but does not represent the (cid:142) nal
step. The conceptual MDLRS data model, as presented in this paper, leaves imple-
mentation and testing to future eVorts. These eVorts in addition to the MDLRS data
model framework will permit transportatio n organizations to share data across
business applications, and between agencies, such as DOTs, MPO and transit agen-
cies. The result is more eYcient and eVective planning and operation decisions as
well as improved performance of transportatio n systems.

Acknowledgments

This work was sponsored by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation OYcials, in cooperation with the Federal Highway Administration,
and was conducted in the National Cooperative Highway Research Program, which
is administered by the Transportation Research Board of the National Research
Council.

References
Abraham, T., and Roddick, J., 1999, Survey of spatio-temporal databases. GeoInformatica,

Adams, T., Koncz, N., and Vonderohe, A., 2000, Functional requirements for a comprehen-
sive transportation location referencing system. In Proceedings of the 2000 North
American T ravel Monitoring Exhibition and Conference (Madison, Wisconsin:
Transportation Research Board).

Adams, T., Koncz., N., and Vonderohe, A., 2001, Guidelines for the implementation of
multimodal
transportation location referencing systems. Research Report 460,
Washington DC: National Cooperative Highway Research Program. Transportation
Research Board.

Allen, J., 1984, Towards a general theory of action and time. Arti(cid:142) cial Intelligence, 23,

3, 61–99.

123–154.

Al-Taha, K., and Abbas, M. S., 1994, The transportation challenge for temporal GIS. In

568

N. A. Koncz and T . M. Adams

Proceedings of the 1994 Geographic Information Systems for T ransportation Symposium
(Norfolk, Virginia: AASHTO), pp. 90–108.

Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J., and Jacobson, I., 1999, T he Uni(cid:142) ed Modeling L anguage Users

Guide (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley).

CGIS-SAIF, 1995, Canadian Geomatics Interchange Standard — Spatial Archive and
Interchange Format: Formal De(cid:142) nition, Release 3.2. CAN/CGSB-171.1-95, Ministry
of Environment, Lands and Parks, Province of British Columbia, Canada.

Chrisman, N., 1997, Exploring Geographic Information Systems (New York: John Wiley

Curtin, K., Noronha, V., Goodchild, M., and Grise`, S., 2001, ArcGIS T ransportation Data

Davis, E., 1990, Representations of Common Sense Knowledge (San Mateo, CA: Morgan

& Sons).

Model (Redlands, CA: ESRI).

Kaufmann Publishers).

De Floriani, L., Marzano, P., and Puppo, E., 1996, Multi-resolution modelling in geograph-
ical information systems. In Spatial Analytical Perspectives on GIS, GISDATA Series
4, edited by M. Fisher (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 9–19.

Dueker, K. J., and Butler, J. A., 1998, GIS-T enterprise data model with suggested imple-
mentation choices. Journal of the Urban and Regional Information Systems Association,
10, 12–36.

Egenhofer, M. J., and Golledge, R. G., 1994, Time in geographic space: report on the
specialist meeting of research initiative 10. Report 94-9, NCGIA, Santa Barbara, CA.
FGDC, 2001, NSDI Framework Transportation Identi(cid:142) cation Standard. Washington, DC:
Federal Geographic Data Committee (Ground Transportation Subcommittee).
Fletcher, D., 2000, Electronic mail to T. Adams and A. Vonderohe, Subject: Questions in

regards to the Pooled Fund Study Model.

Fletcher, D., and Dean, C., 1996, Navigating in a digital object habitat. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Object Orientation and Navigable Databases (Santa Barbara, CA:
NCGIA), pp. 68–75.

Fletcher, D., Henderson, T., and Espinoza, J., 1995, Geographic information systems-
transportation ISTEA management systems server-net prototype pooled fund study
phase B summary. Sandia National Laboratory, Albuquerque, NM.

Galton, A., 1997, Space, time, and movement. In Spatial and T emporal Reasoning, edited by

O. Stock (Boston: Kluwer Academic), pp. 321–352.

Goralwalla, I., Ozsu, G., and Szafron, D., 1998, An Object-Oriented Framework for
T emporal Data Models. In T emporal Databases: Research and Practices, edited by
O. Etzion (Berlin: Springer), pp. 1–35.

Huber, M., and Schneider, D., 1999, Spatial data standards in view of models of space and

the functions operating on them. Computers & Geosciences, 25, 25–38.

Langran, G., 1992, T ime in Geographic Information Systems (London: Taylor and Francis).
Mark, D., 1989, A conceptual model for vehicle navigation systems. In Proceedings of the
First Vehicle Navigation and Information Systems Conference (UNIS’89) Toronto,
Ontario, Canada (New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)),
pp. 448 –453.

Merrett, T., and Shang, H., 1994, Zoom tries: a (cid:142) le structure to support spatial zooming.
In Advances in GIS: Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Spatial Data
Handling (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 792–804.

Peuquet, D., 1994, It’s about time: a conceptual framework for the representation of temporal
dynamics in geographic information systems. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, 84, 441–461.

Peuquet, D., and Wentz, E., 1994, An approach for time-based analysis of spatiotemporal
data. In Advances in GIS Research, Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on
Spatial Data Handling, edited by T. C. Waugh and R. G. Healy (London: Taylor &
Francis), pp. 489–503.

Peuquet, D., and Qian, L., 1997, An integrated database design for temporal GIS. In Advances
in GIS Research II, Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Spatial
Data Handling (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 21–31.

Rumbaugh, J., Blaha, M., Premerlani, W., Eddy, F., and Lorensen, W., 1991, Object-

oriented Modeling and Design (Englewood CliVs: Prentice-Hall).

A data model for MDL RS

569

Shoham, Y., 1988, Reasoning about Change : T ime and Causation f rom the Standpoint of

Arti(cid:142) cial Intelligence (Cambridge: MIT Press).

Snodgrass, R., and Ahn, I., 1987, A taxonomy of time in databases. In Database Management

T utorial (Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society Press), pp. 398–408.

Spear, B., 1994, GIS and spatial data needs for urban transportation applications. In
Proceedings of the 1994 Geographic Information Systems for T ransportation Symposium
(Norfolk, Virginia: AASHTO), pp. 31–41.

Stafford, S., Brunt, J., and Michener, W., 1994, Integration of scienti(cid:142) c information
management and environmental research. In Environmental Information Management
and Analysis, edited by W. Michener (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 3–19.
Sutton, J., 1994, Geochronography: the mapping and representation of real-time data. In
Proceedings of the 1994 Geographic Information Systems for T ransportation Symposium
(Norfolk, Virginia: AASHTO), pp. 109–121.

Vonderohe, A. P., Chou, C. L., Sun, F., and Adams, T. M., 1997, A Generic Data Model
for Linear Referencing Systems. Research Results Digest 218. National Cooperative
Highway Research Program. Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC.

Wachowicz, M., 1999, Object-Oriented Design for T emporal GIS (London: Taylor & Francis).
Yuan, M., 1997, Use of knowledge acquistion to build wild(cid:142) re representation in geographical
information systems. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 11,
723–745.

Zhao, F., and Elbadrawi, H., 1997, The time dimension in GIS. In Computing in Civil

Engineering, edited by T. M. Adams (Washington, DC: ASCE), pp. 57–64.

