This article was downloaded by: [University of Southern Queensland]
On: 04 October 2014, At: 10:01
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

On the accuracy of TIGER-
type geocoded address data
in relation to cadastral and
census areal units
Jerry H. Ratcliffe
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: Jerry H. Ratcliffe (2001) On the accuracy of TIGER-
type geocoded address data in relation to cadastral and census areal units,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15:5, 473-485

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810110047221

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 5, 473± 485

Research Article

On the accuracy of TIGER-type geocoded address data in relation to
cadastral and census areal units

JERRY H. RATCLIFFE
School of Policing Studies, Charles Sturt University, NSW Police College,
McDermott Drive, Goulburn NSW 2580, Australia; e-mail:
jerry.ratcliŒe@bigfoot.com

(Received 20 January 2000; accepted 16 January 2001)

Abstract.
In many applications of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) a
common task is the conversion of addresses into grid coordinates. In many
countries this is usually accomplished using address range TIGER-type (cid:142) les in
conjunction with geocoding packages within a GIS. Improvements in GIS func-
tionality and the storage capacity of large databases mean that the spatial investi-
gation of data at the individual address level is now commonly performed. This
process relies on the accuracy of the geocoding mechanism and this paper exam-
ines this accuracy in relation to cadastral records and census tracts. Results from
a study of over 20 000 addresses in Sydney, Australia, using a TIGER-type
geocoding process suggest that 5–7.5% (depending on geocoding method) of
addresses may be misallocated to census tracts, and more than 50% may be given
coordinates within the land parcel of a diŒerent property.

1.

Introduction
There are now a large number of socio-economic applications that require a
researcher to manipulate address-based data in a Geographical Information System
(GIS). As the capabilities of databases and GIS improve, a greater level of resolution
is possible and the individual address is becoming a standard level for spatial
investigation. Such address-based data may refer to a wide range of records such as
insurance policy holders, medical records or vehicle ownership, and application areas
include market research, the provision of public utilities and the work of the emer-
gency services. To utilise fully the spatial nature of an address it is usually necessary
to create a point associated with the address record. Most GIS have the capability
to geocode - the process of associating an address record with a point on a map—
and to perform spatial queries on the result. Such spatial queries may only require
the original point data and a number of spatial investigative algorithms have been
designed for point pattern analysis (Bailey and Gatrell 1995), though other techniques
may require a point-in-polygo n operation to compare the number of point records
with attribute data associated with an areal unit.

Early work by Gatrell and colleagues (Gatrell 1989, Gatrell et al. 1991) examined
the relationship between points attributed to UK postcodes at a 100 m resolution,

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110047221

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 474

J. H. RatcliVe

with enumeration districts, the smallest UK census tract. Martin and Higgs (1997)
reviewed a number of spatial data sets in the UK, comparing council tax registers
with individually geocoded locations, and variations in the number of properties in
an enumeration district by various means. These studies concentrated on the extrac-
tion of maximum accuracy from postcode information (variously the zip code or
postal code depending on country), used regularly in the UK as a means to protect
the con(cid:142) dentiality of individuals in a study. Much of the research was conducted at
a time when automated individual address mapping was in its infancy, expensive
and generally beyond the scope of many researchers unable to access more descriptive
address records. Recent advances in the last decade have raised expectations in
location referencing, and reduced costs to the level that the centreline data necessary
for geocoding a city such as Canberra, Australia (population 330 000) costs less than
US$500. Once access to con(cid:142) dential address-based data has been negotiated (often
the hardest part of the process) it is now possible to use as a matter of routine the
individual property as the unit of spatial investigation. Within the speci(cid:142) c (cid:142) eld of
law enforcement, the imperfections in the geocoding of address data for policing
purposes have been recognised (Harries 1999, PFCML 2000), though not articulated
or quanti(cid:142) ed clearly. The level of imprecision in geocoding is important to law
enforcement so that a better understanding of the limitations of the data can be
appreciated prior to further spatial analysis, analysis that might be spurious given
the spatial limitations of the geocoded data.

This study aims to build on the previous work in the area, by concerning itself
with the accuracy of individual address locations in the form of high resolution
geocoded point data, by comparison with both cadastral records that delineate the
individual target properties, and areal units from the Australian national census. We
start with an outline of the geocoding process before examining the study area in
Sydney, Australia, in §3 and §4.

2. Geocoding address records

Point-in-polygon operations require both points and polygons. Point data for
urban locations are commonly created from geocoded address records. Current
geocoding tools in the USA and Australia are derived from US TIGER (cid:142) les, collec-
tions of street line segments that hold street names, and the range of house numbers
on each side of the street as attribute data. The TIGER composition was developed
from the DIME structure used originally to map US census data and provides a
US-wide address matching standard (Cooke 1998).

An example is shown in (cid:142) gure 1 where a polyline for Smith Street has a From
node, To node and attribute data. The attribute data for the line indicates that odd
house numbers are on the left side of the street and range from 1 to 17, and the
even numbers found on the right side of the street range from 2 to 18. This is not
the only method of geocoding addresses and some commercial organisations have
created address registers that contain individual coordinates for every house and
address. One of the most widely used in the UK is the ADDRESS-POINT data set
that contains x and y coordinates for millions of British addresses. Derived from
Ordnance Survey mapping (www.ordsvy.gov.uk1 ) with a resolution of 0.1 m the use

1 Information relating speci(cid:142) cally to ADDRESS-POINT is available at

www.ordsvy.gov.uk/productpages/addresspoint/index.htm (accessed January 2001).

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 Accuracy of address range T IGER-type (cid:142) les

475

Figure 1. Example geocode line segment with an oŒset of 10 m (inset not shown).

of
individual address coordinate systems has the potential to provide excellent
geocoding accuracy though some limitations have been noted in relation to correla-
tion between ADDRESS-POINT georeferencing and other data sets (Martin and
Higgs 1997). Outside the UK and the few other areas where individual address
co-ordinate data sets exist however, the use of TIGER-type line segment geocoders
is still the norm.

Most vector GIS have built-in geocoding tools that use derivatives of TIGER
(cid:142) les to interpolate a suitable x and y coordinate for an address. The target address
is used to identify a suitable line segment with an appropriate number range and
then a location along the line is interpolated between the From and To node based
on the number of houses along the line. In the two most popular desktop GIS
programs (ArcView and MapInfo) it is now possible to select an oŒset that relocates
the derived point a number of metres perpendicular to the line segment. ArcView
and the most recent version of MapInfo (at the time of writing version 6.0) both
allow the user to select an oŒset distance, though the new version of MapInfo was
only made available at the time of (cid:142) nal draft of this paper, and all previous versions
had a hardcoded oŒset of 10 m. This paper is therefore written to assist the vast
majority of MapInfo users who are using previous versions of MapInfo (versions 5.5
and earlier), though some consideration to future use of version 6.0 and beyond is
considered. This paper will also be of bene(cid:142) t to all geocoders seeking clari(cid:142) cation
of the importance of the oŒset in geocoding. Version 6.0 of MapInfo also permits
the selection of an inset, a distance from the From and To node that is ignored
before geocoding begins. The relative import of this feature is discussed later.

Given that the line segment should ideally follow the street centreline this helps
to locate the geocoded address closer to the more likely house position and away
from the road. This is shown in (cid:142) gure 1 where number 5 on the left and number 8
on the right side of the street are oŒset by 10 m, the oŒset in most MapInfo versions.
There are a number of potential problems with this type of geocoding technique
and a number of diŒerent sources of error (Harries 1999). Some of these are
outlined below.

Out-of-dat e street directories. The geocoding base (cid:142) les might be out of date, and
this can mean that new addresses or even new housing estates of dozens of streets
are not known. While some vendors endeavour to keep their street directories as
current as possible the problem is worst in urban fringe areas where development
and change are most rapid.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 476

J. H. RatcliVe

Abbreviations or misspelling. Street names can be misspelled or abbreviated. For
example Smith Street can also be shown as Smith St., Smythe Street, or Smithe
Street. Many geocoding engines may only be able to recognise some of the variations.
Often an alias type of table to replace misspellings and abbreviations must be
manually created. Rigid database entry tied to street naming standards can limit the
impact of this type of error. The Australian standard (www.auslig.gov.au) has been
in use for about 5 years and has been developed to establish a consistent set of rules
for street naming, while similar standards exist in other countries.

Local name variations. In some areas the street directory name of a road may
not re(cid:143) ect the local name of the road and this can mean that the target address
cannot be matched to the geocode address (cid:142) le.

Address duplication. In many cities roads are named after historical (cid:142) gures or
places and can be duplicated in nearby suburbs. For example, 40 occurrences of
Smith Street can be found in the Sydney street directory. Without the geocoding
process specifying a suburb or a limiting boundary polygon it is possible for a
geocoding engine to (cid:142) nd multiple matches of common addresses.

Non-existent addresses. Simple typographica l errors can easily turn 30 Smith

Street into 300 Smith Street, an address that may not exist.

Line simpli(cid:142) cation. The sections of line segment may not re(cid:143) ect accurately the
geography of the road or housing layout. This will reduce the geocoding accuracy
and can aŒect streets in hilly areas that can be more winding or new streets in
residential areas that are built on sweeping bends.

Noise in the address (cid:142) le. Unnecessary additional data can complicate an address
(cid:142) eld. Some householders may choose to give their house a name or a target address
(cid:142) eld may start with a company name and this can be di(cid:141) cult for a geocoding engine
to interpret accurately. For example some geocoders would struggle with:
‘Dunroamin, 24 Smith Street’. Similarly a business address can often start with a
company name.

Geocoding non-address locations. A number of organisations such as the emer-
gency services might want to record the location of incidents that do not occur in
buildings. Some geocoding engines can use special characters to recognise intersec-
tions but, for example, an ambulance supervisor might want to record a road tra(cid:141) c
accident that happened ‘50 metres West of the junction with Brown Street’ or ‘outside
number 12 Smith Street’. These locations would be rejected by most geocoders, or
they would geocode to the exact intersection or house.

Geocoding imprecision. The geocoded point might be some distance from the
actual address, and it is the extent of this particular problem that the next sections
will examine.

Ambiguous or vague addresses. Ambiguity of addresses in the target (cid:142) le (such as
simply ‘Smith Street’) can make geocoding impossible. Some geocoders can be
con(cid:142) gured to geocode ambiguous addresses to either the nearest existing address or
to the centroid of the line segment. Neither is an ideal solution as a number of vague
addresses can create a cluster of points at an arbitrary location.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 Accuracy of address range T IGER-type (cid:142) les

477

3. Source data

This study uses three sources of data. The geocoded points have been determined
from centreline data for Sydney in StreetWorks version 5.0, available from MapInfo
Australia. This was used in conjunction with the standard geocoding engine found
in MapInfo version 5.5—the most current version at time of analysis. The geocoded
locations have been compared to the cadastral base for the study area. Cadastre
records are a catalogue of interests in land parcels. Usually these are now retained
as digital maps that contain descriptions of land parcels as well as unique identi(cid:142) ers
that can be used to identify who has ownership rights to the land as well as other
legal interests. An enhanced digital cadastral (cid:142) le has been made available for this
study by the Land Information Centre, Bathurst, NSW, Australia. The Land
Information Centre (LIC) is the government mapping organisation for the state of
New South Wales. Individual polygons in the cadastre are identi(cid:142) ed by a unique
Lot/Deposited Plan (Lot/DP) number. There is no indication from this unique
identi(cid:142) er as to the conventional address of the property or even the name of the
street. During 2000 the LIC have been attempting to correlate disparate data sources
from a number of government bodies to try and identify a street number and road
name for each land parcel in the cadastre. Road names exist as an integral part of
the Digital Cadastre Database (DCDB) for New South Wales and are encoded into
the road polygons but due to technical constraints the names are not included in
the other parcel tags. This is still under development and the choice of study area
was dictated by the availability of data from a semi-completed area. The Eastern
Suburbs of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia has attracted interest from a number
of organisations since this area was the victim of a severe hail storm in 1998 that
caused a considerable amount of property damage. Figure 2 shows this region.

The cadastre for this area has had house numbers attached to polygons by the
LIC, where these can be determined, though no street names. Where a house number
was available the complete street name was attached manually by the author. This

Figure 2. The study area in the Eastern suburbs of Sydney.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 478

J. H. RatcliVe

involved identifying the nearest street for the property and con(cid:142) rming that the house
range for the street matched the house number, and that they were on the correct
side of the street, running in the correct direction (see (cid:142) gure 1). Where any ambiguity
existed the property was not included in the (cid:142) nal study set. The majority of ambigu-
ous locations were on street corners where a house number could have been in either
street. These accounted for less than 2% of the original data set, resulting in over
20 000 addresses included in the following analysis.

The third source of data was the polygon boundaries of the census collection
districts for the study area. Collection districts (CD) are the smallest geographical
area de(cid:142) ned in the Australian Standard Geographical Classi(cid:142) cation (ASGC). In
urban areas, such as the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney, there is an average of 225
dwellings in each of these census tracts. The boundary (cid:142) les were obtained from
CData96, a production of the Australian Bureau of Statistics that includes census
data along with boundary (cid:142) les in MapInfo format.

4. Analysis

A list of 21 890 addresses was obtained by cross-comparison of the StreetWorks
(cid:142) le and the cadastral data set. This ensured that both (cid:142) les knew an address. The
purpose of the study was not to correct every error in each data set, but to extract
enough addresses common to both (cid:142) les that a meaningful analysis could be com-
pleted. There are over 21 890 addresses in the study area shown in (cid:142) gure 2, though
a small proportion did not have house numbers shown in the cadastre (cid:142) le, or their
house number could have referred to more than one street at an intersection. This
lack of completeness in the data set is understandabl e given that this address
enhanced cadastral data set is still under development. Version 5.5 of MapInfo was
used for the following analysis (this version has a hardcoded oŒset of 10 m).

4.1. Geocoded points and cadastre polygons

The (cid:142) rst part of the study performed a standard point-in-polygo n operation to
examine the match between geocoded points and their corresponding cadastral
polygons. Of the 21 980 addresses 7774 (35%) geocoded points were located within
a polygon from the cadastral set. Unfortunately the majority of these were located
in the wrong polygon. Only 2165 (10% of the 21 980) were correctly located in the
concordant cadastral polygon, while 5609 (26%) were located in the polygon for
another address. If we consider these as a proportion of only those points that were
located within a polygon, then this equates to an error level of 72%. This (cid:142) gure does
not include those geocoded points that were referenced within another cadastral
property polygon that was not part of the 21 980 study set.

These (cid:142) gures would seem to raise cause for concern for researchers and mappers
interested in micro-level mapping applications of address related records. The TIGER
system was not designed originally along a cadastral basis but was created to provide
a relatively accurate large scale mapping capability. It is therefore understandabl e
that to some degree it does not hold up to a micro-level examination. The low
number of records that were located correctly (10%) did however suggest that further
work was necessary to better understand the extent of the geocoding error. Visual
inspection of a number of misplaced points showed that a high number were near
the correct polygon, often located in a neighbouring land parcel, though this was
not always the case. The next part of the study endeavoured to get a more empirical
measure of the error level.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 Accuracy of address range T IGER-type (cid:142) les

479

4.2. Geocoded points and cadastre centroids

The geocoded point for each address was extracted as before, as was a centroid
for each known address in the cadastre. The computed centroid for each property
in the cadastre does not show the location of the actual house. One of the advantage s
of using the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney is that this is a more established and older
part of the city, and a desirable area in which to live, and the land plots tend to be
compact and small. The mean area of the land parcels used in this study is only 434
square metres. Examination of aerial photography of the study region with cadastre
polygons used as an overlay, indicated that the majority of properties dominate the
whole land parcel with little room for a garden or, surprisingly for such an a‚ uent
area in Sydney, a swimming pool. Due to the dominance of the domestic unit within
the land parcel the centroid was located within the building perimeter the vast
majority of times. The use of the centroid as an indication of the location of an
individual property is used in this study as the centroid (or similar central point
identi(cid:142) er) is likely to form the basis of any future individual address referencing
system (Hickson 2000) though a (cid:142) rm commitment to a national standard has yet to
be con(cid:142) rmed. It is therefore of interest to measure the distances between the geocoded
points and the cadastral centroids.

The two sets of location coordinates from the geocode set and the cadastre set
can be compared by computing the distance between paired points, and the statistics
of the distribution of these distances can be examined. The mean separation is 47 m,
with a standard deviation of 187 m. A histogram of the distances revealed that there
are a number of outliers with distances of over one kilometre. These outliers are
suspected errors in either the StreetWorks (cid:142) le, the enhanced cadastral data set, or
the geocoding engine. This was con(cid:142) rmed by plotting the points and comparing
back to the original cadastre (cid:142) les. The actual cause of the error is not possible to
determine without the resources to ground truth hundreds of addresses, and when
plotted on a map the erroneous addresses were scattered across the study area
without any apparent pattern. Therefore, as in other studies that have examined
distances between estimated points and actual locations (Gatrell 1989), a ‘trimmed
mean’ that does not include the smallest and largest 5% of values can be used as a
more accurate re(cid:143) ection of the data. The mean distance between the geocoded points
and their corresponding cadastre centroid in the reduced set of 19 791 concordant
points is 31 m.

4.3. OVset adjustment

The ‘trimmed mean’ of 31 m (standard deviation 14.7 m) from the previous section
would appear to be a fairly acceptable degree of error, given that a cadastre centroid
is probably rarely more than about 10 m from the boundary of the land parcel. It
may be that adjusting the oŒset used by the geocoding engine (see (cid:142) gure 1) could
reduce this measure of separation. An adjustment in the oŒset may improve the
separation between linked points, but only if the cadastre centroid is found in the
area of a perpendicular line extrapolated from the geocoding line segment through
the geocoded point at the 10 m oŒset.

Figure 3 shows a line segment that has geocoded a point A, while the centroid
for the cadastral land parcel is shown as point B. The solid line shows an oŒset of
10 m and the continuance of the perpendicular line through point A. The dashed
line shows the degree of error (h) between the perpendicular extrapolation and the
centroid location. This angle can be measured in the data set by extracting the

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 480

J. H. RatcliVe

Figure 3. Line segment from a standard TIGER-type geocode (cid:142) le with an oŒset to geocoded
location A. The centroid for the cadastre polygon is shown as B and the angle h
indicates the amount of variation from the perpendicular.

relevant line segment from the StreetWorks (cid:142) le and comparing this angle to the line
A–B. Ideally we would hope to see low angles for h indicating that an adjustment
in the oŒset distance may help improve geocoding accuracy.

To test this, the two line angles were extracted from the various data sets. All
analyses took place within a single coordinate system (Australian Map Grid 84 Zone
56) and this allowed for the extraction of metric coordinates, and therefore the use
of plane geometry. The line segment nodes were used to calculate the perpendicular
oŒset angle (s in (cid:142) gure 3) and the geocoded point and the cadastral point were used
to calculate the separation line A–B (t in (cid:142) gure 3). This operation was performed
on a subset of the whole data set comprising of 10 000 addresses.

If an adjustment of the oŒset distance in the geocoding engine would improve
the separation distance then we would expect to see angles closer to zero indicating
that the actual location of the cadastre centroid lay roughly along the perpendicular
line extending from the line segment. In (cid:142) gure 4 the angles relative to the line segment
have been shown in a quadrant radar diagram, rounded to whole degrees, along
with the number of records for each angle. The length of each line from the quadrant’s
hub indicates the number of records that are angled in that direction. Because the
direction of the line segment has not been taken into consideration, only a quadrant
of the radar diagram is shown with all angles of h taken to be acute. An exact
correlation with the perpendicular line is shown at the zenith. Close to the horizontal
indicates a greater angle of h, as seen in (cid:142) gure 3. The results from this analysis are
shown in (cid:142) gure 4.

If most of the cadastral centroids had been found roughly in line with the
perpendicular street segment then we would have expected to see a large number of
records appearing close to the vertical in (cid:142) gure 4. However as can be seen, the
majority of the addresses are found to have a displacement angle greater than 45ß .
This would suggest that varying the amount of oŒset from the geocode (cid:142) le line
segment is not alone likely to have the desired aŒect on the accuracy of the geocoded
points. Because this study has only measured the displacement angle (h ) and not the
direction of the error, it may be that increasing or decreasing the oŒset may serve
in some cases to reduce the displacement angle but actually increase the Euclidean
distance between the geocoded point and the cadastre centroid.

As an adjuvancy to geocoders, repetitive testing of the study area data sets prior
to (cid:142) nal draft established that minor improvements in the accuracy of this study data
could be achieved by increasing the oŒset to 25 m. It should be cautioned that this

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 Accuracy of address range T IGER-type (cid:142) les

481

Figure 4. Quadrant radar diagram indicating the degree of diŒerence between a line perpen-
dicular to a geocode street segment and the line between the geocoded point and the
concordant cadastral centroid.

(cid:142) gure works well for the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney with correspondingly low
property sizes, while other areas may need a diŒerent adjustment. It is clearly
indicative however that 10 m, the previous MapInfo hardcoded value, is insu(cid:141) cient
even for areas like the Eastern Suburbs where the centroid is quite close to the road.

4.4. Point-in-polygo n operations

If a research project is designed to examine the relationship of a point variable
with census data, then the important characteristics of the two data sets are not
their simple proximity but whether cases are allocated to the correct areal unit
(Gatrell 1989). This paper consequently turns its attention to the spatial relationship
between census collection districts (CDs) and the geocoded location.

There are many types of areal unit used for socio-economic research, and the
aggregation of points within other types of polygons can also be used as a carto-
graphic technique to simplify the display of large numbers of points. Neither the
research application nor the cartographic requirement necessarily require CDs,
though these have been used in this study as they are a common choice of thematic
aggregator, giving a good indication of population density, and are a popular choice
of areal unit for research. They are also readily available to University researchers
and outside organisations. It is important to stress that the results of point-in-
polygon searches depend on the accuracy with which the boundaries of the polygons
were digitised (Gatrell 1989) and in the case of census tracts the user’s trust is in the
hands of the census bureau. Given the metre resolution of geocoded points in this
study it must be acknowledged in advance that some degree of geographical uncer-
tainty will exist about points that lie close to a census tract boundary and that for
compression purposes the general CD boundaries that are available publicly have
undergone a stage of line simpli(cid:142) cation. The following section of the paper examines
this degree of uncertainty.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 482

J. H. RatcliVe

Using the CD (cid:142) le available from the Australian Census Bureau, a point-in-
polygon operation was performed on both the geocoded points and the cadastre
centroids for all 21 890 points in the study area. Comparison of the unique identi(cid:142) ers
for each concordant pair show that 1634 (7.5%) geocoded points fell into diŒerent
CDs than their corresponding cadastral centroid. The use of every address in the
study was felt reasonable even though it was known from the earlier analysis that
there were outliers that indicated errors in the geocoding process. This is because
most GIS users will not have the bene(cid:142) t of both data sets (given that the cadastre
set used in this study is more or less unique) and in the absence of any indication
to the contrary will take the geocoded location as ‘truth’. Most users of geocoding
tools, such as police analysts wanting to map crime occurrence for example, will
neither have the time nor the skills to question and analyse the distribution of 20 000
geocoded locations, and will proceed with their analysis using the points geocoded
automatically by their GIS.

When the misallocated points are plotted as in (cid:142) gure 5, it becomes apparent that
there is no particular area of density, but that the points that are in the wrong CD
are distributed across the study area. A visual inspection of (cid:142) gure 5(a) suggests that
many of the geocoded points (black dots) are located on or near a CD boundary
(white bordered regions). This would appear to be due to line simpli(cid:142) cation in the
CD boundary (cid:142) le where the generalised boundary of the collection district has not
mimicked the urban geography of the road layout. The example shown in (cid:142) gure 5(b)
is common for many of the misplaced geocoded coordinates across the study area.

Figure 5.

(a) Geocoded points ( black dots) that are in a diŒerent CD (white bordered regions)
to their cadastral centroid. (b) Displacement from the corresponding centroid CD due
to line simpli(cid:142) cation in the CD boundary (cid:142) le. A small increase in the geocoding oŒset
would be su(cid:141) cient to place the geocoded points into the correct CD.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 Accuracy of address range T IGER-type (cid:142) les

483

A discrepancy of 7.5% does seem high given the importance of collection district
level analyses and this (cid:142) gure is likely to be of interest to researchers concerned with
address level data and their relationship to census variables. The result of this
analysis indicates that this should be another error factor to be considered if the
results of a point-in-polygo n process indicate only slight statistical signi(cid:142) cance in
micro-level socio-economic analyses. The lack of high variation in variables between
adjacent CDs goes some way to alleviating the eŒects of this discrepancy for counts
of cases in polygons. The mean distance between points from the (cid:142) rst analysis would
suggest that the problem is not a factor if larger areal units are used, though this
might reduce the impact and quality of the analysis undertaken. It is clear from
(cid:142) gure 5 that an increase in oŒset would generally improve the point-in-polygo n
accuracy, and the reader is referred to the end of the previous section that identi(cid:142) ed
some value in the use of an oŒset of 25 m. This would both improve the point-in-
polygon geocoding and bring the (cid:142) nal point closer to the cadastral unit centroid.
Again the caveat should be added that the (cid:142) gure of 25 m worked well for the Eastern
Suburbs of Sydney, but may need to be increased for areas with more expansive
properties.

The use of an inset is currently only available to MapInfo version 6 users. Given
an optimum of a 25 m oŒset, a number of trials were conducted to identify the
impact of the inset. Two types of inset are available: a (cid:142) xed distance along the
segment from the node, or a percentage distance based on the length of the road
segment. Tests were conducted on insets of 0 metres to 50 m (5 m increments) and
5% to 40% (5% increments). It is di(cid:141) cult to establish an ideal, as some settings had
a greater percentage of points close to the address centroid but also a slightly higher
number of points in the wrong census tract. The end choice is likely to be based on
the desires of the user, who might not be required to perform many point-in-polygo n
operations. As an indication to users (with the caveat that these results are based
on Eastern Sydney and are indicative of a compact inner-urban suburb) an optimum
that achieved the best results overall was the use of a 15 m inset with a 25 m oŒset.
This choice of setting in the geocoding process achieved the results shown in table 1.

5. Summary

An important caveat should be in place when reviewing this research. The author
did not create the cadastre (cid:142) le and therefore an indication of the level of error in

Table 1. Geocoding characteristics of 23 087 addresses geocoded in the Eastern Suburbs of
Sydney with a 25 m oŒset and a 15 m inset.

Characteristic

Points in correct census tract
Points in correct address plot
Points not in an address plot
Points in wrong address plot

Points within 5 m of centroid
Points within 10 m of centroid
Points within 15 m of centroid
Points within 20 m of centroid
Points within 50 m of centroid
Points within 100 m of centroid

Percentage (%)

94.85
46.75
18.62
34.63

11.69
33.75
49.07
60.11
89.08
96.42

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 484

J. H. RatcliVe

the enhanced (cid:142) le is not available. This will not be possible without a considerable
amount of ground-truthin g and the author lacks the resources for this. Given this
unknown in one of the (cid:142) les there was a need for a conservative study, and when
attention was turned to the distances between the centroids and the geocoded
locations, it was deemed sensible to trim the highest and lowest 5% from the values.
The output from this analysis suggests that in compact, urban areas the accuracy of
geocoded points when a 25 m oŒset and 15 m inset are employed is to 81m in 95%
of the cases, 31 m in 75% of the cases, and 16 m 50% of the time. It is not in doubt
that the distances involved are small, but the fact over 5% of points are allocated to
diŒerent CDs from their cadastral centroids is likely to have implications when an
attempt is made to relate counts of cases to census variables, or where areal compar-
isons are made between variables geocoded through two diŒerent processes. This
(cid:142) gure increases to 7.5% when a 10 m oŒset is used, as is only available to the majority
of current MapInfo users. If accuracy of geocoding is important to a MapInfo user,
upgrading to version 6.0 or beyond may be a worthwhile expense. When attempting
to relate counts of cases to a small polygon such as a CD no immediate solution to
the problem presents itself, other than a conservative interpretation of any subsequent
(cid:142) ndings. Although the choice of geocoding settings presented here have optimised
the point location, it is not a corollary that the same (cid:142) gure would improve geocoding
elsewhere and other researchers and geocoders are unlikely to have access to both
data sets used in this study. In the reverse situation, where an areal variable is
extracted for association with a point record, it is possible to use an areally weighted
buŒer approach to minimise the impact of misallocated points. A vicinity-type
approach such as this has been used and demonstrate d successfully in the analysis
of crime locations, described as points, in relation to deprivation measured areally
in enumeration districts (RatcliŒe and McCullagh 1999).

Given the spatial separation found in this study between geocoded coordinates
and a variety of geographical units, it would seem prudent to verify the accuracy of
any new geocoding processes or products, and if a signi(cid:142) cant improvement is found,
to consider the validity of any important (cid:142) ndings that used the older process where
any statistical signi(cid:142) cance is slight. This is a standard scienti(cid:142) c principle but it is
worth stating again given that it seems unlikely that we have reached the pinnacle
of geocoding methodology.

With more than 5% of the geocoded points in this study falling outside the
correct cadastral polygon, and more than 50% being coordinated to either the street,
or worse the wrong property (rising to 90% with a 10 m oŒset), the limitations of
the current geocoding process become apparent. A number of police services in the
UK have been utilising the ADDRESS-POINT (cid:142) le mentioned earlier in this paper
and have built the (cid:142) le into a gazetteer (RatcliŒe and McCullagh 1998). A rigid data
entry process rejects any location that is not known to the system and this prevents
the encoding of erroneous addresses and permits the geocoding at the data point of
entry. This type of data entry method requires constant maintenance as new addresses
have to be cross-checked and then permitted onto the system, but it does present
the possibility of a near 100% geocoding rate. When, if possible, public services have
the opportunity to move to this type of system and where accurate geocoding
presents real analytical pro(cid:142) t, such an adjustment may prove bene(cid:142) cial. For the rest
of us it would seem that the present method of geocoding, warts and all, is here to
stay for the immediate future.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 Accuracy of address range T IGER-type (cid:142) les

485

References
Bailey, T. C., and Gatrell, A. C., 1995, Interactive Spatial Data Analysis (London: Longman).
Cooke, D. F., 1998, Topology and TIGER: The Census Bureau’s contribution. In T he History
of Geographical Information Systems: Perspectives f rom the Pioneers, edited by T. W.
Foresman ( Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall), pp. 47–57.

Gatrell, A. C., 1989, On the spatial representation and accuracy of address-based data in
the UK. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 3, 335–348.
Gatrell, A. C., Dunn, C. E., and Boyle, P. J., 1991, The relative utility of the Central
Postcode Directory and Pinpoint Address Code in applications of geographical
information systems. Environment and Planning A, 23, 1447–1458.

Harries, K., 1999, Mapping Crime: Principles and Practice (Washington: US Department

of Justice).

communication.

Hickson, J., 2000,

L and Information Centre

(Bathurst, NSW, Australia), personal

Martin, D., and Higgs, G., 1997, Population georeferencing in England and Wales: basic

units reconsidered. Environment and Planning A, 29, 333–347.

PFCML, 2000, Police Federation Crime Mapping L aboratory, Geocoding in law enforcement:
Final report. (Washington DC, US Department of Justice: O(cid:141) ce of Community
Orientated Policing Services): 17.

Ratcliffe, J. H., and McCullagh, M. J., 1998, Identifying repeat victimisation with GIS.

British Journal of Criminology, 38, 651–662.

Ratcliffe, J. H., and McCullagh, M. J., 1999, Burglary, victimisation and social deprivation.

Crime Prevention and Community Safety, 1, 37–46.

Downloaded by [University of Southern Queensland] at 10:01 04 October 2014 