Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158
DOI 10.1007/s10707-006-7576-3

Supporting Distributed Spatial Collaboration:
An Investigation of Navigation and Radar
View Techniques

Wendy A. Schafer & Doug A. Bowman

Received: 16 March 2004 / Revised: 14 December 2004 /
Accepted: 8 March 2005
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2006

Abstract Spatial collaboration is a complex problem where people work together
within the context of a large, physical place. Our work investigates ways to support
distributed, synchronous, spatial collaboration activities. We have conducted an
experiment to examine techniques for supporting individual navigation and
providing awareness information to the distributed users. Using a collaborative,
two-dimensional map interface, we examined continuous and discrete styles of
navigation as well as traditional and novel radar view techniques. The results
revealed the advantages of continuous navigation, the issues inherent with discrete
navigation, and the potential for novel radar view designs. We present the lessons
learned from this study as well as some of the issues to consider in designing a
spatial collaboration application.

Keywords Collaboration software . Navigation techniques . Radar views .
Fisheye projections

1. Introduction

Spatial collaboration is a specialized form of collaborative work where the
discussion relates to a physical place [29]. This physical place can vary in size, but
it is typically a large space people occupy and interact with. For example, the place
might be a building, such as a house or a multiple-story ofﬁce space, and the
collaboration activity might be focused on the building’s design. Spatial collabora-

W. A. Schafer (*)
College of Information Sciences and Technology,
The Pennsylvania State University,
330 G IST Building, University Park, PA 16802-6823, USA
e-mail: was15@psu.edu

D. A. Bowman
Department of Computer Science,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
e-mail: bowman@vt.edu

Springer

124

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

tion could also relate to an outdoor area, such as a nature park or intersection of
roads. For example, environmentalists and highway designers may need to work
together to achieve their goals for an area of land. There are many scenarios for a
spatial collaboration activity. The goals and objectives of the activity can vary
widely as well as the number of people collaborating together, each person’s role in
the effort, each person’s level of involvement and time commitment, and each
person’s physical location. The common factor in all of these situations is that the
people involved are focused on a spatial problem concerning a large, physical area.
Distributed, spatial collaboration is particularly interesting because it occurs
when people work together from different locations. For example, while collabo-
rating on a community park design, one person might be at the ofﬁce, while the
others are at home. Today’s technology enables this style of collaboration and it is
an everyday occurrence through the use of email, telephone, and video conferenc-
ing. One approach to supporting this distributed setting for spatial collaboration is
to expand upon the design of single-user map software applications. These
technologies typically offer an interactive representation of the space, enabling the
collaborators to reference features and not rely on their individual, spatial
knowledge. They encourage spatial discussions involving concepts of distance,
orientation, and location information, all of which are difﬁcult to convey using only
a verbal form of communication such as text or speech.

The objective of this work is to investigate techniques that support the
collaborators sharing such a software representation. Similar to a collaborative
whiteboard, we are interested in collaborative map representations that enable
distributed users to synchronously work together. This will enable an exchange of
spatial
ideas related to a physical space. In particular, our work focuses on
supporting independent navigation and providing awareness information between
the distributed participants. Navigation techniques differ in terms of how the users
view the representation. In a spatial collaboration solution, navigation techniques
need to support the collaborators in their exploration of the space. The techniques
employed should enable them to make sense of the representation and understand it
with respect to the real world place. They should also provide the spatial views that
will be most helpful
in solving the spatial problem at hand. The issues with
navigation are further complicated when you consider multiple users engaging in
collaborative navigation. People differ in spatial abilities and have different
conceptions of spatial areas [35]. A useful and usable navigation technique for
spatial collaboration will recognize these differences and encourage the group to
establish and maintain a common understanding throughout an activity.

In addition to navigation, this work investigates the collaboration issue of
awareness. Synchronous awareness involves knowing about the people participating
in the collaboration, including who they are, what they are working on and the
speciﬁcs of their locations and actions [11]. This information is widely available in
face-to-face settings, but is less available in distributed situations. Using awareness
techniques, shared software applications can provide this crucial information to
distributed participants [7], [13], [14]. In particular, we are investigating awareness
techniques that support spatial collaboration tasks. These tasks require information
about how collaborators have navigated independently, which spatial features each
participant is focused on, and any actions the users have performed to manipulate
the representation. A useful and usable awareness technique for spatial collabora-
tion will enable the collaborators to explore different areas of the space and yet

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

125

maintain group focus and coherence. It will also support the group as they work
together, possibly in a small, detailed area.

Both navigation techniques and awareness techniques can have an effect on spatial
collaboration. For instance, a representation that uses a complex form of navigation
can enable the individual users to explore a range of spatial ideas, but it can also cause
coordination problems within a group as each user navigates to a unique viewport.
Alternatively, a representation that restricts the navigation interactions can reduce
these issues, yet prevent the group from developing a complete understanding of the
space or being able to perform complex tasks. Awareness techniques offer a possible
solution. They aim to limit collaboration problems and can indicate what each user
can see. There are a variety of approaches for providing this information and some
techniques will inevitably be more useful for spatial collaboration than others. One
possibility is to use a radar view that displays a miniature of the entire space with
depictions for each user’s viewport. This allows each user to visually understand his
view with respect to the space and with respect to the other users’ views. However,
applying radar views to a spatial collaboration solution is not straightforward. Spatial
representations can involve numerous levels of detail that are navigated with varying
scale factors. It is not obvious how to portray this information in the miniature in a
useful and usable manner.

Combining different awareness and different navigation techniques also warrants
consideration. The awareness technique should complement the navigation style so
that it is clear where each collaborator is working. An awareness technique that is
ambiguous or difﬁcult to comprehend when combined with a complex navigation
technique can create more collaboration issues than it resolves. Users will struggle to
understand the awareness technique and become distracted from the real collabo-
ration task. Our work investigates this balance as it compares two approaches to
individual navigation and two approaches to radar view awareness techniques.

In the following sections we describe a study of navigation and radar view tech-
nique combinations and their effects on spatial collaboration. The empirical study
uses a common collaboration task completed by knowledgeable, but not necessarily
technical users. In the following sections, we present related work, the navigation and
radar view awareness techniques implemented, the task and interface used, as well as
the experimental design and procedure. The results from the study are followed by a
detailed discussion of the ﬁndings and implications for supporting distributed, spatial
collaboration.

2. Related Work

Most of the past literature dealing with spatial collaboration relates to the ﬁeld of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS). GIS is typically used to analyze spatial data
sets in solving domain speciﬁc problems. For example, a recent water main break
might be explained by simultaneously displaying underground pipelines and various
water sources. These systems focus on details, precision, and static visualizations of
different data sets. The approach of this work, in comparison, is to explore the use
of spatial representations to enhance informal, everyday spatial collaboration tasks.
Our tasks involve non-technical people working together on a spatial problem.

A number of different GIS research projects have investigated distributed, spatial
collaboration. In Claus Rinner’s dissertation BArgumentation Maps-GIS-based dis-

Springer

126

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

cussion support for online planning’’ he realizes the need to support group discussions
through linking individual contributions to map elements [25]. Working with a land-use
planning application, Rinner analyzes how GIS and Argumentation Theory can be
combined to support asynchronous, distributed debates. His contributions are primarily
of interest to GIS designers, but his software prototype supports zooming and panning
a map and adding arguments. It does not offer synchronous collaboration support.

The Centre for Computational Geography at the University of Leeds in Britain
takes a different approach toward distributed, spatial collaboration. They investi-
gate how to increase public participation in democracy through web-based GIS [8].
In a testbed project, they compare town improvement ideas contributed online
versus using a physical, three-dimensional model of the town. Our work, on the
other hand, is interested in taking this concept a step further and investigating more
intricate scenarios. The testbed project had the local people add comments
asynchronously to an online map, but it would also be interesting to look at
scenarios that resulted from this effort, such as the synchronous discussions about
the comments, the information gathering and research about the statements, and the
decision-making on what to improve and how to do it.

Another example of distributed, spatial collaboration is the research of the
GeoVISTA Center at Penn State University. They are exploring the use of geovi-
sualizations in distributed work [21], [22]. Geovisualizations use visual representa-
tions to make spatial problems visible to scientists. Displaying these representations
across multiple locations enables experts to share ideas about geographic spaces.
For example, an interactive, 3D view of a river basin allows research teams in
different cities along the basin to understand climate and drainage patterns. An
initial prototype has been developed to discuss important features with potential
users, revealing the need for a variety of awareness and communication techniques
[4], [21]. The prototype uses a form of shared navigation so that all the participants
have a similar view. This differs from our focus on independent navigation and leads
to a similar, but different, set of awareness issues. In shared navigation, collaborators
need to know who is currently controlling the data displayed and how the control is
shared so that some individuals do not dominate. The GeoVISTA Center’s research
also differs from this work with their focus on scientiﬁc applications. This is opposed
to our tasks which are performed by less technical users.

In addition to the GIS literature, there are also prior examples of using spatial
representations for collaboration, although not necessarily for spatial collaboration.
For instance, spatial representations have been used to encourage collaboration
among colleagues within the workplace. Ramonamap is an interactive map tool that
organizes workplace messages by their associated physical locations [1]. The tool
displays a sketch of an ofﬁce and allows users to leave notes for one another, ﬁnd
out conference room schedules, and learn information typically found in a personnel
directory. Similarly, ActiveMap is a visualization tool that provides awareness in-
formation about the location of workers within an ofﬁce environment [23]. Designed
to encourage casual conversations beyond neighboring workspaces, the tool uses a
sketch of the ofﬁce in the background and a collection of faces to indicate the most
recent location information of individuals. Our work with distributed, spatial
collaboration extends these projects as it examines more interactive tasks.

More relevant to this work is the research by the GroupKit Lab at the University of
Calgary. Their research examines the use of spatial representations in collaborative
workspaces. Exploring collaborative tasks, such as laying out newspaper articles,

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

127

creating concept maps, and arranging ﬁctitious pipelines, they study both the
individual and collective aspects of group work, as the collaborators navigate the
spatial representations independently [11]–[14]. These situations highlight the need
for different types of awareness information. To understand the differences between
distributed and same-place work settings, the group also examines face-to-face
collaboration around shared spaces, such as a table or whiteboard. They offer a
framework for awareness information that is typically exchanged in same-place
settings [11]. This framework aids the design of collaborative solutions and
encourages the use of appropriate awareness features.

Prior literature has also examined independent navigation within collaborative,
three-dimensional, virtual environments. Joint research by the University of
Nottingham and King’s College London identiﬁes the collaboration issues when
users work from different viewpoints within a virtual environment. They observe
participants struggling to understand others’ perspectives and actions within the
three-dimensional space [16]. Similarly, research at the University of Michigan by
Yang and Olson details the problems encountered when collaborators view a virtual
environment from different frames-of-reference. With a birds-eye view and a ﬁrst-
person view, pairs of participants struggle to see the same data objects [37], [38].
Both of these research projects demonstrate the importance of supporting
coordination among individual displays in order to resolve perspective differences.
Our work focuses on the different views available with a two-dimensional spatial
representation. It considers two navigation techniques that differ in their approaches
for coordinating individual displays. One simpliﬁes the process of aligning viewports
so that they show the exact same map content; while the other offers overlapping
viewports so some of the same content is visible in each user’s display.

Radar views are a common approach to providing awareness information with
individual navigation. Many different implementations have been developed and
evaluated previously. They were initially described as part of the SharedARK
system [31]. More recently, they have been used with simple spaces that are
navigated through panning interactions, such as collaborative text editing, laying out
newspaper articles, and creating concepts maps [2], [11], [12]. In a study by Gutwin
and Greenberg, radar views were shown to be an awareness feature corresponding
to increased group usability [12]. Using a simple representation, the collaborators
were efﬁcient in their communication and task completion with a radar view. The
technique provided a visual communication channel. This usefulness is not
necessarily applicable to spatial collaboration, however. Our work examines radar
views and the more complex representations typical of spatial collaboration. It
extends the previous study and investigates the utility of radar views with spatial
representations that can change in scale.

3. Spatial Collaboration Experiment

In thinking about spatial collaboration and the tasks involved, it is natural to
consider supporting these activities through a collaborative, two-dimensional
application, or a collaborative map. Map software, in general, has become more
common, especially with increasing use on the Internet. For example, electronic
maps are no longer available just to the institutions and people who purchase

Springer

128

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

software. Anyone with Internet access can visit a website such as Mapquest
(www.mapquest.com) or Maps-On-Us (www.mapsonus.com) and interact with a
map application to generate individualized maps, determine routes, and ﬁnd
location information.

It also known that collaboration involves both individual and shared efforts [7],
[12]. For instance, a participant’s thought process often involves expressing ideas as
well as understanding their partners’ ideas. One approach for supporting this mixed-
focus collaboration is to allow each user to navigate the representation individually
and be able to perform actions not visible to the others, while providing awareness
information about the group effort. For example, a group of people designing a
town park from distributed locations might want each person to have an
individualized map of the park where everyone sees the same set of participant-
created annotations. Our representation uses this approach of allowing users to
explore independently, which is termed relaxed what you see is what I see [32].

3.1. Variables of Interest

Our investigation focuses on supporting navigation and providing awareness
information between the distributed participants. These variables can have an effect
on spatial collaboration both independently and collectively. This study examines
two extremes in navigation techniques and two alternatives to radar view
techniques.

3.1.1. Navigation Techniques

In considering how the users will view the representation, the simplest approach is to
represent the space of interest with a single image that ﬁts on a typical computer
screen. This type of display might work well for some tasks, but spatial collaboration
involves a large, detailed spatial entity and many tasks will require these details.
Navigation techniques provide a way for representations to display varying levels of
scale. They present a Bwindow’’ into the entire representation and implement an
interface for controlling the user’s view [36]. This notion of a Bwindow,’’ also referred
to as a Bviewing window,’’ should not be confused with a window interface widget. It
is a user’s view of the representation at any one time or one’s viewport into the
spatial representation.

Navigation techniques can vary in the number of viewing windows available to
the user and, similarly, the amount of control the user has in switching between
these windows. Given a single representation, one navigation technique might offer
only a few windows into the space. This limits the way a user can navigate. He is
restricted to the windows provided by the technique and he has limited control over
what can be displayed. Alternatively, a navigation technique could offer numerous
windows into the representation. This provides the user with many navigation
options and gives him greater ﬂexibility in adjusting the display.

Current mapping software illustrates these differences in viewing window
approaches. Web-based mapping software, such as Mapquest and Maps-On-Us,
typically corresponds to a limited number of windows. The user interacts with the
map display through a selection of buttons, which adjust the viewport through
incremental shifts and scales. This constrains the users navigation to a discrete set of
viewports. For instance, the Maps-On-Us web interface includes panning buttons to

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

129

shift the viewport by a half screen or a whole screen. Likewise, the Mapquest
approach shifts the viewport by about a quarter of the width and height. Both
websites are limited in the available viewports of the space, offering only a relatively
few viewing windows. In contrast, commercial mapping software, such as the ESRI
products, and consumer map software, such as Delorme’s Street Atlas, incorporate
numerous widows. These tools provide interaction techniques that support
continuous panning and zooming of the spatial representation. They allow the user
to navigate a wide range of viewports and provide a seemingly inﬁnite number of
windows into the space.

The numerous windows alternative may seem superior to the limited windows
approach. In thinking about distributed collaboration, however, the greater num-
ber of windows leads to collaboration issues. With more window possibilities,
there are more ways for the individual displays to differ. Consider the case of
just two users navigating with many window possibilities. There are numerous
ways the displays can differ. One window might be in a completely different area
than the other, or it might be somewhat close, or it might be slightly overlapping
in one corner, or it might be mostly overlapping along one side, or it might be
completely enclosed due to different scales. This range of possible differences
can create problems for the collaborators. It is not obvious what spatial features
are visible on a collaborator’s screen or how one user’s display compares to the
others’. The group will require time and effort to coordinate the individual
displays and ﬁnd similar references.

Incorporating less navigation windows is one way to reduce this coordination
effort. With only a limited number of windows, there are fewer ways the displays
can differ. The users’ navigation is constrained and, likewise, the differences be-
tween any two viewports are restricted. Also, with fewer windows, the number of
navigation steps required to align the windows can be reduced. To completely
align two viewports with many windows can require tedious navigation adjust-
ments in the viewport width, height, and scale. Limited windows, in comparison,
support adjustments that navigate to others’ potential viewports. Lastly, consider-
ing mathematical probability, there is also a greater chance that two windows will
be the same with fewer windows, eliminating the coordinated window problem
altogether.

Our experiment compares two styles of navigation. Each offers a different number
of windows into the spatial representation. The discrete navigation condition provides
only a few windows into the space, while continuous navigation is less constrained,
offering many windows. This contrast is similar to the web-based mapping and
commercial map software comparison. The discrete condition parallels the navigation
approach of a web-based mapping application, while the continuous condition uses
navigation techniques similar to commercial map products. To ensure a fair com-
parison, both styles of navigation are used with the same spatial representations
and both provide the same scale range. This means that every viewport available
with the discrete navigation is also a possibility with the continuous condition.

The discrete condition in this study differs from familiar web-based map navigation
with its use of non-overlapping windows. Panning interactions in web-based maps
often occurs through overlapping shifts. The Mapquest interactions with quarter-
window shifts are a good example. The Maps-On-Us interface demonstrates a
different approach, though, offering both half window and full window shifts.
Non-overlapping windows, corresponding to full window shifts, differ from over-

Springer

130

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

lapping windows in that they place an additional requirement on collaborating
viewports. This technique eliminates the possibility of collaborators using adjacent
viewports and seeing the same map content. In other words, the differences be-
tween individual displays are restricted so that two windows, at the same scale,
will either be identical or have nothing in common. Using non-overlapping
windows can potentially support collaborative efforts as viewports differ less.
With overlapping windows and adjacent viewports, collaborators may struggle to
understand what their partners can see. They may have some references in com-
mon, but not others, due to the overlapping region. This study examines the effect
of window differences through both the comparison of different numbers of
windows and the use of overlapping and non-overlapping windows.

Placing this additional restriction on discrete navigation may not correspond to
the most useful technique for solving a spatial problem. In navigating a space, a user
may be more disoriented with the non-overlapping windows. The focus of this study,
however, is to consider the efforts of multiple users in solving a spatial problem. The
discrete navigation could be effective in supporting collaboration and, at the same
time, less useful for a single user. The discrete condition has distinct collaboration
features. It allows the collaborators to use common references through completely
aligned viewports. It also provides interactions similar to the frequently used web-
based mapping software. This study examines the utility of the discrete navigation
and, more importantly, investigates the usefulness of the technique and its features
in a collaborative setting.

This comparison between discrete and continuous navigation is also similar to
previous research on text presentation in studies of reading comprehension. With a
scrolling presentation, the text changes line-by-line on the screen, while a paging
presentation changes the text all at once, similar to turning the page in a book.
Previous research has found that paging enables users to build a better mental
representation of the text [24], [30]. If this ﬁnding also applies to geospatial
navigation, this would imply that a non-overlapping discrete condition would support
a more accurate understanding of the space. This is not obvious, however, because
text tasks are inherently different than map-based tasks. Our study also explores this
idea with discrete and continuous navigation techniques.

3.1.2. Navigation Implementations

Both the continuous and discrete navigation are implemented using zooming and
panning interactions. These interactions are typical of map software and they allow
the viewing window to change in scale and shift horizontally and vertically across
the representation.

In discrete navigation, the map representation is divided into ninety-one, non-
overlapping windows. There are three discrete zoom levels with different windows
available at each level. At the most zoomed-out level, the entire map is displayed.
At the middle zoom level, there are nine possible windows, corresponding to a
division of the representation into a 3 (cid:1) 3 grid. At the most zoomed-in view, each
window of the middle zoom level is further divided into nine more windows.
Figure 1 below depicts these ninety-one windows into the representation.

This navigation technique provides relatively few windows into the spatial
representation and any overlapping windows exist through the use different scales.

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

131

Fig. 1 The discrete navigation technique uses three discrete zoom levels with non-overlapping
windows into the representation, leading to ninety-one possible viewports

Using this technique minimizes the differences between a set of individual displays.
For example, if there are two participants and both are using the same zoom level,
they either have the exact same window into the space or a completely distinct
window. If the participants are using different zoom levels, there are only three
possibilities. One person could see the entire space while his partner is zoomed in on
a location with either of the other zoom levels; one person could use the middle
zoom level while his partner is zoomed in on a smaller viewport within the area; or
the two viewing windows could have nothing in common.

These options may make it easier for a pair of users to explore individually and
then align their views for discussions. Each person knows that there are only a
limited number of windows into the display that the partner could be looking at, and
the differences between their views can easily be determined. Also, if their task
pertains to a particular area in the space, there are probably only a few windows that
can provide a view of that location.

In contrast, the continuous condition allows a user to navigate many more
windows with much greater control over his display. The representation is divided
into numerous overlapping windows. They overlap along the horizontal axis, vertical
axis, and in between zoom levels creating the illusion that any view of the space can
be obtained. Figure 2 portrays just a few of the possibilities.

In this condition, the number of windows into the space may seem inﬁnite, but
they are actually limited by the user interface. For example, scrollable interface
widgets are ideal for adjusting the display, but they have deﬁnite end points and
their movements are inherently discrete. Thus, they cannot provide an absolute
continuous navigation. Similarly, the representation must adhere to the pixels
available and the precision they provide. So using any style of interaction, the space
can only be enlarged or shrunk to a certain degree of precision. Our approach is to

Fig. 2 The continuous naviga-
tion technique provides many
windows into the representa-
tion. Users control the scale and
position of their window
through panning and zooming
interactions

Springer

132

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

provide a feeling of seemingly continuous control through the use of scrollable
widgets with extreme end points and many discrete levels. This navigation technique
provides each user with ﬂexibility in what he can view. The display can easily be
zoomed in to see small details as well as enlarged and panned to see the surrounding
area.

3.1.3. Radar View Techniques

Radar views are a popular technique for providing awareness information in shared
representations. They display a miniature of the entire workspace and indicate each
collaborator’s current viewport and cursor location. This allows each user to visually
understand his view with respect to the space and with respect to the other users’
views. Yet, this simple technique could be less useful for more complex spatial
representations. In spatial collaboration a representation is often navigated using
panning and zooming techniques as well as levels of detail. The difference in these
interaction techniques can present usability problems for radar views.

When users change the scale of their view through zooming, the size of their
viewport representation in the radar view grows and shrinks. Large viewports are
not a problem, but small viewports can be potentially difﬁcult to use. A viewport
representation in the miniature may be too small to visually comprehend. Also, it
may be difﬁcult to determine if multiple, small viewports overlap.

Levels of detail in a spatial representation can also cause usability problems.
Radar views often provide an abstraction of the shared workspace rather than
display all of the details. This approach requires users to discuss their individual
views and not just examine the radar view. Yet, in a spatial representation that
incorporates zooming, the details in an individual’s view often vary with the zoom
level. For example, a representation of a town might be zoomed so that building
outlines are added to the display. This level of detail technique is useful for a single
user, but it can lead to problems in a collaborative system. Two users could be
viewing the same area with different representations. When the awareness
information in a radar view only offers an abstraction of these views, the users
have to resolve the differences through potentially lengthy discussions.

We designed a ﬁsheye radar view approach to address these potential problems
[27]. This technique maintains the basic design, adding a ﬁsheye projection feature
that supports the zooming interactions and levels of detail used in complex spatial
representations. Fisheye projections are techniques that offer details and an
overview within the same representation [9], [19], [26]. Mathematical functions
magnify certain areas of the representation while keeping the scale of the rest of the
representation somewhat constant [20] (Fig. 3).

The use of ﬁsheye views to support collaboration has previously been explored by
Greenberg et al., but there approach is different [10]. In an initial investigation, they
found that applying ﬁsheye projections within a collaborative workspace could
potentially help users maintain awareness information. Their results suggested that
ﬁsheye techniques could be used as an alternative to radar views.

In our design, ﬁsheye techniques are used within a radar view. We apply a ﬁsheye
projection to each collaborator’s viewport in the radar view. The projection
magniﬁes the map contents within each viewport. It also enlarges the size of the
viewport within the radar view. This technique has two direct consequences. First, it
increases the size of small viewport representations. Viewports that were too small

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

133

Fig. 3 Applying ﬁsheye projec-
tions magniﬁes and enlarges
areas in a spatial
representation

to visually comprehend with traditional radar views are now magniﬁed in the
enhanced version. With the magniﬁcation, both the details of individual viewports
and the overlaps between viewports can easily be discerned. This provides for a
more usable miniature.

Enlarging the viewport representations also allows more detail to be displayed in
the radar view. We described how radar views often provide abstractions of the
shared workspaces to limit clutter. Magnifying the viewport contents, however,
redraws the abstraction in a larger area and provides additional space within the
display. One approach is to use the extra space to render more of the map contents
from the individuals’ viewports. For instance, the magniﬁed viewport could include
the levels of detail visible in the individual’s view. Rendering additional details can
provide the users with greater awareness about each other’s displays. This reduces
the potential for collaboration problems.

3.1.4. Radar View Implementations

Figure 4 illustrates the traditional radar view (Fig. 4a) and the ﬁsheye radar view
(Fig. 4b) compared in this study. The user is working with a representation of the
town of Blacksburg, Virginia and his viewport is outlined with a rectangle in the
radar view. In the enhanced version, the viewport representation is magniﬁed,
creating a bubble effect.

The mathematical function used to create this effect applies a linear transforma-
tion to each coordinate in the map. The function is a piecewise variation of the
polyfocal projection [20]. It magniﬁes an area, demagniﬁes the surrounding area to
compensate, and uses a constant scale for the remaining areas. More speciﬁcally,
points located within the circle of radius R that circumscribes the user’s viewport are
magniﬁed, points in a larger circle of radius E surrounding the viewport are
demagniﬁed, and the remaining points are not altered such that:

F að Þ ¼ a=

D

p

¼

a Rð Þ
p
D
r

þ

0:5 a r (cid:2) R
ð
r

Þ

ð

r < R

Þ

R < r < E
ð

Þ

¼ a

ð

r > E

Þ

Springer

134

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Fig. 4 (a) The user has zoomed into the detailed area on the right. A traditional radar view is
displayed on the left. A crosshair indicates the user’s cursor location, although it is difﬁcult to see.
(b) Navigating to the same location the ﬁsheye radar view more clearly indicates the viewport
details and current cursor location

This transformation is applied to the x and y coordinates separately as each are
placed in the function for a where:
& D is the ratio of the user’s viewport size to the size of the entire map (D < 1)
&
r is the distance between the point to be transformed and the center of the user’s
viewport

& E is the radius of the larger circle, which corresponds to the distance required in

order to demagnify by a constant scale of 0.5

& R is the distance between the center and one corner of the user’s viewport

More speciﬁcally, the larger radius E is determined by the user’s viewport size

indicated by D and R such that E = R (2/¾(D) j 1).

A weighted averaging technique handles multiple users to produce a multiple
bubble effect. Using this approach, each point is determined by applying a weight to
the results of each individual transformation. Our implementation follows Keahey’s
algorithm [17], [18] (Fig. 5).

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

135

Fig. 5 A weighted averaging
algorithm supports two users
collaborating with the ﬁsheye ra-
dar view, creating a multiple
bubble effect on the left

3.2. Task

In collaboration people frequently Bget together’’ to share ideas, have discussions,
and make decisions. Similarly, in this experiment two users have separate ideas
about the location for a new trafﬁc solution. Their task is to make a decision. The
users are asked to work together to integrate their location ideas using a col-
laborative map tool. The speciﬁcs of the task, including the town and the location
ideas, are predetermined and provided by the researcher.

The participants collaborate to position road signs and trafﬁc lights on a town
map. Each user is given a criteria statement about the location for a light/sign such
that when read together a general solution is understood [3]. For example, one
statement may say that people turn before they get to the hospital, while the other
statement indicates that people headed south miss the turn. This reveals that a road
sign should be placed along the road to the hospital north of the landmark.

The road sign tasks are intentionally open-ended to foster a more realistic spatial
collaboration activity. Trafﬁc light criteria, on the other end, lead users to speciﬁc
intersections on the map and often involve less discussion. This distinction is
important as it investigates two common types of tasks in spatial collaboration:
discussion and precision tasks. In collaboration activities, often the goal is to share
and discuss ideas, not necessarily to make decisions. This corresponds to the road
sign task where the users are given a partial set of spatial criteria. This situation
causes them to discuss ideas in order to make a high-quality decision. On the other
hand, spatial collaboration tasks can also be very precision-oriented such as
pinpointing a set of data sites. This need for precision is reﬂected in the trafﬁc
light task. Users are asked to not only determine the intersection from the criteria,
but to mark it with a circular ring icon so that the intersection is centered within
the ring.

In collaborative work people bring different ideas to a problem and during
collaboration these ideas are often combined, expanded, and evaluated. To simulate
this our task gave each participant a different set of criteria. The pair discusses these
location statements and eventually reaches a solution that they felt satisﬁes the
criterion. This solution is then speciﬁed as each user marks his/her individual map
with the agreed upon location. This task design is desirable because it encourages

Springer

136

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

both users to participate and work together to make a decision. Each user has both a
portion of the problem deﬁnition and they have to individually indicate the group
decision. Thus, it engages both participants at the beginning and end of the task.
Participants must also communicate their criteria with one another in order to solve
the problem. This encourages a mutually collaborative effort to understand the
criteria with respect to the spatial representation. Also, in agreeing upon a common
location, the participants need to have an awareness of how their partner has
navigated in comparison their own view. Knowing how their displays are similar, they
are able to discuss different aspects of the spatial problem and consider a solution.

Our experiment also explores the common understanding that is established
among the participants. Collaboration activities, in general, often require a group
to make a decision. During the discussion, at times they may believe they have
reached a consensus when in actuality the participants’ understandings differ. This
incongruous situation can also occur in activities that are distributed or involve
spatial collaboration. The task in this study investigates the group’s shared
understanding at the end of the task. Each participant marks the group’s solution
and the position differences are analyzed. This measurement indicates the group’s
level of agreement and whether or not they have reached a common solution.
These measurements reﬂect on the common understanding established by the
group.

Typically, a usability-engineered groupware system would have incorporated
more visual cues in the interface. The cues could portray where each partner was
placing their marker or used a single, shared set of markers for this task. Such
techniques enable the group to negotiate the precise positioning and establish a
common solution more easily. Our focus, on the hand, is to not provide this explicit
awareness information in an effort to investigate the larger issue of common
understanding. The study explores if the different conditions affected the groups’
ability to develop a common solution. Spatial collaboration problems do not
always correspond to marking one location. Our task is simplistic in this respect,
but it provides an easy measurement of the level of shared understanding in the
solution.

3.3. Interface

During the experiment, users work with similar maps displaying roads and landmark
icons for familiar places, such as hospitals, schools, and airports. This data was
acquired from the Internet and it provided the users with reference points. All of the
map data is displayed at each zoom level in order to eliminate any confusion or
biases due to adding and removing levels of detail.

Maine towns are also used in order to eliminate any effects of prior spatial
knowledge. Many of the users had never been to Maine and the few that had been
did not recognize the town maps. In this way, the users had equal knowledge about
the places they were navigating and discussing during the experiment.

Figure 6 shows a screenshot of the experiment in progress. Each of the landmark
icons is indicative of the place it represents and they are generally familiar symbols
(e.g., a capital FH_ set against a blue background corresponds to a hospital, and an
open book represents a library). Road signs are marked on the map using a star
shape icon and trafﬁc lights used a circular ring. These icons stood out on the road
maps and are easily distinguished from the landmarks. The open area of the circular

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

137

Fig. 6 One participant is viewing the entire town map while this user has zoomed in on a downtown
area. A sign marker has been positioned near the hospital and a light marker has been placed
around an intersection near the airport

ring allows the users to see the intersection they were marking and to be precise in
the icon positioning. The star icon for the sign marker, on the hand, makes the
groups responsible for the level of precision, as they have to determine their own
strategies to ensure they were marking the same location. To position a marker,
users simply drag the icons from the right-hand side onto the map area. Each icon is
associated with a set of map coordinates once it is positioned on the map, so that
panning and zooming the map also cause the icon to move. The markers are not
ﬁxed to the map though, and users can reposition them in completing the tasks.

The map itself supports zooming and panning interactions through familiar
scrollbar and slider widgets. A scrollbar below the map allows users to shift the map
right and left, while another to the right moves the map up and down. The zoom
slider is placed to the left of the map so as not to be confused with a panning
interaction, which typically occurs to the right of a workspace [28]. In Bcontinuous’’
navigation, the slider and scrollbars are implemented using 100 discrete steps, which
gives the appearance of continuous panning and zooming. On the other hand, in
discrete navigation, the scrollbars and slider snap to the available positions. This
occurs when the scrollbar thumb is released after being dragged, when the arrows to
either side of the scrollbar are pressed, and when the open space surrounding the
thumb is clicked.

Lastly, the radar view indicates each user’s mouse cursor location using a
telepointer. Gesturing is an important aspect of same place spatial collaboration and

Springer

138

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

our implementation supports these physical actions in a distributed setting [33], [34].
Using a crosshair to represent each participant’s cursor whenever the mouse was
positioned within the map area allows the users to point out spatial features and
gesture ideas [15]. The color of the telepointer corresponds to the viewport
indication so that each user in the pair is represented by a speciﬁc color. The
crosshair is not displayed when a user has a selected a marker and is dragging it
across the map. This prevents the users from simply align their telepointers in
positioning a marker. Instead, the groups are encouraged to discuss and agree on a
location prior to physically positioning the marker. Once the marker is dropped, the
crosshair reappears in the radar view.

3.4. Experimental Design

The experiment used a 2 (cid:1) 2 within-subjects design to evaluate four user interfaces.
These interfaces correspond to the four possible combinations of the two navigation
conditions and the two radar view techniques. Each participant worked with the
same partner to complete the four tasks and the ordering of the combinations was
counterbalanced using a Balanced Latin Square. This allowed us to measure the
groups at different stages in their familiarity with one another and in their
familiarity with the combining criteria task.

The groups used the same set of Maine towns in completing the experiment.
Each user interface condition was paired with a different town map. The maps were
very similar in size and complexity in order to make the tasks as similar as possible.
The speciﬁc marker trials of the towns were also designed to be comparable and
pilot studies were used to ensure the criteria were clear and logical. Each group
positioned three lights and two sign markers with each town map, generating
repeated metrics.

Sixteen random pairs of people completed the experiment. Most were Blacks-
burg, Virginia residents, and a number of interests were represented including
Biologists, English majors, Computer Scientists, Human Factors majors, and
Ecologists. Twenty males and twelve females completed the task. The average age
of the participants was 30, with the youngest person being 21 and the oldest 53 years
old. Participants were randomly paired, resulting in six male–male pairs, two
female–female pairs, and eight male–female pairs. Most participants did not know
their partner prior to the experiment and others were simply acquaintances. The
participants used were intended to provide one sample of potential users. The study
was not interested in any effects due to age, gender, or personal backgrounds and
did not consider these factors in the statistical analyses.

Each pair of users followed a similar procedure. After being introduced and
reading through a set of instructions, the group completed the four trials. Each user
sat in a separate room with an audio channel connecting the users and the
experiment administrator. Users worked with identical PCs and could freely talk
and hear responses without worrying about headphones or microphones. Before
collaborating with each Maine town, the pair explored the upcoming interface with
a familiar map of Blacksburg, Virginia. Then, after completing the Maine task, the
users individually rated the treatment condition. At the end of all trials, a ﬁnal
questionnaire asked each user to rank the four conditions with respect
to
collaboration, navigation and preference. Informal debrieﬁng discussions were also
conducted before the group left.

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

139

4. Experiment Results

A number of different metrics were used to compare the different navigation and
radar view combinations. A survey was administered at the end of the procedure as
well as after each interface trial. The ﬁnal questionnaire included questions that
compared the four conditions, while the task rating sheets measured the
participants’ immediate feelings about each condition with respect to perceived
effort, navigation support, and collaboration support.

Software logs maintained where each user positioned their markers. This allowed
a calculation of the difference between each user’s marker position for the same
light or sign. The time required to position each marker as well as the total task
completion time were also recorded. Both the distances between markers and the
time were analyzed with respect to the different conditions.

Lastly, the sessions were videotaped and the discussions were partially analyzed.
Each act of positioning a marker was categorized as using one strategy or another.
The frequency counts of these strategies of use were compared as well as the
strategy chosen for a particularly complex task. Frequency counts of pointing were
also observed.

4.1. Final Questionnaire Results

In the ﬁnal questionnaire, users ranked the four treatment conditions based on how
easy/hard it was to collaborate with a partner, preference, and how easy/hard it was
to navigate the map. The sum of ranks for each condition is displayed in Table 1
below, where lower scores indicate higher placement in the ranking and, in turn,
greater ease of collaboration, preference, and ease of navigation.

Using the Chi-Squared Goodness of Fit Test revealed a signiﬁcant difference in
the four rankings with respect to ease of navigation (chi-squared = 25.05, df = 3, p <
0.001), preference (chi-squared = 51.38, df = 3, p < 0.001), and ease of collaboration
(chi-squared = 68.21, df = 3, p < 0.001). Comparing the differences of the means,
both continuous conditions were associated with signiﬁcantly lower rankings in all
three questions. The only signiﬁcant difference between the ﬁsheye and radar view
conditions was within the discrete, ease of navigation rankings. The discrete,
traditional condition, with a score of 101, was found to be signiﬁcantly less than the
118 score for the discrete, ﬁsheye condition.

Table 1 The ﬁnal questionnaire had users rank the four conditions where a rank of 1 corresponded
to the superior condition

Continuous

Discrete

Traditional

Fisheye

Traditional

Fisheye

Ease of collaboration
Preference
Ease of navigation

58
57
48

66
51
53

98
103
101

The two continuous conditions were ranked signiﬁcantly lower for the three questions. Within the
same navigation condition, the sum of the rankings for the two radar views was statistically equal for
ease of collaboration and preference.

100
109
118

Springer

140

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

4.1.1. Straightforward Questions

The ﬁnal questionnaire also asked two sets of straightforward questions focused on
the navigation and radar view conditions. Both sets of questions had users indicate
which design was better for collaboration, which was easier to use, and which the
user preferred. Three choices were provided for each set of questions, including the
two treatment conditions and a neither (about the same) option. The results from
the twenty-eight subjects who answered these questions are summarized in Tables 2
and 3.

Using the results where one technique was chosen over the other, there was not a
statistical difference in the navigation condition in terms of collaboration (chi-
squared = 2.67, df = 1, p < 0.10). Yet, users identiﬁed the continuous technique as
both easier to use (chi-squared = 28.00, df = 1, p < 0.001) and preferable (chi-
squared = 24.14, df = 1, p < 0.001). For the radar view section, there was not a
statistical difference for the collaboration question (chi-squared = 0.73, df = 1, p <
0.50) or the preference question (chi-squared = 1.64, df = 1, p < 0.30). However,
users considered the traditional radar view easier to use (chi-squared = 7.35, df = 1,
p < 0.01).

4.1.2. Equal Contribution

The last part of the ﬁnal questionnaire investigated whether each user contributed
equally to the task. Users rated their partner’s effort in comparison to their own

Table 2 Final questionnaire results when users were asked to choose between the two navigation
conditions

Discrete
navigation

Continuous
navigation

About
the same

Which was better for collaboration?
Which did you prefer?
Which was easier to use?

8
0
0

Users were divided on which was better for collaboration, but clearly favored the continuous
navigation in terms of ease of use and preference.

Table 3 Final questionnaire results when users were asked to choose between the two radar view
conditions

Traditional
radar view

Fisheye
radar view

About
the same

Which was better for collaboration?
Which did you prefer?
Which was easier to use?

13
14
18

Statistically, users did not favor either condition for collaboration or in terms of preference. They
found the traditional radar view easier to use.

Springer

16
27
28

9
8
5

4
1
0

6
6
5

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

141

using a 7-point scale. The participants indicated an equal level of effort more often
than they indicated any other effort level (chi-squared = 11.57, df = 1, p < 0.001).
The responses from the twenty-eight participants who answered this question are
summarized in Table 4.

4.2. Strategies of Use

Each group’s session was captured using video recorders during the study and
reviewed afterwards. One observation of these recordings relates to the two
strategies groups would use in deciding the ﬁnal positioning of the marker.
Frequently, in making their decision a pair would have an intricate discussion
about the shape of the roads with respect to where they wanted to place the marker.
This was the discussion strategy. Other times they would use the radar map to point
out various spots when deciding on the ﬁnal marker location. For example, one user
would indicate the spot and the other would conﬁrm the location using his cursor or
by mentioning a few nearby landmarks. This was the pointing strategy. Both strate-
gies describe an interesting approach to the spatial problem, but more importantly
they provide a way to compare the different conditions. Considering the strategy
choices made by the pairs, we can investigate and analyze the relationships between
the strategies and the conditions. For instance, greater use of the pointing strategy
with a particular condition can reﬂect a more efﬁcient collaboration activity.

Each sign and light marker task was coded with one of these strategies by the
experimenter in reviewing the videos. This coding was based on the participants’
ﬁnal efforts in the task, when they were deciding where to position the marker. This
decision typically occurred after they had identiﬁed the references in the criteria and
had an understanding of the problem. The decision-making was often preceded by a
comment such as: BOkay, now where should we put the sign?’’ When discussing the
ﬁnal position, the pairs either did or did not use the telepointers. If the pair used the
telepointers, this was classiﬁed as a pointing strategy. No use of the telepointers and
a complete reliance on speech counted as a discussion strategy. This analysis did not
require multiple coders because the two categories were straightforward.

Analyzing the frequency counts of all the sign and light tasks, users favored a
discussion strategy overall and the number of discussions was greater with the
traditional approach than the ﬁsheye design (F = 14.24, df = 1, p = 0.004). Using a
pointing strategy occurred more often with the ﬁsheye design than the traditional
approach. The average counts and standard deviations for each condition are dis-
played in Table 5.

Table 4 Final questionnaire results when users were asked to rate their partner’s effort in
comparison to their own efforts

More effort
1

2

2

3

2

4

23

5

1

6

0

0

Less effort
7

Partner’s effort level in comparison to

0

own efforts

Users indicated an equal level of effort within the groups.

Springer

142

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Table 5 Average frequency counts and standard deviations for strategies used in positioning the
three sign markers

Traditional
Fisheye

Discussion strategy

2.36 (s.d. = 0.78)
1.93 (s.d. = 1.22)

Pointing strategy

0.64 (s.d. = 0.78)
1.07 (s.d. = 1.22)

Discussions occurred more often with the traditional radar view and the pointing strategy was
favored with the ﬁsheye design.

Examining a similar set of results for the navigation conditions reveals no
differences in the strategies. Table 6 displays the average counts and standard
deviations for each condition.

4.2.1. Complex Marker Task

The criteria for each town involved positioning at least one sign in a congested area
of the map, or an area with many roads very close to another such as a downtown
area. Using a Conchran Q Test to determine any differences in the strategy used
with respect to the four conditions, users favored a pointing strategy more often
with the ﬁsheye, discrete navigation combination (Q = 13.8, df = 3, p < 0.005). The
total frequency counts for the pointing strategy are displayed in Table 7.

4.2.2. Conﬁrmation Actions

Reviewing the video recordings, participants were also observed with respect to
conﬁrmation statements. During the experiment one user would frequently point
out a location to their partner by placing their cursor on the point of interest and
making a verbal comment. When the partner responded to this statement and
conﬁrmed the location by placing their cursor on the same location, this was noted
as a conﬁrmation action. The experimenter tallied counts of conﬁrmation actions for

Table 6 Average frequency counts and standard deviations for strategies used in positioning the
three sign markers

Discussion strategy

2.15 (s.d. = 1.15)
2.15 (s.d. = 0.85)

Pointing strategy

0.85 (s.d. = 1.15)
0.85 (s.d. = 0.85)

Users did not favor a discussion or a pointing strategy within the navigation conditions.

Table 7 Frequency counts for using a pointing strategy when positioning a sign marker in a
congested area of the map

Discrete

1
7

Continuous

0
3

Discrete
Continuous

Traditional
Fisheye

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

143

each town task. A conﬁrmation action was only counted when the partners matched
their telepointers in the radar view. Again, this analysis did not require multiple
coders because an explicit action was required.

Analyzing the frequency counts, there was a trend for more conﬁrmations in
the discrete navigation than the continuous tasks (F = 3.84, df = 1, p = 0.072).
Table 8 summarizes the use of conﬁrmation statements, displaying the average
counts and standard deviations for each condition.

4.3. Task Rating Sheets

At the end of each treatment condition or town, users rated the condition or
interface. This rating sheet contained three sections: Perceived Effort, Navigation
Support, and Collaboration Support. Answers in each section were based on 7-point,
Likert-like scale and averaged for an overall perceived effort, navigation, and
collaboration rating. The results from each section follow.

4.3.1. Perceived Effort Ratings

The perceived effort questions asked how hard the task was to complete, how much
effort the task required, and how hard they had to concentrate. Conducting an
Analysis of Variance, users overwhelmingly indicated that continuous navigation
corresponded to less effort (F = 32.67, df = 1, p < 0.001). There was also a signiﬁcant
interaction between the radar view and navigation conditions (F = 4.46, df = 1, p =
0.044). In the discrete case users rated the ﬁsheye tasks with greater effort ratings.
Yet, in the continuous case the ﬁsheye was associated with lower ratings (Fig. 7).

4.3.2. Navigation Support Ratings

The navigation questions focused on the user’s experience in adjusting the map,
ﬁnding locations, and align one’s view with the partner’s view. Continuous navigation
was associated with higher ratings, implying that the continuous interface was easier
to navigate (F = 108.07, df = 1, p < 0.001). Results for the traditional radar view also
involved higher ratings than the ﬁsheye radar design (F = 22.62, df = 1, p < 0.001).

There was also a signiﬁcant interaction between the navigation and radar view
conditions (F = 13.32, df = 1, p = 0.001). The mean for the ﬁsheye view with discrete
navigation was much less than its traditional radar view counterpart, but in the
continuous case the ﬁsheye mean was closer to the level of the traditional radar
mean (Fig. 8).

Table 8 Average frequency counts and standard deviations for conﬁrmation actions in positioning
both light and sign markers

Traditional
Fisheye

Discrete

5.71 (s.d. = 1.73)
6.57 (s.d. = 3.20)

Users conﬁrmed a location by matching their cursor with their partners’ signiﬁcantly more often
with the discrete navigation.

Continuous

4.50 (s.d. = 2.90)
4.86 (s.d. = 3.16)

Springer

144

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Fig. 7 Interaction between the navigation and radar view conditions with respect to perceived effort
ratings. Users felt that the ﬁsheye view required less effort with the continuous case

4.3.3. Collaboration Support Ratings

The collaboration questions explored the communication between the two users,
whether they could easily understand one another, how easily they could communi-
cate their ideas, and how helpful they found the radar view. Analyzing the average
collaboration rating, there was not a signiﬁcant difference in the results, although
there were differences in some of the individual questions. Users responded in favor
of continuous navigation when asked about how easily they could work with the other
person (F = 5.42, df = 1, p = 0.027), how easily they could understand their partner (F =
7.24, df = 1, p = 0.011), and how easily they could communicate their ideas (F = 10.84,
df = 1, p = 0.003).

4.4. Task Completion Times

At the conclusion of the study, the video recordings were also used to determine the
amount of time each group required to complete the tasks. An analysis was
conducted on the amount of time spent on an entire town or treatment condition, as

Fig. 8 Interaction between the conditions for the navigation support questions asked after each trial.
Continuous navigation received higher navigation support ratings and the ﬁsheye technique was
associated with higher ratings when combined with continuous navigation

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

145

Table 9 Users collaboratively positioned three sign and two light markers with each condition,
spending a signiﬁcantly greater amount of time with the discrete navigation conditions

Discrete (min:sec)

Continuous (min:sec)

Traditional
Fisheye

15:14 (s.d. = 5:41)
16:51 (s.d. = 4:14)

14:39 (s.d. = 4:37)
14:11 (s.d. = 3:55)

well as the average times used to position the light and sign markers within a town.
Users took signiﬁcantly more time on the towns with the discrete navigation
technique (F = 9.29, df = 1, p = 0.012). The average task completion times and
standard deviations for a town are shown in Table 9.

The time involved with positioning a light marker was also signiﬁcantly greater
with the discrete navigation technique (F = 9.28, df = 1, p = 0.011) (Fig. 9). Another
interesting ﬁnding was a non-signiﬁcant interaction between the conditions for the
time used in positioning a sign (F = 3.60, df = 1, p = 0.079). The ﬁsheye condition
required much more time than the traditional radar view for discrete navigation and
less time than the traditional in the continuous case (Fig. 10).

4.5. Agreement Metric

Using the log ﬁles generated during the experiment, an analysis was conducted to
see if the conditions had an impact on how close the users placed their markers to
one another. A statistical analysis of the distances between all light and sign marker
pairs did not reveal any differences. Yet, subjects placed the trafﬁc light markers
closer together in the discrete condition (F = 5.19, df = 1, p = 0.039).

5. Discussion of Results

These results provide insight into the advantages and disadvantages of the two
navigation and radar view techniques. We observed usability problems with the
techniques as well as positive and negative effects from the different combinations.
A discussion of these results follows.

Fig. 9 The time required to position a light was signiﬁcantly greater with discrete navigation

Springer

146

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Fig. 10 Non-signiﬁcant interaction between the conditions for the time required to position a sign.
Users took less time to mark a sign with the ﬁsheye radar view in the continuous case

5.1. Results in Favor of Discrete Navigation

Many of the ﬁndings highlight the usefulness of continuous navigation, however,
there were some positive effects of discrete navigation. The rating sheet and ﬁnal
questionnaire results provide one indication. In the collaboration section of the Task
Rating sheet, users did not consistently rate the discrete tasks as providing less
collaboration support. A few questions had signiﬁcant results in favor of continuous
navigation, but overall the two navigation conditions were rated statistically equal.
Similarly, an analysis of the straightforward question on the ﬁnal questions asking
which navigation approach was better for collaboration did not reveal a difference
between the two conditions. Also, the timing data corresponds to faster town task
completion using the continuous navigation, yet there was not a signiﬁcant
difference between conditions for the individual sign tasks.

Analyzing some of the other results, discrete tasks involved more conﬁrmation
actions (Section 4.2.2) and, when working within a congested area on a discrete
map, users favored a pointing strategy (Section 4.2.1). This indicates that the groups
used more pointing approaches to collaborate under the discrete conditions. One
explanation for this relates to the ability to have the same viewport. Discrete
navigation enables users to easily align their viewports where there are a limited
number of possibilities. With two viewports aligned, both users know they are
looking at the exact same view so they freely point out features to one another. It is
impossible for their collaboration problems to be a result of differing views as every
feature one user sees or points out is deﬁnitely displayed on his partner’s screen. In
this way, increased pointing with the discrete navigation is a positive effect as users
were taking advantage of the easily aligned viewports.

Our implementation also led to greater agreement among the participants where
the paired light icons were positioned closer in the discrete case. On explanation is
that the users zoomed in completely with the discrete conditions but not with the
continuous cases, leading to less precise marking with continuous navigation. This
result could also be due to inherent precision opportunities in the discrete case.
When each user’s viewport is using the same underlying transformation function to
convert a pixel to a point in the map coordinates, it is possible to mark the exact same
location and achieve a zero difference. Two different transformation functions, on the

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

147

other hand, can result in very small differences when the users follow extremely
precise procedures. This is the case with the continuous navigation as the views most
likely are not exactly aligned and are not using the same transformation.

5.2. Usability Issues with Discrete Navigation

Despite these results, users overwhelmingly favored the continuous navigation
approach. The participants consistently rated the discrete navigation as more difﬁcult
to navigate and requiring more effort in both the ﬁnal questionnaire and task rating
surveys. They also consistently reported continuous, not discrete, as the preferred
navigation approach. During the evaluation, we also observed users struggling
particularly with the discrete navigation conditions.

One explanation of this ﬁnding is that the discrete technique requires users to
perform different spatial transformations than those required by the continuous
technique. In our implementation, there was a minimal overlap between the view-
ports. Viewports available within the same zoom level were non-overlapping and
only changes to the zoom level displayed any overlaps. This requires a single user to
spatially comprehend each discrete movement by maintaining a mental represen-
tation of the initial viewport in order to understand the new viewport. For example,
in panning a user had to make a mental image of the map features that extended off
the edge in the current viewport. Then, after switching the viewport, they could
match up their understanding of the old viewport with the features along the similar
edge in the new viewport. Similarly, in zooming, users needed to remember what
they were looking at beforehand when trying to understand the new viewport. It was
also important to spatially comprehend that zooming in adjusts the map to the
center of the previous viewport, while zooming out adjusts the viewport to a preset
position in a higher zoom level.

The effect of these mental transformations were apparent during the study as
users repeatedly zoomed out or switched back and forth between two adjacent
viewports in order to comprehend the space. The tasks used in the experiment were
designed to be somewhat challenging and so many of the references provided in the
task descriptions could not be viewed within the same viewport. This caused users to
spend more time navigating with the discrete condition because they had to spatially
comprehend the references as well as the overall space in order to solve the problem.
Similarly, the discrete condition also forces the users to make use of less than ideal
views. Discrete navigation involves a set of predeﬁned viewports and often these
viewports cause interesting map features to be physically located near the corners and
the edges of viewports. Such positioning limits the view of the area surrounding the
feature. Our implementation was particularly frustrating to users because each point
on the map was only viewable from one zoomed in viewport. Often, the users desired
a more complete view of the feature that was only available through navigating to the
adjacent viewports and by building a mental model of the surrounding area.

5.3. Approaches for Collaborating with Discrete Navigation

The usability issues with discrete navigation were often observed with just a single
user. The discrete conditions also had an effect on the pairs of users. This navigation
condition caused the groups to take a different approach to completing the tasks, an
approach that required more time and effort. The results show that the pairs com-

Springer

148

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

pleted the town tasks and the individual light tasks signiﬁcantly faster with the
continuous navigation (Section 4.4). The users also rated discrete navigation poorly
with respect to ease of navigation (Section 4.1), perceived effort (Section 4.3.1), and
preference (Sections 4.1 and 4.1.1).

In our observations, the collaborators dealt with the more complex discrete
condition by engaging in collaborative navigation activities to complete the tasks.
For example, one user would frequently mark the agreed upon location at a zoomed
out level by keeping their cursor over the spot and having the radar view share this
location with his/her partner. The other user would use this telepointer as a guide to
navigate to the corresponding zoomed in view. The ﬁrst user could then navigate
their map to match his/her partner’s viewport by observing the window differences
in the radar view or by aligning his cursor with his partner’s cursor location in the
radar view. In this way, neither user would get lost and they both would end up with
the designated location on their displays. The discrete case provided them an easy
way to match up their viewports with its limited view options. Yet, this strategy
required a good deal of effort on behalf of the group.

Another approach that was less successful involved zooming in on a particular
location or landmark. At the most zoomed out view, the users would agree on the
location and each would independently try to navigate to the zoomed in view. This
was often problematic because one user would inevitably ﬁnd the desired view faster,
leaving his partner to try and locate it on his own or rely on the faster user’s
description of the view. Often we observed that the lost user did not see the
identifying landmarks the partner mentioned. For example, in one group we watched
the person trying to match his partner’s view navigate to the correct viewport multiple
times and yet not recognize that it was the same view as their partner. This approach
was often very time consuming as it took time for the pair to reach the same viewport.
The groups also struggled with discrete navigation in making sure all of the
criteria of the tasks were met. In some instances the groups were successful, as each
user examined a different viewport and the radar map was used to point out and
discuss the references. In other cases this effort was less mutually collaborative.
Very often we observed that one partner took a leadership role. This person
typically had the better discrete navigation skills and could create a mental map of
the space with greater ease. Yet, this leader was faced with the difﬁcult task of
describing their spatial thought processes to his partner so he/she could see the same
idea. Often times the partner listening was not interested or did not take the time to
understand the intricacies of the explanation. He would simply mimic the leaders
actions and match cursor locations using the radar map. This resulted in a poor
understanding of where and why one user wanted to place a marker. It was also
undesirable because the task was to collaborate and yet the interface likely caused
some solutions to be the product of one user.

5.4. Advantages of Continuous Navigation for Collaboration

The continuous technique, on the other hand, better supports this particular col-
laboration task. The continuous approach has less usability problems, and our results
clearly indicate that users ﬁnd it easier to navigate (Sections 4.1 and 4.3.2), preferable
(Sections 4.1 and 4.1.1), and requiring less effort (Section 4.3.1) in comparison the
discrete approach. Using this technique, users can adjust the display with both large
and ﬁne grain movements enabling them to maintain a context of the space without

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

149

having to perform mental transformations. Similarly, users can easily examine more
of the surrounding area where a range of adjustments allows the user to keep an
interesting map location within view. Other map tools also commonly use
continuous navigation or discrete techniques that provide many overlapping
windows, so users may be more comfortable using this technique.

Many of the results from this experiment also agree that continuous navigation is
preferable for collaboration. In the ﬁnal questionnaire, users ranked the two
continuous conditions as providing greater ease of collaboration and navigation.
Similarly, users answered a few of the collaboration questions on the Task Rating
sheet in favor of continuous navigation, even though each of these questions
speciﬁcally asked about how easily one could work with his/her partner. Users also
performed the town collaboration tasks faster using continuous navigation.
Reviewing all of the results, the data collected was either in favor of continuous
navigation or the two conditions were statistically equivalent.

One explanation for these results is that the greater ease of use enables an
independent exploration of the space. When users can navigate the map on their own,
the collaborative effort is more salient as both people are contributing and the task
itself is perceived as easier. Also, as the users understand their own view, they are
better prepared to understand their partner’s comments. They do not struggle to
comprehend their individual map during the task, but rather can focus on what their
partner is saying and collaborate efﬁciently. The views produced with discrete
navigation, on the other hand, are at times very confusing to the users and this
distraction most likely limits the ease with which they can work with their partner.

It also could be easier to understand a partner in continuous navigation because
users can point out locations without having to align their individual views. Granted,
the results indicate that the groups used more pointing strategies with the discrete
condition. But in discrete navigation there are less ways the views can overlap. The
viewing windows must be identical or one view has to be zoomed out and include
the other window. In this condition, very often the users had to explicitly align their
viewports before they could share ideas. The overlapping feature of continuous
navigation, on the other hand, enables multiple users to be able to share map
locations even if their viewports are different.

5.5. Other Navigation Possibilities

Considering the positive and negatives of both the discrete and continuous
navigation techniques we evaluated, it is interesting to reﬂect on other navigation
possibilities. Limiting the discrete navigation to a few viewports was beneﬁcial to
spatial collaboration because the participants could easily achieve the same view
and point out features, but navigating with no overlaps had a negative effect on their
spatial understanding. Repeating the study using overlapping windows might
reverse this second ﬁnding. This is not obvious, however. Keeping the number of
viewports the same and simply using an overlapping design as in Fig. 11 would
provide some spatial references as the users navigated to adjacent viewports. Yet,
this approach still would require spatial, mental transformations and taking note of
the features along one side because the differences between viewports remain great.
Our continuous navigation implementation, on the other hand, does not suffer
from this problem. It allows the users to navigate with both minimal and large
viewport shifts. However, it suffers from difﬁculties in aligning multiple viewing

Springer

150

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Fig. 11 A modiﬁed version
of the discrete navigation tech-
nique with overlapping win-
dows still requires users to
perform spatial, mental trans-
formation with only a few
viewports

windows and ensuring that the collaborators know they are referencing the same
features. This is what the discrete navigation technique supported with its limited
viewports. Thus, this encourages an integration of the techniques to support both
ﬂexible navigation and aligned viewports.

One design possibility is to modify the current continuous navigation to enable
synchronized viewports. This would allow the collaborators to easily align their
individual views and be conﬁdent in the similarities. Yet, such a technique also
presents new design issues. How long does the synchronization last? What happens
when the users navigate after the aligning interaction? How is the synchronization
decision negotiated? And, most importantly for spatial collaboration, will the
synchronization disrupt an individual user’s spatial navigation, causing him to
become disoriented or forget where he was previously working and/or what he was
doing? Some of these issues can be negotiated through a social protocol during the
collaboration activity. For instance, the collaborators might verbally agree to
synchronize on one person’s viewport and later in the discussion decide to decouple
their views. Other issues require greater consideration in developing an appropriate
design. For instance, will both users be able to navigate the synchronized view?
What feedback will remind the collaborators of the synchronization? Which
viewports will the collaborators have after decoupling? These questions show that
incorporating synchronized viewports into a design is not straightforward. Adding
such a feature involves making additional choices about how collaboration will be
supported and how the user interface design will provide an intuitive display.

Another approach is to change or improve the awareness techniques in order to
better complement continuous navigation. Our investigation strictly focused on using
a radar view to provide awareness information and examined two approaches to this
technique. Yet, the radar views did not solve all of the awareness requirements of the
task. The collaborators continued to have issues with what their partner could see and
what they were directly looking at. One possible improvement is to provide additional
awareness information on the map interface itself. Subtle indication of telepointers
and viewport bounds in the primary interface would make the awareness information
more salient. Again, this solution presents new design issues, as a spatial rep-
resentation can already be complicated with many details and it is important that
the awareness cues are not confused with the map data.

5.6. Negative Effects of the Fisheye, Discrete Combination

In analyzing the interactions that occurred between the navigation and radar view
conditions, it is interesting to consider the discrete navigation, ﬁsheye radar view
combination. This pairing produced many poor results. In the ﬁnal questionnaire,

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

151

users ranked the discrete, ﬁsheye tasks as the hardest to navigate. Similarly, in the
task ratings, the discrete, ﬁsheye tasks required the most effort and provided the
least navigation support. Lastly, there was a trend in the task completion times for
positioning a sign marker where the discrete, ﬁsheye condition took the longest
amount of time.

There are a couple of explanations for these results. One way this combination
creates problems relates to the ﬁsheye’s distortion. The ﬁsheye technique affects the
size and shape of the viewport, not providing an accurate view of the users’ zoom
levels or the closeness of their viewing positions. During the experiment, users in the
discrete condition would often direct each other on how to navigate their viewport.
This is not as straightforward with the ﬁsheye’s distortion. It is not as obvious how
two viewports differ and nor the navigational steps to take to align viewports. Users
would often rely on trial and error to deal with this situation.

The discrete-ﬁsheye combination is also problematic because the radar map is
less useful in understanding the space. In general, discrete navigation does not
provide a context for the space with its non-overlapping viewports. Because unlike
continuous navigation, users have to build a mental map of the layout as they
navigate. Combining this navigation technique with a traditional radar view
provides users with a visualization of the entire space, reducing the need for a
mental map. Using a distorted radar view with discrete navigation, on the other
hand, limits the usefulness of the visualization for understanding the layout. Users
must rely on their mental image of the space and determine the layout by observing
the viewports displayed through navigation.

5.7. Performance and Usability of the Fisheye Design

The results of this study do not clearly distinguish between the ﬁsheye and
traditional radar view design, yet they indicate the potential for a ﬁsheye design and
encourage further design and evaluation. In the interaction analyses, the ﬁsheye
design was associated with less effort (Section 4.3.1) and faster completion times in
positioning a sign (Section 4.4). It also corresponded to greater use of a pointing
strategy (Section 4.2), implying that the awareness tool is usable, efﬁcient, and
helpful for spatial collaboration.

It is particularly interesting to consider that the use of the discussion strategy was
signiﬁcantly greater with the traditional radar view, while the pointing strategy was
used more frequently with the ﬁsheye radar view (Section 4.2). This indicates that
the users relied on spoken discussions when the radar view did not provide them the
awareness information that they required, particularly in deciding where to position
a marker. This was directly observed in the experiment, where one participant
would try to point out a location and the other would be unsure of the location,
asking for a more detailed description of the spot or suggesting a different spot that
perhaps both participants could easily recognize. The ﬁsheye approach, on the other
hand, enables one user to point at a location and the other user to understand where
the partner is pointing with minimal verbal description. With its enlarged and
pronounced viewport representations, the ﬁsheye design affords pointing interac-
tions. Each user knows that their partners have a magniﬁed version of their view so
they often take advantage of this feature and express ideas through pointing.

It is also interesting to consider the interaction effects observed with respect to
perceived effort ratings and task completion times. These results indicate that the

Springer

152

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

utility of the ﬁsheye approach differs with varying navigation conditions. Continu-
ous navigation was statistically either the superior technique or equal to discrete in
all of the analyses. Considering the ﬁsheye’s performance with the continuous
navigation implies that it better supports collaboration, although the differences
were not statistically signiﬁcant.

Regardless of the differences in strategy and the interaction effects, many of the
users in this study were unsure about the usefulness of the ﬁsheye design. This was
apparent in the ﬁnal survey as users were divided on which condition was better for
collaboration and which they preferred (Sections 4.1 and 4.1.1). During the trials,
some users noticed the difference the bubble made while working together to decide
where to place a marker. This group realized that the bubble was magnifying their
viewport representations and they often expressed positive comments. Other users
saw the traditional radar map as more intuitive and simply more pleasant to look at.
To these users, the ﬁsheye technique added another element of complexity for the
collaboration activity.

The few negative results in the experiment for the ﬁsheye approach were that
the users found the traditional radar view easier to use (Section 4.1.1) and that the
traditional condition provided greater navigation support (Section 4.3.2). This again
may be because the traditional radar map is more intuitive to novice users than the
ﬁsheye view and its distortion effect. Possibly with further use, this and other user
ratings would change. However, the ﬁsheye condition can also create problems with
respect to how users point out features to one another. The transformation of the
ﬁsheye view may be confusing in that it is not clear whether the telepointer’s
position has also been distorted. Also, when one user points out a location to the
other,
it may be more difﬁcult to determine where they are pointing if the
telepointer falls within the demagniﬁed part of the distortion directly adjacent to
the magniﬁed area. This can happen when one user is zoomed in and the other is
not.

To improve the ﬁsheye radar view design, we are exploring ways to modify the
transformation function and add visual cues. One improvement would be to
determine a more appropriate technique for combining multiple ﬁsheye magniﬁca-
tions. The current approach of using a weighted average of the individual ﬁsheye
transformations is problematic in that the presentation does not always correspond to
expectations, where 3D distortion techniques offer one alternative [6]. Also, adding
visual cues to the ﬁsheye display could better inform the users about zoom level
differences and the transformation’s effects. One approach to reduce the confusion is
to associate the space with a checkered grid or simply a line grid [5]. Drawing such a
grid so that it does not overwhelm the map content and it is visible behind the
magniﬁed portions of the radar view could better indicate the magniﬁcation and
compression effects.

6. Implications

Springer

In conducting this experiment, a number of lessons were learned about spatial
collaboration, in general, as well as distributed, spatial collaboration situations. We
enumerate some issues to consider in designing spatial collaboration applications
and review some implications for future collaborative map software programs.

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

153

6.1. Issues in Designing for Spatial Collaboration

In the experiment, the participants’ differences in spatial abilities, thought processes,
and problem solving approaches were clearly apparent. We anticipated some of these
differences and planned to explore their inﬂuence on the collaboration task, but they
were highly variable even in our controlled study. For instance, some users un-
derstood how the discrete navigation worked and offered suggestions for improve-
ment, while others clearly did not understand this technique as they completed the
tasks using trial and error.

Many pairs of users also approached the tasks differently than we expected. We
provided the participants with a paired listing of criteria for the sign tasks and the
light tasks. Yet, some groups choose to complete the light and sign trials in different
orderings and a few groups had considerably different interpretations of the criteria.
One group even located all the references in the criteria on the map before stepping
through the individual tasks. We had not anticipated these approaches and often had
to take them into consideration when compiling the data. Another example of spatial
differences was with the notion of precision. One group had an extreme deﬁnition of
precision and were observed counting pixels. Other groups would simply make sure
their crosshairs were aligned in the radar view, while others positioned the markers
so the tips of the icons marked the same locations. Again, this range in variability
was not expected, but it reveals how people tackle spatial problems differently.

During the experiment, we also observed many groups deﬁning their own terms
and procedures as they progressed through the trials. For example, one group
repeatedly referred to placing the tip of the marker in the Bcrotch of the Y’’ formed
by two roads. Both participants knew what this meant and they could easily align
their marker positions using this funny phrase. This strategy was less successful with
another pair as they became confused when there was more than one Balien
ﬁrehouse.’’ The group used this phrase to refer to a ﬁrehouse that looked like it had
antennae formed by nearby roads. The problem was that another ﬁrehouse had a
similar look and the group did not realize that at times they were talking about two
different locations. This reveals the need for collaborators to have a shared
understanding of the space. These groups established an understanding through fun
terms that referenced speciﬁc locations on the map. Similarly, spatial collaboration
solutions need to consider how this shared understanding of a space will develop in
an activity. Designs should support a common understanding and reduce confusion,
such as the problem with two Balien ﬁrehouses.’’

We also observed different group dynamics in our pairs of participants. Some
groups had a natural leader who took charge and helped the other person through
the tasks, while other groups took a more collective approach. In one instance, a
very capable user let his partner lead the way because the partner did not listen to
his ideas. It was easiest for this user to let his partner lead the effort and only offer
conﬁrmation. Some of the group dynamics were attributed to differences in spatial
abilities and other times the group had a natural leader or a set of team players. In
any case, styles of collaboration can differ between groups and this is important to
consider in designing future spatial collaboration solutions. Our distributed design
lacked features that allowed the users to help one another when someone became
lost. Yet, it was supportive of different styles of independent and collective work as
the software did not limit the users to speciﬁc roles and it enabled both users to
explore the representation.

Springer

154

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Lastly, this study revealed that collaborators might become very focused on a
spatial visualization while working together. For instance, during the experiment we
observed the participants looking very intensely at the map while completing the
tasks. The trials would often start with each user reading their criteria out loud and
occasionally the pair would consult the criteria to conﬁrm speciﬁcs, but most of the
users’ time was spent navigating, discussing the space, and agreeing on the marker
location. Groups would intensely work with the collaborative map to solve the
problem we had given them. Other tasks may not result in a similar behavior, but it is
important to recognize that some spatial collaboration tasks can be very represen-
tation intensive.

6.2. Issues in Designing Distributed, Spatial Collaboration Solutions

In conducting this experiment, we also learned about issues speciﬁc to a distributed
setting of spatial collaboration. For instance, our task turned out to be very audio-
intensive. Even with visual cues provided in the radar map, one user had to listen
closely as the other described his idea or read his clue. We also observed non-native
English speakers struggling to communicate with their partners. Users would often
express their ideas verbally and language issues often caused pairs with a non-native
English speaker to require more time in conveying their ideas. Lastly, our participants
would often have to stop everything they were doing and listen to their partner. They
found that they could not comprehend an idea and explore the map simultaneously.
This heavy reliance on auditory information may be speciﬁc to our task, but it makes a
good point about designing for distributed, spatial collaboration. Namely, it is impor-
tant to consider how the collaborators will communicate spatial ideas. Designs should
support the expression of ideas that involve distance, relative direction, and precise
positioning. Our design was limited in the ways people could share ideas. The partic-
ipants could either express themselves verbally or point and have their partner follow
their telepointer on the radar map. These restrictions were partly due to the metrics
we wanted to collect, but future designs could also implement telepointers within the
primary map, provide a shared set of markers, or include simple annotation tools.

Through this experiment, we also realized the complexity of developing one’s
own ideas with an individualized interface and also staying aware of what your
partner(s) are thinking and investigating. Some of our groups faced collaboration
issues when the participants explored the space in parallel. One user would often
ﬁgure out part of the task and report back causing the other user to lose their train
of thought. Supporting this parallel style of work seems more complicated in spatial
collaboration as users’
in nature and often require
visualization. Distributed, spatial collaboration solutions should keep this complex-
ity in mind and provide ways for users to coordinate parallel activities. One idea is
to allow users to create bookmarks for their viewports so they can easily return to a
previous view. Another feature that allows one user to quickly navigate to a part-
ner’s view may also facilitate this coordination.

ideas are more spatial

6.3. Lessons Learned about Using Representations for Distributed,
Spatial Collaboration

In addition to learning more about the issues with distributed, spatial collaboration,
this experiment revealed some key insights about using a map representation in a

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

155

distributed setting. Earlier we discussed how important it is for the collaborators
to establish a shared understanding. Similarly, users need to have a common un-
derstanding of a representation. During the experiment, we observed one user
pointing out a location and having his partner match up his cursor to be sure they
the same location. Other times, users would align their
were talking about
viewports to establish a shared understanding, even if they were working with
continuous navigation. This demonstrates how essential a common understanding
is for collaboration with a representation.

This experiment also revealed how providing multiple representations is not
necessarily a good solution. For instance, using the radar map and the individual
viewport was not as straightforward as we had hoped. We observed users forgetting
about the awareness information available in the radar map and relying on a dis-
cussion with their partner to determine information. Users also commented that
they did not notice or use the view to the left. Switching between the two maps was
problematic for our users and further work should investigate whether this approach
is useful in other contexts.

7. Conclusions

This research explored the concept of distributed, spatial collaboration and
investigated different techniques for supporting this style of collaboration. In
particular, our experiment compared two ways to navigate a representation
(continuous and discrete) and two ways to use radar views to provide awareness
information (traditional and ﬁsheye views). The results from this empirical study
reveal that discrete navigation is difﬁcult to use when the windows into the rep-
resentation do not overlap. This lack of overlap causes people to spatially com-
prehend the navigation movements in comparison to continuous navigation, which is
more intuitive. As a result, the discrete navigation tasks took longer to complete and
the groups would work together in order to navigate the space. Continuous navi-
gation, on the other hand, supported the spatial collaboration activity, as users did
not struggle with the navigation allowing each participant to explore the space
individually. There were particular problems with the discrete-ﬁsheye combinations
in the study. This condition further limited the users’ understanding of the space, as
they could not rely on the radar view for a visualization of the entire space. Also,
the advantages of the ﬁsheye technique are not yet clear. Some results indicated its
usefulness, while others suggested a redesign.

The contributions of this work include empirical evidence of the advantages and
disadvantages of different navigation techniques and different radar view tech-
niques. Using both qualitative and quantitative measures, we present the effects of
each technique examined and initiate an exploration of alternatives. This work also
offers a novel awareness technique. Radar views are enhanced with a ﬁsheye ap-
proach to reduce issues with changes in scale and level of detail. This design ad-
dresses important aspects of navigation with a complex spatial representation and it
encourages the development of other design ideas. Lastly, this research presents a
unique collaboration task and variety of metrics to evaluate spatial collaboration.
The task of combining criteria encouraged both users to participate and enabled the
pair to solve both open-ended and more precise problems. The strategies of use

Springer

156

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

observed, the analysis of conﬁrmation actions, and the questionnaires provided
valuable information about the collaboration process and the users’ satisfaction.
Future spatial collaboration studies can reuse this task and these metrics to in-
vestigate other design solutions.

This work looks at how people collaborate on spatial problems in a distributed
setting. It offers some lessons learned about this collaboration context and en-
courages further exploration. We will continue to explore novel techniques that
support distributed, spatial collaboration as well as investigate the issues it presents.
For example, we wish to look at other designs for discrete navigation as well as the
ﬁsheye radar view. We are also interested in exploring the ways people spatially
collaborate. This study focused on very speciﬁc task of combining criteria col-
laboratively and marking map locations. Future work will explore the variety of
tasks people engage in and possibly offer a classiﬁcation of these. It will also consult
more cartographic theories of how maps are perceived, understood, and used by
individuals. Such an understanding will help guide the design of spatial collaboration
solutions.

References

1. J.F. Bartlett. BRamonamap: An example of graphical groupware,’’

in Proc. of the ACM

Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 83–84, 1994.

2. J.M.A. Begole. BFlexible Collaboration Transparency: Supporting worker independence in

replicated application-sharing systems.’’ PhD Dissertation, Virginia Tech, 1998.

3. M.Billinghurst, H.Kato, K.Kiyokawa, D.Belcher, and I.Poupyrev. BExperiments with face-to-

face collaborative AR interfaces,’’ Virtual Reality Journal, Vol. 6(3):107–121, 2002.

4. I. Brewer, A.M. MacEachren, H. Abdo, J. Gundrum, and G. Otto. BCollaborative geographic
visualization: Enabling shared understanding of environmental processes,’’ in Proc. of IEEE
Information Visualization Symposium, pp. 137–141, 2000.

5. M.S.T. Carpendale, D.J. Cowperthwaite, and F.D. Fracchia. BMaking distortions comprehen-

sible,’’ IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, pp. 36–45, 1997.

6. M.S.T. Carpendale, M. Tigges, D.J. Cowperthwaite, and F.D. Fracchia. BBringing the advantages
of 3D viewing into focus,’’ IEEE Conference on Information Visualization, pp. 17–20, 1998.
7. P. Dourish and V. Bellotti. BAwareness and coordination in shared workspaces,’’ in Proc. of

ACM Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 107–114, 1992.

8. A. Evans, R. Kingston, and I. Turton. BWeb-based GIS to enhance public democratic

involvement,’’ Geocomp99 Conference Proceedings, 1999.

9. G. Furnas. BThe ﬁsheye view: A new look at structured ﬁles,’’ Technical Memorandum 82-11221-

22, Bell Laboratories, 1982.

10. S. Greenberg, C. Gutwin, and A. Cockburn. BAwareness through ﬁsheye views in relaxed-

WYSIWIS groupware,’’ Graphics Interface, pp. 28–38, 1998.

11. C. Gutwin and S. Greenberg. BA descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real-time
groupware,’’ Computer Supported Cooperative Work, The Journal of Collaborative Computing,
11:3–4, 2002.

12. C. Gutwin and S. Greenberg. BDesign for individuals, design for groups: Tradeoffs between
power and workspace awareness,’’ in Proc. of Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 207–
216, 1998.

13. C. Gutwin and S. Greenberg. BThe effects of workspace awareness support on the usability of
real-time distributed groupware,’’ ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol.
6(3):243–281, 1999.

14. C. Gutwin, M. Roseman, and S. Greenberg. BA usability study of awareness widgets in a shared
workspace groupware system,’’ in Proc. of Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 258–257,
1996.

15. S. Hayne, M. Pendergast, and S. Greenberg. BImplementing gesturing with cursors in group

support systems, Journal of Management Information Systems, Vol. 10(3):43–61, 1994.

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

157

16. J. Hindmarsh, M. Fraser, C. Heath, S. Benford, and C. Greenhalgh. BObject-focused interaction
in collaborative virtual environments,’’ ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,
Vol. 7(4):477–509, 2000.

17. T.A. Keahey and E.L. Roberson. BTechniques for non-linear magniﬁcation transformations,’’

IEEE Visualization, 1996.

18. T.A. Keahey. BNonlinear Magniﬁcation,’’ PhD Dissertation, Indiana University, 1997.
19. J. Lamping, R. Rao, and P. Pirolli. BA focus + context technique based on hyperbolic geometry
for visualizing large hierarchies,’’ Human factors in Computing Systems, pp. 401–408, 1995.
20. Y.K. Leung and M.D. Apperley. BA review and taxonomy of distortion-oriented presentation
techniques,’’ ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1(2):126–160, 1994.
21. A.M. MacEachren and I. Brewer. BDeveloping a conceptual framework for visually-enabled
geocollaboration,’’ International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 18:1–34, 2004.
22. A.M. MacEachren, I. Brewer, and E. Steiner. BGeovisualization to mediate collaborative work:
tools to support different-place knowledge construction and decision-making,’’ in Proc. of 20th
International Cartographic Conference, 2001.

23. J.F. McCarthy and E.S. Meidel. BActivemap: A visualization tool for location awareness to
support informal interactions,’’ in Proc. of Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 158–170,
1999.

24. A. Piolat, J. Roussey, and O. Thunin. BEffects of screen presentation on text reading and

revising,’’ International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Vol. 47(4):565–589, 1997.

25. C. Rinner. BArgumentation Maps-GIS-based discussion support for online planning,’’ PhD
Dissertation, University of Bonn, http://www.gmd.de/publications/research/1999/022/, 1999.
26. M. Sarkar and M.H. Brown. BGraphical ﬁsheye views of graphs,’’ Human Factors in Computing

System, pp. 83–91, 1992.

27. W. Schafer and D. Bowman. BEnhancing radar views using ﬁsheye techniques,’’ in Conference

supplement of Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 147–148, 2002.

28. W.A. Schafer, D.A. Bowman, and J.M. Carroll. BMap-based navigation in a graphical MOO,’’

ACM Crossroads, 9.1:8–15, 2002.

29. W.A. Schafer and D.A. Bowman. BA comparison of traditional and ﬁsheye radar view

techniques for spatial collaboration,’’ in Proc. of Graphics Interface, pp. 39 – 46, 2003.

30. E. Schwarz, I.P. Beldie, and S. Pastoor. BA comparison of paging and scrolling for changing

screen contents by inexperienced users,’’ Human Factors, Vol. 25(3):279–292, 1983.

31. R.B. Smith, T. O’Shea, C. O’Malley, E. Scanlon, and J. Taylor. BPreliminary experiments with a
distributed, multi-media, problem solving environment,’’ First European Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 19–34, 1989.

32. M. Steﬁk, D.G. Bobrow, G. Foster, S. Lanning, and D. Tatar. BWYSIWIS revised: Early
experiences with multiuser interfaces,’’ ACM Transactions on Ofﬁce Information System, Vol.
5(2):147–167, 1987.

33. J.C. Tang. BListing, drawing and gesturing in design: A study of the use of shared workspaces by

design teams,’’ PhD Dissertation, Stanford University, 1989.

34. J.C. Tang. BFindings from observational studies of collaborative work,’’ International Journal on

Man-Machine Studies, Vol. 34(2):143–160, 1991.

35. P. Thorndyke and B. Hayes-Roth. BDifferences in spatial knowledge obtained from maps and

navigation,’’ Cognitive Psychology, Vol. 14:560–589, 1982.

36. H. Tolsby. BNavigating in a process landscape,’’ in Proc. of East–West International Conference

on Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 141–151, 1993.

37. H. Yang. Multiple perspectives for collaborative navigation in CVE, in Extended abstracts for

the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems, pp. 560 –561, 2002.

38. H. Yang and G.M. Olson. BExploring collaborative navigation: the effect of perspectives on
group performance,’’ in Proc. of the 4th International Conference on Collaborative Virtual
Environments, pp. 135–142, 2002.

Springer

158

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 123–158

Wendy A. Schafer
is currently a postdoctoral researcher with the Computer-Supported Collaboration and
Learning Laboratory at the College of Information Sciences and Technology of Pennsylvania State
University. She completed her Ph.D. in Computer Science with a focus on human–computer interaction at
Virginia Tech in 2004. Her research interests include collaborative software, geospatial software, emergency
management, and collaborative virtual environments.

is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at Virginia Tech, where he is a
Doug A. Bowman
member of the Center for Human-Computer Interaction. He received his M.S. and Ph.D. in Computer
Science from Georgia Tech. Doug’s research interests include three-dimensional user interfaces, virtual
environments, and the benefits of immersion. He co-authored the book 3D User Interfaces: Theory and
Practice, and he also received a CAREER award from the National Science Foundation.

Springer

