This article was downloaded by: [University of Strathclyde]
On: 03 October 2014, At: 05:05
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology: a
case study using stochastic simulation,
kernel estimation and SaTScan
L. Bastin a , J. Rollason b , A. Hilton b , D. Pillay c , C. Corcoran c ,
J. Elgy a , P. Lambert b , P. De c , T. Worthington b & K. Burrows b
a School of Engineering and Applied Science , University of Aston ,
Aston Triangle, Birmingham, B4 7ET, UK
b School of Life and Health Sciences , University of Aston , Aston
Triangle, Birmingham, B4 7ET, UK
c Good Hope Hospital NHS Trust , Rectory Road Sutton Coldfield ,
Birmingham, B75 7RR, UK
Published online: 14 Jun 2007.

To cite this article: L. Bastin , J. Rollason , A. Hilton , D. Pillay , C. Corcoran , J. Elgy , P.
Lambert , P. De , T. Worthington & K. Burrows (2007) Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology: a
case study using stochastic simulation, kernel estimation and SaTScan, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 21:7, 811-836, DOI: 10.1080/13658810601135767

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810601135767

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,

systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 21, No. 7, August 2007, 811–836

Research Article

Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology: a case study using stochastic
simulation, kernel estimation and SaTScan

L. BASTIN*{, J. ROLLASON{, A. HILTON{, D. PILLAY**§, C. CORCORAN§,
J. ELGY{, P. LAMBERT{, P. DE§, T. WORTHINGTON{ and K. BURROWS{
{School of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Aston,
Aston Triangle, Birmingham, B4 7ET, UK
{School of Life and Health Sciences, University of Aston,
Aston Triangle, Birmingham, B4 7ET, UK
§Good Hope Hospital NHS Trust, Rectory Road Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham,
B75 7RR, UK

(Received 4 July 2006; in final form 23 November 2006 )

The identification of disease clusters in space or space–time is of vital importance
for public health policy and action. In the case of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA),
it is particularly important to distinguish
between community and health care-associated infections, and to identify
reservoirs of infection. 832 cases of MRSA in the West Midlands (UK) were
tested for clustering and evidence of community transmission, after being geo-
located to the centroids of UK unit postcodes (postal areas roughly equivalent to
Zip + 4 zip code areas). An age-stratified analysis was also carried out at the
coarser spatial resolution of UK Census Output Areas. Stochastic simulation and
kernel density estimation were combined to identify significant local clusters of
MRSA (p,0.025), which were supported by SaTScan spatial and spatio-
temporal scan. In order to investigate local sampling effort, a spatial ‘random
labelling’ approach was used, with MRSA as cases and MSSA (methicillin-
sensitive S. aureus) as controls. Heavy sampling in general was a response to
MRSA outbreaks, which in turn appeared to be associated with medical care
environments. The significance of clusters identified by kernel estimation was
independently supported by information on the locations and client groups of
nursing homes, and by preliminary molecular typing of isolates. In the absence of
occupational/lifestyle data on patients, the assumption was made that an
individual’s location and consequent risk is adequately represented by their
residential postcode. The problems of this assumption are discussed, with
recommendations for future data collection.

Keywords: MRSA; Stochastic simulation; Kernel density; SaTScan; Random
labelling

*Corresponding author for GIS. Email: l.bastin@aston.ac.uk
**Corresponding author for medicine and ethics. Email: devadas.pillay@goodhope.

nhs.uk

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2007 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810601135767

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 812

L. Bastin et al.

1.

Introduction

1.1 Spatial epidemiology

Clustering of disease in space and/or time due to environmental factors or infection
events is a vital topic to inform public-health protection and policy. The application
of spatial analysis in epidemiology is well established, with many well-tested
techniques for visualization and exploration of disease pattern, and a variety of
methods for assessing cluster significance. The locations at which disease events are
recorded may be points which accurately represent the location at which the event
occurred, or they may be aggregated locations such as administrative polygons, or
population-weighted centroids. The aggregation process is generally forced by three
constraints:

1.

2.

3.

the availability and cost of precise location data to which disease events can be
mapped, such as individual street addresses.
the pre-aggregated nature of the demographic data (such as census variables)
to which the disease events must be related in order to estimate rates, rather
than counts.
legal/ethical data protection and anonymity requirements, which demand that
demographic data are aggregated to a level where the individual can no longer
be easily traced.

A major issue for epidemiological cluster analysis is the heterogeneity of underlying
determinants such as population density, meaning that patterns are rarely tested
against a null hypothesis of truly complete spatial randomness (CSR) but rather are
tested against simulated patterns based on what we know of those underlying
factors. To generate these simulations, a model of disease incidence (often Poisson-
based) is applied to the available population data. Models of infectious process and
flow are outside the scope of this paper.

The work reported here addressed Staphylococcus aureus isolates (MSSA,
methicillin-sensitive S. aureus or MRSA, methicillin-resistant S. aureus) processed
by a district general hospital in North Birmingham, UK, in the one-year period
between 1 September 2004 and 31 August 2005 (figure 1). Important questions in the
community epidemiology of MRSA are:

1. Do reservoirs of infection exist outside hospitals and other health-care

settings, and can they be identified?

2. Can community transmission be distinguished from health-care-associated

(‘nosocomial’) spread?

3. Are specific strains of MRSA more clustered in space than we would expect?

This paper aims to address question 1 directly, and to identify some useful pointers
towards tackling question 2. Currently, molecular typing of the data used in this
study is ongoing, and will be the basis for explicit models to address question 3, with
particular emphasis on ‘hyper-transmissible’ strains of MRSA.

The work was undertaken in order to assess the utility of several cluster analysis
techniques for a longer-term spatial analysis of MRSA cases and subtypes, and
particularly those cases which can be attributed to community transmission. The
aim was to identify suitable techniques for integration into an exploratory
visualization framework, and to identify supplementary data which would be
required for such an approach.

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

813

Figure 1. Geographic study bounds, showing population density and context within the
UK. Population density is shown at the level of Census OA, for 2001.

On the basis of public-health importance, permission for this study was given by
the Medical Director of Good Hope Hospital NHS Trust and the Director of
Public Health of North Birmingham Primary Care Trust. Formal ethical approval
was not required, as patient identifiers were deleted from the datasets. To protect
patient confidentiality while using spatially referenced data, database extracts were
made in a two-stage process. This ensured that postcoded records did not record
date of birth, but only the broader age category (under 65, 65–85, 85 + ) of the
patient.

1.2 MRSA: a case study for clustering analysis

Staphylococcus aureus is a clinically important bacterium causing a wide range of
clinical infections from superficial boils to systemic infections such as pneumonia,
bacteraemia, phlebitis, meningitis, UTI, osteomyelitis, sepsis, and endocarditis.
Treatment is usually effective in a majority of cases where the bacterial strain is
susceptible to a variety of antibiotics including methicillin (known in the UK as
‘meticillin’); these strains are referred to as methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus
aureus (MSSA). Methicillin-resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) were
first observed shortly after methicillin was introduced in the 1960s, and by the 1970s
these had already spread worldwide. Limited treatment options exist for MRSA
infection, due to its resistance to multiple antibiotics. Attributable mortality data are
difficult to obtain, as those who die from MRSA are usually already ill, and often
their existing illness, rather than MRSA, is designated as the underlying cause of
death. MRSA-associated mortality in 2002 in the UK was recorded as 248 cases,

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 814

L. Bastin et al.

and MRSA was estimated to be involved in 0.07% of all deaths in 2004; by
comparison, the far more prevalent MSSA was recorded as the cause of death in 394
cases in 2002 (Griffiths et al. 2004).

MRSA is generally perceived by the public to be associated with poor application
of hygiene standards in hospitals. However, since the 1980s, cases have been
observed outside the hospital environment and within the community (Saravolatz et
al. 1982). Although many Primary Care Trusts publish summary MRSA statistics
for selected hospitals, there is little definitive information on MRSA transmission
and carriage rates outside large medical institutions. However, evidence is beginning
to accumulate which implicates community-associated MRSA infection (Okuma et
al. 2002, Holmes et al. 2005). In the absence of exhaustive public screening,
Staphylococcus aureus is estimated to be carried by 30–50% of the adult population,
with 10–20% being persistently colonized and 60% being intermittent carriers
(Kluytmans et al. 1997). MRSA carriage is pragmatically assumed to be around 1%
(Mainous et al. 2006).

There is a notable distinction between the molecular sub-types of MRSA that
prevail in medical environments and in the community. SCCmec I, II and III clones
are characteristic of hospitals and display multiple resistance to antibiotics (Ito et al.
2001). SCCmec IV and V clones are commonly observed outside hospital
environments; they show restricted antibiotic resistance, often being limited to
beta-lactam antibiotics (Ma et al. 2002, Ito et al. 2004) but increased virulence (Baba
et al. 2002). Community acquired MRSA are noted to be predominant in patients
with no hospital connection (Chambers 2001) or no predisposing hospital risk
(Herold et al. 1998) or who have been isolated between the first 48 and 72 h of
hospital admission.

1.3 Area-based disease data and analysis techniques

Disease data are sometimes attached to systematically defined sub-regions of a study
area, such as electoral wards or clinic catchment areas. The primary benefit of an
area-based approach is the ability to construct occurrence rates or frequencies based
on known populations or susceptibilities within the areal unit. The disadvantages
stem from the ‘prism-like’ nature of the areal units (implying uniform rates across
each area) and from the sensitivity of the sampled spatial variation to the
‘Modifiable Areal Unit Problem’ (MAUP). For example, depending on the relative
grain and placement of the areal unit boundaries, a significant cluster surrounded by
sparse events may be divided and diluted to appear insignificant. Techniques such as
regression also suffer from data aggregation and its potential masking of genuine
relationships (the ‘ecological inference’ problem, as reviewed by Gelman et al. 2001).
Individual patient records for this study held information on the unit postcode of
the patient’s home address. The UK unit postcode is part of a coding system created
and used by the UK Mail Service for the sorting and delivery of mail. The unit
postcode (made up of between five and seven characters) represents groupings of
delivery points roughly equivalent to the US Zip + 4 zip code classification. In the
context of this study, some of the independent variables required for analysis (e.g.
population age structure) were only available at Census Output Area level
(henceforth, ‘Output Area’ will be abbreviated to ‘OA’), forcing aggregation of unit
postcode-level data to a coarser spatial resolution. Within the study area, each unit
postcode covered a mean of 19 domestic delivery points, (SD¡16.1), and each OA
contained a mean of 301 people (SD¡62.6). Aggregation to OA population centroids

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

815

Figure 2.
MRSA to MSSA cases, by age group.

(a) Incidence of MRSA and MSSA by age group within the study. (b) Ratio of

also allowed a direct consideration of an age-structured population, rather than an
estimation of population from the number of domestic delivery points. This was very
important, since the relative prevalence of MRSA varied with age (figures 2(a) and
2(b)). The case data themselves were thus handled spatially as points, but it should be
noted that the effects of MAUP still apply to the underlying data.

1.3.1 LISA (local indicators of spatial association). LISA aim to measure ‘the
extent of spatial clustering of similar values around an observation’ (Anselin 1995)
and thus to identify pockets of local non-stationarity. LISAs such as the local
Moran’s I allow rates within areas to be assessed for clusters (i.e. associations of
high or low rates) or outliers (i.e. low rates surrounded by high rates, or vice versa).
In order to assess the context of each area, a matrix is used which records the
‘adjacency’ of each pair of polygons. This matrix may contain simple Boolean values
(‘touching/not touching’), distance between polygons, or a subtler contiguity value,
based on the relative length of the shared boundary segment (as described, for

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 816

L. Bastin et al.

example, in Haining 1990). For this study, Moran’s I was calculated for MRSA
rates (using ArcMap 9.1 and a Boolean adjacency matrix), since a consideration of
polygon adjacency, rather than centroid distance, may mitigate modifiable areal unit
problems.

1.4 Point-based disease data and analysis techniques

The local observed intensity of a point set may be a function of a global trend across
a region, local correlations between points or with environmental determinants,
noise, or a combination of all three. The aim of spatial epidemiology is to tease out
and model these elements so that reliable meaning can be extracted from the
observed patterns.

The last two decades have seen substantial work in the GIS arena on the robust
statistical analysis of point patterns (e.g. Openshaw et al. 1987, Besag and Newell
1991, Diggle and Chetwynd 1991, Bailey and Gatrell, 1995). Useful summaries of
issues and techniques for point pattern analysis can be found in Cressie (1993), while
Gatrell et al.
(1996) specifically review point-pattern analysis techniques for
epidemiological applications. The most relevant issues for this paper are:

1. Spatial aggregation of data to the point centroids of administrative areas. The
original data were aggregated to unit postcode level, but, in order to make use
of available demographic data, the spatial resolution was further coarsened by
aggregation to census OA population centroids. One particular danger here is
that the local intensity of a point pattern may be artificially boosted by the
‘snapping’ of surrounding points to a single centroid, implying sharper peaks
of case frequency than actually occur at any point in space. The stochastic
simulations in this study mitigate this effect by simulating cases at the same
aggregated centroids, potentially generating similar spikes in the simulations.
This ‘cools’ and moderates the peaks caused by aggregation.

2. Correction for edge effects. In choosing a finite study area for point-pattern
analysis, points just outside this boundary will not be included in any
calculations. These ‘edge effects’ bias most estimators of pattern, and unless
otherwise stated, all analyses in this study are edge-corrected.

1.4.1 Kernel estimation. Most statistical descriptions of point patterns sample the
data by stepping across the map, selecting subset ‘windows’ of points and assessing
the distribution of points within that area. In kernel estimation, points closest to the
window’s centre contribute most to the calculated index of intensity. The selection of
kernel bandwidth is extremely important so that a balance can be achieved between
conforming too tightly to noise and ‘spikes’ in the data, and obliterating important
local variation altogether. An alternative to using a fixed kernel is adaptive kernel
estimation, where bandwidth is varied according to local point intensity so that a
required minimum number of points are sampled (e.g. Brunsdon 1995), broadening
and flattening the kernel where data are sparse. A fixed quartic kernel can be defined
by the equation

lt sð Þ~ X

3(cid:1)pt2 1{h2(cid:1)t2
(cid:2)

(cid:3) for each hivt; otherwise 0,

ð1Þ

where lt is the cumulative ‘intensity’ of neighbouring points, calculated for a kernel
centred on point s, and t is the bandwidth radius. The potential contribution of data

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

817

point si to lt varies smoothly, depending on the distance hi between si and s, peaking
at distance 0 and decreasing to 0 at t.

It is important to note that kernel estimation is not in itself a technique for
detecting clustering but generates distributed maps of density which can be
compared, cell by cell, between real point patterns and simulated spatial nulls (e.g.
Kelsall and Diggle 1995).

1.4.2 Ripley’s K-function, pair correlation functions and random labelling. The K-
function or reduced second-moment function (Ripley 1981) describes the expected
number of points within a distance h from a sample location. It is defined by

lK hð Þ~E number of events within distance h of an arbitrary event

ð

Þ,

ð2Þ

where l is the intensity (mean number per unit area) of events. Plotting at multiple
h values (or ‘lags’) allows point patterns to be distinguished, even if their behaviour
differs only at certain scales; a global index such as the mean nearest-neighbour
distance may fail in this regard. The observed pattern may be compared with a
fully defined K-function describing systematic attraction or repulsion between
points at each scale. The simplest example is CSR produced by a homogeneous
Poisson process,
i.e. simply the expected intensity of points within a circular
window:

K hð Þ~ph2:

ð3Þ

For a discussion of defined K-functions for more complex spatial processes, see
Dixon (2002). In the area of epidemiology, Kingham et al. (1995) successfully
combined K-function estimation with logistic regression in order to identify
potential covariates in a study of childrens’ respiratory health. Edge corrections
are commonly performed by comparing the current circular window to a defined
boundary polygon and weighting the results according to how much of the
circumference of the circle falls within the boundary, as follows:

bll bKK hð Þ~ X

X

(cid:2)
w li, lj

i

j=1

(cid:2)
(cid:3){1I dijvh

(cid:3)

N

ð

Ripley 1976

Þ,

ð4Þ

where dij is the distance between the ith and jth events in the area of interest, and
I(dij) is an indicator function which is 1 if dij(h, and 0 otherwise. w(li, lj) is the term
which corrects for reduced sampling at edges and has the value 1 when a circle of
radius h, centred at point li, falls entirely within the study boundary. Otherwise, w(li,
lj) is a value less than 1 representing the proportion of that circle’s circumference
which falls within the study bounds.

In order to stabilize the variance of estimates of K(h), the expected point intensity

under CSR (equation (3)) is employed to estimate Ripley’s L(h):

h
bLL hð Þ~ bKK hð Þ

.

i1=2

p

:

ð5Þ

The expected value of L(h) under a homogeneous random Poisson process is 0;
positive values indicate clustering of points in space at this scale, and negative values
indicate more regular spacing. Figure 3 illustrates the use of bLL hð Þ as a descriptor of
spatial pattern for the data used in this study. Edge-corrected K-functions for all
point sets were generated using the splancs ‘khat’ function and transformed using

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 818

L. Bastin et al.

Figure 3. L-function for MRSA cases, shown against a 95% confidence envelope generated
from 1000 stochastically simulated patterns based on underlying, age-stratified, population
density.

equation (5) for plotting as L-functions. Randomly simulated sets of points based on
age-stratified population density at the same centroids were used to produce 95%
confidence envelopes, which exhibit largely the same characteristic slopes and
inflexion points as the disease data. (Envelopes were generated using the splancs
function ‘Kenv.csr’ (Rowlingson and Diggle 1993), and an adapted version of the
same function which read simulated point sets from file.) It can be seen that MRSA
cases are least clustered (i.e. most regular) at a radius of about 180 m. This
characteristic pattern stems from repulsion between OA centroids, which have an
average spacing of ,200 m. The MRSA cases show significant clustering above and
beyond that of the underlying population, at lags between 0 and 600 m (in contrast,
the MSSA cases have a pattern which falls at the upper limit of their confidence
envelope but never significantly outside it).

It is important to note that both the K-function and the L-function are smoothed
by measuring cumulative clustering up to distance h. The pair correlation function
(pcf) shown below, on the other hand, considers the instantaneous clustering of a
point process at each particular scale:

g hð Þ~K 0 hð Þ=2ph,

ð6Þ

where K9(h) is the derivative of the K-function described in equation (2), and g(h)
tends to 1 at large h. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show pair correlation functions for the
data in this study. The oscillations in figure 4(a) illustrate the structured pattern of
the OA population centroids which stems from their tessellated nature. In
particular, there is a downspike at around 100 m, which represents regular spacing
at the average OA radius, and again around 3500 m, representing the average radius
of settlements in the study area. While this pattern largely drives the spacing of the
disease cases allocated to the centroids, the MRSA cases can be seen to be more
clustered at very short distances (0–100 m) and are generally more clustered than the
base data at distances up to 3000 m. The negative values around 3500 m correspond

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

819

(a) Pair correlation functions for MRSA cases and the 1244 OA centroids to
Figure 4.
which data were aggregated for this study. (b) Pair correlation functions for MRSA cases and
MSSA cases.

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 820

L. Bastin et al.

to the average radii of population clusters in the base data; in other words, as at
100 m, neighbours are generally sparse, at this distance, for an arbitrarily selected
point within the dataset. Figure 4(b) compares the pcfs of MSSA and MRSA cases,
showing that their patterns are broadly similar, but that MRSA is more clustered at
very local scales.

K-functions are often used to model the spatial distributions of marks or labels
within a single point set (for example, a set of mapped trees marked as ‘infected’
(cases) or ‘uninfected’ (controls) in a disease study). Here, the aim is to test whether
events of one type tend to be surrounded by events of the same type, by a ‘random
labelling’ of the existing points (e.g. Diggle and Chetwynd 1991). The random
labelling hypothesis assumes that, among the combined group of case-control
locations, the probability of a particular label at any location (in this case, a positive
test for MRSA) is equal for all points, and not dependent on the label status of
neighbours (MRSA/MSSA).

In a practical application of random labelling, numerous populations of labelled
points are generated by randomly re-allocating the existing labels (without
replacement) to the existing data locations, generating a K-function for the resulting
point pattern each time. From these simulated K-functions, we can create a 95%
confidence envelope, against which (Kcases – Kcontrols) can be plotted. Departure
from the envelope implies that the case pattern is meaningful (i.e. more or less
clustered than expected) at this scale. While this addresses scale well, it gives a global
index of clustering, rather than a map of where any clustering occurs, and differs
from a test of independence between the two point patterns, which can be assessed
using repeated random toroidal shifts.

A spatial adaptation of random labelling was performed for this study by using a
quartic kernel to smooth each resampled set of points, thus generating a statistical
population of surfaces, rather than vectors. In order to perform a one-sided test at
p,0.025 for significant aggregation of points we can generate a surface, cell by cell,
from the 97.5th percentile of the values generated from kernel smoothing of the
relabelled points. Where the surface generated from the original case data exceeds
these ‘pointwise tolerance contours’, the intensity for that cell can be considered
significant. This general method (Kelsall and Diggle 1995) combines visualization of
spatial pattern with a means of testing significance and has been used for space–time
analysis of disease risk (Sabel et al. 2000).

1.4.3 Spatial scan statistics. The geographical analysis machine (‘GAM’) devel-
oped by Openshaw et al. (1987) relies on a similar ‘moving window’ to that used in
kernel estimation. Regular grid points across the study area form the centres of
variably sized circles, within each of which the observed and expected number of
cases (the latter based on local population at risk) are compared. Circles containing
significantly high densities of points are drawn on the map. In the original version of
GAM, circles may overlap, and contain the same case cluster (i.e. are not
statistically independent), and this was a key criticism of the technique. Methods
developed to tackle this problem include spatial scan statistics, which build on the
GAM approach, but constrain the geographical overlap between cluster centres and
the circles around them, and which can be extended to space–time clustering by
constructing volumes, rather than areas, around sets of data points. This study
applied Kulldorff’s spatial scan statistic (Kulldorff 1997), which has been tested on a
variety of real epidemiological datasets and benchmarked on simulated point
patterns, and which compares well to LISA indices (Hanson and Wieczorek 2002).

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

821

2. Methods

2.1 Nature of the data

information available for Staphylococcus aureus isolates
This work uses spatial
processed by a UK general hospital between 1 September 2004 and 31 August 2005.
The samples represent a catchment area defined largely by the bounds of three
Primary Care Trusts (figure 1), and cases which fell outside the boundary were
discounted (82 cases of MRSA (9% of all MRSA cases) and 188 cases of MSSA (9.3%
of all MSSA cases)). The population within the bounds (based on 2001 UK Census
data) was 374 883, while the total number of patients registered with GPs within the
area was 398 642. This implies that 6% of the registered patients live outside the
selected study area, so that the discounted proportions above are reasonable. The data
available are a good representation of the study area (in other words, given the
notification procedures in place in the region, the number of any isolates sent outside
the study area for analysis is likely to be insignificant). The study bounds measure
roughly 25 km by 25 km, and the area of the selected polygon is 328.6 km2.

For each laboratory sample, the home unit postcode provided was matched to
centroid coordinates from the UK All Fields Postcode Directory (AFPD) (Office of
National Statistics 2005) and to the population centroids of 2001 Census OAs. The
bounds shown in figure 1 contained 1244 OAs, and 11 387 spatially referenced unit
postcodes, which were mapped onto 2001 Census OAs using the AFPD.

The data contained a number of inaccuracies in terms of recorded birth dates and
post codes, and only some of these could be corrected. 11.5% of the original case
records had incomplete unit postcodes and could not be spatially located; this was
improved to 7.9% by independent telephone follow-up of the missing data to GP
practices, but the outstanding cases (24 MRSA and 221 MSSA) were discounted for
the purposes of this study. Inclusion of these records, which could only be geo-coded
to a coarser spatial resolution, or not at all, would have severely prejudiced an
assessment of spatial pattern. There was no bias towards specific postcode zones
among these omitted records, so the omissions are unlikely to have introduced any
statistical bias in the analysis.

Preliminary analysis identified patient age as the most important predisposing
factor recorded in the dataset (figures 2(a) and 2(b)), and all analyses were stratified,
to three age groups: under 65, 65–85, and over 85. The restriction of most
demographic data to OA-level necessitated a trade-off between spatial resolution
and verifiable demographics, since, for most analyses stratified by the age and local
density of the vulnerable population, case data were aggregated to OA population
centroids.

Stratification by age, and the presence of both MRSA and MSSA data, led to six

distinct data categories, which are summarized in table 1.

2.2 Spatial analysis techniques used in this study

2.2.1 Spatial/spatio-temporal scan. The spatial scan statistic software described in
1.4.3 is publicly available as the SaTScan software package (Kulldorff 2006). This
widely used technique was used to identify clustering of cases against background
population. SaTScan analyses were stratified by age to the six DCs shown in table 1,
by separating out MRSA and MSSA case locations, and in each case using the three
age categories as a covariate in the analysis.

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 822

L. Bastin et al.

Table 1. Data categories (DCs) for the study, showing total within-bounds numbers of cases
and global incidence probability in the study area (‘IP’)a.

Disease Age category

MSSA

MRSA

No. cases
IP
No. cases
IP

Under 65

1090
0.0034457
196
0.0006196

65–85

563
0.0109267
429
0.008326

85 and over

214
0.0303331
207
0.0293409

aIP was calculated by dividing the number of cases in each age category by the total number
of people in this age group in the 2001 Census (thus assuming a relatively static age structure).

2.2.2 Stochastic simulation and kernel density estimation. As an alternative to
spatial scan, stochastic simulation and kernel estimation were combined as
recommended by Kelsall and Diggle (1995). All kernel and K-function analysis
described in this section was carried out using the R language (R 2005), and the
splancs (Rowlingson and Diggle 1993) and spatstat (Baddeley and Turner 2005)
libraries in particular.

Stochastic simulations were based on the global age-stratified Incidence
Probabilities (IPs) shown in table 1. The null spatial model (as characterized by
Waller and Jacquez 1995) is a heterogeneous underlying Poisson model with no
spatial autocorrelation other than that caused by heterogeneities in the population
at risk, i.e. varying population density and age structure. Monte Carlo techniques
were applied to the known age structure at each OA centroid, to generate a reference
distribution consisting of 1000 sets of simulated case locations, from which
confidence limits can be generated. These simulated case sets can be stratified into
the three chosen age categories, or combined to produce expected total counts for
each OA.

Simulated locations were randomly generated using a Python script which
produced whole numbers of expected cases for each location. Because the real case
data were tied to the population centroid of the OA, simulated cases were not
randomly perturbed around this centroid but were instead assigned to the centroid,
ensuring that the simulated and real datasets were more directly comparable, both
before and after kernel estimation.

In order to assess significance of MRSA clusters, kernel estimation was employed
as described in section 1.4.2. A quartic kernel was used to smooth each simulated
point set, as well as the real data locations for MRSA, to a grid of 100 m.

Selection of a bandwidth in this context is not trivial: Kelsall and Diggle (1995)
note in discussing the generation of relative risk surfaces that a variety of methods
may be used, and that edge correction of the estimates for cross-validation is vital.
Bandwidth selection is further complicated by the fact that discrete data such as the
OA centroids used here bias the cross-validation score for smaller bandwidths (Chiu
1991) and by the fact that, for sparse data, many ‘expected’ kernels will contain few
or no data points and will again bias cross-validation estimates towards infinity
(Hickson and Waller 2003).

For the purposes of this study, a kernel bandwidth of 200 m was implied by
finding the minimum from a simple plot of mean squared distance (using the splancs
‘mse2d’ function). This value was expanded to 400 m in an attempt to counteract the
artificial structure imposed on OA centroids, and ‘force’ neighbouring centroids to

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

823

Figure 5. Kernel density estimation results for four different bandwidths: 200 m, 400 m,
1000 m, and 4000 m.

have more influence. This is largely a subjective choice, as described in Silverman
(1986), but is partly based on an assessment of kernel coverage: a bandwidth of
200 m left 14% of OA centroids as the only data point in a kernel (max. per
kernel58, mean52.92) while a 400-m kernel left only 3% of kernels covering only
one data point (max. per kernel515, mean56.8). In fact, the core clusters identified
by 200-m and 400-m bandwidths differed very little (figure 5); however, an increase
in bandwidth to 1 km indicates just one highly significant cluster in the east, and a
further increase to 4 km (a distance which people might be expected to travel to their
place of work) moves the significant excess to the south of the study area. This bears
out the contention of Waller and Gotway (2004) that a variety of bandwidths,
considered together, may actually give broader insight into underlying phenomena
at different scales.

The chosen bandwidth of 400 m was applied to random labellings of the cases
and each of the 1000 simulated ‘control’ datasets (Kelsall and Diggle 1995). For

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 824

L. Bastin et al.

each grid cell in the ‘real’ surface, a significant value was taken to be one where at
least 975 of the simulated cell values were exceeded by the real value. This extends
the metaphor of the two-dimensional confidence envelope to a 2.5D confidence
surface: only where points are unusually clustered in reality do they generate local
spikes which can penetrate through the 97.5th percentile surface and be seen as
significant. (Consideration of the 2.5th percentile as a lower bound would,
effectively, generate a three-dimensional confidence volume. However, only
excessive clustering above the upper bound was considered for the purposes of
this analysis).

2.2.3 K-functions and kernel estimation from random labelling. For random
locations could be used,
labelling of MRSA/MSSA cases, unit postcode-level
since the underlying population density was not an input. Overall sampling
intensity per head of population (MRSA and MSSA combined) varied widely
across the study area. There was also a natural tendency for paired results due to
medical follow-up, i.e. cases where an individual tested positive for MRSA and was
later found to be clear, or cases where MRSA was suspected but was only
identified on a subsequent test. Paired tests were found to have occurred for 15% of
the MRSA cases. Where control data are available, random labelling can help to
confirm that clustering among cases is genuinely due to a process by which this
label tends to aggregate and not simply an artefact of denser sampling in these
areas. However, given the low likelihood that an active S. aureus infection will fail
to be notified, it is not reasonable to interpret varying MRSA density as simply a
sampling artefact. Rather, sampling rates generally increase in areas where MRSA
incidence is high.

significant departures

K-function plots from random labelling were useful

in identifying a global
clustering trend but less useful in identifying where variations might be. To spatially
from the confidence envelopes, kernel density
assess
estimation was employed (as described in section 1.4.1). Randomly labelled point
sets were smoothed with a fixed-bandwidth 400 m quartic kernel as in section 2.2.2,
and the 97.5th percentile of the results was used to represent the upper envelope as it
exists across space. The genuine MRSA case locations were then smoothed with the
same kernel, and areas where the smoothed grid exceeded the 97.5th percentile grid
were outlined and mapped as significance contours.

3. Results

3.1 Spatial and spatio-temporal scan with SaTScan

Spatial scan statistics for the MSSA data identified the entire study area as one or
two clusters and did not discriminate any local clustering. Spatial scans for MRSA
with age as a categorical covariate (under 65, 65–85, and over 85) identified a
number of apparently significant clusters among the MRSA cases. It is important to
note that two of the highly significant clusters (p,0.0001) consist of just one or two
OAs where risk is strongly elevated. The same two OAs retain their importance
when the analysis is extended to spatio-temporal clustering and will be referred to in
a later discussion as C1 and C2 (figure 6).

The identification of these small areas as significant clusters was a useful outcome,
and the SaTScan software scan was particularly useful in allowing an easy extension
to spatio-temporal scan.

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

825

Figure 6. SaTScan-generated spatio-temporal clusters for MRSA, with three age categories
as covariates. OA polygons whose centroids participate in significant clusters are shaded by
local relative risk. NB: despite this choropleth display, the SaTScan analysis was based on
point centroids rather than areas.

3.2 Stochastic simulation and kernel density estimation

Based on kernel estimations with a bandwidth of 400 m, MRSA cases were found to
be significantly more clustered in certain areas than the stochastic simulations based
on population density (figure 7). The results broadly bear out the clusters identified by
SaTScan. However, although both methods rely on running circular windows across
the data, the adaptable bandwidth of the spatial scan allows us to identify ‘elevated
risk’ circles of varying size, including a sizeable area in the South of the study region.
The kernel estimation method, on the other hand, shows this area as a set of individual
local significance peaks, unless the selected bandwidth is unrealistically large. When
the pair-correlation function for all MRSA cases is plotted against 95% confidence
limits generated from stochastic simulations (figure 8(a)), it can be seen that the major
departure from randomness is at very short range (0–100 m), reinforcing the
conclusion that the major clustering effect in these data has virtually no spatial lag:
in other words, cases co-occurring at, or at least aggregated to, the same location. The
impact of this very small set of coincident points is reinforced by a pair correlation
function where the 22 MRSA cases registered to the two postcodes at the centres of

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 826

L. Bastin et al.

Figure 7. Significant clusters identified using pointwise tolerance contours from kernel
density estimation broadly support the identification of clusters from spatial scan. The
example shown here used a fixed quartic kernel with a bandwidth of 400 m.

clusters C1 and C2 have been removed (figure 8(b)), bringing the pcf within the
confidence limits for most of its range.

3.3 K-functions and kernel estimates based on random labelling

When subjected to 500 random labellings, the MRSA cases are significantly more
clustered at distances of 0–180 m than would be expected from a chance sampling of
all data points. When stratified by age, however, this significant clustering is limited
to the under-65 age group (figure 9). A spatial investigation of this pattern among
the under-65s was generated using the kernel method described in section 2.2.3 and
is shown in figure 10. For cluster C2, the high density of MRSA samples in this age
group is associated with an equally high density of MSSA samples, i.e. no significant
excess is seen. For C1, MRSA cases are still significantly more clustered than MSSA
cases among the under 65s.

Across the study area as a whole, this implies that sparse and dense patterns of
MRSA generally coincide with correspondingly sparse/dense patterns of MSSA
except in the under-65 age group, where MRSA is more clustered at certain
the soft-tissue infections
locations. It
characteristically caused by S. aureus will almost certainly be notified to a medical

to note at

this point

is useful

that

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

827

(a) Pair correlation functions for MRSA cases, compared with 95% confidence
Figure 8.
intervals generated from 1000 age-stratified stochastic simulations. MRSA case clustering
beyond the confidence envelope is most noticeable at extremely short distances (0–100 m). (b)
Pair correlation functions for MRSA cases as above, with 22 cases from clusters C1 and C2
removed. The function now falls within the confidence limits at very short range (0–100 m).

practitioner, and this practitioner may, in the first instance, treat with antibiotics or
take a sample. If MSSA is treated successfully with a broad-spectrum antibiotic, and
a sample is not taken, the case would not appear in this dataset. However, an
MRSA infection would persist to the stage where a sample must be taken and
processed. The result will be a potential preferential bias towards MRSA coverage in
this dataset, so that any observed difference in MSSA sampling intensity across the

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 828

L. Bastin et al.

Figure 9. Stratified random-labelling analysis with MRSA as cases and MSSA as controls.
Significant departure from the envelope (i.e. clustering) is seen only in the under-65 age group,
at very small spatial lags (,150 m).

study area is most likely to result from a medical practitioner’s tendency to treat, or
to test, when the patient first presents.

It appears likely that, in general, the MSSA sample density is being driven by
incidence of MRSA infection, particularly among older people. Coupled with the
fact that 15% of the MRSA-positive individuals had been retested at some point,
this implies pragmatic, structured medical follow up in areas (and possibly in
institutions) where perceived risk is high. For example, cluster C2, where 12 of the
central 13 MRSA cases stem from a single nursing home, shows no significant excess
of MRSA over MSSA. It is interesting to note the two main cases where MRSA/
MSSA tracking does not apply; i.e. the locations where MRSA-MRSA clustering (in
the under-65s) is most significant (see insets in figure 10). Both of these peaks
coincide with significantly high MRSA rates in general (one of them coincides with
cluster C1), but they represent very different phenomena. Cluster C1 (11 cases in
total) centres on nine individuals registered at the central unit postcode of the
cluster, where two separate medical care institutions are registered, both catering to
clients under 65. This independent reinforcement of the pattern identified by the
kernel estimation is encouraging. Individuals from this postcode were prioritized for
further investigation by the hospital, which revealed that seven individuals were
registered at one of the nursing homes, and two at the other. This example highlights
the necessity for data on patients’ health-care status to be attached to this type of
microbiological sample. A simple flag (‘resident in medical care’) would enable the
immediate stratification of records by health-care status, and the assignment of
different expected risks to Census OAs based on the presence and size of health-care
institutions. Simulated cases could then be based on an assumption of risk which
was low for the general population but elevated where nursing homes are known to
be present. Similarly, a record of last hospital attendance would enable sample data
to be, in effect, related to more realistic prior probabilities for the assessment of
significance. The pressing need for supplementary data, recorded at the time that the
microbiological sample is taken, is further discussed in section 5.

The second area of interest, which lies just to the south of cluster C2 and will be
referred to as cluster C3, is not associated directly with health-care locations but is
of particular interest because pulse-field typing data are now available for three of
the five individuals in the cluster. All three individuals exhibited a B8 variant form
of MRSA, which has a prevalence of only 10% across the whole study area. While
this type of MRSA (SCCmec IV) is associated with health-care environments and is

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

829

Figure 10. Kernel density analysis of randomly labelled MRSA/MSSA data for the under-
65 age group. There are two particularly significant areas (C1 and C3) where high MRSA
rates overall coincide with high rates of MRSA relative to MSSA among the under 65s. NB:
in cluster C1, note the cartographic displacement of the two nursing homes registered at the
central postcode.

likely to have been contracted in a hospital, it appears that it may have been further
transmitted between individuals in the community. A non-institutional context
would explain why local sampling among the patients’ age group (all under 65) has
not risen to correspond with this increased local rate of MRSA. Again, the main
outcome has been to prioritize these cases for further investigation, given the

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 830

L. Bastin et al.

severely limited data currently available on these cases. Of particular interest is the
fact that this cluster was not identified by the SaTScan analysis.

3.4 Area-based methods: Moran’s I scores

The methods described above are all restricted to a consideration of point pattern,
while the population data which produce expected disease rates are tied to areas:
namely, census OAs. Both centroids and areas have their disadvantages, as
discussed in sections 1.3 and 1.4, and a calculation of Moran’s I was undertaken on
the observed/expected rates of MRSA in the region. Expected rates were based on
the age-stratified probabilities summarized in table 1, combined with population age
data from the 2001 Census, and a Boolean adjacency matrix was generated for all
polygons to represent connectivity. The OA constituting cluster C1 had a risk level
with little relationship to those surrounding it, implying a truly isolated point
cluster. C2, on the other hand, may possibly be part of a broader cluster, with high
I-values in neighbouring OAs. Since cluster C2 is dominated by health-care patients
at a single nursing home, focused molecular typing in the area will help to establish
whether this location is a reservoir for particular subtypes of MRSA, and whether
these strains have moved between the health-care environment and the local
community.

4. Discussion

This study found MRSA cases (based on home unit postcode) to be significantly
more clustered at certain Census OAs than would be expected, based on the
underlying population and its age structure. The results of a spatio-temporal scan
largely concurred with a stochastic kernel estimation technique in identifying one
large cluster to the south of the study area, and two very small clusters, consisting of
one and two Census OAs, respectively. On closer investigation, the cases within
these OAs are very spatially aggregated to specific unit postcodes at which nursing
homes are also registered. In fact, of the eight unit postcodes with the highest
recorded MRSA rates, seven had registered nursing homes. The cases highlighted in
these areas are currently being investigated (1) by contacting the submitting doctors
to confirm whether they are health care-related and (2) by molecular typing to assess
their similarity. Results so far indicate that, in clusters C1 and C2, the majority of
patients (nine out of 11, and 12 out of 13, respectively) were registered in some form
of care at the time of testing. Molecular results are still pending at the time of
writing.

The ability of the spatial scan method to select the most ‘risky’ of a suite of
possible circular windows (of varying size) is a particular strength when compared
with the fixed-bandwidth of the kernel estimation method. Even an extension of the
kernel smoothing method to an adaptive bandwidth would not explicitly address
this issue. Kernel estimation as demonstrated here is computationally intensive and
required a variety of bespoke programmes; however, it can generate appealing and
accessible visualizations, particularly in space–time contexts (e.g. Sabel et al. 2000).
It also has the advantage that it can readily be used to handle multiple randomly
labelled point sets (figure 8) and to generate confidence ‘surfaces’ which lend
themselves to 3D visualization. All in all, the method was a useful complement to
spatial scan, and the stochastically simulated case sets could be used to illustrate the
structured nature of a random phenomenon in the context of a spatially

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

831

autocorrelated underlying factor (i.e. population density). It is interesting to note
that the kernel estimation method specifically identified a cluster which appears
from early molecular typing results to be a genuine case of community transmission
(see the right-hand inset in figure 10) and that this location was not specifically
highlighted by SaTScan.

The identified clusters cannot necessarily be taken to show community
transmission of MRSA, since it appeared that many of the cases were actually
patients in medical-care establishments such as hospices and nursing homes.
However, although ancillary data suggest residence in an institution (and, possibly,
compromised health status) at the most notable clusters, in one case elevated risk
was observed in two neighbouring OAs, and this is borne out by Moran’s I scores
calculated with an adjacency matrix for OA polygons. The implication is that, while
this extremely localized cluster may represent an outbreak at a medical institution, it
may also be having some impact on the surrounding area. Molecular epidemiolo-
gical typing is being directed towards these cases as a priority and will be of immense
value in identifying transmission events at and around these locations.

This highlights a particular gap in the data available for this study; no
information was available on place or nature of employment, hobbies, or other
risk factors. An individual’s home postcode is, in general, a very poor surrogate for
this information in assessing the risk of contracting MRSA. In fact, it could be said
that, due to their compromised health status, long-term residents of care homes are
the people most likely to contract MRSA at their registered home postcode. Coupled
with intermittent periods of asymptomatic colonization by MRSA (i.e. a patient
could carry the bacterium for months without active infection), the reliability of
such limited data imposes serious limits on tracking MRSA infection events.

The clusters of MRSA identified in this study were also found to be generally
associated with high local
levels of MSSA samples, such that MRSA/MRSA
clustering at one of the two small cluster locations was not distinguishable from
MRSA/MSSA clustering under a random labelling regime. This may be another
result of the medical context in which these individuals generally found themselves,
and the increased surveillance in this context. However, the spatial random labelling
showed several locations to have higher levels of MRSA among the under-65 age
group than could have been generated by varying sampling effort alone, and these
results have highlighted interesting groups of cases for further analysis.

The major influence on observed susceptibility to MRSA was age, but even an
age-stratified approach failed to explain the observed local clusters, whether by
stochastic simulation combined with kernel estimation or spatial scan.

The microbiological sample data presented here are actually very typical for the
UK, and it is notable that, while hospital-onset cases could be removed from the
analysis, there were numerous health-care-associated cases which had not been
recorded as such. The effort required to retrospectively update even a small portion
of the case data with health-care status has been substantial, and one of the major
arguments of this paper is that the time and effort invested by family doctors in
collecting a standard set of ancillary variables (table 2) will be worth while, and will
allow a far more meaningful analysis of MRSA occurrences. It is apparent from this
dataset that, if health care-associated cases can be labelled as such, the residual (i.e.
potentially community-based) rates for small areas such as census OAs will become
even smaller, with all the associated statistical problems. However, the stratification
of cases on health-care status would allow far better modelling of prior probabilities/

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 832

L. Bastin et al.

Table 2. Suggested supplementary data to be collected and attached to microbiological
samples.

Variable
Home postcodea
Agea
Gendera
National Health Service numbera

Further details

Full postcode

Importance

High
High
Medium
High

Current health-care status

Origin of sampleb

High
Date of microbiological sample
Date of last hospital visit (inpatient)
Ward visitedb
Postcode of regular workplace
Hobbies,e.g. sports
Other postcodes regularly visited (e.g.
sports clubs, family members)

Unique for each patient—allows
repeat tests to be automatically
identified

Inpatient (hospital)
In nursing care
Not in a health care environment

High

Ward (if hospital inpatient)
Nursing home (if resident)
Medical practice (if community-based)

High
High
Desirable
High
Desirable
Desirable

aValues have the potential, either alone or in combination with other information, to make
patient records identifiable.
bValues should share a common coding scheme such that each hospital ward/nursing home/
medical practice in the region is assigned a unique ID.

expected rates and open up a range of techniques suited to small-area studies, such
as empirical Bayesian smoothing.

5. Conclusions

Given the international importance of MRSA, this study looks at the problem from a
unique angle. It is important for effective infection control within primary care to
visualize the occurrence of MRSA clusters with full consideration of the underlying
population. This will facilitate effective control measures at these critical points. Given
the limited nature of the patient data available, the results of this study have been
extremely useful in prioritizing case records for clerical follow-up and time-consuming,
expensive molecular typing. The techniques assessed here were found by health-care
experts with little GIS experience to be highly suitable both for visualization and
hypothesis generation, and for assessing significance of spatial clustering in a
community disease context. The work described here has also identified critical
weaknesses in current epidemiological recording and reporting, and specifically
identified a list of supplementary data which will be vital for any serious ongoing
monitoring and tracking of MRSA in the community (table 2). If ancillary variables
such as these can be standardized, reliably recorded, and attached to bacterial isolates,
the power and discrimination of cluster analysis will be greatly improved.

In the absence of occupational/lifestyle data on patients, the assumption was
made that an individual’s location and consequent risk of infection is adequately

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

833

represented by their residential postcode. Given workplace and environmental risk,
this assumption has recognized limitations, identified by Gatrell et al. (1996). An
in
approach which locates cases to home postcode will be more successful
identifying clusters among people who are (1) restricted in movement and (2) liable
to contract MRSA at their registered home address. As such, the data as they stand
are suited specifically to identifying outbreaks at medical-care institutions, and at
this point it would appear that some of these have indeed been identified. In order to
track and model patient movements and probable infection events,
further
information would need to be collected at the point of medical contact. A suggested
list of ancillary variables, which could be presented as a paper or online form, is
shown in table 2. Even a simple categorization such as ‘health care associated
(inpatient)’,
‘health care associated (non-inpatient)’, or ‘community onset’ (as
recommended by Collignon et al. 2006) would be of great value in stratifying the
data addressed in this study, especially as an input to models of expected disease
frequency, and for Bayesian approaches. It would be of particular value to separate
out the point clustering which has practically no spatial lag (usually, individuals in
medical institutions) and prioritize other cases, for example, for a more detailed
assessment of risk including the workplace. The effort required to track an
individual’s potential exposure to MRSA is considerable, as is the time and effort
required to obtain molecular information on isolates. In both areas, this study has
refined the subset of cases to be further investigated.

The ancillary variables suggested in table 2 also have the potential to make
individual patients more easily identifiable. Care should always be taken that unique
patient identifiers (e.g. name, National Health number) are not included in database
extracts and that any combinations of variables which make a patient ‘potentially
identifiable’ are used only according to agreed protocols.

While spatial scan is an established technique, the kernel estimation used here to
visualize cluster significance is less widespread. The simulated points and surfaces
are of value for visualization, and for showing the spatial detail of point pattern
summaries such as the K- and pair-correlation functions shown here. Both spatial
scan and kernel estimation concurred in identifying tightly localized clusters at
single unit postcodes with no spatial lag whatsoever. However, the size and shape of
the risk locations generated by the kernel estimation are bandwidth-dependent,
relate to the aggregated point data rather than the unit area, and could give a false
sense that risk had been predicted at unknown locations. This is an exploratory
technique rather than a model of infection process, and as such is useful and
interesting. Where two point patterns must be compared across space and time,
kernel estimation with a well-validated bandwidth also has the arguable benefit of
harmonizing data to regular, comparable grids.

6. Future work

Molecular typing of the isolates explored here is currently under way, and this will
permit a more detailed analysis of the association of specific types of MRSA with
locations in the study region. The kernels used here for estimation were both fixed
and round; it is planned to extend the kernel estimation technique adopted here to
adaptive kernels, and some suggestions have been made in the literature as to
alternative techniques of spatial scan which do not rely on round kernels (e.g. Tango
and Takahashi 2005).

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 834

L. Bastin et al.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Debra Hirst for her valuable assistance with collection of
data on nursing homes, and Professor Lance Waller for kind advice and
encouragement with R. The advice of two anonymous reviewers was also very
valuable.

References
ANSELIN, L., 1995, Local indicators of spatial association–LISA. Geographical Analysis, 27,

pp. 93–116.

BABA, T., TAKEUCHI, F., KURODA, M., YUZAWA, H., AOKI, K., OGUCHI, A., NAGAI, Y.,
IWAMA, N., ASANO, K., NAIMI, T., KURODA, H., CUI, L., YAMAMOTO, K. and
HIRAMATSU, K., 2002, Genome and virulence determinants of high virulence
community-acquired MRSA. Lancet, 359, pp. 1819–1827.

BADDELEY, A. and TURNER, R., 2005, Spatstat: An R package for analyzing spatial point

patterns. Journal of Statistical Software, 12, pp. 1–42.

BAILEY, T. and GATRELL, A., 1995, Interactive Spatial Data Analysis (Harlow, UK: Longman

Scientific & Technical).

BESAG, J. and NEWELL, J., 1991, The detection of clusters in rare diseases. Journal of the Royal

Statistical Society, Series A, 154, pp. 143–155.

BRUNSDON, C., 1995, Estimating probability surfaces for geographical point data: an adaptive

kernel algorithm. Computers and Geosciences, 21, pp. 877–894.

CHAMBERS, H., 2001, The changing epidemiology of Staphylococcus aureus? Emerging

CHIU, S., 1991, The effect of discretization error on bandwidth selection for kernel density

Infectious Diseases, 7, pp. 178–182.

estimation. Biometrika, 78, pp. 436–441.

COLLIGNON, P., WILKINSON, I., GILBERT, G., GRAYSON, M. and WHITBY, R., 2006, Health
care-associated Staphylococcus aureus bloodstream infections: a clinical quality
indicator for all hospitals. Medical Journal of Australia, 184, pp. 404–406.

CRESSIE, N., 1993, Spatial point patterns. In Statistics for Spatial Data (Revised Edition)

(Chichester, UK: Wiley).

DIGGLE, P. and CHETWYND, A., 1991, Second-order analysis of spatial clustering for

inhomogeneous populations. Biometrics, 47, pp. 1155–1163.

DIXON, P., 2002, Ripley’s K-function. In Encyclopedia of Environmetrics, pp. 1796–1803

(Chichester, UK: Wiley).

GATRELL, A., BAILEY, T., DIGGLE, P. and ROWLINGSON, B., 1996, Spatial point pattern
analysis and its application in geographical epidemiology. Transactions of the Institute
of British Geographers, 21, pp. 256–274.

GELMAN, A., PARK, D., ANSOLABERE, S., PRICE, P. and MINNITE, L., 2001, Models,
assumptions and model checking in ecological regressions. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 164, pp. 101–119.

GRIFFITHS, C., LAMAGNI, T., CROWCROFT, N., DUCKWORTH, G. and ROONEY, C., 2004,
Trends in MRSA in England and Wales: analysis of morbidity and mortality data for
1993–2002. Health Statistics Quarterly, 21, pp. 15–22.

HAINING, R., 1990, Spatial Data Analysis in the Social and Environmental Sciences, pp. 73–74

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

HANSON, C. and WIECZOREK, W., 2002, Alcohol mortality: a comparison of spatial clustering

methods. Social Science and Medicine, 55, pp. 791–802.

HEROLD, B., IMMERGLUCK, L., MARANAN, M., LAUDERDALE, D., GASKIN, R., BOYLE-
VAVRA, S., LEITCH, C. and DAUM, R., 1998, Community-acquired methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus in children with no identified predisposing risk. The
Journal of the American Medical Association, 279, pp. 593–598.

HICKSON, D. and WALLER, L.A., 2003, Spatial analyses of basketball shot charts: an
application to Michael Jordan’s 2001–2002 NBA season. In Proceedings of the Hawaii

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

835

International Conference on Statistics and Related Fields, Available online at:
http://www.hicstatistics.org/2003StatsProceedings/DeMarc%20Hickson.pdf (accessed
9 June 2006).

HOLMES, A., GANNER, M., MCGUANE, S., PITT, T., COOKSON, B. and KEARNS, A., 2005,
Staphylococcus aureus isolates carrying Panton-Valentine leucocidin genes in England
and Wales: Frequency, characterization, and association with clinical disease. Journal
of Clinical Microbiology, 43, pp. 2384–2390.

ITO, T., MA, X., TAKEUCHI, F., OKUMA, K., YUZAWA, H. and HIRAMATSU, K., 2004, Novel
type V staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec driven by a novel cassette
chromosome recombinase, ccrC. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 48, pp.
2637–2651.

ITO, T., KATAYAMA, Y., ASADA, K., MORI, N., TSUTSUMIMOTO, K., TIENSASITORN, C. and
HIRAMATSU, K., 2001, Structural comparison of three types of Staphylococcal
cassette chromosome mec integrated in the chromosome in methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 45, pp. 1323–
1336.

KELSALL, J. and DIGGLE, P., 1995, Non-parametric estimation of spatial variation in relative

risk. Statistics in Medicine, 14, pp. 2335–2342.

KINGHAM, S.P., GATRELL, A.C. and ROWLINGSON, B., 1995, Testing for clustering of health
events within a Geographical Information System Framework. Environment and
Planning A, 27, pp. 809–821.

KLUYTMANS, J., VAN BELKUM, A. and VERBRUGH, H., 1997, Nasal carriage of Staphylococcus
aureus: epidemiology, underlying mechanisms, and associated risks. Clinical
Microbiology Review, 10, pp. 505–520.

KULLDORFF, M., 1997, A spatial scan statistic. Communications in Statistics: Theory and

Methods, 26, pp. 1481–1496.

KULLDORFF, M., 2006, SaTScan—software for the spatial, temporal and space–time scan

statistics. Available online at: http://www.satscan.org/.

MA, X., ITO, T., TIENSASITORN, C., JAMKLANG, M., CHONGTRAKOOL, P., BOYLE-VAVRA, S.,
DAUM, R. and HIRAMATSU, K., 2002, Novel
type of staphylococcal cassette
chromosome mec
community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus strains. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 46, pp.
1147–1152.

identified

in

MAINOUS, A., HUESTON, W., EVERETT, C. and DIAZ, V., 2006, Nasal carriage of
Staphylococcus aureus and methicillin-resistant S. aureus in the United States,
2001–2002. Annals of Family Medicine, 4, pp. 132–137.

OKUMA, K., IWAKAWA, K., TURNIDGE, K., GRUBB, W., BELL, J., O’BRIEN, F., COOMBS, G.,
PEARMAN, J., TENOVER, F., KAPI, M., TIENSASITORN, C., ITO, T. and HIRAMATSU, K.,
2002, Dissemination of new methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus clones in the
community. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 40, pp. 4289–4294.

OFFICE OF NATIONAL STATISTICS, 2005, All Fields Postcode Directory, November 2005.
Crown Copyright 2004. Available online at: http://borders.edina.ac.uk/ukborders/
(accessed 19 May 2006).

OPENSHAW, S., CHARLTON, M., WYMER, C. and CRAFT, A., 1987, A mark 1 geographical
analysis machine for the automated analysis of point data sets. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 1, pp. 335–358.

R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing, 2005, R Foundation for Statistical
Computing. Available online at: http://www.R-project.org (accessed 19 April 2006).
RIPLEY, B.D., 1976, The second-order analysis of stationary point processes. Journal of

Applied Probability, 13, pp. 255–266.

RIPLEY, B., 1981, Spatial Statistics (Chichester, UK: Wiley).
ROWLINGSON, B. and DIGGLE, P., 1993, SPLANCS: spatial point pattern analysis code in S-

Plus. Computers and Geosciences, 19, pp. 627–655.

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 836

Spatial aspects of MRSA epidemiology

SABEL, C., GATRELL, A., LO¨ YTO¨ NEN, M., MAASILTA, P. and JOKELAINEN, M., 2000,
Modelling exposure opportunities: estimating relative risk for motor neurone disease
in Finland. Social Science and Medicine, 50, pp. 1121–1137.

SARAVOLATZ, L., POHLOD, D. and ARKING, L., 1982, Community-acquired methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections: a new source for nosocomial outbreaks.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 97, pp. 325–9.

SILVERMAN, B., 1986, Density estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis, pp. 43–61 (London:

Chapman & Hall).

TANGO, T. and TAKAHASHI, K., 2005, A flexibly shaped scan statistic for detecting clusters.

International Journal of Health Geographics, 4, pp. 11.

WALLER, L.A. and JACQUEZ, G.M., 1995, Disease models implicit in statistical tests of disease

clustering. Epidemiology, 6, pp. 584–590.

WALLER, L. and GOTWAY, C., 2004, Applied Spatial Statistics for Public Health Data (New

York: Wiley).

Downloaded by [University of Strathclyde] at 05:05 03 October 2014 