International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Using GIS and outranking multicriteria analysis for
land-use suitability assessment

Florent Joerin , Marius Thériault & Andre Musy

To cite this article: Florent Joerin , Marius Thériault & Andre Musy (2001) Using GIS and
outranking multicriteria analysis for land-use suitability assessment, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 15:2, 153-174, DOI: 10.1080/13658810051030487

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810051030487

Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 4858

View related articles 

Citing articles: 149 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [79.133.106.139]

Date: 12 November 2016, At: 05:33

int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 2, 153± 174

Research Article

Using GIS and outranking multicriteria analysis for land-use
suitability assessment

FLORENT JOERIN
Centre Universitaire d’Ecologie Humaine et des Sciences de l’Environnement,
Universite´ de Gene`ve, Suisse
e-mail: FLorent.Joerin@unige-ch

MARIUS THE´ RIAULT
Centre de Recherche en Ame´nagement et De´veloppement, Universite´ Laval,
Que´bec, Canada G1K 7P4
e-mail: Marius.Theriault@ggr.ulaval.ca

and ANDRE´ MUSY
De´partement de Ge´nie Rural, Ecole Polytechnique Fe´de´rale de Lausanne,
Ch-1015, Lausanne, Suisse
e-mail: Andre.Musy@ep(cid:143) .ch

(Received 13 July 1999; accepted 14 March 2000)

Abstract. Land-use planners often make complex decisions within a short period
of time when they must take into account sustainable development and economic
competitiveness. A set of land-use suitability maps would be very useful in this
respect. Ideally, these maps should incorporate complex criteria integrating several
stakeholders’ points of view. To illustrate the feasibility of this approach, a land
suitability map for housing was realised for a small region of Switzerland.
Geographical Information System technology was used to assess the criteria
requested to de(cid:142) ne the suitability of land for housing. An example dealing with
the evaluation of noise levels illustrates the initial steps of this procedure. Because
the required criteria are heterogeneous and measured on various scales, an out-
ranking multicriteria analysis method called ELECTRE-TRI was used. However,
using it to assess the suitability of any point in a territory was impractical due
to computational limitations. Therefore, a mathematical function to evaluate
closeness relationships and classify the study area into homogeneous zones was
used. This function is compatible with the outranking function of ELECTRE-
TRI used to assess the suitability index. The resulting maps lend e(cid:141) cient support
to negotiation and are very useful
in dealing with inherent con(cid:143) icts in
land-use planning.

1.

Introduction
During the last few decades, governments in many countries have spent a consid-
erable amount of money to develop large geographical databases describing their
territories. Planners already commonly use and access land management documents

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

154

F. Joerin et al.

in electronic format (e.g. plans, laws, regulations, cadastral and topographica l data).
These data sets have reduced delays in decision-making. Furthermore, they have
improved coordination between ongoing projects in the same territory. The availabil-
ity of readily accessible land information data was anticipated by several authors
(Dueker and Barton 1990, Scholten and Stillwell 1990).

At the same time, land planning has become increasingly complex. The principles
of sustainable development confront land planners with a paradox of two apparently
contradictory objectives: nature conservation and economic development (vanLier
1998 ). Furthermore, land planning, which previously involved only planners and
developers, has now moved into the public arena where diŒerent lobby groups also
promote their points of view. NIMBY (Not In My BackYard) and LULU (Locally
Unwanted Land-Use) controversies illustrate the di(cid:141) culties that often arise when a
development project signi(cid:142) cantly modi(cid:142) es its surrounding environment (Couclelis
and Monmonnier 1995, Wexler 1996, Jankowski and Stasik 1997 ). In this new
situation, planners face a double challenge. First, they must design projects and
plans that maintain an ecological equilibrium but nevertheless contribute to eco-
nomic growth. Second, they must be mediators trying to avoid opposition and
reduce objections. These are mandatory prerequisites for the social acceptance of
land planning procedures (vanLier 1998 ).

Progress in computing sciences, including Geographical Information Systems
(GIS) and Multi Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) can help planners handle this
complexity. The recent literature is replete with proposals combining GIS and
MCDA which meet the above mentioned objectives either partially or entirely. An
extensive literary review of this area of research is beyond the scope of this paper.
Instead, a set of contributions concerning three areas of application of land planning
has been reviewed: location choice, land suitability assessment, and collaborative
decision support systems.

Choosing an appropriate location for an activity or a facility is obviously related
to decision support and MCDA. The problem can be generalized as a question of
what must be done and where it should be realized. The purpose of planning (what)
can involve a hospital (Malczewski and Ogryczak 1990, Malczewski 1991), a solid
waste transfer station (Gil and Kellerman 1993 ), or more generally, any type of
public facility (Joerin 1995, Yeh and Hong 1996). In a series of two articles,
Malczewski and Ogryczak (1995, 1996 ) clearly de(cid:142) ne the multiple criteria location
problem. They also compare the advantage s and the disadvantage s of diŒerent
MCDA methods. Localization problems have also been treated with a more intensive
use of GIS. Carver (1991) uses GIS to evaluate various alternatives for nuclear waste
sites. Then, he evaluates the eŒectiveness of three MCDA techniques used to compare
scenarios in order to select the best one.

Land suitability assessment is similar to choosing an appropriate location, except
that the goal is not to isolate the best alternatives, but to map a suitability index for
(1998 ) combine UET (Ultimate
the entire study area. Senes and Toccolini
Environmental Threshold) method with map overlays to evaluate land suitability
for development. Hall et al. (1992) and Wang (1994) also use map overlays to de(cid:142) ne
homogeneous zones, but then they apply classi(cid:142) cation techniques to assess the
agricultural land suitability level of each zone. These classi(cid:142) cation techniques can
be based on Boolean and fuzzy theory (Hall et al. 1992) or arti(cid:142) cial neural networks
(Wang 1994). Combining GIS and MCDA is also a powerful approach to land
suitability assessments. GIS enable computation of the criteria while a MCDA can

L and-use suitability assessment

155

be used to group them into a suitability index. Following a similar approach,
(1993 ) produced a land suitability map for an industry near
Eastman et al.
Kathmandu using IDRISIâ
(a raster GIS) and AHP (Analytical Hierarchy Process)
(Saaty 1990). Pereira and Du¨ ckstein (1993) have used MCDA and raster GIS to
evaluate a habitat for endangered species. Finally, some other papers have focused
on the technical aspects of combining GIS and MCDA (Jankowski 1995, Laaribi
et al. 1996 ).

The request for tools supporting collaborative decisions has increased over the
few years. For example, the NCGIA (National Centre for Geographical
last
Information and Analysis) led an initiative in this respect in 1995 (Densham et al.
1995, Carver et al. 1996 ). If collaborative (or negotiated ) decisions are needed,
computer-base d Spatial Decision Support Systems (SDSS) are obviously appropriate.
Discussions are easier because negotiations are not slowed down by technical di(cid:141) -
culties and several alternatives can be quickly analysed and compared (Densham
1991 ). Collaborative decision problems can be analysed and supported e(cid:141) ciently
with user-friendly computer systems combining GIS, multicriteria analysis tech-
niques, and environmental modelling (Geertman and Toppen 1990, Fedra and
Jamieson 1996, Fedra et al. 1996 ). Jankowski et al. (1997) have developed a Decision
Support System (DSS) called Spatial Group Choice. This tool has three parts: spatial
visualization, multicriteria decision making, and voting. The last module can be
used, for example, for the selection of criteria and weighting methods as well as to
choose between alternative ranking methods.

The research described in this paper focuses more on a decision support method
than a decision support system. It aims at land suitability assessment. The project
has been closely monitored and evaluated by a group of planners employed by the
canton of Vaud (Switzerland). Discussions with them revealed that they need a very
high level of software integration and a user-friendly interface to directly interact
with a computer-base d DSS. This option would have required a major investment
in software development, which was neither the goal nor one of the research
priorities. Furthermore, from the theoretical point of view, the risk of misuse and
oversimpli(cid:142) cation seems quite high when DSS is used for land-use planning purposes.
For these reasons, a conceptual approach of decision support for land planning
(MAGISTER) was developed. It provides a general framework for specialised SDSS
(§ 2). Furthermore, the link between GIS and MCDA was investigated, focussing in
particular on outranking methods. This type of methods has seldom been combined
with GIS, despite its suitable properties for spatial decision support (§ 5). The (cid:142) ndings
have been applied to the development of a land suitability map for housing. As
explained in § 5.1, the originality of this method is the use of homogeneous zones to
describe the study area. This avoids a threshold eŒect on land description and also
keeps the (cid:142) nal results independent of this spatial districting.

2. MAGISTER model

MAGISTER (Multicriteria Analysis and GIS for Territory) is a decision support
model suited for land planning (Joerin 1998). Its main objective is to help land
planners to ‘translate general policy statements into concrete localisation decisions’
(Geertman and Toppen 1990). MAGISTER’s framework is similar to DSS and SDSS
(ten Velden and Kreuwel 1990, Densham 1991). It includes three main components:
a database management system, a set of models, and a module for the evaluation

156

F. Joerin et al.

and selection of the alternative solutions ((cid:142) gure 1). The database management system
is a GIS, which manages the geographical database (GDB) describing the study
area. Simulations may be done with hydrologic models, air quality models or
demographi c models depending on the decision-making domain. Spatial analysis is
the main technique used to evaluate the quality of the alternatives, which are selected
or sorted using MCDA.

MAGISTER is not a software package but a conceptual combination of tools
to assist land-planners. This open framework should facilitate the social acceptance
of the decision support process (Wexler 1996, Jankowski et al. 1997, Dente et al.
1998 ). In this way, the involved actors are not faced with a prede(cid:142) ned system, but
can control choices related to the models, the software, etc. Thus, the decision
support procedure is speci(cid:142) cally adapted to the context (geographical region and
scale) and to the given problem (e.g. water management and highway planning).

MAGISTER enables and promotes the participation of all actors (e.g. decision-
makers, neighbours, and lobby-groups ) and experts (scientists using GIS, models,
and MCDA) in the decision process. The experts can be considered as a link (a
translator) between the land and the stakeholders who are managing and/or using
a given territory. They should ensure an e(cid:141) cient use of all the available data, models,
software and theoretical knowledge in order to help the Decision-Makers (DMs) to
consider and compare available solutions or alternatives. Ideally, experts should be
neutral relative to the decision-making procedure, in order to avoid a technocratic
decision that would be very di(cid:141) cult to defend socially (Dente et al. 1998 ).

Decision-makers and other actors should be allowed to validate each important
step in the decision support process. They should spend the necessary time and eŒort

Figure 1. MAGISTER model. The ‘subjective dashed arrows’ illustrate the actor’s roles in
the decision process.

L and-use suitability assessment

157

to clearly de(cid:142) ne the problem. For example, they should answer questions about: the
real issues, the in(cid:143) uential actors, the alternatives and the criteria. They also have to
agree to the precision level, the geographical area, etc. (Pictet 1996). It is clearly
very di(cid:141) cult, and sometimes impossible, to answer all these questions in the prelimin-
ary phases of the decision process. Thus, these questions and answers should be
reconsidered in an iterative manner during the entire procedure.

This problem-structurin g phase is also used to design the model needed to
support decision-making. The diŒerent actors should then validate the model with
respect to their particular points of view and objectives. This validation can also be
applied to the geographical database. For example, if a stakeholder wishes to protect
a speci(cid:142) c (cid:143) ower variety, he should verify that the spatial distribution of this species
is correctly handled in the database. In the same manner, the stakeholders could
also be consulted about the simulation models and the spatial analysis procedures
(Carver et al. 1996 ).

The choice of the MCDA method is very important since it has a signi(cid:142) cant
eŒect on the (cid:142) nal outcome. It is therefore necessary to discuss this point with all the
actors. MCDA’s characteristics and properties should be compatible with the speci(cid:142) c
nature of the decision problem (Laaribi et al. 1993, Vincke 1995, Laaribi et al. 1996,
Salminen et al. 1998). For example, some MCDA techniques e(cid:141) ciently handle a
continuous set of alternatives and criteria belonging to the same domain (e.g. eco-
nomic). Other MCDA methods can only consider a small set of discrete alternatives
but are more e(cid:141) cient to handle heterogeneous criteria (Scha¨rlig 1985, Belton 1990 ).
Section 5 discusses this speci(cid:142) c aspect of the decision procedure in more detail.

If there is a con(cid:143) ict between the various actors, they can negotiate the subjective
parameters, like the weights associated with each criterion before adopting a common
set of values. It is also possible to repeat the MCDA process and thus select, for
each diŒerent group of stakeholders, a solution that is adapted to its speci(cid:142) c needs.
MCDA’s results can be mapped in order to display the spatial extent of the best
areas or index of land suitability (see § 5.2). The negotiating parties can then discuss
and compare the results by overlaying these maps, which are in fact geographical
representations of their own set of preferences.

3. Land suitability

Combining GIS and MCDA for land planning involves many tasks including
data gathering and structuring, and computation of criteria using spatial analysis
and simulation. Due to temporal and (cid:142) nancial constraints, such a procedure can
only be done for major projects of regional importance and/or for long term planning
purposes (Malczewski and Ogryczak 1990, Carver 1991, Massam 1991). It is also
necessary to maintain an acceptable ratio between cost of planning and analysing a
project and its overall cost or importance.

Generally, land planning departments are quite open to the idea of using GIS
and MCDA. However,
in most cases, they are not able to do it due to time
constraints. Even when there is a high risk of signi(cid:142) cant impacts, a small set of
scenarios are compared and they are not analysed in detail.

In such a situation, land suitability maps could help planners (Dueker and Barton
1990, Geertman and Toppen 1990, Wang 1994). These maps should integrate all the
relevant data for the analysis of the given territory. While a signi(cid:142) cant amount of
work would be necessary to develop these types of maps, they would be useful for

158

F. Joerin et al.

several years and many decisions. Updating the maps would surely require much
less work than was initially required to produce them.

A procedure that uses MAGISTER in land suitability assessment ((cid:142) gure 2) has
been developed. This procedure could be applied by a land planning department to
produce land suitability maps for the most important land-uses (e.g. housing, manu-
facturing, agriculture) . Obviously, the initial developmental phase should be under-
taken without a tight deadline linked to a particular project. Once the maps are
available, land planners could analyse any new project by using simple operations
such as map overlay or statistical analysis on a given area.

The development of land suitability maps also presents an opportunity for all
governmental departments involved in land management to compare their points of
view and coordinate their policies. Furthermore, subject to the agreement of the
DMs, all the interested stakeholders (e.g. the public, construction enterprises, environ-
mental NGOs) could also be involved in the procedure. In such a case, the land
suitability maps could be widely accepted and the population at large would more
easily endorse decisions based on these maps.

A land suitability map for housing was built for a rural area in the canton of
Vaud (Switzerland). Its total area is approximatel y 50 km2. The most important
town is Cossonay (about 2000 inhabitants) . The database was developed in two GIS;
one using vector format
) and the other one using raster format
). The vector format was mainly used for data management and querying
(IDRISIâ
whereas the raster format was used for most spatial analysis. In the raster GIS, the
study area was represented by 80 000 elementary land units. These units are
represented by pixels, each covering 625 m2 (i.e. 25 mÖ 25 m).

(MapInfoâ

The structuring phase includes the identi(cid:142) cation of all the actors, criteria and
alternatives ((cid:142) gure 3). Because criteria identi(cid:142) cation is often a di(cid:141) cult task for DMs,
a systematic analysis of all factors potentially in(cid:143) uencing suitability for housing was
undertaken (Joerin 1998). DMs can examine the resulting list of thirty factors and
select those that seem relevant and important. The factors are then checked against

Figure 2. Land planning and management by using land suitability maps (MAGISTER is
MEDUSAT in French).

L and-use suitability assessment

159

Figure 3. Main steps used to build a land suitability map.

the available data and the spatial resolution. With the agreement of DMs, some
factors may be ignored because they are irrelevant in the region (e.g. there is no
serious (cid:143) ood risk in the test area), whereas others may be merged because they
basically deal with the same aspect. For example, distance to speci(cid:142) c services (e.g.
schools, recreational areas, and shopping centres) can be replaced by a surrogate
criterion such as ‘distance to the nearest town’, when the speci(cid:142) c locations are
unavailable. For the application in the canton of Vaud, eight criteria were retained:

impacts on a nature reserve, landscape, and water table

E air pollution coming from a waste water treatment plant, dumps, and a highway
E noise due to tra(cid:141) c
E accessibility measured by the estimated time needed to reach a workplace in

the morning
local climate: sunshine, temperature, and fog
risk of landslide

E distance to localities and public facilities such as water supply, electricity, etc.

viewpoint quality estimated from the view shed.

Selecting criteria from a list of factors should be an important step for the
negotiation between actors. Some criterion will be retained by all of them, but others
are only signi(cid:142) cant for certain actors. In this case, the DMs have to continue the
discussion until they obtain a list of criteria that satis(cid:142) es everybody. Economical
aspects also have to be considered in this step. Each criterion evaluation needs data
collection and analysis, leading to a substantial cost.

It is also important to remember that the purpose is to assist DMs by providing
them several suitability maps, one for each main land-use. Each of these suitability
maps would be based on its own list of criteria. So, these criteria lists have to be
coordinated. For example, soil fertility should not be included in the suitability
criteria for housing. Instead, this factor should be put aside and used only for
agriculture. This avoids imbalance problems related to the overestimation of a
factor’s eŒect, when suitability maps are overlaid.

4. Generating criteria maps

Each criterion was evaluated using a diŒerent set of data, at an appropriate scale,
and with a speci(cid:142) c model. For most of the criteria, spatial analysis procedures using
a raster GIS were an important part of the evaluation process. Evaluation of the
noise criterion gives a good example of the processing complexity needed to obtain
representative values over the studied area. The aim is not to improve noise assess-
ment or modelling but to integrate it in a GIS for impact evaluation purposes.

E
E
E
E
160

F. Joerin et al.

Although its evaluation can not be compared to a specialised acoustic study (Stratec
1992, ECOTOX 1998, Weixiong et al. 1998), it does emphasise the compromise that
must be accepted when the study is carried out at the regional scale. In Switzerland,
the relationship between noise and housing is governed by laws (OPB 1986). Brie(cid:143) y,
restrictions apply simultaneously to the source (e.g. the road) and to the receiver.
The law de(cid:142) nes four noise levels, and land-use must comply with the prescribed
levels. A new hospital can only be planned in the quietest category. Conversely, if a
new highway is to be built next to a hospital, it must provide noise mitigation
infrastructure.

Many countries have developed their own methods for tra(cid:141) c noise simulation
(OECD 1995 ). The Swiss Federal Environmental Protection O(cid:141) ce uses a model
coupled with software to ‘standardise’ the assessment of noise levels (OFEFP 1987).
Its general structure is similar to most other noise simulation models (OECD 1995 ).
Noise immissions are computed from noise emission levels using speci(cid:142) c corrective
functions (see § 4.1 and § 4.2).

An accurate evaluation of noise levels must take into account many parameters
and a precise description of the receiving environment. Furthermore, tra(cid:141) c noise
also depends on non-predictabl e parameters such as meteorological conditions and
the type of vehicles. Thus, accurate noise simulation models need a very large data
set and a lot of computing power. For land-use planning purposes, where the surface
area of the studied zone is often very large, an accurate evaluation is not possible.
So, in spite of their importance, noise impacts are generally left out during land-use
planning, except when simulation or measurements are already available.

The most important parameter in computing noise propagation in rural regions,
like the considered study area, is topography . The use of GIS and spatial analysis
has opened new prospects in this (cid:142) eld. In particular, raster-based GIS may be readily
applied to analyse natural topography using digital elevation models. In this manner,
all elementary surfaces or receivers are described and treated simultaneously. Thus,
using a GIS-based approach, the general methodology proposed in the o(cid:141) cial Swiss
documents (OFEFP 1987 ) can be applied without a detailed description of all the
receivers. It also does not require time-consuming computations (Joerin 1998).

Obviously, this method makes quite important simpli(cid:142) cations. The resulting
noise maps do not have the same quality as speci(cid:142) c noise studies, which use special-
ized tools (models combined with measurements) . However, these maps are still
adequate for land-use planning, where the goal is not to obtain a precise assessment
of noise levels, but rather to compare relative levels of noise pollution within a
given area.

4.1. Assessment of emission levels

The most important noise sources in the study area are linked to road and
railway tra(cid:141) c. Noise emission levels due to road tra(cid:141) c depend on tra(cid:141) c density
(number of vehicles/hour) and road slopes (OFEFP 1987) (see appendix 1). Tra(cid:141) c
density comes from the Service des Nuisances de l’Etat de Vaud which regularly
monitors noise emissions. This data set includes data subsets for trucks, cars, and
motorcycles.

Noise from railway tra(cid:141) c is a function of the type and frequency of trains.
Normally, assessment of emission levels is quite di(cid:141) cult. However, for the purposes
of this study, the Swiss Railway Company has provided noise emission values in
decibels for the most important railway lines.

L and-use suitability assessment

161

4.2. Assessment of immission levels

Noise immission levels are computed from noise emission, making adjustments
for absorption by physical obstacles, air or ground, and by re(cid:143) ection (equation (1)
and appendix 2). These corrections generally reduce the noise level. However, they
may, in some circumstances, increase them to take into account sound re(cid:143) ection on
obstacles (OFEFP 1987). Detailed information about these corrections and the
general procedure for noise assessment can be found in OFEFP (1987), Joerin (1998)
and Azouzi (1998).

I 5 E 1 DL 1 DA 1 DR 1 Dw 1 DB 1 DH

(1)

where I: Immission (dB); E: Emission (dB); DL : Correction for distance (dB); DA:
Correction for air absorption (dB); DR: Correction for re(cid:143) ection (dB); Dw: Correction
for opening angle (neglected) (dB); DB: Correction for soil eŒect (dB); DH : Correction
for obstacles (dB).

Corrections are computed by analysing the sound wave path between the noise
source (i.e. roads or railways) and the receivers ( here the pixels). Noise immission at
one point generally results from multiple sources (e.g. several roads and a railway
line). A precise computation should compute the speci(cid:142) c contribution of each source
(equation (1)) before aggregating them using a logarithmic addition (appendix 3).

To simplify the evaluation, the sum of all the sources of noise for each receiver
(each pixel) was not computed, but only the immission due to the nearest source.
With such a simpli(cid:142) cation, the propagation of noise emission can be computed using
Vorono¨ polygons (Vorono¨ 1908, George and Bourouchaki 1997). The network of
roads is described with a set of 100-metre-long linear segments. Each segment is
associated with two Vorono¨ polygons, one on each side of the road (see (cid:142) gure 4).

This simpli(cid:142) cation could produce signi(cid:142) cant errors if, for instance, a location
close to a road with low tra(cid:141) c noise is also not far from a road with much higher

Figure 4. Noise propagation using Voronoi polygons. The road network is described by
100-m long segments. Each of them is associated with two polygons, one on either
side of the segment.

162

F. Joerin et al.

tra(cid:141) c noise. To avoid these possible errors, the noise assessment was repeated with
four diŒerent categories of noise sources: roads with high tra(cid:141) c, roads with low
tra(cid:141) c, highways and railways. Noise levels were computed separately for each
category and the results cumulated using a logarithmic addition. This computation
yields fairly good results, when the line segments and the Vorono¨ polygons are small.

4.3. Mapping the noise levels and the noise criterion

The mathematical operations required to evaluate the emission and the immission
levels have been realised with IDRISIâ 4.0. This raster-based GIS is organised as a
set of partially independent modules. A macro language allows successive calls to
these modules in order to realise procedures. Several procedures of this type are
used to compute the noise map. Once the necessary database is developed and
organised, computations can be carried out in a few hours. Figure 5 shows the (cid:142) nal
computed immission levels using the road network (with highways) and the railway
lines as the only sources of emission.

It is important to point out that these values must be interpreted at the regional
scale. It would be inappropriate to use this map to assess the noise level at a very
speci(cid:142) c location, such as a given house in a village. Even a small wall in front of the
house could completely modify noise propagation and change the immission levels.
In a study of error propagation, Azouzi (1998) has shown that this method of
evaluating noise levels is reliable for land-use planning purposes. The standard
deviation of the computed noise level is lower than 3 dB (A), for 95% of the study
area (see (cid:142) gure 6).

Noise immission levels do not evaluate the noise criterion directly. In fact, land

Figure 5. Final map of immission due to transport activities. Grey scale shows diŒerent
levels of noise.

L and-use suitability assessment

163

Figure 6. Cumulative frequency of pixels and standard deviation for immission ( produced
with data from Azouzi (1998) .

suitability for housing is not a linear function of noise. An area with an immission
level of 10 dB (A) is not really quieter, and thus more suitable than an area with a
level of 30 dB (A). This diŒerence between the noise criterion and the computed
immission value corresponds to the distinction that should be made between an
observed phenomenon and its perception in a speci(cid:142) c decision-making process (in
this case land suitability for housing). Similar diŒerences have been noticed for
almost all criteria used in this study. Fuzzy set theory is an adequate way to integrate
a subjective perception within the de(cid:142) nition of a criterion. It enables the de(cid:142) nition
of criteria using a membership function linked to favourable conditions for housing
(e.g. absence of nuisances, and good climate). The membership function that identi(cid:142) es
quiet areas was de(cid:142) ned using threshold values (cid:142) xed by federal
legislation (in
Switzerland) related to noise impact ((cid:142) gure 7)
(OPB 1986). Application of this
function to the immission values ((cid:142) gure 5) produces an index between 0 and 1. It
evaluates land suitability for housing with respect to noise impact ((cid:142) gure 8).

Obviously, these analytical procedures assessing noise immission levels due to
transportatio n activities could be improved to yield a better level of precision and
higher reliability. However, it should be remembered that land planners do not need
a very precise computation, but rather a good evaluation that is cost eŒective. For
this reason, detailed error propagation studies would be very helpful. This sensitivity
analysis would probably highlight procedural steps to improve and others to simplify.

5. Suitability index

Criteria modelling produces a set of maps, one for each criterion, on which the
score for each elementary surface is indicated. The next step is to aggregate the
partial suitability indexes into a holistic suitability index. This aggregation can be
realized with a multicriteria decision analysis method. There are many MCDA
methods, but two main categories can be considered: methods using a complete

Figure 7. Membership function for a quiet area.

164

F. Joerin et al.

Figure 8. Map of noise criteria. Grey scale represents the suitability index considering noise
immission. Clearer areas are more favourable to housing.

aggregation, such as MAUT (Keeney and RaiŒa 1976 ), UTA (Jacquet-Lagre`ze and
Siskos 1982) and AHP (Saaty 1990), and methods using a partial aggregation, like
ELECTRE (Roy 1985) or PROMETHEE (Brans et al. 1984). The latter are called
outranking methods.

Outranking methods are well suited for land planning purposes. They can handle
simultaneously qualitative and quantitative criteria. Criteria scores can be left in
their own units, which is important when they are related to diverse domains (e.g.
economics, ecology and sociology). This avoids questions like ‘What is the price of
loosing this plant species?’ Furthermore, in land planning, alternatives can be very
diŒerent. For example, it happens frequently that an alternative has a lot of economic
advantage s and serious environmental impacts, while another presents the opposite
characteristics. In such a case, DMs may be unable to rank them. These alternatives
are thus considered as incomparable, and outranking methods are the only methods
that can take into account this situation (Belton 1990).

Using the terminology of MCDA, an alternative is an object, which has to be
evaluated, compared, or ranked. In a land suitability study, each location represented
by an elementary surface should be associated with a suitability index. This implies
that each land unit could be considered as an alternative, yielding a huge number
of alternatives to compare (80 000 pixels in our study area). Unfortunately, out-
ranking methods are not able to compare a lot of alternatives. In other words,
outranking methods seem inappropriate for land suitability assessment (Pereira and
Du¨ ckstein 1993, Eastman et al. 1993, Jankowski 1995).

This limitation in the choice of the MCDA methods has signi(cid:142) cant consequences.
No existing method seems e(cid:141) cient for all kinds of decision-making applications

L and-use suitability assessment

165

(Guitouni and Martel 1998). Furthermore, as already mentioned, the choice of a
MCDA method is part of the problem structuring phase, and the DMs must fully
agree with the chosen method. The decision support method is quite useless if the
actors do not trust the procedure that is applied to compare the alternatives.

For these reasons, the feasibility of outranking methods for land management
purposes and land suitability assessment was analysed. The chosen method is
ELECTRE-TRI (Roy 1981a, b, Roy 1985).

In land suitability studies, outranking methods can be applied if the study area
is divided into zones. These zones are fewer than the elementary surfaces or pixels,
and they provide a manageable set of alternatives (Hall et al. 1992, Wang 1994 ).
Nevertheless, this operation has important disadvantages . First, the resulting maps
are very sensitive to the spatial division. Second, as the number of zones is limited,
the description territory becomes quite rough, resulting in a substantial loss of
information.

In order to solve this dilemma, a modi(cid:142) ed de(cid:142) nition of what constitutes an
alternative in a land suitability study is proposed. From our point of view, an
alternative does not only correspond to a su(cid:141) ciently large area (to build houses in
our case), but it must also correspond to a particular solution. This additional
condition enables the grouping of sub-regions (such as pixels) which have a similar
score with respect to the criteria de(cid:142) ned for the decision-making. Alternatives thus
become zones, which are homogeneous with respect to the decision that has to be
made. As explained in the following section, assessment of the homogeneity may be
computed using similar processes as those applied in the outranking method called
ELECTRE. Therefore, these homogeneous zones bridge the gap between GIS and
outranking methods in land suitability assessment studies.

5.1. Homogeneity index

The grouping of elementary units into homogeneous zones is based on the use
of a homogeneity index. A zone is declared homogeneous when every elementary
area composing the zone has a score, which is close to the average characteristic
score of the zone. This closeness relationship is evaluated using a function de(cid:142) ned
by Slowinski and Stefanowski (1994) to create rough classi(cid:142) cations based on rough
set theory (Pawlak 1991, Slowinski 1992) (table 1). This function uses the diŒerences
between the score of the elementary surface and the average scores for the entire
zone, computed for each criterion. These values are then compared with a set of
indicative values chosen by the DMs. The set of values (which correspond to
subjective parameters) de(cid:142) ne: indiŒerence (qi), strict diŒerence ( pi), and veto (vi) for
each criterion (table 1). A complete description of this homogeneity evaluation
procedure can be found in Joerin and Musy (1998 ).

Zone formation (pixel clustering) begins with a classi(cid:142) cation based on the set of
criteria maps ((cid:142) gure 9). This operation can be done by an ordinary classi(cid:142) cation
algorithm (unsupervised classi(cid:142) cation) (Sneath and Sokal 1973, Everitt 1993). Then,
the diŒerent classes are separated with respect to the discontinuous spatial limits,
such as administrative limits or landslide perimeters. These sub-classes are called
zones. The equation given by Slowinski and Stefanowski (1994) is then applied to
compute the degree of credibility of the closeness relationship between each element-
ary surface and the entire zone. The homogeneity index is the smallest degree of
credibility of the closeness relationship between the entire zone and all the elementary
surfaces that make it up. To be considered homogeneous, a zone must have an index

166

F. Joerin et al.

Table 1. Formula and variables used to compute the closeness relationship between two
elements A and B characterized by their scores in the set of criteria.

Formula

A: [Na,1, Na,2, .. ., Na,n]
B: [Nb,1; Nb,2; . .., Nb.n]

r (A, B) 5 C(A, B) ´ a
i ×1

1Õ di (A, B)
1Õ C(A, B)

I 5 {i5 di(A, B)> C(A, B)}

n

i=1

wi ´ci(A, B)

C(A, B) 5

n

i=1

wi

1

pi Õ Xi
pi Õ
qi
0

ci(A, B) 5 G

Xi 5

|NA,i Õ NB,i|

0

pi Õ Xi
pi Õ
vi
1

if Xi< pi

if Xi ×[ pi; vi]

if Xi> vi

di (A, B) 5 G

Variables used

A: element A
B: element B
Nj,i: score of element j for the criterion i.
r(A, B): Degree of credibility of closeness relationship
between A and B. r(A, B) ×[ 0; 1].

C(A, B): Global concordance. C(A, B) ×[0; 1]
d(A, B) : discordance index on criteria i.
di(A, B) ×[0; 1]
wi: weights on criteria i. wi ×[0; 1]
ci (A, B): concordance index on criteria i.
ci (A, B) ×[0; 1]

if Xi< qi

if Xi ×[qi; pi ]

if Xi> pi

ci (A, B): concordance index, ci(A, B) ×[0; 1]
qi: indiŒerence on criterion i. qi: in criteria units
pi: strict diŒerence on criterion i. pi: in criteria units
Xi: Absolute diŒerence between A and B on criterion
i.

NA,i: score of A on criterion i.
NB,i: score of B on criterion i.
di(A, B): discordance index on criterion i.
di(A, B) ×[0; 1]
pi: strict diŒerence on criterion i. pi: in criteria units
vi : veto on criterion i. vi: in criteria units.

Figure 9. Procedure used to group the study area into homogeneous zones.

greater than a chosen threshold value. Increasing this threshold will increase the
number of homogeneous zones. Obviously, their surface will also become smaller.

This process is based on a homogeneity de(cid:142) nition, which is speci(cid:142) c to the

(cid:158)
(cid:158)
L and-use suitability assessment

167

application’s context. The DMs can contribute to this de(cid:142) nition. For example, they
could be asked for the greatest acceptable diŒerence in a homogeneous zone, for
each criterion. To answer these questions, DMs can use their (professional) experience
and the uncertainties assessed with the criteria evaluation. These answers allow (cid:142) xing
the values of indiŒerence, strict diŒerence, and veto. The homogeneity threshold
is chosen in order to obtain an acceptable compromise between the number of
alternatives and the degree of precision.

By applying a homogeneity index threshold value of 0.8, 650 zones have been
formed in the study area ((cid:142) gure 10). These zones make up the set of alternatives.
Each zone has some attributes made up of its score with respect to the diŒerent
criteria and its homogeneity index. The ability to consult at any time the homogeneity
index of any zone constitutes a safety feature in the decision process. If during the
MCDA, an area with a relatively weak homogeneity index is selected, one could
(cid:142) nd it useful to get more information on this region to improve its description.

5.2. Suitability index assessment

Detailed descriptions of outranking methods can be found in the literature (Roy
1981a, Scha¨rlig 1998). However, as these methods are still quite new, it is useful to
highlight their fundamental principles.

Outranking methods compare possible alternatives on a criterion by criterion
basis. They basically compute an index for each pair of alternatives that quali(cid:142) es or
ranks one alternative relative to another. This index is called the degree of credibility
of the outranking method. If a comparison is made between alternative A and B the
index is calculated twice. The outranking degree of credibility of A over B is (cid:142) rst

Figure 10. Map of the homogeneous zones. The area in black represents one homogeneous
zone. It shows that a zone can be composed of several discontinuous polygons.

168

F. Joerin et al.

calculated, and then of B over A. If focus is on the relationship of A over B, the
outranking degree of credibility (which has a value between 0 and 1) is estimated
and used to assess whether the hypothesis: A is at least as good as B, is true. It is
the product of two factors: the concordance and the discordance. The concordance
is computed with the criteria where the score of A is at least as good as the score
of B. The discordance factor is based only on the criterion with the most important
diŒerence in favour of B. If this diŒerence is very big, there is a veto eŒect, and the
discordance factor puts the degree of credibility at zero. Both values of the degree
of credibility (A over B and B over A) de(cid:142) ne the relationship between A and B.
Four relationships are possible: A is preferred to B, B is preferred to A, A and B are
indiŒerent, or A and B are not comparable.

ELECTRE-TRI classi(cid:142) es the alternatives (the zones) according to prede(cid:142) ned
categories (Roy 1981a). In this study, three categories of land suitability are de(cid:142) ned
as favourable, doubtful, and unfavourable. To de(cid:142) ne this classi(cid:142) cation the DMs
must assign values to a set of subjective parameters that express their preferences.
The most important subjective parameters are composed of two sets of reference
alternatives (zones). The good references give the limits separating favourable and
doubtful suitability, whereas bad references de(cid:142) ne the limits among doubtful and
unfavourable suitability. Each zone is compared with the two sets of reference zones.
If a zone is clearly better than the good references, it is quali(cid:142) ed as favourable. In
an analogous way, it is unfavourable if it is clearly weaker than the bad references.
A doubtful zone is not better than the good references, and not weaker than the
bad ones.

Other subjective parameters are weight, indiŒerence, preference, and veto, which
are associated with each criterion. Weight expresses the relative importance of the
criteria. IndiŒerence is the largest value that may be considered insigni(cid:142) cant.
Preference is the smallest value constituting a clear advantage (Vincke 1992,
Scha¨rlig 1998 ). These parameters are very similar to those used in the homogeneity
evaluation (see table 1). Thus, it is possible to re-use these values, even if DMs are
nevertheless allowed to modify them.

The output of this MCDA is a map that can be immediately reviewed by the
DMs. If they are not satis(cid:142) ed with the result, they can modify any of the subjective
parameters to produce new maps. Priority should be given to rede(cid:142) ning the set of
reference zones, which are certainly the most sensitive parameters. If a con(cid:143) ict arises
between the DMs, they can negotiate the set of subjective parameters. Building a
consensus on subjective parameters should encourage acceptance of the (cid:142) nal map
by all stakeholders. However, DMs may sometimes prefer to develop their own
version of a land suitability map, and then negotiate by overlaying their personal
maps.

All data used by ELECTRE-TRI are stored in MapInfoâ

tables. The alternatives
and reference zones are in tables linked with spatial objects. The weights and the
three thresholds (indiŒerence, preference, and veto) associated with each criterion
are stored in a non-spatial table. It is quite simple to program the ELECTRE-TRI
algorithm in the MapBasicâ
language, allowing to run the multicriteria analysis
inside the GIS.

This integration allows the realization of the entire procedure while keeping the
link with the spatial dimensions of the decision. The reference zones can be directly
selected from the maps describing the study area. This geographical interface has
been tested with a group of public sector land-planners. The study area was presented

L and-use suitability assessment

169

Figure 11. Example of a land suitability map for housing.

using a classical topographica l scanned map (1/25 000). All data concerning the
zones were displayed in the background. Planners can move around the region using
their geographical knowledge to choose the references zones. When a zone is selected
with the mouse, it appears along with its attributes. If the planner decides that this
zone could be a reference zone, it is then simply copied into the reference zone table.
The above mentioned test and the maps obtained met nearly all the actors’
expectations ((cid:142) gure 11). This suggests that even if some improvements might be
necessary, this approach could e(cid:141) ciently support the current tasks of a governmental
land-planning department. It is important to emphasise that this electronic land
suitability map is much more useful than a paper map. All the information ranging
from primary data to synthesised (integrative) indexes may be consulted at any time.
If, for example, a zone has a weak suitability index, the responsible criterion may be
readily identi(cid:142) ed. It is possible to investigate the underlying reasons in order to (cid:142) nd
factors that explain the low score for a given criterion. In the end, DMs get a
comprehensive decision support tool and can debate the reasons behind a given
decision. This is a fundamental advantage whenever a decision process requires
negotiation. Finally, the suitability maps are valuable tools that may be used to
analyse and understand territorial dynamics and structure.

6. Conclusion

Land-use planning can certainly bene(cid:142) t from new technologies such as GIS.
However, improvements in data access and analysis are critical issues for land
planners. Sometimes, they are overwhelmed with data analysis, making subsequent
decisions di(cid:141) cult. Thus, DMs do not only need accurate raw data, but also holistic
information.

MAGISTER is a decision support procedure using GIS and MCDA. It satis(cid:142) es
the descriptive and analytical needs of
land planners, as well as the necessary
integrative data syntheses. GIS is used for the detailed analysis of the spatial decision
context whereas MCDA is applied to compare the set of identi(cid:142) ed alternatives.

170

F. Joerin et al.

An application of this decision support model has shown its usefulness for land
planning purposes. Land planners must often make complex decisions within a short
period of time. A comprehensive set of land-use suitability maps would be very
useful in this respect. Ideally these maps should integrate heterogeneous data and,
with the consent of the decision-makers, all the diŒerent stakeholders’ points of view.
To validate our approach, a land suitability map for housing has been developed
for a small region of Switzerland. The suitability index integrates eight diŒerent
criteria. Each criterion required a considerable amount of data and complex analysis
procedures. An example dealing with the assessment of noise levels illustrates the
use of GIS for computation of criteria. It highlights the methodological compromises
that must be made when evaluations are performed at the regional scale.

To compute the suitability index based on these criteria, the ELECTRE-TRI
). ELECTRE-TRI is
procedure was added to a commercial GIS package (MapInfoâ
an outranking multicriteria method that e(cid:141) ciently classi(cid:142) es scenarios into ordered
categories.

Although outranking MCDA methods have useful properties for land planning
purposes, they have seldom been combined with GIS. To the best of our knowledge,
they have not been used for the evaluation of land suitability. This fact can probably
be explained in two points. First, as an index value has to be mapped everywhere
in the study area, the number of alternatives is generally very high for land suitability
assessment. Second, outranking methods have di(cid:141) culties dealing with more than
a hundred alternatives. To avoid this methodological limitation, a mathematical
function, evaluating closeness relationships among land units, was used to divide the
study area into homogeneous zones. This function mimics the outranking function
used by ELECTRE-TRI to assess the suitability index for the entire region. Thus, a
complete coherent decision support method, starting from the de(cid:142) nition of the
criteria and the alternatives and ending with the (cid:142) nal suitability map, was developed.
This system provides an e(cid:141) cient method to produce land-use suitability maps
based on complex evaluation criteria. It may greatly facilitate negotiations between
land-users and other stakeholders. Using the resulting set of suitability maps, one
for every possible land-use at a speci(cid:142) c location, planners may quickly compare
scenarios. Hence, they can make decisions with good knowledge of the impacts as
well as the inherent constraints on future developments. Finally, the analysis proced-
ure favours negotiation with respect to both stakeholders’ objectives and constraints,
which should make it an excellent
the promotion of democratic
tool
decision-making in the (cid:142) eld of land planning.

for

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Prof Alain Scha¨rlig, and Prof Roman Slowinski for the
stimulating discussions and the suggestions they made during this research. This
research was supported by the Swiss National Foundation for Research (FNRS).
We are also grateful to members of the Service des Nuisances and the Service de
l’ame´nagement du territoire de l’Etat de Vaud for their expertise and their help in
collecting data.

References
Azouzi, M., 1998, Error propagation in spatial analysis for the evaluation of the tra(cid:141) c noise.
In Data Quality in Geographic Information: From Error to Uncertainty, edited by
R. Jeansoulin and M. F. Goodchild (Paris: Hermes).

L and-use suitability assessment

171

Belton, V., 1990, Multiple criteria decision analysis practically the only way to choose. In
Operational Research. T utorial papers (Birmingham: Operational Society), pp. 53–101.
Brans, J. P., Mareschal, B., and Vincke, P., 1984, PROMETHEE: A new family of outranking
Proceedings of Operational Research 84

methods in multicriteria analysis. In
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers) pp. 408–421.

Carver, S. J., 1991, Integrating multicriteria evaluation with geographical information systems.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5, 321–339.

Carver, S., Frysinger, S., and Reitsma, R., 1996, Environmental Modeling and Collaborative
Spatial Decision-Making: Some Thoughts and Experiences Arising from the I-17
Meeting. In Proceedings of T hird International Conference/Workshop on Integrating
GIS and Environmental Modeling (Santa Barbara: NCGIA), CDROM.

Couclelis, H., and Monmonnier, M., 1995, Using SUSS to resolve NIMBY: How spatial
understanding support systems can help with the ’Not in my back yard’ syndrome.
Geographical Systems, 2, 83–101.

Densham, P. J., 1991, Spatial decision support systems. In Proceedings of Geographical
J. Maguire,
Information Systems: principles and applications,
M. F. Goodchild and D. Rhind (London: Longman Scienti(cid:142) c & Technical ),
pp. 403–412.

edited by D.

Densham, P. J., Armstrong, M. P., and Kemp, K. K., 1995, Collaborative spatial decision-

making. Scienti(cid:142) c report for the Initiative 17 (Santa Barbara: NCGIA), pp. 95–14.

Dente, B., Fareri, P., and Ligteringen, J., 1998, T he waste and the backyard: the creation of
waste facilities : success stories in six European countries (Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers).

Dueker, K. J. D., and Barton, P., 1990, GIS in the land development planning process:
balancing the needs of land-use planners and real estate developers. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 56, 483–491.

Eastman, J. R., Kyem, P. A. K., and Toledano, J., 1993, A procedure for multiobjective
decision making in GIS under conditions of con(cid:143) icting objectives. In Proceedings of
European Conference on Geographical Information Systems, EGIS’93 (Utrecht: EGIS
Foundation), pp. 438–448.

ECOTOX, 1998, L es cadastres du bruit (Gene`ve, Service cantonal d’e´cotoxicologie),
Everitt, B. S., 1993, Cluster analysis (New-York: Edward Arnold).
Fedra, K., and Jamieson, D. G., 1996, The WaterWade decision support system for river-

basin planning. 2. Planning capacity. Journal of Hydrology, 177, 177–198.

Fedra, K., Pemberton, R., Elgy, J., and Mannis, A., 1996, Air quality management: an eŒects-
based approach-(development of a sophisticated environmental management technique
based upon the integration of air quality modelling within a GIS/DSS framework).
In Proceedings of Development and Application of Computer T echniques
to
Environmental Studies VI (Como: Comput. Mech. Publications), pp. 637–648.
Geertman, C. M., and Toppen, F. J., 1990, Regional planning for new housing in randstad
holland. In Geographical Information Systems for Urban and Regional Planning, edited
by H. W. Scholten and J. C. H. Stillwell (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers),
pp. 95–106.

George, P.-L., and Bourouchaki, H., 1997, T riangulation de Delaunay et maillage, application

aux e´le´ments (cid:142) nis (Paris: Hermes).

Gil, Y., and Kellerman, A., 1993, A multicriteria model for the location of solid waste transfer

stations: the case of Ashdod, Israel. Geojournal, 29, 377–384.

Guitouni, A., and Martel, J.-M., 1998, Tentatives guidelines to help choosing an appropriate

MCDA method. European Journal of Operational Research, 109, 501– 521.

Hall, G. B., Wang, F., and Subaryono, 1992, Comparison of Boolean and fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation
information systems.

methods in land suitability analysis by using geographical
Environment and Planning A, 24, 497–516.

Jacquet-Lagre`ze, E., and Siskos, K., 1982, Assessing a set of additive utility functions for

multicriteria. European Journal of Operations Research, 10, 151–164.

Jankowski, P., 1995, Integrating geographical information systems and multiple criteria
decision-making methods. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems,
9, 251–273.

Jankowski, P., Nyerges, T. L., Smith, A., Moore, T. J., and Horvath, E., 1997, Spatial group

172

F. Joerin et al.

choice: a SDSS tool for collaborative spatial decision-making. International Journal of
Geographical Information Systems, 11, 566–602.

Jankowski, P., and Stasik, M., 1997, Design considerations for space and time distributed
collaborative spatial decision making. Journal of Geographic Information and Decision
Analysis, 1, 1–8.

Joerin, F., 1995, Me´thode multicrite`re d’aide a` la de´cision et SIG pour la recherche d’un site.

Revue Internationale de Ge´omatique, 5, 37–51.

Joerin, F., 1998, De´cider sur le territoire, Proposition d’une approche par l’utilisation de SIG
et de me´thodes d’analyse multicrite`re, T he`se No 1755 (Lausanne: Ecole Polytechnique
Fe´de´rale de Lausanne).

Joerin, F., and Musy, A., 2000, Land management with GIS and multicriteria analysis,

International T ransactions on Operational Research, 7, 67–78.

Keeney, R., and Raiffa, H., 1976, Decision with multiple objectives: preferences and value

tradeoVs (New-York: Wiley).

Laaribi, A., Chevallier, J.-J., and Martel, J.-M., 1993, Me´thodologie d’inte´gration des SIG

et de l’analyse multicrite`re. Revue de Ge´omatique, 3, 415–435.

Laaribi, A., Chevallier, J. J., and Martel, J. M., 1996, A spatial decision aid: a multicriterion
evaluation approach. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 20, 351–66.
Malczewski, J., 1991, Central facility location and environmental health. Environment and

Planning A, 23, 385–395.

Malczewski, J., and Ogryczak, W., 1990, An interactive approach to the central facility
location problem: locating pediatric hospitals in Warsaw. Geographical Analysis, 22,
244–258.

Malczewski, J., and Ogryczak, W., 1995, The multiple criteria location problem: 1. A
generalized network model and the set of e(cid:141) cient solutions. Environment and Planning
A, 27, 1931 –1960.

Malczewski, J., and Ogryczak, W., 1996, The multiple criteria location problem: 2.
Preference-based techniques and interactive decision support. Environment and
Planning A, 28, 69–98.

Massam, B. H., 1991, The location of waste transfer stations in Ashdod, Israel, using a multi-

criteria decision support system. Geoforum, 22, 27–37.

OECD, 1995, Road transport research. Roadside, noise abatement. Report prepared by an
OECD scienti(cid:142) c expert group (Paris, Organisation for economic co-operation and
development).

OFEFP, 1987, Mode`le de calcul de bruit du tra(cid:142) c routier pour ordinateur. Premie`re partie:
Manuel d’utilisation du logiciel StL -86 (Berne: O(cid:141) ce Fe´de´rale de l’environnement des
foreˆts et du paysage).

OPB, 1986, Ordonnance sur la protection contre le bruit (Bienne: Confe´de´ration Suisse).
Pawlak, Z., 1991, Rough sets. T heoretical aspects of reasoning about data (Dordrecht: Kluwer

Academic Publishers).

Pereira, J. M. C., and Du¨ ckstein, L., 1993, A multiple criteria decision-making approach to
GIS-base land suitability evaluation. International Journal of Geographical Information
Systems, 7, 407–424.

Pictet, J., 1996, De´passer l’e´valuation environnementale. Proce´dure d’e´tude et insertion dans la

de´cision globale (Lausanne: Presses Polytechniques et Universitaires Romandes).

Roy, B., 1981a, A multicriteria analysis for trichotomic segmentation problems. In Multicriteria

Analysis (Gower: Jaap Spronk), pp. 245–257.

Roy, B., 1981b, The optimisation problem formulation: criticism and overstepping. Journal of

the Operational Research Society, 32, 427–236.

Roy, B., 1985, Me´thodologie multicrite`re d’aide a` la de´cision (Paris: Economica).
Saaty, T. L., 1990, How to make a decision. The Analytical Hierarchy Process. European

Journal of Operational Research, 48, 9–26.

Salminen, P., Hokkanen, J., and Lahdelma, R., 1998, Comparing multicriteria methods in
the context of environmental problems. European Journal of Operational Research,
104, 485–496.

Scha¨ rlig, A., 1985, De´cider sur plusieurs crite`res. Panorama de l’aide a` la de´cision multicrite`re

(Lausanne: Presses Polytechnique et Universitaires Romandes).

Scha¨ rlig, A., 1998, Pratique Electre et Prome´the´e (Lausanne: Presses Polytechnique et

Universitaires Romandes).

L and-use suitability assessment

173

Scholten, H. J., and Stillwell, J. C. H., editors, 1990, Geographical information systems for

urban and regional planning (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers).

Senes, G., and Toccolini, A., 1998, Sustainable land-use planning in protected rural areas in

Italy. L andscape and Urban Planning, 41, 107–117.

Slowinski, R., 1992, Intelligent decision support, Handbook of applications and advances of the

rough set theory (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers).

Slowinski, R., and Stefanowski, J., 1994, Rough classi(cid:142) cation with valued closeness relation.
In New approaches in classi(cid:142) cation and data analysis, edited by H. J. Scholten and
J. C. H. Stillwell (New-York: Springer-Verlag), pp. 482–489.

Sneath, P. H. A., and Sokal, R. R., 1973, Numerical taxonomy : the principles and practice of

numerical classi(cid:142) cation (San Francisco: Freeman).

STRATEC, 1992, Cadastre du bruit ge´ne´re´ par le tra(cid:142) c routier en re´gion Bruxelloise (Brussels,

Institut bruxellois pour la gestion de l’environnement).

ten Velden, H. E., and Kreuwel, G., 1990, A geographical information system based decision
support system for environmental zoning. In Geographical Information Systems for
Urban and Regional Planning, edited by H. H. Scholten and J. C. H. Stillwell
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 119–128.

vanLier, H., 1998, The role of land-use planning in sustainable rural systems. L andscape and

Urban Planning, 41, 83–91.

Vincke, P., 1992, Multicriteria Decision-aid (Chichester: Wiley).
Vincke, P., 1995, A short node on a methodology for choosing a decision-aid method. In
Advances in Multicriteria Analysis (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 3–7.
Voronoi¨, G., 1908, Nouvelles applications des parame`tres continus a` la the´orie des formes
quadratiques, Recherches sur les paralle`oe`dres primitifs. Journal Reine angew. Math.,
134.

Wang, F., 1994, The use of arti(cid:142) cial neural networks in a geographical information system
for agricultural land-suitability assessment. Environment and planning A, 26, 265–284.
Weixiong, W., Migneron, J.-G., and CoteÁ , P., 1998, New highway tra(cid:141) c noise prediction
model
’Impact to determine the acoustic eŒect of noise barriers, Proceedings of
Acoustics and vibration ASIA’98 (Singapore: Environmental Engineering Society),
pp. 219–227.

Wexler, M. N., 1996, A sociological framing of the NIMBY (not-in-my-backyard) syndrome.

International Review of Modern Sociology, 26, 91–110.

Yeh, A. G., and Hong, C. M., 1996, An integrated GIS and location—allocation approach
to public facilities planning-an example of open space planning. Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems, 20, 339–350.

Appendix 1

Calculation of noise emission L Ei dB (A).

Cars

Trucks and motorcycles

Variables used

E ¾
1 5 12.8 1 19.5 Ö
E ²
(IÕ 2)
1 5 45 1 0.8Ö
E1 5 max (E ¾
1 , E ²
1 )
L E1 5 E1 1 10 log (N1) 1 A L E2 5 E2 1 10 log (N2) 1 A A: factor depending on road surface

V i : tra(cid:141) c speed ( km/h)
I: slope of the route (%)
Ni : number of vehicles per hours

log (V 1) E ¾
2 5 34 1 13.3Ö
E ²
2 5 56 1 0.6Ö
E2 5 max (E ¾

log (V 2)
(IÕ 1.5)
2 )

2, E ²

Appendix 2

Corrections applied on emission value to obtain immission (OFEFP 1987).

Correction

Formula

Variables used

DL Distance

DL 5 10 log(d )

DA Air

DA 5 0.005 d

D: horizontal distance from source to receptor (m)
(e.g. road—pixel )
D: horizontal distance source–receptor (m)

174

L and-use suitability assessment

DR Re(cid:143) ection DR 5 B0 (3 1 2 B1 )

DB

Soil eŒect

expAÕ

d

300B

h 1 1

DB 5 20

B1: density of built area on the side of the receptor
B0: density of built area in front of the receptor
B0, B1 ×(0, 1)
d: horizontal distance source —receptor (m)
h: mean elevation of sound wave (m)

DH Obstacles DH 5 10 log(5 1 80 w)

w: diŒerence between direct (without obstacle) and
indirect path (m)

Appendix 3

Logarithmic addition of multiplied noise sources

T 5 A C B 5 T 5 10 log(100.1Ö A 1 100.1Ö B)

where T : Total
B : Immission level from source B (dB).

immission level

(dB); A : Immission level

from source A (dB);

