The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2012

Vol. 49 No. 3

pp. 234–246

August 2012

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label
Placement Method Using Eye Movement Data

Kristien Ooms, Philippe De Maeyer, Veerle Fack, Eva Van Assche and Frank Witlox

Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Email: kristien.ooms@ugent.be

This paper focuses on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of dynamic and interactive maps in relation to the user. A
label placement method with an improved algorithmic efficiency is presented. Since this algorithm has an influence on the
actual placement of the name labels on the map, it is tested if this efficient algorithms also creates more effective maps:
how well is the information processed by the user. We tested 30 participants while they were working on a dynamic and
interactive map display. Their task was to locate geographical names on each of the presented maps. Their eye movements
were registered together with the time at which a given label was found. The gathered data reveal no difference in the
user’s response times, neither in the number and the duration of the fixations between both map designs. The results of this
study show that the efficiency of label placement algorithms can be improved without disturbing the user’s cognitive map.
Consequently, we created a more efficient map without affecting its effectiveness towards the user.

Keywords: label placement, interactive maps, eye tracking, user study

INTRODUCTION

The last two decades have seen a signiﬁcant growth in the
number of cartographic products available on the Internet.
The terms neo-geography and neo-cartography have become
common in the literature (Haklay et al., 2008; Jobst and
Do¨llner, 2008; Kraak and He, 2009; Turner, 2006). These
terms are closely linked with the latest technical, multimedia
and web developments, such as Web 2.0, which combine
these developments with traditional GIS, cartography and
imagery research. This evolution has greatly facilitated the
accessibility and availability of geographic data, resulting in
an enormous increase in web map use.

However, these new possibilities and techniques also
bring new challenges. For one there is the key issue of
efﬁciency and effectiveness of web maps. Since these terms are
used in different research and application ﬁelds – each using
their own deﬁnitions – there might be some confusion
regarding their exact meaning. In this paper, the term
efﬁciency, is used from an algorithmic point of view: how
efﬁcient is a certain algorithm or heuristic? One of the key
factors used to measure this efﬁciency is the speed with
which a certain algorithm can accomplish its goal (with a
certain level of quality). In the case of digital (Internet)
maps, the construction of optimal algorithms and data
structures to support or ‘calculate’ the visualisation is
essential. The main challenge is
related to the
interaction possibilities, because a new visualisation must

thus

DOI: 10.1179/1743277412Y.0000000010

be calculated on the ﬂy each time the user alters an element
of the display (e.g. zoom factor, extent, colours and layer
visualisation). To illustrate, if a user zooms in on a map, the
extent of the map that will be displayed after the interaction
changes: a smaller region is displayed but with greater
detail. The algorithm must retrieve the objects within the
limits of this new extent; only those objects that are linked
level of detail or zoom factor are
with the correct
considered. The name of a country, for example, may not
be displayed on a map if the user is zooms in on a little
village within that country. Furthermore, users do not want
to wait several seconds before a new visualisation or display
is generated each time they interact with it. Calculation
times lasting more than one second are deemed unaccep-
table (Freeman, 2005). The efﬁciency of a web map is thus
related to the fast calculation of a new display after an
interaction.

The term effectiveness is in this paper used from a human
information processing point of view: how well can a certain
person process the information presented to him? The
effectiveness of a map is thus related to how well the user
information on it. Therefore, an
can process the visual
effective map is one which can easily be processed by the
user, although the information on it might be rather
complex. Consequently, the effectiveness of a map is, on the
one hand, inherently related to how the information is
presented: the map design. On the one hand, it is also
related to how users process this information. To be able to

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label Placement Method

235

create these effective maps or map designs, it is crucial to
understand how users store and process the visual informa-
tion presented to them. This is in turn related to the users’
cognitive processes or cognition (Harrower, 2007; Slocum
et al., 2001). Research on cognition considers different
aspects of users their internal mental structures and processes
related to, among others, perception, learning, memory,
thinking, reasoning and communication (Montello, 2002,
2009). As mentioned by Harrower (2007) and Slocum et al.
(2001), the challenge of creating effective maps is even bigger
in the case of the highly dynamic and interactive maps: the
limits of the map readers’ cognitive processing capabilities
need to be considered.

When combining both aspects, it can be concluded that an
exceptionally efﬁcient algorithm is useless if the result is
chaotic and thus difﬁcult to process by the user. In order to
create effective maps, the algorithms need to consider a
number of criteria related to how the information needs to be
visualized correctly. These criteria are derived from the
knowledge of the users’ cognitive processes and might have a
negative effect on the algorithms’ efﬁciency. As a conse-
quence, a balance has to be found between the efﬁciency of
the algorithm on the one hand and the effectiveness of the
map (or the quality of the design) on the other hand,
especially when dealing with highly interactive maps.

Towards efficient cartographic displays
A cartographic display consists of a number of different
symbol types, each contributing to the presentation of
information. Name labels are one of the most important
types because they contribute signiﬁcantly to
symbol
orienting the user within the map. Map users prefer the
name labels on a map because less cartographic knowledge
is necessary to understand the map content. These labels
communicate information which cannot be presented with
other types of symbols. Furthermore,
labels (and their
placement) can have a tremendous impact on the quality of
a map because their presence informs the map user about
much more than only the name of the geographic object
associated to it (Barrault, 1998). They fulﬁl a number of
essential functions related to the identiﬁcation, location,
orientation and hierarchical structure of the features. They
are thus essential to assisting the user in interpreting the
content of the map correctly. Imhof (1975, p.128) also
stated that ‘[…] good form and placing of type makes a
good map’ (Ahn and Freeman, 1984; Wood, 2000).

Both Cuenin (1972) and Imhof (1975) proposed a
limited number of basic rules to place labels on maps to
create effective results. Imhof (1975, p.129) summarizes
these rules as follows:

1. The names should be easily read, easily discriminated
and easily and quickly located. […]
2. The name and the object to which it belongs should be
easily recognized. […]
3. Names should disturb other map contents as little as
possible. […]
4. Names should assist directly in revealing spatial
situation, territorial extent, connections, importance,
and differentiation of objects.

5. Type arrangement should reflect the classification
and hierarchy of objects on the map. […]
6. Names should not be evenly dispersed over the map,
nor should names be densely clustered. […]

Although these basic principles were deﬁned before the
popularity of digital maps, they still hold true today for the
dynamic and interactive maps on the Internet. Until
recently, label placement on maps was done completely
manually. This was a time consuming task, which could take
up to 50% or more of the whole production time of a map
(Yoeli, 1972). With the evolution of technological possibi-
lities, many studies have been devoted to automating this
process. Automatic label placement only takes the ﬁrst
rules of Imhof (1975) into
three, apparently simple,
account.

However, the label placement problem – even when only
considering point objects – is an NP-hard problem, which
means that no optimal solution for the problem can be
found in an acceptable time span. Testing all possible
placement options results in an exponential time complexity
(Marks and Shieber, 1991). This time complexity can be on
the order of O(4n) if each point object has four candidate
positions where a label can be placed, with n the number of
points in the dataset. In 1996, the ACM Computational
Geometry Task Force identiﬁed the label placement
problem as an important research ﬁeld in Discrete Com-
putational Geometry (Chazelle et al., 1996).

Consequently, suitable heuristics and meta-heuristics are
needed to ﬁnd a near-optimal solution for a certain
situation, such as a speciﬁc object type. Over the years,
different types of heuristic approaches have been developed,
among others in the ﬁeld of computational geometry. A
number of these optimisation algorithms have been studied
in the light of the label placement problem and have
subsequently been adapted to improve their efﬁciency for
this speciﬁc problem. Among the most interesting heuristics
that deal with the calculation of label placement are: the
Tabu Search Heuristic (Yamamoto et al., 2002); Simulated
Annealing (Christensen et al., 1995; Zoraster, 1997); the
Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure (Cravo
et al., 2008); Multiple Choice Integer Programming
(Zoraster, 1990); and Genetic Algorithms
(van Dijk,
2001). A number of solutions have also been proposed to
speciﬁcally label linear objects (Edmondson et al., 1996;
Wolff et al., 2000), and polygonal objects (Barrault, 2001).
Furthermore, different applications for map displays have
been taken into account
the
heuristics. Automatic label placement for real-time displays
has recently been given much attention (Been et al., 2006;
Mote 2007; Yamamoto et al., 2005; Zhang and Harrie,
2006).

in the construction of

Data structures are also indispensible elements, as it is
important
to store and process data efﬁciently. This
especially holds true when large amounts of labels need to
be considered. The use of conﬂict graphs (Kakoulis and
Tollis, 2001; Wagner et al., 2001) in a pre-processing phase
allows structuring the data in a way which is surveyable,
speeding up the actual calculations considerably. In this
pre-processing phase, potential conﬂicts between the labels’
candidate positions are identiﬁed and stored, using a graph.
The proposal of ‘sliding labels’ (Strijk and van Kreveld,

236

The Cartographic Journal

2002; van Kreveld et al., 1999) is another example of a (data)
structure that results in a more ﬂexible selection of candidate
positions in such a way that more labels can be placed.
However, despite the many extensive studies related to the
label placement problem, no optimal solution has yet been
found. This problem is also effectively summarized by Wood
(2000, p. 5): ‘[…] no one algorithm seems to be capable of
recognizing the many considerations that a skilled human
cartographer is capable of making in lettering a map’.

The studies discussed above mainly focus on ﬁnding
efﬁcient label placement algorithms (through the use of
different heuristics and data structures), but the user side of
the problem has been neglected. These heuristics are based on
a number of rules concerning a good placement of the labels in
relation to the user, but their ﬁnal results have not been tested
in an actual user study. This user side of the label placement
problem is thus related to how users perceive the results of the
(efﬁcient) algorithms. A highly efﬁcient algorithm is useless if
the results it generates appear chaotic and difﬁcult to interpret.
Therefore, user studies are necessary to discover how users
interpret the results from the heuristics.

van Dijk et al. (2002) have developed a method of
assessing the quality of the output of the heuristics. This
method employs a quality function that measures how well
a certain heuristic places labels on a map. The criteria used
in this function are based on the six principles proposed by
Imhof (1975) and therefore have a more theoretical
(2005, p. 1937) also
background. Bradstreet
et al.
described map labelling as a process in which labels should
be arranged on the map ‘such that the result is clear enough
for the map to be useful for a given user and task’. They also
note that ‘clear enough’ means the labels are readable to the
user and that it is easy to identify the label with its
associated site and vice versa.

In both cases, no actual users were involved in these
quality assessments, making them less suitable for investi-
gating the effectiveness of label placement in respect to the
user. To truly investigate the effectiveness of the map
display, a user study has to be designed. A wide range of
techniques are available for conducting user studies, but not
all techniques are equally suitable for a given problem
(Downs and Stea, 1977; Rubin and Chisnell, 2008; van
Elzakker, 2004). This paper focuses on improving the
effectiveness of dynamic and interactive map displays
towards
the inﬂuence of
different label placement options on the effectiveness of a
dynamic map display is considered. In the next section, a
label placement algorithm with an improved efﬁciency is
described. A user study is constructed to test whether the
user experiences any inﬂuence due to the different label
layouts created by the proposed algorithm.

the user. More speciﬁcally,

Improved efficiency
As mentioned in the previous section, a wide range of label
placement algorithms already exists, all using a slightly
different method to improve their (algorithmic) efﬁciency.
However, they all start with the same operation: determine
the objects within the current extent of the map. The most
optimal location of the labels associated with these objects
has to be calculated by the algorithm. How this is done
exactly depends on the speciﬁc algorithm used. The

Figure 1.
Illustration of the number of labels considered by the algo-
rithms during panning: (a) The initial view, (b) View after the pan opera-
tion, application of current label placement algorithm, (c) View after the
pan operation, application of proposed label placement algorithm

‘current extent’ of a digital map corresponds to the part
of the map that is visible on the screen. What is more, the
current extent (or view) of highly interactive maps can
change very often because users can zoom, pan, etc.

When considering panning, a lot of unnecessary calcula-
tions are done (by the algorithm) after each interaction.
Panning is basically a translation of the map’s extent in a
certain direction over a certain distance. Users often pan on
a map to explore the surroundings of the current map. As a
consequence, they might want to keep a rather large part of
the map visible in order to orientate the newly displayed
view in relation to the original one (from before the pan
operation). We will call this part of the map that remains
visible after the pan operation ‘the overlap zone’.

This type of interaction is illustrated in Figure 1a and b.
The large blue rectangles correspond to the current view
(or extent) of the map; the small rectangles represent the
labels on the map. Figure 1a depicts the initial view and
Figure 1b the view after the interaction: a horizontal pan
operation to the right. Current label placement algorithms
(re)calculate an ‘optimal’ position for all labels within the

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label Placement Method

237

new extent. These are the red labels in Figure 1b. Like most
algorithms do, the level of preference related to a certain
label position (relative to the associated point) is taken into
account; the upper right position is the most preferred
candidate position to place a label (Imhof, 1975). Compared
to the initial view (Figure 1a), only the dark red labels’
relative positions have changed. Although all labels that are
situated within the extent of the overlap zone are included in
the calculations of the label placement algorithm, a more
optimal position could be found for only a small number of
them. A as consequence, a large number of unnecessary
calculations have been done or a large number of labels have
unnecessarily been included in the calculations.

Decreasing the number of labels considered by the label
placement algorithm would signiﬁcantly improve its efﬁciency.
A closer look at the maps shows that most labels can remain in
the same relative position, because they were already unam-
biguously positioned in the former view (before the interac-
tion). Only the labels that were not visible in the former view
and labels that could become unreadable after the interaction
need to be included in the calculations. The latter group
constitutes the labels located at the border of the current view,
which could be clipped at the edges. Consequently, all labels
that were visible in the former view and were not located near
the border (and thus not in danger of being cut in half) can
remain in the same relative position and should not be
reconsidered by the label placement algorithm. A rather large
portion of the labels will ﬁt this category, because the panning
operation is often used to explore the surroundings of a certain
location. As mentioned before, the user wants to keep a part of
the former view visible after the interaction to facilitate the
orientation of the newly displayed area.

The outcome when using the algorithm with the
improved efﬁciency is depicted in Figure 1c. The initial
view (before the panning) still corresponds to Figure 1a.
The green labels in this third picture are the ones that could
safely remain in the same relative position without the
danger of rendering them unreadable. Only the labels in red
should be (re)considered by the label placement algorithm.
The red labels on the right side of the view are those which
were not yet displayed in the initial view. Since they were
not yet displayed in the initial view, the algorithm has to
calculate a position for them, regardless which algorithm is
used. The dark red labels, were already present in the
former view, but are located near the border of the current
view and are thus in danger of being clipped at the edge. In
this case, this is only one label at the left side of the view.
The advantage of the algorithms used today is higher
level of quality of the ﬁnal map. Every new view is
the results of previous
recalculated,
calculations. This means that for every view, the most
optimal position for every label can be considered.
However, this higher level of quality pays a price in terms
of (algorithmic) efﬁciency because a lot of unnecessary
calculations are done. The algorithm proposed in this paper
has a higher level of efﬁciency since fewer calculations have
to be done. Labels which were already placed in the former
view are not recalculated, except for a few that otherwise
would be cut in half by the border of the map.

independently of

The disadvantage of this improved algorithm (in terms of
efﬁciency) concerns the quality of the outcome. Fewer labels

are placed in their optimal position, although it would be
possible to place them there. Furthermore, subsequent
panning operations over a small distance decrease the quality
even more: with every interaction, fewer labels will be placed
in the optimal position. This lower level of quality might
affect the effectiveness of the map in a negative way. In the
example of Figure 1a, a number of labels are placed in the
upper left corner (relative to their point object) in the initial
view because otherwise they would be cut in half by the right
border of the map. After the pan operation, they are still
located in the upper left corner (see Figure 1c, which depicts
the outcome of the proposed algorithm), although now there
is space to place them in the most preferred position, which is
the upper right corner (see Figure 1b, which depicts the
outcome of existing algorithms). Other research concerning
automatic label placement on interactive maps suggests that
popping or moving of labels is also not desirable because it is
distracting (Been et al., 2006). It might be more difﬁcult for a
user to orientate the map if a number of labels are in a
different relative position after the interaction, because this
increases complexity of the map (Harrower, 2007).

The algorithm described above improves the efﬁciency of
the label placement algorithm, but is the outcome also
beneﬁcial towards the users? The result of the algorithm
also has consequences on how the labels are displayed on
the map, especially after an interaction. From the elements
described above, it can be derived that the outcome of the
proposed algorithm has both negative and positive elements
regarding the quality of the map and thus regarding its
effectiveness: fewer labels are placed in a position with a
higher level of preference, but the users are less distracted
after the interaction because the relative position of more
labels remains the same. The goal of the current study is to
investigate if the application of this algorithm might have
a negative inﬂuence on the user’s cognitive processes.
Therefore, a suitable method, able to register changes in the
user’s attentive behaviour and cognitive processes while
working with a dynamic medium, needs to be selected.

In this paper, we focus on the panning operations. As
mentioned before, panning is an operation which is rather
often executed independently from other operations – such
as zooming, turning on layers and changing font sizes – to
explore the surroundings of
the current map view.
Improving the efﬁciency of the label placement algorithms
related to this type of interaction would therefore improve
the overall processing times when (re)calculating a map’s
visualisation. Furthermore, turning on layers, changing font
sizes and other similar interaction possibilities are not as
widely integrated in digital maps as zooming and panning.
The proposed algorithm might also be beneﬁcial when
considering zooming, since some of the labels can remain in
the same relative position. However, zooming on a map
also inﬂuences the priority levels of the labels on the map:
some labels should not be placed at a certain zoom level,
whereas others might appear on that level.

Tracking effectiveness
Nivala (2007) studied the familiarity of cartographers with
usability engineering and its methods. Her results support
the suitability of usability engineering for map application
design, and showed that the methods are slowly being

238

The Cartographic Journal

incorporated in the design process. Consequently, research
on the improvement of the effectiveness of map displays
towards the user is almost non-existent, certainly when
considering the inﬂuence of label placement options on a
user’s cognitive processes. This lack of research is in sharp
contrast with the amount of research devoted to enhancing
the efﬁciency of label placement methods.

Duchowski (2007) and Rayner (1998) described the
close link between a person’s eye movements and his
cognitive processes. In the past, concerns about the eye
tracking method have been expressed because there is no
one-to-one relation between eye movements and attentive
behaviour: a person can shift his attention without moving
his eyes. However, with complex stimuli (or when complex
cognitive processes are triggered, causing a high cognitive
load), it is more efﬁcient to move the eyes than to move
attention. As a consequence, it can safely be assumed that
there is a tight link between eye movements and attentive
behaviour when a person has to solve a complex task
(Duchowski, 2007; Jacob and Karn, 2003; Rayner, 1998).
During the last decade, the eye tracking method has been
successfully applied to a wide range of studies concerning
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) and usability research
(Salvucci and Anderson, 2001; Jacob and Karn, 2003;
Schiessl et al., 2003; Joachims et al., 2005; Zambarbieri
et al., 2008; Djamasbi et al., 2010). Poole and Ball (2006,
p. 211) stated that this method ‘can help HCI researchers
understand visual and display-based information processing
and the factors that may impact upon the usability of system
interfaces’, which was also previously described in the
work of Henderson and Hollingworth (1998). Moreover,
Fleetwood and Byrne (2006) studied and modelled the
visual search of computer users on a graphical user interface
based on eye tracking data. This study has some ground in
common with the experiments described in this paper.
However, the study by Fleetwood and Byrne (2006) focused
on the design of icons in a graphical user interface whereas
the experiments described in this article are directed to the
improvement of the quality of the map design for the user.
Furthermore, the eye tracking method has been intro-
duced in the ﬁeld of cartography to study, for example,
the effectiveness of a new symbol design for a topographic
map of Denmark (Brodersen et al., 2001). These authors
concluded that ‘the method as a whole is promising for
future studies of map reading and map design as it reveals
interesting information about a map’s design, the user’s
behaviour, and the correlation between these’ (Brodersen
et al., 2001, p. 57). More recently, the eye tracking method
has been integrated into studies
that evaluated the
effectiveness of interactive maps and small-multiple map
displays (Coltekin et al., 2009; Fabrikant et al., 2008).

STUDY DESIGN

In the present experiment, the effectiveness of different map
designs – which are a result of the application of different
label placement algorithms – towards the user was tested. It
was chosen to use a controlled study design in order to
avoid as many (unforeseen) inﬂuencing factors as possible
and to be able to study one element in more detail. In this

experiment, only one type of interaction was thus con-
sidered: panning. This choice was based on the fact that
panning is possible on almost every digital map and it is an
operation which is commonly executed on a map.

Each map design included in study was linked to one of
two speciﬁc label placement algorithms, which are in turn
linked to the efﬁciency of the associated algorithms. This
process allowed testing whether improvements in the
efﬁciency of the label placement algorithms – with different
visual outputs – had any (negative) inﬂuence on the user’s
cognitive processes and thus on the effectiveness of the map
display. The design of the study is described in more detail
in the next sections.

Participants
Since the study has a within-user design, a group of 30
students was selected. All participants speak Dutch, have a
similar educational background, and belong to the same age
group (between 18 and 20 years old). The participants
registered to the experiment on a voluntary basis. None of
them received any previous cartographic training.

Task and stimuli
To test the different map designs, a number of map stimuli
were constructed. An example of such a map stimulus is
presented in Figure 2. Each of these map stimuli had the
same simple back ground: three areas ﬁlled with a pastel
colour. On this background, point objects and their
associated labels are presented. These points and the names
linked to them originate from real-world locations to obtain
a realistic distribution. The 20 areas selected to construct
the map stimuli had to meet a number of criteria. First, the
participants had to be unfamiliar with the region. Second,
the region could contain only names that are rather short.
Third,
it had to contain a constant number of names.
Fourth, the region cannot contain any well-known names.
Combining these 20 areas with the two label placement
options (with and without the application of the proposed
algorithm) resulted in a total of 40 map stimuli. Because the
duration of a user study is preferably limited, these 40 maps
were divided into two sets of 20. On 10 maps of each set,
the improved algorithm was applied: only labels near the
border could be relocated after an interaction. On the
remaining 10 maps, all labels in the map image could be
relocated after the interaction. This subdivision prevented a
learning effect, as the same region will not be displayed
twice to a single user. All of the maps were displayed in a
random order during the study.

During the display of such a map stimulus, three different
time intervals could be identiﬁed. The ﬁrst interval was the
initial view of the map, displayed to the user for 50 seconds.
Next, a horizontal pan operation was simulated. This pan
operation corresponded to a translation of the map image
to the right. Finally, the view after the interaction was
presented until the user located all names and ended the
trial. These three stages are depicted in Figure 2. The
deﬁnition of the length of the initial interval was based on
the results of an (unpublished) experiment, which we
conducted prior to the actual experiment. The study design
of this pilot study was the same as the one described in this

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label Placement Method

239

to locate the ﬁve names in the initial view. Each time the
participant found a name he had to push a button, resulting
in a response time measurement. In order
to avoid
distracting the participant from the actual task, he had to
push the same button for each label. After 50 seconds,
the horizontal pan operation was simulated, during which
the current view and the list with names changed. Next, the
participant again had to locate these ﬁve names in the new
view and push a button each time he found a name. When
the participant had located all names, he could terminate
the current trial himself and proceed to the next map.

The instructions were read out loud to each of the
participants to make sure that everybody got them in
exactly the same way. They contained a detailed description
of the structure of the study, including how many names
they had to ﬁnd, the number of trials, duration of the initial
view, the pan operation and a description of the equipment.
Furthermore, each user had to do two demo-trials before
starting with the actual test. The goal of these demo-trials
was to make the participant familiar with the task, stimuli
and equipment. As a consequence, nothing was recorded
during the demo-trials: the participant could still make
mistakes or ask additional questions.

The task described above corresponds to a visual search.
This is a task which is rather often executed on a map: the
user wants to locate multiple points of interest (POIs) on a
map, such as tourist attractions or cities. Phillips et al.
(1978) also considered searching to be a good task to
evaluate a map. They used the time to ﬁnd a name as
a measure to evaluate different types of typography used on
a map. The disadvantage of working with a map on a
relatively small screen is that these POIs are not situated
within the extent of one view (with a certain scale). The user
has to execute a pan operation to get both objects within
one view. Consequently, he has to relocate the POIs from
the previous view and the POIs in the new view.

In order to obtain a similar effect in the controlled
environment of the experiment, it was decided to list ﬁve
names, from which three were repeated after the interac-
tion. This also prevented the participant from tracking the
relative position of the labels during the simulated pan
operation. Since the names which remained in the list were
chosen randomly, the user could not know beforehand
which label he would have to relocate after the interaction.
Otherwise, the results would not have been comparable
to keep the
between the different maps.
participant’s search behaviour as natural as possible, he
could choose whether he wanted to search for the ﬁve
names in the given order or randomly. As can be derived
from Figure 1, the difference between the two algorithms is
situated in the overlap zone. As a consequence, after the
interaction, the user has to relocate the majority of the
names in this part of the map.

In order

Figure 3 gives an overview of the different types of
cognitive processes that could be identiﬁed during this
visual search on the map. When the map stimulus is
displayed, the participant will read one or more names from
the list displayed on the right side of the map. Then he will
look at the map to initiate the search. If the map is displayed
for the ﬁrst time, he will need some extra time to orientate
it. During his search, he will try to identify potential label

Figure 2.
stimulus (top:
bottom: ﬁnal view)

Illustration of the three subsequent intervals of the map
initial view; middle: a view during the translation;

paper, except that only the reaction times were measured
and the time of the ﬁrst interval was ﬁxed at 90 seconds.
The results of this pilot study revealed that almost all
participants could ﬁnd the ﬁve labels within 50 seconds.

On the right side of each map stimulus, a list of ﬁve
names was visible during the whole trial. The content of this
list changed after the interaction: three names remained in
the list and two were new ones. Owing to the interaction,
the absolute position of all labels on the map changed: they
moved horizontally to the left over a certain ﬁxed distance
(the pan distance). In the list itself, the three names that
were retained were also displayed on a different position
after the interaction.

During the study, each participant had to repeat a
number of tasks on each of the 20 map stimuli. First, he had

240

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Overview of the users’ cognitive processes during the visual search task

candidates: labels which look like the one he had read form
the list earlier (e.g. length, shape of subsequent characters).
When he has identiﬁed such a potential candidate, the
participant will compare it with the information stored in
his memory. If he ﬁnds a match, he can either return to the
list with names to read one or more new ones or, if he still
has one or more names in memory, he will start searching
again on the map. If no match was found, he will continue
searching on the map. A more detailed discussion about
these cognitive processes and their relation to the Cognitive
Load Theory can be found in Ooms et al. (2012b).

After completing the 20 trials, a questionnaire was presented
that gathered background information, structured in several
themes: general information, known regions, familiarity with
web maps and feedback. The measurements from the tests
could be distorted by certain factors such as the familiarity of a
participant with a certain region displayed during the tests. The
questionnaire is thus as a tool to eliminate biases and explain
these possible distortions in the data.

Apparatus and data
the Department of
The Eye Tracking Laboratory of
Experimental Psychology
(Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium) is equipped with an Eye Link 1000 device. This
eye tracking device from SR Research (Mississauga, Ont.,
Canada) can sample a person’s Point Of Regard at a rate of
1000 Hz (or once every millisecond). The eye movements
are recorded from one eye only. The software used to
program the study and subsequently record the eye
movements is the Experiment Builder (SR Research).
Data Viewer software (SR Research) is used to conduct
the initial processing and visualisation of the obtained raw
eye movement data. This software also allows identifying

eye movement metrics related to ﬁxation and saccades. The
monitor on which the stimuli are presented has a size of
21 inch and a resolution of 128061024 pixels.

During the study, a number of different elements were
recorded simultaneously, which have to be combined in a
correct way. First, response times were measured related to
the moment a participant pressed a button indicating that
he had found a label in the current view. A comparison of
these response time measurements between different map
designs can then indicate which design allows a faster
retrieval of information.

However, when using this method alone,

there is
absolutely no information on which labels are found or
whether the participant found the correct labels. Further-
more, there is no indication of how easily the information on
the map can be processed by the user. This type of
information can typically be derived from the eye movement
metrics related to the ﬁxations. The duration of the ﬁxation,
for example, gives an indication of the time a user needs to
process a certain view. However, eye movement data alone do
not allow detecting if a label is found by a user and if it is the
correct label. The user can ‘accidently’ overlook the label
without actually identifying it as one of the labels from the
list.

Only the combined data from the button actions and the
eye movements allow identifying whether a label is found by
the user and which label this is. The time measurements
from the button actions thus indicate when a user ﬁnds a
label; the location of the ﬁxation at that moment identiﬁes
the label that was found. But caution is needed when
combining measurements from different sources as it may
cause synchronisation errors. Synchronicity is achieved
during this study because all recordings (eye movements

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label Placement Method

241

and response time measurements) were processed simulta-
neously by one software system.

cognitive processes

To get insights in the map users’ cognitive processes
during this task, data from multiple different sources were
analysed, providing information about different aspects of a
user’s
and attentive behaviour.
Response time measurements are a type of performance
measurement which is very often used in the ﬁeld of
human–computer interaction to evaluate the design of,
among others, user interfaces and web pages (Nielsen,
1993). In this case, these measurements indicate how fast a
user can ﬁnd a name on a map. A more effective map design
would result in smaller response times because the user can
process the (visual) information more easily (Harrower,
2007; Phillips et al., 1978).

More detailed information about

the participants’
cognitive processes can be derived from the eye movement
metrics. The work of Jacob and Karn (2003) and Poole and
Ball (2006) provide an excellent overview of a wide range of
studies in which the eye movements of participants are
analysed, which eye movement metrics are most often used,
and what can be derived from them in terms of human–
computer interaction. Since the goal of this research is to
test the effectiveness of two different map designs (that are a
result of two different label placement algorithms), the
participants’ ﬁxations are analysed: number of ﬁxations and
ﬁxation duration. For example, the duration of the ﬁxations
may give insights in the difﬁculty with which a user
processes the visual information presented to him. A very
chaotic, and thus not very effective, map would conse-
quently result in longer ﬁxation durations (Jacob and Karn,
2003; Poole and Ball, 2006).

As mentioned before, a close link between a participants
eye movements and his attentive behaviour can be assumed
if complex cognitive processes are triggered (corresponding
to a high cognitive load). The task and the stimuli described
above might seem rather simple, but they do trigger a high
cognitive load: while the participant is searching for a label
on the map, he is also trying to remember the locations of
the names located previously. This results in an increasing
cognitive load (Ooms et al., 2012b). Furthermore, the
basic design of the maps and the controlled laboratory
environment prevents the participants to get distracted,
both due to internal (within the task or stimuli) or external
(e.g. noises, striking elements in the surroundings) causes.
Based on the considerations mentioned above, it can safely
be assumed that the participants will not be distracted
during the study and consequently, that there is a close link
between the eye movements and his attentive behaviour.
Hence, the metrics resulting from the eye moment study
can be used to obtain insights in the underlying cognitive
processes.

A qualitative, visual analysis of the eye movements also
allows analysing the spatial dimension of the obtained data.
Deviations or patterns in the users’ scanpaths, a succession
of subsequent ﬁxations and saccades, give insights in the
users’ search behaviour and might indicate problems in the
(map) design (Ooms et al., 2012a). Finally, these quanti-
tative data sources are complemented with the results of a
post-study questionnaire. The goal of this questionnaire is
to obtain information about the users’ preferences towards

label placement. A user’s preference
a certain type of
towards a certain type of design might not always
correspond to the most effective one (Nielsen, 1993).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The results from two participants were removed from the
dataset. The ﬁrst participant was familiar with the presented
regions and knew some of the names by heart. The other
participant was extremely slow in locating the names. As a
consequence, he could not execute the assignment cor-
rectly. From the remaining participants, all measurements
related to locating a wrong name were removed from the
dataset. Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were performed
across participants with map design (border-labels relocated
versus all-labels relocated) as independent variables. The
dependent variables were the mean reaction times across
trials, the ﬁxation count and the ﬁxation durations.

for

(SD: 1716 ms)

Relative response times
The results showed no difference between the border-labels
relocated and all-labels relocated map design conditions
(F50.069, P50.793). The mean reaction time for locating
the ten labels was 5614 ms
the
condition in which only labels at the border were relocated
after an interaction and 5570 ms (SD: 1630 ms) for the
condition in which all labels could be relocated after the
interaction. The mean values (in milliseconds) for locating
the different labels in the two map designs are illustrated in
Figure 4. In the map design Border, only labels near the
border could be relocated after the interaction; in map
design Total, all label could be relocated. Five labels were
located before the simulated interaction (Before) and ﬁve
after this interaction (After). Paired comparisons of the
intervals of locating each label in both map designs (e.g.
the ﬁrst label that was found in the Border-design versus the
Total-design, the second label that was found in the Border-
design versus the Total-design) showed no signiﬁcant
differences for any of the intervals (P.0.106).

the interaction. Again,

When a map is displayed to the user for the ﬁrst time, he
has to orientate it. The time needed to do this is included in
the time interval to locate the ﬁrst label. Since no difference
was found in this ﬁrst time interval, it can be concluded that
there was no difference in how fast the user can orientate
the map. After the simulated pan operation, the user will
orientate the map again: he wants to link the initial view
with the map view after
the
orientation time is included in the time interval needed to
locate the ﬁrst label. Also in this case, no signiﬁcant
different could be detected between the two map designs
(or label placement methods). As mentioned previously,
users might be distracted after the simulated pan operation
if some labels’ relative position suddenly changes after the
interaction. However, in the case of the proposed label
placement algorithm, no signiﬁcant improvement could be
detected. Another effect of the proposed algorithm on the
map design is the lower quality in the ﬁnal label placement:
fewer labels are placed in their most preferred position.
Since no signiﬁcant difference could be detected in the
corresponding response times of the two types of map

242

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 4. Mean response time measurements (ms, ¡1 SD) for both types of label placement related to ﬁnding the ﬁve labels, before (a) and
after (b) the interaction

it can be concluded that

design,
the users were not
negatively affected in their visual search due to this lower
quality.

Fixation count and duration
The ﬁxation count corresponds to the number of ﬁxations
during the trial. Since this is inherently related to the length
of the trial, a more objective metric is used: number of
ﬁxations per second. The number of ﬁxations per second is
closely linked with a second metric often used in eye
movement
research: ﬁxation duration. Although both
measurements are linked with each other, it might be very
useful to consider them both in order to obtain a better
understanding in the users’ cognitive processes. This
duration of a ﬁxation may give an indication about how
the user processes the (visual) information presented to
him. Longer ﬁxation durations may indicate that the user is
confused by or has difﬁculty in reading the display, but it
could also indicate that the user ﬁnd that part of the display
interesting (Poole and Ball, 2006). However, the basic
structure of the map stimuli in the experiment assures that
all regions on the maps look equally interesting. Therefore,
the latter explanation is not considered in this study. If the
labels are placed in a very chaotic way on the map, it is
expected that the user needs more time to process the visual
stimuli, resulting in longer ﬁxation durations. Some of the
labels on a map with a Border-design, are placed in a less
preferred position than with a Total-design. Therefore, it
might be expected that the proposed algorithm creates
maps that are more difﬁcult
to process, resulting in
deviating eye movement metrics such as longer ﬁxation
durations.

The mean number of ﬁxation per second (ﬁx/s) for both
map designs is 3.843 (SD: 0.436) with a minimum and
maximum of respectively 2.425 and 5.036 ﬁx/s. The mean
number of ﬁx/s counts 3.829 for the Border-map design
(SD: 0.451) and 3.856 (SD: 0.422) for the Total-map
design. A one-way ANOVA over all response times and
with map design as a factor shows no signiﬁcant difference

on the level of the ﬁxed factor (F50.822; P50.365.0.05).
Since the map design type is related to how the labels are
placed after an interaction, the label’s positions might have
a more pronounced inﬂuence on the user after
the
interaction. As a consequence, the dataset is further divided
into two subsets: before and after the interaction. The mean
ﬁxation counts, related to both map designs, are illustrated
in Figure 5. In this case, it can be noticed that both mean
values are smaller after
the
difference is larger with a Border-map design. However, a
paired comparison between both map designs shows no
signiﬁcant difference in the results, both Before (F50.118,
P50.731) and After (F50.787, P50.376).

the interaction and that

The mean duration of ﬁxations is 228.2 ms (SD: 32.8 ms)
for both maps designs, with a minimum of 164.3 ms and a
maximum of 357.2 ms. When only considering the Border-
map design this mean duration is 229.6 ms (SD: 34.2 ms),
whereas this is 226.9 ms (SD: 31.5 ms) for the Total-map

Figure 5. Mean ﬁxation count (ﬁx/s, ¡ 1 SD) for both types of
label placement, before and after the interaction

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label Placement Method

243

already ﬁxed the time interval before the interaction at
50 seconds, the same will be done to visualize the scanpaths
after the interaction.

A comparison of the scanpaths of the corresponding map
designs, both before and after the interaction, can reveal
deviations or differences in how the users search on the map.
For every combination, the scanpaths of the users were very
similar. As an example,
these scanpaths are illustrated
for one of the maps in Figure 7. The two upper pictures
correspond to maps which are created with a traditional
labels placement algorithm (Total-map design), whereas the
two lower pictures are created with the proposed algorithm
(Border-map design). The pictures on the left side illustrate
the scanpaths before the interaction and the pictures on the
right side the ones after the interaction (during 50 seconds).

Questionnaire
A number of questions in the post-study questionnaire were
related to the two map designs presented to each participant.
The goal of these questions was to discover whether the
preference of the users towards one label placement type
corresponds to the results of the statistical comparisons: time
measurements and eye movement metrics. These questions
were formulated as follows (translated from Dutch):

During the study, two types of maps were presented to

you.
N Describe the difference between both map types.
N Which of the two types do you prefer the most?
N Why do you prefer this type more than the other one?
All of the participants answered to the ﬁrst question that
they did not notice any difference between the 20 maps
presented to them. Consequently, no useful answers could
be derived from the two subsequent questions. But the
answers on the ﬁrst question clearly indicate that the
participants did not notice the difference between the maps
(or label layouts) presented to them.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This paper describes a study in which the effectiveness of an
improved label placement algorithm (in terms of efﬁciency)
towards the user is investigated. The combination of response
time measurements and eye movement metrics allows
identifying when a label was found and which label was found
by the user. The gathered eye movement metrics, duration
and number of ﬁxations, allow detecting whether the different
label
layouts have an inﬂuence on the user’s cognitive
processes and thus on its effectiveness towards the user.

The analysis of the participants’ response times shows
that the proposed label placement algorithm does not have
any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the user’s cognitive processes.
The assignment can be completed in the same time interval
on both map designs, which means that the different label
layout does not affect
the participant his orientation
process, nor the his visual search on the map. More detailed
analyses of the users’ cognitive processes, using the eye
movement metrics ﬁxation count and ﬁxation duration,
conﬁrm this ﬁnding even further. Both the number of
ﬁxations per seconds and the duration of these ﬁxations are

Figure 6. Mean ﬁxation duration (ms, ¡1 SD) for both types of
label placement, before and after the interaction

design. Also on this dataset, a one-way ANOVA is applied
whose results correspond to these from the ﬁxation count:
no signiﬁcant difference on the level of the independent
(F51.439; P50.231.0.05). The mean ﬁxation
factor
durations, related to if they occurred before or after the
interaction, are presented in Figure 6. Also in this case, the
paired comparison showed no signiﬁcant difference between
the two map designs, both Before (F50.304, P50.582) and
After (F51.228, P50.268).

The eye movement metrics thus show no signiﬁcant
deviations between the application of the two different label
placement methods. This means that, although fewer labels
are placed in a more preferred position by the proposed
algorithm, the users do not have more difﬁculty to process
the information. This may be explained by the fact that it
only concerns a limited number of labels that are not placed
in a more optimal position: certain labels that were located
near the border of the previous view and were therefore
restricted in their placement.

Qualitative scanpath analysis
Besides the statistical analysis of the eye movement metrics,
interesting elements regarding the users search behaviour
might be obtained from a visual analysis of the scanpaths.
These scanpaths are a succession of subsequent ﬁxations
and saccades. The spatial distribution of these scanpaths was
analysed and compared using the Visual Analytics Toolkit,
whose functions – and their applicability on eye movement
data – are described in the work of Ooms et al. (2012a).
The scanpaths were ﬁltered based on their attributes, using
a ﬁxed time interval. The distribution of the scanpaths
related to the same area, but with the application
of a different label placement algorithm, could thus be
compared.

In order to create more comparable datasets, the eye
movements of a certain map were ﬁltered based on a ﬁxed
time interval. This is necessary because the users could end
the trial themselves when they had located all labels. As a
consequence, each trial had a different length. Since we had

244

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 7. The users’ scanpaths when searching on one of the maps (top: Total-map design, bottom: Border-map design; left: before the inter-
action, right: after the interaction)

not signiﬁcantly different. Furthermore, no deviations in
the users’ search behaviour could be derived from the
visual analysis of the scanpaths. The questionnaire also
revealed that the participants did not notice the difference
between both label placement methods. It can thus be
concluded that the two map designs, with or without the
application of the proposed algorithm, are as difﬁcult to
interpret by the participants. Although both map designs
created different visual outputs, the participants stated that
they did not notice any difference between the maps
presented to them. This conﬁrms that the application of
the more efﬁcient algorithm does not inﬂuence the user in
any way. The label placement algorithm is thus more
efﬁcient without affecting the user and thus the effective-
ness of the map in any way.

However, these results were obtained during a controlled
study, using a basic map design, a simple task and in a
laboratory environment, which is different from a real life
situation. So the question arises: how generalisable are these
results? During the controlled study, the goal was to direct
the focus of the participants only on the labels on the maps,
avoiding other inﬂuencing or distracting factors (such as
other map elements) as much as possible. As a consequence,
if there would have been any effect of this adapted label
placement algorithm on the map user, it would be expected

to be the clearest in this study. More complex maps would
lessen the effect of the lower qualitative label placement, as
there are too many other elements on the map to which the
focus of the user will be directed. Nevertheless, it should
also be noted that the actual labels will be placed differently
due to the other map elements, which may also affect the
quality of the placement and thus its efﬁciency towards the
user. In order to be able to answer this question objectively,
a series of follow-up studies have to be conducted in which
more complex map stimuli are used. Gradually adding more
map elements to the stimuli would allow investigating
which elements (or what level of complexity) would have to
greatest impact on the map user.

In order to be able to create more effective maps, more
information is needed on how users actually interpret maps:
how do they orientate a map, how do they process, store
and retrieve the visual
information presented to them.
Detailed insights in the user’s cognitive structures are thus
essential to understand these processes, especially while
working with highly interactive and dynamic maps. Eye
tracking is an excellent method to get in touch with the
user’s cognitive processes while working with visual stimuli.
More detailed studies are planned to investigate how users
orientate these dynamic maps, how their cognitive maps are
created and what inﬂuences them.

Investigating the Effectiveness of an Efficient Label Placement Method

245

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Kristien Ooms is a research
assistant in the Department
of Geography at Ghent Uni-
versity (Belgium). The goal
of her PhD research is to
improve the quality of screen
maps towards the end users.
Her research focuses on geo-
visualisation, cognitive maps,
user studies and eye tracking.
She obtained an MSc in Geo-
graphy and in Applied Infor-
matics at Ghent University.

REFERENCES

Ahn, J. and Freeman, H. (1984). ‘A program for automatic name

placement’, Cartographica, 21, pp. 101–109.

Barrault, M. (1998). Le Placement Cartographique des E´ critures:
Re´solution d’un proble`me a` Forte Combinatoire et Pre´sentant un
Grand Nombre de Constraintes Varie´ees. University of Marne-la-
Valle´e, Marne-la-Valle´e, France.

Barrault, M. (2001). ‘A methodology for placement and evaluation of
area map labels’, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
25, pp. 33–52.

Been, K., Daiches, E. and Yap, C. (2006). ‘Dynamic map labeling’,
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
12, pp. 773–780.

Bradstreet, L., Barone, L. and While, L. (2005). ‘Map-labelling with
a Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm’, in 2005 Conference
on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 1937–1944,
Washington, DC, Jun 25–29.

Brodersen, L., Andersen, J. H. K. and Weber, S. (2001). Applying the
Eye-Movement Tracking for the Study of Map Perception and
Map Design, Kort and Matrikelstyrelsen, National Survey and
Cadastre Denmark, Copenhagen.

Chazelle, B., Amenta, N., Asano, T., Barequet, G., Bern, M.,
Boissonnat, J., Canny, J., Clarkson, K., Dobkin, D., Donald, B.,
Drysdale, S., Edelsbrunner, H., Eppstein, D., Forrest, A. R.,
Fortune, S., Goldberg, K., Goodrich, K., Guibas, L. J., Hanrahan,
P., Hoffman, C. M., Huttenlocher, D., Imai, H., Kirkpatrick, D.,
Lee, D. T., Melhorn, K., Milenkovic, V., Mitchell, J., Overmars,
M., Pollack, R., Seidel, R., Sharir, M., Snoeyink, J., Toussaint, G.,
Teller, S., Voelcker, H., Welzl, E., and Yap, C. (1996). Application
Challenges to Computational Geometry. Report TR–521–96.
Computational Geometry Impact Task Force’s report: Princeton
CS Dept. Technical. Princeton University, Princeton NJ.

Christensen, J., Marks, J. and Shieber, S. (1995). ‘An empirical study
placement’, ACM

of
Transactions on Graphics, 14, pp. 203–232.

point-feature

algorithms

label

for

Coltekin, A., Heil, B., Garlandini, S. and Fabrikant, S. I. (2009).
‘Evaluating the effectiveness of interactive map interface designs: a
case study integrating usability metrics with eye-movement
analysis’, Cartography and Geographic Information Science,
36, pp. 5–17.

Cravo, G. L., Ribeiro, G. M. and Lorena, L. A. N. (2008). ‘A greedy
randomized adaptive search procedure for
the point-feature
cartographic label placement’, Computers & Geoscience, 34, pp.
373–386.

Cuenin, R. (1972). Cartographie Ge´ne´rale, Eyrolles, Paris.
Djamasbi, S., Siegel, M. and Tullis, T. (2010). ‘Generation Y, web
design, and eye tracking’, International Journal of Human–
Computer Studies, 68, pp. 307–323.

Downs, R. M. and Stea, D. (1977). Maps in Minds. Reflection on

Cognitive Mapping, Harper & Row, New York.

Duchowski, A. T. (2007). Eye Tracking Methodology – Theory and

Practice, Springer, London.

Edmondson, S., Christensen, J., Marks, J. and Shieber, S. (1996). ‘A
general cartographic labeling algorithm’, Cartographica, 33, pp.
13–23.

Fabrikant, S. I., Rebich-Hespanha, S., Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G.
and Montello, D. R. (2008). ‘Novel method to measure inference
affordance in static small-multiple map displays representing
dynamic processes’, The Cartographic Journal, 45, pp. 201–215.
Fleetwood, M. D. and Byrne, M. D. (2006). ‘Modeling the visual
search of displays: a revised Act-R model of icon search based on
eye-tracking data’, Human–Computer Interaction, 21, pp. 153–
197.

Freeman, H. (2005).

‘Automated cartographic text placement’,

Pattern Recognition Letters, 26, pp. 287–297.

Haklay, M., Singleton, A. and Parker, C. (2008). ‘Web Mapping 2.0:
the neogeography of the GeoWeb’, Geography Compass, 2, pp.
2011–2039.

Harrower, M. (2007).

‘The cognitive limits of animated maps’,

Cartographica, 42, pp. 349–357.

Henderson, J. M. and Hollingworth, A. (1998). ‘Eye movements
during scene viewing: an overview’, in Eye Guidance in Reading
and Scene Perception, ed. by Underwood, G., pp. 49–65, Elsevier,
Oxford.

Imhof, E. (1975).

‘Positioning names on maps’, The American

Cartographer, 2, pp. 128–144.

Jacob, R. and Karn, K. (2003). ‘Eye tracking in human–computer
interaction and usability research: ready to deliver the promises’, in
The Mind’s Eye: Cognitive and Applied Aspects of Eye
Movement Research, ed. by Radach, R., Hyona, J. and Deubel,
H., pp. 573–605, Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Joachims, T., Granka, L. and Pan, B. (2005). ‘Accurately Interpreting
Clickthrough Data as Implicit Feedback’,
in 28th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 154–161, Salvador,
Aug 15–19.

Jobst, M. and Do¨llner, J. (2008). ‘Neo-cartographic influence on map
communication in LBS’,
in Location Based Services and
TeleCartography II (Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and
Cartography), pp. 207–219, Springer, Heidelberg/Berlin.

Kakoulis, K. G. and Tollis, I. G. (2001). ‘On the complexity of the
edge label placement problem’, Computational Geometry:
Theory and Applications, 18, pp. 1–17.

Kraak, M.-J. and He, N. (2009). ‘Organizing the Neo-Geography
Collections with Annotated Space–Time Paths’,
in 24th
International Cartographic Conference, Santiago, Nov 15–
21.

Marks, J. and Shieber, S. (1991). The computational complexity of
cartographic label placement. TR-05-91. Center for Computing
Technology, Harvard, UK.

‘Cognitive map-design research in the
Montello, D. R. (2002).
twentieth century:
approaches’,
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 29, pp.
283–304.

and empirical

theoretical

Montello, D. R. (2009). ‘Cognitive research in GIScience: recent
achievements and future prospects’, Geography Compass, 3,
1824–1840.

Mote, K. D. (2007). ‘Fast point-feature label placement for dynamic

visualizations’, Information Visualization, 6, pp. 249–260.

Nielsen, J. (1993). Usability Engineering, Morgan Kaufmann, San

Francisco, CA.

Nivala, A. (2007). Usability Perspectives for the Design of

Interactive Maps, University of Technology, Helsinki.

Ooms, K., Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N., de Maeyer, P. and Fack,
V. (2012a). ‘Analysing the spatial dimension of eye movement data
using a
approach’, Expert Systems with
Applications, 39, pp. 1324–1332.

analytic

visual

Ooms, K., de Maeyer, P., Fack, V., van Assche, E. and Witlox,
F. (2012b). ‘Interpreting maps through the eye of expert and
novice users’, International Journal of Geographic Information
Science, in press.

Phillips, R. J., Noyes, E. and Audley, E. J. (1978). ‘Searching for
names on maps’, The Cartographic Journal, 15, pp. 72–77.
Poole, A. and Ball, L. J. (2006). ‘Eye tracking in human computer
status and future
interaction and usability research: current
prospects’, in Encyclopedia of Human Computer Interaction,
ed. by Ghaoui, C., pp. 211–219, Idea Group, Hershey, PA.

246

The Cartographic Journal

Rayner, K. (1998).

‘Eye movement in reading and information
processing: 20 years of research’, Psychological Bulletin, 124,
pp. 372–422.

Rubin, J. and Chisnell, D. (2008). Handbook of Usability Testing.
How to Plan, Design and Conduct Effective Tests, 2nd ed.,
Wiley Publishing, New York.

Salvucci, D. D. and Anderson, J. R. (2001).

‘Automated eye-
movement protocol analysis’, Human–Computer Interaction,
16, pp. 39–86.

Schiessl, M., Duda, S., Tho¨lke, A. and Fischer, R. (2003). ‘Eye tracking
and its application in usability and media research’, MMI-
Interaktiv Journal – Online Zeitschrift zu Fragen der Mensch-
Maschine-Interaktion, 6, pp. 41–50.

Slocum, T. A., Blok, C., Jiang, B., Koussoulakou, A., Montello, D. R.,
Fuhrmann, S. and Hedley, N. R. (2001). ‘Cognitive and usability
issues
in geovisualization’, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 28, pp. 61–75.

Strijk, T. and van Kreveld, M. (2002). ‘Practical extensions of point
labeling in the slider model’, GeoInformatica, 6, pp. 181–197.
Turner, A. J. (2006). Introduction to Neogeography, O’Reilly

van Dijk, S. (2001). Genetic Algorithms for Map Labeling, Utrecht

Media, Sebastopol, CA.

University, Utrecht.

van Dijk, S., van Kreveld, M. and Wolff, A. (2002). ‘Towards an
evaluation of quality for names placement methods’, International
Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 16, pp. 641–661.
van Elzakker, C. (2004). The Use of Maps in the Exploration of

Geographic Data, Labor Grafimedia b.v., Utrecht.

van Kreveld, M., Strijk, T. and Wolff, A. (1999). ‘Point labeling with
and

labels’, Computational Geometry: Theory

sliding
Applications, 13, pp. 21–47.

Wagner, F., Wolff, A., Kapoor, V. and Strijk, T. (2001). ‘Three rules
suffice for good label placement’, Algorithmica, 30, pp. 334–349.
Wolff, A., Knipping, L., van Kreveld, M., Strijk, T. and Agarwal, P. K.
(2000). ‘A Simple and Efficient Algorithm for High-Quality Line
Labeling’, in 7th Annual Conference GIS Research UK, pp.
147–159, Southampton, Apr 27–29.

Wood, C. H. (2000). ‘A descriptive and illustrated guide for type
placement on small scale maps’, The Cartographic Journal, 37,
pp. 5–18.

Yamamoto, M., Camara, G. and Lorena, L. A. N. (2002). ‘Tabu search
placement’,

cartographic

label

for

heuristic
GeoInformatica, 6, pp. 77–90.

point-feature

Yamamoto, M., Camara, G. and Lorena, L. A. N. (2005). ‘Fast Point-
Feature Label Placement Algorithm for Real Time Screen Maps’, in
7th Brazilian Symposium on GeoInformatics, pp. 122–138, Sa˜o
Paulo, Nov 20–23.

Yoeli, P. (1972).

‘The logic of automated map lettering’, The

Cartographic Journal, 9, pp. 99–108.

Zambarbieri, D., Carniglia, E. and Robino, C. (2008). ‘Eye tracking
analysis in reading online newspapers’, Journal of Eye Movement
Research, 2, pp. 1–8.

Zhang, Q. and Harrie, L. (2006). ‘Real-time map labelling for mobile
applications’, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 30,
pp. 773–783.

Zoraster, S. (1990). ‘The solution of large 0–1 integer programming
problems encountered in automated cartography’, Operations
Research, 38, pp. 752–759.

Zoraster, S. (1997). ‘Practical results using simulated annealing for
point feature label placement’, Cartography and GIS, 24, pp.
228–238.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

