The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Cartographies of Fuzziness: Mapping Places and
Emotions

Alenka Poplin

To cite this article: Alenka Poplin (2017) Cartographies of Fuzziness: Mapping Places and
Emotions, The Cartographic Journal, 54:4, 291-300, DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1420020

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2017.1420020

Published online: 19 Feb 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 54 No. 4
© The British Cartographic Society 2018

pp. 291–300

2017

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Cartographies of Fuzziness: Mapping Places and Emotions

Alenka Poplin

Department of Community and Regional Planning, Iowa State University, Room 487, 477 College of Design, Ames, IA
50011, USA
Email: apoplin@iastate.edu

Mapping emotions and places is an emerging field in cartography. This article explores expressed emotions related to power places,
which are defined as places at which people can recharge and relax. At these places they can find their balance and inner power.
Our research is based on empirical experiments in Germany and the USA in which the participants self-identified and mapped
their power places. They described them and selected expressions for emotions that best describe how they feel at these places. The
main goal of this paper is to compare the results gained on two different continents. Using Russell’s Circumplex Model of
Affect, we explore the cultural differences by mapping emotions in a two-dimensional circular place. We conclude the article
with a discussion of the results and further research directions.

Keywords: power places; emotions; Circumplex Model of Affect; mapping places and emotions

INTRODUCTION

Mapping places and emotions is increasingly gaining atten-
tion in the geoinformation science and cartography research
communities. This year, 2017,
the International Carto-
graphic Conference (ICC) organized in Washington DC,
offered a workshop (the first of a kind) on Mapping
Emotions, gathering the researchers active in this newly
emerging research field. The workshop combined carto-
graphic and artistic approaches, recognizing that it is a
highly interdisciplinary field of research which needs to
involve other experts and researchers in environmental
psychology, geoinformation- and data science, and citizen
science.

Not only are emotions difficult to gather and represent on
a map, there is also a lack of understanding of emotions
related to places, how people perceive places and how they
express their emotions felt at these places. Often the measure-
ment of so-called emotions has been reduced to measuring
the Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) such as the example of
Emotion Maps developed by Nold (2017) or the work
done by Zeile and his collaborators (2015a, 2015b).
Additional research needs to be invested in an improved
understanding of how these and other measurements can
be translated into emotions and related to places.

In this paper we explore the notion of power places and
how people express their emotions felt at these places.
Power places are defined as places at which people can
recharge and relax; at these places they can find their
balance and inner power. We base our discussion on empirical

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2017.1420020

experiments conducted in Hamburg, Germany and Ames,
Iowa, USA. In these experiments, we encouraged people to
map their self-selected power places in the cities they live
and know well. We worked with paper and online interactive
maps implemented on Volunteered Geographic Information
(VGI) (Goodchild, 2007) and Public Participation GIS prin-
ciples (Craig et al., 2002; Kingston and Carver, 2000; Poplin,
2012; Sieber, 2006). The participants, students in both cities,
additionally described these places with their own words;
they were encouraged to use a list of emotions taken from
Rosenberg (1999) and selected the emotions that best
described their emotions felt at these places. We then inserted
the gathered data into a geographic information system
(GIS) software.

The main goal of this paper is to compare the results
gained in two different cities in two different countries;
Hamburg, Germany and Ames, Iowa. We particularly con-
centrate on emotions associated with places, which we rep-
resent on the Russell’s (1980) Circumplex Model of Affect.
His and other empirical studies and factor-analytic evidence
has lead most researchers to describe emotion/affect (used
interchangeably in this paper) as a set of dimensions such
as pleasure, stress, depression and excitement, with each
the others. These
dimension varying independently of
dimensions are interrelated and, according to researchers,
can be represented by a spatial model in which affective con-
cepts can be represented in a circle. We use this model created
by Russell (1980) to map gathered expressed emotions into a
two-dimensional space with pleasure–displeasure and degree-

292

The Cartographic Journal

of-arousal axes. The use of the model makes cultural differ-
ences in verbal expressions of emotions more transparent.
We conclude the paper with a discussion of the fuzzy con-
cepts we encountered conducting these experiments includ-
ing the fuzziness of location when discussing power places;
the fuzzy, not well-defined borders and shapes of power
places and the fuzziness of expressed emotions. These are
all topics that call for additional research. We conclude the
paper with a summary of the results and further research
directions.

EMOTIONAL RESPONSE TO THE PHYSICAL

ENVIRONMENT

Figure 2. Russell’s (1980) Circumplex Model of Affect, representing
eight affect concepts in a circular order

Experiencing the physical environment
The experience of place is unique to each individual. In
environmental psychology, research on emotions and affect
are considered important topics (Kaplan, 1995; Kaplan and
Kaplan, 1989; Korpela, 2012; Korpela et al., 2001; Russell
and James, 2003; Russell and Pratt, 1980). ‘Affect is central
to conscious experience and behaviour in any environment,
whether natural or built, crowded or unpopulated. Because
virtually no meaningful thoughts, actions, or environmental
encounters occur without affect’ (Ulrich, 1983). In addition,
the cognitive component is of considerable value in experien-
cing the physical environment as well (Ittelson, 1973; Russell
and Pratt, 1980).

Environmental stimuli affect humans and result in different
emotional states that cause different responses (Figure 1).
People react to places and react at these places, which is an
involving interplay of emotions, knowledge, beliefs, and beha-
viours in reference to a place (Proshansky et al., 1983;
Waxman, 2006). Steele (1981) distinguishes among immedi-
ate feelings and thoughts, views of the world, intimate knowl-
edge of one spot, memories or fantasies, and personal
identification. Places may also provide restorative experience
as people may seek these places after experiencing negative
emotions such as stress, accidents, or depressions. Restorative
experiences may involve positive mood changes, positive
sensations, or feelings of being at peace or happy.

Russell’s Circumplex Model of Affect
In 1980 Russell proposed a Circumplex Model of Affect
based on the idea of Schlosberg’s (1954) proposal that the
emotions are organized in a circular arrangement. In 1941
Schlosberg published a paper titled A scale for the judgment

of facial expressions in which he presented data collected on a
series of pictures of facial expressions showing emotions.
He concluded that
the scale describing these emotions
describes a roughly circular surface. ‘Inspection of pictures
arranged around the scale suggested that the surface might
be generated by two axes, pleasantness-unpleasantness, and
attention-rejection’ (Schlosberg, 1952, p. 86). Inspired by
Schlosberg’s (1952) model, Russell (1980) developed a
model that includes a two-dimensional space with eight vari-
ables arranged in a circle (Figure 2). The horizontal, east–
west dimension, is the pleasure–displeasure dimension. The
vertical, north–south dimension, is arousal–sleep. Mehrabian
and Russell (1974) described arousal as a mental activity in
terms of a dimension ranging from sleep to frantic excite-
ment. The following four variables help to better define the
four quadrants. North-east we find excitement and the
polar opposite is depression on the South-west. Distress is
located on the north-west with its polar opposite, content-
ment, on the south-east. This model is still used today in
social psychology to assess affect.

Laymen’s verbal expression of emotions
How do laymen conceptualize emotions? According to
Russell (1980, p. 1162), ‘the laymen’s cognitive represen-
tation of emotion is presumably implicit in the sense that
few if any could explicitly state their complete conceptual fra-
mework; it must be inferred from judgements made about
emotion. It may also be useful to think of cognitive represen-
tation as a theory in that it includes a set of categories (each
labelled by a term such as happy, excited, or sad)’. He con-
cludes that ‘persons possess a cognitive structure capable of

Figure 1. Environmental stimuli result in emotional states that cause different responses

Cartographies of Fuzziness

representing affect’. There have been in general few studies
concerned with the laymen’s theories of affect.

The majority of the initial studies of nonverbal emotional
expressions (Abelson and Sermat, 1962; Green and Cliff,
1975; Schlosberg, 1954) confirmed the existence of two
independent dimensions, the first being pleasantness–unplea-
santness and the second being some combination of Schlos-
berg’s attention-rejection and sleep-tension.

(1952) hypothesis

Studies of the affective structure implicit in the verbal
expression in the English language have also supported
Schlosberg’s
(Russell, 1980). They
confirm two specific properties of cognitive representation
for affect. The first dimension, pleasantness–unpleasantness
(P–U), and the second arousal–sleep (A–S) dimension
‘account for the major proportion of variance in the judged
similarities
1980,
p. 1163). Russell and Mahrabian (1977) added a third
dimension which they called dominance–submissiveness.
However, each additional dimension to P–U and A–S often
accounts for a quite small proportion of variance. Fillenbaum
and Rapopert (1971) reorganized and analysed the data col-
lected by Block (1957) and also concluded that verbal
emotional names were arranged on the circumference of a
circle in a two-dimensional space (Russell, 1980).

emotion words’

(Russel,

among

Mapping places and emotions
Both, places and emotions involve fuzziness, which makes
them difficult to grasp, understand, scientifically analyse,
and to cartographically represent. Canter (1977) described a
place as the intersection of a setting’s physical characteristics,
a person’s individual perceptions, and the actions or uses
that occur in a particular location (Bonnes and Secchiaroli,
1995; Bott et al., 2003; Pretty et al., 2003); it is therefore a
set of qualitative and quantitative characteristics that deter-
mine a place. Geoinformation science and digital cartography
call for an improved understanding of places and recognize the
need to establish a place-based GIS (Goodchild, 2011; Winter
and Freksa, 2012). Currently, GIS can store objects with well-
defined borders but is not able to deal with objects that do not
have clear, well-defined borders and/or descriptions. Objects
like chairs or tables have clear borders. However, in nature
we often find objects such as lakes, forests and meadows that
have either changing borders (think of a lake in a Karst
region that disappears when there is no rain and appears
large in the rainy seasons) or not well-defined borders.
Places are often described in terms of ‘downtown Hamburg’
or ‘that place in front of the sports centre’, which do not indi-
cate clear borders.

Fuzziness of borders and descriptions are characteristics of
places, which makes it difficult to map and represent them in
a GIS. A GIS requires the objects to be defined and rep-
resented as either a point, line or polygon with well-defined
borders and locations. Goodchild (2011) recognized the
need to deal with such cases and suggested to concentrate
research on what he calls place-based GIS. Winter and
Freksa (2012) supported this idea and stressed the importance
of the ‘human cognitive notion of place’ and the need to
capture, gather and map human cognitive notions of places.
Mapping emotions related to places is in its infant phase.
Emotions may be fuzzy, difficult to express, measure and to

293

map. Currently we lack computer-based models which may
enable one to represent fuzzy objects. Some current research
on emotional maps reduce the notion of emotion to the
measured results gained by the Galvanic Skin Response
(GSR) as in the example of Emotion Maps developed by
Nold (2017). This is not satisfactory, and we need a more
critical and deeper perspective on emotions and cartography.
GSR in principle measures skin conductance (and not the
whole spectrum of emotions); an electro-dermal activity in
the skin, which modulates the amount of sweat secretion
from sweat glands. In simple words, it measures how much
people sweat. How much is this related to emotions? It is
for sure that an arousal and fear can be measured with this
these measurements?
technique. How can we interpret
Both positive (happy, pleasant, joyful) and negative (stress,
tension,
in an increased
emotional arousal and in an increase of skin conductance.
Also Zeile and his collaborators (2015a, 2015b) base their
work on GSR and the responses to external events. We
should be careful in calling these measurements emotions.

threatening) stimuli can result

Gartner (2010, 2012) explored the relevance of emotions
in the wayfinding process by collecting emotional responses
to space as personal evaluations of affective qualities of this
space. Griffin and Mcquoid (2012) clearly state that ‘a rela-
tively small proportion of cartographic efforts have been
made in this direction [visualizing and assessing emotions]
because, perhaps, of the difficulties in data collection and rep-
resentation that mapping emotion entails.’ They argue that
(p. 291)

the time is ripe in cartography to engage with this element
of human experience, as new data collection method-
ologies and Web 2.0-derived data sources provide the
potential to open up whole new worlds for cartographers
to more fully map the human experience,
including
emotions … .

Mapping power places and expressed emotions: research questions
There is a need for a better understanding of emotions related
to places, the definitions and descriptions of places, the fuzzi-
ness of the concept of a place and emotion, and how can they
be mapped in a GIS (Gartner, 2010, 2012; Griffin and
Mcquoid, 2012; Zeile et al., 2015a, 2015b; Poplin, 2017).
This paper is a small step towards improved understanding
of descriptions related to places and emotions felt at these
places. We concentrate on power places, which we define as
follows: A power place is a place of choice at which people recharge
and relax. At this place they can find their balance and inner
power in an often very stressful daily life. A power place can
evoke different emotions. Power places can be located outside, in
open public spaces, or inside.

The research questions we address are the following:

. Where in the city are power places located?
. How do people describe these places?
. How do people describe emotions felt at these places?

In this paper we concentrate on a comparison between two
different cities selected for our experimental work. A better
understanding of human experience at places and the
notion of emotions aims to contribute to the debate on

294

The Cartographic Journal

younger than 20 years old, one participant of the age
between 35 and 49 and one of the age between 50 and 65.
Six participants did not reveal their age. In Ames we have
so far involved 72 students in two set of surveys; 40 students
participated in the paper-map experiments and 33 students
participated in the online survey. All involved students were
in the ages of 21–34.

Mapped locations of power places
A power place can be located inside in a building or outside in
an open space. In our surveys in both cities, Hamburg and
Ames, we particularly asked the participants to indicate
places outside, in public spaces. The power places identified
in Hamburg were all
located outside; there we gathered
191 power places (Figure 4). There is a higher concentration
of power places in Hamburg such as the parks and green
public spaces, in the city park Stadtpark, which is a big
open space north of the downtown area, around the Alster,
lake close to the downtown, and along the
the artificial
river Elbe and its canals. All
identified power places in
Hamburg were located outside.

The power places indicated in Ames are located outside
and inside and up to now (July 2017) we collected 136
valid entries for power places in Ames (Figure 5). The
majority of them are located in the parks and green areas
(45), especially noticeable is the concentration in Ada
Hayden Park and Brookside Park. The third concentration
of power places (22 power places) is noticeable in the
Campus Town. The Campus Town includes the university
campus where there are no official park areas, but the univer-
sity campus itself includes many bigger green surfaces includ-
ing grass and trees with benches at attractive locations.

The second category in Ames, 36 power places, was
located inside the buildings. Several avenues and roads
(nine power places) were indicated as power places due to
inspiring
their walkability,

and interesting or

shops

how to map fuzzy objects such as places in a GIS and how to
classify and grasp emotions related to places. It aims to con-
tribute to the research on mapping emotions, emotional car-
tography and expand this field with more depth in the area of
emotions and fuzzy objects such as power places.

POWER PLACES: EMPIRICAL RESULTS GATHERED IN

GERMANY AND USA

Research methodology and survey of participants
In order to conduct empirical experiments we selected two
located in the
cities; the large German city, Hamburg,
north of Germany, and the small university town of Ames
in Iowa,
located in the Midwest of the US. They were
selected due to their major differences in size and location.
Hamburg has 2 million inhabitants, and Ames currently
counts about 62,000 inhabitants.

In both cities we concentrated on interviewing the young
population, mostly students,
in order to get comparable
results. The research methodology was based on a paper
map representing the city, a printed questionnaire and a list
of emotions (Figure 3). We explained the concept of the
power place to the participants and let them map their
power places on the map and describe them in the question-
naire. In Ames we also used an online map-based survey
which contained the same questions as in the paper map
experiments. It can be viewed following the link https://
maptionnaire.com/en/2726.

The main categories in the questionnaire included the
location of the power place, description of the main charac-
teristics of the place (described with the words of choice,
up to four words for each power place), emotions felt at
these places that were chosen from the list of emotions pub-
lished in the book by Rosenberg (1999), indication of the
transportation model which allows the participant to access
the selected power place, a possibility to sketch the power
place, and give basic information about the participant such
as age and gender. The online version of the questionnaire
included the following additional categories: travel distance
to the power place, frequency of visits, importance of the
power place to the participant, level of income, a story that
the participant may be willing to share about this self-selected
power place.

In Hamburg we involved 101 participants and received the
corresponding 101 filled-in questionnaires. The majority of
the participants, 83, were students at the university in the
age between 20 and 24. We also had 10 participants

Figure 3. The paper map, questionnaire and list of emotions used in the
paper-map experiments

Figure 4. Power places captured in the experiments executed in the city
of Hamburg, Germany

Cartographies of Fuzziness

295

Figure 5. Power places captured in the experiments executed in the city of Ames, Iowa

environment. Restaurants and coffee places (nine power
places) may also be considered power places; often they are
inside places. If we add them to the inside buildings we get
a rather larger category, 45 power places, located inside.

Descriptions of power places
Many different words were used for the description of places.
We did not propose any pre-specified categories and let the
participants feel free in their expression. After we gathered
all descriptions we decided to sort them out into a few
main categories. These categories include the following:
. Experience. This category includes words describing
what people can experience at their power place. Examples
of the words may be: cleanliness, success, community
involvement, connection with nature, wild life, religion,
interaction, friendly people, cultural …

. Atmosphere. The category Atmosphere describes the way
the power place feels to the subjects, the way the atmos-
phere feels like. Examples of words used: peaceful, bright,
personal, fresh, lush, flowing, relaxing, silent, social, crea-
tive, artsy, tranquil, refreshing, energetic, dim, chill, cosy,
vibrant, soft, calm, colourful, motivating, bustling …
. Infrastructure. The category Infrastructure describes the
infrastructure available to the people. The words used may
include: pathways, food, comfortably furnished, coffee,
shops, seating, vending machines, big rooms, trails, proxi-
mity to home, restroom, dining, chairs, beer, internet, play
area, printer …

. Green. The category Green includes green areas described
by the use of the following words: ground cover, trees,
nature, mountain, rugged, green space, forest, large areas
of grass, flora, fauna, nature …

. Water. The descriptions related to water include: proxi-

mity to water, lake, fountain, creek, river … .

. Activity. All activities indicating what one can do at the
power place are included in this category. This may
include: walking, playing frisbee, hiking, playing golf, rec-
reational activity, swing, exercising, walking, fishing, …
. Objects. The category Objects include objects visible at
power places and significant to the subjects of our survey.
Those mentioned in our survey include: benches, built,
many houses, brick building, old architecture, houses, …

important characteristics of

Table 1 summarizes the main categories of the descriptions,
the number of the descriptions in each category and the per-
centage of all descriptions for the selected city. In Hamburg
followed by the Experience
the Atmosphere (27.2%),
(21.5%), are the most
the
power places. Water (18.3%) is the third most important
element in Hamburg due to the many canals formed by the
river Elbe and its importance for the image of the city.
Green areas have 13.8% of importance for our participants
in Hamburg. Infrastructure is on the sixth level of impor-
tance for Hamburg. In Ames, the most important was the
Experience (31%), followed by the Atmosphere (23%) and
Infrastructure (20.5%). It is interesting that infrastructure
plays an important role in the US city, but may be considered

Characteristic

Hamburg

Hamburg % 191 power places

Ames

Ames % 136 power places

296

Table 1. The frequency of descriptions

Experience
Atmosphere
Infrastructure
Green
Water
Activities
Objects
Together

128
162
42
82
109
19
53
595

The Cartographic Journal

21.5%
27.2%
7.1%
13.8%
18.3%
3.2%
8.9%
100%

121
90
80
51
23
17
8
390

31%
23%
20.5%
13.1%
5.9%
4.4%
2.1%
100%

given or not so important in a German city. In the US, more
participants mentioned indoor places, while in Germany this
was hardly mentioned. Green (13.1%) and water areas
(5.9%) in Ames are more important than Activities (4.4%)
and visible Objects (2.1%).

Emotions felt at power places
Table 2 summarizes the words used to describe the men-
tioned emotions felt at the identified power places. The
words were translated from English into German for the

German participants in Hamburg; the same list was used in
both cities. The percentage in the table calculates the percen-
tage of the participants using this particular word to describe
their emotions felt at these places in a particular city.

In order to better understand the differences we used
Russell’s (1980) Circumplex Model of Affect to illustrate
where in the four quadrants the words can be located for
the emotions expressed in each of the cities (Figures 6 and 7).
As we basically concentrate on the positive aspects of these
places, we find all verbal emotions on the north-east and

Table 2. Overview of the emotions felt at power places

Emotion in English language

Emotion in German language

Hamburg, Germany

Hamburg %

Ames, North America

Ames %

relaxed
calm
exuberant
happy
animated
satisfied
comfortable
liberated
peaceful
balanced
pleasant
carefree
quiet
secure
warm
energetic
inspired
touched
mellow
serene
easygoing
mindless
excited
tejuvenated
tranquil
clear
loving
eager
empowered
friendly
jubilant
open
optimistic
productive
alert
content
delighted
lively
Together

entspannt
ruhig
lebendig
glücklich
belebt
zufrieden
bequem
befreit
friedlich
ausgeglichen
angenehm
sorglos
leise
sicher
warm
energiegeladen
inspiriert
beruhigt
sanft
gelassen
unbeschwert
unbekümmert
aufgeregt
regeneriert
ruhig
klar
libevoll
eifrig
ermaechtigt
freundlich
freudestrahlend
offen
optimistisch
produktiv
wachsam
zufrieden
hocherfreut
lebhaft

50
28
29
24
24
24
–
18
18
17
17
16
–
–
–
13
12
12
–
11
11
11
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
4
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
339

14.8%
8.3%
8.6%
7.1%
7.1%
7.1%
–
5.3%
5.3%
5%
5%
4.7%
–
–
–
3.8%
3.5%
3.5%
–
3.2%
3.2%
3.2%
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1.2%
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
100%

29
21
–
26
–
–
14
–
7
–
–
–
10
10
9
8
–
–
8
8
–
–
7
7
7
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
236

12.3%
8.9%
–
11%
–
–
5.9%
–
3%
–
–
–
4.2%
4.2%
3.8%
3.4%
–
–
3.4%
3.4%
–
–
3%
3%
3%
2.5%
2.5%
2.1%
2.1%
2.1%
2.1%
2.1%
2.1%
2.1%
1.7%
1.7%
1.7%
1.7%
100%

Cartographies of Fuzziness

297

Figure 6. Verbal emotions felt at power places in Hamburg, Germany

Figure 7. Verbal emotions felt at power places in Ames, Iowa

south-east side of the diagram. Figure 6 shows the emotions
expressed for places located in Hamburg, and Figure 7 cap-
tures emotions gathered in Ames. The most noticeable differ-
ence is in the north-east quadrant which displays the
emotions that are pleasant and have a higher arousal. Only
two words in this quadrant – energetic, happy – were the
same in both cities. We find six emotions in this category in
Hamburg, and twelve in Ames. In the south-east quadrant,
the pleasant-sleepy axis, we see the same number of words
for Germany and Ames. However, the words are rather
different. Six of them – including friendly, peaceful, serene,
relaxed, calm – were the same in both cities. Apart from
that, the participants used a different vocabulary in each of
the cities.

MAPPING FUZZY OBJECTS: EXAMPLES OF PLACES

AND EMOTIONS

Fuzziness of the location
The personal notion of the location and the computer-based
GIS notion of the location may be quite different. A GIS
requires a very precise location given in a latitude and longi-
tude or coordinates, and entering the data into the system
requires from the experimenter to choose the exact location
of a power place to be represented on a map. In our exper-
iments we decided to cartographically visualize power
places as points. These points are located at an exact location
of a point in a GIS system. The points were gathered from the

298

The Cartographic Journal

drawings of power places on the paper maps and from the
online interactive maps and the associated geodatabase. The
points inserted in the paper map were sometimes bigger
(due to the thickness of the pencil or colour used to draw
these points) than some objects around them. The exper-
imenter had to decide about the exact point at which the
power place can be mapped in a GIS. For the digital,
online maps, the participants had to choose the location.

In the case of a power place, an exact location might not be
important, as the individual may get the same experience and
atmosphere ‘near’ this location.

An example of a situation like that is demonstrated in
Figure 8, which shows a bench that enables a human being
to observe the river in front and perhaps enjoy the atmos-
phere of a sunset. The different points represent different
locations at which this experience would be possible. One
can sit on the bench in different locations & sit or stand some-
where close to the bench for the same experience of the
atmosphere. Depending on the health condition of the indi-
vidual or overall feeling and preferences, standing or sitting
would be chosen as optimal or a preference. Figure 8
clearly presents a general versus an exact location, which
leads to the concept of a fuzzy location. This example illus-
trates how vague the concept of the place’s location is in
general, and in particular for a power place. Indicating and
mapping a power place as a point is a highly generalized rep-
resentation of this place. Additional research needs to be
invested in exploring this concept and the amplitude of the
fuzziness related to the location.

Fuzziness of the place’s borders
Places often do not have clear, well-defined borders. They are
expressed with the notions such as the place ‘in front of the
school’, ‘in the back yard’, or ‘at the lake near a restaurant’.
The borders of a place are often fuzzy, which does not seem
to impact the concept or pleasure of the place, but rather
becomes an essential part of how places are perceived, mem-
orized and experienced by human beings.

Figure 9 shows an example of a power place selected in
Hamburg and located in Planten un Bloomen City Park.
Where is the beginning of this place and where is the end?
The bench and the tree seem to be central to this power
place, but where would the participant draw the line indicat-
ing the borders of this place? A power place is not just its

Figure 8. An example of a power place at a bench with a river view

representation on a two-dimensional map, but rather a com-
bination of the physical objects (benches, trees, …) and the
experience (quite, colourful, cool, …) attached to this par-
ticular place.

Fuzziness of the shape of the place
Figure 8 showed the case in which the power place can be
mapped as a point. This is true in cases when the location
can be identified with a high precision as a point, as a rela-
tively exact location. Often, the shape of a power place may
be different than just a point; the whole park might be con-
sidered a power place or just a walking path along the lake.
Figure 10 shows the linear shapes of indicated power
places which are the paths around the Alster Lake where
people enjoy jogging, walking their dogs or meeting
friends for a long walk. The location of a power place may
also be represented as a polygon. This experience encourages
us to think about different shapes of power places and also
their differences in sizes. Our first mapping experiment did
not deal with these characteristics of power places, but
rather inspired our future research in this direction.

Fuzziness of the expressed emotions
In this paper we compared expressed emotions about power
places in Hamburg, Germany, with the words for emotions
used in Ames, Iowa. The cultural differences are noticeable,
especially in the north-east quadrant on the axis pleasure-
arousal. American students tend to use more expressions in
this quadrant than the German students. The quadrant plea-
sure-sleepy is equally represented in terms of the number of
words, but the students used different words. The different
structures of affect reported in studies carried out in different
languages appear to say that there is a variety of structures
that appear in each language. Such studies were conducted
in different languages such as Japanese, Hebrew (Fillenbaum
and Rapopert, 1971), Swedish, and German, but did not
consider places and affect related to places. Additional
research in inter-lingual expressions of emotions is needed,
especially in relation to places.

The words expressing emotions gathered in our surveys
were placed in the respective quadrants by the experimenter.
Additional research on the similarity of these expressions and
ordering them in different quadrants may be performed as a
follow up of this study. When we talk about the fuzziness of
the descriptions and/or uses of
the words describing
emotions we refer to the interpretation of these words and
possible different meanings or intensity the same or similar
word may have for different participants. Additional research
is needed in this area, and especially in the area of urban
emotions in which we may link the physical characteristics
of places and the emotions to these places and their character-
istics they may evoke.

CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH

In this paper we summarized the empirical results of the
power places gathered in Hamburg, Germany and Ames,
Iowa. These places, along with their descriptions and the

Cartographies of Fuzziness

299

Figure 9. A power place in Hamburg selected by a survey participant

the experiments on paper- and online,

emotions felt at these places, were gathered with the help
of
interactive
maps. Both types of maps were associated with the same
basic questions (some additional questions were added
into the online version) and the same list of emotions the
participants
could choose from, while describing the
emotions felt at these places. An interesting conclusion is
associated with the descriptions of these places in which
experience and atmosphere play an important role, more
important
than the green areas or infrastructure. The
experience was described as immersive, rewarding, comfor-
table, historic architecture, wild life,
indoor, community
included
etc. The
involvement, historic,
descriptions such as peaceful, bright, personal, fresh, peace-
ful, lush, flowing, fresh clean breeze, relaxing, silent, social,
creative, open, quiet, artsy, and others. It is interesting to
observe that it is not something tangible that is the most
important to the citizens. The infrastructure, and indoor
places, are more important to the participants in Ames
than to those in Hamburg.

atmosphere

The article particularly concentrates on additional classifi-
cation of the emotions according to the Russell’s (1980) Cir-
cumplex Model of Affect. The method aided in an
understanding that there are differences in expressions of
emotions between German and American students in the cor-
responding cities of Hamburg and Ames. The American stu-
dents used more uplifting words in the quadrant pleasure-
arousal than the German students; there were six words
used by the German students (energetic, exuberant, ani-
mated, inspired, touched, and happy) and the American stu-
dents used 12 (energetic, alert, excited, empowered, eager,
loving,
delighted, productive, optimistic,

rejuvenated,

Figure 10. Power places as lines in Hamburg

jubilant, and happy). There was an equal number of words
used in the quadrant pleasure-sleepy, but the words used to
describe their emotions were different
in both cities/
countries. These differences call for additional research.

the cultural differences

Additional research is needed in a better understanding
of the cartography of fuzzy objects in order to be able to
contribute to the discussion related to place-based GIS
and mapping places and emotions. We discussed the fuzzi-
ness of the concept of location for a power place; the
unclear, not well-defined borders of a place and the differ-
ent shapes a place can have. In our further analysis we will
concentrate on the emotions related to places and in par-
ticular
in expressing emotions
related to places. We will continue using VGI in the data
gathering stage. Additionally, we need to better understand
the connectivity and accessibility of places, especially, for
example, in parks in the cities. We intend to apply space
syntax analysis combined with a spatial analysis in a GIS.
Place-based GIS is still in its infancy; deeper discussions
of these concepts are needed. The topic of this paper
opened up many interesting and challenging research ques-
tions. We aim to continue contributing to the discussions
on places, place-making, emotions felt at places, place-
based GIS and cartographic challenges of mapping infor-
mation about intangible landscapes.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Alenka Poplin is an Assistant Professor
at the Department of Community and
Regional Planning, Iowa State Univer-
sity, and a founder of GeoGames Lab.
Her research interests include geovisua-
lization, interaction with online maps,
power places and place-based GIS, geo-
for civic
games, and serious games
engagement in planning.

300

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thank you to Stephen Poplin for language improvements of
this text. Thank you also to Shoaib Mahmud, my research
assistant at Iowa State, for his help with organizing the
data about power places in Ames.

REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P. and Sermat, V. (1962). ‘Multidimensional scaling of facial
expressions’, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63, pp. 546–554.
Block, J. (1957). ‘Studies in the phenomenology of emotions’, Journal

of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 54, pp. 358–363.

Bonnes, M. and Secchiaroli, G. (1995). Environmental Psychology: A

Psycho-Social Introduction, Sage, London.

Bott, S., Cantrill, J. G. and Myers, O. E. (2003). ‘Place and the promise
of conservation psychology’, Human Ecology Review, 10(2).
Canter, D. V. (1977). The Psychology of Place, Palgrave Macmillan,

New York.

Craig, W. J., Harris, T. M. and Craig, W. J. (2002). Community
Participation and Geographic Information Systems, Taylor and
Francis, London.

Fillenbaum, S. and Rapopert, A. (1971). Structures in the Subjective

Lexicon, Academic Press, New York.

Gartner, G. (2010). Emotional Response to Space as an Additional
Concept of Supporting Wayfinding in Ubiquitous Cartography.
Mapping Different Geographies, Lecture Notes in Geoinformation
and Cartography, 67–73.

Gartner, G. (2012). Putting Emotions in Maps – The Wayfinding
and Cognition. Mountain Cartography

Example. Usability
Workshop in Taurewa, New Zealand Cartographic Society.

Goodchild, M. F. (2007). ‘Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data
infrastructure in the world of Web 2.0’, Journal of Spatial Data
Infrastructures Research, 2, pp. 24–32.

Goodchild, M. F. (2011). ‘Formalizing place in geographic information
systems’,
in Communities, Neighborhoods,
and Health:
Expanding the Boundaries of Place, pp. 21–35, Springer, New York.
Green, R. S. and Cliff, N. (1975). ‘Multidimensional comparisons of
structures of vocally and facially expressed emotions’, Perception
and Psychophysics, 17, pp. 429–438.

Griffin, A. and Mcquoid, J. (2012). ‘At the intersection of maps and
spatially representing experience’,

emotion: The challenge of
Kartographische Nachrichten, 6, pp. 291–298.

Ittelson, W. H. (1973). Environment and Cognition, Seminar Press,

Oxford.

Psychological
Cambridge.

Kaplan, R. and Kaplan, S. (1989). The Experience of Nature: A
Press,

Cambridge University

Perspective,

Kaplan, S. (1995). ‘The restorative benefits of nature: Toward an integra-
tive framework’, Journal of Environmental Psychology, 15, pp.
169–182.

Kingston, R. S. and Carver, E. A. (2000). ‘Web-based public partici-
pation geographical information systems: An aid to local environ-
mental decision-making’, Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 24(109–25).

Korpela, K. (2012). ‘Place attachment’, in The Oxford Handbook of
Environmental and Conservation Psychology, ed. by Clayton,
S., pp. 148–163, Oxford University Press, New York.

Korpela, K. M., Hartig, T., Kaiser, F. G. and Fuhrer, U. (2001).
‘Restorative experience and self-regulation in favorite places’,
Environment and Behavior, 33(572). The online version of this
article can be found at: http://eab.sagepub.com/content/33/34/572.

The Cartographic Journal

Mehrabian, A.

and Russell,

J. A.

(1974). An Approach to

Environmental Psychology, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Nold, C., ed.

(2017). Emotional Cartography. Online: http://
Creative

emotionalcartography.net/EmotionalCartography.pdf,
Commons.

Poplin, A. (2012). ‘Web-based PPGIS for Wilhelmsburg, Germany: An
integration of
interactive GIS-based maps with an online
Questionnaire’, Special Issue of the Journal of Urban and
Regional Information Systems Association (URISA), 25(2),
pp. 71–84.

Poplin, A. (2017). ‘Mapping expressed emotions: Empirical experiments
on power places’, Special Issue of the Journal Kartographische
Nachrichten on Empirical Cartography, 2, pp. 83–91.

Pretty, G. H., Chipuer, H. M. and Bramston, P. (2003). ‘Sense of place
amongst adolescents and adults in two rural Australian towns: The
discriminating features of place attachment, sense of community
and place dependence in relation to place identity’, Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 23, pp. 273–287.

Proshansky, H., Fabian, A. K. and Kaminoff, R. (1983). ‘Place-identity:
Physical world socialization of the self ’, Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 3, pp. 57–83.

Rosenberg, M. B. (1999). Nonviolent Communication: A Language

of Compassion, PuddleDancer Press, Encinitas, CA.

Russell, J. A. (1980).

‘A circumplex model of Affect’, Journal of

Personality and Social Psychology, 39(6), pp. 1161–1178.

Russell, J. A. and James, A. (2003). ‘Core affect and the psychological con-
struction of emotion’, Psychological Review, 110(1), pp. 145–172.
Russell, J. A. and Mahrabian, A. (1977). ‘Evidence for a three-factor
theory of emotions’, Journal of Research in Personality, 11, pp.
273–294.

Russell, J. A. and Pratt, G. A. (1980). ‘A description of the affective
quality attributed to environments’, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 38, pp. 311–322.

Schlosberg, H. (1952). ‘The description of facial expressions in terms of
two dimensions’, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44(4), pp.
229–237.
Schlosberg, H.

‘Three dimensions of Emotion’, The

(1954).

Psychological Review, 61(2), pp. 81–88.

Sieber, R. (2006). ‘Public participation geographic information systems:
A literature review and framework’, Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 96(3), pp. 491–507.

Steele, F. (1981). The Sense of Place, CBI Publishing, Boston.
Ulrich, S. R. (1983). ‘Aesthetic and affective response to natural environ-
ment, behavior and the natural environment’, Human Behavior and
Environment, 6, pp. 85–125.

Waxman, L. (2006). ‘The coffee shop: Social and physical factors influ-
encing place attachment’, Journal of Interior Design, 31(3), pp.
35–53.

Winter, S. and Freksa, C. (2012). ‘Approaching the notions of place
by Contrast’, Journal of Spatial Information Science, 5, pp.
31–50.

Zeile, P., Resch, B., Dörrzapf, L., Exner, J.-P., Sagl, G., Summa, A. and
Sudmanns, M. (2015a). ‘Urban emotions – Tools of integrating
people’s perception into urban planning’, in REAL CORP 2015,
ed. by Schrenk, M., Popovich, V., Zeile, P., Elisei, P. and Beyer, C.,
Vienna, Genth, CORP – Competence Center of Urban and
Regional Planning.

Zeile, P., Resch, B., Exner, J.-P. and Sagl, G. (2015b). ‘Urban emotions:
Benefits and risks in using human sensory assessment for the extrac-
tion of contextual emotion information in urban planning.’
in
Planning Support Systems & Smart Cities, Lecture Notes in
Geoinformation and Cartography, ed. by Geertman, S., Ferreira,
J., pp. 209–225, Springer
J., Godspeed, R. and Stillwell,
International Publishing.

