The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

Adaptive Relative Motion Representation of
Space–Time Trajectories

Antoni B. Moore & Judy Rodda

To cite this article: Antoni B. Moore & Judy Rodda (2015) Adaptive Relative Motion
Representation of Space–Time Trajectories, The Cartographic Journal, 52:2, 204-209

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1119463

Published online: 27 Nov 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 4

View related articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi]

Date: 14 January 2016, At: 21:20

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 52 No. 2
q The British Cartographic Society 2015

4
pp. 20 –209

International Cartographic Conference, Rio 2015 - Special Issue May 2015

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

Adaptive Relative Motion Representation of Space–Time
Trajectories

Antoni B. Moore and Judy Rodda

School of Surveying, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Email: tony.moore@otago.ac.nz

Many devices are now geared towards collecting spatiotemporal data on a massive scale. Trajectory data of objects form a
large component of this resource and even the smaller trajectory datasets are a representational challenge for cartography.
We present a method that regularizes mapped trajectory data into an object|time interval matrix to better compare the
direction characteristics of objects. We use a simulated annealing method to optimize the order of object rows at a speciﬁc
time interval so that objects that are close together in space tend to be close together in the matrix. We also graphically
represent the distance between objects and the general direction the object is travelling in the matrix, which is called Adaptive
Relative Motion (ARM). Finally, we demonstrate the implementation of ARM through a case study of dolphin trajectories.

Keywords: ARM matrix, simulated annealing, trajectory generalization

INTRODUCTION

We have moved from a data-poor to data-rich situation in a
very small amount of time. Spatial data used to be typically
just that – x, y (and perhaps z) collected at one time only.
Spatial data with time existed and data structures and
geographical information systems (GIS) adaptations were
applied to store and enable query, retrieval and subsequent
analysis (Langran, 1992). Early spatiotemporal visualization
efforts are in evidence too (Ha¨gerstrand’s time geography,
1970) but these could only realize their potential when
sufﬁcient and appropriate data became available. These
time-intensive spatial data have now well and truly arrived,
laying down critical challenges in effective query (i.e. for big
data, where there are continuous streams of huge datasets to
manage), analysis and visualization. In short, there is simply
too much information to effectively display using conven-
tional mapping methods.

The data in question come from a multitude of sources:
GPS receivers or GPS devices embedded in smartphones,
tracking devices tiny enough to be attached to small animals.
All are capable of collecting a staggering amount of data.
The data describe trajectories of objects, where each object
(animal, human, vehicle, etc.) has a spatial location (x0, y0) at
a speciﬁc time (t0), which is linked to consecutive location
and time updates ([x1 y1] [x2 y2] . . . [xn yn] at t1, t2 . . . tn) of
the object to form a trajectory path.

This paper’s theme is in the visualization discipline, where
representation approach [Adaptive Relative

a visual

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1119463

Motion (ARM)] to making sense of complex spatiotemporal
trajectory data is outlined and exempliﬁed with a case study.

ADAPTIVE RELATIVE MOTION

Existing solutions
Time geography (Ha¨gerstrand, 1970) has been revisited as
vehicle for representation of trajectories, mostly in a ‘space –
time cube’ context (Kraak, 2003). There have been
subsequent reﬁnements, for example, Shaw et al. (2008)
present a method for generalizing lifelines using user-
deﬁned temporal intervals. Andrienko et al. (2013) also
employed aggregation in their visual analytics approach to
exploring episodic spatial data. Another example is the
compression of trajectory data based on semantic content
(Richter et al., 2012).

As another example using a generalization –aggregation
approach, Laube et al. (2004) developed a RElative MOtion
matrix (REMO) that regularized each individual track into
its own row in the matrix, splitting all tracks into equal time
intervals to serve as columns. Then what is displayed in each
square of the matrix is a summary aspect of the individual
(direction of travel, velocity) at a particular time interval. In
this kind of representation, individuals that exhibit ﬂocking
and consistent direction – i.e. useful information – would
be easy to identify (Figure 1).

Other approaches use reorderable matrices, as deﬁned by
Bertin (1981). For example, Guo et al. (2006) use reorderable

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 21:20 14 January 2016 Adaptive Relative Motion Representation

205

Figure 1. A schematic of RElative MOtion (Laube et al., 2004)

matrices and hierarchical clustering to make sure that similar
objects are next to each other in the arrangement (they also
implement a map matrix to represent spatial relationships).
In their Story Tracker, Krstajic et al. (2013) developed a visual
means of tracing the evolution of clustered news stories
through time that resembles the matrices as deﬁned by Laube
et al. and Guo et al., but allows an ‘object’ to change rows in
the matrix, while minimizing row (edge) crossings.

Proposed method
The solution by Guo et al. recognizes that the row order in the
matrix is not necessarily optimal, while Krstajic et al. acknowl-
edges the changing nature of interrelationships over time,
necessitating a change in row. In spatiotemporal terms, then,
individuals that are generally close together at a particular time
should also be close together row-wise in the matrix
(Figure 2b). We propose an ARM matrix, whereby an
optimization algorithm (simulated annealing) works to
minimize the average separation distance between sequential
rows (Moore et al., 2013).

Working on the average location points of the objects at
each time interval, the simulated annealing algorithm
attempts to solve what is essentially a travelling salesman
problem, striving to traverse all points at each time interval in
the shortest distance. Figure 2a illustrates this for the four
object paths introduced in Figure 1, providing shortest paths
for objects at t1 and t5. This then deﬁnes the order down the
column in Figure 2b, with O3 in the next row to O1 at t1
because they are located close together at that time. In the
ARM representation, the path of each object is emphasized
so that it can be followed across time from left to right.

The above procedure provides an optimal solution for row
ordering but a further process stage to adjust the reordered
column relative to the next time column was needed. The
adjustments included ‘nudging’ so that objects were at the same
row level as much as possible (e.g. in Figure 5, there are only
three objects at the ﬁrst time interval that need to be aligned as
much as possible with the same three objects at the next time
interval). The second type of adjustment was ‘ﬂipping’, as the
optimal order may be reversed relative to the next time interval.
In practice, minimizing geographic distance between rows
led to hard-to-interpret matrices with large amounts of objects
(e.g. Figure 6); so, a loosening of the travelling salesman
algorithm was applied so that distance across the matrix (deﬁned
as the amount of vertical displacement of an object path from

Figure 2.
(a) Travelling salesman solutions (dotted lines) for four
objects at t1 and t5 (adapted from Laube et al., 2004); (b) development
of the ARM visualization method using the data in (a), optimizing row
ordering based on proximity (i.e. the row order for a speciﬁc time
follows the travelling salesman solution)

one time interval to the next – for example, in Figure 2b,
O1 experiences a displacement of one from t4 to t5) was taken
into account, as well as geographic distance. This led to more
interpretable ARM matrices, such as the one in Figure 7, where
more horizontal paths across the matrix are created, yet most of
the geographic proximity from row to row has been retained.

Cartography
The symbology of the ARM matrix is also considered,
speciﬁcally via the use of line thickness on the dividing line
between adjacent objects along a column to represent
a continuous variable: physical distance separation.
Colour rendering is also employed to represent
the
dominant direction of objects at each time interval. The
Munsell colour circle was used for this and the visual results
of this and the distance line can be seen in Figure 5.

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 21:20 14 January 2016 206

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Tracks of over 40 Hector’s dolphins in Te Waewae Bay over a 2-year period

CASE STUDY: DOLPHIN TRAJECTORIES

Background
The space–time characteristics of animal locations can provide
information about their interactions with habitat resources and
other animals, including humans. The spatial data collection
and mapping tasks that this implies are a key facet of spatial
ecology research. The mapping of animal locations requires
sampling in space and time and has typically been achieved
through direct observation including radio-telemetry,
representing just a small window into the overall animal
spatiotemporal behaviour. Remote tracking technology has
now become accurate, compact, efﬁciency powered and
ﬁnancially viable enough for devices to be unobtrusively
attached to free-ranging wildlife.

This section features a case study of Hector’s dolphins,
a species endemic to the South Island of New Zealand.
The results of applying ARM to a spatiotemporal
dataset of a small population of these dolphins will be
relayed here.

Data
Geotagged photographs of
these dolphins were taken
monthly in Te Waewae Bay (on the south coast of the South
Island) over a 2-year period. In all, more than 40 dolphins
were monitored. Figure 3 shows the path data of these
dolphins, an illustration of why generalization is needed for
sense making. The spatial and temporal data were stored
in Esri ArcGIS and processed into ARM matrices
using Python, pyqt (graphics and interface) and the arcpy
library.

Testing
Before applying ARM to the full dataset, it was developed
using a subset of six dolphins for testing. Even with only
these six mapped (Figure 4), the map contains hard-to-
interpret clutter. If these are not processed into something
more legible, then a lot of potentially valuable information is
going to be lost.

The result of applying ARM on our six dolphins
(with time interval equivalent to a season, so that there are
eight columns over the 2 years covered) is shown in Figure 5.
Working on the average location points of the dolphins at
the simulated annealing algorithm
each time interval,
attempts to solve the travelling salesman problem for each
time period, striving to traverse all six average points in the
shortest distance. In the representation, the path of each
dolphin is emphasized so that it can be followed across time
from left to right. The inter-row separation (geographic
distance) is also represented by the thickness of
the
intervening white line and travel direction of dolphin is
represented by a colour signifying one of the eight cardinal
directions. In this way, groups of individuals close together
(on average) and travelling in a similar direction (on average)
are apparent. For example, Dolphin 67 is generally going in
the same direction (west) and is proximal to Dolphin 232 in
the ﬁnal two seasons.

Results
Figures 6 and 7 show the ARM matrices derived for the full
population of dolphins, ﬁrst with optimization for
geographic distance only (which means that the thickness
of white lines in the matrix would be kept to a minimum).
Unfortunately, in this case, there are excessive row crossings,

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 21:20 14 January 2016 Adaptive Relative Motion Representation

207

Figure 4. Space– time trajectories of a sample of six dolphins over 2 years. The mean seasonal position of each dolphin is represented as points.
Dolphins 67 and 232 for the ﬁnal 2 seasons are highlighted to help interpret Figure 5

Figure 5. Adaptive relative motion (ARM) representation of the six dolphins in Figure 4. Each column is a season, inter-dolphin separation is denoted by
thickness of the white line and colour is direction of trajectory. Dolphins 67 and 232 for the ﬁnal two seasons are highlighted to link to the Figure 4 map

which mean that not many insights on spatiotemporal
behaviour can be gained easily.

The second matrix enhances readability by optimizing
matrix distance travelled by an object as well as geographic
separation. As a result, the Figure 7 matrix presents a
considerable amount of space– time associations that are
immediately apparent visually. For example, groupings of
dolphins that are close together and travelling in the same
direction are detectable at the same time interval, while

dolphins that remain associated into the next time interval
are obvious by their parallel path lines.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Geovisual and spatial analytical tools that are used to
navigate the abundance of spatiotemporal data are vital.
Through this application, spatiotemporal and social insights
of moving objects are gained. The tool introduced here,

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 21:20 14 January 2016 208

The Cartographic Journal

ARM, is effective at highlighting objects that are close
together and moving in a similar direction, if they are in
adjacent rows. With some examination, it is possible to
identify two or more dolphins with similar spatiotemporal
characteristics, in the case that they are separated by two or
three rows in the matrix. Dolphins travelling in a constant
direction are also apparent in the display. However, ARM
does not fare so well in helping to interpret if dolphins
reunite after dispersal, having grouped early in the time
sequence. Strategies such as aggregation of dolphins into
groups in the display may make such interpretation easier
and reveal other types of pattern. This is an intended future
stage in the development of this tool.

We have seen how one example of the ARM matrix could
provide useful information for zoologists, who can gain
insights from the spatiotemporal information on the social
behaviour of the animals they are studying. The technique
could also be trained on similarly structured data derived
from smartphone GPS and linked social media feeds to
provide insights on human society.

At this stage, the displays generated are static, with no
tools for manipulation of what you are seeing. It would be
good to be able to alter the symbology and dimensions of
the matrix on the ﬂy to match the desires of the user (e.g. the
displays here symbolize direction in a way that is intuitive to

Figure 6. Adaptive relative motion (ARM) matrix for the full population
of dolphins with row order optimized for geographic separation

Figure 7. Adaptive relative motion (ARM) matrix for the 40 dolphins with row order optimized for both geographic distance and matrix
distance. Two examples of patterns have been highlighted: top right are four dolphins all moving westward in the ﬁnal two seasons – the decrease
in separating white lines (distance) from season 7 to season 8 suggest that they converge; the white arrows in the bottom half of the matrix trace two
dolphins that remain close from season 2 through season 7.

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 21:20 14 January 2016 Adaptive Relative Motion Representation

209

someone in the Northern Hemisphere – yellow for South,
blue for North – but tools should be in place for easily
modiﬁcation to the Southern Hemisphere perspective).
Another, more powerful, addition would be to place this
display in a geovisual analytics context. For example,
dynamic brushing and linking to a conventional map display
would give the abstracted matrix an explicit geographic
context as well as foster visual interrogation of the data. For
some users, the map would provide essential grounding for
the abstracted ARM display.

The next stage will be to test the technique with datasets
of varying spatial and temporal scale, with data derived from
small GPS receivers and trackers. These include daily sample
data of buff weka on a large alpine farm comprising a ridge
and valley system for a duration of around 4 months; hourly
sampling of feral cats and hedgehogs in a large alpine valley
for just over a year (though not at all times for all animals);
and sea lion data at the beach scale and collected several
times a day.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Antoni Moore is a senior
lecturer in Geographical Infor-
mation Science and Deputy
Head (Research and Post-
graduate) at
the National
School of Surveying, Univer-
sity of Otago. He is the
coordinator of
the Otago
Applied Science undergradu-
ate and postgraduate degrees
in GIS and is also Secretary of
the New Zealand Carto-
graphic Society. He was pre-
viously
Otago’s
in
Department of Information
Science from 2001 to 2008
and before that working as a
coastal/marine GIS Analyst at Plymouth Marine Laboratory in
the UK. He completed his BSc in Geographical Science
(Portsmouth) in 1993, an MSc in GIS (Leicester) in 1994 and
his PhD (on the application of spatial artiﬁcial intelligence to
integrated coastal zone management, Plymouth) in 2001.
He currently researches in the areas of geovisualization,
cartography and spatial analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks due
co-conspirators,
Mariano Rodriguez Recio, Jim Watts, Philip Seddon,
Nathan McNally and Ame´lie Auge´.

to other biological

REFERENCES

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., Strange, H., Liebig, T. and Hecker, D.
(2013). ‘Visual analytics for understanding spatial situations for
episodic movement data’, Kunstl Intell, 26, pp. 241–251.

Bertin, J. (1981). Graphics and Graphic Information Processing

De Gruyter, Berlin.

Guo, D., Chen, J., MacEachren, A. M. and Liao, K. (2006).
‘A Visualization System for Space-Time and Multivariate Patterns
(VIS-STAMP)’, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
,
Computer Graphics, 12/6, pp. 1461–1474.

‘What

(1970).

about people

Ha¨gerstrand, T.

in regional
science? Papers of the Regional Science Association’. Volume 24,
pp. 7 – 21, The Regional Science Association, University of
Pennsylvania, USA.
Kraak, M.-J. (2003).

‘The Space-Time Cube Revisited from a
Geovisualisation Perspective’, in Proceedings of the International
Cartographic Conference (ICC), Durban, SA.

Krstajic, M., Najm-Araghi, M., Mansmann, F. and Keim, D. A. (2013).
text analytics of news
Information Visualisation, 12/3-4,

Incremental visual

‘Story Tracker:
story development’,
pp. 308–323.

Langran, G. (1992). Time in Geographic Information Systems

Taylor and Francis, London.

in geospatial

Laube, P., Imfeld, S. and Weibel, R. (2004). ‘Finding REMO –
detecting relative motion patterns
lifelines’,
in Developments in Spatial Data Handling, ed. by Fisher, P.,
pp. 201–215, Springer, Heidelberg.
,
Moore, A., Recio, M. R., Rodda, J., Watts, J. and Seddon, P. (2013).
‘Visual
generalized
optimized
and
in Joint Proceedings of the
spatiotemporal animal paths’,
NZIS and SIRC NZ 2013 Conferences, ed. by Denys, P.,
Strack, M., Moore, A. B. and Whigham, P., pp. 131–132, NZIS,
New Zealand.

data mining

of

Richter, K-F., Schmid, F. and Laube, P. (2012). ‘Semantic trajectory
compression’, Journal of Spatial Information Science, 4,
pp. 3–30.

Shaw, S.-L., Yu, H. and Bombom, L. S. (2008). ‘A space-time GIS
approach to exploring large individual-based spatiotemporal
datasets’, Transactions in GIS, 12/4, pp. 425–441.

Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 21:20 14 January 2016 