This article was downloaded by: [University of York]
On: 19 July 2013, At: 05:20
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Ontologies of geographic information
Helen Couclelis a
a Department of Geography, University of California, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA
Published online: 20 Oct 2010.

To cite this article: Helen Couclelis (2010) Ontologies of geographic information,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24:12, 1785-1809, DOI:
10.1080/13658816.2010.484392

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2010.484392

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 24, No. 12, December 2010, 1785–1809

Ontologies of geographic information

Helen Couclelis*

Department of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA

(Received 7 December 2009; final version received 14 February 2010)

This article explores the notion of a system of ontologies specifically designed for the
needs of an information science. A framework for geographic information ontologies is
outlined that focuses on geographic information constructs rather than on the direct
representation of real-world entities or on linguistic terms. The framework takes the form
of a generative hierarchy anchored by the notion of intentionality at one end and of a
spatiotemporal field of potentially relevant information at the other. Two theoretical
notions are used in the generation of the hierarchy. The first is the principle of semantic
contraction, whereby, starting from a level of geographic information constructs speci-
fied so as to reflect user intentionality, semantically coherent domains of properties are
removed over several steps until only the rudiments of a spatiotemporal information
system are left. The second notion is that of object of discourse, which allows entities to
be represented as the composites of geographic information constructs at the higher levels
of the hierarchy, explicitly reflecting the connections between the purpose, function,
appropriate internal constitution, and ensuing categorization of the entities represented.
The framework’s main contribution is thus twofold: first, it allows the notions of user
purpose and object function to be directly built into geographic representations; second, it
proposes a hierarchy of ontological levels that are linked by systematic semantic rela-
tions. Further, the framework presents an integrated view of object and field representa-
tions. It may also provide a novel perspective on a number of issues of ongoing interest in
geographic information science.

Keywords: information; ontology; object of discourse; user purpose

1.

Introduction

Real-world entities are the focus of most ontologies that have been formulated to date, both
generally and more specifically in the area of geographic information. Other ontologies
stress cognitive representations of entities instead of the entities themselves, attempting to
model the ‘world in the head’ rather than the ‘world out there.’ Distinct from but related to
the latter are ontologies that model language. This article proposes a different approach
whereby it is the information available about the world, and not the world itself (whether
‘real’ or cognized), that forms the basis of an ontological system. That system takes the form
of suitably ordered and interpreted classes of observations forming a hierarchy, the levels of
which are connected through a systematic generative procedure. To the extent that the
observations in question may be identified with properties of specific entities of interest,
the system practically reproduces the solutions proposed by several researchers of carving
separable, discrete objects out of a field of properties (Kjenstad 2006, Goodchild et al. 2007).

*Email: cook@geog.ucsb.edu

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
# 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2010.484392
http://www.informaworld.com

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1786

H. Couclelis

It is even closer to the unifying object–field formalization proposed by Voudouris (2010) in
that one and the same hierarchical structure generates the equivalents of fields at the lower
levels and of objects at the higher levels. The highest levels of the hierarchy are also
characterized by semantics not commonly associated with geographic ontologies, compris-
ing objects that embody the notion of intentionality. Following Searle (1983), intentionality
here refers to the purposes, intentions, motivations, needs, beliefs, and so on, of an observer
or a user of the system. Human intentionality seeks, selects, and sifts through information
always from a particular perspective, the perspective relevant to a user. One major advantage
of an ontological system based primarily if not entirely on the notion of information is that it
allows such an extension into the semantics of user-centered interpretations: indeed, infor-
mation is a relational concept presupposing an intelligent recipient/decoder as well as a
source (Williamson 1994, Huchard et al. 2007). Further, the proposed system produces
geographic information constructs, not directly representations of real entities, except at the
highest hierarchical level(s). As defined in this article, geographic information constructs
can have richer and more flexible semantics than empirical object representations, allowing
several different views of the same empirical entity to coexist and a broader range of
questions in geographic information science to be explored. This also means that epistemo-
logically, the ontology is neutral with respect to the realist/mentalist and related debates,
leaving questions of the true structure of the world and of the workings of human cognition
to theoretical physicists, psychologists, linguists, and philosophers. Without elevating it to
the status of a metaphysical axiom, the approach is closest to the working definition given by
Zeigler et al. (2000), according to whom the real world is the universe of potentially
acquirable data. There is no contradiction, however, in saying that the proposed system
has ‘cognition written all over it,’ as any purposeful selection and interpretation of raw data
is inescapably a cognitive act.

The main objective of this article is to explore the notion of an ontological system
specifically designed for the needs of an information science. The system outlined here may
be described as a meta-ontology, just as an information science is a meta-science. It derives
from a fundamentally different premise than most current ontologies, one that owes much to
theories of modeling and representation as developed in computer science and mathematical
system theory (Klir 1985, Mesarovic and Takahara 1989, Zeigler et al. 2000). Geographic
information constructs can be generated that conform to any number of different descriptions
or specifications, and these can coexist within the system without conflict. This includes the
coexistence of field-like and object-like specifications. Further, it may offer an alternative
perspective on several current issues and debates in geographic information science, includ-
ing uncertainty, semantic interoperability, the difference between natural, artificial, and
conventional (‘fiat’) entities, and the relation between analysis and design in science and
engineering (Couclelis 2009a, 2009b). It also helps bring certain little discussed topics, such
as the representation of imaginary geographic entities and the potential role of normative
thinking, within the purview of the field. As for the fundamentally important issues of time,
change, and action, these will be treated in a future paper. This article presents the basic
structure and principles of the framework, which only allow for conventional representations
of time.

Even though it might seem obvious that information should be at the core of an information
science, a drawback of a system of geographic ontologies focused directly on information,
rather than on real-world entities or concepts, is that it is not very intuitive. But entity- and
concept-based ontologies also have a major drawback: people can hardly ever agree on what
these entities or concepts should be and how they are to be represented. Indeed, on second
thought, the idea is so natural that even some ontologies focusing on real-world entities have

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1787

used ‘atoms’ of geographic information as the elementary building blocks (e.g., Goodchild
et al. 2007). An explicit information-based system of geographic ontologies thus appears worth
exploring, if only – for the time being – as a thought experiment.

There is a further reason why such an approach may make sense. Geographic informa-
tion science is about designing good geographic information tools to serve specific purposes,
not about discovering how things are in the world, and is thus much closer to engineering
than to traditional empirical science. An ontological system that focuses on how information
is put together in representations that serve specific purposes may help address, among other
things, the belief of some researchers that geographic information science has thus far taken
geographic objects (and the corresponding real-world entities) too much for granted. As
Bibby and Shepherd (2000, p. 583) write, ‘the ‘‘objects’’ represented in Geographical
Information Systems (GIS) are unquestionably assumed to have a prior, unproblematic
existence in the external world . . . a crippingly restrictive conceptualization of objects.’
Being able to formally specify for what purpose a particular representation may be needed
could help reduce an ontological problem (in the original, intractable philosophical sense of
the term) to a technical one.

A related issue is that the geographic entities represented in GIS typically carry multiple
potential meanings that go well beyond their lexical designations. This results, among other
things, in the problems of semantic interoperability among databases that are attracting the
attention of increasing numbers of researchers (Sheth 1999, Fonseca et al. 2002, Kavouras
and Kokla 2002, 2008, Kuhn 2003). It could well be that the naı¨ve geography of mountains,
rivers, swamps, lakes, cities, freeways, land uses, and administrative units may be perfectly
appropriate for everyday purposes, but perhaps not when used as the basis for constructing
formal ontologies for geographic information systems. Denotation is not connotation, and
different users of a system may have very different meanings in mind when using the same
geographic term to designate the ‘same’ entity or object, with very different practical
implications (Couclelis and Gottsegen 1997). It is clear that land cover is not land use and
that the same piece of land may mean very different things to an environmentalist and to a
developer, and yet it is extremely difficult to capture systematically these kinds of semantic
differences in current data models (Ahlqvist 2008, Comber 2008). This is because purpose is
at the core of the semantics of land use but not of land cover and because the meaning of a
thing depends to some extent on the perspective of the observer. Beyond land use, purpose,
along with the spatial functions that serve it, is the reason why artificial spatial entities from
tool sheds to national freeway systems exist. Purpose thus enters the GIS picture in two
different ways: as the motivation for constructing particular kinds of representations and as a
property of the human-designed entities that GIS commonly represents.

The framework outlined in this article proposes a method for generating and ordering
geographic information constructs such that a smooth transition is effectuated from a level of
maximally meaning-ful, explicitly intentional object representations at one end, to a
meaning-less field of rudimentary observations on the other. Between these two extremes
lies a sequence of connected hierarchical levels of varying semantic content. The develop-
ment of the hierarchy occurs over several steps, beginning with the level of the semantically
richest representations. Then, using a method called here semantic contraction (developed in
Section 3), the semantics of the system are gradually reduced through the subtraction at each
step of a specific domain of potentially observable properties, along with the interpretative
intelligence required to process these. As further domains of properties are removed at each
step, the universe of possible meanings contracts and the geographic information constructs
at each consecutive level become semantically poorer but also less ‘problematic’ in that their
descriptions are increasingly likely to converge for different kinds of observers. Eventually

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1788

H. Couclelis

the constructs shift from being object-like to being field-like. As the semantic contraction
nears its lower limit the geographic information constructs begin to dissolve into a flux of
uninterpretable observations. The procedure ends with a spatiotemporal field of potential
rudimentary observations and the rudimentary intelligence required to register these.

The framework’s main contribution is thus twofold. First, it allows the notions of user
purpose and object function to be directly built into geographic information constructs.
Second, it outlines a hierarchical system whereby consecutive ontological levels are gener-
ated from one another through a recursive procedure and linked through systematic semantic
relations. Following a brief discussion of recent work on geographic ontologies in Section 2,
Section 3 develops the conceptual and methodological premises of the project. Section 4
outlines the generation of a seven-level hierarchy of geographic information constructs.
Section 5 briefly discusses how certain important current issues and debates in geographic
information science may be approached within the framework. Section 6, the conclusion,
addresses certain problems and prospects relating to the still tentative framework and
adumbrates some future research challenges.

2. Ontologies for geographic information science

Ontologies are as necessary for the systematic conceptualization of phenomena in any
scientific domain as they are for the development of effective computational representations
of these phenomena across different applications and platforms. It is thus not surprising that in
recent years ontology has become one of the top areas of interest in geographic information
science (see Agarwal 2005, Kavouras and Kokla 2008 for an overview). Directly or indirectly,
ontologies specify the composition, structure, and basic properties of the simplified worlds that
our models represent and clarify the intended meanings of the terms we use. Ontologies can
also play a major role in negotiating meanings and in helping establish consensus among
human or artificial agents representing different perspectives (Masolo et al. 2003). A good
ontology is thus extraordinarily valuable in helping address fundamental properties of phe-
nomena such as dynamics and change, as well as issues of communication and interoperability
for cognitive and computational systems. Although no single ontology could satisfy all needs,
a good ontology must be neutral, computationally tractable, acceptable to and reusable by those
working in the domain that the ontology describes (Smith and Mark 2001).

2.1. Kinds of ontologies in geographic information science

The relevant ontologies for this article are the upper-level ontologies, which purport to
describe fundamental concepts and relations that are valid across domains. This is in contrast
to the more specialized domain ontologies that are specifically tailored to the needs of
particular domains of discourse. Kavouras and Kokla (2008) provide a comprehensive
overview and discussion of the philosophical, theoretical, formal, and practical issues raised
by upper-level ontologies and suggest several different sets of criteria that may be used for
their classification. Most relevant here are distinctions based on different interpretations of
the nature of the concepts represented in an ontology and of the nature of representation and
modeling more generally. In some cases these concepts are assumed to directly represent
corresponding real-world entities (e.g., Grenon and Smith 2003, Goodchild et al. 2007).
Other ontologies espouse a cognitive/linguistic perspective consistent with twentieth-
century analytic philosophy, focusing on the semantics of natural language terms and the
ways these structure human understandings of space (e.g., DOLCE: http://www.loa-cnr.it/
DOLCE.html and WordNet: http://wordnet.princeton.edu/). Related to but distinct from the

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1789

latter are ontologies constructed on the premises of cognitive semantics, an approach to
spatial cognition represented in the work of cognitive linguists such as Talmy (1983), Lakoff
(1988), Kuhn (2003, 2009), Kuhn et al. (2007), and others.

Still other ontologies and ontological sketches are mixed, and some strive to encompass
the entire spectrum of empirical reality as seen from a spatial standpoint, including abstract
aspects such as the social and experiential. These proposals are always hierarchical, consist-
ing of ‘levels,’ ‘realities,’ ‘worlds,’ or ‘spaces,’ and they tend to be quite similar in principle.
For example, Couclelis (1992) suggests a hierarchy consisting of mathematical space,
physical space, socioeconomic space, behavioral space, and experiential space; Guarino’s
(1999) ontology consists of a physical level, functional level, biological level, intentional
level, and social level; and Frank’s (2003) proposed tiers are physical reality, observable
reality, object world, social reality, and cognitive agents. These and several other efforts
along similar lines may all be useful and intuitively plausible but they tend to lack a formal
justification for the designation and order of the levels, as well as a systematic procedure for
moving up and down the hierarchy. The framework presented here follows a very different
tack, proposing a constructivist approach that generates hierarchies based on a systematic
contraction of semantic content. Philosophically the approach is closest to instrumentalist
and pragmatist philosophies of science, which tend to be neutral on the question of external
reality but focus instead on seeking the most productive solutions to specific problems.

2.2. Granular/discrete space and time

The information-based ontological system outlined in this article has at its core the notion of
observation. Observations are necessarily discrete and are made at discrete times or time
intervals over discrete regions of space, and thus the system is built on a discrete framework
of space and time. Whereas classical mathematics and human intuition favor continuous
representations, notions of granular or discrete space and time have existed since antiquity. In
the age of the digital computer, interest in discrete representations was revived for obvious
practical reasons. Also, twentieth-century theoretical physics has revisited notions of discrete
space and time on several occasions, so that the theoretical and philosophical relevance of
granularity assumptions are now better understood. Wolfram (2002) outlines that history, noting
that arguments in favor of discreteness stress ‘in particular the idea that a given region of space
should contain only a finite amount of information’ (p. 1027). For current purposes the
methodological argument is the strongest: namely, that fitting discrete observations to contin-
uous models and then rediscretizing the results for computational purposes is a less effective
way of safeguarding the integrity of the data than when a discrete framework is used throughout.
In geographic information science there are by now several widely cited papers that
formalize the description and properties of discrete space and time and show how GIS
objects can be generated as mereological sums of sets of atomic regions. Thus Stell and
Worboys (1997) discuss Heyting algebras as algebraic theories of sets of regions, whereby
regions, not points, may be the primitives. Heyting algebras thus appear to be effective for
granular spaces. Masolo and Vieu (1999) discuss the properties of granular versus infinite
divisible spaces, noting that ‘atomicity [granularity] is especially important if one seeks to
build a bridge between spatial reasoning and spatial database approaches’ (p. 235). Galton
(1999) presents ‘a high-level qualitative spatial theory premised on a discrete model of
space.’ This brief overview shows that in principle both the mathematical apparatus for
handling granular space and time and the theoretical justification for doing so are already
well established, though of course after centuries of near-exclusive focus on the continuum
many details have yet to be worked out.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1790

H. Couclelis

2.3. Principles for ontology building

The ontological system outlined in this article differs from similar efforts in that it seeks to
represent geographic information constructs rather than direct real-world entities, linguistic
entities, or concepts. However, it does conform to the principles of ontology building
presented in Guarino (1999, pp. 232–233). These are briefly summarized as follows:

(1) ‘Be clear about the domain.’ The domain of a general ontology may be particulars
(i.e., ‘things’ of different sorts), universals, such as conceptual properties and
relations, or linguistic entities. Here the domain consists of a special kind of
particulars called geographic information constructs. These eventually map onto
the usual kinds of entities modeled in geospatial ontologies, but they are logically
distinct from these.

(2) ‘Take identity seriously.’ The notion of identity criterion is at the core of the discus-
sion in Guarino (1999) and is used to address the problem of ‘IS-A overloading’ in
many current ontologies. The problem results from a confusion between lexical
relations between words on the one hand and ontological relations between classes
of domain entities on the other hand and leads to several different kinds of logical
inconsistencies. Among Guarino’s examples, both the Pangloss and Cyc ontologies
(http://www.cyc.com and http://www.isi.edu/natural-language/projects/ONTOLO
GIES.html) use IS-A links to represent a person/animal as both a physical object and
a living being (Pangloss) or perceptual agent (CYC). The problem here, Guarino
notes (p. 224), is in the ‘clash of senses,’ as physical object and living being (or
physical object and perceptual agent) have no common identity criteria. Certainly,
living beings depend on and are constituted by physical bodies, but these relations
are not identity or inheritance relations. This example is very similar to the land
cover/land use issue in GIS. Land use depends on and is constituted by particular
kinds of land cover but the two have no identity criteria in common: land cover has
to do with vegetation, water bodies, buildings, and the like, whereas land use is about
human purpose. This point is so important that Guarino (1999, p. 226) considers
Lowe’s principle: ‘No individual can instantiate both of two sorts if they have
different criteria of identity associated with them’ to be ‘the basic principle to be
adopted for well-founded ontologies.’

(3) ‘Isolate a basic taxonomic structure.’ This structure should have types at its core,
whereby each type is characterized by a distinct set of identity conditions. Types thus
should form mutually disjoint classes. In the taxonomic structure described in this
article, the types are defined through the method of semantic contraction, which is
outlined in the next section. However, as will be seen in the following, information
object types need not be mutually disjoint if they result from different user perspec-
tives. This has interesting implications for semantic interoperability.

(4) ‘Identify roles explicitly.’ Roles are nonessential properties of things in the sense that
in some possible worlds the things in question will not have that property. An
example given by Guarino (1999, p. 223) is ‘An apple is both fruit and food’
(WordNet, CYC). This puts a necessary and a nonessential property on the same
footing: an apple is necessarily a fruit, but ‘food’ is a role, as it is not essential to
something being an apple. The distinction is useful when making inferences from an
ontology. In the present framework, roles are considered at the higher levels of the
hierarchy in connection with functions.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1791

3. Geographic objects of discourse and semantic contraction

Qua hierarchical structure, the ontological framework presented in this article relies on two
basic notions, one purely semantic, the other a methodological principle that helps oper-
ationalize the former. The notion of object of discourse is discussed first, followed by an
outline of semantic contraction.

3.1. Objects of discourse
As used in this article, the notion of object of discourse was introduced to the GIS science
readership by Bibby and Shepherd (2000). This is not to be confused with the ‘domain of
discourse’ as defined in ISO standards. An object of discourse is whatever we can talk about,
regardless of its ontological (in the original philosophical sense) status. Atlanta, Georgia, is
an object of discourse, and so is the continent of Atlantis. Even though the name ‘Atlantis’
does not denote any known geo-referenced region of the earth, it carries connotations rich
enough for it to deserve a place in at least some ontologies (and Atlases: see Post 1973).
Closer to home, ‘land use’ and ‘land cover’ may denote the exact same patch of vegetated
land, but ‘land use’ carries connotations of function, organization, and purpose that ‘land
cover’ does not. Land cover may, of course, have its own – say – ecological, military, or
recreational functional connotations, but these are ‘roles,’ or perhaps ‘affordances’ (Gibson
1979), not an intrinsic part of the definition of land cover. For the purposes of the ontological
framework presented here, objects of discourse are complex (multilevel) geographic infor-
mation constructs occupying the upper levels of the hierarchy.

The notion of object of discourse builds on the work of Moravcsik (1975) in philosophy,
which itself goes back to Aristotle and his fourfold view of ‘cause’: material, formal,
efficient, and final. (The translation of the Aristotelian term AITIA as ‘cause’ continues to
be the subject of ongoing discussions in philosophy. The emerging consensus is that AITIA
has more to do with understanding than causality.) In a modern interpretation, objects of
discourse (i.e., anything we can talk about) can have four distinct levels of meaning, called
the formal, constitutive, agentive, and telic dimensions. The formal dimension (as in ‘form’)
has to do with what kind of object something is: it is concerned with those properties that
distinguish one category of things from another. The constitutive dimension has to do with
what the object is made of and in particular, its parts (material or abstract), and how these are
connected. The agentive dimension addresses the processes by which things come to be or
their roles as agents in other processes or their function relative to some end. Finally, the telic
dimension refers to the purpose of things or the reasons why things happen. These four
distinct dimensions or levels of meaning of objects of discourse occupy the four highest
levels of the hierarchy presented in this article. Section 3.2 below further develops this idea.
To the extent that speech acts are intentional acts, all four dimensions of objects of
discourse are relevant to some degree to any thing we may talk about. The telic and agentive
dimensions are especially critical in the case of artificial (e.g., buildings, airports, freeways)
and conventional (e.g., administrative units) geographic entities. These kinds of entities
would not have come to be but for their intended function and purpose, so that it is only
reasonable to demand that these dimensions be part of their description. But all geographic
entities, from contested territories to apparently ‘unproblematic’ streams, lakes, and hurri-
canes, can be talked about in many different ways, each of which may or may not be relevant
in a particular context (Ahlqvist 2008), but all of which should be potentially accessible as
part of a complete ontological system. Thus the agentive and telic dimensions are necessary
for describing all kinds of entities, natural as well as artificial, to the extent that it is the

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1792

H. Couclelis

representation of these entities that is the focus of interest, as different representations of
phenomena must in principle be developed for different scientific or practical purposes.

A striking example of how the different dimensions of a geographic object of discourse may
arise in practice is provided by the 2002 diplomatic incident between Spain and Morocco
involving the tiny uninhabited island of Perejil (Leila to Morocco), as reported in The Economist
(2002). Perejil belongs to Spain but is much closer to the coast of Morocco, which has coveted
the island for a long time. As Spain was claiming Gibraltar from the United Kingdom in 2002,
Morocco found a pretext to raise the issue of Perejil/Leila one more time. The four dimensions of
Perejil as object of discourse are reflected directly in verbatim quotes taken from the Economist
article. Formal dimension: Perejil is ‘a tiny, uninhabited island near Ceuta.’ Constitutive
dimension: ‘If you want Gibraltar, says Morocco to Spain, why can’t we have some rocks?’
‘Why all the fuss over a pile of rocks?’ [says Spain]. Agentive dimension: We need it in ‘the fight
against illegal immigration and drug smuggling into Europe’ [says Morocco]. Telic dimension:
‘It’s an issue of national prestige, sovereignty, and territorial rights’ [says Spain].

It is remarkable how the constitutive dimension was used in Morocco’s diplomatic
rhetoric to serve that country’s purpose of belittling its claim. But good examples of
geographic objects of discourse can be found well outside of territorial disputes, in the
case of virtually any geographic entity familiar from everyday life. It seems indeed that
whether man-made or natural, geographic entities have more than just ‘brute existence’ and
can be represented as multidimensional objects of discourse.

3.2. The principle of semantic contraction

We may, therefore, say that a world of chance is simply our actual world viewed from the
standpoint of an animal at the very vanishing-point of intelligence.

Peirce (1878)

Imagine a hypothetical being, initially a fully conscious intentional agent, which gradually
loses its capacity to find meaning in the world. That being starts out with the ability to
recognize, describe, query, and construct full-fledged objects of discourse, but regresses in a
series of steps to the level of Peirce’s ‘animal at the very vanishing-point of intelligence.’ At
first it can no longer ‘understand’ purpose, then also function, then the fact that objects can
be made up of other, noncontiguous objects, then that categories of things exist that have
names. By now that creature has lost the intelligence necessary to understand any of the four
dimensions of objects of discourse, but it continues to regress, losing the ability to observe
the field of attributes and associated geometric patterns left behind by the geographic
information constructs that have already vanished from its grasp, then the ability to discern
qualitative differences in the spatiotemporal flux of information. In the end there is nothing
left but a dim awareness that ‘relevant information exists out-there now’ (Couclelis 2009a).
The metaphor alludes to the performance levels of a hypothetical series of increasingly
simple information decoders, ranging from the capabilities of expert human agents to those
of the most rudimentary sensor, over a series of decreasingly sophisticated decoding devices.
Table 1 suggests appropriate concepts that may be associated with these levels of
information-decoding capabilities. It also establishes correspondences between these levels
and, on the one hand, the levels of objects of discourse discussed in Section 3.1 and, on the
other, the levels of the ontological framework outlined in the following.

It is a fundamental principle of the framework developed in this article that the most
semantically rich geographic information construct is the one reflecting the intentionality of

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1793

Table 1. Objects of discourse are gradually collapsed over levels 7–4 of the hierarchy as the semantics
of the system contract from top to bottom.

Semantic resolution levels

Decoder capabilities

Aspects of objects of discourse

7 purpose
6 function
5 composite objects
4 simple objects
3 similarities
2 observables
1 existence

Intentionality
Instrumentality
Association
Categorization
Classification
Perception
Awareness

Telic
Agentive
Constitutive
Formal

the observer or user. That information object coincides with an object of discourse that is
specified through the telic level of the hierarchy, which is also the one of maximum semantic
content, in the sense that all relevant ways of talking about the object in question (i.e.,
describing, analyzing, specifying, designing, querying it, . . .) are enabled there. The
hierarchy is defined by a gradual filtering process that at each step removes the possibility
to talk about certain aspects of things, thus contracting the universe of discourse. At each step
the system loses the ability to ‘make sense’ of entire domains of properties that specific
geographic information constructs may or may not possess at any particular time. The
domains of properties that define the semantic levels in Table 1 correspond to the identity
criteria, in the sense of Guarino (1999) discussed earlier in Section 2.3.2, differentiating
seven disjoint types of geographic information constructs. The hierarchy itself is described
in Section 4. This subsection discusses the generative principle behind it.

Semantic contraction may be described as an orderly procedure for draining the ontolo-
gical system of semantics in a stepwise fashion as one moves from the more complex to the
simpler levels. Just as we can build a hierarchy of object descriptions based on decreasing
spatiotemporal and attribute detail, we can also envision a hierarchy based on decreasing
semantic richness. Semantic contraction is necessary to help reproduce discrete types of
geographic information constructs that differ qualitatively in terms of what it is possible to
say about them. For example, a geographic information construct that is a polygonal structure
may be interpreted as a ‘school,’ in which case many kinds of concepts, descriptions, and
queries concerning its location, function, proper configuration, constitution, capacity, physical
condition, other associated structures, and so on, are possible and relevant. That is, a rich
conceptual language is required to relate the object’s geometrical and other properties with the
functions normally expected of a ‘school’ in the social environment in which that entity is
embedded. On the other hand, the same polygonal object may be subject to all kinds of
measurements and described in any degree of detail in the language of geometry and topology
only. Clearly the ‘school’ geographic information construct is at a higher semantic level than
the ‘(just) polygonal structure’ object, regardless of the volume of data that happens to be
available for the description of each. Semantic contraction is thus the principle that allows the
systematic transition between levels of qualitatively different semantic content, from higher to
lower. The principle will first be explicated here and it will then be applied to the generation of
spatiotemporal information objects in the next section.

3.2. Semantic contraction as an analog of rough sets theory

The procedure may best be described with reference to the theory of rough sets as a
conceptual analogy. The analogy appears apt for the following reasons directly relevant to

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1794

H. Couclelis

the model presented here (Pawlak and Skowron 2007): (1) the rough sets approach relies on
the notion of information, in that it assumes that objects can be ‘seen’ only through the
information (data, knowledge) available about them; (2) it posits that whether objects are
indiscernible (same) or different can only be decided based on the available information; (3)
it accepts that knowledge must be granular, in that in general we can only reason about
classes of indiscernible objects; (4) it provides an illuminating window on the notion of
vagueness; (5) it defines an ‘information system’ in the same way as it is defined in this
article (see below); (6) it allows object attributes to be partitioned into ‘condition’ and
‘decision’ attributes, and the notions of a ‘decision system’ and a ‘decision rule’ (or function)
to be defined. Rough sets already figure prominently in geographic information science, also
in the context of constructing hierarchies (Bittner and Smith 2001, Bittner and Stell 2003,
Worboys and Duckham 2004). A major difference between the structure outlined below and
other stratifications and granular hierarchies developed in the context of rough sets theory is
that it consists of levels of semantically distinct types of geographic information constructs
rather than of increasing/decreasing spatiotemporal detail. A discussion of whether the
rough sets approach can be used literally, rather than as an analogy, to help implement the
framework presented here will be the subject of a future article.

Semantic contraction is presented here in analogy with recursive attribute reduction in
rough sets. There is a closed universe of geographic information constructs, a finite set of
properties, and a corresponding domain of property values or value ranges. In semantic
contraction we consider a series of property domains {p7}, {p6}, {p5},. . ., {p2} (cid:2) P such
that {pn} = {pn1, pn2, pn3, . . ., pni}, n = 1, 2, . . ., 7, and P = P7. is the universe of properties
relevant to a particular object of discourse. Each property domain {pn}characterizing a distinct
semantic domain is removed at each step, starting at level 7, such that the next level down is
comprised of geographic information constructs of a different semantic type, as per Table 1.
The decision function f may be understood as: ‘IF property pni is part of property domain {pn}
THEN remove to obtain IND(Pn - 1).’ Thus, beginning with P7, the domain of all properties
relevant to a particular domain of discourse or user perspective, we get

IND P6ð
Þ ¼ IND P7 (cid:3) p7f g
Þ
ð
IND P5ð
Þ ¼ IND P6 (cid:3) p6f g
Þ
ð
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Þ ¼ IND P2 (cid:3) p2f g
IND P1ð
Þ
ð

Each level Li-1 is a reduct relative to Li because the prior classification of the geographic
information constructs in P is left intact. The final reduct, IND(P1), is the core of the system.
It turns out that the core is the spatiotemporal framework appropriate for each particular
object of discourse (see Section 4.7).

The hierarchy generated by the above procedure may be represented in a table that keeps
track of the gradual disappearance of property domains and of quantitative changes in
property values within property domains. Table 3 is a multilevel adaptation of what
Pawlak and Skowron (2007, p. 7) call an ‘information system,’ which they define as ‘a
data table containing rows labeled by objects of interest, columns labeled by attributes and
entries of the table are attribute values.’ For obvious reasons it cannot be named here a
geographic information system even though its purpose is to track the transformations that
geographic information constructs undergo under the semantic contraction procedure. We
will use the name ‘semantic information system’ instead. At this stage it is strictly a
conceptual device and is not meant as a data model.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1795

The semantic information system is subdivided into seven primary columns correspond-
ing to the seven levels of the hierarchy. Each of these columns is headed by one of the
domains of properties {pn} that characterize the corresponding level over and above the
properties at the next level down and is further subdivided into as many columns as there are
properties in that set. In practice, each property domain {pn} may be disaggregated into any
number of more detailed subsets, and each of these may be disaggregated again, as needed.
The degree of detail (attributes and attribute values) available at each level is not here a
relevant consideration. The primary rows are labeled for the geographic information con-
structs of interest GICi. Each primary row is subdivided into further rows, one for every
granule of the space g1, g2, g3, . . ., gi P G that the corresponding geographic information
construct occupies at a specific (discrete) point in time. As will be seen in the following
neither the spatial nor the temporal granules can be geometrically specified in advance
independent of the highest semantic level at which a geographic information construct is
considered. To differentiate these extended atoms of space and time from ordinary spatio-
temporal coordinates they are given the names of topons and chronons, respectively. A topon
(from Greek topoB, place) is thus the smallest two- or three-dimensional chunk of space
over which properties of interest (from the perspective of a particular user purpose) may be
measured. A chronon (from Greek wro(cid:2)oB, time: see Claramunt and Theriault 1995) is the
smallest interval of time over which a change in some property of interest to the user may be
observed. Spatial and temporal atoms are treated separately because the properties of time
and space are not necessarily parallel at all levels. Beyond level 3, topons and chronons are
part of specific objects of discourse that are named and described from the user’s viewpoint.
At the lower levels (1–3) they make up a spatiotemporal field where each granule may or
may not be occupied by information relevant to the particular object of discourse (see
Table 1). A cell Cij of Table 2 thus records whether, for chronon x, topon g has been observed
to have property p. The entry will be binary (yes/no, the property is or is not present) in the
simplest case but generally it may be any value within the appropriate domain. For simplicity
most of the discussion that follows will be restricted to binary values. The table is read from
right to left, in the direction of the semantic contraction, beginning with the most semanti-
cally rich level 7, where all the properties are available that are necessary for describing the
relevant aspects, functions, and purposes of any specific geographic object of discourse.
Then the characteristic properties of level 7 are removed, leaving behind a level-6 geo-
graphic information construct specification, and so on, until level 1 is reached. Reading
across the rows we find descriptions of what (in terms of properties) is known to exist at each

Table 2. The semantic information system.

{p1}

p1

1
1
.
..
1

xt

G1
g2
.
..
gm

{p2}

1 0 . . . 1
1 1 . . . 1

.
..

0 1 . . . 0

GICi

p21, p22, . . ., p2k

p31, p32, . . ., p2j

p71, p72, . . ., p7i

P = P7

{p3}

1 0 . . . 0
0 1 . . . 1

.
..

1 1 . . . 0

. . .

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

{p7}

1 1 . . . 0
1 1 . . . 1

.
..

1 1 . . . 0

The table represents one geographic information construct, GICi, occupying topons g1– gm at chronon xt, complete
through level 7. Columns {pn} may be removed sequentially from right to left to yield reduced versions of the
original geographic information construct. The profile of each topon g for a given chronon x is a code (here: binary)
extending across n (cid:4) 7 hierarchical levels.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1796

H. Couclelis

topon, and these descriptions, called profiles, get shorter and more general with every set of
properties being removed. Note that there is no logical necessity for the number of levels to
be exactly seven; it just turns out that seven levels are needed for an efficient description of
the framework.

4. Constructing the semantic hierarchy
This section outlines the generation of geographic information constructs using the notation
and stepwise procedure outlined above. The outcome is an ordered sequence of seven
hierarchical levels corresponding to seven semantic domains differentiated by their degree
of complexity or expressive power, from highest (level 7) to lowest (level 1). In between the
two ends lie five more levels that can be derived from each other by subtracting suitably
selected semantic content so that the information objects left behind are still meaningful
though increasingly semantically impoverished.

4.1. Level 7: purpose

Purpose is not itself a geospatial concept. It is, however, the reason why geographic informa-
tion constructs have the spatial structure and properties that they do. Purpose may be thought
of as the interface between the world of geospatial entities on the one hand and the social world
of intentional agents on the other (Couclelis 2009a). The sources of purposes for geographic
objects of discourse are many, including culture, technology, administration, planning and
management, theory, or any particular perspective from a thematic domain. Every different
purpose entails a different window on the available information. Purpose determines what
spatial functions need to be represented, what distinct spatial entities belong together to form a
composite object, how simple objects are named and categorized, what spatial patterns and
measurable properties correspond to the entities of interest and how these should be analyzed,
what sort of information is relevant, and finally, what spatial and temporal granularity must
underlie the representations appropriate for the purpose in question. Purposes thus select
suitable information subsets out of a comprehensive domain of possible data and construct
out of these the semantically appropriate (to each purpose) geographic information constructs.
These purposes may be quite broad, as for an entire professional domain, or, at the limit, very
specific, as for meeting the needs of one user at one time.

We need to distinguish between two kinds of purposes of geographic representations: (i)
their purposes as models built with an end use in mind (e.g., to explain, to analyze, to
demonstrate, to reassure, to communicate, to teach) on the one hand (intrinsic purpose) and
(ii) the purposes of the real-world entities represented on the other (extrinsic purpose). In the
first case ‘purpose’ may be directly understood as user needs: think of the representation of a
weather front intended for navigation rather than for presentation on television. Carton
(2007) shows how different policy-related purposes (scientific analysis, policy exploration
and formulation, negotiation, communication) are best served by different map designs. The
second case involves two different, nested types of purposes. It addresses the fact that human
purposes shape space functionally, in the form of artificial or natural entities arranged in
configurations that support specific human activities (e.g., malls to support retail activities)
or needs (e.g., levies to protect from flooding). Howarth (2008) develops a data model that
makes explicit the connection between purpose, function, activity, and spatial organization,
using an island ranch as an illustration. The illustrative example in Table 3 juxtaposes these
two cases: here a map of roads qua representation serves two different purposes, in the first
of which the main objects represented (roads) are approached as artificial entities endowed

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1797

Table 3. Purpose of artificial entities and purpose of representations (only): contrasting examples.

A road map of region X

A map of roads in region X

7 purpose

Facilitate vehicular travel planning and

Identify and mitigate barriers to wildlife

6 function

Represent possible routes from place A

Represent the locations where wildlife

movements

corridors intersect with roads

A wildlife corridor network

navigation

to place B
A road network

5 composite
objects

4 simple objects

Places, freeways, arterials, collectors,

Roads, wildlife corridor segments,

intersections, ramps, roundabouts, . . .

underpasses, culverts, high-conflict
intersections, . . .

3 classes

Fields of properties (surface material,

Fields of properties (incident

slope, signage location, . . .)
exhibiting diverse geometrical
patterns

frequency, barrier permeability,
height, width, . . .) exhibiting diverse
geometrical patterns

2 observables

Hard, rough, green, brown, wet, . . .

Open, blocked, green, hard, kill, dry,

1 existence

‘Road-map relevant information exists

here now at such-and-such
appropriate granularity’

wet, . . .

‘Wildlife-corridor relevant information
exists here now at such-and-such
appropriate granularity’

Adapted from Couclelis (2009a).

with their own purpose (transportation), whereas in the second case (ecological study) the
purpose of the roads is irrelevant and only their emerging function as dangerous physical
barriers to wildlife movements is of interest.

Level 7 is thus characterized by two distinct subdomains of properties, {p7r}, {p7a} (cid:2)
{p7}, where {p7r} is the domain of purposes of geographic information constructs as
representations and {p7a} that of the purposes of the artificial (human-configured) entities
that these objects may correspond to. Removing {p7} from the universe of discourse leaves
everything intact except for the possibility to ‘talk about’ the purposes of things. The system
is thereby truncated down to level 6, (spatial) function.

4.2. Level 6: (spatial) function

Levels 6 and 7, function and purpose, are closely bound together in a means–ends relation.
(Spatial) functions serve purposes. The two symmetric perspectives of design and analysis are
reflected in this relation: design operates from level 7 to 6 (from purpose to function,
e.g., spatial optimization, planning), whereas analysis moves up from level 6 to 7 (analyzing
spatial function to infer purpose, e.g., identifying a secret military installation from observed
configurations and activities). At these highest levels of the hierarchy geographic information
constructs coincide with (fully expanded) entity representations in the ordinary sense, as well
as with complete objects of discourse. Each entity thus represented can have several purposes
and corresponding functions, and several different entities can have same or similar purposes
(a many-to-many mapping). Some of these mappings can be temporally variable. For example,
a university campus whose main purpose is education may have an income-generating
purpose in the summer months, doubling as a conference center: its spatial organization
must then be such as to function in a satisfactory manner for both purposes. The means–ends
relations represented by functions and purposes can also permanently change over time
(e.g., ‘Rails to Trails’). Notions of obsolescence, deterioration, abandonment, innovation,

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1798

H. Couclelis

and so on, express different combinations of changing or enduring functions and purposes
(Howarth 2008). Level 6 corresponds to an object of discourse specified through the agentive
dimension. According to Moravcsik (1975), the agentive dimension allows questions to be
asked that have roughly the form ‘on account of what is object m generated?’ or ‘what is
responsible for the coming into being of some object m?’ Function is thus one major
interpretation of the agentive dimension.

Qua representations, all geographic information constructs have functions that are
expressed spatially (e.g., visualizations of natural geographic entities are spatially config-
ured so as to help convey specific properties of the entities represented), but those represent-
ing artificial entities in particular (dams, transportation networks, cities, land use structure,
states) normally must also reflect functions that are essential aspects of the description of
corresponding entities (Chaigneau et al. 2008). Some geographic entities are explicitly
defined through their function: for example, metropolitan statistical areas (MSA) are defined
to correspond to functional regions, for example, commuter sheds. Watersheds and ecosys-
tems are examples from the natural sciences. It is thus necessary to distinguish the domain of
functional properties characterizing the object of discourse itself – see, for example, ‘How to
lie with maps’ (Monmonier 1996) for all the ways in which maps may function differently
than assumed – from the domain of functions attributed to the real-world entity represented
(e.g., the function of the road network represented on a map). This distinction is especially
critical for the interoperability of representations.

Similar to level 7, level 6 is thus characterized by two distinct domains of properties, {p6r},
{p6a} (cid:2) {p6}, where {p6r} is the domain of functions of geographic information constructs as
representations and {p6a} that of the functions of the human-configured entities that these
objects may correspond to. Removing {p6} from the system impoverishes its semantics one
step further, by precluding discourse about spatial function as well as purpose. The system is
thereby truncated down to level 5, that of composite geographic information constructs.

4.3. Level 5: composite geographic information constructs
At this stage there is still enough intelligence left in the system to allow for the fact that certain
geographic information constructs may be made up of spatially disconnected or inhomoge-
neous parts. These are constituted either through spatial function or through nonspatial
relations of naming, similarity, custom, membership, authority, and so on. Examples: a set
of towers that are part of a mobile telephony network; island nations; the buildings and
walkways making up a campus; dispersed parcels of land constituting a farmer’s property.
The properties characterizing level 5 are still quite abstract in the sense that the intelligence
required to distinguish and describe composite objects must go beyond any directly measur-
able qualities. Purpose and function are now reduced to a named role, a nonessential attribute
of objects that does not permit queries relating to functional and/or associated spatial changes.
Note that the distinction between composite and simple geographic information constructs is
often one of granularity or scale: a town may be a composite object at the scale of 1:20,000 but
a simple polygon at 1:200,000 (Couclelis 1996). Without the conceptual vocabulary necessary
to identify function and purpose it is no longer possible at this level to decide internally the
appropriate granularity for a given composite geographic information construct. That deter-
mination can only be inherited from the levels above.

The constitutive aspect of objects of discourse is described at this level. Concepts and
formalisms based on notions of spatial association such as proximal space (Couclelis 1997),
metamaps (Takeyama and Couclelis 1997), the geo-dipole (Goodchild et al. 2007), and so
on, facilitate the representation and analysis of level-5 geographic information constructs.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1799

Level 5 is characterized by two distinct domains of properties: object-specific properties
{p5o} that allow the level-5 objects to be identified (categorized, named) as being an airport,
a town, an archipelago, and so on, and internal relations {p5i} associating level-4 simple
objects with level-5 composite objects. Removing these two domains of properties {p5o},
{p5i} (cid:2) {p5} truncates the system down to level 4.

4.4. Level 4: simple geographic information constructs

There is another significant contraction of semantic content at this level, as the ability to
identify and reason with geographic information constructs constituted of spatially discon-
nected parts is lost. Spatially connected, homogeneous geographic information constructs
are categorized and named either as independent objects or as parts of composite objects if
such information was inherited from level 5. These may be organized into any number of
different hierarchical structures in the general manner of object-oriented and other common
data models. Two basic domains of properties characterize this level: object-specific proper-
ties {p4o} that allow the level-4 geographic information constructs to be identified (categor-
ized, named) as corresponding to spatially connected entities of specific types (lakes,
mountains, hurricanes, roads, counties, etc.) and internal relations {p4i} associating classes
of properties from level 3 with level 4 objects. This is the lowest of the four levels at which an
object of discourse is defined – the so-called formal level of basic categorization. It is also the
lowest level at which an ‘object’ view (in the GIS sense) is possible. Removing the two
domains of properties {p4o}, {p4i} (cid:2) {p4} truncates the system down to level 3: ‘similarities’
and switches the perspective from there on down to a ‘field’ view (Table 4).

4.5. Level 3: similarities

At level 3 the ability to identify and name objects in the above sense has been lost, and the
geographic information constructs are now fields of properties. It is still possible, however,
to measure, analyze, and classify the patterns discernible at that level in any way compatible
with the categorizations inherited from level 4. Ahlqvist (2008) discusses the difference
between categorization and classification. He writes, ‘Thus, the categorization process can
be regarded as an individual, mental-level precursor to a social process of classification at a
group level’ (p. 170). Further, ‘. . . classes can be customized to user requirements but also
have common identities across users’ (p. 171). Categories thus result from cognitive acts,
reflecting the intentionality of the observer or user within a particular context of space, time,
and circumstances, whereas classes are intersubjective within social or more narrowly
professional groups, based on agreed conventions of observation and measurement
(e.g., ISO standards).

Table 4. The object–field transition occurs between levels 4 and 3.

Semantic resolution levels

Aspects of objects of discourse

Corresponding representation

7 purpose
6 function
5 composite objects
4 simple objects
3 similarities
2 observables
1 existence

Telic
Agentive
Constitutive
Formal

Object

Field

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1800

H. Couclelis

The results of automatic image classification, without interpretation, would be an
example of pure level-3 geographic information constructs. Topons with similar properties
and property values, whether contiguous or not, may now be perceived to belong in
homogeneous classes forming spatial patterns. Classes may be defined by single properties
or by property complexes (e.g., ‘mixed pixels’). The grain of the space–time information
matrix is explicit at this level, as the selection of information appropriate for each object of
discourse must be done within an acceptable range of granularities. The patterns found here
are analyzed using geometry and topology: The notions of distance, contiguity, shape,
orientation, and so on, inherited from the higher levels are still fully defined, as well as the
possibility to perform associated measurements of intensive and extensive properties.
Indeed, all operations described in Goodchild et al. (2007) in their discussion of bona fide
geographic objects apply at level 3. In the geo-atom notation introduced by these authors,
which distinguishes between properties and property values, this would be written as , x, g,
p3, p3(g, x)., where p3(g, x) is the measured value of property p3 at topon g and chronon x.
This is the lowest level at which property values can be talked about. The property domain
characterizing this level is thus that of measurable properties {p3} and associated values.
Removing {p3} leads to level 2, ‘observables.’

4.6. Level 2: observables

This level of the last, crude geographic information constructs allows only the qualitative
observation that distinct kinds of relevant information exist at specific topons: ‘This there
now reddish.’ Measurements are no longer possible. Indeed Probst (2007) distinguishes
measuring from observing ‘by requiring that a measurement process produces a commu-
nicable result, while an observation process results only in a quale existing in the observing
agent’s mind’ (p. 7). That is, properties at this level are sense qualia, and the geographic
information constructs are field-like but not fields. This reflects the distinction between
properties and property values mentioned above (Goodchild et al. 2007). Thus, although
both spatial differentiation and the potential for change over time still exist at level 2, these
are no longer in a form that can be communicated. Here the characteristic property domain is
{p2} = {p2i: p2i is an observable quality}. Its removal leads to level 1.

4.7. Level 1: existence

We have now reached the level of Peirce’s (1878) ‘animal at the very vanishing point of
intelligence.’ All that is left is an informational primordial soup consisting of granular space,
granular time, and an inscrutable field of information. There is only one property at that
level: existence, or the ability to ascertain that some kind of relevant information may exist at
a particular granule of space and time: ‘What information is there now is/may be relevant.’
‘Relevance’ here is but the distant echo of the purposeful geographic information construct
at the root of the entire semantic contraction procedure. It is indeed the user intentionality
built into that object that guides the selection of properties at each level right through the end.
In terms of properties, level 1 is thus trivially characterized by a singleton property set, {p1},
where p1 may take a binary or uncertain value. Level 1 is, however, the core of the entire
system (see Section 3.2) in that what is left on it is the trace of the spatiotemporal framework
(‘there,’ ‘now’) appropriate for each particular object of discourse.

This completes the outline of the proposed ontological framework for geographic
information constructs. As represented in the semantic information system (Table 2), com-
plete objects of discourse correspond to bundles of topon- and chronon-specific profiles that

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1801

extend across all seven levels of the hierarchy. This will not and need not always be the case.
The framework can handle incomplete information object descriptions that either fully miss
the information and intelligence required to construct the higher levels or have substantive
missing information at any level. An example of the former case would be representations
that only reach to level 4 or 5 (simple and composite objects, respectively), corresponding to
the ‘unproblematic’ GIS objects that Bibby and Shepherd (2000) criticize. In the latter case,
missing information at one level may sometimes be deduced from properties at other levels,
as when the function of a geographic information construct (level 6) is inferred from its level-
5 configuration as a composite object (Ahlqvist and Wa¨stfelt 2008, Howarth 2008). The next
section presents a discussion of how the framework could be used in practice to address a
number of issues of current interest in GIS science.

5. Using the ontological framework

In Section 4 a generative description of the geographic information ontology framework was
given, according to which specific objects of discourse, and domain ontologies based on
collections of such objects, can be constructed. Starting from some intentional stance, the
user considers the purpose(s) of an object of discourse, then the purpose-serving spatial
function(s) of that object, then whatever parts of the object are necessary for the function(s)
in question, then the type of object itself. Once the relevant type of object is identified, the
appropriate classes of observations are also determined, and thereby also the relevant kinds
of measurements, including the appropriate grain for topons and chronons (i.e., the mini-
mum temporal and spatial resolution of observations necessary for the purpose). The
following briefly outlines how the framework may help approach a number of issues of
current interest in geographic information science, including a couple of topics not much
discussed today.

5.1. Uncertainty
It is easy to see that different forms of uncertainty are associated with each different level of
the semantic hierarchy. Worse, problems from one level are inherited by the next, so that
uncertainties accumulate, propagate, and compound as we move deeper into the structure.
Approaching these problems from the semantically richest level of the hierarchy can greatly
contribute to their resolution – or to their further complication, if several observers with
different intentions are involved.

Levels 6 and 7 (function and purpose) should be discussed together as uncertainties as
these two levels often mirror one another. The essence of an object of discourse, the reason(s)
why it is considered at all, is defined at level 7. Once its purpose is clear, the choice of
possible properties at all other levels of the hierarchy is drastically narrowed and other kinds
of properties become much more likely, or even necessary. Uncertainties at level 7 primarily
involve doubts or disagreements regarding the purpose of the representation itself or of the
object represented. Thus, in the example of the Perejil/Leila diplomatic incident mentioned
earlier, the designation of a small rocky island as a ‘pile of rocks’ raises questions about what
may be allowable extensions of that phrase’s meaning. Although the literal meaning of ‘pile
of rocks’ is indeed vague, one immediately realizes that Morocco’s purpose (level 7) is to
claim the island from Spain, and the function (level 6) of representing Perejil as ‘a pile of
rocks’ is to belittle the importance of the claim. Additional uncertainties at these levels
include whether a particular spatial configuration is appropriate to sustain a function that will
serve one or more purposes, whether particular purposes are appropriate or desirable

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1802

H. Couclelis

considering their implications for spatial organization, and generally, disagreements con-
cerning means–ends relationships between human desires and fears on the one hand and
purposeful adaptations of space on the other.

Level 5 (composite geographic information constructs) allows the observer to distin-
guish the internal structure of objects of discourse. This includes spatial associations of
nearness and gestalt (archipelagos, constellations), conventions of naming, membership, and
authority (the Maldives, Baltimore’s suburbs), as well as the ability to distinguish the
material composition and physical parts of self-connected objects. The new kinds of
uncertainties that arise at this stage include questions regarding the proper assignment of
parts to objects, the identification of objects exhibiting atypical material composition or
spatial structure, and the persistence of object identity over time under changing composition
or structure or under changing spatial relations with associated objects (see Section 5.5
below).

Level 4 (simple geographic information constructs) is the lowest level at which geo-
graphic information constructs may be identified with specific entities and categorized and
named as such. Moving up to level 4 from level 3 constitutes a qualitative shift because we
assume that the intrinsic uncertainties that arise here are due to semantic and linguistic
factors rather than to imperfect observations. Vagueness and its troubling consequence, the
sorites paradox, emerge from the necessity to assign discrete terms (names or adjectives) to
spatially and temporally connected classes of observations that exhibit essentially contin-
uous variation over a given range (Duckham et al. 2001). (The valley very gradually turns
into the mountain; one grain of sand, two grains of sand, . . ., ten billion grains of sand away
from the lake is still the lake – or? . . . .) Beyond its profound philosophical interest, the
sorites paradox has practical import because it illustrates how very small errors can accu-
mulate into a big error (Sorensen 2006). True vagueness, which characterizes concepts
having borderline cases that no test can resolve, is irreducible, but several methods have been
proposed to circumvent it. Fuzzy set theory, a simple but not universally accepted way of
circumventing vagueness, can be easily accommodated on the (binary) property sheet by
entries in the 0–1 range. Other proposed partial solutions, such as rough sets (Bittner and
Stell 2003, Pawlak and Skowron 2007) and supervaluation (Kulik 2001), can also be used
with the present framework. Most compatible with an information-based ontology, however,
is the perspective of contextualism, whereby vagueness may be at least partially resolved
through clarification of the specific context of the discourse within which it occurs (Sorensen
2006). For example, whereas ‘valley’ is a textbook example of a vague geographic entity,
‘building a hotel ‘‘in valley x’’ ’ is largely disambiguated by the knowledge of which
particular valley is referred to, and what infrastructure, and so on, already exists there.
Paraconsistent logics, discussed in Worboys and Duckham (2004), are among the contextu-
alist approaches.

Level 3 (similarities) is associated with the possibility of measurement errors of all kinds,
including missing measurements, as well as with issues of appropriate levels of accuracy and
precision, and thus of appropriate topon and chronon granularity. Level 3 also brings in
questions of what may be relevant differences between observations and of appropriate
classification criteria, especially for topons with multiple properties. Level 2 (observables) is
associated with the risk of incorrect discrimination of the qualia available for observation,
that is, of under- or overestimating their variety. Even the rudimentary level 1 (existence)
raises the question of whether any kind of relevant information really exists at a particular
topon. The framework thus acknowledges in many different but connected ways that
representation is inescapably uncertain.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1803

5.2. Semantic interoperability, multiple representations, and spatial analysis

The geographic information ontology system presented here integrates the field-based and
object-based perspectives, representing geographic information constructs at one end of the
hierarchy and fields on the other. In this the framework rejoins other recent works, for
example, Galton (2001, 2003), Kjenstad (2006), Goodchild et al. (2007), Voudouris (2010).
Other aspects of the framework point to additional ways in which diverse kinds of repre-
sentations may be compared or integrated. For example, the preceding discussion of
uncertainties residing at different levels of the hierarchy directly suggests how multiple
representations and semantic differences among representations of the same entity may
arise. Differences or disagreements about the purpose and function of an object of discourse
may result in differences about how to describe the constitution of that object, about what
name to give to the object, about what classes of properties define the object, down to what
kinds of raw observations are needed for its study. This backward-chaining process is greatly
complicated by the myriad of potential uncertainties that reside at each level. Currently no
technique seems to exist for formalizing that process, especially at the critical initial steps of
levels 7 and 6. Conventional spatial analysis operates at levels 3–5 of the hierarchy. There is
little direct
intersection between spatial analysis and the framework presented here.
However, the notion that information at a point (topon) may be represented by binary
codes of different length (profiles), and entities by bundles of such profiles, may suggest
possible additional modes of analysis and data mining. For example, Hemming distances
and other similarity measures between profiles may be calculated or geometrical approaches
may be used such as Q-analysis (Earl and Johnson 1981). In theory such methods would
work equally well for profiles of any length (i.e., for both complete and incomplete objects of
discourse). Indeed, several existing hierarchical multidimensional analysis and visualization
techniques may be used for that purpose, each with different strengths and drawbacks.

5.3. Conventional entities

Social purpose is what gives meaning to conventional (‘fiat’) entities such as legal and admin-
istrative units. These units can only be understood through their social purpose and through the
specific functions these serve in support of that purpose. Purpose and function must thus be
explicitly represented in the corresponding geographic information constructs. For example, the
purpose of administrative units is to spatialize political power, and their function is to support the
practical implementation of that power in space in its diverse institutional expressions. Similarly,
the purpose of land parcels is to express in space the institution of private property, and their
function is to allow the concrete exercise of specific property rights. These functions require the
identification of spatial parts with specific properties (notably, well-defined closed boundaries
and interiors within a certain range of shapes and sizes), resulting in homogenous objects
denoted by names such as ‘Middle County’ or ‘the Smythe property.’ These objects are
constructed by classifying different parts of an area as belonging to different polygons, based
on observations derived from the raw measurements made by professional surveyors using
particular kinds of instruments. Thus conventional entities definitely require the entire ontolo-
gical hierarchy to be traversed from the top down, that is, from level 7 to level 1.

5.4. Mythical and imaginary places

Mythical and imaginary places are special kinds of conventional entities that differ from
legal and administrative entities in two very important respects. First, their purpose is

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1804

H. Couclelis

symbolic, cultural, and psychological rather than practical, and their function is, accordingly,
to serve as background to narratives meant to educate, to entertain, to warn, or more
generally to help convey social messages. Second, mythical and imaginary places only
exist as objects of discourse, meaning that their profiles do not exhibit any observable
properties at levels 1–3. (They do have imaginary properties, of course.) Still, it is important
that they be part of a geographic information ontology as mythical and imaginary places may
interact with actual events and actual places and on occasion even become actual places.
Thus Homer’s mythical city of Troy inspired archaeologists to seek and eventually find a real
place that could be tentatively identified with the Homeric one. In such cases the left-hand
side of the profile of these objects of discourse (Table 2) can be filled in – most notably
column 1, ‘existence’ – transforming these into ordinary geographic places. Many other
places of religion and myth, from the Garden of Eden and Atlantis to Shangri-La, have
inspired actual explorations and geographic speculations. Columbus’ West Indies, a mis-
nomer deriving from an unreal map of the world, eventually became the real continent of
America. But even if they remain imaginary, or simply unrealized, as in a sketch plan that is
never implemented, these objects of discourse deserve a place in the glossary of geographic
information science.

Identity through time and change

5.5.
Identity preservation through time and change, including spatial change, is a difficult
philosophical issue, and ever since antiquity there have been many different ways of
approaching it. Intuitively we accept that an object’s identity is preserved as long as its
‘essential’ properties endure, although ‘nonessential’ properties may change. In spatially
extended entities location may be an essential property (my house) or not (my mobile home).
The distinction between essential and nonessential properties was already discussed in
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, according to which the essence (ousı´a) of a thing is whatever
property is responsible for it being what it is, and which also explains why that thing
possesses all the other necessary features specified in its definition. Other features are
incidental and may or may not be present at any one time. Somewhat similar is the distinction
in Guarino (1999) between type, which is necessary (Athens is necessarily a city), and role,
which is contingent (Athens happens to be a tourist city). The present framework suggests
another way of defining identity through change, by looking for the essential properties of a
thing in its main purpose(s) and function(s). Thus the identity of Athens has endured across
the millennia – despite dramatic changes in its observable qualities, footprint, spatial pattern
and extent, constituent parts, forms of government, and jurisdictional fortunes – in as much
as its function as the primate city of the Greek world, and its cultural and symbolic purpose as
the focus of Greek national identity and pride have remained the same. ‘Israel’ is a stronger,
more extreme example of this phenomenon.

5.6. Normative (synthetic) thinking and design
The framework presented here embodies one particular perspective on the relationship
between positive and normative (or telic) thinking, and thus on the relationship between
empirical science on the one hand and the design disciplines on the other. By allowing
function and purpose to be part of an object’s description if so desired, the framework helps
narrow the gap between the polar opposites of analytic and synthetic thought and brings
within the purview of geographic information science a mode of spatial thinking not

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1805

normally associated with that field. Normative thinking underlies what Simon (1969) has
called the ‘sciences of the artificial,’ which in the geographic domain range from land use
and transportation planning and landscape architecture to spatial optimization, robotics, and
agent-based modeling. All these ‘design’ disciplines have in common the requirement to
develop representations and solve constraint-satisfaction problems to satisfy specific pur-
poses (see Brachman et al. 1992). The present framework recognizes that any representation
(model, visualization, program, or ontology) is a design in the above sense and provides for
the smooth integration of the analytic and synthetic aspects of the general problem of
representation. Conceivably, the framework could also serve as a foundation for an ontology
of design (Couclelis 2009b).

6. Conclusion

This article sketched out an ontological framework for geographic information science that
is built upon the notion of information. This contrasts with most other ontologies which tend
to focus on direct representations of real-world entities, on the semantics of linguistic terms,
or on cognitive constructs mediating between the empirical world and its representations.
While in principle compatible with these other efforts, this framework is based on funda-
mentally different principles. In a sense, it is a ‘meta’ ontology, just like an information
science is a ‘meta’ science. A substantial background section was required to explicate the
epistemological context of this perspective.

Considering the exploratory, purely conceptual nature of this work, any claims made for
it must of necessity be tentative and cautious. Assuming that the broad outlines of the
proposed framework will stand, two distinct contributions to geographic information science
may be pointed out. First, the framework indicates how user purposes and object functions
may be built into geographic representations, while also encompassing conventional kinds
of representations of varying degrees of abstraction. Second, the hierarchy generated by
means of the semantic contraction procedure is characterized by well-defined semantic and
logical relations between levels. This facilitates understanding how heterogeneous geo-
graphic entity representations may stand relative to one another.

An additional advantage of the proposed approach is that it provides a novel perspective
on a number of issues of interest to geographic information science. These are summarized in
Section 5 under the rubrics of (1) uncertainty and vagueness; (2) semantic interoperability,
multiple representations, and spatial analysis; (3) conventional entities; (4) mythical and
imaginary places; (5) identity through time and change; and (6) normative thinking and
design. These are in addition to the treatment of the field–object duality, which results from
the constructivist approach used in the generation of the hierarchical structure. The ‘morph-
ing’ of fields into objects at the transition between levels 3 and 4 appears to rejoin a recent
proposal by Voudouris (forthcoming) for an integrated object–field model. These two efforts
also have in common the notion of an elementary granule with no predefined geometry. Any
further connections could not be explored here.

The framework presented in this article is compatible with several accepted definitions
and desiderata for ontologies in geographic information science. For example, Smith and
Mark (2001, p. 594) define an ontology as ‘a neutral and computationally tractable descrip-
tion or theory of a given domain which can be accepted and reused by all information
gatherers in that domain.’ The proposed framework is neutral, because it does not presup-
pose any method, theory, philosophy, or worldview beyond the foregrounding of the notions
of intentionality and information. It is designed to be (eventually) a computationally

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1806

H. Couclelis

tractable description or theory of its domain, which is geographic information, and can in
principle be reused by all working with geographic information, as it can explicitly accom-
modate the specific intentions and purposes of any user. Further, Section 2.4 describes how
the framework meets Guarino’s (1999) principles for ontology building, especially the most
important ‘identity criterion.’ The framework also agrees with two of the three desiderata for
spatiotemporal ontologies discussed in Galton (2003, p. 1): the need to provide (a) ‘. .
.suitable forms of representation . . .to do justice to the rich network of interconnections
between field-based and object-based views of the world’ and (b) ‘. . . a means to develop
different views of spatio-temporal extents and the phenomena that inhabit them.’ Galton’s
third condition, the need to extend such views into the temporal domain, is important enough
to warrant a separate paper. Finally, it should be noted that many of the potential benefits for
ontology engineering to be gained from cognitive semantics, as suggested by Kuhn et al.
(2007, p. 7–8), may also be claimed to some extent for the present framework. These include
(original emphases):

l ‘Grounding ontologies, that is, establishing primitives that are both meaningful and

suitable as building blocks for ontologies’.

l ‘Moving space and time from their current status as application domains to become

foundational aspects of ontology’.
l ‘Reconciling meaning and truth’.
l ‘Allowing for perspectivalism without giving in to relativism’.
l Providing ‘A cognitively plausible . . . understanding and formalization of conceptual

l ‘Personalizing geospatial services’ by taking into account ‘situational and personal

mappings’.

context’.

The importance of building information systems that are based on a sound ontology has been
recognized in geographic information science (Fonseca et al. 2002). The framework pre-
sented here suggests that the construction of the ontologies themselves may be guided by
certain principles of information analysis and synthesis. But formidable challenges lie ahead.
Implementing the structure to the point where it can be practically useful will be no mean
task. It will involve formalizing not just the ‘meta’ framework itself but also its relations with
current ontologies. The development of a dynamic (event-based) version of the framework,
in progress at the time of writing, poses equally difficult challenges. There is hope that this
effort, being a new departure of sorts, may be capable of stimulating a broad-based discus-
sion in geographic information science. Should this be the case, and even if it does not
survive in the end, this thought experiment will have served a purpose.

References
Agarwal, P., 2005. Ontological considerations in GIScience. International Journal of Geographical

Information Science, 19 (5), 501–536.

Ahlqvist, O., 2008. In search of classification that supports the dynamics of science: the FAO Land
Cover Classification System and proposed modifications. Environment and Planning B: Planning
and Design, 35 (1), 169–186.

Ahlqvist, O. and Wa¨stfelt, A., 2008. Reconciling human and machine based epistemologies for
automated land use detection. Abstract. In: Conference on geographic information science,
September 2008, Park City, Utah.

Bibby, P. and Shepherd, J., 2000. GIS, land use, and representation. Environment and Planning B:

Planning and Design, 27 (4), 583–598.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1807

Bittner, T. and Smith, B., 2001. A taxonomy of granular partitions. In: Proceedings of the international
conference on spatial information theory: foundations of geographic information science COSIT
‘01. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 2205, ed. D.R. Montello. Berlin: Springer, 28–43.
Bittner, T. and Stell, J.G., 2003. Stratified rough sets and vagueness. In: M. Worboys, S. Timpf, and W.
Kuhn, eds. Spatial information theory: cognitive and computational foundations of geographic
information science. International conference COSIT003. Berlin: Springer, 286–303.

Brachman, R.J., Levesque, H.J., and Reiter, R., 1992. Knowledge representation. Cambridge: The MIT

Press.

Carton, L., 2007. Map making and map use in a multi-actor context: spatial visualizations and frame
conflicts in regional policymaking in the Netherlands. Thesis (PhD). Delft Technical University.
Chaigneau, S.E., Castillo, R.D., and Martinez, L., 2008. Creator’s intentions bias judgments of

function independently of causal inferences. Cognition, 109, 123–132.

Claramunt, C. and Theriault, M., 1995. Managing time in GIS: an event-oriented approach. In: J.
Clifford and A. Tuzhilin, eds. Recent advances in temporal databases: proceedings of the inter-
national workshop on temporal databases. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 23–41.

Comber, A.J., 2008. The separation of land cover from land use using data primitives. Journal of Land

Use Science, 3 (4), 215–229.

Couclelis, H., 1992. Location, place, region, and space. In: R.F. Abler, M.G. Marcus, and J.M. Olson,

eds. Geography’s inner worlds. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 215–233.

Couclelis, H., 1996. Towards an operational typology of geographic entities with ill-defined bound-
aries. In: P.A. Burrough and A.U. Frank, eds. Geographic objects with indeterminate boundaries.
London: Taylor & Francis, 45–55.

Couclelis, H., 1997. From cellular automata to urban models: new principles for model development
and implementation. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 24 (2), 165–174.

Couclelis, H., 2009a. Ontology, epistemology,

triangulating geographic information
science. In: G. Navratil, ed. Research trends in geographic information science. Berlin:
Springer, 3–16.

teleology:

Couclelis, H., 2009b. The abduction of geographic information science: transporting spatial reasoning
to the realm of purpose and design. In: K. Stewart Hornsby, C. Claramunt, M. Denis, and G.
Ligozat, eds. Spatial information theory. 9th international conference COSIT009. Berlin: Springer,
342–356.

Couclelis, H. and Gottsegen, J., 1997. What maps mean to people: denotation, connotation, and
geographic visualization in land-use debates. In: S. Hirtle and A.U. Frank, eds. Spatial information
theory: a theoretical basis for GIS. International conference COSIT097. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 1329. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 151–162.

Duckham, M., et al., 2001. A formal approach to imperfection in geographic information. Computers,

Environment and Urban Systems, 25 (1), 89–103.

Earl, C.F. and Johnson, J.H., 1981. Graph theory and Q-analysis. Environment and Planning B, 8,

Fonseca, F.T., et al., 2002. Using ontologies for integrated geographic information systems.

367–391.

Transactions in GIS, 6 (2), 231–257.

Frank, A.U., 2003. Ontology for spatio-temporal databases. Spatio-temporal databases:

the

CHOROCHRONOS approach, Vol. 2520. Berlin: Springer, 9–77.

Galton, A., 1999. The mereotopology of discrete space. In: C. Freksa and D.M. Mark, eds. Spatial
information theory: a theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings, international conference COSIT 099.
Berlin: Springer, 251–266.

Galton, A., 2001. A formal theory of objects and fields. In: D.R. Montello, ed. Proceedings, interna-

tional conference COSIT 2001. Berlin: Springer, 458–473.

Galton, A., 2003. Desiderata for a spatio-temporal geo-ontology. In: W. Kuhn, M. Worboys, and S. Timpf,
eds. Spatial information theory: a theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings, international conference
COSIT 003. Heidelberg: Springer, 1–12.

Gibson, J.J, 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Goodchild, M.F., Yuan, M., and Cova, T., 2007. Towards a general theory of geographic representation

in GIS. International Journal of Geographic Information Science, 21 (3), 239–260.

Grenon, P. and Smith, B., 2003. SNAP and SPAN: towards dynamic spatial ontology. Spatial

Cognition and Computation, 4 (1), 69–104.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 1808

H. Couclelis

Guarino, N., 1999. The role of identity conditions in ontology design. In: C. Freksa and D.M. Mark,
eds. Spatial information theory: a theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings, international conference
COSIT 099. Berlin: Springer, 221–234.

Howarth, J.T., 2008. Landscape and purpose: modeling the functional and spatial organization of the

land. Thesis (PhD). University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.

Huchard, M., et al., 2007. Relational concept discovery in structured datasets. Annals of Mathematics

and Artificial Intelligence, 49 (1–4), 39–76.

Kavouras, M. and Kokla, M., 2002. A method for the formalization and integration of geographical
categorizations. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16 (5), 439–453.
Kavouras, M. and Kokla, M., 2008. Theories of geographic concepts: ontological approaches to

semantic integration. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Kjenstad, K., 2006. On the integration of object-based models and field-based model in GIS.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 20 (5), 491–509.

Klir, G.J., 1985. Architecture of systems complexity. New York: Saunders.
Kuhn, W., 2003. Semantic reference systems. International Journal of Geographical Information

Kuhn, W., 2009. Semantic engineering. In: G. Navratil, ed. Research trends in geographic information

Science, 17 (5), 405–409.

science. Berlin: Springer, 63–76.

Kuhn, W., Raubal, M., and Gardenfors, P., 2007. Cognitive semantics and spatio-temporal ontologies,

Editorial. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 7 (1), 3–12.

Kulik, L., 2001. A geometric theory of vague boundaries based on supervaluation. In: D.R. Montello,
ed. Spatial information theory. Proceedings, international conference COSIT 2001. Berlin:
Springer, 44–59.

Lakoff, G., 1988. Cognitive semantics. In: U. Eco, P. Violi, and M. Santambrogio, eds. Meaning and

mental representation. Indiana: Indiana University Press, 119–154.

Masolo, C. and Vieu, L., 1999. Atomicity vs. infinite divisibility of space. In: C. Freksa and D.M.
Mark, eds. Spatial information theory: a theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings, international
conference COSIT 099. Berlin: Springer, 235–250.

Masolo, C., et al., 2003. WonderWeb Deliverable D18: Ontology Library (final), Del 18. IST Project

2001-33052 WonderWeb: Ontology Infrastructure for the Semantic Web.

Mesarovic, M.D. and Takahara, Y., 1989. Abstract systems theory. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Monmonier, M., 1996. How to lie with maps. 2nd ed. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Moravcsik, J.M., 1975. Aitia as generative factor in Aristotle’s philosophy. Dialogue, 14, 622–636.
Pawlak, Z. and Skowron, A., 2007. Rudiments of rough sets. Information Sciences, 177, 3–17.
Peirce, C.S., 1878. The order of nature. Popular Science Monthly, June. Reprinted in Cohen, M.R. ed.

Chance, love, and logic. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1998.

Post, J.B., 1973. An atlas of fantasy. Baltimore, MD: Mirage Press.
Probst, F., 2007. Semantic reference systems for observations and measurements. Thesis (PhD).

University of Mu¨nster.

University Press.

Searle, J.R., 1983. Intentionality: an essay in the philosophy of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge

Sheth, A., 1999. Interoperability and spatial information theory, Chapter 2. In: M.F. Goodchild, M.
Egenhofer, R. Fegeas, and C. Kottman, eds. Interoperating geographic information systems.
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic, 5–29.

Simon, H.A., 1969. The sciences of the artificial. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Smith, B. and Mark, D.M., 2001. Geographical categories: an ontological investigation. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15 (7), 591–612.

Sorensen, R., 2006. Vagueness. In: E.N. Zalta, ed. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy [online]. The
Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/ [Accessed July 2008].

Stell, J.G. and Worboys, M.F., 1997. The algebraic structure of sets of regions. In: S.C. Hirtle and A.U.
Frank, eds. Spatial information theory: a theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings, international
conference COSIT 097. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 163–174.

Takeyama, M. and Couclelis, H., 1997. Map dynamics: integrating cellular automata and GIS through

geo-algebra. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 11 (1), 73–91.

Talmy, L., 1983. How language structures space. In: H.L. Pick and L. Acredolo, eds. Spatial orienta-

tion: theory, research and application. New York/London: Plenum Press, pp. 225–282.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1809

The Economist, 2002. A row over rocks, July 18 [online]. Available from: http://www.economist.com/

world/europe/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_TNQTPPJ [Accessed July 2008].

Voudouris, V., 2010. Towards a unifying formalisation of geospatial representation: the object-field
model with uncertainty and semantics. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, in press.

Williamson, T., 1994. Vagueness. London: Routledge.
Wolfram, S., 2002. A new kind of science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media, Inc.
Worboys, M.F. and Duckham, M., 2004. GIS: a computing perspective. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC

Press.

Zeigler, B.P., Praehofer, H., and Kim, T.G., 2000. Theory of modeling and simulation: integrating
discrete event and continuous complex dynamic systems. 2nd ed. San Diego: Academic Press.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:20 19 July 2013 