This article was downloaded by: [University of Alberta]
On: 27 November 2014, At: 20:03
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer
House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Usability evaluation and PPGIS: towards a user-
centred design approach
Mordechai Haklay a & Carolina Tobón b
a Department of Geomatic Engineering , University College London (UCL) , Gower Street,
London, WC1E6BT, UK E-mail:
b Department of Geography and Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (CASA) , University
College London (UCL) , Gower Street, London, WC1 E6BT, UK E-mail:
Published online: 21 May 2010.

To cite this article: Mordechai Haklay & Carolina Tobón (2003) Usability evaluation and PPGIS: towards a user-
centred design approach, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17:6, 577-592, DOI:
10.1080/1365881031000114107

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1365881031000114107

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of
the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied
upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall
not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other
liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

. .   , 2003
. 17, . 6, 577–592

Research Article

Usability evaluation and PPGIS: towards a user-centred design
approach

MORDECHAI (MUKI) HAKLAY
Department of Geomatic Engineering, University College London (UCL),
Gower Street, London,WC1E6BT, UK
e-mail: m.haklay@ucl.ac.uk

and CAROLINA TOBO´ N
Department of Geography and Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (CASA),
University College London (UCL) Gower Street, London, WC1 E6BT, UK
e-mail: c.tobon@ucl.ac.uk

(Received 12 July 2002; accepted 20 January 2003)

Abstract. Public Participation GIS (PPGIS) is a ﬁeld of research that, among
other things, focuses on the use of GIS by non-experts and occasional users.
These users tend to have a diverse range of computer literacy, world views,
cultural backgrounds and knowledge. These aspects require that the systems used
within PPGIS are accessible and easy to use. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
and the related usability evaluation techniques focus on how to make computer
systems more accessible, while focusing on user needs and requirements. Thus,
the synergy between PPGIS and HCI seems natural. In this paper, we discuss
the aspects of this synergy, building on our experience from three workshops. We
demonstrate how usability evaluation can contribute to PPGIS research, and
how PPGIS research can contribute to the HCI aspects of GIS in general. We
conclude this paper with a call for a user-centred design approach to PPGIS
projects.

1.

Introduction
Public Participation Geographic Information Systems (PPGIS)

is inherently
about empowering GIS users from all walks of life and enabling them to use the
technology purposefully to capture their local knowledge and advance their goals
(Talen 2000, Craig et al. 2002). Although the usability of GIS products has improved
immensely in recent years, they still require users to have or acquire considerable
technical knowledge to operate them (Traynor and Williams 1997). This presents
major obstacles to non-expert users in terms of navigating an interface that embeds
a language, world view and concepts that support the system’s architecture rather
than the user’s work view (Traynor and Williams 1995, Elwood and Leitner 1998,
Ghose 2001, Goodchild 2002, Haklay 2002). In such situations, HCI issues, which
are concerned with how people design, implement and use computer systems (Myers
et al. 1996), the usability or the eﬀectiveness of the interaction between humans and

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1365881031000114107

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 578

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

machines (Butler 1996), and how computers aﬀect individuals, organizations and
society, are vital to the success of PPGIS. Although HCI and a number of usability
aspects of GIS received attention in the ﬁrst part of the 1990s (Medyckyj-Scott and
Hearnshaw 1993, Nyerges et al., 1995a, Davies and Medyckyj-Scott 1996), it seems
that within PPGIS research, little attention has been paid to the inﬂuence of HCI
on research and practice.

This is, in a way, unfortunate as the type of users that are being exposed to GIS
in a PPGIS setting are very diﬀerent from those who have been at the centre of the
earlier research on HCI issues in GIS. While this early research focused on the use
of GIS by specialists who use the system to accomplish a speciﬁc work-related task,
PPGIS settings usually call for an open-ended exploration in which users experiment
with the GIS and examine various issues that relate to their community and locality.
Furthermore, these users may not access the technology in the oﬃce but rather in
new application scenarios, such as is the case with Internet-based applications which
are accessed from the home and the community (Thomas and Macredie 2002,
Krygier 2002). Combined with the varying level of computer skills and literacy of
users in PPGIS settings, these types of applications pose interesting challenges when
it comes to evaluating their usability and use in these diﬀerent contexts.

In addition, within PPGIS research, HCI and usability evaluation can contribute
to the subject matter and not just to the improvement of the system used, as other
aspects of this study have shown (Boott et al. 2001, Haklay and Harrison 2002).
This is due to at least two reasons. On the one hand, HCI techniques, including
usability evaluation, are geared towards understanding how people interact with
computer applications within an environment. On the other, they are built upon
methods researched and validated in a number of scientiﬁc ﬁelds (Thomas and
Macredie 2002), which can aid PPGIS in the design of more robust applications
that are accessible to a wider range of users, most of them with little or no experience
of GIS. As a result, HCI and usability evaluation methods open new avenues for
understanding users’ expectations from a GIS, the ways in which they use, understand
and value the system, and the role of GIS within the wider societal context.

This paper discusses the HCI and usability evaluation techniques that were
deployed in three PPGIS studies. Two focused on PPGIS research, and the third
was a study that focused on usability. They will demonstrate the contribution of
these techniques to PPGIS research. The paper begins with a brief overview of the
links between HCI and usability evaluation and GIS. A brief history of HCI research
and trends is discussed, as well as related work that has been carried out within
Geographic Information Science (GISc). The second part of the paper builds on this
theoretical background and demonstrates how HCI and usability evaluation can
contribute to PPGIS research and practice. Based on our experience, the contribution
of these ﬁelds to PPGIS research is outlined ﬁrst. The contribution of PPGIS to
usability is then explained. The ﬁnal section of the paper discusses these ﬁndings
within the broader PPGIS framework and suggests that an iterative development
process is needed in projects and research wishing to improve the use of the tech-
nology and its applications. We conclude with suggestions for future research and
developments in this area.

2. Human-computer interaction and GIS

There is currently no agreed deﬁnition of HCI but a working one describes it as
‘a discipline concerned with the design, evaluation and implementation of interactive

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

579

computing systems for human use and with the study of major phenomena sur-
rounding them’ (Hewett et al. 2002). Hence, HCI is concerned with enhancing the
quality of interaction between humans and computer systems within the physical,
organisational and social aspects of the users’ environment to produce systems that
are usable, safe and functional (Preece 1995). Research on these issues is based on
the assumption that the needs, capabilities and preferences for the way users perform
an activity within an environment should inﬂuence the design and implementation
of a system in order for it to match users’ requirements. Knowledge about the users
and the work they need to accomplish, as well as about the technology is required
to meet this approach to systems design, which makes HCI a multidisciplinary ﬁeld
of research.

2.1. A brief history of human-computer interaction

HCI’s history is indicative of its multidisciplinary nature as it ‘arose as a ﬁeld
from intertwined roots in computer graphics, operating systems, human factors,
ergonomics, industrial engineering, cognitive psychology, and the systems part of
computer science’ (Hewett et al. 2002). The interest or emphasis in one or more of
these and many other ﬁelds contributing to HCI has been heavily inﬂuenced by
contemporary technological developments. For instance, the origins of HCI are
commonly traced back to the 1940s when Bush (1945) proposed the Memex, a device
for individual use that could speed routine and time-consuming calculations and
store, retrieve and project text and multimedia information, among other features.
Although the ideas that contributed to the concept of a modern digital computer
pre-date the 19th century, the technology available in Bush’s time permitted their
implementation into systems (Baecker and Buxton 1987). In the following decades,
their development and use triggered the interest in designing systems that could aid
human problem solving and creativity (Licklider 1960). Enriching and facilitating
people’s work through the use of computers is still a major concern in HCI.

During the late 1970s and early 1980s, research was driven by the interest of
cognitive psychology on information processing (Lindsay and Norman 1977), which
dealt with issues such as perception, attention, memory, learning and problem solving
and how they can inﬂuence computer and interface design. This was partly possible
due to the research on graphical displays carried out during the 1950s and successfully
developed in the 1960s (Sutherland 1963). The importance of the quality of the
interface and the need for its testing was, therefore, on the agenda from, at least, the
1960s, as shown in the work of Engelbart (1962) and Nelson (1965). However,
interest in the usability of single-user computer systems rocketed during the 1980s
in response to the personal computer explosion. By that time, the ﬁeld had greatly
developed and eﬀort was placed on laying the theoretical foundations of HCI by
formalising and developing theories and methods of design that took user needs into
account (Card et al. 1983).

In the late 1980s and 1990s, multi-user workstations, multimedia and multitasking
shifted the emphasis of research towards group working, integration and interaction
of media as well as the impact of the new technology in society (Preece et al. 1994).
Today, research is driven by trends that include the decreasing costs of hardware
that have led to larger memories and faster systems; the reduction in power require-
ments and the miniaturization of hardware that have brought portability (Hewett
et al. 2002); and the distribution of computing and new input technologies such
as voice or gesture that have broadened the possibilities of user interaction with

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 580

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

computer systems. Some of these advances have prompted trends of special interest
in PPGIS, which aim at incorporating social concerns and public characteristics in
system design. Examples of this include striving for improved access to computers
by disadvantaged groups such as disabled users, or interfaces that appeal to a
particular age group (Muller et al. 1997).

These examples also illustrate the emphasis of HCI in designing user-centred
systems, or systems that, from an early stage, involve target users and experts to a
great extent to inﬂuence the design of the system. In this approach, usability evalu-
ation is central to ensuring that the design meets the user requirements. Such a
design process is highly iterative and common, in practice, to Rapid Application
Development methods where user requirements, the design and the ﬁnal system
usually evolve gradually (Preece et al. 1994). Therefore, the design process encom-
passes the understanding of how people do their work in order to implement systems
that can allow users to accomplish their tasks eﬀectively, eﬃciently and satisfactorily.

2.2. Usability and human-computer interaction

Apart from understanding how to improve users’ work processes, HCI is also
concerned with understanding how people use computer systems in order to develop
or improve their design. The aim is to meet users’ requirements so that they can
carry out their tasks safely, eﬀectively and enjoyably (Preece et al. 1993). Usability
deals with these issues and it applies to all aspects of a system’s user interface, deﬁned
here as the medium through which a user interacts and communicates with the
computer (Nielsen 1993b). Usability refers to the eﬀectiveness of the interaction
between humans and computer systems and it can be speciﬁed in terms of how well
potential users can perform and master tasks on the system (Butler 1996).

A system’s usability can also be measured empirically in terms of its learnability,
eﬃciency, memorability, error rate and user satisfaction (Nielsen 1993b). The ease
of learning a product is measured as the time it takes a person to reach a speciﬁed
level of proﬁciency in using it, assuming the person is representative of the intended
users. Eﬃciency refers to the level of productivity that the user must achieve once
the system has been learned. Memorability measures how easily a system is remem-
bered either after a period of not using it or by casual users. An error in this context
is deﬁned as ‘any action that does not accomplish the desired goal’ (Nielsen 1993b,
p. 32). Counting such actions provides a measure of a system’s error rate. Satisfaction
refers to how pleasant the system is to use. Preece et al.
(1994) also mention
throughput, ﬂexibility and user attitude towards the system. Ease of use or through-
put is comparable to Nielsen’s eﬃciency and error rate as it is deﬁned as ‘the tasks
accomplished by experienced users, the speed of task execution and the errors made’
(Preece et al. 1994, p. 401). Flexibility refers to the extent to which the system can
accommodate tasks or environments it was not originally planned for. Attitude is
comparable to Nielsen’s user satisfaction or how pleasant it is to use the system.

All these aspects relate to intrinsic objectives of PPGIS research—to make a
complex computer technology accessible to a wide range of users, many of them
from disadvantaged backgrounds. If we are to increase the access and use of GIS
for those who are bringing a diversity of knowledge, technical capabilities and
cultural perspectives, we ought to provide them with a positive experience of the
technology. In this sense, the principles of HCI and usability evaluation methods
provide a sound base for the appraisal of PPGIS research. However, the speciﬁc

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

581

complexity which is inherent in GIS is signiﬁcant and, therefore, we now turn to
discuss the relationship between HCI and GIS.

2.3. Cognitive aspects of human-computer interaction for GIS

During the late 1980s, cognitive aspects of HCI for GIS were discussed at
workshops of larger conferences or as sections of books where HCI issues in GIS
were not their primary focus. The 1990s, however, saw a strong international research
interest in the topic. Evidence of this can be found in four workshops that were held
between 1990 and 1994 in the US and Europe1 which explicitly discussed HCI
aspects in GIS, as well as in at least two books (Medyckyj-Scott and Hearnshaw
1993, Nyerges et al. 1995a) published solely on the topic (Nyerges et al. 1995b).

The interest in cognitive aspects of HCI for GIS can be explained by two main
trends. On the one hand, the recent increased availability and power of aﬀordable
personal computers broadened their user community, which was no longer restricted
to ‘a technical and mathematical priesthood’ (Baecker and Buxton 1987, p. 51). This
new user community both desired and demanded interfaces that required limited
technical expertise as was demonstrated by the commercial success of the Apple
Macintosh. On the other hand, GIS had been developing since, at least, the late
1960s and had reached a state where functionality such as map production, display
and spatial data analysis was commonly provided (Kuhn et al. 1992). Concerns in
the GIS community about increasing processing speed and storage requirements
were the main topics on the agenda but they expanded at the beginning of the 1990s
to include how GIS were used and how they could accommodate users’ needs. This
had not been a matter of substantial interest as advances in GIS functionality to
satisfy expert user needs were the focus of computer systems’ designers and developers
and the systems’ manufacturers (Hearnshaw and Medyckyj-Scott 1993). It was
realised, however, that GIS were ‘more likely to fail on human and organizational
grounds [...] than on technical ones’ (Medyckyj-Scott 1992, p. 106) as the deﬁciencies
of the systems in terms of human factors could compromise their future success.

As GIS evolved out of a number of ﬁelds including geography, cartography and
database management, it requires its users to have considerable knowledge of these
ﬁelds to operate the system (Traynor and Williams 1995). Furthermore, GIS require
users to be computer literate and invest enough time to use ‘an interface that reﬂects
the system’s architecture’ (Traynor and Williams 1997, p. 288). Nevertheless, GIS
users vary in expertise and may use the technology in one of a large number of
application areas, as well as demand diﬀerent functionality and analytical power.
Accommodating such a wide spectrum of needs is a challenge in its own right that
must take into account a number of factors such as the components and requirements
of the users’ work, their capabilities and limitations, the types of support the system
can provide, and where it can be provided most eﬀectively (Muller et al. 1997).
Continuing research into the understanding of spatial knowledge sources and the
representation of such knowledge can provide valuable information in the designing

1‘Cognitive and Linguistic Aspects of Geographic Space’, July 1990, Spain, NATO
Advanced Study Institute. ‘User Interfaces for GIS’, June 1991, USA, NCGIA Initiative 13.
‘Task Analysis in Human-Computer Interaction’, June 1992, Austria, 11th interdisciplinary
workshop on Informatics and Psychology. ‘Cognitive Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction
for Geographic Information Systems’, March 1994, Spain, NATO Advanced Research
Workshop.

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 582

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

of eﬀective user interface architectures that take into account these factors and can
also improve the quality of the users’ work.

It is not yet fully understood how spatial knowledge maps ‘onto functional
abilities in thinking about space’ (Hearnshaw and Medyckyj-Scott 1993, p. 237), or
how well the digital representation of such knowledge in a GIS translates into
intuitive human reasoning (Goodchild 1999). Nevertheless, work in these areas has
opened areas of research, of particular interest to PPGIS, concerned with enabling
the accessibility of the technology to a wider public. Questions as to whether or how
complex models and methods for spatial analysis should be made available to non-
experts can develop from the type of research carried out in PPGIS. For example,
research into appropriate visualisation (Krygier 2002) or the use of multimedia
(Shiﬀer 2002) can be integrated with mainstream GISc research to improve the
usability of GIS for occasional and non-specialist users. Of signiﬁcance is the concern
within PPGIS literature of the limited use of sophisticated functionality of GIS
(Craig et al. 2002). In the following section, we discuss the role of usability engineering
techniques in obtaining information on the interests and needs of a particular user
group and the environment for designing applications that suit their requirements.
Furthermore, we discuss how these techniques can beneﬁt PPGIS research and
practice.

3. The synergy of usability and PPGIS research

Building on the background of HCI and usability evaluation methods and their
applications in GIS, we move to the description of two workshops and a usability
evaluation that were conducted in a southern borough of London and the role that
usability evaluation techniques played in these (boroughs are the basic administrative
unit of local government in London). The ﬁrst part of this section describes the two
workshops which were aimed at eliciting views and opinions of active publics towards
the use of GIS within the physical planning process. Within these workshops, HCI
and usability evaluation techniques played an important role in assisting their design
and analysis. The second part of this section describes a usability test of an online
mapping system that was designed by the local authority to provide access to
planning information. In this test, we used knowledge from our PPGIS studies
to understand the user requirements and to improve the design of the system.
Together, these three studies stress the role of a user-centred approach to the design,
development and deployment (Preece et al. 1994, Landauer 1995) of PPGIS projects
which is discussed in the following sections.

Part I. Using usability techniques for PPGIS research

In the workshops undertaken in the inner London Borough of Wandsworth, we
used the focal point of environmental planning as the gateway to the use of GIS as
a planning tool, and the issue of brownﬁeld development and the actions of local
amenity groups and individual residents as the focus for discussions on PPGIS. The
workshops involved a proposed high-density development of luxury homes on the
River Thames that was of concern to local residents. These concerns related to
the lack of provision for aﬀordable homes and the wider environmental impacts
the development would incur—for example, traﬃc generation and congestion and
pressure on local services such as schools, playgrounds and libraries.

As for recruitment of participants, we invited two distinctive local groups of
residents to the two workshops. We recruited fourteen people for the ﬁrst workshop

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

583

all of who were active members of the Wandsworth community. For the second
workshop, we recruited nine participants who had objected to a planning application
in the Borough during the last twelve months, two of which had participated in the
ﬁrst workshop. Participants varied in computer literacy from the novice to the
experienced. All respondents were white and predominantly middle class. In this
regard participants were typical of those ‘active publics’ other studies of public
participation in planning have recorded (Thomas 1996, Rydin 1998).

Both workshops were structured in three parts: an introductory plenary session,
a practical session and a focus group discussion. The introductory session outlined
the basic features of the GIS and the database that was compiled for the workshop.
During the practical session, participants worked around a free-standing PC in
groups of two or three for 90 minutes. Each group was supported by a GIS ‘chauﬀeur’
and group facilitator. The GIS ‘chauﬀeur’ is a person familiar with the GIS and the
data content of the system. The chauﬀeurs demonstrated some of the basic tasks
and then encouraged participants to take control of the mouse and keyboard and
to navigate their own way through basic operations of the system. The facilitators
encouraged users to verbalise their thoughts regarding their interactions with the
software. After a break, some of the facilitators moderated an hour-long focus group
discussion by an experienced member of the research team followed the practical.
All the discussions during the workshop were recorded and transcripts prepared. We
used an oﬀ-the-shelf GIS package (ESRI’s ArcView) in both workshops which also
provided multimedia access to specially designed web pages or existing websites. For
a full description of these workshops and the substantive outcome, see Boott et al.
(2001) and Haklay and Harrison (2002).

There are four identiﬁable HCI and usability evaluation techniques that we have
used within these workshops which are discussed in turn in the paragraphs to follow:

$ the reliance on chauﬀeurs to ‘drive’ the software,
$ the use of software to record the interactions between the users and the system,
$ the instruction to facilitators to encourage participants to verbalise their
thoughts regarding the interactions and the development of a task list to guide
the process, and

$ the use of tasks or scenarios to obtain information about users’ performance

and attitudes towards the system.

The use of ‘chauﬀeurs’ has long been an established practice in studies of com-
puter-supported collaborative work (CSCW) (Nunamaker et al. 1991). This tech-
nique was identiﬁed and adopted in GIS studies in the mid 1990s by researchers
who explored the potential of GIS within the CSCW framework (Shiﬀer 1995a,
1995b, Jankowski and Nyerges 2001). In essence, the chauﬀeur acts as a mediator
between those who need to use the GIS but lack the technical know-how, and the
system. Hence, the chauﬀeur ‘drives’ the system on behalf of the users. In the two
workshops, this was especially valuable as, apart from the complexities of an unfamil-
iar GIS interface, world view and concepts that are encapsulated in the software
itself, the user must be familiar with the datasets and the information they contain.
Thus, without extensive training it is unlikely that an occasional user would make
the most of an oﬀ-the-shelf GIS (Traynor and Williams 1995). In terms of PPGIS
research, the use of chauﬀeurs could reduce the technical complexities that the
participants experience when working with a GIS, as a professional assistant is
always present. However, we did not assume that the same person would have the

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 584

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

skills as a facilitator to guide the participants through the process and to encourage
them to focus on the issues that were at the centre of the research project. Thus, in
every group we had an experienced facilitator, with a solid background in conducting
qualitative research plus a chauﬀeur to drive the system. One of the outcomes of
our PPGIS workshops is that, in an ideal situation, it would be better to have a
chauﬀeur/facilitator rolled into the same person as this will make the analysis more
accurate and can make the whole experience more natural. This requires a high level
of competency in GIS combined with qualitative research and facilitation training.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of such researchers due to the internal ‘cultural divide’
in Geography, Urban Planning and related disciplines and it is hoped that the
growing interest in socio-technical topics such as PPGIS will bring to the fore a new
generation of researchers with appropriate training.

For the purpose of analysing and understanding how users perform tasks with
computers, HCI literature advocates the complete recording of the interactive session,
including the audio and the computer screen. The recording can assist in analysing
what the participants viewed on the screen during the session and provide a better
understanding of the relationship between the speciﬁc images that appear at a speciﬁc
point and the topics that were discussed. They can be used to time diﬀerent tasks
and evaluate the performance of participants in accomplishing them. For the purpose
of PPGIS studies, the recording provided a much needed augmentation of the current
practice of analysing the textual output in the form of transcripts. The session
recording enables the researcher to associate the discussion to the results obtained
by the users in each task, as well as to analyse the sequence of events that led to a
speciﬁc comment about the system or the information obtained.

The practice of asking participants to verbalise their experience with the system
is aimed at understanding a range of cognitive activities such as the users’ conceptual
model, especially with regards to their expectations of the system’s behaviour, while
performing a speciﬁc task. As we found out from encouraging the participants to
discuss their thoughts while using the system, this practice was very useful within
our PPGIS workshops. Participants provided clear examples of the diﬃculties in
respect of the concepts that are intermingled in the GIS package. For instance,
participants with little computer experience commented on the diﬃculty to under-
stand the meaning of operations such as ‘zooming to active theme’ as well as on
terms such as ‘butt’, ‘mitre’ or ‘pan’. For experienced GIS users, similar concepts
together with their interfaces may be obvious and the fact that they draw heavily
on multiple ﬁelds becomes unnoticeable. However, by asking the participants to
express their thoughts, we could understand better some of the main limitations or
intimidating factors to using a GIS for this user group.

In usability evaluations, the deﬁnition of tasks and task analysis is used to obtain
a quantitative measure of performance in terms of the time it takes to accomplish a
task, or success/failure rates (Preece et al. 1994). Task analysis frameworks such as
Rasmussen’s (1986) that aim at controlling complex processes by mapping them in
a simple manner in a display, have been considered for GIS interface design and
understanding complex user tasks (Kuhn et al. 1992). Within our studies, we used
this concept to guide the participants through a set of activities that were designed
to provide a speciﬁc experience with the software, but also to explore PPGIS research
issues. For example, towards the end of the practical session in the workshops, we
guided the participants to try to add information to the system on topics that did
not exist in the system’s database. This was based on the emphasis in PPGIS

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

585

literature on the importance of local knowledge and the ability to integrate it into
a GIS. By putting this ‘task’ on the list, without a clear deﬁnition of what type of
information the participants were expected to ﬁll in, we encouraged them to discuss
the type of information that they would like to capture, as well as the value of that
information.

Finally, it must be noted that other qualitative research and analysis techniques
were used in tandem with the HCI and evaluation methods. The use of focus groups,
as well as the techniques employed to elicit substantive ﬁndings in the workshops
go beyond the remit of this paper. Having stated this, it is clear that we would not
have reached many of the main results of the workshop without the reliance on the
HCI and evaluation techniques.

Part II. Using PPGIS research to improve usability

The next phase of the development occurred as a result of an initiative by the
local authority, the London Borough of Wandsworth, to further develop their website.
Wandsworth is considered one of the most forward-looking in terms of public
participation and innovative use of Information and Communication Technologies
(Carver 2001). It was one of the ﬁrst local authorities to provide full access over the
Internet to all the documents, which are used in its development planning (including
letters of objection and minutes of the planning committee). The local authority also
promotes public involvement in service delivery, and in the case of its planning
department, this includes the involvement of advisory committees, community panels
and attitude surveys. This innovative approach was recognised by the central
Government, which recently (mid-2001) granted the Borough funds to further develop
its website as part of the Government ‘pathﬁnder’ initiative towards e-government
(DETR 2001). As part of this initiative, the planning department decided to provide
a wide range of services online, including the ability to complete an application for
planning permission over the Internet. As the planning department was aware of
our workshops, we were asked to help in the design and testing of the system. While
the original remit of our involvement in this project was to ensure that the system
will be ‘user-friendly and easy to use’, we were able to advise the Borough based on
the outcome of our workshops and to integrate some of the wishes of the local
residents into the system. Thus, the PPGIS workshops contributed to the usability
of the system and inﬂuenced the design and structure of a usability test.

Within this project we conducted a usability test based on common practices
within the HCI and usability evaluation literature. Our approach was based on
Nielsen’s (1993a) ‘Guerrilla HCI’, which allowed us to run the tests with a relatively
small group of participants and use the computer training facilities of the local
authority. As for recruitment, we followed the method of the second PPGIS work-
shop. We sent email messages and posted letters to approximately 110 people who
had objected to planning applications (either online or oﬄine) in the last year, a list
that was compiled by the local authority’s planning department. From this list, we
recruited nine participants who were able to attend the testing session. Just as in the
previous workshops, participants varied in computer literacy from the novice to the
experienced.

The testing session opened with a brief introduction of the reasons for conducting
the testing, its potential contribution to the design of the ﬁnal system in terms of
making it more accessible and easy to use for the Borough’s community, as well as
the role of the university team as independent consultants to the local authority.

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 586

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

After explaining the purpose of the evaluation, participants were asked to start using
the system and to complete a set of four speciﬁc tasks using the following system.

$ Task 1 was intended to allow participants to use the application for the ﬁrst
time and become familiar with its main functionality by navigating to locations
of interest. This allowed the evaluation of the navigation tools, including a
menu with a list of locations that took the users to predeﬁned areas of interest
in Wandsworth. It also permitted the evaluation of the background maps for
providing contextual information about locations of interest.

$ Task 2 was aimed at testing the usability of the system for displaying layers of
planning constraints and using the layer selection functionality for obtaining
details about them.

$ Task 3 built on this and included not only mapping further planning constraints
but also navigating the map to compare map themes or layers and obtaining
detailed information from selected planning constraints.

$ Task 4 included using all the functionality they had learned, after at least 30
minutes of interaction with the application, to ﬁnd information about the
planning constraints for a particular building.

As can be seen in this list, the design was geared towards the evaluation of the
system itself and our aim was to discover if the participants were successful in
performing a speciﬁc task with the online application. We used recording software
to capture the audio and video interactions to aid us in the analysis of the individual
sessions. Each participant was encouraged to try to complete the task without help
and only when it was clear that the interface was misunderstood or the participant
was ‘lost’, an observer standing by provided hints about operating the system. The
observer also completed an observations sheet to ensure that we could capture the
main issues during the session. After completing the test, we asked participants to
complete a questionnaire about their experience. The whole session took about 30
minutes. While the main issues and the lessons about the system that we gleaned
through the usability testing were valuable and some integrated into the ﬁnal system
http://www.wandsworth.gov.uk/pathﬁnder/pathmappingwandsworth.htm or
(see
ﬁgure 1), in the following paragraphs we will focus on the contribution of the three
studies to this system.

3.1. Contribution of the studies to a user-centred system design

Four main contributions can be identiﬁed that stemmed from the two PPGIS
workshops and the usability test and were integrated into the system (or were
integrated into its development plan):

$ informing community members about relevant planning content,
$ content and presentation of layers in the GIS,
$ the navigation and control of the mapping environment, and
$ the general usability of the ﬁnal application.

3.2. Informing community members about relevant planning content

During the workshops and the usability test we found that local residents felt it
was diﬃcult to ﬁnd and learn about proposed developments in their area. Within
the online system, a module was devised and termed ‘My Community’ which was
aimed at enabling Borough residents to interactively deﬁne a geographical area on
the map that was of interest to them. Once deﬁned, the system logs a planning

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

587

Figure 1. Wandsworth council online GIS.

application within this area and sends an email message to the user with details
about relevant planning constraints, thus enabling more active participation from
the user.

3.3. Content and presentation of layers in the GIS

The way in which the system presents and integrates geographical information
is based on the results of our three studies. We found that participants were interested
in the integration of aerial photographs with map information, so as to make it
more accessible to people with limited map reading skills and to provide better
contextual information about the neighbourhood and the area. Another ﬁnding was
the need for an easy and clear access to the Unitary Development Plan—a document
and related maps that deﬁne the planning restrictions in diﬀerent areas in the
Borough and resemble zoning ordinances in the US. Participants were interested in
the ability to click on a speciﬁc area on the map and seeing which policies applied
to that location, including hyperlinks to the relevant sections in the policy document.
These two requests were integrated into the ﬁnal system and are available to all
local residents over the Internet. During the usability sessions, participants used the
diﬀerent layers and followed the information on the pages to retrieve information
of interest.

3.4. T he navigation and control of the mapping environment

During the design and implementation of the online system we encouraged the
developers to make the control and navigation of the map as simple as possible.
The observations during the preliminary workshops suggested that even operations
like zooming in and out and panning can be diﬃcult to novice users, and that they

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 588

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

found the concept of zooming by clicking on the map more natural than the more
sophisticated method of drawing a bounding box on the screen. The ﬁnal system is
based mainly on one click navigation (zoom in, out and panning the map), while
advanced navigation functionality is separately available. Furthermore, to get
information from the system, the user only needs to click on the map while the
information panel is visible.

3.5. T he general usability of the ﬁnal application

Finally, the usability test contributed to improving the ﬁnal system interface in
terms of enabling non-expert users to use it more eﬃciently and purposefully. By
running a usability test, the developers and our research team were able to locate
and remove some problems with the interface. Some of these included: lack of
feedback after the user had issued a command to indicate whether the system was
performing any operations; lack of visual guidelines on the interface to indicate how
tools were operated; and a selection of symbology on the map and layer representa-
tion that made it diﬃcult to read the map at some zoom levels. By ensuring that
the ﬁnal application was more usable and accessible, the online GIS can potentially
be used by more people and increase their participation.

4. Towards a user-centred design, development and deployment cycle

Based on the process that the three studies started, we can envisage an iterative
development cycle for PPGIS projects. By and large, such a cycle should be based
on the concept of user-centred design, development and deployment as suggested in
the HCI literature (Preece et al. 1994, Landauer 1995). While such development is
generally recommended on the premise that the system implementation is more
likely to be successful, within a PPGIS setting this can prove to be vital in ensuring
that the system achieves the goals of improving participation and opening up new
arenas for public involvement in planning and management processes. As Elwood
(2002) noted, the use of software is at the same time an empowering and disem-
powering process and despite advances in the Graphical User Interface (GUI) design
of modern GIS, these systems still require users to hold a wide range of skills and
background knowledge to operate them. This presents major obstacles for occasional
or novice users, or those not interested in investing a considerable amount of time
to acquire such skills.

It is signiﬁcant that the sophisticated interface of advanced Web-based GIS such
as ArcIMS, is using all the complex terminology and iconography of a full-scale
GIS. For many users, such an approach means that the system is less accessible and
intimidating. As a number of studies have demonstrated, in some cases users are
reluctant to ask for computer assistance as this is perceived as degrading or associated
to social costs (Harris 2000). Considering the range of operations that are common
in the PPGIS literature (mainly local data entry and spatial queries), there should
be a way to deliver this functionality within an application that is as easy to use as
buying a book over the Internet or sending an email message.

As was shown, a user-centred design approach to PPGIS projects will not just
contribute to the project itself but will also provide, as a by-product, rich and detailed
accounts about the ways in which diﬀerent users with a diversity of backgrounds
and needs use GIS to advance their own goals. This means that such an approach
contributes substantially to the way in which we understand how PPGIS operates
as a socio-technical object. Although we have not fully analysed the transcripts of

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

589

the usability session, there are some discussions and opinions about the system that
are very similar to the other two workshops. In a broader project, it can be envisaged
that the cycle will move on by observing the ways in which the intended users use
the ﬁnal system over a period of time. Using techniques such as online questionnaires
or analysis of the system’s log ﬁles—which record every interaction between the end-
user and the system—the system designer can learn about how the system works
and continue to improve it if necessary. In general, PPGIS projects should be seen
as an open-ended process in which the system is being developed and adapted to
the changing needs of the local community and where designers and maintainers
must be sensitive to the changing goals and objectives of their end-users.

There are, of course, some issues to consider. For example, in a Web-based
environment the log ﬁles can be adapted in such a way that they will provide a full
account of the session and become material for research. Doing so without prior
notiﬁcation to the end-user amounts to surveillance and can undermine the conﬁd-
ence of users and their trust in the system designers. Thus, within PPGIS projects,
it is doubly important to use a transparent design approach and to advise the users
if such forms of interaction recording take place (and possibly to allow users to opt
in or opt out of being recorded).

5. Conclusion and future research directions

In this paper we have presented the connection between HCI, usability evaluation
and PPGIS. We have demonstrated how this connection is not just natural but also
very valuable within the societal stance of PPGIS. Building on our three case studies,
we have suggested the adoption of the user-centred design, development and deploy-
ment approach to PPGIS projects, pointing to the main issues that ought to be
taken into account when adopting such methods. There are, however, other aspects
of current activities in GISc research that relate to HCI and that can be integrated
into PPGIS research. First, the development of tools in the area of geographical
visualisation (GVis) that allows the interactive and dynamic exploration of spatial
data has renewed the interest in human factors of GIS. These tools rely on the users’
perception of visual stimuli (Gahegan 2001), which in turn depends on the GUI
supporting deﬁned users’ tasks. The type of tasks that these systems can support is
yet to be fully understood. Research in this area may illuminate how we can better
support the visual exploration of spatial data, which can be of signiﬁcant value in
some PPGIS settings. Second, issues surrounding naı¨ve geography (Egenhofer and
Mark 1995) and the representation of knowledge in ways that can accommodate
local perceptions and ‘mental maps’ can be valuable to approach and integrate local
knowledge in PPGIS. Finally, natural spatial queries, such as the work on ‘query
by sketch’ (Egenhofer 1997) can provide ways to interrogate spatial databases that
reﬂect human understanding of spatial knowledge rather than the system’s architec-
ture (Freundschuh and Egenhofer 1997). These are just a few of the areas that are
relevant for current PPGIS research.

Probably the most important lesson from our project is that ease of use and user
friendliness are characteristics of software that are more elusive than they ﬁrst seem
to be. Even if the PPGIS designers believe that they have managed to create
something that is easy to use, only appropriate testing—even using simple methods
such as Nielsen’s—will show if the design is successful in meeting users’ needs or
not. It seems to us that in PPGIS projects, this is not just a technical obligation,
but also a moral one.

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 590

M. Haklay and C. T obo´n

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank M. Hawell of the planning department in the
London Borough of Wandsworth for his help in this project, and the team of MVM
ltd and David Rix for their willingness and support during the usability testing.
Special thanks to S. Brostoﬀ. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the
ﬁrst URISA PPGIS conference, 21–23 July 2002, Rutgers University

References
B, R. M., and B, W. A. S., 1987, A historical and intellectual perspective. In
Readings in Human-Computer Interaction: A Multidisciplinary Approach, edited by
R. M. Baecker and W. A. S. Buxton (San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann), pp. 41–54.

B, R., H, M., H, K., and M, J., 2001, The use of GIS in brownﬁeld
redevelopment. In Innovations in GIS 8: Spatial Information and the Environment, edited
by P. Halls (London: Taylor and Francis), pp. 241–258.
B, V., 1945, As we may think. T he Atlantic Monthly, 176, 101–108.
B, K. A., 1996, Usability engineering turns 10, Interactions, 3, 59–75.
C, S. K., M, T. P., and N, A., 1983, T he Psychology of Human-Computer

Interaction (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates).

C, W. J., H, T. M., and W, D., 2002, Community participation and Geographic
Information Systems. In Community Participation and Geographic Information Systems,
edited by W. J. Craig, T. M. Harris and D. Weiner (London: Taylor and Francis),
pp. 3–16.

C, S., 2001, Participation and Geographical Information: a Position Paper. Paper presented
at the ESF-NSF Workshop on Access to Geographic Information and Participatory
Approaches Using Geographic
2001.
http://www.iapad.org/ bibliography.htm

Information, Spoleto,

6–8 December

D, C. and M-S, D., 1996, GIS users observed. International Journal of

Geographical Information Systems, 10, 363–384.

DETR, 2001, On the path to E-Government – Council pathﬁnders picks. News Release 164:

22 March, (London: DETR).

E S., 2002, GIS use in community planning: a multidimensional analysis of

empowerment. Environment and Planning A, 34, 905–922.

E, S., and L, H., 1998, GIS and community-based planning: exploring the diversity

of neighborhood perspectives and needs. Cartography and GIS, 25, 77–88.

E, D. C., 1962, Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework. Summary

Report AFOSR-3223, Stanford Research Institute (SRI), October, 133.

E, M. J., 1997, Query processing in spatial-query-by-sketch. Journal of V isual

L anguages and Computing, 8, 403–424

E, M. J., and M, D. M., 1995, Naive geography. In Spatial Information T heory:
A T heoretical Basis for GIS, edited by A. U. Frank, and W. Kuhn (Berlin: Springer-
Verlag) Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences No. 988, 1–15.

F, S., and E, M. J., 1997, Human conceptions of spaces: implications

for GIS. T ransactions in GIS, 2, 361–375.

G, M., 2001, Visual exploration in geography: analysis with light. In Geographic Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, edited by H. J. Miller and J. Han (London: Taylor
and Francis), pp. 260–288.

G, R., 2001, Use of information technology for community empowerment: transforming
Geographic Information Systems into community information systems. T ransactions
in GIS, 5, 141–163.

G, M. F., 1999, Reﬂections of a Past Editor. Geographical Analysis, 31, 328–331.
G, M. F., 2002, Forward. In Community Participation and Geographic Information
Systems, edited by W. J. Craig, T. M. Harris, and D. Weiner (London: Taylor and
Francis), pp. ix–xxiii.

H, M., 2002, Public Environmental Information Systems: Challenges and Perspectives,

PhD thesis, Department of Geography, UCL, University of London.

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 Usability evaluation and PPGIS

591

H, M., and H, C. M., 2002, The potential for public participation GIS in UK
environmental planning: appraisals by active publics, International Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management (JEPM), 45, 841–863.

H, K., 2000,

‘Everyone gets hooked’ exploring ICTs in low-income neighbourhoods.

Community Development Foundation, 42.

H, H. M., and M-S, D., 1993, The way forward for human factors in
GIS. In Human Factors in Geographical Information Systems, edited by D. Medyckyj-
Scott and H. M. Hearnshaw (London: Bellhaven Press), pp. 235–243.

H, T. T., B, R. M., C, S. K., C, J. G., G, M. M,. M, G.,
P, G. W., S, and V, B., 2002, Curricula for Human-Computer
Interaction. http://www.acm.org/sigchi/cdg/cdg2.html#2_1, Accessed May 2002.
J, P., and N, T., 2001, Geographic Information Systems for Group Decision
Making: T owards a Participatory Geographic Information Science (London: Taylor
and Francis).

K, J. B., 2002, A praxis of public participation GIS and visualization. In Community
Participation and Geographic Information Systems, edited by W. J. Craig, T. M. Harris
and D. Weiner (London: Taylor and Francis), pp. 330–331.

K, W., W, L., M, D. M., and F, A. U., 1992, User interfaces for Geographic
the specialist meeting. In User Interfaces
Information Systems: discussions at
for Geographic Information Systems: Report on the specialist Meeting, edited by
D. M. Mark, and A. U. Frank (Buﬀalo, NY: NCGIA).

L, T. K., 1995, T he T rouble with Computers (Cambridge, MA: MIT press).
L, J. C. R., 1960, Man-computer symbiosis. IRE T ransactions on Human Factors in

Electronics, HFE-1, 4–11.

L, P., and N, D. A., 1977, Human Information Processing: An Introduction to

Psychology (New York: Academic Press Inc.).

M-S, D., 1992, GIS and the concept of usability. In User Interfaces for Geographic
Information Systems: Report on the Specialist Meeting, edited by D. M. Mark and
A. U. Frank (Buﬀalo, NY: NCGIA), pp. 105–110.

M-S, D., and H, H. M. (editors), 1993, Human Factors in Geographical

Information Systems (London: Bellhaven Press).

M, M. J., W, C., MI, W. J., and L L., 1997, Toward an HCI research
and practice agenda based on human needs and social responsibility, in conference
Proceedings on Human factors in Computing Systems, 1997, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States, pp. 155–161

M, B., H, J., C, I., B, S., B, D., C, T., C, W.,
G, E., G, J., I, Y., J, R., J, B., K, D., O, D.,
P, R,. S, S., S, B., S, J., S, G., and W, K.,
1996, Strategic directions in human-computer interaction. ACM Computing Surveys,
28, 794–809.

N, T. H., 1965, A ﬁle structure for the complex, the changing, and the indeterminate.

Proceedings of the ACM National Conference, pp. 84–100.

N, J., 1993a, Guerilla HCI: using discount usability engineering. In Cost Justifying

Usability, edited by R. Bias and D. Mayhew (Boston: Academic Press).
N, J., 1993b, Usability Engineering (San Diego, CA: Morgan Kaufmann).
N, J. F., D, A. R., V, J. S., V D., and G, J. F., 1991,

Electronic meeting systems. Communications of the ACM, 34, 40–61.

N, T. L., M, D. M., L, R., and E, M. J. (editors), 1995a, Cognitive
Information Systems

Interaction for Geographic

Aspects of Human-Computer
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers).

N, T. L., M, D. M., L, R., and E, M. J., 1995b, Cognitive aspects
of HCI for GIS: an introduction. In Cognitive Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction
for Geographic Information Systems, edited by T. L. Nyerges, D. M. Mark, R. Laurini
and M. J. Egenhofer (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 1–8.

P, J., 1995, Human-computer Interaction (Wokingham, UK: Addison-Wesley).
P, J., B, D., D, G., K, L., and R, Y., 1993, A Guide to Usability:

Human Factors in Computing (Dorset: Addison-Wesley).

P, J., R, Y., S, H., B, D., H, S., and C, T., 1994, Human-

Computer Interaction (Harlow: Addison-Wesley).

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 592

Usability evaluation and PPGIS

R, J., 1986, Information Processing and Human-Machine Interaction: An Approach to

Cognitive Engineering (New York: North Holland).

R, Y., 1998, Urban and Environmental Planning in the UK (London: Macmillan).
S, M. J.,1995a, Environmental review with hypermedia systems. Environment and

Planning B, 22, 359–372.

S, M. J.,1995b, Interactive multimedia planning support: moving from stand-alone
systems to the World Wide Web. Environment and Planning B, 22, 649–664.
S, M. J., 2002, Spatial multimedia representations to support community participation.
In Community Participation and Geographic Information Systems, edited by W. J. Craig,
T. M. Harris, D. Weiner (London: Taylor and Francis), pp. 309–319.

S, I. E., 1963, Sketchpad: a man-machine graphical communication system. In
Proceedings of the Spring Joint Computer Conference (Detroit, Michigan), pp. 329–346.
T, E., 2000, Bottom-up GIS: a new tool for individual and group expression in participat-

ory planning. Journal of the American Planning Association, 66, 279–294.

T, H., 1996, Public participation in planning. In British Planning Policy in T ransition:
Planning in the 1990s, edited by M. Tewdwr-Jones (London: UCL Press), pp. 168–188.
T, P., and M, R. D., 2002, Introduction to the new usability. ACM T ransactions

on Computer-Human Interaction, 9, 69–73.

T, C., and W, M. G., 1995, Why are Geographic Information Systems hard to
use? CHI ’95 Mosaic of Creativity, Denver, Colorado, ACM/SIGCHI, 288–289.
T, C., and W, M. G., 1997, A study of end-user programming for Geographic
Information Systems. Empirical Studies of Programmers: Seventh Workshop, ESP7
(Alexandria, VA: ACM Press).

Downloaded by [University of Alberta] at 20:03 27 November 2014 