 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(3): 341–364

XXX 
© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1467-9671
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK

Research Article

Research Article
Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data
B G Jacob, D A Grifﬁth and R J Novak

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic 
Habitat Data into Spatial Autocorrelation 
®
Eigenvectors in a SAS/GIS
 Module

Daniel A Griffith
School of Social Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas

Benjamin G Jacob
Department of Medicine
William C. Gorgas Center for 
Geographic Medicine

Robert J Novak
Department of Medicine
William C. Gorgas Center for 
Geographic Medicine

An.  gambiae

Anopheles gambiae

Abstract
We  present  a  geostatistical  approach  that  accounts  for  spatial  autocorrelation  in
malaria  mosquito  aquatic  habitats  in  two  East  African  urban  environments.
QuickBird  0.61 m  data,  encompassing  visible  bands  and  the  near  infra-red  (NIR)
 s.l. aquatic habitats
bands, were selected to synthesize images of 
  s.l.  aquatic
in  Kisumu  and  Malindi,  Kenya.  Field  sampled  data  of 
An.
habitats were used to determine which ecological covariates were associated with 
®
  spatial  database  was  used  to
s.l.  larval  habitat  development.  A  SAS/GIS
gambiae 
calculate univariate statistics, correlations and perform Poisson regression analyses
  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  datasets.  Semivariograms  and  global
on  the 
®
. The spatially dependent models
autocorrelation statistics were generated in ArcGIS
 s.l. aquatic habitats exhibits weak positive
indicate the distribution of 
autocorrelation in both study sites, with aquatic habitats of similar log-larval counts
tending to cluster in space. Individual anopheline habitats were further evaluated in
terms  of  their  covariations  with  spatial  autocorrelation  by  regressing  them  on
I
candidate spatial filter eigenvectors. This involved the decomposition of Moran’s 
statistic into orthogonal and uncorrelated map pattern components using a negative
binomial regression. The procedure generated synthetic map patterns of latent spatial
  s.l.  aquatic
correlation  representing  the  geographic  configuration  of 

An.  gambiae

An.  gambiae

An. gambiae

Address  for  correspondence: 
Benjamin  G.  Jacob,  Department  of  Medicine,  William  C.  Gorgas
Center  for  Geographic  Medicine,  845  19th  Street  South,  Birmingham,  AL,  35294,  USA.  E-mail:
bjacob@uab.edu

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

342

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

habitat locations in each study site. The Gaussian approximation spatial filter models
accounted for approximately 13% to 32% redundant locational information in the
®
  module  can  capture
ecological  datasets.  Spatial  statistics  generated  in  a  SAS/GIS
spatial dependency effects on the mean response term of a Poisson regression analysis
of field and remotely sampled 

 s.l. aquatic habitat data.

An. gambiae

1 Introduction

Spatial  autocorrelation  is  frequently  encountered  in  the  analyses  of  mosquito  aquatic
habitat  data  (Klienschmidt  et  al.  2000).  Typically,  these  mosquito  aquatic  habitats  in
urban  ecosystems  are  positively  autocorrelated,  such  that  nearby  aquatic  habitats  in
geographic  space  have  more  similar  larval  counts  than  would  be  expected  by  random
chance (Jacob et al. 2005). This pattern is often driven by multiple causes that may be
exogenous (e.g. autocorrelated environment disturbance) and/or endogenous (conspecific
attraction, dispersal limitations, demography) (Griffith 2005). In addition to its ecological
significance, spatial autocorrelation is problematic for classical tests commonly used in
mosquito  data  analyses,  such  as  ANOVA  and  ordinary  least  squares  (OLS)  regression
that assume independently distributed errors. Modeling the geographical distribution of
urban malaria mosquito data often are subject to considerable random error (Snow et al.
1998, Craig et al. 1999).

Spatial  statistics  can  address  the  issue  of  observational  correlation  amongst
georeferenced  mosquito  larval  habitat  data  which  is  known  as  spatial  autocorrelation.
This  type  of  correlation  can  be  indexed  with  a  Moran  Coefficient  (MC;  a  product
moment correlation coefficient type of spatial autocorrelation index) or a Geary Ratio
(GR;  a  paired  comparisons  coefficient  type  of  spatial  autocorrelation  index).  The
simplest  and  most  straightforward  null  hypothesis  on  which  to  test  the  significance  of
the MC assumes spatial autocorrelation in the population from which a sample is drawn
to be zero. Two assumptions about a sample can be made: the sample values are drawn
from  a  normally  distributed  population;  or,  the  sample  values  represent  one  random
arrangement  of  attribute  values  from  all  the  possible  arrangements  that  could  occur
(Cliff and Ord 1981). The GR compares the neighboring values with each other directly
to  measure  how  dissimilar  the  two  values  are.  The  MC  and  GR  indices  may  be  tested
using analytical expectations and variances based largely on the neighborhood structure
assumed  in  a  spatial  weighting  (Cliff  and  Ord  1973).  Spatial  autocorrelation  often  is
positive  in  nature,  with  most  phenomena  exhibiting  a  moderate  tendency  for  their
similar values to cluster in geographic space. Occasionally, the tendency is for dissimilar
values to cluster in geographic space, representing negative spatial autocorrelation. The
MC and GR are asymptotically normally distributed.

In  highly  heterogeneous  environments,  however,  the  MC  and  GR  indices  may  fail
to detect hidden negative spatial autocorrelation, though all of the visual and conventional
numerical  evidence  suggests  the  presence  of  positive  spatial  autocorrelation.  Recent
quantitative geographical analysis methods have supplemented spatial statistics with an
approach  to  determine  latent  autocorrelation,  by  decomposing  the  MC  and  GR  into
synthetic variates whose linear combinations constitute a spatial filter model specification.
The  eigenvector  filtering  approach  is  a  non-parametric  technique  that  removes  the
inherent spatial autocorrelation from generalized linear regression models by treating it
as a missing variables (i.e. first order) effect. The aim of non-parametric spatial filtering

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(3)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

343

is to control for spatial autocorrelation, with a set of spatial proxy variables, rather than
to  identify  a  global  spatial  autocorrelation  parameter  for  a  spatial  process.  As  such,
spatial filter analyses utilize the misspecification interpretation of spatial autocorrelation,
which  assumes  that  spatial  autocorrelation  is  induced  by  missing  exogenous  variables,
which  themselves  are  spatially  autocorrelated.  One  advantage  of  spatial  filter  analyses
is that it enables the use of a generalized linear model (GLM) specification, which for disease
mapping purposes can be based upon the Poisson probability model (Griffith 2003).

Z 

Another approach to analyzing mosquito aquatic habitat relationships in the presence
of fine-scale autocorrelation is kriging. Kriging is a group of linear least squares estimation
of  the
algorithms  used  to  interpolate  the  value  of  a  random  field  (e.g.  the  elevation 
landscape  as  a  function  of  the  geographic  location),  at  an  unobserved  location,  from
observations  of  its  value  at  nearby  locations  (Krige  1966).  Kriging  starts  with  a  prior
distribution  over  functions  similar  to  a  Bayesian  inference  (Diggle  et  al.  1998).  This
  samples  from  a  function  will  be
distribution  takes  the  form  of  a  Gaussian  process: 
normally distributed, where the covariance between any two samples is the covariance
function (or kernel) of the Gaussian process evaluated at the spatial location of two data
points. A set of values is then observed with each value associated with a spatial location.
Thereafter, a new value can be predicted at any new spatial location by combining the
prior distribution with a Gaussian likelihood function for each of the observed values.
The  resulting  posterior  distribution  is  also  Gaussian,  with  a  mean  and  covariance  that
can be simply computed from the observed values, their variance, and the kernel matrix
derived from the original distribution (Krige 1966).

n

Recent developments in GIS, for fitting auto-Gaussian and other models significantly
expand spatial analytical tools for analyzing mosquito aquatic habitat data that is auto-
correlated. The role of GIS in analyzing spatial interaction in mosquito aquatic habitat
data is twofold: (1) to pre-process the data by extracting ecological covariates from field
and  remotely  sampled  data;  and,  (2)  to  post-process  the  results  by  plotting  estimated
area  effects  on  a  map  (Hay  et  al.  1998).  The  essential  core  of  any  spatial  analyses  of
mosquito data is, however, stochastic and thus must employ statistical programs to take
account of the random nature of the processes involved. The SAS Geographic Information
®
) software component is optional for producing maps of model output
System (SAS/GIS
(see SAS 9.1.3 at http://www.sas.com/products/gis for additional details). As a component
®
  software  stores  all  its  spatial  data  in  SAS  data  sets.  The
of  the  SAS  System,  SAS/GIS
®
 spatial database work together as one logical file, even though
data sets for a SAS/GIS
they are split into multiple physical files. This module extends the base SAS functionality
®
 can link tabular data in SAS with spatial
with an interactive GIS. Additionally, SAS/GIS
data  in  ArcGIS  so  that  queries  can  consider  spatial  proximities  as  part  of  the  analysis
including  estimating  eigenvector  mapping,  generalized  least  squares  (GLS),  conditional
autoregressive  models  (CAR),  simultaneous  autoregressive  models  (SAR),  generalized
linear  mixed  models  (GLMM),  generalized  estimation  equations  (GEE)  and  others.
®
 may generate
Modeling ecological factors of urban mosquito aquatic habitats in SAS/GIS
and validate covariates associated with larval abundance, while controlling for potential
spatial autocorrelation in model residuals.

In this research, data from the visible and near infra-red (NIR) region of the QuickBird
satellite (see http://www.digitalglobe.com for additional details), and field sampled larval
®
 software, using environmental pre-
habitat data, were statistically modeled in SAS/GIS
s.l., a major malaria vector in sub-Saharan Africa. A quantitative
dictors of 
s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  a
An.  gambiae 
assessment  spatially  targeting  highly  productive 

An. gambiae 

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(3)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

344

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

®
SAS/GIS
  module,  and  other  newer  GIS  applications  using  QuickBird  data,  may  help
direct resources for implementing control strategies in an urban environment. Therefore,
our research objectives were to: (1) perform a Poisson regression analyses to determine
ecological covariates affecting larval habitat abundance; (2) apply kriging techniques to
develop  a  spatial  linear  prediction  model  of  potential  larval  habitat  sites;  (3)  generate
global  autocorrelation  statistics  to  determine  spatially  dependent  predictor  variables;
and  (4)  spatially  filter  all  latent  autocorrelation  in  model  residuals  using  a  stepwise
s.l. aquatic hab-
negative binomial regression, to summarize georeferenced 
itats in Kisumu and Malindi, Kenya.

An. gambiae 

2 Methodology and Data Sources

2.1 Study Sites

Two  cities,  Kisumu  and  Malindi,  were  chosen  as study  areas  to  carry  out  the remote
sensing and ecological investigations in Kenya. Kisumu has a population of approximately
315,000 and is located 10 km south of the equator, on Lake Victoria in Nyanza Province.
Western  Kenya  has  two  distinct  rainy  seasons,  March  through  May  and  September
through December, with average yearly precipitation ranging from 1,000 to 1,500 mm.
Urban  Kisumu  comprises  residential,  commercial  and  industrial  areas  surrounded  by
An. arabiensis
rural hinterland. The anopheline vectors in this region are 
of the 

An. gambiae
 (Githeko et al. 1993).

 complex, and 

An. gambiae

An. funestus

 and 

Malindi is the tenth largest urban center in Kenya, with a population of approximately
80,500 people. Located on the shore of the Indian Ocean in Coast Province, it is 108 km
north  of  Mombasa.  Coastal  Kenya  has  two  distinct  rainy  seasons,  April  through  June
and October through November. The precipitation throughout the coastal plain varies
from  75  to  1,200 mm  per  year.  Malindi  covers  commercial  and  residential  areas,  sur-
  An.
,
An.  gambiae
rounded  by  rural  land.  The  anopheline  vectors  in  this  region  are 
 (Mbogo et al. 2003).
An. gambiae
 An. merus
,
arabiensis

 complex and 

An. funestus

 of the 

2.2 Laval Sampling

Field  sampling  was  performed  from  January  2005  to  June  2006.  One  hundred  eighty-
four  temporary,  permanent,  and  semi-permanent  mosquito  larval  habitat  sites  in  the
study sites were mapped and classified using a differentially corrected global positioning
system (CSI DGPS Max) receiver, relying on the OmniStar L-Band satellite signal, yielding
a positional accuracy of less than 1 m for most locations (Jacob et al. 2007a). Habitats
were defined as temporary if they held water for up to 2 weeks, semi-permanent if they
sustained water for up to 3 months, or permanent if they held water for a period equal
to  or  longer  than  6  months.  Water  bodies  were  inspected  for  mosquito  larvae  using
standard  dipping  techniques,  with  a  350-ml  dipper  for  the  collection  of  the  mosquito
larvae (Service 1993). The number of dips per habitat was 20. All data from the habitat
 s.l. aquatic larval habitat was recorded on a field
characterization of each 
sampling  form.  Larvae  and  a  sample  of  water  from  each  larval  habitat  were  placed  in
whirl-pack  bags  and  transported  to  the  Centre  for  Geographic  Medicine  Research,  at
the  Kenya  Medical  Research  Institute  (KEMRI)  in  Kilifi,  and  the  Centre  for  Vector
Biology  and  Control  Research,  at  (KEMRI)  in  Kisumu,  for  further  processing.  All  3rd
and  4th  instar  larvae  were  immediately  preserved  in  95%  ethanol  and  later  identified

An. gambiae

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(3)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

345

morphologically  to  species  using  taxonomic  keys  (Edwards  1941,  Giles  and  Coetzee
1987). The 1st and 2nd instars were reared in plastic pans under semi-field conditions,
and those that survived to 3rd instar also were preserved and identified morphologically
to  species.  The  pupae  were  kept  in  mosquito  emergent  cages  (Bioequip  Products  Inc.)
and the resultant emergent mosquitoes were identified morphologically.

2.3 Habitat-base Mapping

An. gambiae 

Base maps of major roads and hydrography were created from DGPS ground coordinates
®
  (Environmental  Systems  Research  Institute,  Redlands,  California)
using  ArcInfo  9.2
s.l. aquatic habitat, with its associated land cover
(Figures 1 and 2). Each 
®
attributes from the study sites, was entered into a Vector Control Management System
(VCMS)  (Clarke  Mosquito  Control  Products,  Inc.,  Roselle,  Illinois)  database.  VCMS
supported the mobile field data acquisition in the study sites through a PocketPC™. All
two-way, remote synchronization of data, geocoding, and spatial display were processed
using  the  embedded  GIS  Interface  Kit™  that  was  built  using  ESRI’s  MapObjects™  2

Figure 1 Base-map of the Malindi study site

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(3)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

346

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

Figure 2 Base-map of the Kisumu study site

technology. The VCMS database plotted and updated DGPS ground coordinates of
An. gambiae 
s.l. aquatic habitat data in both study sites and supported exporting all data
in a spatial format; whereby, any combination of larval habitats and supporting data was
described  in  an  ESRI  shapefile  format  for  use  in  GIS.  The  database  displayed  this
information on a user-defined field base map.

2.4 Remote Sensing Data

QuickBird  images  were  acquired  in  January  2005  for  the  study  sites  (Figure  3).
QuickBird multispectral products provide four discrete non-overlapping spectral bands
m,  with  an  11-bit  collected  information  depth
covering  a  range  from  0.45  to  0.72 
with  a  spatial  resolution  of  0.61 m.  Urban  risk  mapping  must  include  remote  sensing
technology at a level of no greater than 1 m spatial resolution for guiding intervention
strategies for urban malaria control (Breman et al. 2004). Information from the visible
s.l. aquatic habitats in the study sites.
An. gambiae 
and NIR spectrum was used to detect 
Information  from  visible  and  NIR  wavebands  can  distinguish  between  high  and  low
mosquito producing areas (Wood et al. 1991).

µ

QuickBird imagery was classified using the Iterative Self-Organizing Data Analysis
 v.8.7™ (ERDAS, Inc.,
Technique (ISODATA) unsupervised routine in ERDAS 
Atlanta, Georgia). An unsupervised classification is commonly used for the identification
of  land  cover  and  mosquito  aquatic  habitats  associated  with  intermediate  host  and
disease vectors (Hugh-Jones 1991, Beck et al. 1994, Pope et al. 1994, Rejmankova et al.

Imagine

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(3)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

347

Figure 3 A QuickBird visible and near-infra-red (NIR) data of urban Malindi

1995,  Thomson  et  al.  1999).  The  images  were  co-registered  manually,  using  gathered
ground  control  points  and  geo-rectified  images  from  the  QuickBird  data.  The  satellite
images were co-registered by applying a first order polynomial algorithm with a nearest
neighbor  resampling  method.  The  Universal  Transverse  Mercator  (UTM)  Zone  37S
datum WGS-84 projection was used for all of the spatial datasets.

2.5 Environmental Parameters

®
 with QuickBird
Distance and canopy coverage measures were recorded in ArcInfo 9.2
data or by field sampling. The distance to the nearest house was categorized into seven
classes  (e.g.  1:  50–100 m,  2:  101–200 m,  and  so  on,  and  7  for  distances  greater  than
600 m). Canopy cover was defined as the proportion of terrestrial vegetation and other
objects in the habitat. The number of individuals of each family identified was counted
and recorded. Shade coverage was measured in percentage of water surface covered by
2
2
) above the habitat. Turbidity, primarily
) with grids (100 cm
placing a square frame (1 m
caused  by  suspended  organic  matter,  was  measured  through  visual  examination  of  the
water against a white background and categorized as either clear or turbid.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(3)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

348

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

2.6 Stratifying a Grid-based Algorithm

An.  gambiae

2
 orthogonal grid matrices was overlaid on the base maps of the study
A series of 10 m
®
, to generate spatial sampling units for larval habitat data collection
sites, in ArcInfo 9.2
  s.l.  aquatic  habitats,  the  first
efforts.  For  remote  identification  of  urban 
step is often to construct a discrete tessellation of the region, using grid-based algorithms,
constructed in GIS (Jacob et al. 2006). A unique identifier was placed in each grid cell.
The  grid  extended  to  a  1  km  buffer  from  the  external  boundary  of  each  study  site.
Drainage patterns and district development plans were used to stratify the spatial datasets
into: 0-Poorly drained and 1-Well drained areas. The level of house spacing, road types
and networks, community water sources, and access to utilities were also noted. Infor-
mation contained in Census and District Development Reports of the study sites, as well
as environmental descriptions from previous field and topographical maps were used to
assist with the stratification process. The boundaries of selected grid cells were located
in the field, using hand-held navigational units from DGPS and base maps, with landmarks,
car paths, and roads indicated. Latitude and longitude readings were taken at the corners
and  center  of  each  selected  grid  cell  to  confirm  the  location  and  extent  of  grid  cell
boundaries.

An. gambaie

An.  gambiae

We  expected  the  larval  count  of  the 

  s.l.  aquatic  habitats,  sampled  in
the study sites, to follow a Poisson distribution, as was the case in previous research in
the same areas (Jacob et al. 2005, 2006). Poisson regression allows the variance to change
as a function of the mean using count data (Kaiser and Cressie 1997). The mean count
 s.l. larval counts, collected
and standard deviations on the log number of 
in both study sites, were used to determine sample size requirements. A sampling inten-
  s.l.  larval  habitat  samples  to
An.  gambiae
sity  formula  for  determining  the  number  of 
 2), s = the
=
=
2
, where 
)^
E
/
ts
 (
 
n
collect in each study site was used where, 
standard deviation of log larval count values observed in the study sites (s = 0.889), and
E  was  the  desired  half-width  of  the  confidence  interval  around  the  mean  expressed  in
the  same  units  as  the  standard  deviation  (E  =  ln(1.25))  (Avery  and  Burkhart  1994).
Applying  this  formula, and assuming larval production was similar for An. gambiae s.l.
aquatic  habitats  in  the  study  sites,  it  was  determined  that  184  samples  were  required
from each location. Vector images of the sampling scheme were overlaid with the raster
image to identify An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats within each grid cell of the sampling
scheme, in each study site. All potential aquatic larval habitat sites were identified, and
data relative to species composition and abundance, predators, water quality and environ-
mental parameters were collected longitudinally.

 
t
 value (
t

=
 

 
t

2.7 Non-spatial Analyses

Field  data  parameters  were  entered  in  Excel  files  and  analyzed  using  SAS  9.1.3®  (SAS,
Inc.,  Cary,  North  Carolina).  The  first  stage  of  this  analysis  utilized  Poisson  regression
to  determine  the  relationship  between  larval  productivity  and  the  field  and  remotely
sampled covariates of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats, in each study site. Urban mosquito
data may be assumed to be from several families of probability distributions, including
the  normal,  binomial,  Poisson,  negative  binomial,  or  gamma  distribution,  many  of
which  better  fit  the  non-normal  error  structures  inherent  in  ecological  data  (Griffith
2005).  Poisson  regression  has  been  suggested  as  an  alternative  to  logistic  regression
model  specification  for  modeling  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  larval  counts  in  an

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(3)

Transactions in GIS

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

349

urban  environment,  as  the  Poisson  distribution  predicts  non-negative  integers  in  data
analyses  where  the  mean  and  variance  are  equal.  For  example,  Jacob  et  al.  (2005)
reported Poisson models explained 52% of the variation in the Malindi study site, and
36%  in  the  Kisumu  study  site,  using  field  sampled  data  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  and  An.
funestus aquatic habitats and remotely sampled covariates extracted from Multispectral
Thermal Imager (MTI) 5 m data. The logistic regression models described 34% of the
variation in the Malindi study site and 5% of the variation in the Kisumu study site.

Before  analyses,  the  data  was  tested  for  collinearity  using  a  design  matrix  from  a
regression and run through the SAS PROCREG procedure, which indicated the absence
of  problematic  correlation  among  the  covariates.  Collinearity  increases  the  standard
error of model parameters leading to false acceptance of the null hypotheses (Fotherigham
et  al.  2002).  Model  validation  data  was  analyzed  with  the  GENMOD  procedure  of
SAS®. These data were then used with the models already developed to calculate predicted
values,  which  were  used  to  compute  deviation  residuals  that  were  summed  over  the
observations to calculate a validation model deviation. The resulting deviation was used
to compute a validation model R2. The validation model R2 was compared with that of
the original model to test whether the model fitted the validation data. When generating
predictive/prognostic statistics of urban An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat models, validity
is an important aspect in terms of both the internal validity and accuracy, i.e. the model
explains the field and remotely sampled An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data well, and
external validity or generalizability of the ecological datasets, i.e. the model predicts new
data well (Jacob et al. 2005). The validation method, in this research, is an extension
commonly used for least squares data outlined by Neter et al. (1992).

Non-linearity  in  the  relationship  between  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  prevalence
and  a  predictor  variable  was  explored  by  adding  polynomial  terms  and  then  grouping
the values of continuous variables into categorical ones. Variable selection for the multiple
regression models was carried out by a combination of automatic (stepwise) procedures
and  goodness-of-fit  criteria  and  by  selecting  ecological  covariates  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.
aquatic  habitat  data  that  explained  larval  abundance  and  distribution  in  both  study
sites. A Poisson regression with statistical significance, determined by a 95% confidence
level,  was  used  to  ascertain  whether  the  proportions  of  aquatic  habitats  positive  for
Anopheles larvae differed by strata.

The  Poisson  regression  assumed  independent  counts  (i.e. ni),  taken  at  locations
i = 1, 2, . . . , n, where each of the An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat larval counts was from
a  Poisson  distribution,  and  these  larval  counts  were  described  by  a  set  of  explanatory
variables denoted by matrix Xi, a 1 × p vector of covariate values for a aquatic habitat
ββββ), where
location i. The expected value of these data was given by µ
ββββ  was  the  vector  of  non-redundant  parameters,  and  the  Poisson  rates  parameter  was
given  by  λ
i(Xi)  was  both  the  mean  and  the
variance  of  the  Poisson  distribution  for  an  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  location  i.
The dependent variable was total larval count in An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats. The
regression analyses were performed in SAS PROCREG.

i(Xi)/ni(Xi);  the  rates  parameter  λ

i(Xi) = ni(Xi) exp(Xi

i(Xi)  =  µ

2.8 Spatial Analyses

Spatial  linear  prediction  was  performed  initially  using  kriging.  In  this  research,  the
dependent  variable  was  the  larval  count  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  each
study  site,  which  was  transformed  to  fulfill  the  diagnostic  normality  test  prior  to

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

350

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

performing kriging. The sampling site was the An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in both
study areas, but the larval count was used as an indicator of the local density based on
the gridded area.

A  semi-variogram  was  used  to  measure  spatial  interaction  in  both  the  field  and
remotely sampled An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data, in both study sites. Prediction
by kriging for mosquito aquatic habitat data analyses can be based on the assumption
that covariance between habitats is entirely a function of distance between them to the
habitats,  as  modeled  by  means  of  the  variogram  (Klienschmidt  et  al.  2000).  Semi-
variograms were generated in ArcGIS Spatial Analyst to obtain a spatial model for kriging
and to examine spatial patterns in the An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data. The semi-
variance γ(h) measures half the average squared difference between pairs of data values
separated by the lag distance, h:

γ( ) 
h

=

 

∑1
( )
N h

2

( )
N h
i

y
(
i

 

−

 

y

)

j

2

where  N(h)  is  the  number  of  pairs  of  sample  points  at  a  distance  in  the  range h  ±  h/2
from  each  other.  Computations  of  γ(h)  are  repeated  for  2h,  3h,  4h . . . etc.  The  semi-
variogram is a plot of the semi-variance γ(h) against lag distance h. If the semi-variance
is markedly small for low values of h, it is taken as an indication of spatial autocorre-
lation, i.e. values at short distances from each other are more alike (less variable) than
those at large distances (Krige 1966).

The semivariogram described the spatial dependence between the field and remotely
sampled  measurements  of  an  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  as  a  function  of  the
distance  between  the  aquatic  habitats,  which  allowed  for  the  estimation  of  the  larvae
count of an aquatic habitat at any point in the study sites. The value of prevalence, Z, at
the  coordinate  (x0,  y0)  was  estimated  from  the  n  nearest  sampling  values,  Zobs(x1,  y1),
Zobs(x2, y2), . . . Zobs(xn, yn) by the linear formula:

The ai were found by introducing a Lagrange multiplier λ and solving the system:

(
Z x
0

, 

ÿ =
) 

 

0

(
a Z x y
i
i
obs

, 

i

)

n

∑

=
1

i

n

∑

=
1

i

γ
(
a h
i

i j
,

) 

+

 

λ γ
=
  (
 
h
i

0
,

),   
j

=

  , . . . , 
1

n

n

∑ =
ai

 
1 

=
1

i

under the constraint:

(1)

(2)

(3)

where  hi,j  denotes  the  distance  between  two  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  the
study sites located at (xi, yi) and (xj, yj), and hj,0 is the distance between the two aquatic
habitats (x0, y0). The semivariance was defined as γ(h) (Krige 1966). The magnitude of
the  semivariance,  in  these  analyses,  was  dependent  on  the  distance  between  the  An.
gambiae s.l.  aquatic  habitats.  Semivariance  of  the  deviance  residuals,  of  all  pairs of
An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  each  study  site,  was  calculated  and  a  variogram
constructed to determine if there was evidence of residual spatial correlation. The semi-
variance increases as the distance increases, until at a certain distance away from a point
the semivariance equals the variance around the average of independent values (Oliver
et  al.  1992).  The  plot  of  the  semivariances,  as  a  function  of  distance  from  a  point,  is

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

351

referred to as a semivariogram (Oliver et al. 1992, Carrat and Valleron 1992, Diggle et
al. 1998). Thereafter, the semivariance no longer increases, causing a trend line parallel
to the horizontal axis for that part of the semivariogram called a sill. The semivariogram
nugget  coefficient  allows  an  interpretation  of  the  required  scale  for  defining  spatial
variability, or of existing uncertainty in experimental values, and can provide minimized
unbiased prediction error for residuals on the logit scale (Cressie 1993).

SAS/GIS was used to perform the spatial filter analysis on the field and remotely
sensed  data  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  both  study  sites.  The  SAS  PROC
GENMOD was used to build Poisson models with a non-constant, gamma-distributed
mean. In each study site, both positive and negative spatial autocorrelation eigenvectors
were  selected  by  the  stepwise  negative  binomial  regression  procedure.  To  expand  the
inferential  basis  with  a  random  effect,  a  GLMM  was  used  to  account  for  latent
non-spatial  residual  correlation.  GLMM  estimation  was  computed  using  SAS  PROC
NLMIXED.

GLMMs are flexible and suited for analyzing mosquito aquatic habitat relationships
(Griffith 2005). GLMMs are mathematical extensions of linear models that do not force
data into unnatural scales, thereby allowing for non-linearity and non-constant variance
structures (Hastie and Tibshirani 1990). GLMMs are based on an assumed relationship,
called a link function, between the mean of the response variable and the linear combination
of  the  explanatory  variables.  The  link  function  for  Poisson  regression  is  usually  a  log
transformation of the mean for a given set of covariates, which adjusts for the skewness
and  prevents  the  model  from  producing  negative  predicted  values  (Kaiser  and  Cressie
1997).  Since  mosquito  aquatic  habitat  data  are  from  several  families  of  probability
distributions,  including  the  normal,  binomial,  Poisson,  negative  binomial,  or  gamma
distribution, a spatial filter analysis can be used to study stochastic error characteristic
in a time series analysis (Griffith 2005).

Global indicators of spatial autocorrelation were calculated from the ground-based
and  remotely-sensed  ecological  databases.  A  Box-Cox  type  of  power  transformation
was  employed  for  normal  approximation  analysis  purposes,  so  that  the  frequency
distributions of the larval counts of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in each study site
better  approximated  a  bell-shaped  curve.  The  spatial  filter  construction  methodology
transformation procedure was used, as proposed by Griffith (2002), that depends on the
eigenfunctions  of  matrix  (I  −  11T/n)C(I  −  11T/n);  where  matrix  c  is  the  geographic
connectivity, I denotes the identity matrix, 1 is an n-by-1 vector of ones and T denotes
matrix transpose, a term appearing in the numerator of the MC and GR. According to
Griffith  (2003),  the  first  eigenvector, E1,  is  the  set  of  numerical  values  with  the  largest
spatial indice achievable, by any set, for the spatial arrangement defined by the matrix
C. The second eigenvector is the set of values with the largest achievable MC and GR,
by  any  set  that  is  uncorrelated  with  E1.  The  third  eigenvector  is  the  third  such  set  of
values and so on. This sequential construction of eigenvectors continues through En, the
set  of  values  with  the  largest  negative  MC  and  GR  achievable  by  any  set  uncorrelated
with the preceding (n − 1) eigenvectors.

To  identify  spatial  clusters  that  can  be  uncovered  with  spatial  filtering,  Thiessen
polygons  were  generated  to  construct  geographic  neighbor  matrices,  each  denoted  by
matrix C, which also were used in the spatial autocorrelation analysis. Entries in matrix
C were 1, if two An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats shared a common Thiessen polygon
boundary  and  0,  otherwise.  Next,  the  linkage  structure  for  each  surface  was  edited  to
remove  unlikely  geographic  neighbors  to  identify  pairs  of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

352

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

habitats sharing a common Thiessen polygon boundary, but whose separation was too
great.  Eigenvectors  of  a  modified  version  of  this  matrix C  furnished  synthetic  variates
that  constituted  distinct  map  patterns  representing  the  full  range  of  autocorrelation
possibilities. Attention was restricted to those map patterns associated  with  at  least  a
minimum  level  of  spatial  autocorrelation,  which,  for implementation purposes, was
defined  by  | MCj/MCmax |  >  0.25,  where  MCj  denoted  the  jth  value  and  MCmax,  the
maximum value of MC. This threshold value allowed two candidate sets of eigenvectors
to be considered for substantial positive and substantial negative spatial autocorrelation,
respectively.

A Moran scatterplot was used for the visualization of the global spatial autocorre-
lation  in  the  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  datasets.  A  DynESDA  extension  was
invoked in an ArcView database to construct a Moran scatterplot in each study site Y,
which  were  converted  to  z-scores,  (ZY).  Next,  those  adjacent  or  nearby  z-score  values
of Y were summed; this was achieved with the matrix product CZY, where ZY was the
vector concatenation of the individual ZY values. Finally, the coordinate pairs (ZY, i,
Σ = nj 1ij Yj c z ), i = 1, 2, . . . , n, were plotted on the graph whose vertical axis is CZY
and whose horizontal axis is ZY. To compare an An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat larval
count with its neighboring aquatic habitat larval count, the Moran scatter plot regressesed
a  spatially  lagged  transformation  of  a  variable  (y-axis)  on  the  original  standardized
variable  (x-axis).  The  values  of  X  were  expressed  in  standard  deviation  units  with  a
mean of zero and a variance of one (values above 2 were potential outliers).

All  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  data  in  SAS/GIS®  were  integrated  inside  SAS
using SAS/EIS. Typically, SAS/GIS® application sessions driven from SAS/EIS or SAS/AF
provide  researchers  with  powerful  SAS  Component  Language  (SCL)  and  data  step
processing  capabilities  for  manipulating  data,  such  as  theme  datasets  utilized  in
mapping  (see  http://www.sas.com  for  additional  details).  SAS/GIS®  allowed  for  the
creation and modification of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat maps to display results, as
well  as  interactive  feature  selection  and  exploration.  Spatial  information,  of  each
An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat in each study site, was imported interactively and in a
batch mode.

Additionally,  Proc  MAPIMPORT  was  used  to  import  the  shapefile  data  created
from the An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data into a SAS/Graph as map datasets using
the following syntax:

PROC MAPIMPORT OUT= An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat-map-data-set
DATAFILE= ‘path-to-shapefile’
<CONTENTS>
<CREATE_ID_>;
<SELECT <′>field-identifier-1<′><...<′>field-identifier-n<′>>>;
<EXCLUDE <′>field-identifier-1<′><...<′>field-identifier-n<′>>>;
<RENAME <′>field-identifier-1<′>=SAS-variable-name-1<...
<′>field-identifier-n<′>=SAS-variable-name-n>>;
PROC MAPIMPORT OUT=sasuser.newmap DATAFILE=’e:\nc.shp’; run

The  geographic  tables  generated,  however,  had  to  be  processed  to  identify  the
coordinates of each An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat, in each study site, with an attribute
table  being  joined  to  the  map  data  for  spatial  analyses  and  map  display.  Additionally,
the SAS/GIS® program action linked each table generated with a subset of key predictor
variables  associated  to  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  each  study  site.  Thematic

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

353

map  layers  were  also  used  to  provide  more  detail  for  each  table.  SAS/GIS®  used  SAS/
SHARE to open all An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat datasets with record level locking,
allowing GIS applications to simultaneously read and update all data generated.

3 Results

Poisson  regression  was  used  to  model  the  spatio-temporal  larval  productivity  of  An.
gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in both study sites. An examination of the data, however,
indicated  that  significant  overdispersion  was  present.  Therefore,  a  negative  binomial
was used to model the overdispersed Poisson An. gambiae s.l. larval count data, in both
study sites. Negative binomial regression models estimate a dispersion parameter that is
used  to  remove  the  effects  of  overdispersion  and  provide  more  accurate  estimates  of
standard  error  (Pielou  1969).  The  negative  binomial  was  derived  as  a  Poisson–gamma
mixture  and  as  a  GLM.  PROC  GENMOD  expresses  the  variance  of  the  response  for
the negative binomial as variance(y) = µ + kµ2 as opposed to the more common notation
(y)  =  µ  +  µ2/vµ  (McCullagh  and  Nelder  1989).  The  difference  in  notation  is  trivial
(k = 1/v).

The  straightforward  derivation  of  the  Kisumu  and  Malindi  models,  from  the
negative  binomial  probability  distribution  function,  did  not,  however,  equate  with  the
Poisson–gamma mixture-based version of the negative binomial. Rather, canonical link
and inverse canonical link were converted to log form. A GLM-based negative binomial
was  produced  that  yielded  identical  parameter  estimates  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic
habitats  to  those  calculated  by  the  mixture-based  model  for  both  study  sites.  As  a
non-canonical  linked  model,  however,  the  standard  errors  did  differ  slightly  from  the
mixture  model.  A  maximum  likelihood  estimator,  was  used  by  default  as  an  observed
information matrix, to produce standard errors. The GLM algorithm produced standard
errors based on the expected information matrix using the difference in standard errors
between  the  two  versions  of  negative  binomial  analyses.  The  GLM  negative  binomial
algorithm  was  amended  to  allow  production  of  standard  errors  based  on  the  field
sampled larval count data of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats, in both study sites. The
amended  GLM-based  negative  binomial  produced  identical  estimates  and  standard
errors  to  that  of  the  mixture-based  negative  binomial  analyses.  The  log-negative
binomial data was imported into an ArcInfo database using the spatial analytical tools
in SAS/GIS®.

Table  1  reports  the  initial  predictive  strength  of  the  available  predictor  variables
and  the  proportion  of  ecological  variation  explained  in  the  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic
habitat  datasets.  Predictor  variables  were  added  in  a  stepwise  fashion,  beginning  with
the  one  that  explained  the  most  variation.  At  the  p  <  0.001  level  of  significance,  the
ecological  predictors  for  the  Malindi  study  site  were  shade,  algal  mat  and  turbidity.
Shade and turbidity were negatively associated with the An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habi-
tats, while presence of algae was positively associated with the urban aquatic habitats.
Similar  findings  were  observed  between  the  variables  in  the  Kisumu  study  site,  except
for levels of algae. The final model explains 32.8% of the variation in the Malindi study
site and 27.8% of the variation in the Kisumu study site. All other coefficients were
non-significant.

Both  study  sites  rendered  the  spatial  autocorrelation  analysis  results  included  in
Table 2. Results indicated that negligible positive spatial autocorrelation is detected for

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

354

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

Table 1 Poisson  regression  results,  with  levels  of  significance  for  the  percent  of  total
deviation  of  the  field  and  satellite  parameters  for  the  Malindi  and  Kisumu  study  sites  for
abundance and distribution An. gambiae larval mosquitoes

Malindi
Final

<0.001
<0.001
0.001

Variable

Shade
Algae
Turbidity
Pseudo-R2

Beta

R2

Beta

R2

−1.87
2.58
−2.74

14.7
14.0
4.1
32.8

−1.97
3.34
−1.95

9.6
1.6
16.6
27.8

Kisumu
Final

0.020
0.057
0.005

Table 2 Global spatial analyses of An. gambiae s.l. larval mosquito counts by study site

Study Site

n

Transformation

P(S-W)

MC

sMC

GR

Kisumu
Malindi

184
184

LN(count + 1)
LN(count + 1)

<0.0001
0.0100

0.069
0.000

0.068
0.070

0.898
0.966

the  sample  geographic  distribution  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  in  each  of  the
study sites.

Estimation results from SAS PROC GENMOD for these models appear in Table 3.
Positive and negative spatial autocorrelation spatial filter component pseudo-R2 values
are reported. These values do not exactly sum for the complete spatial filter; however,
the  values  are  very  close  to  their  corresponding  totals,  suggesting  that  any  induced
multicollinearity is quite small.

Rather than switching from a Poisson to a negative binomial probability model, the
GLMM was extended to account for latent non-spatial correlation effects, as well as to
allow inferences to be drawn for a much wider range of geographic sampling configu-
rations.  The  GLMM  included  a  random  effect,  which  was  specified  in  this  research  as
a random intercept that was assumed to be normally distributed with a mean of zero, a
constant variance, and zero spatial autocorrelation. This varying intercept term compen-
sated  for  the  nonconstant  mean  associated  with  a  negative  binomial  model  GLMM
specification. This GLMM specification moved the investigation toward Bayesian map
analysis,  given  that  all  parameters  except  the  intercept,  were  treated  as  single-valued;
whereas,  the  intercept  was  treated  as  a  distribution  of  values  and  was  estimated  using
empirical  Bayes  techniques.  In  addition,  positing  the  set  of  prior  distributions,  stating
that  parameters  follow  a  normal  distribution  and  variances  follow  a  gamma  distribu-
tion,  results  in  essentially  the  same  results,  but  purely  Bayesian  outcomes  are  reported
in  this  research.  The  spatial  structuring  of  random  effects  was  implemented  with  a
conditional autoregressive model and was achieved here with a spatial filter.

GLMM estimation results from SAS PROC NLMIXED appear in Table 4. Notably,
an  extremely  strong  linear  correlation  exists  between  the  negative  binomial  dispersion
parameter  estimate  reported  in  Table  4  and  the  random  effects  variance  estimate
reported  in  Table  3.  These  spatial  autocorrelation  components  suggest  the  presence  of

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

355

Table 3 Poisson  spatial  filtering  model  results  for  An  gambiae  s.l.  mosquito  counts  by
urban study site

Spatial Statistics 

SF: # of eigenvectors
SF: MC
SF: GR
SF pseudo-R2
Positive SA SF: # of eigenvectors
Positive SA SF: MC
Positive SA SF: GR
Positive SA SF pseudo-R2
Negative SA SF: # of eigenvectors
Negative SA SF: MC
Negative SA SF: GR
Negative SA SF pseudo-R2
Deviance statistic
Dispersion parameter

Kisumu

5
0.654
0.402
0.198
4
0.567
0.484
0.150
1
−0.369
1.291
0.048
1.168
0.542

Malindi

2
0.063
1.058
0.139
1
0.843
0.148
0.072
1
−0.517
1.825
0.067
1.161
1.098

SF denotes spatial filter
SA denotes spatial autocorrelation
A pseudo-R2 is the squared correlation between observed and GLM-predicted c

Table 4 Poisson  SF  GLMM  random  effects  results  for  An.  gambiae  s.l.  larval  mosquito
counts in the Kisumu and Malindi study site

Statistics

Mean
Standard deviation
P(S-W)
MC
GR
Pseudo-R2
Changes in significance 
(using a 0.10 level) 
of eigenvectors

Kisumu

0.056
0.492
0.0002
−0.054
1.028
0.924

the negative SA 
vector becomes 
nonsignificant

Malindi

0.094
0.932
0.005
0.010
0.914
0.996
the positive SA 
vector becomes 
nonsignificant

SF denotes spatial filter
GLMM denotes generalized linear mixed model
MC denotes the Moran Coefficient
GR denotes the Geary Ratio
P(S-W) denotes the probability of the Shapiro-Wilk normality diagnostic statistic under the null hypothesis
SA denotes spatial autocorrelation

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

356

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

Figure 4 Kriged larval abundance of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats for Kisumu, Kenya

roughly  13  to  32%  redundant  information  in  the  field  and  remotely  sampled  urban
An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat datasets.

A semivariogram plot of logit scale model residuals was constructed, confirming a
short range spatial pattern up to a distance of about 18 km. To carry out this process,
residuals  for  all  observed  points  were  calculated  on  the  logit  (ln(p/1  −  p))  scale  of  the
logistic model. A kriged map of deviance residuals was calculated, which was added to
the predicted values on the logit scale before transforming the results back to proportions
for  the  Kisumu  (Figure  4)  and  Malindi  (Figure  5)  study  sites.  Spatial  dependence,
displayed by these plots, was modeled using the previously constructed semivariogram.
The addition of kriged residuals allowed the maps to deviate from the model and move
closer  to  the  larval  counts  of  An.  gambaie  s.l.  aquatic  habitats;  the  deviation  was

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

357

Figure 5 Kriged larval abundance of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats for Malindi, Kenya

supported  by  other  aquatic  habitats  field  sampled  in  the  study  sites.  These  smoothed
values improved the final maps of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data sampled in both
study  sites.  An  exponential  model  was  fitted  to  the  semivariogram,  using  a  range  of
70.8 m, a nugget of 0.23 (variance), a lag size of 12.1 m with 12 lags and a partial sill
of  0.23  (variance)  for  the  Malindi  study  site.  The  exponential  model  for  the  Kisumu
study site was fitted to the semivariogram, using a range of 1,988 m, a nugget of 0.85
(variance), a lag size of 169 m with 12 lags and a partial sill of 0.18 (variance). Figure 6
shows  that  the  spatial  filters  obtained  with  the  Poisson  spatial  filtering  model  and
GLMM analyses were almost identical for the two study sites.

4 Discussion and Conclusions

An orthogonal grid-based algorithm generated in an ArcInfo geodatabase, overlaid on the
QuickBird visible and NIR data of both study sites, identified all productive larval An.
gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in the poorly drained strata. Similar findings have been reported
by Jacob et al. (2003) and Keating et al. (2004) in the study sites, suggesting that drainage
does affect anopheline larval habitat development to some extent, in urban environments.

A  Poisson  regression  analyses  identified  levels  of  algal  mats,  shade  and  levels  of
turbidity as significantly influencing the larval count of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats
in  both  Malindi  and  Kisumu.  Muturi  et  al.  (2007)  reported  that  larval  abundance  is
affected by changes in less sunlight reaching the water surface, decrease in temperature,

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

358

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

Figure 6 Scatterplots  of  the  spatial  filter  pairs  obtained  with  a  GLM  (vertical  axis)  and  a
GLMM (horizontal axis): (a) the Kisumu study site; and (b) the Malindi study site

physical  obstruction,  predators  and  water  conditions.  Our  findings  are  also  consistent
with  the  results  of  Robert  et  al.  (1998)  in  Dakar,  Senegal,  who  found  the  occurrence
and abundance of urban anopheline larvae in aquatic habitats (market-garden wells) to
be determined by multiple ecological variables.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

359

The semivariograms, generated in ArcGIS Spatial Analyst, modeled the structure of
spatial variability in the An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data, in each study site. Optimal
linear predictors of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat were generated by incorporating a
model  of  the  covariance  of  the  random  function  using  a  weighted  moving  average
interpolation. The kriged smoothed maps, generated through the regression models, of
both  study  sites,  displayed  spatial  patterns  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats,  based
on  all  residuals  generated.  The  kriged  models  provided  a  method  for  not  constraining
the larval count data of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in each study site. In turn, the
kriging  algorithm  allowed  distance  and  direction  in  the  interpolation  process  to  be
analyzed,  which  minimized  the  variance  of  unexpected  error.  The  resulting  residual
spatial correlation in both study sites was weak.

While  the  kriging  did  provide  minimized  unbiased  predictor  error  of  residuals  on
the logit-scale for both study sites, this cannot be guaranteed for the back transformed
predictors (Cressie 1993). The kriged logit-scale residuals generated from the field and
remotely  sampled  data,  in  both  study  sites,  were  only  a  small  component  of  the  linear
predictors, which were back transformed to produce the final dataset of urban covariates
for An. gambaie s.l. aquatic habitats.

The  geographic  distribution  of  the  log-larval  count  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic
habitats,  in  both  study  sites,  exhibit  positive  autocorrelation  in  all  models  tested.
Common local weather patterns, the use of door and window screens, mosquito repellant
and  mosquito  (adult  and  larvae)  control  programs  tend  to  have  socio-economic/
demographic  dimensions  with  spatial  expressions  (Griffith  2005,  Jacob  et  al.  2007b).
All  of  these  factors  tend  to  impact  contagion  diffusion,  inducing  positive  spatial
autocorrelation. Distance between An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats, in each study site,
affects larval abundance and distribution, and are proximally influenced by differences
in environmental landscape.

The spatial filter analyses used geographic weights matrices and a stepwise negative
binomial regression routine, constructed in a SAS/GIS framework, to select eigenvectors
as  regressors  in  each  study  site.  This  eigenvector  spatial  filtering  approach  added  a
minimally  sufficient  set  of  eigenvectors  as  proxy-variables  to  a  set  of  linear  predictors
of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat and, in doing so, eliminated spatial autocorrelation
by  inducing  mutual  independence  in  the  ecological  datasets.  The  regression  residuals
represented  spatially  independent  variable  components.  The  eigenvectors  yielded  dis-
tinct  map  pattern  descriptions  of  latent  spatial  autocorrelation  in  the An.  gambiae  s.l.
aquatic habitat data at the Malindi and Kimusu sites. This was interpreted as synthetic
map variables that represented specific natures (i.e. positive or negative) and degrees (i.e.
negligible,  weak,  moderate,  strong)  of  potential  spatial  autocorrelation.  In  the  case  of
urban  An.  gambiae  s.l.  mosquitoes,  two  counteracting  spatial  autocorrelation  effects
can be conceptualized (i.e. common factors leading to positive and competitive factors
leading to negative spatial autocorrelation materializing) at the same time, with a possible
net effect being global detection of near-zero spatial autocorrelation.

Estimation  of  the  spatial  filter  Poisson  model  equation  revealed  that  spatial
autocorrelation  accounts  for  sizeable  amounts  of  geographic  variation  in An.  gambiae
s.l. aquatic habitats within the studied locations. Both study sites have Anopheles larval
counts  that  contain  hidden  negative  spatial  autocorrelation  that  is  masked  by  positive
spatial autocorrelation, not obvious in a Moran scatterplot. Because the MC is asymp-
totically normally distributed, MC may fail to detect hidden negative spatial autocorrelation
in highly heterogeneous environments, although all the visual and conventional numerical

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

360

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

evidence suggests the presence of positive spatial autocorrelation (Cliff and Ord 1973).
The  spatial  dependency  in  the  models  suggests  the  presence  of  redundant  information
due to the presence of both negative and positive autocorrelation components (Griffith
2003).  Redundant  information  may  be  attributed  to  the  locational  arrangements  of
sample points, which may cause observations to be dependent, rather than independent,
moving  data  analysis  away  from  the  classical  statistical  independence  model  (Griffith
and Peres-Neto 2006).

The spatial filtering approach presented in this research is closely tied to the covariance
matrices so fundamental to regression analyses of urban covariates of An. gambiae s.l.
aquatic  habitats.  This  is  important  for  identifying  the  presence  of  multicollinearity  in
field  and  remotely  sampled  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  datasets,  especially  as  the
number of regressors increases. By using SAS/GIS, more detailed data can be acquired,
and improvements in the multicollinearity problem can be expected (see http://www.sas.com/
products/gis  for  additional  details).  Thus,  the  approach  allows  for  spatial  regression
where  the  desire  is  to  either  avoid  a  spatial  autoregressive  specification  or  duplicate  it
in a more explicit spatial form. This is the case because eigenvectors for the geostatistical
covariance  and  autoregressive  inverse  covariance  matrices  are  approximately  the  same
(Getis  and  Griffith  2002).  This  approach  also  allows  in-depth  studies  of  how  spatial
autocorrelation impacts correlation coefficients calculated with georeferenced variables
of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats. Other advantages of the eigenvector approach for
modeling An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in urban environments include the fact that
eigenvectors are both uncorrelated and orthogonal, allowing stepwise regression procedures
to be used in identifying prominent latent vectors, and allowing them to be used in an
additive  fashion;  OLS  theory  is  maximized.  Once  a  surface  partition  is  established,
incorporating  field  and  remotely  sampled  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  data,  the
eigenvectors for the spatially analyzed variables do not change, thereby relating an urban
An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  data  analysis  to  fixed  effects  regression  theory.  These
eigenvectors generated from the analyses of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat datasets in
Kisumu  and  Malindi  also  relate  directly  to  the  Moran’s I  statistic,  as  well  as  to  spatial
autoregressive model specifications.

To  verify  the  accuracy  of  an  eigenfunction  decomposition  approach  for  analyzing
An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats in an urban environment, model “checking” procedures
are advocated. For example, statistical restrictions must be applied to those eigenvectors
describing  substantive  positive/negative  spatial  autocorrelation.  Restricting  the  set  of
eigenvectors, over which a stepwise selection search is performed, is sensible for several
reasons.  First,  if  a  homogeneous  process  underlies  a  field  and  remotely  sampled  An.
gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat dataset, then the nature of spatial autocorrelation components
should not vary. A Moran scatterplot may help assess the feasibility of this characterization.
Second, if a parsimonious set of eigenvectors is to be selected, then eigenvectors depicting
near-zero  spatial  autocorrelation  should  be  avoided,  since  such  a  set  of  latent  vectors
associated with a matrix equation fail to capture any geographic information. Third, as
n increases, the number of eigenfunctions increases. Consequently, the numerical intensity
involved in executing a stepwise regression also increases. Finally, selection experience,
with  positive  spatial  autocorrelation  analyses,  suggests  that  virtually  all  prominent
eigenvectors are contained in the set of eigenfunctions whose eigenvalues constitute the
top quartile.

Additionally,  in  each  SAS/GIS  statistical  procedure,  all  eigenvectors  entered  into  a
spatial  filter  equation  derived  from  an  analysis  of  field  and  remote  covariates  of  An.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

361

gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  data  should  be  reassessed,  with  the  possibility  of  removal
of vectors added at an earlier step. Such a verification procedure begins with the inter-
cept in a regression specification. Thereafter, at each step, an eigenvector must be carefully
considered  for  addition  to  the  model  specification.  For  the  stepwise  linear  Gaussian
model, the eigenvector having the largest partial correlation with the variable should be
selected, but only if its corresponding F-ratio surpasses a prespecified level of significance.
Meanwhile, in stepwise generalized linear modeling regression, the eigenvector that
produces  the  greatest  reduction  in  the  log-likelihood  function  chi-square  test  should  be
selected, but only if it produces at least a prespecified minimum reduction. As before, this
is  the  criterion  used  to  establish  statistical  importance  of  an  eigenvector.  The  forward/
backward stepwise procedure terminates automatically when some prespecified threshold
values  (respectively  for  F-ratios  and  chi-square  statistics)  are  encountered  for  entry  and
removal of all candidate eigenvectors (Griffith 2005). The ultimate inclusion criterion in
a  spatial  filtering  specification  of  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  field  and  remote
sampled data is determined by the MC value of the residuals, which should indicate an
absence  of  spatial  autocorrelation.  Satisfying  this  MC  condition  requires  supervised
backward elimination of marginally selected eigenvectors as their inclusion will force the
residual MC value to decrease too far below 0 (Griffith 2000). This final stopping crite-
rion for the linear Gaussian model is relatively easy to implement as MC distributional
theory  is  known  for  linear  regression  residuals.  A  corresponding  stopping  rule  for
generalized linear modeling regression is far more difficult to implement because of a lack
of such distributional theory (Griffith 2005).

The  models  generated  in  this  research  accounted  for  spatial  autocorrelation  in  the
urban An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat datasets, by using a variogram for deriving linear
unbiased  estimators,  based  on  assumptions  on  covariances,  and  by  including  latent
map  pattern  components  as  predictor  variables  in  a  spatial  filter  model  specification.
Future  research  efforts  should  include  Generalized  Additive  Models  (GAMs)  (Hastie
and  Tibshirani  1986),  which  are  non-parametric  extensions  of  GLMs  for  investigating
covariates  of  urban  An.  gambaie  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  based  on  larval  productivity.  As
opposed  to  GLMs,  which  estimate  parametric  linear  combinations  of  the  explanatory
variables,  GAMs  fit  non-parametric  curves  using  various  smoothing  functions.  Spatial
predictions from GAM can be generated in a GIS database (Lehmann 1998). A drawback
to GAMs is that the fitted curves do not have analytic forms, making inference difficult
for  some  applications  (e.g.  determining  species  response  ‘optima’  along  environmental
gradients) (Yee and Mitchell 1991). More importantly, the fitted curves may be difficult
to  interpret  biologically,  although  some  ecological  theories  predict  complex  species
response curves along environmental gradients (Austin 1987).

In  conclusion,  a  Poisson  regression  analyses  identified  the  algal  mat  and  levels  of
turbidity as significantly influencing the larval count of An. gambiae s.l. mosquitoes in
both study sites. The final model explains 32.8% of the variation in the Malindi study
site  and  27.8%  of  the  variation  in  the  Kisumu  study  site.  The  geographic  distribution
of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats, in the study sites, exhibit positive autocorrelation
in  all  models  tested;  similar  log-larval  count  aquatic  habitats  aggregate  in  space.  A
spatial filter model specification enabled eigenfunction decomposition of the regression
residuals  which  yielded  eigenvectors  with  latent  autocorrelation  in  the  field  and
remotely sampled An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat datasets. The spatial filtering analyses
transformed  all  variables  containing  spatial  dependence  into  covariates  free  of  spatial
dependence, by partitioning the original georeferenced An. gambaie s.l. aquatic habitat

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

362

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

attribute variable into two synthetic variates: (1) a spatial filter variate capturing latent
spatial  dependency  that  otherwise  would  have  remained  in  the  response  residuals,  and
(2) a nonspatial variate that was free of spatial dependence. The inclusion of a random
effects term had little impact upon the resulting spatial filters. These spatial autocorrelation
components  suggest  the  presence  of  roughly  13  to  32%  redundant  information  in  the
urban An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitat data.

Geostatistical  predictive  algorithms  generated  in  SAS/GIS® using  field  sampled
environmental covariates of An. gambiae s.l. aquatic habitats and QuickBird visible and NIR
data offer an attractive and better alternative to the traditional malaria mapping approach,
which  does  not  adequately  address  the  spatial  correlation  inherent  in  mosquito
aquatic habitat datasets. Such an approach lends itself to the development of powerful
predictor  models  for  estimating  multiple  environmental  predictors  of  urban  An.
gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitats  while  incorporating  many  complexities  (e.g.  clustering  of
aquatic habitats). Spatial modeling allows errors of estimations to be quantified, making
it  possible  to  assess  the  precision  of  an  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  map  and  the
relative  importance  of  factors  associated  with  larval  abundance  and  distribution  in  an
urban environment. Additionally, spatial filtering can adjust spatial correlation in a SAS/
GIS® framework, thereby, avoiding overstating the statistical significance of the coefficients.
In the near future, a new release of SAS/GIS® Frame object is expected, which will
expand integration of SAS/GIS® with SAS/EIS and SAS/AF applications. This will allow
researchers  to  tap  into  ‘out-of-the-box’  SAS/EIS  objects  or  customize  SAS/AF  screens,
thus linking them to the spatial eigenvector mapping environment. In SAS/GIS® frameobject,
SAS/EIS  and  SAS/AF  will  be  fully  intergrateable  with  new  or  existing  applications.
Additional goals for the new SAS/GIS® module include enhancing PROG GIS, providing
a  more  powerful  batch  tool,  and  refining  the  geocoding  capabilities.  Newer  spatial
analytical  tools  such  as  Proc  GINSIDE  in  SAS  9.2®  will  also  help  generate  predictor
models  using  covariates  of An.  gambiae  s.l.  datasets  to  map  datasets  for  identification
of polygons containing aquatic habitats of interest. Continued exploitation of QuickBird
visible  and  NIR  data  and  geostatistical  algorithms  in  newer  GIS  applications  will
improve  modeling  applications  for  risk  mapping  An.  gambiae  s.l.  aquatic  habitat  in
urban environments.

Acknowledgements

We  would  like  to  thank  the  data  collection  efforts  of  the  ICIPE  Mwea  Rice  Mosquito
Team  provided  by  James  Wauna,  Peter  Barasa,  Nelson  M.  Muchiri,  Glady  Kamari,
Christine  W.  Maina,  William  M.  Waweru,  Peter  M.  Mutiga,  Irene  Kamau,  Paul  K.
Mwangi,  Nicholus  G.  Kamari,  Martin  Njigoya,  and  Naftaly  Gichuki  at  the  Mwea
Divison  in  Kenya  for  conducting  the  study.  This  research  was  funded  by  the  National
Institute of Health Grant U01A154889 to Robert Novak of the University of Alabama
at Birmingham.

References

tion 69: 35– 45

Austin M P 1987 Models for the analysis of species’ response to environmental gradients. Vegeta-

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

Decomposing Malaria Mosquito Aquatic Habitat Data

363

Avery E T and Burkhart H E 1994 Forest Measurements. New York, McGraw-Hill
Beck  L  R,  Rodriguez  M  H,  Dister  S  W,  Rodriguez  A  D,  Rejmankova  E,  Ulloa  A,  Meza  R  A,
Roberts D R, Paris J F, and Spanner M A 1994 Remote sensing as a landscape epidemiologic
tool  to  identify  villages  at  high  risk  malaria  transmission.  American  Journal  of  Tropical  of
Medicine and Hygiene 51: 271–80

Breman J G, Alilio M S, and Mills A 2004 Conquering the intolerable burden of malaria: What’s
new,  what’s  needed,  a  summary.  American  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene  71:
1–15

Carrat F and Valleron A J 1992 Epidemiologic mapping using the ‘kriging’ method: Application
to  an  influenza-like  illness  epidemic  in  France.  American  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and
Hygiene 135: 1293–300

Cliff A D and Ord J K 1973 Spatial Autocorrelation. London, Pion
Cliff A D and Ord J K 1981 Spatial Processes: Models and Applications. London, Pion
Craig  M  H,  Snow  R  W,  and  Lesueur  D  1999  A  climate-based  distribution  model  of  malaria

transmission in Africa. Parasitology Today 5: 105–11

Cressie N 1993 Statistics for Spatial Data. New York, John Wiley and Sons
Diggle  P  J,  Tawn  J  A,  and  Moyeed  R  A  1998  Model  based  geostatistics  Journal  of  the  Royal

Edwards F W 1941 Mosquitoes of the Ethiopian Region: III, Culicine Adults and Pupae. London,

Fotheringham A S 1992 Exploratory spatial data analysis and GIS. Environment and Planning A

Getis A and Griffith D A 2002 Comparative spatial filtering in regression analysis. Geographical

Statistical Society 47: 299–350

British Museum (Natural History)

24: 1675–8

Analysis 34: 130 – 40

Gilles M T and Coetzee M C 1987 A Supplement to the Anophelinae of Africa South of the Sahara

(Afrotropical Region). Johannesburg, South African Institute for Medical Research

Githeko  A,  Service  M  W,  Mbogo  C  M,  Atieli  F  K,  and  Juma  F  O  1993  Plasmodium  falciparum
sporozoite  and  entomological  inoculation  rates  at  the  Ahero  rice  irrigation  scheme  and  the
Miwani sugar-belt in western Kenya. Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 87: 379 –
88

Griffith D A 2000 A linear regression solution to the spatial autocorrelation problem. Journal of

Griffith D A 2002 A spatial filtering specification for the auto-Poisson model. Statistical Probability

Geographical Systems 2: 141–56

Letters 58: 245–51

Griffith D A 2003 Spatial Autocorrelation and Spatial Filtering. New York, Springer
Griffith  D  A  2005  Comparison  of  six  analytical  disease  mapping  techniques  as  applied  to  West
Nile  Virus  in  the  coterminous  United  States.  International  Journal  of  Health  Geography  4:
18–23

Griffith D A and Peres-Neto P R 2006 Spatial modeling in ecology: The flexibility of eigenfunction

spatial analyses. Ecology 87: 2603–13

Hastie T J and Tibshirani R J 1986 Generalized additive models. Statistical Science 1: 297–318
Hastie T J and Tibshirani R J 1990 Generalized Additive Models. New York, Chapman and Hall
Hay S I, Snow R W, and Rogers D J 1998 From predicting mosquito habitat to malaria seasons using
remotely sensed data: Practice, problems and perspectives. Parasitology Today 14: 306 – 13
Hugh-Jones M 1991 The remote recognition of tick habitats. Journal of Agricultural Entomology

8: 309–15

Jacob B G, Arheart K L, Griffith D A, Mbogo C M, Githeko A K, Regens J L, Githure J I, Novak R J,
and  Beier  J  C  2005  Evaluation  of  environmental  data  for  identification  of  Anopheles
(Diptera: Culicidae) aquatic larval habitats in Kisumu and Malindi Kenya. Journal of Medical
Entomology 42: 751–8

Jacob B G, Muturi E J, Funes J E, Shililu J I, Githure J I, Kakoma I I, and Novak R J 2006 A grid-
based infrastructure for ecological forecasting of rice land Anopheles arabiensis aquatic larval
habitats. Malaria Journal 5: 91–6

Jacob B G, Muturi E J, Funes J, Shililu J I, Githure J I, Regens J L, and Novak R J 2007a Using

imaging technologies to control malaria. Imaging Notes 2: 18–23

Jacob B G, Muturi E, Mwangangi J, Funes J, Shililu J, Githure J, and Novak R J 2007b Remote
and  field  level  quantification  of  vegetation  covariates  for  malaria  mapping  in  three  rice  agro-
village complexes in Central Kenya International Journal of Health Geographics 6: 21–8

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

364

B G Jacob, D A Griffith and R J Novak

Jacob B G, Regens J L, Mbogo C M, Githeko A K, Keating J, Swalm C M, Gunter J T, Githure J L,
and  Beier  J  C  2003  Occurrence  and  distribution  of  Anopheles  (Diptera:  Culicidae)  larval
habitats  on land cover change sites in urban Kisumu and urban Malindi, Kenya.  Journal of
Medical Entomology 40: 777–84

Kaiser  M  and  Cressie  N  1997  Modeling  Poisson  variables  with  positive  spatial  dependence.

Statistical Probability Letters 35: 423 –32

Keating J, Macintyre K, Mbogo C, Githure J, and Beier J 2004 Characterization of potential larval
habitats  for  Anopheles  mosquitoes  in  relation  to  urban  land-use  in  Malindi,  Kenya.
International Journal of Health Geography 3: 9–17

Klienschmidt  I,  Bagayako  M,  Clarke  G  P  Y,  Craig  M,  and  Le  Sueur  D  2000  A  spatial  statistical

approach to malaria mapping. International Journal of Epidemiology 29: 355– 61

Krige  D  G  1966  Two  dimensional  weighted  moving  average  trend  surfaces  for  ore-evaluation.

Journal of South African Institute Mining Metal 66: 13–38

Lehmann A 1988 GIS modeling of submerged macrophyte distribution using Generalized Additive

Models. Plant Ecology 139: 113–24

Mbogo  C,  Mwangangi  J,  Nzovu  J,  Gu  W,  Yan  G,  Gunter  J  T,  Swalm  C,  Keating  J,  Regens  J  L,
Shililu  J,  Githure  J,  and  Beier  J  C  2003  Spatial  and  temporal  heterogeneity  of  Anopheles
mosquitoes  and  Plasmodium  falciparum  transmission  along  the  Kenyan  coast.  American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 68: 734 – 41

McCullagh P and Nelder J A 1989 Generalized Linear Models. London, Chapman and Hall
Muturi E J, Mwangangi J, Shililu J, Muriu S, Jacob B, Kabiru E, Gu W, Mbogo C, Githure J, and
Novak R. 2007 Mosquito species succession and the physico-chemical factors affecting their
abundance in rice fields in Mwea Kenya. Journal of Medical Entomology 44: 336 – 44
Neter J, Wasserman W, and Whitmore G 1992 Applied Statistics (Fourth Edition). Boston, MA,

Allyn and Bacon

Oliver M A, Muir K R, and Webster R 1992 A geostatistical approach to the analysis of pattern

in rare disease. Journal of Public Health Medicine 14: 280–9

Pielou E C 1969 Introduction to Mathematical Ecology. New York, John Wiley and Sons
Pope  K  O,  Rejmankova  E,  Savage  H,  Arredonde-Jimenez  J  I,  Rodriguez  M  H,  and  Roberts  D  R
1994 Remote sensing of tropical wetlands for malaria control in Chiapas, Mexico. Ecological
Applications 4: 81–90

Rejmankova  E,  Roberts  D  R,  Pawley  A,  Manguin  S,  and  Polanco  J  1995  Predictions  of  adult
Anopheles albimanus densities in villages based on distances to remotely sensed larval habi-
tats. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 53: 482– 8

Robert  V,  Awono-Ambene  H  P,  and  Thioulouse  J  1998  Ecology  of  larval  mosquito  with  special
reference  to  Anopheles  arabiensis  (Diptera:  Culicidae)  in  market-garden  wells  in  the  urban
area of Dakar, Senegal. Journal of Medical Entomology 35: 948 –55

Service M W 1993 Mosquito Ecology: Field Sampling Methods (Second Edition). Amsterdam, Elsevier
Snow R W, Gouws E, Omumbo J A, Rapuada B, Craig M H, Tanser F C, Leseur D, and Ouma
J 1998a Models to predict the intensity of Plasmodium falciparum transmission: applications
to  the  burden  of  disease  in  Kenya.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Tropical  Medicine
and Hygiene 92: 601– 6

Thomson  M  C,  Connor  S  J,  D’Alessandro  U,  Rowlingson  B,  Diggle  P,  Cresswell  M,  and
Greenwood B 1999 Predicting malaria infection in Gambian children from satellite data and
bed  net  use  surveys:  The  importance  of  spatial  correlation  in  the  interpretation  of  results.
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 61: 2–8

Wood B, Washino R, Beck L, Hibbard K, Pitcairn M, Roberts D, Rejmankova E, Paris J, Hacker C,
Salute  J,  Sebesta  P,  and  Legters  L  1991  Distinguishing  high  and  low  anopheline-producing
rice fields using remote sensing and GIS technologies. Preventionary Veterinary Medicine 11:
277– 88

Yee T W and Mitchell N D 1991 Generalized additive models in plant ecology. Journal of Vegetation

Science 2: 587– 602

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(3)

