The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 292–293 December 2003

292

S U R V E Y

Bridging the Information Gap

Terry Robinson*

*Describe Online, Email: terry@describe-online.com

There is an information gap that severely restricts the lives of blind and visually impaired people. The author set up
Describe Online in April 2000 to develop new solutions to this information gap through online text descriptions,
improving accessibility of websites and revising product manuals to make them more informative to purchasers. Experience
to date has revealed a spectrum of situations for which both tactile diagrams and text descriptions are both desirable
and complementary. Whilst a tactile diagram should always be accompanied by some text annotation, at least to the
extent of that which normally accompanies print diagrams, some text descriptions can be stand-alone and may be
the only practical way to convey the necessary information. The converse is also true, there are many instances where
text alone cannot convey the subtlety which could be presented via a tactile approach. The author wishes to explore
this topic to see if criteria can be developed that could inform content providers of the extent to which these two
complementary approaches should be adopted for each practical situation.

INTRODUCTION

Since most people receive up to 75% of their information
through sight, it follows that, for those with a visual impair-
ment, the ability to receive this information decreases in
proportion to their visual limitation. In fact, totally blind
people may not know what lies within metres of them, either
because they’ve yet to discover it, no-one’s told them or
relevant publicity simply hasn’t reached them in a meaning-
ful or accessible form. This can have serious implications
for the daily lives of blind and visually impaired people,
severely restricting their ability to participate in both the
community and the economy.

BACKGROUND

Most of us receive way(cid:142)nding information through signage
or graphic maps. These are usually meaningless to blind
and, possibly, to vision impaired people as well. We there-
fore need to (cid:142)nd an alternative means of conveying this
information.

If as the saying goes ‘a picture paints a thousand words’,
then a map could be equivalent to a book of many volumes
such is the amount of information it contains. However
whilst this may be true of (cid:142)ne art and detailed visual maps,
it is still possible to contend that maps of the built environ-
ment and public buildings in a form accessible to blind
people can be rendered via verbal descriptions. Not only
are urbanspaces more manageable, when limited in terms
of their extent, the type of information required by the
user is also very speci(cid:142)c. It is therefore possible to concen-
trate on spatial information that addresses the needs of
blind and vision impaired people.

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225013032

Describe Online was established by the author in 2000 to
develop new solutions to the challenges blind and partially
sighted people face in trying to access spatial information
about large-scale environments. To date, an accessible web-
site has been produced containing text maps of both the
UK National Rail and London Underground networks,
together with text guides to over 40 stations. These include
Birmingham New Street and Oxford Circus.

Describe Online have completed successful pilot projects
in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames, Ealing
and Watford to develop systems for joining public trans-
port to local businesses and other public venues using text
guides. These included trials with vision impaired participants
to gauge the bene(cid:142)ts of the existing system and discover
its limitations. The overriding aim is to empower as many
blind and vision impaired people as possible by enabling them
to decide where to visit and what assistance they need,
rather than relying on others, especially sighted friends and
guides, to make these decisions for them by being the sole
source of information.

DESCRIBE ONLINE GUIDES

Many public venues already claim to have ‘Access Guides’.
Whilst these are very useful,
in that they describe the
accessibility features and facilities offered by venues, a large
proportion of them do not suf(cid:142)ciently explain how to get
there, nor do they provide the detail to enable those without
maps or who are unfamiliar with the area to signi(cid:142)cantly
improve their mobility options.

Guides produced by Describe Online not only include
directions, but also aim to improve users knowledge about
the area or space in which a venue is located, together

Bridging the Information Gap

293

with a better understanding of the venue itself. It is not
enough to just tell users what to do by providing a single
route description. What happens for example if having only
given one route option it becomes obstructed by road works?
It is easier to (cid:142)nd alternative routes when a user knows
what the possibilities are.

For examples of the text guides and the way(cid:142)nding
possibilities these present blind and visually impaired people,
visit the Describe Online website at: http://www.describe-
online.com.

WHO STANDS TO BENEFIT?

Given the ability to access spatial information in the way
described it is a very real possibility that blind and partially
sighted people will feel empowered. It is not dif(cid:142)cult to
suggest that the greater levels of con(cid:142)dence that accrue
from improved knowledge of the environment encourages
more involvement in both the community and economy.
Measures to capitalize on the potential contributions vision
impaired people could then make should not be under-
estimated either. The bene(cid:142)ts to everyone could stretch well
beyond those originally envisaged. Take the eight million
people in the UK who have a signi(cid:142)cant disability. It is
estimated they have about £40 billion per year to spend.
Think of the immediate impact on the high street retailer
by opening up public space to even a small portion of this
group.

TEXT OR TACTILE?

Many people, including those with visual impairment, under-
stand and bene(cid:142)t from tactile representations of (cid:143)oor plans
and road networks. However experience shows that there
is a limit to the information that can be easily conveyed by
a single diagram, which is much less than that offered
by standard maps. A solution is to produce a series of
tactile diagrams, each providing different information about
a particular area. Individually each still require a textual
description to explain the context of the diagram, and just as
frequently, to explain what information is being conveyed
and how it is being represented. A text-based solution
possibly offers greater potential. It can be received via the
Internet, is easily downloadable, can be translated from text
to audio or other media and is readily amended to re(cid:143)ect
changes to the built environment.

CONCLUSION

A clear need to undertake research that will examine alter-
native solutions to way(cid:142)nding for blind people has been
identi(cid:142)ed. Describe Online is investigating and offering a
text based solution for people who cannot use or would
prefer to employ means of accessing spatial information other
than through conventional tactile maps. It also recognizes
the ways text and tactile might compliment each other in
the future.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

