The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

How Do Map Readers Recognize a Topographic
Mapping Style?

Jérémie Ory, Sidonie Christophe, Sara Irina Fabrikant & Benedicte Bucher

To cite this article: Jérémie Ory, Sidonie Christophe, Sara Irina Fabrikant & Benedicte Bucher
(2015) How Do Map Readers Recognize a Topographic Mapping Style?, The Cartographic
Journal, 52:2, 193-203

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2015.1119459

Published online: 26 Nov 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 59

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [University of California, San Diego]

Date: 18 March 2016, At: 05:46

The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 52 No. 2
q The British Cartographic Society 2015

3
pp. 19 –20

3

International Cartographic Conference, Rio 2015 - Special Issue May 2015

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

How Do Map Readers Recognize a Topographic
Mapping Style?

Je´re´mie Ory1,2, Sidonie Christophe1,2, Sara Irina Fabrikant3 and Benedicte Bucher1,2

1Institut National de l’Information Ge´ographique et Forestie`re (IGN), COGIT Lab., 94165 St Mande´, France.
2Paris-Est University, 5 bd Descartes, Champs-sur-Marne, 77454 Marne-la-Valle´e, France. 3University of Zu¨rich,
Department of Geography, Winterthuresrstr. 190, CH-8057 Zu¨rich, Switzerland
Email: Jeremie.Ory@ign.fr

The process of reading a topographic map requires users to recognize and learn the cartographic symbols of the key
(or legend) while interpreting the territory as depicted on the map at a given level of abstraction (the form and nature of
features, their saliency and relationships). We present the results of an empirical user study that aims to identify and assess
the main graphical characteristics that are used by map users to recognize the design principles which constitute the
topographic mapping style adopted by IGN (Institut National de l’Information Ge´ographique et Forestie`re), France.
Our results suggest that 91% of the participants were able to recognize an IGN-France topographic map amongst other
topographic map products. We also determine which graphical characteristics play a role in the recognition of this
cartographic style, either by visual memory or by visual perception, and identify the representation of relief, including
contour lines and shaded relief, as one of the major graphical characteristics of the topographic mapping style of
IGN-France. Moreover, the participants of our study considered the representation of touristic POI (points of interest),
toponymy, typography, the main roads network, the individual buildings and the forests, to be essential for stylistic

recognition.

Keywords: topographic map style, map perception and cognition, empirical study, graphic semiology

INTRODUCTION

Stylized views of geographical space enable users to interpret
and analyse information (e.g. the relative importance of
paths and roads) at a given scale more efﬁciently than other
views, such as satellite imagery. Cartography is the science of
communicating information about geographical space based
on visual representation (Robinson, 1960). For instance,
topographic maps covering a country are produced by
National Mapping Agencies (NMAs) and are based on a
conceptual model of
topographic features and their
portrayal through graphical choices (styles). The process of
reading a topographic map requires users to recognize and
learn the cartographic symbols of the key (or legend) while
interpreting the territory as depicted on the map at a given
level of abstraction (the form and nature of features, their
saliency and relationships). This process involves several
cognitive capacities, like perception, recognition and visual
analysis. Wood (1993) and Kent (2005) suggest that the
understandability of a map is not only supported by the key,
but also by its overall visual cartographic design as a
particular combination of speciﬁc visual variables applied to
cartographical data. Brunet (1987) shows that cartographic
language is composed of the form, layout, and signiﬁcance
of the distribution shown by the map. Moreover, Kent and
Vujakovic (2011) apply the cartographic language paradigm
to further explain stylistic diversity in topographic mapping.

DOI: 10.1080/00087041.2015.1119459

However, a new issue has emerged in recent years: the
topographic maps and users’ ability to
efﬁciency of
recognize, learn and decode the maps’ abstraction of a
geographical space, in a context where topographic maps are
no longer a ‘well-known’ series produced by a NMA but
may be designed by various producers and combined
together (Hoarau et al., 2013).

According to Kent and Vujakovic (2009), the notion of
‘style’
is closely related to the concept of recognition
of certain ‘similarities within a group and the recognition
to these outside that group’. These
of differences
similarities convey some ‘visual proximity’ between maps
and make it easier for a reader familiar with one map to
read the others. Indeed, if a good map design optimizes
the reading and thinking processes of map readers, it can be
assumed that the users’ performance of visual queries and
tasks would be improved if such users are familiar with
some visual characteristics in the map: they categorize
them, consciously or not, to belong to a ‘group’, referring
not only to data and conﬁdence in the map, but also to
what they already know, or what they have been learning,
through their experience of
topographic maps and
geographical
space. Formalizing topographic styles as
families of design principles would be an opportunity to
enhance map efﬁcacy, when,
for instance, adding new
information to an existing topographic map, designing

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016  
 
 
194

The Cartographic Journal

new maps at larger scales, or when mixing heterogeneous
data from producers and individual mapmakers.

Therefore, our long-term aim is to understand how
people learn and use styles of
topographic mapping,
as families of map design principles, for reading such maps
more efﬁciently. Our approach,
in addressing the issue
mentioned above,
involves studying how readers ﬁrst
recognize families of cartographic design principles. In the
next section, we ﬁrst review existing literature related to
topographic styles and the categorization of maps and map
design principles,
in order to deﬁne the concept of
‘topographic style’. The following section presents an
empirical study to identify the recognizable and representa-
tive graphic characteristics of the topographic style of
IGN-France. Finally, we present and discuss the results of
the empirical user test.

TOWARDS A DEFINITION OF TOPOGRAPHIC STYLE

We attempt to arrive at a deﬁnition of the concept of
‘topographic style’ in considering the notion of ‘family of
map design principles’. We therefore review some related
research and propose a framework that
synthesizes
knowledge about topographic style.

‘style’

Related research on deﬁning cartographic styles
To organize the review of related work, we rely on a generic
deﬁnition of
taken from the Oxford English
Dictionary1. Three basic explanations are highlighted as
follows: (1) a particular procedure by which something is
done; a manner or way; (2) a distinctive appearance, typically
determined by the principles according to which something
is designed; and (3) elegance and sophistication. The
ingredients of this general deﬁnition are very relevant to
addressing the issue introduced in Section 1, and particular
focus will be given to the aspect of ‘visual appearance’ (as per
explanation ‘(2)’ above).

et al. 

Ingredient (1), ‘a particular procedure’, is related to the
production process, i.e. the technical choices made by the
NMA to design their maps – data selections, cartographic
generalization, symbol speciﬁcation, and so on – in order to
  , 2011).
represent their geographical spaces (Ducheˆne  
The diversity of cartographic styles amongst NMAs is partly
due to the distinctive design of their map symbols (Kent and
Vujakovic, 2009; Bucher et al., 2010). Indeed, the map
producer uses some low-level visual detectors present in the
set of visual variables that Bertin (1967) recommends in
order to express efﬁciently geographic information to map
users. Groupe m (1992) explains that image interpretation is
very dependent on the medium chosen to transmit the
information, and the targetted receiver, i.e. map readers and
their experience and motivation. Much research exists
concerned with describing maps in the sense of an objective
(aim) and how to meet this objective (speciﬁcation of a
production and rendering process). Amongst others,
Bucher et al. (2007) propose to represent explicitly the
intention of a map designer in terms of scale, represented
features, relationships between the features, and reading
modalities (to be seen at ﬁrst sight versus to be read).

Ingredient (2), ‘a distinctive appearance’, is related to
elementary visual characteristics which constitute this
appearance, not only derived from the previous ingredient,
but also derived from the particular user model (experience
of maps and geographical spaces, perceptual and cognitive
processes, and so on).

Cartographic processes are managed regarding the spatial
and semantical characteristics of the geographical spaces.
The cartographic visual scene is inﬂuenced by the depicted
geographical context (such as urban areas, water features,
mountains, and so on), the spatial distribution of different
landscape features and theirs depictions (shape, texture,
colour, and so on). The combination of abstraction
processes ﬁnally provides a particular visual composition in
the map, based on graphic features, such as the colour and
shape of road networks, the colour and texture of vegetation
cover, and the colour and shape of the built environment.
According to speciﬁc visual properties they may have
(e.g. spatial structures, contrasts, visual saliency), some
graphic features or some combinations of graphic features
may be particularly identiﬁable and distinguishable by a
map user.

Figure 1 below illustrates how the three components –
spatial distribution, and visual
geographical context,
characteristics of
features – give a meaningful visual
hierarchy to the map, notably guided by some particular
saliency between features, assigned by the map producer,
according to the purpose of the map.

We deﬁne a graphical characteristic by those salient
graphic features that stand out to the users, because of their
colour,
form, texture, spatial distribution, and so on.
A graphical characteristic emerges from the organization in
sequences and groups of all graphical signs contained in the
map composition. In this sense, we also consider a graphical
characteristic as a visual stimulus (Goldstein, 2010),
facilitating the reading and visual
interpretation of the
cartographic composition and the apprehension of the
geographical space by the map users. The graphical
characteristics, as visual stimuli, inﬂuence the map users’
visual perception and memory. Indeed, the visual appear-
ance of a cartographic composition is encoded and stored in
their brain through experience of use. In this sense, theories
of visual perception and cognition thus are important to
consider in deﬁnitions of cartographic styles. Gestalt Theory
provides the basis on how we perceive and understand a
visual scene. This theory is based on the idea that users try to
organize what they see into ﬁgures that sit in the foreground

Figure 1. Design [by National Mapping Agencies (NMA)] and
perception (by users) of graphical characteristics

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How do Map Readers Recognize A Topographic Mapping Style?

195

of a visual scene, separated from a background, according to
a number of ‘laws’. Gibson (1977) extents the Gestalt
theory, introducing the term of ‘affordance’. The concept of
affordance is based on the presence of graphical signs in the
scene, offering (affording) the opportunity for the users to
perform an action. Moreover, according to Ware (2008),
salient graphical features, i.e. ‘low-level detectors’ such as
form, orientation, ﬁlling, and so on, allow viewers to detect
visual characteristics in an image.

In a previous work (Ory et al., 2013), we identiﬁed
speciﬁc graphical differences between topographic map
products from two particular NMAs, IGN-France and
Swisstopo, based on a systematic comparison, as illustrated
in Figure 2 below. The salient graphical characteristics may
be perceived at ﬁrst glance by users: we suppose that they
allow them to recognize a map product
through its
particular topographic style. Nevertheless, these graphic
characteristics are not clearly explained, neither in the
speciﬁcation of the intended map nor in the production
ingredient (1) above does not
process. Furthermore,
systematically capture all parameters
leading to the
identiﬁcation or recognition of
the particular graphic
characteristics of a cartographic style.

In order to assess the visual appearance of maps, much
research has attempted to categorize maps and to extract
related criteria. In order to measure the stylistic diversity of
state topographic maps amongst European countries, Kent
and Vujakovic (2009) systematically analyzed a sample of
twenty 1:50,000 topographic maps each produced by a
different European NMA, based on the maps’ content and
appearance. They created a multi-level classiﬁcation of the
symbology used to represent
themes in topographic
‘vegetation’, and
‘built-up area’,
such as
mapping,
‘hydrology’. Their approach suggests that the diversity of
European topographic styles is partly due to differences in
cartographic representation which arise both from carto-
graphic processing (for instance, generalization) and from
symbol speciﬁcations. Their ﬁnal results indicate a high
degree of stylistic diversity throughout Europe. Moreover,
with the application of a cluster analysis, the authors identify
a number of groups of similar European topographic styles;
with the French and the Swiss topographic map falling into
the same group, which was tentatively labelled the ‘Alpine
style’. Beconyte (2011) visually compared a variety of map
types in order to identify their graphical styles, divided into
decorativeness, expressiveness, and originality. Based on
these categories she classiﬁed a range of maps into different
laconic, expressive, and so on.
styles: artistic, antique,

Christophe (2012) provided various approaches (visual
categorization, topographic style speciﬁcation, and transfer
from an artistic style to a topographic style) to formalize and
model a topographic style. She emphasizes that being able to
manage cartographic styles during the map design process
should enhance users’ creativity and improve map quality.

Ingredient (3), ‘elegance and sophistication’, is related to
the emotional or aesthetic response that can be experienced
by users (related to ingredient ‘2’) and the graphical
characteristics that can be controlled during the map design
process according to what the producer attempts to achieve
(related to ingredient ‘1’).

The visual appearance (ingredient

‘2’) provides an
emotion, a feeling, and an aesthetic response, as addressed
by Kent (2005), and Fabrikant et al. (2012), amongst
others. Jolivet (2009) and Bucher et al. (2010) show that
the application of different symbol speciﬁcations from many
European countries to the same cartographic dataset
produces various topographic depictions with different
graphical appearances, which in turn inﬂuence the users’
perception of colour (for instance, drab versus luminous)
and of feelings or conﬁdence (for instance, realistic versus
artistic, untidy versus accurate). These emotions, feelings or
aesthetic responses may be controlled during the map design
process, according to the related abstraction processes
the cartographer may manage,
i.e. colour speciﬁcation
(Chesneau, 2007; Christophe, 2011), artistic stylization
(Christophe and Hoarau, 2012; Christophe et al., 2015)
and level of realism/abstraction (Hoarau et al., 2013).

Modelling a unifying framework
In order to study the efﬁciency of the map reading process, it
is necessary to synthesize the theoretical advances made by
the recent research outlined above through the creation of a
unifying framework. The model
shown in Figure 3
represents each ingredient composing a family of design
principles.

This model also addresses an important aspect: to use
visual appearance as a style parameter for formalization even
though visual appearance might change over
time.
In particular, we notice the changes in map design
techniques (i.e., moving from print production to digital-
database-driven methodologies) or the changes in the map
producer’s intentions (i.e. evolution of map purpose and use
for the military to public use). Thus visual appearance may
vary little over time, and such changes might produce
identities.
topographic maps with different graphical

Figure 2. A comparison of graphical characteristics between topographic maps of the same scale: Institut National de l’Information Ge´ographique et
Forestie`re (IGN)-France and Swisstopo

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 196

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 3. Proposed unifying framework to synthesize knowledge from recent research into the design of topographic maps: how users read them to
enrich their apprehension of a geographical space, from underlying design principles

Figure 4 below illustrates the visual appearance of two
1:25,000 IGN-France topographic maps over time.

To keep some consistency in delivering the cartographic
message to users over time, the producers of topographic
maps have established consistent mapping practices. These
are notably guided by some general and technical
speciﬁcations (Ruas, 2006) which lead to the notion of a
family of design principles. One might thus distinguish
visual characteristics that remain constant over time, such as
colour choices to distinguish between different feature
types, e.g., black for cultural features (including buildings,

railways, and so on), green for vegetation (such as wooded
areas, orchards, and vineyards), orange and white to depict
different road network categories, blue for water features,
and white for the background. Certain constancy in the
visual appearance of a map can be identiﬁed, and we believe
that users learn this way of depicting geographical space
through their map-reading experience. We also believe that
the graphical characteristics directly identiﬁed by the users
allow them to recognize a family of design principles, i.e. a
topographic style. To tackle this issue, we conducted an
empirical user experiment with a view to formalizing the

Figure 4. Two different types of Institut National de l’Information Ge´ographique et Forestie`re (IGN)-France symbology, indicating change over
time (IGNw copyright)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 How do Map Readers Recognize A Topographic Mapping Style?

197

topographic style of IGN-France from the user’s ability to
recognize it, by identifying some representative graphical
characteristics. We chose the very popular 1:25,000
topographic map series of IGN-France, which is the most
widely used topographic map in France, and is therefore
expected to be well known by French map users.

EXPERIMENT: ASSESSING THE GRAPHICAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TOPOGRAPHIC STYLE OF
IGN-FRANCE

This section describes an experiment which aims to assess
the relevance of the concept of topographic style introduced
in the previous section, speciﬁcally, whether users learn and
recognize topographic styles and how this may be achieved.
Practically, in alignment with related studies, we focus on
a certain style that is represented in the topographic map
in this case, produced by
series of a speciﬁc NMA,
IGN-France. We also concentrate on users that may be
especially familiar with such a style because they regularly
work with maps: cartographers, researchers, professionals,
and so on. We decided to mainly involve French people in an
attempt to keep the level of knowledge and experience of the
IGN-France maps generally consistent. The experiment
aims to test the following hypotheses:
. (H1) Users are able to recognize the IGN-France
topographic style among others and to determine
whether a map or a cartographic symbol belongs to this
style or not;

. (H2) Some map properties play a major role in how users

identify and recognize a topographic style;

. (H3) As map symbols, some types of feature are more
effective than others for the identiﬁcation and recog-
nition of a topographic style.

. (H4) During the map’s reading, the mechanism for the
recognition of a topographic style is based on two steps:
(1) users identify some graphical characteristics as
representatives and (2) compared them with the graphical
characteristics learned from past experience of topo-
graphic maps reading.

including seven from IGN-France,

Materials
First, a French expert in cartography (i.e. an expert in
producing and using maps and with a familiarity of the
French landscape and territory) selected various topographic
maps produced by NMAs depicting various parts of the
world,
two from
Swisstopo (Switzerland), one from Ordnance Survey (UK),
one from the Cartographic Institute of Catalonia
(ICC, Spain), one from the Land Registry and Topography
Administration (Luxembourg), and one from the Land
Information of New-Zealand (LINZ). All topographic maps
were of a scale comparable to 1:25,000. This selection of
maps helps participants to focus on aspects of visual
appearance for the experiment. In order to reduce the
inﬂuence of language used for toponymy (place names), the
maps designed by Swisstopo and by ICC (Spain) depict
French territories and the IGN-France 1:50,000 map depicts
an Italian territory.

Second,

the same expert manually extracted some
graphical characteristics from several digital 1:25,000
IGN-France topographic maps, which they considered as
representative of
the visual content of a 1:25,000
IGN-France topographic map. They highlight certain
graphic choices made by the cartographer, such as the
level of generalization and symbolization, combined with
the spatial structure of the related geographical space.
Figure 5 below shows these graphical characteristics on a
white background in identical manner as in a 1:25,000
IGN-France topographic map, representing the following
geographic themes:
. relief (relief shaded and contour lines) in sample 1;
. roads network in sample 3 (main roads), sample 10

(secondary roads), and sample 16 (local roads);

. built environment in sample 7 (central urban zone),
sample 12 (individual buildings), sample 14 (industrial
zone) and in sample 4 (landmarks);

. vegetation cover in sample 6 (hedges), sample 8 (forests)

and sample 15 (orchards);

. hydrography in sample 2 (channels and marshland) and
sample 9 (hydrographic surfaces) toponymy in sample 11;
tourist information in sample 5 (touristic routes) and
sample 13 (touristic points of interest).

These were shown to the participants as visual stimuli to
assess the IGN-France topographic style in the experiment.

Procedure
The full experiment comprised eight groups of questions.
In this paper, we focus on two question groups (the entire
test protocol is described in Ory et al.(2014).

two maps

In the ﬁrst group of questions, the participants have to
identify a topographic map among others and specify which
features have been used to identify it. This ﬁrst group
determines whether participants are able to correctly
recognize IGN-France style amongst that of the other
NMAs, and which criteria were used most often.
We displayed six topographic maps designed by different
NMAs:
from IGN-France (1:25,000 and
1:50,000) and four other topographic maps, one each
from ICC, Swisstopo, ACT, LINZ. We then asked
the participants to identify which map is designed by
IGN-France NMA (question 1). The goal of this question is
to validate the hypothesis H1, i.e., whether users are able to
recognize IGN-France style among others and to determine
whether a map or a cartographic symbol belongs to this style
or not. Then, in question 1.2, we proposed ﬁve criteria to
the participants which we considered important in the
recognition of a topographic style:
. the displayed geographic features;
. the graphic appearance of the depicted features;
. the level of cartographic generalization of the map;
. the toponymy used in the map;
. the selected geographic footprint.

We asked the participants to assess each of these criteria
according to how they help users to recognize the
topographic style of IGN-France among that adopted by
other NMAs. In this sense, the participants assign a score for
each criterion according to three values: most important,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 198

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. Graphical characteristics extracted from Institut National de l’Information Ge´ographique et Forestie`re (IGN)-France 1:25,000 topographic
map series (IGNw copyright)

somewhat important and not important. The goal of this
question is to validate the hypothesis H2, i.e., whether some
map properties play a major role in how users identify and
recognize a topographic style. In question 1.3, to complete
this assessment on visual appearance, we asked the
participants to evaluate the visual
the
symbolization of six different cartographic themes which
(we assume) allow them to recognize the topographic style
of IGN-France:
. symbolization of roads network;
. symbolization of hydrographic features;
. symbolization of vegetation cover features;
. symbolization of build-up areas;
. labelling style;
. representation of relief.

importance of

The participants assigned a score for each criterion
important, somewhat
according to three values: most
important and not important. The goal of this question is
to validate the hypothesis H3, i.e., as map symbols, whether
some types of feature are more effective than others for the
identiﬁcation and recognition of a topographic style.

In the second group of questions, the participants have to
identify and select which graphical characteristics (as per
Figure 5) are mainly representative of an IGN-France
topographic map. In question 2.1, the participants have to
select the four most representative graphical characteristics
of the style of IGN-France without seeing IGN maps, thus
relying on their memory or previous knowledge of
IGN-France maps. The goal of this question is to test the
hypothesis H4.2,
i.e., whether the mechanism for the
recognition of a topographic style is based on remembrance
(from past learning). It is important to emphasize that the
graphical characteristics were selected by participants with-
out their specifying any order of preference. In question 2.2,
the participants selected the four most representative
graphical characteristics of the topographic style of IGN-
France by visualizing four maps of IGN-France. This
attempted to identify what was visually representative of the
maps that had been seen. The goal of this question being to
test the hypothesis H4.1, i.e., whether users identify some
graphical characteristics as representatives during the map’s
reading.

Participants
The experiment was ﬁrst broadcast online during the 26th
International Cartographic Conference in Dresden and
second on a mailing list about Geography2. We sought to
reach expert participants, e.g., those having a certain level of
experience of producing and using maps for leisure or work
purposes, and therefore likely to possess a high-level ability
in reading, interpreting and recognizing maps. Professional
mailing-lists
in geography and cartography, and the
international conference in cartography, were therefore
used to recruit participants. Moreover, the mailing lists
are mainly French-speaking and participants generally come
from, or know, the French landscape and territory.

Four hundred and ten participants (43% female) took part
in this user-study. On average, participants were 35 years old
and ranged between 18 and 85 years, with 72% of the
participants reported to conduct research in cartography or
in a related discipline and 30% considered themselves to be
advanced or experts in cartography. Participants came from
24 different nations, with 85% from France and 10% from
other European nations. We decided to request mainly
French people in order to manage a certain level of
knowledge and experience of the IGN-France maps.

RESULTS, ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION

For each group of questions, we analyse statistically the results
in order to highlight the graphical characteristics used by
participants to recognize, characterize and identify a topo-
graphic map produced by IGN-France. Then, we apply the
main representative graphical characteristics (identiﬁed in the
experiment) to a cartographical dataset, in order to visualize
and analyse the resulting judgements of what is representative
in IGN-France maps, by visual memory or by visual perception.

Criteria which enhance recognition of the topographic style
of IGN-France
In question 1.1, 14% of participants selected only the
1:25,000 map from IGN-France and 0.5% of participants
selected only the 1:50,000 map from IGN-France.
In addition, 30% of participants selected the 1:25,000
map from IGN-France and at the same time the map from
Swisstopo and/or the map from ICC, depicting French

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 How do Map Readers Recognize A Topographic Mapping Style?

199

territories. Finally, the 1:25,000 IGN-France map was
selected by 91% of participants, i.e. alone or in addition to
others, and was better recognized than the 1:50,000
IGN-France map. Only a few participants (16%) correctly
selected the two maps from IGN-France. These results
show that the 1:25,000 IGN-France map is clearly the most
representative map of the IGN-France style for users.
Nevertheless,
the Swisstopo and ICC maps depicting
French territories were also selected and considered to be
IGN-France maps, which suggests that the language used
in the toponymy and the depicted geographical space are
both important criteria. With these results,
it remains
difﬁcult to prove whether the recognition of the 1:25,000
IGN-France topographic style is high.

For question 1.2, 80% of participants considered the
graphic appearance of the depicted features as the most
important criterion, above the cartographic generalization
level of the map (47%) and the toponymy (33%). While the
graphic appearance of depicted features is the most
important criterion, we believe that the level of cartographic
generalization plays a more signiﬁcant
role in the
recognition of a topographic style for the expertise of
these participants when compared to the general expertise
of
their
recognition of the language used by the toponymy, the
participants selected an IGN-France map ‘a priori’ as such
maps use the French language.

the wider population. Moreover, because of

For question 1.3, 62% of participants considered the
representation of relief as the most important criterion,
above the symbolization of built-up area (48%) and the
roads network (47%). We consider these three cartographic
objects as the major elements leading to the deﬁnition of a
topographic map: relief þ built-up areas þ roads network.
Moreover, given their importance, the representations of
these three cartographic objects have a ‘visual structuring
effect’ on the map’s appearance, allowing users
to
recognize its topographic style. It is also worth noting
that the labelling style is considered the most important
criterion by 40% of participants, which is relevant to the
results of the previous question, where toponymy was
considered as an important criterion by 33% of participants.
the language used for the toponymy
We notice that
(question 1.2) seems to be less important than their
typographic style (question 1.3).

We wish to know whether the participants will identify the

same cartographic objects in the following question.

Graphical characteristics which represent the topographic style
of IGN-France most effectively
Figure 6 below shows the percentage of participants which
selected the four most representative graphical character-
istics of IGN-France style without seeing IGN maps
(question 2.1) and a statistical analysis of these results in
four groups3.

The ﬁrst group represents the most representative

graphical characteristics for participants:
. relief (sample 1).

The second group comprises two graphical characteristics,
which participants consider as highly representative,
by importance order:

. touristic points of interest (POI) (sample 13)
. toponymy and typography (sample 11).

The third group comprises six graphical characteristics,
which participants consider as moderately representative,
by importance order:
. forests (sample 8);
. landmarks (sample 4);
. channels and marshland (sample 2);
. individual buildings (sample 12);
. main roads (sample 3);
. orchards (sample 15).

The fourth group comprises six graphical characteristics,
few representatives,
which participants consider as
by importance order:
. industrial zone (sample 14);
. secondary roads (sample 16);
. hydrographic surfaces (sample 9);
. touristic routes (sample 5);
. central urban zone (sample 7);
. local roads (sample 10);
. hedges (sample 6).

Figure 7 below shows the percentage of participants which
selected the four most representative graphical character-
istics of IGN-France’s topographical style in visualizing four
maps samples (question 2.2) and a statistical analysis of these
results in four groups3.

The ﬁrst group comprises the three most representative
graphical characteristics for participants, by importance order:
. relief (sample 1);
. main roads (sample 3);
. touristic POI (sample 13).

The second group comprises two graphical characteristics,
which participants consider as highly representative,
by importance order:
. individual buildings (sample 12)
. forests (sample 8).

The third group comprises two graphical characteristics,
which participants consider as moderate representative,
by importance order:
. toponymy and typography (sample 11);
. orchards (sample 15).

The fourth group comprises nine graphical characteristics,
which participants consider as
few representatives,
by importance order:
. landmarks (sample 4);
. channels and marshland (sample 2);
. touristic routes (sample 5);
. industrial zone (sample 14);
. central urban zone (sample 7);
. secondary roads (sample 16);
. hydrographic surfaces (sample 9);
. local roads (sample 10);
. hedges (sample 6).

We note that the representation of relief, i.e. contour lines
and relief shaded, and the touristic POI are considered as

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 200

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 6. Bar chart representing graphical characteristics selected by participants without seeing maps: visual memory

Figure 7. Bar chart representing graphical characteristics selected by participants in visualizing four maps: visual perception

essential graphical characteristics to recognize the 1:25,000
IGN-France topographic map in the two cognitive tasks
(visual memory and visual perception). Moreover,
the
representation of relief has a predominant role for the
participants, because it is considered as the major graphical
characteristics by the participants in the two cognitive tasks.
Second, the importance given to the main roads and the
toponymy and typography vary in visualizing the four map
samples. It seems that the depicted geographical space
inﬂuences the choices of participants, probably because of
the presence of a structuring road network in one or several
given map samples.

Visualization of the main results using a cartographic dataset
According to the main representative graphical character-
istics identiﬁed in the experiment, we applied them to a
in order to visualize
cartographic IGN-France dataset
the mental
image (by visual memory and by visual
perception) that the participants have of the IGN-France
style.

The map on the left of Figure 8 shows the application of
the three most representative graphical characteristics (the
ﬁrst two groups of analysis) selected by participants in the
visual memory task, and so in retrieving what is stored in
their memory: representation of relief (1), touristic POI (13)
and toponymy (11). We consider these graphical elements
to form a basis of knowledge for style recognition that is
highly important for users, because it is stored in the
memory by the participants.

The map on the right of Figure 8 shows the application of
the ﬁve most representative graphical characteristics (the ﬁrst
two groups of analysis), selected by participants in the visual

perception task,
in identifying what is most important:
representation of relief (1), main roads (3), touristic
POI (13),
individual buildings (12) and forests (8).
These visually salient elements, highlighted by this
cartographic representation, could be described through
two main criteria: colour and form. Colour: used by
IGN-France to symbolize some features, notably the pink
of touristic POI and the green of forests; the form and the
spatial distribution of certain features: the individual
buildings, which seem visually prominent because of their
individual form and the distribution of all features; both
colour and form: main roads, which seem to be an important
structuring graphical element of the map.

If we analyse comparatively these two maps, we
distinguish that some graphical characteristics are common
between them: representation of relief and touristic POI.
We suppose that
these graphical characteristics are
interpreted by the users, as a graphical signature of the
cartographical language used by the producer. Indeed, these
graphical characteristics are perceived but also stored in the
memory by users. Moreover, the map on the left represents
the IGN-France memorized style, i.e. what the users learn of
the design principle used to express geographic information.
Indeed this map highlights elements which are stored in the
user’s memory. The map on the right represents the IGN-
France style as perceived and summarized by the users. This
map highlights cartographic elements which are graphically
salient and allow the user to quickly interpret the design
principles of the NMA. A ﬁlter process is carried by users
from the map on the right to the map on the left. We note
that the language used by the representation of toponymy is
important for users, indeed it allows them to locate the map
and to identify its producer.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 How do Map Readers Recognize A Topographic Mapping Style?

201

Figure 8. Cartographic results, by application of the most and highly representative graphical characteristics identiﬁed in the experiment (the ﬁrst two
groups). The left map corresponds to the visual memory; the right map corresponds to visual perception (IGNw copyright)

DISCUSSION

Through their map-reading experience, users learn some of
the design principles used by NMAs, leading to the ‘concept’
of topographic style. We identify that some graphical
characteristics have a better perception and memorization to
others, due to their properties (i.e. form, colour, structure, and
distribution). From the analysis of our results, we identify four
major groups of information contained in the map:
. signature information, corresponding to the common
graphical characteristics, is the most representative of the
two cognitive tasks (representation of relief and touristic
POI). We suppose that this information allows the users to
recognize the design principles of the map producer.
. visual salient information, corresponding to the graphical
characteristics, is visually salient, due to their colour and
form or their spatial distribution: representation of the main
roads, built-up areas and forests). We suppose that this
information allows users to read and interpret more
efﬁciently the topographic map.

. located information, corresponding to the toponymy and
typography. We suppose that this information is semantically
salient and allows the users to locate it in the space-image.
. secondary information, corresponding to the rest of the
graphical characteristics contained in the map and assessed as
less representative or non-representative of cartographic
language used by the producer. These graphical character-
istics don’t help the users in recognizing the topographic
style of the map.

If we consider only the most representative graphical
characteristics, i.e. the relief representation, the reading and
the understanding of it in a topographic map require some
knowledge and some experience of maps;
it would be
interesting to reproduce this visual test on non-expert
participants to compare the obtained results. In addition, as
the sample of relief representation was shown to the
the ﬁrst rank on the set
participants ﬁrst (placed at

displayed),
it would also be interesting to show other
characteristics to the users ﬁrst to check whether the
expected results are identical. We should also emphasize that
the obtained results are also dependent on the extraction of
graphical characteristics. This step brings a bias in our study,
even if we consider our selection of graphical characteristics
as an expert selection.

Moreover, concerning the individual buildings and the
main roads, they seem to be considered important for the
users due to their graphical saliency. The form and the spatial
distribution of these cartographic features are important
parameters in the generalization process used by the map
producer in order to preserve their original form and a
consistent spatial distribution of the real world, allowing the
user to directly distinguish and recognize them. This kind of
cartographic features seems belonging to a particular group,
by given a special visual impact on the map and allowing the
recognition of a geographical space. In this sense, the content
of the map, i.e. the geographical space depicted by the map,
becomes an important parameter in the map’s visual
appearance and hence in the formalization of topographic
style, as stated by Kent and Vujakovic (2009).

Finally, our experiment aims to identify which graphical
elements contained in the map are representative of its style
for users, and to try to identify which of these are ﬁrst and
directly perceived and which are stored in the user’s
memory. With this experiment, we deduce that the users are
able to identify what is visually representative and salient for
them. In order to test the relevance and resilience of our
method, it would be interesting to compare our results with
those obtained in an automatic method of saliency detection
(Touya et al., 2015).

CONCLUSION & PROSPECTS

In conclusion, we have proposed a unifying framework for
understanding topographic mapping style and examined a key
aspect of this framework: the ability of readers to recognize a

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 202

The Cartographic Journal

topographic style and the mixed processes of map reading and
learning styles involved in such recognition.

Our protocol has relevance for the identiﬁcation of the
graphical characteristics of NMA style. In this paper, we
identify the graphical characteristics which formalize the
visual appearance of IGN-France topographic style: rep-
resentation relief, touristic POI, main roads,
individual
buildings, toponymy and forests.

This experiment brings some new insights to under-
standing the parameter of visual appearance regarding the
notion of topographic style, as introduced by Ory et al.
(2014), in which further hypotheses are tested. Moreover,
through this experiment, comparing the characterization of
IGN-France topographic style, by visual perception and by
visual memory, we are able to distinguish which graphical
characteristics are representative in each cognitive task. We
can now begin to understand how a user visually perceives
and visually memorizes an IGN-France topographic map.

These results bring some insights into how users perceive
the graphical symbols that constitute the cartographic
language of a particular map producer, which allow readers
to recognize a topographic style. In addition to suggesting
how symbol designs can be developed by recommendations
regarding the application of visual variables, these results
also suggest how the legibility of the topographic map might
be improved as well as the efﬁciency of the cartographic
message that is communicated to its users.

Our ﬁndings will be pursued in analysing the user’s selection
of graphical characteristics in different geographical contexts.
Moreover, to improve our experiment it would be interesting,
ﬁrst, to allow open responses about what are representative of
topographic style, and second, to enrich the procedure in
independently analysing the criteria ’colour’ and ’cartographic
features’. One approach would be to give test participants the
option to specify which colours and features are signiﬁcant
(or not) when recognizing topographic style. In this sense, the
participants would be able to manipulate the visual elements to
include in or exclude from the family of design principles.
With these future studies, we hope to identify the exact
parameters of visual appearance of the IGN-France maps
related to the depicted geographical space and to formalize
a more comprehensive model of topographic map style.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

After completing a Bachelor’s
degree in geography and
a Master’s degree in GIS,
Je´re´mie Ory is currently a
PhD student in the COGIT
Laboratory – Cartography &
GISciences – at IGN-France.
His thesis work consists in
analyzing the design and the
topographic
perception of
depictions in order to formal-
ize knowledge on the recog-
nition of topographic styles.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to offer our sincere thanks to all participants
for taking part in our experiment. We would also like to
thank those who reviewed our manuscript for their detailed
and thoughtful comments. This work is granted by the
French National Research Agency, with the reference ANR-
12-CORD-0025.

NOTES

1

http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/
english/style or http://www.merriam-webster.com/
dictionary/style

2 https://sympa.unil.ch/wws/info/geotamtam
3 The number of classes was determined by the Sturges
calculation method and their classiﬁcation using Jenks
natural thresholds. The number of classes was determined
by the Sturges calculation method and their classiﬁcation
using Jenks natural thresholds.

REFERENCES

Bertin, J. (1967). Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks,
Maps. University of Wisconsin Press, 1983 [ﬁrst published in
French in 1967, translated to English by Berg, W.J. in 1983].
Beconyte, G. (2011). ‘Cartographic styles: criteria and parameters’,
Proceedings 25th International Cartographic Conference,
(ICC’11), 3-5 July, Paris, France.

Bucher, B., Jolivet, L., Buard, E. and Ruas, A. (2007). ‘The need
for web legend services’, in 7th International Symposium on
Web and Wireless GIS (W2GIS), Lecture Notes
in
Computer Science, Springer ed. by Ware, J. M. and Taylor, G. E.,
pp. 44– 60.

Bucher, B., Mustie`re, S., Jolivet, L. and Renard, J. (2010). ‘Adding
metadata to maps and styled layers to improve map efﬁciency’,
in INSPIRE Conference 2010. 22-25 June, Krakow, Poland.
Brunet, R. (1987). La carte mode d’emploi, Fayard/Reclus,

Paris/Montpellier.

Chesneau, E. (2007). ‘Improvement of colour contrasts in maps:
application to risk maps’, 10th AGILE International Conference
on Geographic Information Science, Aalborg, Denmark.

Christophe, S. (2011).

‘Creative colours speciﬁcation based on
knowledge (ColorLegend System)’, The Cartographic Journal,
48(2), pp. 138– 145.

Christophe, S. (2012). ‘Cartographic styles between traditional and
original (towards a cartographic style model)’, Proceeding of Auto
Carto Conference 2012. Columbus, OH, USA.

Christophe, S. and Hoarau, C. (2012). ‘Expressive map design based on
pop art: revisit of graphic semiology?’, Cartographic Perspectives, 73,
pp. 61–74.

Christophe, S., Hoarau, C., Boulanger, L., Turbet,

J. and
Vanderhaeghe, D. (2015).
‘Automatic rendering of a Cassini
style’, 27th International Cartographic Conference (ICC’15).
Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

Ducheˆne, C., Christophe, S. and Ruas, A. (2011). Generalisation,
symbol speciﬁcation and map evaluation:
feedback from
research done at COGIT laboratory, IGN France, International
Journal of Digital Earth, 4(Suppl, 1, pp. 25–41.

Fabrikant, S., Christophe, S., Papastefanou, G. and Maggi, S. (2012).
‘Emotional response to map design aesthetics’, Proceedings of
Giscience Conference 2012. 18-21 September, Columbus, OH, USA.
Gibson, J. (1977). ‘The theory of affordances’, in Perceiving, Acting,
and Knowing, ed. by Shaw, R. and Bransford, J., pp. 67–82.
Goldstein, E. B. (2010). Sensation and Perception, Cengage

Learning, Andover.

Groupe m. (1992). Traite´ du signe visuel, Seuil, Paris.
Hoarau, C., Christophe, S. and Mustie`re, S. (2013). ‘Mixing, blending,
merging or scrambling topographic maps and orthoimagery in
geovisualizations?’, Proceedings 26th International Cartographic
Conference (ICC 2013). Dresden, Germany.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 How do Map Readers Recognize A Topographic Mapping Style?

203

Jolivet, L. (2009).

‘Characterizing maps to improve on-demand
cartography – the example of European topographic maps’, Proceed-
ings of 17th Conference on GIScience and Research in UK
(GISRUK’09), Leeds, United-Kingdom.

Kent, A. J. (2005). ‘Aesthetics: a lost cause in cartographic theory?’,

Ory,

J., Christophe,

(2014).
and
‘Caracte´risation visuelle d’un style topographique’, Proceedings
International Conference SAGEO. 24-27 November, Grenoble,
France.

Fabrikant,

S.

S.

Robinson, A. H. (1960). Elements of Cartography, John Wiley &

The Cartographic Journal, 42/2, pp. 182–188.

Sons Inc., New York.

Kent, A. J. and Vujakovic, P. (2009). ‘Stylistic diversity in European
state 1:50 000 topographic maps’, The Cartographic Journal,
46/3, pp. 179–213.

Kent, A. J. and Vujakovic, P. (2011). ‘Cartographic language: towards a
new paradigm for understanding stylistic diversity in topographic
maps’, The Cartographic Journal, 48/1, pp. 21– 40.

Ory, J., Christophe, S. and Fabrikant, S. (2013). ‘Identiﬁcation of style
in topographic maps, in poster proceedings’, 26th International
Cartographic Conference (ICC 2013). Dresden, Germany.

Ruas,

A.

(2006). Usages

donne´es
ge´ographiques – exemple de l’IGN, Rencontre Jacques Cartier,
Lyon, France.

bases

des

de

Touya, G., Christophe, S. and Hoarau, C. (2015). ‘Clutter and map
legibility in automated cartography: a research agenda’, Cartographica
(in press).

Ware, C. (2008). Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufman.
Wood, M.

‘The user’s

to map design’,

response

(1993).

The Cartographic Journal, 30/2, pp. 149–153.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 05:46 18 March 2016 