The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 2
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 111–115

ICA Special Issue 2003

111

S E C T I O N 1

Some Personal Reflections on Change . . . The Past and
Future of Cartography

Michael Wood

Department of Geography, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UF, UK

INTRODUCTION

ideas,

Cartography is instinctive in origin and has evolved as
a discipline, but it is now entering a revolutionary phase
in its development. Although mapping1 is fundamentally
cognitive, for centuries it has been known through the
paper-based products which have been used to express
geospatial
to store and to communicate spatial
information. More recently they have been applied to the
exploration and analysis of
increasingly complex spatial
problems in science and society. Paper maps have many
qualities and have bene(cid:142)ted from technology-led develop-
ments but they all
lacked the dynamic and interactive
(cid:143)exibility of their cognitive counterparts . . . that is . . . until
the past decade.

The basic mapping abilities of our early ancestors not
only gave them an essential awareness of the environ-
ment but, at times, also the ability to construct and scratch
out simple sketches of their cognitive ‘maps’ in the sand
or dust. This ability remains embedded in the human
psyche. However, as with writing and the development of
literature, it took an emerging class of specialists (eventually,
professionals) in what became known as the discipline of
‘Cartography’ to develop formal map products of quality
and value. After many centuries of more gradual evolution,
maps began to increase in status and in their contribution
to the understanding of world geography. Cognitive
mapping continued in the ‘background’ but there was also
a centuries-long era during which the activities of ‘making’
and ‘using’ real map products were largely separate. One
consequence of recent advances in technology has been an
acceleration of the trend towards the convergence of these
apparently very different activities. Through intelligent
access to databases and interactive user support it is now
possible not only to (cid:142)nd suitable maps on the Internet,
but also to create and modify them to meet speci(cid:142)c and
individual needs. Instead of merely ‘using maps’ produced in
advance by others, these new interactive exploratory facilities
allow individuals to truly ‘use cartography’ themselves in
a more holistic sense.2 For a long period the only link
between our uniquely (cid:143)exible and responsive cognitive
maps and the growing external sources of spatial data were
frequently inadequate paper maps, designed for broad
categories rather than individual users. Cartography is now
maturing into a more personal interactive facility for the
information.
investigation and representation of spatial

DOI: 10.1179/000870403235001458

New technologies have made possible the creation of a
‘live link’ between the instinctive internal realm of our
spatial cognition, through vision and direct interaction
with a new generation of cartographic visualizations, to
the potentially in(cid:142)nite resources of the Internet. Although
cartographic visualizations are, by de(cid:142)nition, abstractions,
new technology (and high resolution data sources)
also permits a spectrum of representational possibilities.
Dependent on task and need, these can range from near-
realistic dynamic visualizations,
if
required, static map models, all of which are linked directly
to the databases from which they were derived. They are
‘malleable’ (Cartwright, 2000) and can be transformed in
response to the changing demands of the investigation.

to generalized and,

Re(cid:143)ecting on these remarkable changes

the author
attempts to put cartography into a broader developmental
context. This emphasizes the fundamental nature of the
subject in humans and marginalizes the narrower de(cid:142)nition
of cartography as only the visual communication of spatial
data. It may be abbreviated to ‘the making and using of
maps’ but, in line with recent developments in scienti(cid:142)c
visualization,3 a fuller, more holistic de(cid:142)nition is ‘a unique
and instinctive multi-dimensional facility for the creation
and manipulation of visual (or virtual) representations of
geospace (maps), to permit the exploration, analysis, under-
standing and communication of information about that
space.’

EVERYONE’S A ‘MAPPER’

itself

It may manifest
in people to differing degrees,
but everyone has basic mapping ability. Since studies
with rats in the 1920s (Tolman, 1948) cognitive mapping
(mental images or itinerary-based constructs) has become
accepted as a ‘general property of mobile organisms’ and
‘an evolutionary adaptive mechanism necessary for spatial
survival’ (Downs and Stea, 1977). Although some scholars
doubted early humans’ ability to engage in such sophisticated
cognitive behaviour, Wynn concluded that ‘hominids had
achieved operational
intelligence by 300 000 years BP,
and perhaps earlier’ (Wynn, 1989, p. 89). Our experience
con(cid:142)rms its continuing existence as do examples from
contemporary communities such as in the Chiapas region
of southern Mexico. Without real (physical) maps these

112

The Cartographic Journal

people appear to have detailed knowledge of local geography
residing in a ‘cognitive atlas’, which is consulted constantly
(Bricker and Gossen, 1989). Such geographical knowledge
can be essential for survival at local and regional scales.

BUT COGNITIVE MAPS ARE NOT ENOUGH

Cognitive mapping may have continued throughout human
evolution, but the visible historical record provides the
only basis for what is normally referred to as ‘cartography’.
Its content has been classi(cid:142)ed into performance cartography
(mainly non-material, deriving directly from information
in our cognitive ‘databases’) and material cartography,
in the form either of (cid:142)xed artefacts (such as rock art)
or ‘mobile comparable objects’, (Woodward and Lewis,
1998, p. 3). Performance cartography can be a spontaneous
reaction to the need of the moment, but the wider functions
of material cartography have changed through time. Some
communities may still operate without material maps but
this cannot apply universally. Groups such as the Paci(cid:142)c
living in a uniquely
instance,
Marshall Islanders
challenging environment, created special maps — the stick
charts — to support community survival (Woodward and
Lewis, 1998). The more complex a spatial problem (and
the greater the cognitive information load it presents) the
more urgent the need for extensions (such as a map) to
the internal cognitive (thinking) space. This process has
been referred to as ‘external cognition’ (Scaife and Rogers,
1996) and, as printed maps, is the essence of cartography
as we have known it for centuries. Spatially-related problems
can increase in variety and complexity as communities
become more advanced and as the quantity of associated
information also challenges mental manipulation alone.
Maps are also vital for the recording of such things as land
ownership, and provide a framework for planning and
development.

for

Material maps4 can be further classi(cid:142)ed as spontaneous
(ephemeral) and permanent. Examples of spontaneous maps
lie on the boundary of the categories of performance and
material cartography and emerge naturally during spatial
thinking and dialogue. One person might draw a sketch
(map) to represent part of her spatial knowledge. Another
participant in the ‘discussion’ might understand only part
of it and this could contribute to the reconstruction, and,
thus, extension of his own knowledge. Mapping and map
use are processes of knowledge analysis and construction
and not
just knowledge transfer or communication
(MacEachren, 1995). The presentational methods normally
adopted in spontaneous mapping are pragmatic, ranging
from hand gestures, to drawings in the dust or sand
(or the modern equivalent, pencil sketches ‘on the back of
an envelope’!). Although there is little early evidence
of this category of mapping, it has a critical place within
our overall spatial intelligence and represents a direct and
personally-externalized part of the spatial thinking process.
Even a map drawn on sand can thus become a crude but
legitimate interactive tool — easily modi(cid:142)ed or deleted
during use by one or more participants. These spatially
discursive procedures could also be summarized as truly
‘using’ cartography to investigate a problem spatially,5

as one might ‘use’ mathematics to analyse a problem
numerically. Indeed the concept of spontaneous mapping
and ‘using’ cartography holistically have much in common,
and when supported by new technologies, may re(cid:143)ect the
instinctive procedures of cognitive mapping.

Externalized personal maps, although frequently essential,
are seldom suf(cid:142)cient and represent only one way of ful(cid:142)ll-
ing the potential of our spatio-cognitive skills to resolve
problems. Another
involves the more permanent map
artefacts, examples of which can be traced back for at least
20 000 years.6 Earlier map themes included the sacred,
cosmological, secular and aesthetic (Harley and Woodward,
1987), but
such (cid:142)gurative cartography was used by
quite small sections of the community. The output of
the last (cid:142)ve centuries has been of much greater value in
the expansion and application of geographical knowledge.
Early examples of partially-customized cartographic tools
were the innovative fourteenth/(cid:142)fteenth-century Portolani
(harbour-(cid:142)nding charts) of the Mediterranean ‘made by
seamen for seamen’ (Tooley, 1961, p. 15). They contained
much of the information required and therefore provided
a vital link between the cognitive knowledge/maps of the
users and the navigational problems they faced. From the
mid-eighteenth century, developments in printing launched
the real era of cartographic expansion, bringing maps of
all types into the public domain, based increasingly on
accurate data collection and with improved image quality.
Although not as precisely customized as the Portolani,
these new navigation charts, topographic and thematic
maps were compiled and designed to be optimal
for
speci(cid:142)c user groups in the scienti(cid:142)c, military and even
leisure (mountaineering) communities.

During the twentieth century most changes in the
cartographic process were technical, broadly consolidating
the trends of previous centuries, and thus maintained the
dichotomy between professional map making and map use.
Improved data collection (by ground, air and, eventually,
satellite survey) and production methods (photographic,
scribing and photo-mechanical) increased the response
rates of map provision to satisfy the increasingly urgent
demands of both military and civilian communities. Such
speed of delivery had previously been constrained by
the nature and long training periods required for older
manual techniques. An early example of the convergence
of mapmaking and use emerged during wartime with
the establishment of special in-house map of(cid:142)ces. Taking
advantage of more user-friendly drawing and production
tools and technology a new class of cartographer helped
interpret spatial
ideas and created specialized maps for
soldiers, scientists and planners. In some cases the carto-
to
graphers were by-passed by investigators anxious
accelerate their research by doing their own data mani-
pulations and spatial analyses. The results were returned to
the cartographers for more formal presentation if necessary.
Although essentially cartographic in character the analytical
processes referred to above would not have been acknowl-
edged in a mid-twentieth-century dictionary de(cid:142)nition of
cartography, which would have focused on the art and
science of ‘map making’. These analytical methods, how-
ever, had been employed regularly by geography researchers
who knew that the map was ‘not an end in itself; carto-
graphic representation of facts is the graphic means which

Section 1: The Past and Future of Cartography

113

the geographer employs in studying distributions and their
possible causal relationships’ (Rudmose Brown, 1922, quoted
by Board, 1984).

PAPER MAPS

Paper maps have epitomized cartography for almost (cid:142)ve
hundred years, and modern examples are the culmination
of many theoretical, technical and artistic advances in
the subject. Despite their qualities these maps had to
be standardized in order to target speci(cid:142)c user groups.
But the spatial
information required by individuals for
speci(cid:142)c tasks can be very different from what is offered by
any single product (even when considered conventionally
‘optimal’ for intended purpose). Maps had always suffered
from frustrating limitations (Longley et al., 2001, p. 251).
Apart, occasionally, from poor design and legibility, criticisms
included inappropriate scales, over- or under-generalization,
inconvenient sheet edges and being out-of-date. And of
course what-you-saw-was-what-you-inevitably-got. There
was nothing beyond the printed image — one reason
why naõ¨ve users could lose out! Experienced percipients7
knowing the map and, occasionally, also the depicted land-
scape, can contribute as much to the map-use ‘dialogue’ as
does the map itself — an inductive procedure referred to
as ‘map interpretation’. It must be emphasized, however,
that no one has been more conscious of the limitations of
traditional paper maps than the professional cartographer.

A PERIOD OF DIVERGENCE AND PARALLEL
DEVELOPMENT

Computing began to impact on cartography from the mid-
twentieth century (Tomlinson, 1988). Two separate and
contrasting trends were noted: a) attempts by some spatial
scientists to develop computer cartographics to support
data exploration and analysis. This eventually led to the
emergence of GISystems; and b) more limited use of
computer-assisted methods to convert analogue maps into
digital form and speed up the production process. The
latter was initially quite simple and merely continued the
‘map-drawing’ tradition. Not until the application of data-
base management systems was some ‘intelligence’ introduced
into the process. The developers of GISystems, less con-
strained by convention, saw greater possibilities in digital
and electronic methods8 and their work would make
major contributions towards the new phase of Cartographic
evolution. GISystems were not devised for quality mapping
as such, but the virtual ‘point-line-area’ structures contained
within them, linked to attribute databases and sources of
symbolism (the digital landscape and cartographic models
of Kraak and Ormeling, 2002) were essentially carto-
graphic and did seem to offer the ideal formula for an ‘all-
purpose mapping machine’. Even the manipulation and
spatial analysis functions in GISystems have been referred
to as the ‘digital equivalents of analogue procedures that
cartographers (and others MW) have used for 50 years’
(Robinson et al., 1995, p. 307). Today GISystems support
a wide variety of spatial tasks, but map-making remains
dominant and this concept is still promoted by ESRI. One
recent publication states that ‘a GIS is a kind of supermap’

(Davis, 1999, p. 2), and a current ESRI project is pro-
moting ‘GIS for Cartography’. GISystems have certainly
not replaced cartography but, through diffusion, have pro-
vided outstandingly successful technologies to help the
discipline advance towards greater breadth of maturity and
effectiveness.

THE REVOLUTION IN CARTOGRAPHY

Just as enthusiasts had led GISystem developments from
the 1960s, so have equally-motivated groups from the
cartographic community begun to exploit the possibilities
of new systems and dynamic interactivity. This has grown
rapidly over the past (cid:142)fteen years with a new generation of
electronic atlases and maps, especially on the Internet. An
important development is what is referred to as multimedia
cartography. According to Cartwright, multimedia, global
communication systems and global publishing offer the
opportunity to produce dynamic and interactive visualizations
which build on the exciting virtual environments of the
computer games business (Cartwright, 2000). No doubt
recent innovations such as SMIL (Synchronized Multimedia
Integration Language) (URL 1) will contribute greatly to
this form.

Many of the unsatisfactory maps of the printing era
resulted from earlier and more restrictive methods of data-
gathering and reprographics. These maps generally offered
little to support visual thinking and cognitive cartography.
When dealing with the speci(cid:142)c needs of a single user,
neither the maker of the paper map nor even the map
searcher herself, might know what is wanted until it is seen
(MacEachren, 1995)! The ideal extension of the cognitive
mapping facility is thus to provide an open two-way live
link between the mind and the data with attendant inter-
facing tools. This would allow full (cid:143)exibility for exploratory
search through many sources and scenarios,
leading to
discovery. Although such investigations are possible using
static maps alone, maximum potential can only be effected
by the simultaneous implementation of dynamic, interactive
and multimedia facilities, implicit in the model of what
is called human-map interaction space (Figure 1). These
new cognition-friendly solutions can then be employed in
a range of spatial enquiries, from the search for an ideal
holiday place, to the identi(cid:142)cation of areas most prone to
earthquakes along an active fault line.

The ICA Commission on Visualization and Virtual
Environments has pioneered this research direction through
collaborative work with the Association of Computing
Machinery, Special Interest Group on Graphics (ACM
SIGGRAPH) and others (URL 2). Building on Scienti(cid:142)c
Visualization and Multimedia,
it has focused on data
representations in environmental science and, in particular,
dynamic cartographic visualization for exploration and
analysis to gain understanding and insight into data (URL 3).

PARADIGM SHIFT OR A RETURN TO BASICS?

With the New Cartographic facilities of GISystem-based
interactive Web maps, a different philosophy is emerging.
Whereas previously — when map ‘making’ and ‘using’
were largely separate — the mapper as percipient merely

114

The Cartographic Journal

individual users with their own speci(cid:142)c needs. But with
new technology we have now extended the power and
scope of what, after all, is at the core of the discipline —
the instinctive skills of cognitive mapping and the related
abilities of feature identi(cid:142)cation and comparison during
visual data exploration and analysis. The accessibility of
these popular new cartographic working environments
may also refute the charge that the number of carto-
graphers is decreasing. Some professionals, such as ocean
navigators, already interact with electronic charts (e.g.
ECDIS10). Specialized ‘super cartographers’ will continue
to practice,11 as do specialist architects today. But under
the new de(cid:142)nition of our subject, the numbers of both
cartographers and maps are increasing by orders of
magnitude.

CONCLUSION

The importance of Geographic Information Science, the
new research (cid:142)eld behind the technology and application
of Geographic Information Systems, is fully acknowledged,
especially as it incorporates sub-(cid:142)elds critical to New
Cartography. But sections of the GIScience community
seem unaware of the full signi(cid:142)cance of cartography’s
ancient and instinctive nature, or of the radical changes,
from its paper-based past, which have taken place in recent
decades.12 Just as cartography bene(cid:142)ted from, and con-
tinues to absorb developments in, GISystems and the
Internet, GISystems have also bene(cid:142)ted greatly from
fundamentally cartographic concepts. However, many which
have prevailed until recently, derive from the 1960s and
70s. Important cartographic advances of the past three
decades have been largely ignored. Spatial representation is
the unifying element of GIScience (URL 4) and carto-
graphy, as now de(cid:142)ned, could be regarded as integral to
that science.

Although restricted physically to the production of static,
symbolic and optimal13 maps to support their investi-
gations, innovative users of cartography in the past imagined
much more than they could ever create. Their cognitive
landscapes or
realms offered animated visualizations of
data-sets, realistic or simpli(cid:142)ed according to the project in
hand, but these could not be created externally at that
time. The dynamic, detailed, task-centred and interactive
facilities of today need not, in the author’s view, represent
some radically ‘new’ subject. This is just ‘cartography’
enhanced (yet again) by new technologies and thinking.
More importantly it represents a cartographic revolution —
the dynamic and interactive convergence of our instinctive
cognitive powers with the ‘outside world’ of geospatial
data. Current international geovisualization studies include
the examination of how visualization can contribute to all
aspects of the geoscienti(cid:142)c process.14 This paper, based on
a review of the instinctive nature of mapping and the
evolution of cartography (especially during the last decade),
could be associated with these. The model presented, of
‘using cartography’ holistically, has always been applied
by humans in spatial problem-solving. Today, however,
technology has broadened its scope and effectiveness.

While sharing origins and interests, those within carto-
graphy and the other GISciences should keep to their

Figure 1. The map use cube, showing four forms of visualization,
for exploration, analysis, synthesis and presentation (A. M. MacEachren)

studied the map with a view to expanding her knowledge.
Now she can truly interact with the map (and with its
data sources) and become, in the process, a map-maker
also. No longer restricted by (cid:142)xed content and symbols or
conventional visualization techniques, she can now create
a range of maps or map-related images (such as cross-
sections and terrain models) from underlying databases
as part of a spatial investigation. Cartography in its new
more holistic form is a unique and instinctive multi-
dimensional facility which we can use to explore, analyse
and communicate geospatial information.

We have now come full circle, from the experience of
our Upper Paleolithic ancestors trying, through spontaneous
map sketches,
to represent and share their cognitive
maps, to their modern counterparts doing the same, but
interactively on the Web. Now, however, the extended
dimension of
‘external cognition’ goes far beyond the
subjective sketches of the prehistoric (or modern) mapper,
or even the super(cid:142)cial map images on paper or screen. The
whole networked knowledge-base of the World-wide Web
is available,
live-linked through eye-and-hand-on-mouse
to the interface map.9 The map is more than a space for
image manipulation and design, it can be a graphic window
onto in(cid:142)nite possibilities. This new visual-thinking environ-
ment takes maximum advantage of our instinctive cognitive
mapping powers which can be used, even more effectively,
in a kind of geovisual dialogue with the cartographic/
geographic visualization system.

While this new futuristic vision of ‘use-it-yourself carto-
graphy’ might be characterized as a paradigm-shift from
the restricted spatial investigations previously dominated by
the maker/user dichotomy, it could equally be described
the basics of our
as a return to ‘basics’. To support
individual cognitive mapping skills we (cid:142)rst created archives
of maps directed at broad user categories rather than at

Section 1: The Past and Future of Cartography

115

unique approaches and programmes of research while still
maintaining open lines of communication between them.
Increased opportunities to discover innovative solutions
to the problems of our planet should be the result. This
is the long-term hope of the International Cartographic
Association (URL 5) as it embarks on a new era rede(cid:142)ned as
‘The International Society for Cartography and Geographic
Information Science’.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I must thank many colleagues for their advice and con-
tributions to these thoughts, but especially to Chris Board,
who helped sharpen my fuzzy concepts, and to Alan
MacEachren for permission to use the only (cid:142)gure in the
paper, and for the continuing inspiration of his pioneer-
ing and imaginative contributions to the ICA and to the
advancement of the (cid:142)eld of Cartography and Geographic
Visualization. Thanks must also go to the editor of this
section, for his remarkable patience and tolerance.

REFERENCES

21(1), 85–97.

Board, C. (1981). ‘Higher order map-using tasks’, Cartographica,

Bricker, V., and Goosen, G. (eds) (1989). Ethnographic Encounters
in Southern Mesoamerica: Essays in Honour of Evon Zartman
Vogt, Jr., Studies on Culture and Society, 3. Institute for
Mesoamerican Studies, State University of New York at Albany.
Brodlie, K. W., et al. (1991). Scienti(cid:142) c Visualization: techniques

and applications, Springer Verlag, London.

Cartwright, W. (2000).

‘Future Cartographies: where to now?’
Presentation made at the Conference of the British Cartographic
Society, Oxford, 2000.

Davis, D. E. (1999). GIS for Everyone, ESRI Press, Redlands.
Downs, R. M., and Stea, D. (1977). Maps in Minds: Re(cid:143) ections on

Cognitive Mapping, Harper & Row, London.

Harley,

J. B., and Woodward, D.

(1987). The History of

Cartography, vol. 1, The University of Chicago Press, London.
Kraak, M.-J., and Ormeling (2003). Cartography: Visualisation of

Geospatial Data, Pearson Education, Harlow.

Longley, P. A., Goodchild, M. F., Maguire, D. J., and Rhind, D. W.
(2001). Geographic Information, Systems and Science, John
Wiley, Chichester.

MacEachren, A. M. (1995). How Maps Work: Representation,

Visualisation and Design, The Guilford Press, London.

Moellering, H. (1980). ‘Strategies of real time cartography’, The

Cartographic Journal, 17(1), 12–15.

Rinner, C. (2001).

‘Argumentation maps: GIS-based discussion
support for online planning’, Environment and Planning — B:
Planning Design, 28, 847–63.

Robinson, A. H., and Petchenik, B. B. (1976). The Nature of Maps:
Essays toward Understanding Maps and Mapping, University
of Chicago Press, London.

Robinson, A. H., Morrison, J. L., Muekrcke, Kimerling, A. J. (1995).

Elements of Cartography, 6th edn, John Wiley, London.

Rudmose Brown, R. N., Howarth, O. J. R., and McFarlane, J.
(1922). The scope of school geography, Clarendon Press,
Oxford.

Scaife, M., and Rogers, Y. (1996). ‘External Cognition: how do
graphical representations work?’ International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 45, 185–213.

Tolman, E. C.

(1948).
Psychological Review, 33, 189–208.

‘Cognitive Maps

in Rats and Men’,

Tomlinson, R. F. (1988). ‘The impact of the transition from analog
to digital cartographic representation’, American Cartographer,
15(3), 249–63.

Tooley, R. V. (1961). Maps and Map-Makers, Batsford, London.
Woodward, D., and Lewis, G. M. (eds) (1998). The History of
Cartography, vol. 2, book 3, The University of Chicago Press,
London.

Wynn, T. (1989). The Evolution of Spatial Competence, Illinois
Studies in Anthropology, No. 17. University of Illinois Press,
Urbana.

URL 1: http://www.streamingmediaworld.com/smil/smilhome.html
URL 2: http://ica.soi.city.ac.uk
URL 3: http://www.geovista.psu.edu/sites/icavis/
URL 4: http://ncgia.ucsb.edu/giscc/units/u020/u020.html
URL 5: http://www.icaci.org

ENDNOTES

1 The ability to construct, internally, a knowledge framework of
the spatial environment . . . a more fundamental meaning than
that of Robinson and Petchenik (1976): ‘one who makes real
maps.’

2 As one might

‘use mathematics’

rather than just

individual

3

mathematical formulae.
‘Scienti(cid:142)c visualisation is concerned with exploring data and
information in such a way as to gain understanding and insight
into data’ (Brodlie, et al., 1991).

4 Also referred to as ‘real’ maps by Moellering (1980).
5 This might also be compared with collaborative tools referred to

as ‘argumentation maps’ (Rinner, 2001).

6 The earliest known material map, c. 26 000 years old, engraved in
a tusk or horn, was discovered in the Pavlov Hills of S. Moravia,
Czech Republic.

7 A map percipient is ‘one who obtains information about the
milieu by looking at a map’ (Robinson and Petchenik, 1976),
p. 20.
e.g. Jack Dangermond and the company, Environmental Systems
Research Institute (ESRI).

8

9 The way in which cartography/mapping is providing an approach
for all science to access knowledge was discussed at the Arthur
M. Sackler Colloquium on ‘Mapping Knowledge Domains’
(http://vw.indiana.edu/sackler03/), with contributions by members
of the ICA Commission on Visual and Virtual Environments.
10 Electronic Chart Display and Information System (http://

www.osl.com/Support/OSL_Support_ECDIS.htm).

11 Typically members of organizations

such as

the Society of

Cartographers (SoC).

12 The chapter on visualization in one high pro(cid:142)le GIS textbook
makes no speci(cid:142)c reference to the important research publications,
dating back over ten years, from the International Cartographic
Association (ICA) Commission on Visualization and Virtual
Environments.

13 Normally compiled and designed for a user category, rather than

for a speci(cid:142)c user and task.

14 The paper ‘Building an open, (cid:143)exible visualization environment
to support GIScience activities’, by Mark Gahegan, GeoVISTA
Center, Department of Geography, Penn State University, USA,
will appear as a chapter in the forthcoming book (from the ICA
Commission on Visualization and Virtual Environments) entitled
‘Exploring Geovisualization’.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

