 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

Transactions in GIS

, 2003, 7(3): 309—324

731000
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
June 2003
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2003
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Oxford, UK

Review Article

Peter F Fisher
Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

Peter F Fisher
Department of Geography 
University of Leicester

Multimedia Reporting of the Results of 
Natural Resource Surveys

Abstract
For  most  of  the  twentieth  century  Natural  Resource  Surveys  were  executed  for
particular  geographical  regions  and  for  each  region  a  paper  map  was  produced
together with a written report. Those conducting the survey and preparing the report
have used that report to convey much information to the user, which would otherwise
be lost. To the authors the report is the real product, and the map a view onto it. To
most users, however, it has always been the map that was important because many
lack  the  knowledge  to  comprehend  the  report  in  any  detail:  the  report,  therefore,
being an adjunct to the map. Increasing production costs combined with the advances
in  computer  systems  and  especially  the  widespread  use  of  this  information  within
GIS have resulted in a shift from paper to digital as the publication medium for the
map and the report (when it is produced at all). Currently, many different models
of presentation of natural resource survey results are apparent, ranging from those
which only contain the map (spatial information) to those combining the report and
the  map  on  CD-ROM  to  those  presenting  a  more  integrated  view  of  the  map  and
the equivalent of the report. None has yet reached the full spatial multimedia solution
which  is  now  possible  with  computer  technology.  Such  an  approach  will  make  it
possible  to  interrogate  the  map  for  the  report  information,  and  vice  versa,  and  to
access and visualize tabular information. The current diversity of approaches means
the potential loss of the valuable knowledge of the surveyors and report-writers other
than as it is expressed in the map, but the integration of the report with the map in
a multimedia presentation may save the report, and make that information available
to more people than ever before.

Address  for  correspondence:
Leicester LE1 7RH, United Kingdom. Email: pete.(cid:222)sher@le.ac.uk

  Peter  Fisher,  Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Leicester,

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003. 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

310

P F Fisher

1 Introduction

Natural resource surveys as part of national inventory programmes have been common
in the developed world, with most nations having some form of geological survey docu-
menting  the  locations  of  potential  geological  resources,  and  soil  survey  assessing  the
agricultural  potential.  Vegetation  Surveys  and  Land  Use  Surveys  have  also  been  con-
ducted giving snapshots of changing phenomena, but until the advent of satellite remote
sensing  these  have  not  been  widespread  or  frequently  updated,  possibly  due  to  their
temporal  instability.  Now,  however,  mapping  of  vegetation  or  Land  Cover,  but  not
Land Use, at the national scale and with incremental updates is also becoming common.
Paper  publication  has  been  the  principal  means  of  publishing  this  information.
Digital  publication,  on  the  other  hand,  has  the  dual  advantages  of  reduced  cost  and
increased speed of publication. Furthermore, the increasing bandwidth of internet-based
communication and the large data volumes of CD and DVD ROM media mean that both
methods  of  electronic  publication  are  becoming  a  compelling  alternative  to  traditional
printing. At the same time as the change in publication medium, the reports themselves
are changing in style and content. There are threats and advantages to be realised in this
change of medium, and this article examines some of the possible ways ahead.

The article (cid:222)rst examines the traditional survey report as practiced for most of the last
century, and as it frequently continues to be practiced. It then looks at how the informa-
tion is being presented in digital representations of the survey information, and discusses
the  possible  risks  and  advantages  in  the  change  to  digital  publishing.  The  paper  ends
with a warning that users are at risk of losing what is a valuable part of the reporting
of the survey results (possibly the most valuable), namely the textual report which is the
encapsulation of the surveyors experience beyond what they perceive as mappable.

2 Reporting

Natural  Resource  Reports  come  in  many  different  varieties.  The  author  has  examined
reports  in  a  number  of  organisations  in  Britain,  the  United  States,  Australia  and  New
Zealand  for  this  paper,  as  well  as  being  familiar  with  ones  from  a  number  of  other
countries.  The  common  model  is  for  publication  of  a  text  report  in  association  with  a
map which can be at a variety of scales. In Britain, for example, the British Geological
Survey published Memoirs with accompanying maps at scales of 1:63,630 (1 inch to
1 mile; e.g. Greig et al. 1968) and more recently 1:50,000 (e.g. Horton 1989). They also
publish  Regional  Geologies  (e.g.  Chatwin  1960),  Mineral  Assessments  (Clarke  et  al.
1980) and other reports. The Soil Survey of England and Wales (as was) published Soil
Survey  Memoirs  (named  after  the  extant  series  of  the  British  Geological  Sruvey)  to  go
with  the  1:63,630  maps  (e.g.  Thomasson  1971),  Soil  Survey  Records  to  accompany
1:25,000 maps (e.g. Johnson 1971) and Soil Survey Bulletins to accompany 1:250,000
maps  (e.g.  Hodge  et  al.  1984;  Figure  1).  The  Soil  Conservation  Service  of  the  U.S.
Department  of  Agriculture  prepares  Soil  Survey  Reports  with  accompanying  maps  at
1:15,840 (4 inches to the mile; e.g. Olsson 1981) although more general scales are used
in less productive areas (e.g. 1:24,000; Young 1981), and historically other scales have
been used (e.g. 1:31,680 or 2 inches to the mile; Secor et al. 1955). In New Zealand
too Soil Survey Reports have been at a variety of scales including 1:31,680 (1 inch to
2 miles; Puller 1985), and 1:50,000 (Mew 1980), but focussing on 1:50,000 and 1:25,000

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

311

Figure 1 Portions  of  maps  (top  row)  and  covers  of  traditional  reports  (bottom  row)  for  a
variety  of  UK  soil  surveys:  from  left  to  right  the  Soil  Bulletin  and  1:250,000  map  (Hodge
et al. 1984), the Soil Memoir and 1:63,360 map (Thomasson 1971), and the Soil Record and
the 1:25,000 map (Johnson 1971)

more recently (McIntosch 1995). Bulletins of the New Zealand Geological Survey have
also  been  at  a  variety  of  scales,  depending  more  on  the  subject  matter.  Thus  Speden
(1975) included maps at both 1:15,840 and 1:31,680, while Johnston (1980) published
maps  at  1:63,360,  and  Isaac  and  Lindqvist  (1990)  produced  more  regional  maps  at
1:100,000.  Recently  the  New  Zealand  survey  programme  has  shifted  to  focus  on  pro-
duction of a national map at 1:250,000 (Rattenbury et al. 1998).

3 The Report

3.1 Report Structure

There is a similar general structure to most reports. Indeed, within any one inventory organ-
isation there is usually a template for report writing which surveyors/authors are required
to follow, although over time that template may change and evolve. The basic structure,
which can be discerned in many inventory reports, has the following components:

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

312

P F Fisher

Introduction
The introduction of the report sets the scene. It usually gives a broad description of the
area, with general information, which may be of little immediate importance to the main
topic of the report. This may include a description of the settlement pattern, or it may
discuss some of the important archaeological sites, and it may review pre-existing surveys:
thus a soil report may comment on the geology and the land use in at least general terms.
These may have a bearing on the phenomenon being reported, but the section is really
to give the reader a feeling for the area, as a person, independent of that phenomenon.
It gives to the reader a sense of presence in the landscape and of kinship with the surveyor.

Methods
A review of the methods used is frequently, but not always included. This may contain
details of the classi(cid:222)cation scheme to be used in developing the mapping units, laborat-
ory  methods  used,  (cid:222)eld  description  methods  and/or  mapping  methods.  The  presence
and  absence  of  the  methods  section  in  the  report  is  partly  dependent  on  the  generality
of the methods in the discipline and an indication of the audience for the report. Thus
(cid:222)eld description methods are frequently included in UK soil reports, and details of the
classi(cid:222)cation scheme in US soil reports because both are unusual and may contain terms
unfamiliar  to  the  lay  reader,  especially  farmers  who  are  a  large  part  of  the  intended
audience for soil reports. 

Map Unit Descriptions
This  section  provides  extensive  discussion  of  the  characteristics  of  each  and  every  unit
represented on the map, whether that is the lithostratigraphic map unit of the geological
map or the soil map unit, or the vegetation community of the botanic map. It gives a type
location or locations and description or descriptions of the taxonomic units to be found within
the map. A general description of the environmental associations of the map unit is also
included; thus in a soil report, the variety of vegetation, geology, and terrain on which the
map unit occurs may be described (Johnson 1971, Olsson 1981, Ritchie et al. 1978). The
inclusion of impurities in the map units may be recorded; in describing soil map units,
soil  types  other  than  the  named  soils  that  do  occur  within  the  map  unit  may  be  noted
(Ritchie  et  al.  1978).  Descriptions  may  be  linked  to  the  results  of  laboratory  analyses,
which are usually tabulated in the text or more usually in the appendices. These sections may
be accompanied by photographs of the rock exposures, soil pro(cid:222)les, or vegetation covers,
which typify some or all units, and of the landscapes associated with particular units.

Map Unit Interpretations
Mostly the authors of the report are only partly interested in communicating raw data
(the map units), rather they are more interested in presenting interpretations for a gen-
eral readership. Thus a soil report is not really concerned with communicating informa-
tion about the soils, but rather how the soils may be used for a variety of uses including
construction, agriculture, silviculture, and recreation. Similarly, the authors of a geolo-
gical report are interested in describing the exploitable geological resources present in an
area  and  the  lithostratigraphy  which  commonly  forms  the  organising  principle  for  the
report  is  only  a  convenient  framework.  Soil  survey  organisations  developed  the  Land
Use Capability Classi(cid:222)cation speci(cid:222)cally to provide a general interpretation for the soil
suitability  for  mechanised  agriculture  (Bibby  and  Mackney  1969).  Therefore  the  inter-
pretation  of  map  units  is  perhaps  the  most  important  part  of  the  report,  certainly  for

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

313

the  lay-user  of  the  report,  and  so  commonly  the  interpretations  are  accompanied  by
tables listing the map units and their interpretation.

Appendices
A number of different items may be listed in appendices, but most typically they include
detailed (cid:222)eld or laboratory descriptions of map units or components of map units. They
can  also  contain  specialist  reports  on  unusual  or  surprising  (cid:222)ndings  of  the  survey,  or
special laboratory analyses.

Map
The (cid:222)nal, but to some the most important component of the report is the map. The map
portrays the spatial extent of the map units described in the body of the report. The map
is included in a number of ways. Sometimes it is distributed in its own right; sometimes
it  is  bound  in  with  the  textual  report.  A  general  topographic  map  (UK  mappings;
Thomasson 1971, Johnson 1971), an aerial orthophotograph (US soil surveys; Olsson 1981,
Ritchie et al. 1978), or even a mosaic of satellite scenes may be used as background to
the natural resource map. Organisations tend to have a standard presentation method,
but  may  also  experiment  with  alternatives  (e.g.  use  of  orthophotography  in  the  UK;
Seale  1975).  The  map  also  tends  to  be  produced  at  a  standard  scale  within  the  organ-
isation, although the organisation may map at a number of different scales each will be
its own standard, and again the organisation may experiment with alternatives.

3.2 Report Concepts

Within  the  report  there  are  many  different  types  of  information,  but  most  (cid:222)t  into  one
or another of the following interacting classes (Figure 2):

Text
Most of the report is text. The text conveys the narrative of the results of the survey, of
the method or methods used, and of the background information. It is a complex piece
of writing, partly to a formula (map unit descriptions are generally of the same pattern),
and  partly  free  style  (the  introduction  may  start  with  any  observation  depending  on
what  is  important  in  the  area  concerned).  The  style,  however,  is  generally  constrained
and rarely (cid:223)orid. To many it would be viewed as a factual account of the nature of the
phenomenon concerned in an area, to others it is a document rich in the observation of
the natural resources of the region, conveying the experience of the surveyors over the
period (usually years) they took executing the survey.

Pictures
Pictures  are  considered  here  as  any  material,  which  uses  visual  patterns,  other  than
letters, to convey information, and are an integral component of the report. Photographs
are an obvious form of picture, including both landscape photography and photographs
of the resource itself, such as soil pro(cid:222)les, geological exposures or vegetation quadrats.
Graphs of statistical information and more interpretative graphics are also included. Sketch
diagrams are considered to be pictures, and may include local maps and cross sections.
The main map is also a picture and so included in this category of information; although
it  is  developed  to  different  conventions.  The  spatial  location  is  shown  graphically  to
illustrate the position of resources of different character.

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

314

P F Fisher

Figure 2 The report of a Natural Resource Survey acts as a (cid:222)lter between the environment
and the user. It contains three interrelated types of information: pictures, text and tables

Tables
Finally, the report includes tables. These report statistical, descriptive and interpretative
information about map units or speci(cid:222)c locations. Tables are particularly used to illus-
trate type locations of map units, but can also show within map unit variations.

The three different types of information all cross-reference so that, for example, the
legend  of  the  map  is  the  key  for  cross  referencing  to  tables  and  text  about  map  units.
The total assemblage of material presented in the report in the different forms are akin
to the (cid:210)representational barrage(cid:211) Krygier (1997) identi(cid:222)ed in the reports of nineteenth
century  expeditions  of  discovery  in  what  is  now  the  United  States  (the  same  could  be
said  of  expedition  reports  everywhere).  He  observed  that  multiple  stimuli  of  pictures
(including maps), text, and tables were deployed as a complex combination of impres-
sion  and  scienti(cid:222)c  fact  as  is  typical  of  many  of  the  (cid:222)rst  Europeans  to  visit  parts  of  the
world throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Furthermore, the barrage of
natural  resource  reports  is  assembled  for  exactly  the  same  reason,  namely  to  convince
the reader that the authors are knowledgeable of the area, and their views are reliable,
and that attention should be given to the opinions expressed.

4 Going Digital

The  report  is  probably  the  principal  product  for  the  surveyor.  It  encapsulates  all  the
surveyor has learnt about, and can generalise from, the natural resource in the area of

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

315

Figure 3 The  view  of  various  individuals  in  the  business  of  producing  and  using  natural
resource reports and maps (spatial data)

concern. Thus the report may be seen as a window into the information shown on the
map specifying, justifying and explaining it (Surveyor(cid:213)s View, Figure 3).

Frequently, the report is distributed in a form which is integral to the map informa-
tion.  Indeed,  for  the  US  Soil  Conservation  Service  County  Soil  Surveys,  the  map  is
usually bound in with the report, as a large number of foldout pages following the text
report. In some other countries the map is sold separately, dissociated from the report.
To  many  users  of  the  result  of  the  survey,  such  as  planners,  it  is  the  map  which  is
important.  They  do  not  have  the  specialist  knowledge  to  comprehend  much  that  is
included in the more technical sections, and the only information that is of interest
is  the  interpretation  of  the  suitability  of  map  units  for  particular  uses.  The  report  has
therefore  been  a  half-closed  book,  even  when  they  know  it  exists.  Thus  the  map  may
act as a window onto the report; the report being no more than an adjunct to the map
(Map User(cid:213)s View, Figure 3).

The cost of publishing and compiling full paper-based reports is becoming prohibit-
ive, especially in situations of stringency in government-(cid:222)nanced activities. Furthermore,
the  widespread  use  of  Geographical  Information  Systems  (GIS)  within  those  agencies
producing the surveys and those using the results has placed an emphasis on the map
as a product, which was not there before.

The  net  result  of  these  pressures  is  that  a  paradoxical  position  has  arisen  where
more people than ever access and use the results of natural resource surveys (or at least
the spatial data which results from such surveys — the map) but fewer than ever are even
aware of the existence of the survey report (GIS User(cid:213)s View, Figure 3). Indeed, it may
now be true that for a majority of users the report may as well never have been written,
beyond  the  tabulation  of  interpretations  of  which  they  may  be  aware.  In  computer
database terminology the report has become metadata to the spatial data (Guptill 1999)
rather than the reverse that was perhaps originally intended (Surveyor(cid:213)s view, Figure 3).
The  Surveyor  must  therefore  rethink  the  role  of  the  report.  As  metadata  it  is  without
doubt a valuable adjunct to the mapped data. However, this type of metadata (extensive
text  pictures  and  interpretative  tables)  is  not  envisaged  in  any  of  the  standards  for
reporting of spatial metadata (Guptill 1999).

The  move  from  analogue  reporting  of  natural  resource  surveys  to  digital  is  being
followed  in  many  ways  in  different  natural  resource  survey  organisations  around  the
world.  Necessarily  what  follows  is  selective,  but  it  is  remarkable  that  the  move  to  the
digital has resulted in the loss of a uniform template in the reporting of survey results.
As  noted  above,  the  paper  report  contains  a  broadly  similar  structure  and  content  for

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

316

P F Fisher

all  examples,  and  for  all  countries  of  which  the  author  is  aware,  but  now,  in  a  digital
context,  there  are  numerous  approaches  even  within  one  organisation.  There  are  a
number  of  reasons  for  this  variation  which  could  all  be  described  under  the  banner  of
institutional context:

1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

the  differing  attitudes  to  the  copyright  status  of  digital  data  in  the  different  coun-
tries, between, and even within, an organisation;
the sophistication and willingness in terms of GIS and computing in general of the
organisation preparing and distributing the data; 
the struggle to (cid:222)nd the (cid:210)correct(cid:211) approach with the new, digital medium;
the lack of a recognised template, metaphor or standard for the process; and
the mission of the organisation, and the target audience for the information.

The map data and the alternative interpretations of the map units are at their most
useful when both can be used together within a GIS. This involves moving away from
the  paper  map  to  a  digital  representation  of  the  map,  in  the  (cid:222)rst  place  through  the
process of digitising, but sometimes a paper map is never created (as in the case of recent
exercises in National and Supra-National Land Cover Mapping; USGS 2000a, d).

Owing to the structure of digitally encoded information within a GIS, the map unit
is  paramount,  either  as  a  single  entity  or  as  a  class.  Thus  the  soil  mapping  unit,  the
lithostratigraphic unit and the land cover type are the foci of the digital soil, geological
and land cover databases, respectively.

Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that,  although  reporting  of  natural  resource  surveys  as
usable spatio-digital data, is now common, the traditional report is not dead. Organisa-
tions, which are at the forefront of developing new ways to present survey results, are
sometimes still using the traditional medium of paper (Ward 1999).

5 Steps Towards Digital Reporting

5.1 Land Cover Map of Great Britain 1990, 2000

The Land Cover Map of Great Britain (one of the products of the Countryside Survey
2000)  has  only  ever  been  available  in  digital  form  (CEH  2000).  It  was  prepared  from
satellite imagery for release in both 1990 and 2000, based on a variety of multi-temporal
imagery, using methods which have changed in detail between the two surveys.

The map has never been printed for publication. The agency preparing the map (the
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, now the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology — CEH) has
produced neither a general nor a detailed paper map of the Land Cover of Britain. On
the  other  hand,  the  databases  are  both  based  on  a  25 m  grid  cell,  and  a  minimum
mapping unit of two grid cells, so they are both suitable for publication and printing
as  a  relatively  detailed  set  of  maps.  However,  such  printing  was  never  part  of  the
intention.  The  databases  have  been  developed  under  contract  to  government  agencies
for use in policy formulation and analysis. For that purpose the digital version is all that
is required.

Reports relating to the work are dominantly internal documents relating the methods
of processing employed and journal articles (Fuller et al. 1994). In the 2000 database a
wealth of metadata is being held on every map unit, tracking the method of deciding the
land cover of that unit. This metadata will mean that users may be able to re-evaluate

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

317

the designation of the unit, and generate alternative versions of the database more suited
to their own purposes.

In  short,  in  this  example  of  natural  resource  survey  no  attempt  has  been  made  to
generate a detailed regional textual report of the results, in the tradition of the geological
survey report, for example. The clients were only interested in the database, not in the
wealth of less tangible knowledge, which has been accrued in the process of collecting
that database and would be suitable for a textual report. The users are therefore missing
information which might include how classes are interpreted from the original imagery,
how this may vary with region, and what reliability may be placed on different classes.

5.2 US National Land Cover Map

Recently,  in  October  2000,  the  USGS  Biological  Resources  Division  released  its
National Land Cover Map (USGS 2000a). These data are arranged by state and freely
available either on CD ROM or by ftp delivery direct from the Web, in ready to use
GIS  formats  (USGS  2000b).  Each  state-GIS  (cid:222)le  is  accompanied  by  a  (cid:210)ReadMe(cid:211)  (cid:222)le
(common in computer databases). The latter (cid:222)le explains how the dataset was derived, the
satellite  images  used,  the  map  units  are  listed,  and  the  accuracy  assessment  discussed
(USGS 2000c). Map unit de(cid:222)nitions, however, are standard from state to state and do
not  even  relate  how  similar  to  the  conceptual  standard  they  are  in  a  particular  state.
Indeed, many statements are directly general to the national coverage, not the local. The
National Land Cover Map accompanies an earlier Global Land Cover Map, which was
(cid:222)nalised in 1999, and is also available on line, with a similar brief report.

With  the  remote  sensing  of  the  data  associated  with  these  GIS-map  products  it  is
perhaps not surprising, although regrettable, that the data are not well documented. It
suggests  a  pressure  and  concern  to  deliver  the  spatial  information  on  the  part  of  the
agency rather than to thoroughly document it, but more worryingly it may show a lack
of local familiarity (remoteness) among the operators. On the other hand, the accuracy
assessment of at least the National Map did involve (cid:222)eldwork (Zhu et al. 2000), and so
those  preparing  the  data  must  have  been  engaged  to  a  degree  with  the  (cid:222)eld,  perhaps
their voice could have been given an outlet in more than just the tables of the accuracy
assessments. This lack of local and detailed information is very different from the wealth
of information that historically accompanied national maps of vegetation, such as that
of New Zealand (Newsome 1987), for example.

5.3 Soil Explorer (USDA)

The Soil Explorer is a product from the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS Staff 1999), which is currently available for a limited number of counties (NRCS
2000), but the number is rising. For each county the soil map is made available in digital
form (the SSURGO data; NRSC 1995) with orthphotograph backdrop, and interpreta-
tions for multiple land uses. A small amount of ground-based photography is included
showing soil pro(cid:222)les and landscapes identi(cid:222)ed generally by map unit, although not geo-
located (Figure 4).

There  is  no  attempt  in  the  Soil  Explorer  to  capture  or  distribute  the  metadata
contained  in  the  soil  report.  Indeed,  in  a  number  of  places  the  statement  is  made  that
the Soil Explorer does not replace the paper Soil Report (although no effort is made to
inform the user how to acquire the report).

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 

318

P F Fisher

Figure 4 A view of the Soil Explorer CD-ROM for Madison County, New York. The panels
to  the  left  give  the  necessary  navigation  tools,  enabling  the  user  to  pick  a  map  theme,
reference  information  or  legend  and  photographs,  description  or  locator  of  the  detail  area
shown to the right. In separate windows over the map line work of the soil map units, it is
possible to see interrogation boxes for a particular soil unit at which the cursor is pointing,
block diagram of the soil landscape and a photograph of the terrain

In  parallel  the  Natural  Resource  Conservation  Service  is  starting  to  distribute  the
soil reports in digital form. A sample of county reports are available for delivery via the
internet using ftp and Portable Document Format (pdf) (cid:222)les.

This product is an excellent way to distribute the digital version of the soil map in
which the Service has invested heavily and which many farmers are wishing to use with
their agricultural GIS and precision farming software. It can only be considered regret-
table  that  the  opportunity  to  include  the  valuable  text  component,  which  is  otherwise
contained in the soil report, is not taken. This may be due to a lack of data volume on
the CD, or to the judgement that it would take a great deal of time to prepare the text
in the report for incorporation, but that information is quite clearly spatially or legend
related  and  embeddable  as  spatial  multimedia.  It  is  also  regrettable  that  the  photo-
graphic  record  is  so  dissociated  from  the  map.  It  is  even  hard  to  show  the  location  of
soil map units for which photographs exist, or to show the photograph for a particular
map unit, even if there is one.

In  vegetation  mapping,  Austin  et  al.  (2000)  take  a  similar  approach,  placing  the
report  and  map  as  well  as  appendices  on  a  single  CD-ROM.  The  only  linking
between information in this report, however, is between the outline of the document
and the text. 

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

319

Figure 5 A view of the digital report of the Tanami Area of Australia. The background is a
view of the MapInfo (cid:228)
 database, with one of the photographic views shown in the foreground
(the  small  dots  in  the  map  view  show  the  locations  of  photographs  which  include  details,
as here, and landscapes). It is possible to view alternative interpretations of the geology, and
would also be possible to embed map unit descriptions with this application (Figure provided
by Russell Hay and John Wilford, Australian Geological Survey Organisation)

5.4 Geological Survey of the Tanami Region, Australia

The Australian Geological Survey(cid:213)s digital report of the Tanami region of the Northern
Territory (Wilford 2000) has taken digital reporting a stage further. Of nine CD ROMs,
seven contain plot (cid:222)les for geological maps of the region, the remaining two include an
index  of  that  database  of  maps,  metadata,  quality  information,  3-D  models  and  (cid:223)y-
throughs of the region, a full electronic version of the geological report (as it might have
been  printed),  and  a  GIS  of  the  region  with  multiple  layers  and  spatially  embedded
multimedia although this last is restricted to photographs (Figure 5).

The  report  represents  an  increasing  number  of  one-off  reports  published  on  CD-
ROM which go well beyond using the CD as a convenient means to distribute the data
(although  it  is  doing  this),  and  contains  a  richer  set  of  information  including  some
multimedia links (between map and photograph).

5.5 Liti Survey

The Liti (Greece) vegetation survey executed by the author and colleagues, proved
an  opportunity  to  develop  an  application  providing  an  exploratory  visualization  of
spatially embedded multi-media, similar to a natural resource report, but in a restricted
context (Figure 6; Fisher et al. 2001).

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

320

P F Fisher

Figure 6 A view of the Liti Survey report, showing the base map, together with all observa-
tion points shown, and coloured grey (legend to top right) according to the amount of open
ground (list of variables to the bottom left, the pie charts and linked histograms (to bottom
right) show the observations for one particular quadrat, one panoramic view of the landscape
(bottom  centre)  is  shown  (for  a  speci(cid:222)c  location  shown  on  the  base  map).  Centre  top  is  a
set  of  parallel  coordinate  plot  of  the  fuzzy  memberships  of  three  vegetation  communities
interpreted  in  the  area.  Note  that,  as  appropriate,  all  windows  link  to  information  in  other
views, and, in particular, most link back to the base map

Essentially  the  system  links  tables  and  pictures  reporting  the  results  of  the  survey.
A map with observation locations indicated, and alternative maps of the area forms the
(cid:222)rst  point  of  entry  for  the  user.  For  each  observation  point  there  are  two  entries  in
tabular  records:  original  plant  frequency  at  quadrats  and  transects,  and  the  results  of
interpretative multivariate statistical analysis. There are photographic records of plants
and panoramic photography of the landscape. All are viewable from the map interface.

5.6 Full multimedia?

The recent report on a GIS-based investigation of archaeological landscapes in the vicinity
of  Stonehenge  may  indicate  the  further  integration  which  may  be  possible  for  Natural
Resource Reports. As well as the paper-based report (Exon et al. 2000), a CD ROM is
included with hot links between a digital version of the text and a wealth of exploratory
visualisations including panoramic, video and still photography, VR models, animated
and interactive maps, and even audio commentary. The totality of the publication makes

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

321

for a very adventurous presentation and one, which contains many alternative views as
well as making the reader feel that the presentation will repay detailed inspection.

The styles of reporting in the systems reviewed above represent a progression, and
for some levels in that progression multiple examples might be quoted. Among the later
cases, it is increasingly hard to (cid:222)nd other examples. The earlier ones are also part of a
general production programme, while the later ones are individual.

However,  the  (cid:222)nal  two  examples  really  indicate  the  way  ahead  so  that  where  the
funding  permits,  the  rich  views  of  the  surveyor,  which  are  essentially  metadata  to  the
spatial database, are not lost to the user. Indeed, a multimedia system, which embodies
the full linkages between pictures, tabulations and text and with exploratory statistical
visualization, is not only the obvious way to advance the digital presentation of natural
resource reporting, but also the logical progression from these last two. If the different
types of information were fully linked the reader and presenter would realise a number
of advantages over any of the foregoing examples. 

6 Conclusions

Reporting  of  Natural  Resource  surveys  has  undergone  considerable  change  in  the  last
few years from the traditional paper-based report to the CD-ROM and the Internet as
a  vehicle  for  reporting.  This  change  has  been  brought  about  by  push  factors  such  as
government  (cid:222)nancial  stringency,  but  more  importantly  by  pull  factors  such  as  the  low
cost of digital reporting and the demand for digital spatial data to feed the appetite of
Geographical Information Systems. 

It  has  been  argued  that  the  traditional  report  can  be  seen  as  having  a  number  of

purposes:

¥

¥

¥

¥

to convince the reader of the view of the author or authors (usually the surveyor
or surveyors);
to  inform  the  reader  of  information  known  to  the  authors  which  cannot  be
portrayed on the paper map;
to  give  the  reader  a  feeling  of  place  in  and  of  familiarity  with  the  landscape
surveyed; and
to  accompany  the  map  or  maps  which  now  would  be  seen  as  the  principal
product.

A review of some of the current generation of experiments in digital presentations
of natural resource survey results indicates that none is achieving all of these purposes.
In some instances no attempt is being made to provide the detailed map-unit metadata
of the traditional report, but in others some innovative attempts are being made to give
the user the familiarity with landscape.  None  are  providing the reader  with accessible,
convenient  information  supplementary  to  the  spatial  data.  Where  the  report  does
accompany the spatial data it is separate.

It  is  suggested  that  a  full  spatial  multimedia  approach  would  better  replicate  the
intentions of the report working with the paper map. Indeed this approach could work
better  than  the  traditional  approach,  by  presenting  the  user  with  text  and  graphics
related to the speci(cid:222)c location as well as the map unit or the overall map. Information
would  be  available  at  the  click  of  a  mouse  for  every  mapped  object,  with  the  task  of
linking  between  the  map,  the  text  and  the  tables  implicit  in  how  the  information  is

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

322

P F Fisher

stored, and in how it is accessed. It is even conceivable that this information would be
importable into the GIS of the user(cid:213)s choice.

It is anticipated that with increasing availability of tools for spatial multimedia and
with  increasing  realisation  that  general  purpose  GIS  serve  this  function  already,  it  will
become  the  standard  for  digital  reporting  of  natural  resource  survey  results.  The  only
limitations are the time taken in writing this sort of report and the desire and appropri-
ate  copyright  permissions  to  distribute  such  spatial  information.  This  may  generate  an
understanding and appreciation among more users than ever before of the subtleties and
intricacies of natural surveys. Only time will tell.

Acknowledgements

A  number  of  people  have  assisted  in  the  course  of  the  research  reported  here.  I  wrote
the  paper  while  on  sabbatical  and  I  would  like  to  thank  Brian  Lees  of  the  Australian
National  University  and  Pip  Forer  of  the  University  of  Auckland  for  hosting  me,  and
providing  insights  and  suggestions.  Information  was  provided  by  Russell  Hay  and
John Wilford of Australia Geoscience;  Neil  McKenzie  and John  Gallant  of  the  CSIRO
Division  of  Land  and  Water;  and  Mike  Austin  of  the  CSIRO  Division  of  Wildlife  and
Ecology,  and  I  would  like  to  record  my  thanks  to  all.  Anonymous  reviewers provided
very valuable comments on the paper which has bene(cid:222)ted substantially from the changes
suggested.  Finally,  colleagues  on  the  Virtual  Field  Course  and  FLIERS  projects  at
Leicester are to be thanked, especially Charlie Arnot, Lucy Bastin, and Jason Dykes.

References

Austin M P, Cawsey E M, Baker B L, Yialeloglou M M, Grice D J, and Briggs S V 2000 

Predicted
.  Canberra,  CSIRO  Division  of  Wildlife  and

Vegetation  Cover  in  Central  Lachlan  Region
Ecology: CD-ROM

Bibby  J  S  and  Mackney  D  1969 

Land  Use  Capability  Classi(cid:222)cation

.  Harpenden,  Soil  Survey

Technical Monograph No 1

CEH  2000 

Countryside  Survey  2000:  Audit  of  the  British  Countryside

.  Wallingford,  Centre  for
Ecology  and  Hydrology,  Natural  Environment  Research  Council  (available  at  http://
www.cs2000.org.uk/)

Chatwin  C  P  1960 

The  Hampshire  Basin  and  Adjoining  Areas

  (3

  Edition).  London,  HMSO,

rd

Institute of Geological Sciences

Clarke M R, Raynor E J, and Sobey R A 1980 

The Sand and Gravel Resources of the Loddon Valley

Area

. London, HMSO, Institute of Geological Sciences Mineral Assessment Report No 48

Exon  S,  Gaffney  V,  Woodward  A,  and  Yorston  R  2000 

Stonehenge  Landscapes:  Journeys

Through Real-and-Imagined Worlds

. Oxford, Archaeopress

Fisher P F, Arnot C, Bastin L, and Dykes J 2001 Exploratory visualization software for reporting

environmental survey results. 

Journal of Environmental Management

 62: 399—413

Fuller R M, Groom G B, and Jones A R  1994 The land cover map of Great Britain: An automated
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote

classi(cid:222)cation of Landsat Thematic Mapper data. 
Sensing

 60: 553—62

Greig  D  C,  Wright  J  E,  Hains  B  A,  and  Mitchell  G  H  1968 

Church Stretton, Craven Arms, Wenlock Edge and Brown Clee
the Geological Survey of Great Britain

Geology  of  the  Country  Around
. London, HMSO, Memoir of

Guptill  S  C  1999  Metadata  and  data  catalogues.  In  Longley  P  A,  Goodchild  M  F,  Maguire  D  J,
Geographical Information Systems: Volume 2 Management Issues and

and Rhind D W (eds) 
Applications

. Chichester, John Wiley and Sons: 677—92

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Reporting Natural Resource Surveys

323

Hodge  C  A H, Burton R G O, Corbett W M, Evans  R, and Seale R S 1984 

Soils and Their Use

in Eastern England

. Herpenden, Soil Survey of England and Wales Bulletin No 13

Horton  A  1989 

Geology  of  the  Peterborough  District

.  London,  HMSO,  Memoir  of  the  British

Geological Survey

Isaac M J and Lindqvist J K 1990 

Geology and Lignite Resources of the East Southland Group,

New Zealand

. Lower Hutt, New Zealand Geological Survey Bulletin No 101

Johnson  P  A  1971 

Soil  in  Derbyshire  I:  Sheet  SK17  (Tideswell)

.  Harpenden,  Soil  Survey  of

Johnston M R 1980 

Geology of the Tinui-Awatoitoi District

. Wellington, New Zealand Geological

England and Wales Record No 4

Survey Bulletin No 94

Krygier  J  B  1997  Envisioning  the  American  West:  Maps,  the  representational  barrage  of  19

th

century  expedition  reports,  and  the  production  of  scienti(cid:222)c  knowledge. 
Geographic Information Systems

 24: 27 —50

Cartography  and

McIntosh  P  D  1995 

Soils  of  the  Edendale  District.  Lincoln

,  Manaaki  Whenua  Press,  Landcare

Research Science Series No 15

Mew  G  1980 

Soils  of  Greymouth-Hokitika  Region,  South  Island,  New  Zealand

.  Wellington,

Department of Scienti(cid:222)c and Industrial Research, Soil Survey Report No 58

Newsome P F J 1987 

The Vegetative Cover of New Zealand

. Wellington, National Water and Soil

Conservation Authority Miscellaneous Publication No 112

NRCS 1995 

Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) Data Base: Data Base Information

. Washington,
D.C., U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service Miscellaneous
Publication No 1527 (available as http://www.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/pdf/ssurgo_db.pdf)

NRCS  2000 

Soil  Explorer:  A  Digital  Soil  Map  Viewer  for  SSURGO  on  CD-ROM

  (available  as

http://www.statlab.iastate.edu/soils/nssc/explorer/soilex.htm)

NRCS Staff 1999 

Soil Explorer for Madison County, New York: A Digital Soil Data Viewer

. Fort
Worth, TX, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service: CD-ROM
. Washington, D.C., USDA-Soil Con-

Soil Survey of Orange County, New York

Olsson K S 1981 

servation Service

Puller W A 1985 

Soils and Land Use of Rangitaiki Plains, North Island, New Zealand

. Wellington,

Department of Scienti(cid:222)c and Industrial Research Soil Survey Report No 86

Rattenbury M S, Cooper R A, and Johnston M R 1998 
Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences

Ritchie A, Bauder J R, Christman R L, and Reese P W 1978 
Washington, D.C., USDA-Soil Conservation Service

Geology of the Nelson Area

. Lower Hutt,

Soil Survey of Portage County, Ohio

.

Seale R S 1975 

Soils of the Chateris District of Cambridgeshire

. Harpenden, Soil Survey, Special

Survey No 9

Secor  W,  Koehler  L  F,  Kinsman  D  F,  Benson  W  E,  Cline  M  G,  Moran  W  J,  Leighty  R  G,
Johnsgard  G  A,  Martin  L  L,  Donner  H  L,  Hardesty  J  S,  Ruffner  J  D,  Sheetz  J  D,  and
Kelsey L P 1955 
. Washington, D.C., USDA-Soil
Conservation Service

Soil Survey of Dutchess County, New York

Speden  I  G  1975 

Cretaceous  Stratigraphy  of  Rankumaru  Peninsular

.  Wellington,  New  Zealand

Thomasson  A  J  1971 

Soils  of  the  Melton  Mowbray  District

.  Harpenden,  Memoir  of  the  Soil

Geological Survey Bulletin No 91

Survey of Great Britain

USGS 2000a 

New National Land Cover Database Now Available

. Washington, D.C., U.S. Geo-
logical  Survey,  Department  of  the  Interior  News  Release  (available  at  http://www.usgs.gov/
public/press/release/public_affairs/press_releases/pr1299m.html)

USGS  2000b 

Land  Cover  Characterisation  Program

.  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.  Geological  Survey,

Department of the Interior (available at http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/programs/lccp)

USGS 2000c 

National Land Cover Data: New York

Department of the Interior (available at http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov.bin/mrlc_readme.cgi?(cid:222)le
local/ftp/pub/edcuser/vogel/states/new_york_readme_ver070600.txt)

. Washington, D.C., U.S. Geological Survey,
/usr/

=

USGS  2000d 

Global  Land  Cover  Characteristics  Data  Base  2.0

.  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.
Geological  Survey,  Department  of  the  Interior  (available  at  http://edcdaac.usgs.gov/glcc/
globdoc2_0.html)

Ward  W  T  1999  Soils  and  Landscapes  near  Narrabri  and  Edgeroi,  NSW,  with  Data  Analysis

Using Fuzzy k-means. Canberra, CSIRO Division of Land and Water

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

324

P F Fisher

Wilford J 2000 Tanami Regolith Mapping Dataset. Canberra, Geoscience Australia: CD-ROM
Young  J  F  1981  Soil  Survey  of  Fremont  County,  Wyoming,  Lander  Area.  Washington,  D.C.,

USDA-Soil Conservation Service

Zhu Z, Yang L, Stehman S, and Czaplewski R 2000 Accuracy assessment for the U.S. Geological
Survey Regional Land-Cover Mapping Programme: New York and New Jersey Region.
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 66: 1425—35

' Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

