The Cartographic Journal
The World of Mapping

ISSN: 0008-7041 (Print) 1743-2774 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycaj20

The Interaction of Landmarks and Map Alignment
in You-Are-Here Maps

Grant McKenzie & Alexander Klippel

To cite this article: Grant McKenzie & Alexander Klippel (2016) The Interaction of Landmarks
and Map Alignment in You-Are-Here Maps, The Cartographic Journal, 53:1, 43-54, DOI:
10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000101

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000101

Published online: 21 Apr 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 16

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycaj20

Download by: [University of Sussex Library]

Date: 15 May 2016, At: 08:49

The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society

Vol. 53 No. 1

2016

pp.

–
43 54

February 2016

R E F E R E E D P A P E R

The Interaction of Landmarks and Map Alignment in You-
Are-Here Maps

Grant McKenzie1 and Alexander Klippel2

1 Department of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 2Department of Geography,
Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA
Email: grant.mckenzie@geog.ucsb.edu

Knowing where one is located within an environment is one of the most fundamental tasks humans have to master in their
daily routines. Maps, as external representations of the environment offer intuitive ways to extend the capacities of the
human cognitive systems. Operations such as planning a route can be performed on maps instead of in the environment.
Question of how to design maps that support cognitive processes such as wayfinding in novel environments have been
discussed in several disciplines. The research reported here addresses the question of how map alignment and the presence
of landmarks in maps interact during wayfinding. For the purpose of systematically analyzing the relationship between
map alignment and landmark presence, nine virtual environments were designed. Routes learned from maps with different
alignments and different numbers of landmarks present at decision points were used. While generally landmarks are
assumed to foster wayfinding performance, our results indicate that misaligned maps can cancel out positive effects
obtained through landmarks.

Keywords: landmarks, wayfinding, map alignment, you-are-here map, virtual environment

INTRODUCTION

Having spatial awareness, that is, knowing where you are
and where things are located in your immediate environ-
ment is essential for human beings. The multi-billion dollar
industry that has developed around spatial information such
as location-based services (Raper et al., 2007), GPS guided
navigation (Kealy et al., 2008), Wi-Fi technologies (Hills,
2005), and the integration of location (‘Where’) informa-
tion into Facebook and smart phone applications is an
this desire and the demand for spatial
expression of
information (Grossner et al., 2008; Torrens, 2008). Our
reliance on technical support to guide us through spatial
environments is increasing and it is only in situations where
this support fails or provides false information that we
become aware of this dependency (Parush et al., 2007).

In the area of navigation support, this reliance drives an
urgency for cartographic methods that seamlessly integrate
with our cognitive abilities to understand spatial environ-
ments and enable us to make spatial decisions efﬁcient and
effectively (Fabrikant et al., 2010). While not everyone has
the same spatial orientation abilities (Allen, 1999; Hegarty
et al., 2006), there are some general guidelines on how to
provide spatial information to increase awareness of where
we are and help us to navigate the world around us (Aretz,
1991; Arthur and Passini, 1992; Clark, 1997; Ho¨lscher

DOI: 10.1179/1743277414Y.0000000101

et al., 2007; Levine, 1982). A plethora of approaches exist
that foster spatial awareness: physically installed you-are-
here maps (Klippel et al., 2010; Levine et al., 1982;
O’Neill, 1991; Warren and Scott, 1993), mapping of
landmarks (Couclelis et al., 1987; Duckham et al., 2010),
mobile navigation devices (Kru¨ger et al., 2000; Raper et al.,
2007), and other orientation equipment (Harrower, 2007).
Maps are prepared for a variety of functions, one of which
is to guide travel from origin A to destination B (Chase,
1983; Golledge, 1999; MacEachren and Johnson, 1987).
The use of maps (in general) for navigational purposes
greatly fosters orientation and wayﬁnding in an environ-
ment (Devlin and Bernstein, 1995; Liben and Downs,
1993; Lobben, 2007). But how exactly do maps help us?
Which elements represented in maps support our wayﬁnd-
ing abilities and which impede them? Understanding
cognitive processes related to the acquisition of spatial
knowledge and use of maps is essential for informing map
design (for an overview see Montello, 2002). While many
responses to these questions are discussed, the need for
more behavioural assessments of wayﬁnding with maps
remains.

We are particularly interested in two factors that have
the use of
shown to affect wayﬁnding performance:
landmarks as a navigational tool (Newman et al., 2007;
Presson and Montello, 1988; Richter, 2007) and map

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 44

The Cartographic Journal

alignment (Levine, 1982; Rossano and Warren, 1989;
Shepard and Hurwitz, 1984; Montello, 2010a). While
these two factors have often been evaluated separately, very
little research has explored their inﬂuence when combined.
Both have considerable impact on map usability and their
combined effects are therefore of signiﬁcant interest to map
designers. This combined effect of landmarks and map
alignment on wayﬁnding performance will therefore be the
focus of this article.

Map alignment is one of the best-deﬁned and cognitively
explored aspects of map design. Its cognitive grounding comes
from research on mental rotation tasks (Shepard and Metzler,
1971) that clearly demonstrate the challenging nature of
in an object-matching task, a linear
misaligned objects;
relationship exists between the angle of rotation (misalign-
ment) and the time it takes to match two objects. The greater
the angle of rotation deviates from being perfectly aligned (a
perfectly aligned map would mean that the top of the map is in
line of sight of the travel direction), the longer it takes
participants
relationship is well
documented for objects as well as maps (Warren, 1994).

to match objects. This

Landmarks have become the focus of current research as
a natural way to communicate and organize spatial knowl-
edge (Duckham et al., 2010; Golledge, 1987; Lynch,
1960). Landmarks, especially at decision points where a
change of direction is required, are regarded as wayﬁnding
enhancers, reducing navigational errors, and speeding up
decision making processes (Caduff and Timpf, 2008;
Coluccia and Louse, 2004; Deakin, 1996; Devlin and
Bernstein, 1995).

A ﬁnal aspect relevant to this article is the use of virtual
environments (VEs) that open new possibilities to spatial
cognition research, including wayﬁnding research (Meng and
Zhang, 2012; Tang et al., 2009; Waller et al., 2004). As
computer software and immersive technology develop further,
more options will emerge (Bishop, 2001; Frey et al., 2007).
The use of a VE model in this study has allowed the design of
controlled experimental environments, while maintaining the
level of realism necessary for behavioural testing.
Three hypotheses are tested in this article:

1. An increase in landmark presence (at decision points
that require a turn) on properly aligned maps results in
improved wayfinding performance.

2. Reading a properly aligned map (as opposed to a
following Levine’s Forward-up
misaligned map),
Principle (1982) results in increased wayfinding
performance.

3. An increase in landmarks on a map compensates, in
terms of wayfinding performance, for increased map
misalignment.

The remainder of this paper describes the experimental
setup using a VE, details the results, and discusses their
meaning and implications.

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Participants
Thirty participants were recruited for
the experiment
through email and posters at the authors’ university. The

participant pool was equally split by gender, aged between
24 and 30 years. Seven participants had previous experi-
ence in the spatial sciences (Architecture, Geographic In-
formation Systems, 3D Animation and Aviation). While
every effort was made to ensure an approximate representa-
tion of the population, it should be noted that the majority
of the participants were pursuing degrees at the university
and therefore could be considered well educated. Every
participant
received a $15 bookshop voucher. Each
participant was presented with the same set of instructions
and scenarios (though the order of scenarios was rando-
mized).

Materials
A virtual city was designed using a computer game engine
and photographs of real buildings. Nine different environ-
ments and corresponding maps were created.

We refer to this combination of a VE and map as a
scenario. The experiment had a 363 factorial design
(Figure 1a). Factor alignment used: properly aligned
(meaning that the top of the map corresponds to the
direction the subject views on entry into the VE), 90u
misaligned, and 180u misaligned. Factor landmarks used:
no landmarks at decision points with a direction change,
one landmark, and two landmarks, respectively.

Maps
Each map displayed a solid black line representing the route
with the words ‘Start’ and ‘Finish’, printed at opposing ends.
Thirty-ﬁve grey rectangular city blocks made up the grid
structure of the map with the white space between the blocks
representing streets. The blocks were created as rectangles so
that a difference between map alignments would be more
apparent (proper alignment vs 90u misalignment). Each route
contained three turning and two straight-through intersec-
tions. Depending on the scenario, the turning intersections
were marked by zero, one or two landmarks. Three maps
contained six landmarks (e.g. Figure 1b), three contained
three landmarks, and three showed zero landmarks.

Map alignment
The nine scenario maps were divided evenly into three map
alignments: properly aligned, 90u misaligned, and 180u
misaligned. Given that existing research has shown simila-
rities between the effects of 90u clockwise and counter-
clockwise rotation (May et al., 1995; Shepard et al., 1982),
it was decided that the 90u misaligned maps would always
be misaligned clockwise with no loss of generality. Every
effort was made to provide an equal number of left and
right hand turns on the maps overall.

Landmarks
Landmarks were carefully chosen, consisting of building
facades with similar degrees of saliency: fast food restau-
rants, car rental agencies, convenience stores, etc. We also
aimed to keep the names of the landmark the same length
syllables). Both landmark
(i.e.
placement location (corner of an intersection) and type
were randomized to remove bias. Along with the landmarks

the same number of

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 Landmarks and Map Alignment

45

Figure 1.

(a) nine scenario maps and (b) scenario map A (properly aligned with six landmarks)

presented on the map and in the VE, there were additional
potential landmarks visible in the environment, but not on
the map. Rather than allowing participants to make a
decision based on the presence of a landmark alone, effort
was made to ensure that they were making speciﬁc decisions
at speciﬁc landmarks. By including additional landmarks in
the environment, but not in the map, participants would be
forced to not only remember the presence of landmarks at
an intersection, but the presence of one or two speciﬁc
landmarks at an intersection. Depending on the scenario,

we randomly placed one or two previously unseen and
unmapped landmarks at one of
the straight-through
intersections (non-turning decision points).

Virtual environment
The VE was created through the construction of the setting
and terrain as well as buildings and streets. The Torque video
games engine was used as the base code from which the
environment was built. The buildings were created using
real-world structures, manipulated and
photographs of

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 46

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 2. The virtual environment

projected onto three-dimensional blocks. Each city block
contained between six and ten buildings depending on
building size, and measured approximately 40 m by 25 m.
These blocks were designed to be smaller than typical real city
blocks in order to reduce the time required of the participants,
while not making their movement speed excessive. Depending
on the scenario, the virtual city consisted of between 23 and
30 city blocks. The street width (space between blocks)
measured approximately six meters. Shadows were minimized
and the sun was placed at mid-day in an attempt to remove
shadow as a navigational aid. The maximum speed of
movement in the environment was limited to six meters per
second and the camera height was set to average eye level
(approximately 1.7 m high). Figure 2 shows screen-shots of
the VE.

PROCEDURE

The VEs, and their corresponding maps, were presented to
the 30 participants in random order. Each session took
approximately 45 min to complete. The experiment was
designed as individual sessions and consisted of three parts:

1. Navigating nine routes in nine VEs
2. Completing an anonymous profile questionnaire
3. Completing a standardized spatial orientation test.

Navigating the virtual environment
Each participant was ﬁrst given instructions and a demon-
stration of the controls necessary for movement in the VE
(see Figure 3).

A test scenario map was the ﬁrst map shown to each
participant. Each map contained a Start and Finish point
connected with a solid black line. This line represented the

route the participant was being asked to follow in the VE.
The participant was told that the alignment of the map and
the presence of landmarks might differ between maps. He
or she was also told that they would always be facing the
ﬁrst intersection, pointing in the initial direction shown on
the map. As some of the participants had little ﬁrst person
computer game experience, controlling movement through
a mouse and keyboard required some training. The purpose
of the test environment was to familiarize each participant
with the technology and controls. Each participant was told
that he or she had to successfully navigate the test scenario
path in less than 45 s in order to continue on in the
experiment. If he or she did not succeed they were asked to
redo the test scenario until the requirement was met. This
time limit reduced the possibility of variations in scenario
results being caused by movement control errors. Twenty-
seven participants completed the task within the required
time on the ﬁrst attempt, three on the second attempt.

After completing the test scenario, nine scenarios were
presented in random order to each of the 30 participants.
Initially, the participant was shown a map of the route he or
she was required to follow. Each participant was given 20 s to
examine the map and to inform the experiment controller
when he or she was ready to move on to the virtual navigation
component. The participants then completed the virtual
navigation component. If the participant made an incorrect
turn at any point during a scenario, he or she was stopped by
the controller and returned to the intersection where the
incorrect decision was made and oriented facing in the correct
direction.

Questionnaire
The questionnaire asked the participant for biographical
data as well as computer game experience, most common
form of transportation, and spatial ability self-assessment.

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 Landmarks and Map Alignment

47

Figure 3. Testing environment

Spatial orientation test
The spatial orientation test, developed by Hegarty and
Waller (2004), measured participants’ spatial abilities. Each
participant completed the spatial orientation test by
estimating the angle between two objects. The overall
error between their estimation and the actual measurement
angle was calculated for each of the 12 questions and then
averaged to produce one numerical value for each
participant.

RESULTS

In the following section, we present the analysis of the data
by looking at them from different perspectives. We also
discuss the ways in which the different assessments of
wayﬁnding performance were calculated (i.e. speed and
success scores). The main analysis is split into two parts; the
ﬁrst part focuses on speed (as a measure of wayﬁnding
performance). This analysis was performed using linear
mixed models (LMMs). Linear mixed model allows for
(1) use of all participants, even if they became lost in one
scenario, which rendered time an inappropriate measure of
wayﬁnding performance (e.g. the remaining eight scenarios
are entered into the analysis), and (2) integrating additional
aspects into the analysis (such as the order in which the
scenarios were presented).

A second approach was employed to cross-validate
ﬁndings. Wayﬁnding performance was scored for each
participant’s behaviour
at each decision point. This
approach, termed Success Score, allowed researchers to
have a second perspective on the wayﬁnding performance
and to use the more classical approach of repeated measures
ANOVA. Finally, we looked into the relationship between

alignment and landmarks for each segment along the route.
This latter aspect is important as the scenario routes consist
of multiple segments with different orientations.

Errors and incomplete data

The virtual environment
Of the 270 speed measurements (30 participants by nine
scenarios), only one error occurred and eight special cases
were encountered. The one error can be attributed to a
fault in the data collection process. In the eight special
cases, the participants became completely lost and either
wandered well off the speciﬁed route or stopped for a long
period of time despite controller assistance as described in
the section on ‘EXPERIMENTAL SETUP’. While partici-
pants eventually ﬁnished the scenario, their speed value was
not included in the analysis; their success score remained
valid.

The spatial orientation test
Twenty-nine of the 30 participants completed the spatial
orientation test in the allotted time. The one participant
who did not ﬁnish was removed from this part of the
analysis.

Calculating segment speed, overall speed and success score
Each of the 30 participants completed nine study scenarios
resulting in 269 tracking ﬁles (after subtracting the one
error that occurred). These tracking ﬁles were composed
of X, Y position values recorded every 0.1 s from the
beginning of the scenario to the end. It was determined
that the ﬁrst segment would begin at the starting point and

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 48

The Cartographic Journal

ﬁnish as the participant turned the corner and crossed a
speciﬁc X or Y value line (a line across an intersection that
joined two adjacent buildings). The second segment would
start at the previous ﬁnish line and again conclude as the
participant turned the corner, crossing the X or Y ﬁnish line
and so on. Each of the tracking ﬁles was examined and the
time taken to complete each of the segments was recorded.
Equal weighted mean speed was determined by ﬁrst
calculating participant speed over each route segment
followed by computing the average for the three segments.
This resulted in an equally weighted mean value for speed
with no single segment having a greater impact on the
overall route mean value. When the participants navigated
the VE, they were either stationary or, when pressing the
appropriate key, moving forward at a constant rate of
6 m s21. Therefore the ﬁnal speed values are averaged
measurements. The average was calculated based on the
amount of time spent at each of the two speeds.

A success value was used to rank participant’s wayﬁnding
behaviour at each decision point that required a turn (three
per scenario) on a scale of 0 to 3: ‘0’ signiﬁed completely
lost and ‘3’ represented no problems according to observed
participant wayﬁnding behaviour (independent of speed).
Overall mean success values were calculated by averaging
the success across the three turning decision points in each
scenario.

Main analysis of speed using LMM
Linear mixed model allows the use of all participant data
and additionally accounts for effects such as order in which
participants received the scenarios (to account for potential
learning effects). However, just like ANOVA (general linear
model), the data needs to conform to certain distributional
characteristics
such as normality and homogeneity of
variance. Using the Sapiro-Wilk Test for normality we
found that this criterion is violated in our data; revealed by
visually inspecting a stem and leaf plot ﬁnding that our data
sets were negatively skewed. The speed data was also not
compliant with the assumption of homogeneity of variances
as revealed by a signiﬁcant Levene’s tests. We therefore
decided to follow recommendations by Tabachnick and
Fidell (2007) and Field (2009) and transformed the data.
Speciﬁcally, we used the inverse and reﬂection to achieve
normality. A new variable was created based on speed values
using the following formula: speedNew51/(6–speed). This
procedure improved the normality of the data and Levene’s
test showed that the data now is in compliance with the
requirement of homogeneity1.

The ﬁrst analysis we performed was to test whether there
exists a correlation between spatial abilities and wayﬁnding
performance (speed/newSpeed). While the correlation
between speed and speedNew is highly
signiﬁcant
(r50.849, p,0.001), neither of the dependent variables
(speed/speedNew) showed a signiﬁcant correlation with

1This procedure was developed in collaboration with the Statistics Consultant
Center at Penn State. We did not rely on this procedure alone however, but also
used the success values that we assigned to the wayfinding performance at each
decision point (see next Section). As both analyses provided us with comparable
results, we are confident in interpreting them in the discussion section. We
additionally incorporated the original variable whenever possible to corroborate our
analysis and did not find substantial differences before and after the transformation.

spatial abilities (r50.036, p50.57; r50.076, p50.226,
respectively).

The validity of the speciﬁed LMM (with landmark,
alignment, and landmark*alignment interaction as ﬁxed
factors and order as an additional random factor) was tested
by examining the distribution of the residuals and the
predicted values. For the residuals we found that they were
normally distributed with a mean of nearly 0, which allows
us to assume validity of our model. For the relationship
between residuals and predicted values we would ideally
expect no correlation. We found a mild positive correlation.
No other model setting delivered the perfect no-correlation
assumption.

With this model, we do ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant main
effects for all three factors (landmarks, alignment, and
landmark*alignment interaction). In the presence of a
(F(4,210.892)56.96, P,
signiﬁcant
0.001), this effect has to be considered ﬁrst as it indicates
that landmarks do not have the same effect across all three
levels of alignment.

interaction effect

To better understand the interaction effects, we depict
the mean speed values with 95% conﬁdence intervals. We
show in Figure 4 the speed values to demonstrate that the
transformation made the data compliant with the prerequi-
sites for LMM but did not change the overall pattern. We
therefore can interpret the original values as this makes it
easier to follow this discussion.

In the case of proper alignment we ﬁnd the hypothesized
pattern: the scenario with two landmarks at each intersec-
tion allowed participants to ﬁnd their way the quickest, the
scenario with no landmarks yielded signiﬁcantly slower
speed values, while the scenario with one landmark is placed
between the two other scenarios. In case of maps being 90
degrees misaligned, the picture becomes more complicated
and statistically hard to distinguish as indicated by the
overlapping conﬁdence intervals. For maps 180 degrees
misaligned, however, we ﬁnd a clearer, yet unexpected
picture. The wayﬁnding performance is highest in scenarios
without landmarks, lowest (and signiﬁcantly so) in scenarios
with one landmark at each decision point, and somewhere in
the middle for scenarios with two landmarks at each decision
point. The main interaction effect to observe here is the
change in rank of the scenario not using landmarks; in the case
of proper alignment, missing landmarks lead to the lowest
speed values (3rd rank). In contrast, 180 degrees misaligned
maps proﬁt from the absence of landmarks and speed values
are highest when no landmarks are present (1st rank).

Repeated measures analysis of success
To offer a different perspective on the wayﬁnding perfor-
mance of participants (other than speed) and to comple-
ment the LMM analysis, we performed repeated measures
ANOVA on the success scores. For the score values we
excluded one participant (i.e. the one error data set) but
were able to use data of participants who got lost at certain
decision points (N529). As expected, correlation analysis
was highly signiﬁcant comparing speed and success scores,
adding to the general validity of using different assessments
speed and success).
of wayﬁnding performance (i.e.
Mauchly’s test of sphericity indicated that the assumption
of sphericity was not violated for the main effects of

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 Landmarks and Map Alignment

49

Figure 4. The mean speeds (with 95% conﬁdence intervals) for the nine scenarios

landmark (X2(2)51.55, p.0.05) and alignment (X2(2)5
4.77, p.0.05). However, the interaction of landmark and
alignment violated the assumption of sphericity (X2(9)5
19.71, p,0.05) and the degrees of freedom were corrected
using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates (e50.75).

The analysis, most importantly, conﬁrmed the signiﬁcant
interaction effect of map alignment and number of landmarks
present at a (turning) decision point in a map (F(3.01,
84.15)54.03, p50.01). This is a further clear sign that the
alignment of a map affects map reading processes (and
subsequent wayﬁnding performance) differently depending
on the number of landmarks present at decision points. To
further understand this interaction effect, contrasts were
performed. We depict the success patterns in Figure 5 to
accompany this discussion. We found that comparing proper
alignment and 90 degree misalignment for six and three
landmarks was not statistically signiﬁcant (F(1,28)52.683,
p50.113). Comparing the interaction between six and three
landmarks for 90 and 180 degree misalignment shows a
statistical trend (F(1,28)53.904, p50.058), indicating that
the performance of maps with only one landmark present at
intersections suffered signiﬁcantly more when the maps were
presented upside down (misalignment 180). Comparing the
scenarios with landmarks (both six and three) against the
scenario without landmarks (zero) shows that there is a

signiﬁcant interaction effect comparing proper alignment and
180 degree misalignment (F(1,28)56.843, p50.014) as well
(F(1,28)56.469,
as 90 and 180 degree misalignment
p50.017). There is no signiﬁcant interaction between these
two landmark conditions and proper and 90 degree
misalignment. Looking in detail at the interaction effects
between 90 and 180 degree misalignment comparing zero
landmarks against six, and zero landmarks against three, we
ﬁnd that only the latter interaction is statistically signiﬁcant
(F(1,28)59.067, p50.005).

Questionnaire
None of the results from the questionnaires correlated
signiﬁcantly with wayﬁnding performance. This suggests
that the results apply regardless of gender, age, computer
game experience, and level of education. The frequency at
which participants consulted a map, purpose of consulting a
map, and their most common method of travel also proved
to be insigniﬁcant in this study. The implication in these
results is that frequency and purpose of map consultation
have little inﬂuence on one’s ability to make correct
route.
wayﬁnding decisions
Similarly, difference in mode of transportation had no
effect on wayﬁnding performance.

in navigating a particular

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 50

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 5. Success scores for the nine scenarios

It is also important to note that participant’s verbal
actions were recorded as they completed each scenario.
While most participants did not voice their actions, a
number of participants mentioned navigation through
counting blocks in the environment.

DISCUSSION

Our study addresses a critical gap in the current literature
on wayﬁnding aids: the interaction between using land-
marks in a map to improve wayﬁnding performance and the
map misalignment that has been shown to negatively affect
wayﬁnding performance.

Research on landmark usage in virtual and real environ-
ments suggests that (a) landmarks are a natural way for
humans to organize route knowledge and (b) incorporating
landmarks into representations (wayﬁnding aids such as
maps) increases wayﬁnding performance (Allen, 1997;
Janzen et al., 2007; Jansen-Osmann and Fuchs, 2006;
Steck and Mallot, 2000).

While studies exist that show the beneﬁts of using
landmarks in aided wayﬁnding tasks (e.g. Tom and Denis,
2003; Goodman, 2004), we also ﬁnd literature that casts
doubt on the unequivocal statement that landmarks are

always the best way to provide wayﬁnding support (e.g.
Harrower, 2007; Montello, 2010b). Harrower (2007), for
example, analyzed different navigation aids for 3D-ﬂy-over
and found that landmarks, compared to other navigation
aids, performed poorly. The point is not to say that
landmarks are good or bad but
for a more
differentiated perspective on landmarks to reveal in which
situations landmarks work and in which they do not.

to call

One area that needs to be addressed when researching
landmarks as wayﬁnding aids is the complexity of the
representation (the map) and the effects this complexity
might have on the map reading/map interpretation
process. Map complexity has long been a topic of interest
to cartographers (Phillips, 1979; Phillips and Noyes, 1982)
and has more recently stirred research in the area of
knowledge representation and maps (e.g. Freksa, 1999).

The question to ask is: Does adding (too many)
landmarks make a map more (or too) complex? Do
landmarks make maps complex not only from the percep-
tual perspective (which undoubtedly is the case), but also
from the perspective of cognitive complexity (Bunch and
Lloyd, 2006). In other words, does adding landmarks to a
map make maps more cognitively adequate (reﬂected in
better wayﬁnding performance) or not?

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 Landmarks and Map Alignment

51

The effect of landmarks on orientation is an important
question and is rooted in research on reference frames
(Levinson, 1996) and mental
rotation (Shepard and
Hurwitz, 1984). In the introduction, we mentioned studies
which show that misaligning maps inevitably leads to a
decrease in orientation (and wayﬁnding) performance. We
also know from research on mental rotation tasks that
rotating more than one object lowers the performance
(Koning and van Lier, 2004; Folk and Luce, 1987; Heil and
Jansen-Osmann, 2008). This brings us to the intriguing
question of whether adding perceptual complexity to a map
in the form of landmarks reduces cognitive complexity and
whether the advantage of representing landmarks out-
weighs the potentially increased efforts on having to
mentally rotate a more complex object (or several objects
represented in a map).

In our experiment, participants followed a route in a VE
after learning this route from a map that contains land-
marks. Our results indicate clearly that, as in most complex
scenarios, the factor landmarks cannot be looked at in
isolation. In other words, the assumption that providing a
landmark is always the best way to cognitively adequately
provide route information may or may not be the case.

is

important

The most

result of our analysis

the
signiﬁcant interaction effect that we found between the
number of landmarks present at decision points that require
a turn (zero, one, or two) and the alignment of the map
that participants used to learn a route (proper aligned, 90
degrees rotated, and 180 degrees rotated). We conﬁrmed
this interaction effect by looking at both an LMM analysis
of the speed with which participants navigated through the
VE after learning routes from maps, and, by using a success
score that more directly assesses participants’ wayﬁnding
performance at individual decision points in the different
scenarios (A to I, see Figure 1).

By combining the two aspects we discussed above (map
complexity and mental rotation), together with ﬁndings
that landmarks are not always the best way of keeping
people oriented (Harrower, 2007), we can conclude that
relying on a landmark-based wayﬁnding strategy is not
always the most efﬁcient one. In scenarios where partici-
pants are forced to adopt a non-landmark-based strategy,
that is, in scenarios in which no landmarks are presented in
the map, the wayﬁnding performance (measured as speed
and success) exceeded the scenarios in which wayﬁnding
was aided by landmarks – if the map was 180 degree misali-
gned. If we consider landmarks as supporting wayﬁnding
performance and also as elements in a map that makes maps
more complex, we can make the point that having to
mentally rotate a complex object (that may consist of several
individual objects), at some point, outweighs positive
landmark effects.

The quantitative results are supplemented by the
qualitative collection of utterances of participants who got
confused, for example, by the side on which they expect a
landmark to be. And, more importantly, people reported
that they indeed used a different strategy in scenarios in
which no landmarks were present, that is, they counted
blocks rather than using landmarks. While the results
presented in this work show signiﬁcant interaction effects,
it is important to keep in mind that the ﬁndings presented

are based on a sample of the global population. While
efforts were made to ensure an appropriate sample (e.g.
equal gender split and age divisions), additional aspects
associated with the participant pool may not have been
controlled (e.g. level of education, etc.).

An additional aspect is important to note. Our results
also show that the number of landmarks inﬂuences the
overall mean speed at which a participant navigates a route
and that having two landmarks at each turning decision
point not only yields the highest wayﬁnding performance
when the maps are properly aligned, but also that the
presence of two landmarks at decision points is not as
susceptible to confusion as the case where only one
landmark is present at turning decision points when the
maps are 180 degrees misaligned. This supports Levine
et al.’s Two Point Theorem which states that in order to
orient oneself in an environment, the minimum informa-
tion that must be known is the location of two points
in addition to one’s own location (Levine et al., 1982). In
case of a forward movement one could make the argu-
ment that one landmark should be sufﬁcient as the way-
ﬁnder’s current location is not a point but rather a directed
axis and the presence of one additional point (a landmark)
should be sufﬁcient. However, our results indicate that this
is not necessarily the case and that especially in situations
where maps are 180 degrees misaligned, providing redun-
dant information has positive effects on the wayﬁnding
performance.

Last, the results of the spatial orientation test did not
signiﬁcantly correlate with speed or success in wayﬁnding.
Since participants had to mentally realign two thirds of the
scenario maps before travelling the route in the VE, we
were expecting to ﬁnd that participants who performed
poorly on the spatial orientation test also had greater
trouble with misalignment, but this was not the case. The
spatial orientation test was perhaps not suitable for this
study because different spatial encoding methods were used
to create a mental representation of the environment
depending on the scenario map. A change in encoding
behaviour no doubt alters the way one interprets and
mentally realigns a map. An alternate explanation lies in the
complexity of the route and the number of decision points.
The spatial orientation test simply tests one’s ability to
realign two points; conceivably an increase in the number of
points (landmarks) inﬂuences one’s ability to spatially orient
a map.

CONCLUSIONS

is a necessity for

successful
Having spatial awareness
wayﬁnding and navigation activities. While
familiar
environments allow us the luxury of unguided success in
reaching our destinations, unfamiliar or partially familiar
environments require the use of external spatial information
in mostly map-like or verbal form. With the omnipresence
of location-based services our dependence on information
about individual location-action pairs has increased. One
focus of current developments to make wayﬁnding aids
cognitively adequate is to incorporate landmarks into maps
and route directions. Landmarks are omnipresent in both

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 52

The Cartographic Journal

linguistic and graphic human-generated route directions.
However, our results are in line with other researchers
(Harrower, 2007; Montello, 2010a) showing and ques-
tioning the value of landmarks in every situation; incorpor-
ating landmarks into wayﬁnding aids is not always the best
way to improve wayﬁnding performance. Especially when
we are interested in wayﬁnding in the wild it will be of
critical
importance to look at landmarks as part of an
orchestra of aspects that inﬂuence our ability to ﬁnd a
destination. Two such factors are the well-known carto-
graphic aspect of map complexity and the cognitive effort
(we could say the cognitive load, e.g. Bunch and Lloyd,
2006) that is induced by the requirement to mentally rotate
maps. That these aspects are still taken too lightly has been
revealed in a recent assessment of YAH maps that showed
that YAH maps are almost never properly aligned, surpris-
ingly so even when used as emergency maps.

the exception. This

What is required is an even more detailed analysis of the
interaction effects of landmarks and map rotation when
travelling multi-segment routes as well as research on how
YAH maps contribute to research on creating spatial
awareness (Klippel et al., 2010). While our data did not
allow for an in-depth analysis of the alignment/landmark
effect for each segment, we consider it crucial to shed more
light on this aspect as travelling multi-segment routes is the
norm, not
research direction is
becoming particularly important in the light of ﬁndings
that turn-by-turn directions impede the creation of spatial
awareness (Parush et al., 2007; Bakdash et al., 2008). With
information available in a much wider array for
spatial
formats,
it is time to rethink how to provide spatial
information for wayﬁnding from the perspective of increas-
ing wayﬁnding performance and creating spatial awareness.
Every mobile application user has opportunities to explicitly
incorporate location information into their interaction with
their mobile device. Research on leveraging the dependence
on navigation devices, a deeper understanding of how
spatial
information is acquired with both mobile and
stationary You-Are-Here information, and the integration
of new technologies is necessary in the pursuit of turning
passive users into active spatial thinkers.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Grant McKenzie is a doc-
toral candidate in the
Department of Geogra-
phy at the University of
California, Santa Barbara
and a member of
the
STKO Lab. He holds a
Master of Applied Science
degree from the Univer-
sity of Melbourne (2008),
an Advanced Diploma in
Geographic Information
Science from the British Columbia Institute of Technology
(2004) and a Bachelor’s degree in Geography from the
University of British Columbia (2002). Grant currently holds
the award for Excellence in Research in the Department of

Geography at UCSB based on promising research in the area
of GIScience. Prior to starting his PhD, Grant was a founding
member of the Seattle based start-up Spatial Development
International and worked as a geospatial software developer for
the Engineering Consulting ﬁrm CH2M Hill.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Parts of this research are funded by the National Science
Foundation, grant number #0948601.

REFERENCES

Allen, G. (1997). ‘From knowledge to words to wayfinding: Issues in
the production and comprehension of route directions’, in Spatial
Information Theory: A Theoretical Basis for GIS, ed. by Hirtle,
S. C. and Frank, A. U., pp. 363–372, Springer, Berlin.

Allen, G. (1999). ‘Spatial abilities, cognitive maps, and wayfinging:
Bases for individual differences in spatial cognition and behavior’, in
Wayfinding Behavior. Cognitive Mapping and Other Spatial
Processes, ed. by Golledge, R. G., pp. 46–80, John Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, London.

Aretz, A. J. (1991). ‘The design of electronic map displays’, Human

Factors, 33(1), pp. 85–101.

Arthur, P. and Passini, R. (1992). Wayfinding - People, Signs, and

Architecture, McGraw-Hill, New York.

Bakdash, J. Z., Linkenauger, S. A. and Proffitt, D. (2008). ‘Comparing
decision-making and control for learning a virtual environment:
Backseat drivers learn where they are going’, Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Proceedings, 52(27), pp.
2117–2121.

Bishop, I. (2001). ‘Predicting movement choices in virtual environ-
ments’, Landscape and Urban Planning, 56(3–4), pp. 97–106.

Bunch, R. L. and Lloyd, R. E. (2006).

‘The cognitive load of
geographic information’, Professional Geographer, 58(2), pp.
209–234.

Caduff, D. and Timpf, S. (2008). ‘On the assessment of landmark
salience for human navigation’, Cognitive Processing, 9(4), pp.
249–267.

Chase, W. G. (1983). ‘Maps and navigation: Introduction’, in The
Acquisition of Symbolic Skills, ed. by Rogers, D. and Sloboda, J.
A., pp. 357–358, Plenum Press, New York.

Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World

Tegether Again, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Coluccia, E. and Louse, G. (2004). ‘Gender differences in spatial
orientation: A review’, Journal of Environmental Psychology,
24(3), pp. 329–340.

Couclelis, H., Golledge, R. G., Gale, N. and Tobler, W. (1987).
‘Exploring the anchor-point hypothesis of spatial cognition’,
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 7(2), pp. 99–122.

Deakin, A. K. (1996). ‘Landmarks as navigational aids on street maps’,
Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 23, pp. 21–
36.

Devlin, A. S. and Bernstein, J. (1995). ‘Interactive wayfinding: Use of
cues by men and women’, Journal of Environmental Psychology,
15, pp. 23–38.

Duckham, M., Winter, S. and Robinson, M. (2010).

‘Including
landmarks in routing instructions’, Journal of Location Based
Services, 4(1), pp. 28–52.

Fabrikant, S. I., Hespanha, S. R. and Hegarty, M. (2010). ‘Cognitively
inspired and perceptually salient graphic displays for efficient spatial
inference making’, Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, 100(1), pp. 13–29, Retrieved from http://www.
informaworld.com/10.1080/00045600903362378.

Field, A. P. (2009). Discovering Statistics Using SPSS: and Sex,
Drugs And Rock’n’roll (3rd ed.) (2. ed., reprinted). ISM,
Introducing statistical methods, Sage Publ., London.

Folk, M. D. and Luce, R. D. (1987). ‘Effects of stimulus complexity on
mental rotatioin rate of polygons’, Journal of Experimental

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 Landmarks and Map Alignment

53

Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13(3), pp.
395–404.

Freksa, C. (1999). ‘Spatial aspects of task-specific wayfinding maps: A
representation-theoretic perspective’,
in Visual and Spatial
Reasoning in Design, ed. by Gero, J. S. and Tversky, B., pp.
15–32, Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition, Sydney.
Frey, A., Hartig, J., Ketzel, A. and Zinkernagel, A. M. H. (2007). ‘The
use of virtual environments based on a modification of the
computer game Quake III Arena in psychological experimenting’,
Computers in Human Behavior, 23(4), pp. 2026–2039.

Golledge, R. G. (1987). ‘Environmental cognition’, in Handbook of
Environmental Psychology, ed. by Stokols, D. and Altman, I., pp.
131–174, Wiley, New York.

Golledge, R. G. (Ed.) (1999). Wayfinding Behavior: Cognitive
Mapping and Other Spatial Processes, John Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, London.

Goodman, J., Gray, P., Khammampad, K. and Brewster, S. (2004).
in
‘Using landmarks to support older people in navigation’,
MobileHCI 2004, pp. 38–48, Glasgow, UK, September 13–16.
Grossner, K. E., Clarke, K. C. and Goodchild, M. F. (2008). ‘Defining
a digital earth system’, Transactions in GIS, 12(1), pp. 145–160.
Harrower, M. (2007). ‘Utterly lost: Methods for reducing disorienta-
tion in 3-D fly-over maps’, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 34(1), pp. 19–29.

Hegarty, M., Montello, D. R., Richardson, A. E., Ishikawa, T. and
Lovelace, K. (2006). ‘Spatial abilities at different scales: Individual
differences in aptitude-test performance and spatial-layout learn-
ing’, Intelligence, 34, pp. 151–176.

Hegarty, M. and Waller, D. (2004). ‘A dissociation between mental
rotation and perspective-taking spatial abilities’, Intelligence,
32(2), pp. 175–191.

Heil, M. and Jansen-Osmann, P. (2008). ‘Sex differences in mental
rotation with polygons of different complexity: Do men utilize
holistic processes whereas women prefer piecemeal ones?’, The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(5), pp. 683–
689. Retrieved from doi: 10.1080/17470210701822967.

Hills, A. (2005). ‘Smart Wi-Fi’, Scientific American, 26, pp. 86–94.
Ho¨lscher, C., Bu¨chner, S. J., Meilinger, T. and Strube, G. (2007).
‘Map use and wayfinding strategies in a multi-building ensemble’,
in Spatial Cognition V. Reasoning, Action, Interaction, ed. by
Barkowsky, T., Knauff, M., Ligozat, G. and Montello, D. R.,
Springer, Berlin.

Jansen-Osmann, J. and Fuchs, P. (2006). ‘Wayfinding behavior and
spatial knowledge of adults and children in a virtual environment:
The role of landmarks’, Experimental Psychology, 53(3), pp.
171–181.

Janzen, G., Wagensveld, B. and van Turennout, M. (2007). ‘Neural
representation of navigational relevance is rapidly induced and long-
lasting’, Cerebral Cortex, 17(4), pp. 975–981.

Kealy, A., Winter, S. and Retscher, G. (2008). ‘Intelligent location
models for next generation location based services’, Journal of
Location Based Services, 1(4), pp. 237–255.

Klippel, A., Hirtle, S. C. and Davies, C. (2010). ‘You-are-here maps:
Creating spatial awareness through map-like representations (editor-
ial)’, Spatial Cognition and Computation, 10(2 & 3), pp. 83–93.
Koning, A. and van Lier, R. (2004). ‘Mental rotation depends on the
number of objects rather than on the number of image fragments’,
Acta Psychologica, 117(1), pp. 65–77. Retrieved from http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6V5T-4CPM3XM-3/
2/9e309cccd8bd6e880f7c687a66626a2f.

Kru¨ger, A., Baus, J. and Butz, A. (2000). ‘Smart graphics in adaptive
way descriptions’, Advanced Visual Interfaces 2000 (AVI2000),
Palermo, Italy, May 23–26.

Levine, M. (1982). ‘You-are-here maps - Psychological considera-

tions’, Environment and Behavior, 14(2), pp. 221–237.

Levine, M., Jankovic, I. and Palij, M. (1982). ‘Principles of spatial
problem solving’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
111(2), pp. 157–175.

Levinson, S. (1996). ‘Frames of reference and Molyneux’s question:
Cross-linguistic evidence: Language and Space’, in Language and
Space, ed. by Bloom, P., Peterson, M. P., Nadel, L. and Garrett, M.
F., pp. 109–169, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Liben, L. S. and Downs, R. M. (1993). ‘Understanding person - space-
map relations: cartographic and developmental perspectives’,
Developmental Psychology, 29(4), pp. 739–752.

Lobben, A. K.

(2007). Navigational map reading: Predicting
performance and identifying relative influence of map-related
abilities, Annals of the Association of American Geographers,
97(1), pp. 64–85.

Lynch, K. (1960). The Image of the City, MIT Press, Cambridge.
MacEachren, A. M. and Johnson, G. B. (1987). ‘The evolution,
travel maps’,

strip format

application and implications of
Cartographic Journal, 24, pp. 147–158.

May, M., Pe´ruch, P. and Savoyant, A. (1995). ‘Navigating in a virtual
enrironment with map-acquired knowledge: Encoding and align-
ment effects’, Ecological Psychology, 7(1), pp. 21–36.

Meng, FX and Zhang, W. (2012). ‘A review of wayfinding and a new
virtual reality system for wayfinding studies’, International Journal
of Services Operations and Informatics, 7(2/3), pp. 197–211.
Montello, D. R. (2010a). ‘The role of landmarks is exaggerated’, Invited
lecture at Las Navas 2010: Cognitive and Linguistic Aspects of
Geographic Space, Las Navas del Marques, Spain, Jul 5.

Montello, D. R. (2010b). ‘You are where? The function and frustration
of
Spatial Cognition &
Computation: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 10(2), pp. 94–
104. Retrieved from doi: 10.1080/13875860903585323.

(YAH) maps’,

you-are-here

Montello, D. R. (2002). ‘Cognitive map-design research in the twentieth
century: theoretical and empirical approaches’, Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, 29(3), pp. 283–304.

Newman, E. L., Caplan, J. B., Kirschen, M. P., Koroley, I. O., Sekuler,
R. and Kahana, M. J. (2007). ‘Learning your way around town:
How virtual taxicab drivers learn to use both layout and landmark
information’, Cognition, 104, pp. 231–253.

O’Neill, M. (1991). ‘Effects of signage and floor plan configuration on
wayfinding accuracy’, Environment and Behavior, 23(5), pp.
553–574.

Parush, A., Ahuvia, S. and Erev, I. (2007). ‘Degradation in spatial
knowledge acquisition when using automatic navigation systems’,
in Spatial Information Theory. 9th International Conference
(COSIT 2007), ed. by Winter, S., Kuipers, B., Duckham, M. and
Kulik, L., pp. 238–254, Melbourne, Australia, September 19–23.
Springer, Berlin.

Phillips, R. J. (1979). ‘Making maps easy to read: A summary of
research’, in Processing of visual language, (ed. by Kolers, P. A.,
Wrolstad, M. E. and Bouma, H., Vol. 1, pp. 165–174, Plenum
Press, New York.

Phillips, R. J. and Noyes, L. (1982). ‘An investigation of visual clutter
in the topographic base of a geological map’, Cartographic
Journal, 19(2), pp. 122–132.

Presson, C. C. and Montello, D. R. (1988). ‘Points of reference in
spatial cognition: Stalking the elusive landmark’, British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 6, pp. 378–381.

Raper, J., Gartner, G., Karimi, H. A. and Rizos, C. (2007). ‘A critical
evaluation of location based services and their potential’, Journal of
Location Based Services, 1(1), pp. 5–45.

Richter, K.-F. (2007). ‘A uniform handling of different landmark types
in route directions’,
in Spatial Information Theory. 9th
International Conference (COSIT 2007), ed. by Winter, S.,
Kuipers, B., Duckham, M. and Kulik, L., pp. 373–389, Melbourne,
Australia, September 19–23. Springer, Berlin.

Rossano, M. J. and Warren, D. H. (1989). ‘Misaligned maps lead to

predictable errors’, Perception, 18, pp. 215–229.

Shepard, R. N. and Hurwitz, S. (1984). ‘Upward direction, mental
left and right turns in maps’,

rotation, and discrimination of
Cognition, 18, pp. 161–193.

Shepard, R. N. and Metzler, J. (1971). ‘Mental rotation of three

dimensional objects’, Science, 171, pp. 701–703.

Shepard, R. N., Cooper, L. A. and Farrell, J. (1982). Mental Images
and Their Transformations. A Bradford Book, MIT Press,
Cambridge.

Steck, S. D. and Mallot, H. A. (2000). ‘The role of global and local
navigation’, Presence:

landmarks
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 9(1), pp. 69–83.

environment

virtual

in

Strube, G. (1991).

‘The role of cognitive science in knowledge
engineering’, in Proceedings of the First Joint Workshop on
Contemporary Knowledge Engineering and Cognition, pp.
161–174. Springer, Berlin.

Tang, C. H., Wu, W. T. and Lin, C. Y. (2009). ‘Using virtual reality to
determine how emergency signs facilitate way-finding’, Applied
Ergonomics, 40(4), pp. 722–730.

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 54

The Cartographic Journal

Tabachnick, B. G. and Fidell, L. S. (2007). Using Multivariate

Torrens, P. M. (2008). ‘Wi-fi geographies’, Annals of the Association

Statistics, Pearson/Allyn and Bacon, Boston, MA.

of American Geographers, 98(1), pp. 59–84.

Tom, A. and Denis, M. (2003). ‘Referring to landmark or street
iniformation in route directions: What difference does it make?’,
in Spatial Information Theory: Foundations of Geographic
Information Science.
International Conference (COSIT
2003), ed. by Kuhn, W., Worboys, M. and Timpf, S., pp.
362–374, Ittingen, Switzerland, September 24–28. Springer,
Berlin.

Warren, D. H. (1994). ‘Self-localization on plan and oblique maps’,

Environment and Behavior, 26, pp. 71–98.

Warren, D. H. and Scott, T. E. (1993). ‘Map alignment in traveling
multisegment routes’, Environment and Behavior, 25, pp. 643–666.
‘Using virtual
to assess directional knowledge’, Journal of

Waller, D., Beall, A. and Loomis, J. M. (2004).

environments
Environmental Psychology, 24, pp. 105–116.

Downloaded by [University of Sussex Library] at 08:49 15 May 2016 