This article was downloaded by: [Universidad de Sevilla]
On: 21 October 2014, At: 01:55
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Assessing similarity matching for
possible integration of feature
classifications of geospatial data from
official and informal sources
Maythm Al-Bakri a & David Fairbairn a
a School of Civil Engineering and Geosciences , Newcastle
University , Newcastle Upon Tyne , UK
Published online: 10 Feb 2012.

To cite this article: Maythm Al-Bakri & David Fairbairn (2012) Assessing similarity matching
for possible integration of feature classifications of geospatial data from official and informal
sources, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26:8, 1437-1456, DOI:
10.1080/13658816.2011.636012

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.636012

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 26, No. 8, August 2012, 1437–1456

Assessing similarity matching for possible integration of feature
classiﬁcations of geospatial data from ofﬁcial and informal sources

Maythm Al-Bakri and David Fairbairn*

School of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK

(Received 21 January 2011; ﬁnal version received 23 October 2011)

One difﬁculty in integrating geospatial data sets from different sources is variation in
feature classiﬁcation and semantic content of the data. One step towards achieving ben-
eﬁcial semantic interoperability is to assess the semantic similarity among objects that
are categorised within data sets. This article focuses on measuring semantic and struc-
tural similarities between categories of formal data, such as Ordnance Survey (OS)
cartographic data, and volunteered geographic information (VGI), such as that sourced
from OpenStreetMap (OSM), with the intention of assessing possible integration. The
model involves ‘tokenisation’ to search for common roots of words, and the feature
classiﬁcations have been modelled as an XML schema labelled rooted tree for hierar-
chical analysis. The semantic similarity was measured using the WordNet::Similarity
package, while the structural similarities between sub-trees of the source and target
schemas have also been considered. Along with dictionary and structural matching, the
data type of the category itself is a comparison variable. The overall similarity is based
on a weighted combination of these three measures. The results reveal that the use of
a generic similarity matching system leads to poor agreement between the semantics
of OS and OSM data sets. It is concluded that a more rigorous peer-to-peer assess-
ment of VGI data, increasing numbers and transparency of contributors, the initiation
of more programs of quality testing and the development of more directed ontologies
can improve spatial data integration.

Keywords: spatial data integration; semantic similarity; structural similarity; VGI data;
classiﬁcation schema integration

1.

Introduction

The use of contemporary technical infrastructure, including Web 2.0, location-aware
mobile devices and extensive sensor networks, for collecting, disseminating and access-
ing geospatial data, also allows for the ‘geotagging’ of online content by web users and the
development of extensive geodatabases incorporating signiﬁcant user-generated content
(UGC). Deﬁned by (Krumm et al. 2008) as data, information or media that comes from reg-
ular, or ‘amateur’, people who voluntarily contribute their own material to web resources,
UGC has signiﬁcant impact on models of web use and web user behaviour. Goodchild
(2007) has speciﬁed volunteered geographic information (VGI) as an example of UGC in
a geodata context: location (coordinated) and attribute data produced and distributed by

*Corresponding author. Email: dave.fairbairn@newcastle.ac.uk

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.636012
http://www.tandfonline.com

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1438

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

generally untrained citizens, whose actions are voluntary, generally unmoderated and not
motivated by ﬁnancial gain or legal stricture.

As the web becomes the dominant source of geospatial data exchange for ‘formal’
sources of geospatial data, including that supplied by ofﬁcial mapping agencies and
professional geodata providers, a number of data dissemination projects, which handle
‘informal’ or non-ofﬁcial data, have also been developed. OpenStreetMap (OSM) (http://
www.openstreetmap.org), for instance, is one of the leading platforms for VGI, initiated in
2004 and aiming to build a free geographic database of the world (Ramm et al. 2011). This
project has been further developed to create and disseminate maps and geodata, as alter-
natives to ofﬁcial data, and also to contribute to their production. The free accessibility of
OSM data (through license, cost and share policies informed by the Creative Commons –
Attribution-Share Alike approach) and the opening up of a new paradigm of ‘people’s
geodata’ can be considered the current main beneﬁt of this project. The amount of OSM
data grows continually, building on the collaborative approach of users: Haklay (2010)
showed that ‘adequate’ data coverage for England had reached 29% in the ﬁrst 4 years of
the project, while the internal statistics held by OSM show an increasing rate of data cap-
ture and download (http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Stats). Other VGI activities include
Wikimapia (http://wikimapia.org), an online map and satellite imaging resource allowing
contributors to add a ‘tag’, title, description and images to any place mark on a world
map (currently over 15,000,000 places are marked); while Flickr (http://www.ﬂickr.com/)
can be considered a VGI archive, as it allows participants to upload, embed and anno-
tate particular resources, primarily personal photographs of the Earth’s surface, based on
geographical coordinates.

With a different approach, but also taking advantage of contemporary technical devel-
opments, some ofﬁcial mapping agencies, such as Ordnance Survey (OS) of Great Britain,
now supply data through web services and are developing further functionality based on
this (OrdnanceSurvey 2010). The OS’s OpenSpace service allows the embedding of maps
in web applications for levels of detail ranging from the whole of Great Britain down to
street level. It is clear that web-based geospatial data sources are managed by different
communities, targeting a variety of user groups, and their data can also differ in type, for-
mat, quality, coverage and purpose. This variability raises issues of the comparative value
of ofﬁcial data with respect to VGI. VGI may have signiﬁcant value in conjunction with
other Web 2.0 technologies such as social networking and has been used in more critical
situations such as disaster management and spatial data infrastructure (SDI) development:
it is easy to dismiss the ‘amateur’ nature of VGI projects, but it is clear that their geodata is
effectively replacing ofﬁcial data in many human activities, including mapping (Coleman
2010). However, if VGI is being used in conjunction with ofﬁcial data sources, then, as
with any exercise in data integration, caution must be exercised: the reliability, accuracy
and usefulness of VGI must be effectively tested against formal data to determine whether
the former can be used to supplement or enhance the latter. Such testing can also determine
the degree to which it can replace formal data in a range of situations.

The integration of available geodata sources provides a chance to gain the relative
beneﬁts of each data set. Data integration is not just overlaying the data in a geographic
information system, but also assessing how well the geometric and semantic properties of
one data set can be transferred to the other (Butenuth et al. 2007). In two, or more, dif-
ferent databases, the problem of heterogeneity may occur at geometric, semantic and also
structural levels, and this may lead to difﬁculty in attempting integration. Initial responses
of formal data providers (e.g. national mapping agencies) to the availability of VGI, con-
tributed by ‘informal’ spatial data collection activities, may well indicate indifference (and

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1439

even hostility) to the possibilities of integration, with the promotion of an inbuilt sepa-
ration of ‘high-quality’ and ‘low-quality’ databases suggested by some (EuroSDR 2010).
However, there is acknowledgement that although ‘national mapping agencies should fol-
low a direction of dual databases, well linked, (they) may converge in the future’ (op. cit.,
p. 10).

In order for such convergence, and potential data integration, to become useful, to assist
in the development of SDIs, for example, a number of data set properties must be addressed,
including currency (how up-to-date are the data?), completeness (are any data missing?)
and lineage (what are the source and the processing trail of the data?). Also to be included
in any comparative assessment are geometric and semantic characteristics of the data set,
the former based on an assessment of geometric accuracy, an area of signiﬁcant long-
standing interest in the ﬁelds of surveying and geomatics. In the context of Geographic
Information Science (GIS), two possible components of geometric accuracy, positional and
shape accuracy can be considered. Previous studies have compared positional and shape
quality for formal data, such as OS, and VGI data, such as OSM information. Al-Bakri and
Fairbairn’s (2010) emphasis on the positional accuracy of large-scale data has concluded
that there are signiﬁcant shortcomings in geometric accuracy of the OSM data, although
Haklay (2010), adopting an alternative approach using ‘completeness’ as an accuracy met-
ric, concluded that a comparison of OSM data with smaller-scale OS data is favourable.
Saalfeld’s pioneering work on conﬂation (Saalfeld 1988, Wenbo et al. 2009), which exam-
ined the automated convergence of differing spatial data sets based primarily on coordinate
modiﬁcation (e.g. rubber sheeting), showed that an initial geometric approach could help
to also resolve some feature coding ambiguities. An enhancement of such warping pro-
cedures, which are based on identiﬁable corresponding common points in the data sets,
is to calculate and match structural deﬁnitions of geospatial objects. More complete inte-
gration of attribute data relies on a consideration of the inherent meaning within textual
feature descriptions and classes which may be derived from such structural deﬁnitions
(e.g. a sinuous line feature is more likely to be correctly coded as a river than as a rail-
way). Kovalerchuk et al. (2004) have proposed a rule-based system to support image and
data set conﬂation functions further, based on a strategy involving the capture of expertise
from individuals and also from recorded domain-speciﬁc ontologies, and its automated
expansion into an extensive knowledge base. Ontologies are used with image and pattern
recognition techniques to identify the nature, type and coding of features, which are then
conﬂated using the rule base.

Thus, an assessment of the similarity of semantic properties of geospatial objects is
a fundamental notion which needs to be addressed in the context of data integration in
GIScience and a search for beneﬁcial interoperability among geospatial data sets. The
most important problem of heterogeneity in spatial data sets may occur in the lack of
semantic and structural similarities of the data from different sources. A main issue is
concerned with the relationship among the classiﬁcation schema for features, their varying
structures and the meanings carried. It is common, for example, to ﬁnd that the same
concept (e.g. ‘track’) is given different names in two data sets (e.g. ‘footway’ and ‘path’).
At the same time, it is possible that a categorised feature may belong to a sub-class in one
data set and a super-class in another one. Integration of multiple geospatial data sets, with
variability in categorisation/classiﬁcation schema and semantic meaning of those feature
classes, therefore remains a major challenge facing geospatial data consumers handling
different data sets.

Methods of assessing and modelling semantic similarity have received some attention
from the GI community (e.g. Winter 2001, Spaccapietra et al. 2005, Schwering 2008).

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1440

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

Approaches to semantic similarity assessment may use geometric, network, feature, align-
ment or transformational models, differing with respect to the ways in which concepts are
deﬁned or positioned, how they are then related and the metric properties of that relation-
ship. In geometric models, the spatial distance apart of concepts, classed and positioned in a
multi-dimensional space, would indicate a measure of relative semantic similarity. Network
modelling for semantic similarity is similarly based on the location of concepts within a
categorisation space, but with connectivities and neighbourhoods established using super-
and sub-class linkages. In a feature model, indirect calculation of similarity based on deﬁni-
tions of concepts related to unsorted lists of features leads to a measure of metric similarity
based on equations presented by Tversky (1977). The alignment models are close to feature
models, but similarities are assessed using the equivalent of pattern matching, by determin-
ing whether elements align with each other or not. The transformational models compute
semantic similarity according to the number of transforming steps necessary to make one
concept equal to another: clearly similarity is low if there are a large number of perceptual
steps required to perform such matching.

It should be further considered that the broader use of ontologies can assist in the
development of semantic similarity testing. Formal ontologies present speciﬁcations and
descriptions related to entities, generally within a particular domain. The content of
ontologies of geographic information can be used to examine classiﬁcation schemas,
assess adherence to standards of geodata and deﬁne rules for concepts and relationships
of features. In the project described in this article, the ontologies embedded in the chosen
similarity matching software are used to quantify semantic similarity.

The focus is on the integration of classiﬁcation schemas for ofﬁcial data, such as
OS national mapping data, and for VGI data, such as the data derived from the OSM
project. Semantic similarity testing covered feature classiﬁcation, in effect comparing pos-
sible categories (legend classes) and actual attributes attached to features. This initially
involved ‘tokenisation’ to search for common roots of words and hierarchical ordering of
classes in an XML schema labelled rooted tree. The semantic similarity software package
(WordNet::Similarity) was used to compute the similarity between the classes based on
a lexical database of dictionary deﬁnitions. Among several proposed semantic similarity
measures offered in WordNet::Similarity, the Lin approach has been adopted to give nor-
malised comparison scores. Along with this dictionary matching of semantic similarity,
data-type similarity is also used as a comparison variable. Further, the structural similar-
ity between sub-trees of source and target schemas has also been considered. Thus, the
position of a class in the schema hierarchy, and its sibling and ancestor nodes, has been
quantiﬁed and compared. The overall similarity of the feature classiﬁcation of one data set
with another is based on a weighted combination of these three measures.

2. The nature of volunteered geographic information

The increasing availability of VGI can be considered as both an opportunity and a chal-
lenge for the geographic information handling community. This article addresses one
particular issue, the alignment of VGI with longer-established, generally ‘ofﬁcial’ and for-
mally created geospatial data sets, through an assessment of their integration possibilities.
Associated with this, and worthy of further discussion, are broader points including the
merits and drawbacks of reliance on VGI, the factors that inﬂuence the worth of VGI and
the characteristics of VGI which can bring ‘added value’ to GI applications.

While a range of systems have been developed to handle, store and disseminate VGI,
these vary in terms of the provenance, the checking and the accessibility of data. The

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1441

varying models used by, for example, Google Maps, with its MapMaker facility for com-
mercially incorporating VGI supplied by users; OSM, with its mission to display users’
own data under a Creative Commons licence and swisstopo, with its interactive revi-
sion service recording user input into the topographic mapping revision process, are each
indicative of the potentially confusing choices faced by members of the GI community in
creating and using VGI in practice. Although there is signiﬁcant usage of VGI by those
undertaking passive visualisation activities, more active and interactive, GI use tasks, such
as navigation, policy-making and regulation, recording and archiving and spatial analysis,
require data that are reliable, standardised and consistent.

Applications for VGI in statutory mapping, for example, by local government, are
increasing. Spatial analysis increasingly relies on alternatives to formal map data (e.g.
Singleton et al. 2011). The role of VGI in emergency mapping is well documented, notably
in accounts of the work of the OSM community in assisting emergency planning in Haiti
after the January 2010 earthquake (Neis et al. 2010). Some of the most formal GI data
handling initiatives within frameworks for SDIs consider the possible contribution of VGI
(McDougall 2009). In all such applications, information about the VGI is essential in order
to assess the worth of the data, its possibilities in integration with other data and the value
of derived information.

Data quality issues are central to such assessment. VGI is usually initiated and created
by volunteers who are often unqualiﬁed, untrained, with no experience and no requirement
to adopt professional standards. Further, for most VGI projects, no extensive metadata
exist, which can often imply poor-quality data. In contrast, information obtained from tra-
ditional mapping agencies can usually convey an immediate sense of care, attention to
detail, experienced compilation and consequent high quality. Extensive metadata exists,
often in the form of documented speciﬁcations based on national and international stan-
dards. As noted by Castelein et al. (2010) in the access to such formal data is focussed
on a user service model, while VGI systems concentrate primarily on accumulating and
representing the community effort in data collection. Although the interfaces for such sys-
tems are effective and efﬁcient, the major purpose is the display of the data, rather than its
download and use by the GI community.

VGI data collection efforts involve a wide range of GPS devices, satellite images, aerial
photographs and local knowledge (Ramm et al. 2011). The former tend to be low accuracy,
while deriving data from the imagery of an unfamiliar area often leads to inconsistency and
inaccuracy. Further variability in VGI can be due to the nature of the area mapped. Al-Bakri
and Fairbairn (2010) have shown that rural and natural VGI data (soft detail) have a lower
positional accuracy and completeness compared to the ‘hard’, man-made data collected in
urban sites – and user experience and abilities exhibit similar variation.

Given the nature of VGI data, their signiﬁcant potential for use in the GI community
and their potential application alongside formal data, it is important to understand the pos-
sibilities and limitations of these data source. In particular, the integration of VGI with
formal data needs consideration: it is one aspect of this which is investigated here.

3. WordNet and similarity methods
WordNet is a lexical online database for the English language, created and maintained
at Princeton University, and designed to establish the connections between four types of
Parts of Speech (POS): noun, verb, adjective and adverb. These sets of words are organised
into sets of cognitive synonyms (synsets), which represent a speciﬁc meaning of the word.
A synset also has a short deﬁnition or description of the real-world concept known as a

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1442

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

Entity

Object

Artefact

Instrumentality

Conveyance

Public transport

Train

Bus

Ceramic

Brick

Figure 1. A fragment of the WordNet is-a hierarchy (Giannis et al. 2005).

‘gloss’. A tree-like hierarchical structure is designed for synsets in WordNet. For instance,
in version 2.0, there are nine separate noun hierarchies that include 80,000 concepts and
554 verb hierarchies that are made up of 13,500 concepts (Pedersen et al. 2004a). The rela-
tionship between a currently chosen synset and other synsets is deﬁned through different
types of explicit semantic connections. The most common of these are hyponymy, hyper-
nymy and troponymy (‘is-a’ or ‘kind-of’ relationships), meronymy and holonymy (‘part-of’
relationships). Figure 1 illustrates a fragment of the WordNet ‘Is-A’ hierarchy.

WordNet is particularly suitable for semantic similarity and relatedness measures, as
it organises the information into meaning-rich hierarchies. A component package, the
WordNet::Similarity software, can be used to measure semantic similarity and relatedness
between a pair of concepts based on the lexical database WordNet. It is important to
note that there is a difference between semantic similarity and relatedness similarity.
Two concepts are semantically similar when they can be synonyms or have similar mea-
sured meaning. For example, such a measure can show that ‘footway’ is more similar to
‘pathway’ than it is to ‘river’. Relatedness similarity quantiﬁes the degrees to which two
concepts are linked to each other. For instance, two terms can be related because one is a
part of another (e.g. ‘leaves’ and ‘tree’), or there is any other kind of accepted relationship
(such as ‘paper’ and ‘pencil’).

WordNet::Similarity provides six measures of semantic similarity, and three measures

of relatedness as follows (Pedersen et al. 2004b).
res: According to Resnik (1995), semantic similarity can be determined based on the
common information of the two concepts being considered. The information content of
a concept (c) can be quantiﬁed as minus the log likelihood (–log p(c)). This quantitative
characterisation of information provides a way to measure semantic similarity. Formally
deﬁned, similarity between c1 and c2 is

sim (c1, c2) = maxc ∈ S(c1,c2)[− log p(c)]

(1)

where S(c1, c2) is the set of concepts that subsume both c1 and c2 and p(c) is the probability
of encountering an instance of a synset c in a speciﬁc corpus.
lin: Lin’s (1998) measure of semantic similarity considers the information content of the
least common subsume, augmenting it with the sum of the information content of classes
c1 and c2 themselves. It scales the information content of the least common subsume by
this sum. The Lin measure is deﬁned as

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1443

sim (c1, c2) =

2 × log p(co)
log p(c1) + log p(c2)

(2)

where c0 is the most speciﬁc parent class subsuming the concepts c1 and c2 between which
the semantic similarity is measured.
jcn: Jiang and Conrath (1997) also relied on the notion of the statistical information content
of a corpus for measuring semantic similarity, but combined this with a lexical taxonomy
structure. Speciﬁcally, this combined model employs edge-based distances while adding
the information content as a decision factor. In particular, attention has been given to the
conditional probability of encountering an instance of a child synset and an instance of a
parent synset. Therefore, the information content of two nodes representing concepts and
that for their subsumes will both inﬂuence the model. Originally Jiang and Conrath deﬁned
the distance between two concepts as follows:

distjc(c1,c2) = IC(c1) + IC(c2) − 2 × IC [lcs(c1, c2)]

(3)

where IC is the information content of a concept and lcs is the lowest common subsume
(LCS) of two given concepts.
lch: Leacock and Chodorow (1998) measured the semantic similarity between two words
by using the distance between them in WordNet. This can be done by ﬁnding the shortest
path between two concepts and scaling that value by the maximum depth of the taxonomy.
The similarity between c1 and c2 can be computed using the following formula:

sim (c1,c2) = − log

Np
2D

where c1 and c2 represent the two concepts, Np the length of the shortest path between the
two synsets a and b and D the maximum depth of the taxonomy.
wup: Wu and Palmer’s (1994) semantic similarity metrics are based on path lengths
between concepts located in the WordNet hierarchy. It calculates the depth of the LCS
of the concepts from the root of the hierarchy, and then scales that value by the sum of the
depth of the individual concepts, which is deﬁned as in Figure 2 and Equation (5):

(4)

(5)

sim (c1, c2) =

2 × N3
N1 + N2 + 2 × N3

where N 1 is the number of nodes on the path from c1 to c3, N 2 is the number of nodes on
the path from c2 to c3 and N 3 is the number of nodes on the path from c3 to the root.

Root

N3

C3

N1

N2

C1

C2

Figure 2. The concept of similarity measure (Wu and Palmer 1994).

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1444

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

path: Pedersen et al. (2004b) deﬁnes this method as the measuring of the inverse of the
shortest path length between two concepts (e.g. the paths N 1 and N 2 between concepts c1
and c2 in Figure 2).
hso: The Hirst and Onge (1998) method uses all of the semantic relationships in
WordNet and classiﬁes these as ‘upwards’, ‘downwards’ and ‘horizontal’. It then estab-
lish relatedness between concepts c1 and c2 by taking into account both path length and
the number of changes in direction of the path. The strength of relationship is given by the
following (Budanitsky and Hirst 2001):

rel (c1, c2) = C − path length − k × d

(6)

where d is the number of changes of direction in the path and C and k are constants.
lesk: Banerjee and Pedersen (2003) presented another measure of semantic relatedness
between concepts that is based on incorporated information from WordNet glosses. This
method can assign a value of relatedness between two concepts c1 and c2 by measuring the
number of overlapping words in their respective glosses.
vector: In this method, Patwardhan (2003) suggested that each concept in WordNet can be
represented by a ‘gloss vector’, a context vector formed by considering a WordNet gloss
as the context. The relatedness of two concepts is then determined as the cosine of the
normalised gloss vectors corresponding to the two concepts, which can be represented as
follows:

relvector(c1, c2) = cos

(cid:2)
angle

(cid:3)−→
v1 ,

−→
v2

(cid:4)(cid:5)

(7)

where c1 and c2 are the two given concepts,
to the concepts and angle is the angle between vectors.

−→
v1 and

−→
v2 are the gloss vectors corresponding

WordNet::Similarity thus offers a range of possible measures of similarity, based on a
number of metrics. This geospatial project aims to use one of these in the practical task
of comparing classiﬁcations (or database attribute codings, or map legend categories) of
discrete data sets to determine their possible integration.

4. WordNet::Similarity performance
In choosing which measure to use from the range of similarity metrics offered by
WordNet::Similarity, it would be reasonable to evaluate the performance of each of the
indices and their rating related to human judgement. The data of human ratings have been
experimentally addressed by Miller and Charles (1991). The generic test on the similarity
of noun pairs revealed results tabulated in Figure 3.

The performance of each of the methods described above was evaluated by calculat-
ing Pearson’s correlation values (Figure 3). The information content of the LCS similarity
methods have a minimum score of 0.47 (Jiang and Conrath) and maximum score of 0.80
(Resnik). Path length methods vary little from 0.75 (path method) to 0.78 (Leacock and
Chodorow). The relatedness methods vary from 0.35 (Banerjee and Pedersen) to 0.89
(vector method).

Thus, the similarity score of vector method is very close to human judgement results.
Path length methods also seem to perform very well, especially the lch method. With infor-
mation content similarity approaches, the lin and res methods are very close to each other,
both performing better than other methods in this family. For semantic similarity in this

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1445

WordNet similarity performance

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

H-J

Res

Lin

Jcn

Lch

Wup

Path

Hso

Lesk

Vector

Semantic similarity methods

Figure 3. The correlation between human judgement results and WordNet::Similarity methods.

study, Lin’s (1998) approach has been adopted because it emphasises the meaning rela-
tionship, and the range of similarity scores is between 0 and 1, thus a normalising process
is not required (unlike the Resnik method).

5. Semantic similarity assessment between different features
5.1. Preprocessing of classes name

A geospatial data category name can be classiﬁed as either (1) an atomic name, com-
posed of a single word or (2) a composite name, composed of multiple words. In the latter
case (and for complex single words), it is necessary to split the name into ‘tokens’ (an
identiﬁable word or root) before computing the semantic similarity with another one: this
operation is called ‘tokenisation’ (Tansalarak and Claypool 2007). Each category name is
parsed into a set of tokens (L) using delimiters such as punctuation, uppercase or special
symbols. A simple example is to tokenise ‘bus stop’ into ‘bus’, ‘stop’; a more complex
example might be to break down the category ‘scrub and rough grassland’.

A second step in preprocessing a set of class names is to encode feature classiﬁcations
as XML schema. Such an action allows for individual comparison of classes along with
a consideration of hierarchical organisations of the entire classiﬁcation array. In general
terms, an XML schema provides the data structure of XML documents, deﬁning a set of
elements and type declarations. The data model that represents an XML schema can be
considered an important factor in measuring XML schema similarity. Several authors have
suggested various approaches for modelling XML schema, as described in (Erhard and
Philip 2001) and (Melinik et al. 2002). A recent study by Thang and Nam (2010) reported
that the most signiﬁcant approach is to represent schema as labelled graphs. The hierarchi-
cal nature of an XML schema tree can consist of relationships such as parent–child, order
relationships or ancestor–descendant. The XML schema itself is typically comprised of a
set of components such as element declarations, attribute declarations, simple-type deﬁni-
tions and complex-type deﬁnitions. The simple-type deﬁnition has a simple content, which
can be deﬁned as, for example, string, decimal, integer and Boolean. Complex–type deﬁ-
nitions can be considered the internal nodes in the schema graph. Each of them is declared

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1446

(a)

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

(b)

Tidal water

Foreshore

Water

Inland water

Track

Roador
Track

Path

Roadside

Roads, tracks and
paths

Rail

Rail

Land

General surface

Multi surface

Scrub, rough grassland
& non-coniferous trees

Coniferous trees, non-
coniferous trees & scrub

Natural
environment

Non-coniferous trees, scrub

Buildings

Building

Scrub

Structures

Structure

Coniferous trees, non-
coniferous trees

Non-coniferous trees

Teritary

Unclassified

Track

Service

Cycleway

Footway

Residential

BusStop

Rail

Level crossing

Stream

Riverbank

River

Recretion ground

Allotments

Garden

Playground

Golfcourse

Nature reserve

Pitch

Bird hide

Wood

Water

Gate

Stile

Sub station

Post box

Town hall

Place of worship

Memorial

Highway

Railway

Waterway

Leisure

Natural

Barrier

Power

Am enity

Historic

Building

OS Mastermap

Landform

Farm

Landuse

Physical

OSM project

Figure 4. XML schemas for feature classiﬁcations (a) OS data set (b) OSM data set.

by other nodes through directed labelled edges (Formica 2008). Thus, a labelled, hierarchi-
cal, XML schema allows for semantic similarity assessment, along with further data-type
similarity measurement, and structural similarity comparison.

The feature classiﬁcations to be compared – the topographic layer of OS MasterMap
and the OSM data set – each covering the same areas in both Cramlington and Clara Vale,
have been modelled as labelled rooted trees in an XML schema model. Each element or
attribute of the schema is translated into a node. The semantic models of two XML schemas
for features in Clara Vale are shown in Figure 4. Many features in each data set are the same,
but differences occur in the deﬁnitions of concepts, categories and classiﬁcations. It can be
seen from Figure 4 that there are some concepts in OS data from one level that correspond
to a different level of the OSM schema. For instance, ‘rail’ corresponds to the third level of
the OS schema, but to the fourth level of the OSM schema. There are some concepts such as
‘track’ that have the same meaning and the same level in both schemas. For the term ‘path’
in the OS model, there is no exact equivalent term in the OSM schema, although there
is a synonym concept, ‘footway’. For some features in OSM (e.g. playground or garden)
there is no correspondence in OS data, and vice versa. Some OS categories are combined
area classes, with mixed vegetation cover. The use of semantic and structural similarities
as measures of overlap for different data sets could ensure integration of classiﬁcation
schemas for different sources of data sets, although this does not initially look promising
from the variability shown in Figure 4.

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1447

5.2. Name similarity measure

Each named class has been tokenised into a list of words, and the WordNet::Similarity
software package has been used to compute the similarity between the words. Measuring
the name similarity of two sets of tokens L1 and L2 can assist in determining how linguisti-
cally close the names of two features are. The name similarity between the two sets of name
tokens can be determined as the average best similarity measure for each source token with
a target token, as follows (Tansalarak and Claypool 2007):

(cid:6)

Nsim (N1, N2) =

[maxl2∈ L2 sim(l1, l2)] +

l1∈ L1

l2∈ L2

[maxl1∈ L1 sim(l1, l2)]

(8)

(cid:6)

|L1| + |L2|

where |L1| and |L2| are the lengths of the token sets for words N 1 and N 2, respectively,
and l1, and l2 are the respective lin similarity measurements. This equation ensures con-
sideration of common cases where cross-referencing of multiple words and tokens is
required.

The output of semantic relations is a coefﬁcient in the range (0, 1), indicating the
strength of the name similarity. High values correspond to similar names (i.e. 1 indicates
identical names), whereas low values correspond to different names. The value recorded
is the maximum score from a matching of every deﬁnition of two tested features: most
of the terms recorded in the generic WordNet ontology have several speciﬁc deﬁnitions
and for the tests reported here, the best match has been adopted. For example, the term
‘path’ (which has four separate deﬁnitions in WordNet) and the term ‘track’ (which has
10 deﬁnitions) were submitted without any speciﬁc senses being pre-determined. In this
case, deﬁnition number 4 of ‘path’ matched optimally with deﬁnition number 1 of ‘track’
with a score of 1.0 and it was this score which was recorded. There is a possibility that the
optimally matched deﬁnitions are not linking the desired geospatial concepts, but inves-
tigation of the tested data sets revealed that this was never the case. Thus, the optimal
score for linking ‘path’ and ‘track’ was derived from separate deﬁnitions based on the ‘line
or route along which something travels or moves’, not deﬁnitions based on ‘a course of
conduct’ (path) and ‘a groove on a phonograph recording’ (track). It is suggested that the
nature of the comparison of two class names speciﬁcally from geospatial data sets will
invariably ensure that it is similarity in the geospatial domain which will be measured and
scored most highly.

The semantic similarity measure between geospatial concepts presented here is based
on two sets of analyses. The ﬁrst set of analyses examined the semantic similarity of all
corresponding feature pairs of OS and OSM data for urban and rural areas. It can be seen
from the data in Tables 1 and 2 that there is agreement between the semantic matching rates
in both urban and rural areas. In both sets, the lower similarity scores (0.00–0.25) predom-
inate while there are few features exhibiting high similarity scores (0.75–1.00) – in fact,
none in the urban area. Thus, a signiﬁcant ﬁnding from this part of the study is that there is
a signiﬁcant separation between most of the feature pairs of OS and OSM data sets.

A second set of experiments was implemented to observe the nature of the relationship
between the nodes of two schemas. As Howard et al. (2010) reported, there are several
categories of nodes relationships (correspondences) such as One-To-One, when one class
in the ﬁrst schema matches only one class from another schema; One-To-Many, when one
node in the source schema matches two or more nodes in the other; and Many-To-One,
when multiple instances in one schema match a single instance in another schema. In addi-
tion, there are missing correspondences (Source Lacks Data) when the element required

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1448

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

Table 1. Results of feature-based approach in Cramlington (urban).

Semantic similarity score

Rate (%)

Table 2. Results of feature-based approach in Clara Vale (rural).

Semantic similarity score

Rate (%)

0.00 ≤ S < 0.25
0.25 ≤ S < 0.50
0.50 ≤ S < 0.75
0.75 ≤ S ≤ 1.00

0.00 ≤ S < 0.25
0.25 ≤ S < 0.50
0.50 ≤ S < 0.75
0.75 ≤ S ≤ 1.00

54
19
27
0

58
20
11
11

by the target schema is lacking in the source schema or (Target Lacks Data), when data
present in the source schema has no corresponding location in the target schema. A matrix
of semantic similarity scores was created for the classes in two schemas (the OS schema
and the OSM schema). If the semantic similarity score exceeded 0.5, then a relationship
was assumed.

The relationships were examined and Tables 3 and 4 show the results obtained from
the analysis of semantic correspondence of schema node classiﬁcations in the urban and
rural areas, respectively. The most striking result is that there are no One-To-One rela-
tions for any classes in either area. Thus, there is no semantic similarity score greater than
0.5 recorded for a unique relation between only one class in each of the data sets (the
source and the target classiﬁcation schemas). Confused relationships are indicated by the
signiﬁcant rate values for the multiple node relations. For instance, in Table 3, the rate of
the relations One-To-Many and Many-To-One were 44% and 53%, respectively (note that

Table 3. Results of schemas relationships in Cramlington.

Node relations

Rate (%)

Single correspondences (One class in Source-To-One class in Target)
Single correspondences (One class in Source-To-Many classes in Target)
Single correspondences (Many classes in Source-To-One class in Target)
Missing correspondence (Source Lacks Data)
Missing correspondence (Target Lacks Data)

Table 4. Results of schemas relationships in Clara Vale.

Node relations

Rate (%)

Single correspondences (One class in Source-To-One class in Target)
Single correspondences (One class in Source-To-Many classes in Target)
Single correspondences (Many classes in Source-To-One class in Target)
Missing correspondence (Source Lacks Data)
Missing correspondence (Target Lacks Data)

0
44
53
47
41

0
43
57
43
39

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1449

some source classes do appear in both of these categories). Approximately half of the nodes
in one schema match two or more nodes in the other schema. Further, there are consider-
able numbers of features which have no correspondences in the other schema, reﬂected
by the results for the categories ‘Missing correspondences’. These ﬁndings conﬁrm the
disappointing rate of similarity between formal sources such as OS data and VGI data
such as OSM information and the probable difﬁculties in subsequently integrating their
classiﬁcation schema.

A major reason for such discrepancy is that the tags (names of classes) of OSM features
can be arbitrary strings. There is no deﬁnitive list of allowed tags in OSM, and the mapper
can (and does) choose whatever tags he/she likes. This open condition has enabled map-
pers to create and use most tags without needing to refer to a central authority or complex
decision-making process. Although proposals for new tags should be voted upon, in reality
only a very small number of people are interested in this process. Many of the contributors
just create the tags that they need for their own mapping without vote. Often they simply
consult their peers by e-mail and if a suggested tag seems sensible or if no objection is
raised, then the mapper may introduce and use a tag regardless of whether anyone else has
used it, or whether it has been put to any type of ‘vote’. A second possible explanation
for the mismatching of classes comes from the method by which OSM data sources are
recorded. There are many sources of OSM data such as Yahoo aerial or satellite imagery,
Landsat products, GPS tracking and ﬁeld survey. Ramm et al. (2011) indicate that the
‘source’ tag on OSM feature data is commonly used to specify the origin of the data. In the
case of secondary image-sourced data, the mapper will often guess the classiﬁcation of an
identiﬁed feature. Specifying data sources allows others to assess precision of both plani-
metric accuracy and feature coding correctness: for instance, a tag pathway with ‘source =
landsat’ will usually be less geometrically precise than that obtained by GPS tracking, and
the feature classiﬁcation may have similar inaccuracies. The use, by OSM mappers, of data
sources such as imagery, unsupported by ﬁeld completion, is a further indication of the
possible lack of rigour in feature attribution.

The results from the name similarity tests described here do not reﬂect the intuitive
matching which might be employed by a GIS expert to assist in integrating classes of
geographical features. The submission of the OS and OSM feature classiﬁcations to the
WordNet::Similarity software has revealed that such mechanistic attempts to integrate
schemas do not yield success. It may be that more focussed ontologies than the general
deﬁnitions listings held in WordNet would improve the matching and subsequent data
integration. Clearly this would involve signiﬁcant preprocessing, such as the ontologies
development implemented by Kovalerchuk et al. (2004), along with the use of a system
which allowed for the ‘expert-captured’ deﬁnitions to be easily added to the ontologies
held within it.

6. Structural similarity

Structural correspondence determines the similarity between two concepts as a function of
the length of the path in a labelled graph linking the terms and the position of the element in
the hierarchy. Rada et al (1989) proposed a similarity measure called ‘distance’ to compute
the conceptual distance for measuring similarity between two concepts in the same hier-
archy. Their method can measure the average minimum path length between all pairwise
combinations of nodes under two different subsets of nodes. Such methods are applied
to measure the structural similarity between separate concepts in one hierarchy. In this
study, however, the similarity between two separate elements in two different hierarchies

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1450

(a)

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

(b)

Teritary

Road or
track

Path

Roadside

Unclassified

Track

Service

Cycleway

Footway

Residential

Bus stop

OS mastermap

Roads, tracks
and paths

Highway

Physical

OSM project

Figure 5. An example of structural similarity for part of OS and OSM schema in Clara_Vale (a) OS
data set (b) OSM data set.

is the target. Therefore, a distance measure has been developed which considers structural
similarity based on the semantic similarity of parents, siblings and children and hierar-
chy (Amarintrarak et al. 2009). The structural similarity between the elements of schemas
is based on the number of similar child elements, along with the position of sibling and
ancestor nodes of source and target nodes as shown in Equation (9):

StrSim (n1, n2) =

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

1
p

×

sls
sib

(9)

where p is the shortest path length of the parent node level of n1 which has semantic
similarity to the parent node of n2. Amarintrarak et al. (2009) suggested that the shortest
path length which is considerable will be less than 10 steps, and if p is more than 10 or
not found, then the parent node similarity is very small (and p value will set to 10); sls is
the number of sibling nodes of n1 which have semantic similarity to sibling nodes of n2;
sib will be the number of sibling nodes of n1, when the number of sibling nodes of n1 is
greater than the number of sibling nodes of n2 (otherwise, sib will be the number of sibling
nodes of n2).

Figure 5 shows part of XML schema trees of OS and OSM in the rural area. An assess-
ment of the structural similarity between footway (OSM schema) and path (OS schema),
for example, yields the fact that the semantic similarity of the parents (‘roads, tracks and
paths’ with ‘highway’) is 0.44: this is low and no similarity can be assumed; thus P is 10.
The number of sibling nodes for ‘footway’ is 7, but none of these have any signiﬁcant
semantic similarity with the siblings nodes for ‘path’, thus sls is 0. The structural similarity
between footway and path is therefore:

StrSim (footway, path) = 1
10

× 0
7

= 0

A series of tests revealed that there is no structural similarity between OS and OSM data
sets, mainly because the initial semantic similarity between two data sets on which this is
predicated is already very low.

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1451

7. Data-type similarity

As mentioned in Section 5.1, the XML schema can consist of elements of varying data
types and formats. The element data type is a further schema information characteristic
which can make a contribution to determining the XML schema element similarity. One
method to determine data-type similarity is to build a data-type similarity table based on
the approach suggested by Hong-Minh and Smith (2007). They proposed a function for
measuring the compatibility of two data types presented in hierarchical structure of types,
as in Figure 6. The compatibility c between two data types d1 and d2 can be deﬁned as
follows:

c (d1, d2) = e−βl × eαh − e−αh
eαh + e−αh

d1 (cid:5)= d2

c (d1, d2) = 1 d1 = d2

(10)

(11)

where d1 and d2 are the data types of node one (n1) and node two (n2), respectively; l is
the shortest path length between d1 and d2; h is the depth of subsuming node of d1 and d2
and α and β are tuning parameters (determined experimentally by Hong-Minh and Smith
(2007) to both equal 0.3057). Data-type similarity coefﬁcient ranges between (0, 1) and
Table 5 shows a portion of the data-type similarity table.

Although data-type similarity might appear to be a rigorous method for classifying and
comparing the methods by which attributes are held and presented, the large number of
different possible elements available, as shown in Figure 6, suggests that this measure of
similarity might be less critical than the semantic and structural metrics. With the data sets
used in this project, the data-type similarity measurement was usually 1.0, reﬂecting the
String:String nature of data-type comparisons, although some were classed as 0.0 when
deﬁned as String:Complex comparisons.

All complex types

All simple types

Anytype

Calendar

Duration

Date time Time Date

gYearMonth

gYear

gMonthDay

gDay

gMonth

Text

Logic

Numeric

Other

String

Boolean

Base64binary

Hexbinary

Float

Decimal Double

Any URI QName

Notation

Normalizedstring

Token

Integer

Nonpositive integer

Long

Non negative integer

Language

Name

NMtoken

Negative integer

Int

Usinged long

Positive integer

NCName

NCtokens

ID

IDREF

ENTITY

IDREFS

ENTITIES

Short

Byte

Usinged int

Usinged short

Usinged byte

Figure 6. The hierarchy of XML schema data types (Hong-Minh and Smith 2007).

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1452

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

Table 5. Portion of data-type similarity.

Type 1

String
String
Token
Float
–

Type 2

String
Token
Name
Integer
–

Similarity

1
0.4
0.7
0.2
–

8. Similarities combination

Notwithstanding the varying perceptions of the relative merits of each similarity measure,
each has value in an attempt to understand the relationship between two different geospatial
data classiﬁcation strategies. Thus, the combining of the three similarities (semantic,
structural and data-type) was examined.

This could be done by averaging; by taking the maximum measure of the three; by
additive combination (e.g. [1 – (1 – similaritya)(1 – similarityb)(1 – similarityc)]) or by
calculating a weighted sum. Kim et al. (2008) recommend the latter

sim (A, B) = (WN × Nsim) + (WS × Ssim) + (WT × Tsim)

(12)

where N sim, Ssim and T sim are name (semantic) similarity, structural similarity and data-type
similarity, respectively; and WN, WS and WT are similarity weights, WN + WS + WT = 1

The weights which indicate the importance of each measure in determining similarity
can be obtained from the domain experts or learned from human semantic mapping data.
Amarintrarak et al (2009) suggested that the element name is the essential information in
determining similarity, thus assign it the highest weight (WN = 0.5); structural similarity
shows the right or wrong position of an element in tree, so is weighted next most important
(WS = 0.35) and the weight for data-type similarity (WT) is assigned as 0.15 (the least
important).

An evaluation of the combined similarity measures, for the OS and OSM data sets in
both urban and rural areas is reported in Tables 6 and 7. The results indicate the rates of
node correspondences are very low, while the rates of missing correspondences are very
high. For instance, the single correspondences One-To-One relation achieves combined
similarity rates 3% and 5% in urban and rural areas, respectively, whereas the rates of the
combined similarities for the missing correspondence (Source Lacks Data) relation were
91% and 74% for both the areas. Clearly, the results are not very supportive of attempts to

Table 6. Results of combined similarity between OS and OSM classiﬁcation in
Cramlington.

Similarity relation

Single correspondences (One-To-One)
Single correspondences (One-To-Many)
Single correspondences (Many-To-One)
Missing correspondence (Source Lacks Data)
Missing correspondence (Target Lacks Data)

Rate (%)

3
0
6
91
88

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1453

Table 7. Results of combined similarity between OS and OSM classiﬁcation in
Clara Vale.

Similarity relation

Single correspondences (One-To-One)
Single correspondences (One-To-Many)
Single correspondences (Many-To-One)
Missing correspondence (Source Lacks Data)
Missing correspondence (Target Lacks Data)

Rate (%)

5
10
17
74
58

integrate feature classiﬁcation from formal data such as OS sources and VGI data such as
OSM information.

9. Discussion and conclusion
Semantic interoperability is a very important step for geospatial data integration in all
forms. The main issues are concerned with the relationship between the structure of the ele-
ments of a classiﬁcation schema (the ‘legend’, in traditional terminology) and the meanings
they carry. This article presents an approach to measure semantic and structural similari-
ties among data sets for such integration purposes. Several similarity assessment methods,
along with ideas from other ﬁelds, have been combined together in order to assess the inte-
gration of ofﬁcial data, such as OS data, and VGI, such as OSM data. Firstly, a tokenisation
was applied, splitting up category names composed of multiple words into single words,
and considering word roots and common stems. Then, the feature classiﬁcations were mod-
elled as an XML schema labelled rooted tree. The WordNet::Similarity software package
was used to compute the semantic similarity between the classes. The structural similar-
ity between sub-trees of source and target schemas was also considered. Along with such
dictionary and structural matching, data type itself is a comparison variable. The overall
similarity has been calculated by combining all individual similarity measures together.
The results of this analysis found that the structures and semantics data of OSM do not
generally match the OS data sets. As shown in Tables 1 and 2, the number of features in
the data sets which can be deﬁned as ‘matching’ in terms of feature class (using a relatively
low threshold, 0.5) is 27% for the urban area, and 22% for the rural area. Tables 3 and 4
show the direct matching of feature class name between data sets is very low.

Major issues emerging from this investigation include the handling of the hetero-
geneity between authoritative and VGI data and suggestions of how to minimise it for
successful integration purposes. It is suggested that much more consideration be given to
establishing greater authority of VGI data sources by initiating programs of quality test-
ing and publishing more detailed documentation of the procedures used to create such
data. Associated with this, a more rigorous implementation of peer-to-peer assessment can
improve the reliability of informal data: network methods already exist to assist in the
determination of information credibility. Next, the number of people engaged in creating
VGI data has impact on data itself: entries created by individuals are likely to be less accu-
rate than objects created by large numbers of volunteers. Haklay et al. (2010) concluded
that ‘Linus Law’, which proposes a positive correlation between the number of contributors
to open-source system development and data quality, is valid for VGI data, in general, and
OSM mapping, in particular. Further, more generic approaches can be attempted following
procedures assessing the quality of Wikipedia contributors: Flanagin and Metzger (2008)

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1454

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

suggested increasing author transparency using WikiScanner which can reveal the identity
(via IP address) of editors and contributors of the online content. Additional effort may
be necessary to make VGI data reﬁned data source for the kind of critical data integration
applications described here.

The results of submitting the feature-coded categories of geospatial objects in schema
from formal and informal data sets to the standard WordNet::Similarity software are dis-
appointing. It has been shown that direct use of a standard, readily available semantic
similarity matching system will not successfully ensure integration of a formal geospatial
data set (speciﬁcally represented by a OS schema) and an informal geospatial data set
(speciﬁcally represented by the OSM schema). Although some of the similarity assess-
ment does correspond with what a GIS expert would regard as obvious (e.g. ‘wood’ in one
schema does give a 100% match to ‘forest’ in another), the majority of pairwise compar-
isons are not well matched. Results shown in Sections 5.2 and 8 reveal that attempts to
integrate the particular data sets tested here would result in confusion, with, for example,
informal data being tagged in such a way that formal data could not be updated using it, or
subsequent spatial analysis of features being misleading. Improvement of matching would
result from modiﬁcations to the generic ontologies embedded within WordNet::Similarity:
enhancement of these using information sourced from experts is one way of addressing
the mismatching. Such updating and expansion of the base WordNet ontologies has been
attempted by a small number of researchers (e.g. Clark et al. 2006).

This study had previously considered and reported on geometric accuracy and integra-
tion of data of variable levels of precision, while the work described here has addressed
similarity of content and possibilities of matching attribute information. In future work,
further parameters such as temporal accuracy, completeness, lineage and other inherent
processing (e.g. generalisation) will be incorporated into the integration model. Additional
data sources such as images (e.g. Flickr), textual descriptions and user updating (e.g.
TomTom MapShare) are increasingly being used to contribute to ‘crowdsourced’ data sets
and their accuracy also needs to be examined. The wider range of possible OSM data
sources, for example, needs to be tested, as the OSM database comes to rely not only on
primary data captured in the ﬁeld, but also on data from satellite and aerial imagery, out-
of-copyright sources, low-resolution data capture devices and other ‘non-ofﬁcial’ data. The
resultant measures of accuracy will assist in an assessment of the role of VGI in the ﬂowline
of ofﬁcial spatial data handling.

References
Al-Bakri, M. and Fairbairn, D., 2010. Assessing the accuracy of crowdsourced data and its integra-
tion with ofﬁcial spatial datasets. 9th international symposium on spatial accuracy assessment
in natural resources and environmental sciences, July 2010, Leicester. Leicester: University of
Leicester, 317–320.

Amarintrarak, N., et al., 2009. SAXM: semi-automatic XML schema mapping. 24th international
technical conference on circuits/systems, computers and communications, July 2009, Jeju Island,
Korea, Institute of Electronics Engineers of Korea, 44–47.

Banerjee, S. and Pedersen, T., 2003. Extended gloss overlaps as a measure of semantic relatedness.
Proceedings of the 18th international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, August 2003,
Acapulco, Mexico, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 805–810.

Budanitsky, A. and Hirst, G., 2001. Semantic distance in WordNet: an experimental, application-
oriented evaluation of ﬁve measures. Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 workshop on WordNet and
other lexical resources, June 2001, Pittsburgh, PA, 29–34.

Butenuth, M., et al., 2007. Integration of heterogeneous geospatial data in a federated database.

ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 62 (5), 328–346.

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1455

Castelein, W., et al., 2010. A characterization of volunteered geographic information. 13th AGILE
international conference on geographic information science, May 2010, Guimarães, Portugal,
1–10.

Clark, P., et al., 2006. From WordNet to a knowledge base. Proceedings of the AAAI 2006 spring
symposium on formalizing and compiling background knowledge, March 2006, Stanford, CA,
Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1–6.

Coleman, D.J., 2010. Volunteered geographic information in spatial data infrastructure: an early look
at opportunities and constraints. Ch. 10 in Rajabifard, A., Crompvoets, J., Kalantari, M. and
Kok, B. (eds), Spatially Enabling Society, Leuven University Press, 131–147.

Erhard, R. and Philip, A.B., 2001. A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching. The VLDB

Journal, 10 (4), 334–350.

EuroSDR, 2010. Identifying common interests and future research issues in the ﬁeld of crowd
sourcing for the updating of national databases. Proceedings of the EuroSDR workshop:
crowdsourcing for the updating of national databases August 2009, Wabern, Switzerland.
Flanagin, A.J. and Metzger, M.J., 2008. The credibility of volunteered geographic information.

GeoJournal, 72, 137–148.

Formica, A., 2008. Similarity of XML-schema elements: a structural and information content

approach. Journal of Computers, 51, 240–254.

Giannis, V., et al., 2005. Semantic similarity methods in WordNet and their application to informa-
tion retrieval on the web. Proceedings of the 7th annual ACM international workshop on web
information and data management, Bremen, Germany. New York: ACM, 10–16.

Goodchild, M.F., 2007. Citizens as sensors: the world of volunteered geography. Geojournal, 69,

211–221.

Haklay, M., et al., 2010. How many volunteers does it take to map an area well? The validity of linus

law to volunteered geographic information. The Cartographic Journal, 47, 315–322.

Haklay, M.M., 2010. How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of
OpenStreetMap and Ordnance Survey datasets. Environment & Planning B, 37, 682–703.
Hirst, G. and Onge, D.S., 1998. Lexical chains as representation of context for the detection and cor-
rection malapropisms. In: C. Fellbaum, ed. WordNet: an electronic lexical database. Cambridge:
MIT press, 305–332.

Hong-Minh, T. and Smith, D., 2007. Hierarchical approach for datatype matching in XML schemas.
24th British national conference on databases, July 2007. Glasgow: University of Glasgow,
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 120–129.

Howard, M., Payne, S., and Sunderland, R., 2010. Technical guidance for the INSPIRE schema

transformation network service. West Sussex: INSPIRE.

Jiang, J.J. and Conrath, D.W., 1997. Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical tax-
onomy. International conference research on computational linguistics (ROCLING X), August
1997, Taiwan, 19–33.

Kim, J., et al., 2008. A layered approach to semantic similarity analysis of XML schemas. The
2008 IEEE international conference on information reuse and integration, July 2008, Las Vegas,
274–279.

Kovalerchuk, B., et al., 2004. Virtual experts for imagery registration and conﬂation. In:
B. Kovalerchuk and J. Schwing, eds. Visual and spatial analysis. Dordrecht: Springer, 537–560.
Krumm, J., Davies, N., and Narayanaswami, C., 2008. User-generated content. IEEE Pervasive

Computing, 7 (4), 10–11.

Leacock, C. and Chodorow, M., 1998. Combining local context with WordNet similarity for word
sense identiﬁcation. In: C. Fellbaum, ed. WordNet: a lexical reference system and its application.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 265–283.

Lin, D., 1998. An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity. Proceedings of the 15th international

conference on machine learning, July 1997, Madison, WI: Morgan Kaufmann, 296–304.

McDougall, K., 2009. Volunteered geographic information for building SDI. 2009 Surveying and
Spatial Sciences Institute biennial international conference (SSC2009), September / October
2009, Adelaide, Australia. Canberra, ACT: Surveying and Spatial Sciences Institute, 645–653.

Melinik, S., Garcia-Molina, H., and Rahm, E., 2002. Similarity ﬂooding: a versatile graph match-
ing algorithm and its application to schema matching. Proceedings of the 18th international
conference on data engineering, February / March 2002, San Jose, CA, IEEE, 117–128.

Miller, G. and Charles, W., 1991. Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and

Cognitive Processes, 6 (1), 1–28.

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 1456

M. Al-Bakri and D. Fairbairn

Neis, P., Singler, P., and Zipf, A., 2010. Collaborative mapping and emergency routing for disaster
logistics – case studies from the Haiti earthquake and the UN portal for Afrika. Geoinformatik
2010, March 2010, Kiel, Germany, 1–6.

OrdnanceSurvey, 2010. OS OpenSpace [online]. Available from: http://openspace.ordnancesurvey.

co.uk/openspace/pro.html [Accessed 10 Dec 2010].

Patwardhan, S., 2003. Incorporating dictionary and corpus information into a context vector measure

of semantic relatedness. Thesis. University of Minnesota.

Pedersen, T., Patwardhan, S., and Michelizzi, J., 2004a. WordNet::Similarity – measuring the
relatedness of concepts. 5th annual meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-2004), May 2004, Boston, 38–41.

Pedersen, T., Patwardhan, S., and Michelizzi, J., 2004b. WordNet::Similarity – measuring the
relatedness of concepts. 19th national conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (AAAI-2004), July
2004, San Jose, California, 1024–1025.

Rada, R., et al., 1989. Development and application of a metric on semantic nets. IEEE Transactions

on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19 (1), 17–30.

Ramm, F., Topf, J., and Chilton, S., 2011. OpenStreetMap – using and enhancing the free map of the

world. Cambridge: UIT Cambridge.

Resnik, P., 1995. Using information content

to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy.
Proceedings of the 14th international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence – volume 1,
August 1995, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 448–453.
Saalfeld, A., 1988. Conﬂation: automated map compilation. International Journal of GIS, 2 (3),

Schwering, A., 2008. Approaches to semantic similarity measurement for geo-spatial data: a survey.

217–228.

Transactions in GIS, 12 (1), 5–29.

Singleton, A.D., et al., 2011. Estimating secondary school catchment areas and the spatial equity of

access. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 35 (3), 241–249.

Spaccapietra, S., Zimányi, E., and Kuhn, W., 2005. Geospatial semantics: why, of what, and how?

Journal on Data Semantics III, LNCS, 3534, 1–24.

Tansalarak, N. and Claypool, K.T., 2007. QMatch – using paths to match XML schemas. Data &

Knowledge Engineering, 60 (2), 260–282.

Thang, H.Q. and Nam, V.S., 2010. XML schema automatic matching solution. International Journal

of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, 4 (1), 68–74.

Tversky, A., 1977. Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84 (4), 327–352.
Wenbo, S., et al., 2009. Automated geospatial conﬂation of vector road maps to high resolution

imagery. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 18 (2), 388–400.

Winter, S., 2001. Ontology: buzzword or paradigm shift in GI science? International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 15 (7), 587–590.

Wu, Z. and Palmer, M., 1994. Verb semantics and lexical selection. 32nd annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, June 1994, Las Cruces, NM, The Association for
Computational Linguistics, 133–138.

Downloaded by [Universidad de Sevilla] at 01:55 21 October 2014 