This article was downloaded by: [University of Connecticut]
On: 09 October 2014, At: 02:50
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

The potential for the use of
Open Source Software and Open
Specifications in creating Web‐based
cross‐border health spatial information
systems
Rafael Moreno‐Sanchez a , Geoffrey Anderson b , Jesus Cruz c &
Mary Hayden d
a University of Colorado at Denver , Department of Geography and
Environmental Sciences , Denver, CO 80217
b CloudShadow Consulting , Boulder, CO 80306
c Departamento de Tecnología Informática , Secretaría de Salud
Pública del Gobierno del Estado de Sonora , Mexico
d University of Colorado at Colorado Springs , CU Trauma Studies
and Resource Center , Network Information and Space Security
Center , Colorado Springs, CO 80933
Published online: 20 Nov 2007.

To cite this article: Rafael Moreno‐Sanchez , Geoffrey Anderson , Jesus Cruz & Mary Hayden (2007)
The potential for the use of Open Source Software and Open Specifications in creating Web‐based
cross‐border health spatial information systems, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 21:10, 1135-1163, DOI: 10.1080/13658810701300113

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701300113

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,

proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 21, No. 10, November 2007, 1135–1163

Research Article

The potential for the use of Open Source Software and Open
Specifications in creating Web-based cross-border health spatial
information systems

RAFAEL MORENO-SANCHEZ*{, GEOFFREY ANDERSON{,
JESUS CRUZ§ and MARY HAYDEN"
{University of Colorado at Denver, Department of Geography and Environmental
Sciences, Denver, CO 80217, USA
{CloudShadow Consulting, Boulder, CO 80306, USA
§Departamento de Tecnologı´a Informa´ tica, Secretarı´a de Salud Pu´ blica del Gobierno del
Estado de Sonora, Mexico
"University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, CU Trauma Studies and Resource
Center, Network Information and Space Security Center, Colorado Springs, CO 80933,
USA

(Received 22 February 2006; in final form 21 February 2007 )

Globalization is contributing to the blurring of borders making irrelevant the
distinctions between domestic and international health problems. Cross-border
and global health spatial information systems (CBHSIS) are required to address
the new global health challenges. There is a need to build and document
alternatives for addressing the technological, economic, and sociocultural–
political challenges encountered in the creation and deployment of these systems.
This paper documents the building of a prototype Web-based multimedia GIS
system for use in a public health context using Open Source Software and Open
Specifications and its deployment across the US–Mexico border. These
technologies offer advantages in addressing several of the challenges previously
issues
mentioned. We highlight the technological and sociocultural–political
important in successful collaboration across borders and cultures and in the
creation of interoperable CBHSIS.

Keywords: Open Source Software; Open Specifications; Web-based GIS; cross-
border health spatial information systems

1.

Introduction

Diseases and environmental health problems do not respect political borders. In the
globalized political economy of the 21th century, social, political, and economic
interdependence increases as a result of the rapid movement of goods, information,
people, and financial transactions across national borders. People and products
cross borders more easily and often carry with them vectors for diseases and toxic
carriers.
substances. People
Communication, coordination, and data sharing between neighbouring countries
and trade partners are critical to addressing the public and environmental health

themselves may be non-symptomatic disease

*Corresponding author. Email: rafael.moreno@cudenver.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2007 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701300113

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1136

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

problems that are reemerging or accelerating due to this blurring of borders (Kemel
1996, Frenk et al. 1997, Ka¨ ferstein et al. 1997, Banta 2001, Imperato 2001, Kombe
and Darrow 2001, Rodriguez-Garcia 2001, Frenk and Gomez-Dantes 2002). At the
same time, the globalization of the world’s economy and the implementation of
neoliberal economic principles have been accompanied by intense economic
competition and increased pressure on governments to downsize. Public-sector
austerity has contributed to the deterioration of health infrastructures (including
their Information Technology capabilities) and reduced disease surveillance in many
countries (Berkelman et al. 1994, Ka¨ ferstein et al. 1997, Binder et al. 1999, Kombe
and Darrow 2001, MacLehose et al. 2002).

There is a pressing need for interoperable cross-border and, more ambitiously,
global public and environmental health information systems. A substantial body of
research (e.g. Tim 1995, Richards et al. 1999, Higgs and Gould 2001, Moreno et al.
2002, Ricketts 2003) suggests that Geographic Information Systems (GIS) mapping,
visualization, and spatial analysis capabilities will be important components of these
systems. Given the need for ubiquity, ease of access, flexibility, and reduced risk of
isolation and obsolescence, the World Wide Web (WWW or the web) is likely to be
the platform of choice for the deployment of these systems.

Economic, cultural, financial, political, and technological differences between
countries raise challenges to the creation and deployment of interoperable cross-
border health spatial-information systems (CBHSIS). There are tight and disparate
financial resources between countries. Health information infrastructures (hard-
ware, software, data, people, and procedures) differ, and levels of their development
vary, as do data formats and proprietary Information Technologies (IT). The same
is true of spatial-information infrastructures and Geographic Information Systems
(GIS)
there is the challenge of achieving the necessary
communication, trust, coordination, and motivation for creating CBHSIS. In this
paper, we suggest that the features that characterize Open Source Software (OSS)
and the use of Open Specifications (OS) can meet these challenges.

technology. Finally,

Little can be found in the published literature about the use of OSS (particularly
geospatial OSS and web-GIS OSS) in the health sector. Even less has been reported
on the potential contributions of OSS and OS for the creation and deployment of
CBHSIS. This paper contributes to the body of knowledge in this area by
documenting our experiences in creating a prototype Web-based multimedia spatial-
information system (WBMMGIS) using OSS and OS and deploying the system
across the US–Mexico border. The WBMMGIS was used to support a 3-year
research study of the environmental and sociocultural factors that might be
contributing to the expansion of the dengue fever vector’s habitat into the deserts of
the southwest US and northwest Mexico along the Arizona–Sonora border. We use
this case study to highlight the technological, financial, and sociocultural–political
challenges that are likely to emerge in the creation of CBHSIS, and to point to
possible solutions offered by the use of OSS and OS.

Section 2 provides a brief background of OSS and OS and highlights
interoperable
characteristics that are likely to contribute to the creation of
CBHSIS. Section 3 reviews the technological and sociocultural issues involved in
successful collaborations in information-systems projects across borders. Section 4
presents the WBMMGIS case study explaining the need for the system, the issues
that led to the selection of OSS and OS for its development, the design and
architecture of the system, and the issues that emerged during its deployment across

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1137

the Arizona–Sonora border. Section 5 summarizes the case-study experiences, lists
the technological, economic, and sociocultural–political challenges that may be
encountered in the creation and deployment of CBHSIS, and discusses how the use
of OSS and OS can help to bridge them. Section 6 presents conclusions and
recommendations regarding the use of OSS and OS for the creation of CBHSIS.

This section provides a brief background of OSS and OS. Further resources on the
specific OSS and OS used in the case study are provided in appendices A and B.

2. OSS and OS

2.1 OSS

OSS are programs whose licences give users the freedom to run the program for any
purpose, to modify the program, and to freely redistribute either the original or
modified program without further limitations or royalty payments (Open Source
Initiative: http://www.opensource.org/docs/definition.php). OSS, also known by the
acronym FOSS for Free and Open Source Software, has 20–40 years of history
(Lagesse 2002). Several authors tell the story of the OSS movement, how OSS are
developed, and why some OSS projects are successful (DiBona et al. 1999, 2005,
Raymond 2001, Feller and Fitzgerald 2002, Williams 2002, Bonaccorsi and Rossi
2003, Lakhani and Wolf 2005).

There is emerging support for and endorsement of OSS projects by large private
hardware and software companies (C/NET News 2005, Schutzberg 2005). Also,
international organizations,
there are calls by national and local governments,
scientists, and development officials to support the use and development of such
projects (Wade 2005, Lowe 2002, Schenker 2003, Smarr 2005, Wambui 2004,
respectively). A growing number of commercial services, studies, and resources exist
to assist potential users in choosing and deploying the best OSS for their
informational needs (e.g. Sereon Research 2003, Holck et al. 2005, Woods and
Guliani 2005, The FOSS Evaluation Center http://foss.technologyevaluation.com/).
Wheeler (2005) proposes that OSS could be, under certain circumstances, a
superior alternative to proprietary counterparts. Wheatley (2004) dispels some of
the most common concerns about OSS (e.g.
‘OSS is not for mission-critical
applications’). OSS is not likely to completely displace proprietary software (Nichols
and Twidale 2002), but it offers alternatives that should be evaluated at par with
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software (see Wang and Wang 2001 for evaluation
criteria and adoption considerations). Besides the criteria suggested by these
authors, the evaluation of OSS should include the following questions (Ramsey
2005): Is it clear who the core development team is? Is the software modular? How
wide is the development community? How wide is the user community? Positive
answers to these questions indicate a healthy and mature OSS project which
provides a greater degree of confidence in its use.

OSS alternatives have been declared crucial for the developing world (Naronha
2002, 2003, Rajani et al. 2003, Schenker 2003, Wambui 2004). They enable poorer
countries to develop their own technology instead of having to import it. They have
been suggested as the best path to close the digital divide between rich and poor
countries. They create healthy competition with proprietary software companies and
may lead to affordable pricing and increased access. They address some national
security concerns. Several developing countries (e.g. Korea, China, Argentina, and

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1138

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

Brazil) have decided to move their entire government systems to OSS (Wambui
2004). There is interest also on the part of several developed countries such as
France (Marson 2005), Germany (Gillespie 2000, Sereon Research 2003), UK (UK
Office of Government Commerce 2004), and Australia (Coonan 2004) just to name
a few.

In the area of health informatics, there are OSS projects dating back to the 1970s
(e.g. COSTAR; see appendix A). The Open Source Health Care Resources (http://
www.openhealth.com/en/healthlinks.html) website maintains a list of health-care-
specific OSS projects (as of August 2006 it lists 93 projects). Table 1 presents a
sample list of such projects. Goulde and Brown (2006) present a concise overview of
health OSS and point to the potential benefits of their use in health care systems.
Appendix A lists useful sources of information and recent applications of OSS in
health. OSS deployments in health organizations are expanding beyond the invisible
IT infrastructure (e.g. operating systems, and database management systems
running in back-office servers), into more visible applications on the desktop such
as health records, word processing, spreadsheets, and email (e.g. use of OpenOffice)
(Fitzgerald and Kenny 2003a, b, Tiangco et al. 2005).

As of August 2006, the Open Source GIS website (http://opensourcegis.org/) has
listed a large number (237) of GIS-related OSS projects. Table 2 presents a sample of
GIS OSS projects covering different aspects of geospatial informatics.

In spite of this interest in open technologies, there are sizeable barriers to the use
of OSS in the health-care industry. Health information technology leadership tends
to be conservative, and senior management has been eliminating the in-house,
technical, and developmental teams that could best leverage OSS to the advantage
of the institution (Fitzgerald and Kenny 2003a, b, McDonald et al. 2003). Except for
Moreno-Sanchez et al. (2006) or the use of UMN MapServer in the World Health
Organization (http://mapserver.wpro.who.int/default.cfm), there are few reports in
the published literature about the use of geospatial OSS and web-GIS OSS in the
health sector. Anderson and Moreno-Sanchez (2003) present the advantages of the
use of OSS and OS technologies to create Web-based spatial-information systems
and highlight some of the disadvantages of proprietary web-GIS software. The
issues raised by these authors are relevant for the creation of CBHSIS, as we will
discuss later.

Table 1. Sample Open Source Software medical informatics projects.

Project

Purpose

References

COSTAR
DHCP/VistA Hospital information system

Medical records and billing system

http://costar.net/costar.htm
http://www.hardhats.org/

OSCAR
GEHR

Office management/Medical records
Electronic health records

OpenEHR
OpenEMed Distributed health information

Health computing platform

service components

OpenGALEN Management of clinical information
OpenEMR Electronic medical records system

dhcptovista.html
Brown et al. (2003)
http://www.oscarmcmaster.org/
http://www.gehr.org/
http://www.chime.ucl.ac.uk/
work-areas/ehrs/GEHR/

http://www.openehr.org/
http://openemed.org/

http://openemed.net/
http://www.opengalen.org/
http://www.synitech.com

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1139

Table 2. Sample of GIS related Open Source Software projects covering different aspects of
geospatial informatics.

Project

GRASS
OpenJUMP

Purpose

GIS system
Desktop GIS

QuantumGIS
gvSIG
UMNMapServer Web GIS

Desktop GIS
Desktop GIS

MapGuide Open

Web GIS

Source
GeoServer

Web GIS

Reference

http://grass.itc.it/
http://openjump.org/wiki/show/

HomePage

http://www.qgis.org/
http://www.gvsig.gva.es/index.php
http://mapserver.gis.umn.edu/

index.html

https://mapguide.osgeo.org/

http://docs.codehaus.org/display/

GEOS/Home

http://postgis.refractions.net/
http://dev.mysql.com/tech-resources/
articles/4.1/gis-with-mysql.html

PostGIS
MySQL Spatial

DBMS spatial extension
DBMS spatial extension

TerraLib

Library of C + + GIS classes

http://www.terralib.org/

and functions

OpenMap
GeoTools

Library of Java GIS components http://openmap.bbn.com/
Library of Java GIS components http://geotools.codehaus.org/

The OSS movement has been suggested as a model

for financing and
implementing Spatial Data Infrastructures (Holmes et al. 2005). The same authors
report that the OSS GIS community is mature enough and well positioned to
contribute to creating a truly Global Spatial Data Infrastructure (GSDI). Efforts to
create a GHSIS could model the approach being followed to create the GSDI.

2.2 OS

OS provide information about a given specification as well as specific programming
rules and advice for implementing the interfaces and/or protocols that enable
interoperability between systems. The Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. (OGC)
defines interoperability as ‘the ability for a system or components of a system to
provide information portability and interapplication cooperative process control’
(http://www.opengeospatial.org).

Public health partners have complex responsibilities and interactions, and need
information technology and information-sharing
significant coordination of
methodologies to meet public health, emergency, and bioterrorism preparedness
objectives (Center for Disease Control [CDC] 2002, World Health Organization
[WHO] 2005). Compliance with OS is a must to create interoperable CBHSIS or a
GHSIS capable of sharing health and spatial information. The WHO, through the
eHealth Standardization Coordination Group (http://www.who.int/ehscg/en/), has
issued a set of standards and OS to facilitate the interoperability of health
information and systems (http://www.who.int/ehscg/resources/en/ehscg_standards_
list.pdf). The WHO is also working on semantic interoperability issues (http://
www.who.int/classifications/terminology/prerequisites.pdf). In the US, The Center
for Disease Control (CDC 2002) has issued a set of recommendations and
specifications for nine IT functions for emergency preparedness and bioterrorism.
Croner (2003a, b, c) highlights the importance of the adoption and compliance with
OS for spatial data-sharing in health applications.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1140

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

In the geospatial arena, numerous organizations worldwide are working on the
creation of OS to enable spatial information and systems interoperability (Klopfer
2005). The OGC has created a set of core OS that enables the creation of
interoperable spatial-information systems, National Spatial Data Infrastructures
(NSDI), and eventually a Global Spatial Data Infrastructure (GSDI) (Holland
2001, McKee 2003, http://www.gsdi.org/). McKee (2005) explains the need for and
impact of open technologies (e.g. OSS, OS, Open Interfaces, Open Portals) in
geospatial-information technology, and Reichardt (2004) points to the dangers of
spatial-information non-interoperability. The US National Aeronautics and Space
Agency (NASA) reports a return on investment (ROI) value of 119% and points to
savings of 26% in projects that used geospatial interoperability standards compared
with projects that relied upon proprietary standards (NASA 2005).

As part of the WBMMGIS described in the case study, we created a map service
compliant with the OGC Web Map Service (WMS) Open Specification. A WMS
service delivers map images in graphic formats in response to requests by clients.
This specification is part of a set of OGC’s OS that define interfaces for the access
and distribution of geographic information (http://www.opengeospatial.org/specs/).
The other OS from this set are: Web Feature Services (WFS), Web Coverage
Services (WCS), and Web Terrain Services (WTS). Demonstrations of the use of
some of these interfaces can be found at http://www.geoconnections.org/CGDI.cfm/
fuseaction/webServices.type/gcs.cfm and http://sis.agr.gc.ca/cansis/systems/online_
maps.html. These interfaces allow the access and fusion of multiple geographic
layers maintained in distributed servers (Kolodziej 2003). This capability would be
important to create cross-border spatial information systems. Each country could
maintain and provide in an interoperable way their own collections of health-related
geographic layers.

Issues involved in successful collaborations in information systems projects across

3.
borders

In today’s globalized economy, it is common to find examples of cross-border
collaborations to develop products, services, software, and information systems (IS)
(Carmel and Agarwal 2002, Herbsleb and Mockus 2003, Sarker and Sahay 2004).
There are two sets of issues important to the creation of information systems across
borders. One is the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) and
collaborative tools that facilitate the cooperation between distributed development
teams (e.g. Carmel 1999, Herbsleb et al. 2002, Mockus and Herbsleb 2002). The
other involves social, cultural, and human considerations, including the necessary
knowledge-sharing to develop trust and motivation between distributed develop-
ment teams (e.g. Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1999, Faraj and Sproull 2000, Storck 2000,
Orlikowski 2002, Evaristo 2003, Sarker and Sahay 2004, Kotlarsky and Oshri 2005).
A powerful ICT infrastructure (e.g. email, instant messaging, web-teleconferen-
cing, collaborative websites, phone/teleconferencing, video-conferencing) has been
mentioned as a requirement to ensure connectivity and data transfer between remote
sites (Carmel 1999, Smith and Blanck 2002, Herbsleb and Mockus 2003). Also, a
number of specific collaborative tools for software development exist to support
globally distributed teams (e.g. configuration and version-management
tools,
document-management systems, replicated databases, and CASE tools) (Ebert
and De Neve 2001, Carmel and Agarwal 2002, Smith and Blanck 2002). In our
experience, we found that despite the sophistication of ICT technologies, success of

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1141

our cross-border collaboration depended in great part upon careful consideration of
cultural, social, and political factors. The available literature supports our findings.
Geographical, time-zone, and cultural differences reduce the intensity of both
formal and informal communications among members of distributed teams (Smith
and Blanck 2002, Kotlarsky and Oshri 2005). Formal and informal communication,
trust, social ties, and motivation have been highlighted as important issues in the
context of remote collaborations for the development of IS (Kotlarsky and Oshri
2005). An effective team depends on open, effective communication, which in turn
depends on trust among members (Smith and Blanck 2002). Trust is more likely to
be built if social ties and rapport are developed through personal contact, frequent
interactions, and socializing between teams and individuals (Arino et al. 2001, Child
2001, Kotlarsky and Oshri 2005). Although trust is the foundation for a successful
collaboration between remote sites, it is also the very quality that is most difficult to
build at a distance (Smith and Blanck 2002). Furthermore, cultural differences,
expressed in different languages, values, working and communication habits, and
implicit assumptions are likely to cause misunderstandings and conflicts (Herbsleb
and Moitra 2001, Kotlarsky and Oshri 2005).

Sharing knowledge is important to building trust and improving the effectiveness
of group work (Herbsleb and Mockus 2003). Several studies have highlighted the
importance of knowing who knows what, knowing whom to contact about what,
initiating contact, and communicating effectively as keys to knowledge-sharing
activities (Herbsleb et al. 2000, Orlikowski 2002, Herbsleb and Mockus 2003).
Gallivan (2001) and Hoegl and Gemuenden (2001) suggest that, in addition to
performance objectives, teams must also work in a way that increases members’
motivation to engage in future teamwork. There should be some level of personal
satisfaction that motivates individuals and teams to continue their engagement in
collaborative work despite the differences mentioned above.

The WBMMGIS described in the case-study section which follows was not
developed in a distributed way. However, the issues raised in the previously cited
literature were relevant to the deployment of the system across the US–Mexico
border and would be important to consider in any effort to create cross-border
health spatial-information systems worldwide.

4. Case study: Creation and deployment of a Web-based multimedia spatial-
information system (WBMMGIS) along the US–Mexico border

In this section, we first present the context and need for the WBMMGIS, and the
functionality present in the system. Later, we elaborate on the system’s design,
architecture, and development, and finally we discuss the issues involved in the
deployment of the WBMMGIS across the US–Mexico border. Moreno-Sanchez
et al. (2006) present more details on the public health context, and on how the
functionality present in the WBMMGIS was used to support the dengue study
described next.

4.1 Context for the creation of the WBMMGIS

The mosquito Aedes aegypti is the principal vector for dengue fever (DEN) in the
Americas. It feeds primarily on human blood, and it is typically found in urban
subtropical/tropical areas (Engelthaler et al. 1997, Hoeck et al. 2003). An estimated
two-thirds of the world’s population lives in regions infested with this mosquito, and

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1142

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

an estimated 80 million people suffer from DEN annually (Pinheiro and Corber
1997).

The WBMMGIS was created in the context of a research project to study the
hypothesis that changes in peri-domestic environmental conditions and socio-
cultural behaviour are resulting in the expansion of Aedes aegypti’s habitat into the
urban areas of the desert southwest (Moreno-Sanchez et al. 2006). The study
concentrated in the Tucson, Arizona (AZ)-Nogales, AZ,-Nogales, Mexico (the twin
border cities known as Ambos Nogales) corridor.

The environment and conditions around each sampling site had to be carefully
documented to try to explain the presence and survivability of the vector in an urban
desert environment. Sixty-eight sites were established for the study. Weather data
loggers were placed to record temperatures and humidity at 1-h intervals. Field
notes, georreferenced 360u panoramic photos, digital maps, and high-resolution
remote-sensing images were used to provide a strong sense of presence in each site
(Moreno-Sanchez et al. 2006). Five times a year, oviposition traps were set to collect
mosquito eggs for identification to monitor for the presence of Aedes aegypti.

4.2 Need for a WBMMGIS based on OSS and OS

The idea of creating a WBMMGIS based on OSS and OS emerged from the need to
address two sets of challenges. First, there were limitations on the way traditional
DEN field studies document the sampling sites and how this information is kept and
distributed. Table 3 lists these limitations and points to the WBMMGIS features
that address them.

A bilingual Web-based spatial-information system with dynamic links between
sampling records, field notes, maps, remote-sensing images, and 360u panoramic
photos would provide easy and immediate access to highly interrelated informa-
tion—information necessary to DEN researchers and health officials on both sides
of the border. This access would better support the generation of hypotheses to
explain the presence of the mosquito in a desert environment and assist in the
coordination of efforts to plan for or respond to a DEN outbreak on the border.
Second, we had to address the challenges raised by the limited funding available
for the DEN study, the health organizations’ IT context, the end users’ (health
officials and DEN researchers) characteristics, and the need for access and eventual
deployment of the system on both sides of the border. Table 4 summarizes these
characteristics, the challenges raised, and how the system’s features (and use of OSS
and OS) address them.

At the beginning of the study, we considered creating a custom application using
locally installed proprietary GIS solutions (e.g. ArcView 3.x or MapInfo). This
would have implied software licensing costs and would have limited access to the
system to only those users with the technological and know-how resources to
support the locally installed application. Later, we considered the use of proprietary
Web-GIS solutions (e.g. ArcIMS). Previous experience with these technologies
(Anderson and Moreno-Sanchez 2003) told us that besides their software costs, they
have high training costs and steep learning curves for the creation of custom
applications. They require significant and long-term commitments of human,
financial, and technological resources (e.g. close attention by IT personnel and
sophisticated Web servers that need to be almost solely dedicated to its operation).
These requirements could not be easily met. They would make a deployment across
the border practically impossible, and they were not in step with the prototype

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1143

Table 3. Limitations in the way traditional DEN field studies data, documentation, and
results are collected, kept, and distributed, and how the WBMMGIS features contribute to
overcome them.

Limitation

Original data are kept in paper records that
have limited distribution and are hard to access.

System’s feature

N Web-based system

Records do not have dynamic links to other
information such as digital maps, photos,
satellite images, or databases. Exploration
and analysis of these complex and highly
interrelated sets of information are difficult.

Subjective estimations, partial descriptions,
and/or poorly defined terms are used to
describe the sample sites thus preventing
current and future researchers from having
a clear picture of the sites’ environment
and conditions. This information does
not adequately support the generation
of hypotheses to explain change.

Results presented in conferences and journal
articles do not provide easy access to the
original, unfiltered data to current and
future researchers. This information does
not adequately support the generation of
hypotheses to explain change.

The geographical information, sampling data,
and the results of DEN field studies are not
easily and quickly accessible to public health
officials on both sides of the border to help
them assess the risk and to respond to a
DEN outbreak.

N Multimedia: Integrated access to
database records, maps, remote
sensing images, and 360u
panoramic photos

N Georeferenced 360u panoramic photos
N High-resolution satellite images and

aerial photos

N Multimedia: Integrated access to
different sources of information
provides a strong sense of presence
on the sites

N Web-based system
N Multimedia: Integrated access to

original and complete set of database
records, maps, remote sensing images,
and photos

N Web-based system
N Bilingual
N Multimedia: Integrated access to
database records, maps, remote
sensing images, and photos

It

nature of the WBMMGIS. The use of proprietary solutions presented one more
complication.
service, and
homogenous pricing by vendors’ representatives in different countries. After
considering the alternatives, we decided that the combined use of OSS and OS
would best address the needs and issues we were facing.

to coordinate purchases,

is difficult

training,

4.3 Functionality present in the WBMMGIS

Access to the WBMMGIS is password-protected to prevent the violation of the
privacy of the households that participated in the study. A bilingual tutorial
provides detailed instructions for the system’s use (top of figure 1). Figure 1 presents
the Web interface for the WBMMGIS. It is divided into frames. Each frame can be
resized to give a better view of the information contained therein. The ‘Map Panel’
(top-left frame in the interface) provides basic GIS functionality (turning on and off
layers, zooming in and out, paning, identifying and selecting) and is used to display
the geographical
layers (streets, Digital Orthophoto Quadrangles for Tucson,
satellite images from the IKONOS satellite for Ambos Nogales, one-foot color
aerial photos for Tucson, and sampling points). Using the identify tool, the user can
click on each of the sampling points on the map and display its attributes in the

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 Table 4. Challenges raised by health organizations’ IT context and end users’ characteristics on both sides of the border and how they are addressed by the
WBMMGIS system.

Characteristic

The spatial information
infrastructures in public
health organizations can
be described as being in
the early stages of
development.

Limited financial
resources. Many
high-priority
activities compete
for funding.

Limited human resources.
Many high-priority
activities demand
attention.

End users with access to
basic computing
resources and relative
low computer know-how

N Limited distribution of spatial information and GIS

N Web-based. Centrally developed and maintained,

Challenge

System’s feature

know-how throughout the organization.

N Knowledgeable IT personnel and adequate software
and hardware cannot be found in local health offices.
IT central resources need to be better used to
support local health offices.

N

N No funding for new software licenses and

maintenance fees (e.g. desktop GIS, Web GIS, DBMS).

N No funding for training IT personnel in new complex

proprietary solutions (e.g. Web GIS).

N No funding for acquiring new dedicated high-end
hardware that is required to run some proprietary
solutions (e.g. Web servers to run Web GIS).
N No IT personnel can be dedicated to install, be
trained on the use of, and support new complex
proprietary software (e.g. Web GIS).

N Health professionals are over committed and do not
have time for training in GIS software operation
with steep learning curves.

N Need for efficient, easy-accessible, and user-friendly
spatial information systems without steep learning
curves which adequately address their specific needs.

it leverages the IT resources found at some central level
to support local health offices.

N End users receive a task-specific application, easy to learn
and operate, that requires minimum hardware and software.

N OSS-based. No software cost.
N The OSS used have: smooth learning curves for personnel
with basic IT backgrounds; ample resources for education
and training, many for free; and small footprints. They
operate adequately in existing, non-dedicated servers.

N OSS (particularly Web-GIS) installation and operation are
more easily compatible with IT personnel current expertise.

N Web-based system requires minimum hardware.
N Customized spatial application contains only the

functionality required by end users.

N There is a smooth learning curve, and the time required
to obtain useful information to support decision-making
is reduced.

1
1
4
4

R

.

M
o
r
e
n
o
-
S
a
n
c
h
e
z

e
t

a
l
.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 Table 4. (Continued.)

Challenge

System’s feature

Characteristic

Health IT infrastructures
on each side of the border
with different levels of
development, funding,
strategic plans, proprietary
software, data formats,
personnel characteristics,
and procedures.

N Difficulty to agree on new proprietary solutions (e.g.
GIS, Web-GIS, new DBMS) that would demand
significant resources and significant changes to existing
plans and IT infrastructures.

N Concern for dependency on proprietary foreign

solutions (e.g. Web GIS).

N Need for technological solutions that: (1) do not
require large financial, human, and technological
resources; and (2) are easy to integrate with existing IT
infrastructures (hardware, software, personnel know-how).

N OSS-based. No software cost. Small footprint.
N The OSS used have versions for the most popular

operating systems (UNIX, Windows).

N OSS Web-GIS works with existing DBMS.
N OSS–OS solutions are easier to integrate with existing IT
infrastructures (Anderson and Moreno-Sanchez 2003).

Need to share informa-
tion across the border

N Need for data and systems that have the capability

of being interoperable.

N Use of OS.
N System is bilingual.

O
S
S

a
n
d
O
S

i
n

c
r
e
a
t
i
n
g

h
e
a
l
t
h

i
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n

s
y
s
t
e
m
s

1
1
4
5

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1146

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

Figure 1. Web-based multimedia GIS interface divided into panels to access each of the
functions of the system: maps, tables, SQL queries, and 360u panoramic photos.

‘Tables Panel’ (top-right frame). The table of attributes contains survey notes (e.g.
availability of services), the local climatic information from the automatic weather
loggers, and the oviposition trapping results for each of the sampling periods
considered in the study. At the foot of the table, there are two hyperlinks to choose
what to display in the ‘Media Panel’ (right-bottom frame). Depending on the user’s
choice, this panel can display rotating 360u panoramic photos and regular photos of
each sampling site, or graphs created from the data in the tables of attributes of each
site. The select tool in the Map Panel allows the user to select one or more sampling
points of interest on the map and access their tables of attributes and media in the
corresponding panels. The ‘SQL Query Builder Panel’ (bottom frame) is used to
display drop-down boxes to enter parameters for SQL queries. These queries search
for sampling points that have attributes of interest. Once the query is executed, the
selected sampling points are highlighted in yellow on the map, and the attributes of
each of them are displayed in the Tables Panel.

4.4 WBMMGIS’s design, architecture, and development

During the system’s design and development, we addressed the points discussed in
Moreno-Sanchez et al. (1997) to enhance the chances of developing a system that is
useful, easy to use, and has long-term viability: (1) solve the problem, and do not fit
the problem to a preconceived solution; (2) consider the concepts of ‘perceive(d
usefulness’ and ‘perceived ease of use’; (3) clearly identify the client(s) and carefully
study the decision-making process to be supported; (4) provide reasonable initial
ease of use; (5) make provisions for effortless and cost-effective future system
development; (6) prioritize use needs and address them through self-contained
modules; (7) involve end users in the design and development process; and (8) create
detailed support documentation.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1147

Simplicity and reliability were important considerations during the design phase.
We based the system on reliable software components and technologies (appendix B)
that are simple to integrate and customize. Each component requires the creation of
a few simple files to make them work. For example, MapServer requires only two
files to create an application (an html file and a .map file containing easy-to-learn
scripting code). The programs that glue the components are also simple and easy to
learn. In situations where personnel have only basic IT skills and where
technological resources are limited, simplicity and reliability are important for
learning, maintenance,
future development, and integration with existing IT
infrastructures.

When choosing which OSS to use, we looked for mature OSS projects with clearly
identified core development teams, wide development communities, and broad and
very active users communities (particularly at the international level). We also
sought projects with well-established records of success in developing a simple
prototype system as well as large mission-critical applications. Also important were
the support resources available in the form of books, users’ forums, users’
conferences, and online documentation. After considering several options (table 2),
we decided to use the OSS mentioned next (see appendix B for more information).
The current version of the WBMMGIS is the result of a second development
cycle. Figure 2 presents how the system is integrated. The system is maintained and
run on a server running the Red Hat Linux operating system and the Apache Web

Figure 2. Software components that integrate the Web-based multimedia GIS system.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1148

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

server. UMN MapServer provides the Web-GIS functionality that is accessed
through the ‘Map Panel’ in the system’s interface (figure 1). Through MapServer,
three sources of geographical data are accessed for display. The first is the collection
of vector layers stored as PostgreSQL-PostGIS spatial tables (streets from Tiger
files, and sampling point locations from GPS readings); the second are the high-
resolution remote sensing images stored in GeoTiff format (IKONOS satellite
images for the area of Ambos Nogales, and the DOQ’s and one-foot color aerial
photos for Tucson AZ); and the third is a shaded relief for the study area that is
accessed from a remote Web Map Service compliant with the OGC Web Map
Service (WMS) OS (see http://mapserver.gis.umn.edu/docs/howto/wms_client for
details on how to set up this connection).

PostgreSQL-PostGIS was used to process spatial and attribute queries. Vector
geographical layers were stored as spatial tables, together with tables of attributes
and photographs that document the environmental conditions at each site (360u
panoramas and regular photos of features of interest). The PostGIS extension offers
the capability to perform over 60 spatial and geo-processing operations (http://
postgis.refractions.net/docs/). In the next development cycle of the system, we are
planning to add some of these functions to enhance the analytical capabilities of the
system.

PHP was used to create interapplication communication and to process the user’s
input and send back the system’s output to the Web interface. The ‘SQL Query
Builder Panel’ is an HTML form that captures the user’s input to query the sampling
sites’ attributes and the layers stored as PostGIS spatial tables for attributes or
features of interest. The parameters entered by the user are sent to the server using the
HTML form. In the server, a PHP script converts the user’s input into an SQL
statement that is submitted to the PostgreSQL-PostGIS for processing. The text string
returned by PostgreSQL-PostGIS is converted to XML by another PHP script. Then,
an XLST style sheet is applied to this XML code to format it for display in the ‘Tables
Panel’ in the Web interface. New XSLT style sheets can be created to format the XML
output to various desired formats for display. For example, we decided to add color
backgrounds to the table displays to facilitate their reading.

interest

The ‘SQL Query Builder Panel’ is also used to submit searches for geographical
features of
(e.g. SELECT the_geom FROM streets WHERE
name5‘Speedway’). A temporary PostGIS spatial table was set up to store the
results of these spatial queries. The content of this spatial table is displayed in
MapServer by setting up a PostGIS connection layer in the MapServer map
configuration file (.map) (see the MapServer how-to http://mapserver.gis.umn.edu/
cgi-bin/wiki.pl?PostGIS). We found this connection process simple and easy to
understand by novice developers.

4.5 Deployment of the WBMMGIS across the US–Mexico border

Starting during the third year of the DEN vector research, deployment of the system
was initiated in the Information Technology Department (ITD) within the General
Office of Innovation and Development for the Administrative Branch of the Public
Health Ministry in the State of Sonora, Mexico. The ITD infrastructure and the end
users in Mexico share the characteristics listed in table 4. Appendix C provides more
details about the IT infrastructure and resources available in Sonora. Noteworthy is
the fact that previous to our project, they were already using some OSS (Apache and
MySQL).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1149

Of the sets of technological and sociocultural issues that have been reported in the
literature as key in successful information systems collaborations across borders
(section 3), we found that the sociocultural–political issues were more important in
obtaining positive results
Information and communication
technologies (ICT) and remote collaborative tools were not critical during our
efforts to deploy the system across the border. Email and phone communications
were sufficient to coordinate the necessary work.

in our project.

Fundamental, however, to moving the project forward were the development of
trust and rapport among the international teams, the creation of motivation to start
and continue the work, and the sharing of knowledge about whom to contact and
how to approach them with new proposals. Table 5 builds on the ideas presented by
Kotlarsky and Oshri (2005) and summarizes activities that we found useful in
developing trust and rapport and in improving communication at each stage of the
project. The Office of Border Health for Arizona-Sonora (OBH)
(http://
www.azdhs.gov/phs/borderhealth/) facilitated many of these activities by providing
information, coordination, and points of contact. We find this promising in the face
of reports that increased traffic of products and people along the US–Mexico border
has not led to increased coordination regarding health issues (Ruiz-Beltran and
Kamau 2001, Homedes and Ugalde 2003).

The ITD in Sonora agreed to install the required OSS in one of their less mission-
critical Internet servers, which is running the Windows 2000 Server operating
system. The time required to install all the necessary OSS was approximately 6 h.
These times are similar to those we have experienced in Linux servers—from 6 h (for
people with strong IT backgrounds) to 24 h (for novice students with minimum
assistance).

Besides the trust and rapport that developed between the US team and the head of
the ITD and the ‘laissez-faire’ attitude evidenced by higher health IT officials in
Sonora, several factors figured in the ITD willingness to deploy the prototype
system. These included the perception that little risk would be involved and few
resources required to deploy the WBMMGIS: no software costs, short installation
time, small software footprint, access to resources for learning the software on their
own with relatively small effort, and simplicity of the software components and
methods involved in linking them. The ITD positive experiences with OSS previous
to our project also contributed to their interest in the deployment. There was a
further perception that long-term benefits could be derived from the time and effort
invested in deploying the WBMMGIS. Young highly motivated ITD personnel were
excited about exploring open technologies alternatives and adding web-GIS
capabilities to their current IT infrastructure.

5. Discussion

The technological, economical, and sociocultural–political contrasts found along the
US–Mexico border make it a good area for a case study of the challenges facing the
creation of cross-border health spatial-information systems (CBHSIS) and, more
ambitiously, a global health spatial-information system (GHSIS). Although the
WBMMGIS previously described is a prototype system (and hence was not
deployed as a fully operational system on both sides of the border), many of our
experiences would be relevant to efforts in developing CBHSIS around the world or
a GHSIS.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 Table 5. Activities that promote communication and the development of rapport and trust between distributed teams.

Stage

Activity

Setting up the project

Clearly present the context and importance of the project. Highlight mutual benefits. Prevent development of a

perception that the project is a foreign agenda with no local benefits.

Have a clear picture of the intra- and inter-institutional structures and relationships in remote locations (e.g. chains of

command and responsibility, who knows what, relationships between institutions and individuals).

Have an understanding of the ‘political landscape’ in remote locations (e.g. best channels to bring up new initiatives,

how ideas coming from outside would be perceived).

Identify potential partners and natural leaders that would support the project (e.g. people in key administrative

positions or ‘in the trenches’ that would support the project).

Identify potential partners’ interests that might enhance motivation in initiating and maintaining work in the project.

Prior to face-to-face meetings

Promote initial introductions (e.g. phone call, virtual meeting) by individuals trusted by the remote team.
Reduce communication barriers (e.g. language and culture courses, set up contact person, communication protocol).

During visits to remote locations

Encourage interaction in informal settings (e.g. lunches or cookouts)
Learn as much as possible about the social, cultural, political, economic, and technological environment in which the
project will be developed (e.g. cultural or political sensitivities, resistance to change, preconceptions and perceptions
regarding the project and participants).

After face-to-face meetings

Routinize communications (e.g. project meetings, reflection sessions, periodical visits to remote locations).
Open communication channels (e.g. promote direct non-hierarchical communication).
Ensure that messages (email, phone, other) are clearly understood.

During development of the project Give attention to maintaining and enhancing trust and rapport. Work on frequent interactions and socializing (even

remotely through phone and email).

Work to increase members’ motivation to engage in current and future work.

1
1
5
0

R

.

M
o
r
e
n
o
-
S
a
n
c
h
e
z

e
t

a
l
.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1151

The components and integration methods we used were simple to learn and easy
to deploy, yet they can provide sophisticated Web-based geoprocessing function-
the combined use of PostgreSQL-PostGIS and UMN
ality. For example,
MapServer is a simple way to add spatial analytical capabilities on vector layers
to Web-based spatial
information systems. The numerous PostGIS spatial
functions can be imbedded into complex SQL statements and scripts to perform
spatial analyses. Then, the results can be displayed over the Web using UMN
MapServer.

In cross-border projects, alternative technological solutions must always be
evaluated not only on their technological merits, but also on their capability to be
relevant to the sociocultural–political context. Features that characterize OSS and
OS address technological and financial issues involved in the creation of CBHSIS.
More importantly by their very nature and characteristics, these open technologies
are well suited for addressing the sociocultural–political concerns that arise in
development of CBHSIS (see table 6, which complements information presented in
table 4).

Our experience emphasizes that careful consideration of sociocultural–political
issues is fundamental for the success of cross-border IS projects. Cultural sensitivity
must be learned and exercised by the parties involved. Differences in language, inter-
personal communications, business dealings, and social protocol can lead to
misunderstandings and unnecessary resistance. Perceived financial, technological,
and political risks must be brought out and dealt with in the early stages of a cross-
border project. Initial mistrust must be quickly overcome, and perceptions that the
project is a foreign agenda with low priority or no immediate benefits for the other
country must be rapidly corrected. Efforts must be made to understand the
complexities of the political landscape in remote locations. Such understanding
facilitates the identification of key partners and of ways to develop political support
for the project both in principle and in practice. Emphasis must be given to activities
and benefits (personal and institutional) that foster and maintain motivation to
initiate and continue work on the project. Table 5 presented several activities that
can be carried out during the life of the project to create the rapport, trust, and
motivation necessary to its success.

Several factors could hamper the use of OSS for the creation of CBHSIS or a
GHSIS. Although there are examples of the use of OSS in mission-critical
applications (Lowe 2002, Wheatley 2004), perceptions remain that OSS is inferior,
less reliable, or more risky than their proprietary counterparts. Fear, uncertainty,
and doubt (FUD) scare tactics practised in the IT industry (http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/FUD) and the shortage of documented experiences in the use of OSS for large
enterprise-wide applications in the health sector tend to reinforce these perceptions.
Top managers in health organizations are more likely to be conservative because
they are responsible for critical operations. They are concerned by the fact that OSS
do not have the traditional hotline telephone support and written maintenance
contracts (Fitzgerald and Kenny 2003a), and that information about them is gained
through less traditional venues because OSS do not have marketing budgets.
Systems security is particularly important
in health applications where the
protection of privacy and confidentiality are paramount. There is still heated
debate over whether OSS leads to more or less secure software and systems (Cowan
2003). All these concerns are less likely to trouble well-educated and experienced IT
personnel, who are in the best position to leverage OSS and OS for the benefit of the

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 Table 6. Sociocultural–political concerns that are addressed by OSS and OS.

Issues

Sociocultural–political
Perceived risk of becoming dependent on particular

vendors, proprietary solutions, or foreign technologies.
Political implications and resistance.

Perception that the CBHSIS is a foreign agenda and

pushes foreign technologies.

Perceived financial and political risk of commitment to
the development and deployment of a CBHSIS or
GHSIS that relies on the coordination and support
of many countries.

Economic
Very limited financial resources in health organizations

and developing countries.

OSS and OS features

N Open source, non-proprietary.
N OSS have no software costs.
N OSS do not require large long-term financial commitments. Facilitate prototyping

of ideas and methods.

N Developed and maintained by organizations and individuals across the world.
N Any local development can be given back to the community of users.

Multidirectional development and support.

N Developed in a spirit of openness, cooperation, and contribution to the community.

Can facilitate and encourage a spirit of cooperation between countries.

N Because of previous points, could facilitate international agreement on a common

set of technologies and methods to develop CBHSIS and a GHSIS.

N OSS have no software costs.
N OSS facilitate access to IT, Web, and GIS technologies.
N OSS have abundant free education, training, and development resources.
N OSS and OS may lead to reduced total cost of ownership (NASA 2005,

Anderson and Moreno-Sanchez 2003).

Technological
IT infrastructures with basic and overcommitted resources.

N OSS have small software footprint.
N OSS smooth learning curves make them accessible to developers with even

Need to share information across borders.

the most basic IT knowledge and skills.

N OSS don’t require high-end computers to perform at a satisfactory level.
N By the way OSS are created and developed, they use and comply with the latest OS.
N Use of OS leads to interoperable systems.

1
1
5
2

R

.

M
o
r
e
n
o
-
S
a
n
c
h
e
z

e
t

a
l
.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1153

health organizations. However, budget cuts are reducing (or totally eliminating from
local health offices) IT personnel with these characteristics.

The use of the OGC’s map service specifications (WMS, WFS, WCS, and WTS)
can allow each country to maintain a repository of its own health related geographic
layers and then make those layers available for composing views that transcend
borders (McKee 2000). However, several challenges exist for the implementation of
this capability (Cicone 2005, CIESIN 2005). There is a need for test beds and pilot
projects to provide insights and to guide the international community toward the
solution of these issues.

6. Conclusions and recommendations

Today, we have newer and closer physical, economic, social, cultural, financial, and
political
linkages between nations. In our ‘global village’, distinctions between
domestic and international health problems are misleading. There is a pressing need
for interoperable cross-border and, more ambitiously, global public and environ-
mental health-information systems. GIS mapping, visualization, and spatial analysis
capabilities will be important components of these systems, and the Web is likely to
be the platform of choice for their deployment.

So far, in the work toward creation of global interoperable geospatial and health
information infrastructures,
the
attention and most of the research efforts. More research is necessary on how to
address the sociocultural–political issues that will emerge in health IT collaborations
across borders and cultures.

issues have captured much of

technological

OSS and OS have several characteristics that are assets for the creation of

CBHSIS:

1. Besides their capability to address technological and financial challenges, by
their very nature and the way they are developed, OSS and OS are particularly
suited to addressing social-cultural–political issues. The openness, distributed
development, spirit of cooperation, and willingness to contribute back to the
community under which OSS and OS are developed can facilitate and
encourage a spirit of cooperation between countries for the creation of
CBHSIS and eventually a GHSIS.

2. The combined use of OSS and OS can assist health organizations in
prototyping and testing different aspects of a Web-based distributed health
the risks
spatial-information infrastructure at a low cost and without
associated with the long-term commitments required by proprietary web-
GIS software solutions.

3. Many OSS and OS are being used successfully in large mission-critical

applications in diverse sectors.

4. The OSS and OS components and integration methods we used were simple to
install, learn, and deploy across the border. They required few resources, and
performed well on average computers in the context of our prototype system.

Liabilities we experienced in the use of OSS and OS were related to the lack of

knowledge and information regarding their use:

1. There is a need for strong quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the use
of OSS and OS in general, and geospatial OSS and OS in particular, in large
enterprise-wide health applications.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1154

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

2. We chose the OSS and integration methods that we considered to be the most
mature, reliable, and simple to learn and implement. However, there are open-
source alternatives to each of the software and methods we used (e.g.
PostgreSQL-PostGIS vs MySQL-Spatial MySQL; MapServer vs GeoServer;
PHP vs JavaScrit), and there is a need for evaluations and comparisons of the
merits and shortcomings of these OSS alternatives, and for studies on
compatibility issues between them, and between OSS solutions and
proprietary software.

3. Although, as previously stated, the OSS and OS components and integration
in our prototype system on average
methods we used performed well
there is a strong need for research on issues related to
computers,
performance, scalability, security, and total costs of ownership which would
be important in large fully operational CBHSIS deployments. For example,
our data sets and geographical databases were small compared with what will
be required for a full international deployment. Would the performance fine
tuning we used (such as spatial tables indexing) be enough to provide
satisfactory performance in large systems? The choice of PHP as the glue to
integrate the software components was simple and worked well for us.
However, would it be fast enough in larger applications?

4. We observed a lack of awareness, education, and use of health and spatial
information OS in the health organization we worked with. The OGC and the
WHO among others have issued OS that are at this point sufficient to start
moving toward the creation of interoperable health spatial-information
systems, but test beds and promotional and educational efforts, followed by
technological and financial support to advance the use of OS, are needed. The
work by the eHealth Standarization Coordination Group (http://
www.who.int/ehscg/en/ and the Group and Strategic Advisory Committee
to the Leadership in Global Health Technology (LIGHT) (http://www.
ehealthinitiative.org/initiatives/programs/LIGHT.mspx) needs to be better
known, as do the efforts for the creation of National Spatial Data
Infrastructures (NSDI) (Hyman et al. 2003) and the Global Spatial Data
Infrastructure (GSDI) (http://www.gsdi.org/).

5. Despite public health austerity and stiff competition for financial resources,
health organizations should invest in creating and maintaining strong well-
educated IT teams at least at some central level (e.g. state level). We suggest
that at least one member of these IT teams should have a strong background
in Geography and Geographic Information Science. Such teams are in the
best position to take advantage of OSS and OS, and facilitate the creation of
interoperable CBHSIS worldwide.

The use of OSS and OS in the development and deployment of our prototype
WBMMGIS contributed to the success of the DEN cross-border study. Given the
appropriate research, we foresee the emergence of open technologies as important
technological alternatives in the field of health informatics.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the IJOGIS North American editor and the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions for improve-
ment. We are grateful to the personnel from the Office of Border Health and the
Arizona Department of Health Services for their assistance in facilitating the

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1155

development of this project. In particular, we would like to express our appreciation
to Dr Cecilia Rosales, Arizona Department of Health Services, Dr Enrique Davis,
Dr Mercedes Gameros, and Dr Hector Llanos from the Binational Office, Oficina
de la Salud Pu´ blica, Nogales, Sonora,
for their assistance in facilitating
communication and contacts in Mexico, and finally to the IT personnel in the
Departamento de Tecnologı´a Informa´ tica, Subsecretaria de Administracio´ n de la
Secretaria de Salud Pu´ blica del Gobierno del Estado de Sonora. This project would
not have been possible without their ongoing and enthusiastic support. The authors
are grateful
funding support provided by NOAA (grant number
#NA16GP2615) for the work described in the case study.

for

References
ANDERSON, G. and MORENO-SANCHEZ, R., 2003, Building web-based spatial information
solutions around Open Specifications and Open Source Software. Transactions in
GIS, 7, pp. 447–466.

ARINO, A., DE LA TORRE J. and RING, P.S., 2001, Relational quality: managing trust in

corporate alliances. California Management Review, 44, pp. 109–131.

BANTA, J.E., 2001, From international health to global health. Journal of Community Health,

26, pp. 73–76.

BERKELMAN, R.L., BRYAN, R.T., OSTERHOLM, M.T., LEDUC, J.W. and HUGHES, J.M., 1994,

Infectious disease surveillance: a crumbling foundation. Science, 264, pp. 368–370.

BINDER, S., LEVITT, A.M., SACKS, J.J. and HUGHES, J.M., 1999, Emerging infectious diseases:

Public health issues for the 21st century. Science, 284, pp. 1311–1313.

BONACCORSI, A. and ROSSI, C., 2003, Why Open Source Software can succeed. Research

Policy, 32, pp. 1243–1258.

BOUMPHREY, F., DIRENZO, O., DUCKETT, J., GRAF, J., HOULE, P., HOLLANDER, D.,
JENKINS, T., JONES, P., KINGSLEY-HUGHES, A., KINGSLEY-HUGUES, K., MCQUEEN, C.
and MOHR, S., 1998, XML Applications (Birmingham, Pennsylvania: Wrox Press).

BROWN, S.H., LINCOLN, M.J., GROEN, P.J. and KOLODNER, R.M., 2003, VistA-US
International Journal of

Department of Veterans Affairs national-scale HIS.
Medical Informatics, 69, pp. 135–156.

CARMEL, E., 1999, Global Software Teams: Collaborating across Borders and Time Zones

(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall).

CARMEL, E. and AGARWAL, R., 2002, The maturation of offshore sourcing of information

technology work. MIS Quarterly Executive, 1, pp. 65–77.

CDC (Center for Disease Control), 2002, Public Health Information Technology Functions
and Specifications (for Emergency Preparedness and Bioterrorism). Available online
at: http://www.cdc.gov/cic/functions-specs (accessed December 2005).

CHILD, J., 2001, Trust—the fundamental bond in global collaboration. Organizational

Dynamics, 29, pp. 274–288.

CICONE, R., 2005, Geospatial data fusion: integration challenges. In Global Spatial Data
Information and Information User Workshop: Development, Dissemination, and Use,
CIESIN, 21–23 September 2005 Venue: Lamont–Doherty Earth Observatory,
Columbia University Palisades, New York. Available online at: http://sedac.ciesin.
columbia.edu/GSDworkshop/ (accessed January 2006).

CIESIN (Center for International Earth Science Information Network), 2005, Workshop
Report: Global
spatial data information and information user workshop:
Development, dissemination, and use. 21–23 September 2005 Venue: Lamont–
Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University Palisades, New York. Available
online at: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/GSDworkshop/ (accessed January 2006).

C/NET NEWS, 2005, Year in review 2005 Open Source 2005 highlights. C/Net News.com.
Available online at: http://news.com.com/Year + in + review + The + open-source +
effect + spreads/2009-7344_3-5992992.html (accessed December 2005).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1156

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

COONAN, H., 2004, Government leads the way on Open Source Software. Australian
Government
for Communications,
Information Management Office. Minister
Information Technology and The Arts Media Release August 31 2004. Available
online at: http://www.agimo.gov.au/media/2004/08/35491.html (accessed December
2005).

COWAN, C., 2003, Software security for Open-Source systems. Security & Privacy Magazine,

IEEE, 1, pp. 38–45.

CRONER, C.M., 2003a, A healthy perspective on spatial data standards and interoperability.
http://www.directionsmag.com/

Directions Magazine. Available
editorials.php?article_id5400 (accessed December 2005).

online

at:

CRONER, C.M., 2003b, Geographic Information Systems: Challenges to effective data sharing
[excerpts]. Public Health GIS News and Information, July 2003. Available online at:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/gis/cdcgis53.pdf (accessed December 2005).

CRONER, C.M., 2003c, Public health, GIS and the Internet. Annual Review of Public Health,

DIBONA, C., OCKMAN, S., and STONE, M. (Eds), 1999, Open Sources: Voices from the Open

Source Revolution (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).

DIBONA, C., STONE, M., and COOPER, D. (Eds), 2005, Open Sources 2.0: The Continuing

Evolution (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).

EBERT, C. and DE NEVE, P., 2001, Surviving global software development. IEEE Software,

24, pp. 57–82.

18, pp. 62–69.

ENGELTHALER, D.M., FINK, T.M., LEVY, C.E. and LESLIE, M.J., 1997, The reemergence of

Aedes aegypti in Arizona. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 3, pp. 241–242.

ESPINO, J.U., WAGNER, M.M., TSUI, F.C., SU, H.D., OLSZEWSKI, Z.L., LIU, Z.,
CHAPMAN, W., ZENG, X., ZHONG, L.M., LU, W. and DARA, J., 2004, The RODS
Open Source Project: Removing a barrier to syndromic surveillance. In Proceedings of
the 11th World Congress on Medical Informatics Volume 107 Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics, M. Fieschi, E. Coiera and Y.-C.J. Li (Eds) (Amsterdam:
IOS Press), pp. 1192–1196.

EVARISTO, R., 2003, The management of distributed projects across cultures. Journal of

Global Information Management, 11, pp. 58–70.

FARAJ, S. and SPROULL, L., 2000, Coordinating expertise in software development teams.

Management Science, 46, pp. 1554–1568.

FELLER, J. and FITZGERALD, B., 2002, Understanding Open Source Software Development

(London: Addison-Wesley).

FITZGERALD, B. and KENNY, T., 2003a, Open Source Software in the trenches: Lessons from a
large-scale OSS implementation. In 24th International Conference on Information
Systems, 14–17 December 2003, Seattle, WA, pp. 316–326. Available online at: http://
is.lse.ac.uk/events/ESRCseminars/fitzgerald.pdf (accessed December 2005).

FITZGERALD, B. and KENNY, T., 2003b, Open Source Software Can Improve the Health of the
Bank Balance—The Beaumont Hospital Experience. Available online at: http://
opensource.mit.edu/papers/fitzgeraldkenny.pdf (accessed December 2005).

FRENK, J. and GOMEZ-DANTES, O., 2002, Globalization and the challenges to health systems.

BMJ, 325, pp. 95–97.

FRENK, J., SEPULVEDA, J., GOMEZ-DANTES, O., MCGUINESS, M.J. and KNAUL, F., 1997, The

new world order and international health. BMJ, 314, pp. 1404–1407.

GALLIVAN, M.J., 2001, Striking a balance between trust and control in a virtual organization:
a content analysis of open source software case studies. Information Systems Journal,
11, pp. 227–304.

GARDNER, J.R. and RENDON, Z.L., 2002, XSLT and XPATH: A Guide to XML

Transformations (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall).

GESCHWINDE, E. and SCHOENIG, H-J., 2002, PHP and PostgreSQL Advanced Web

Programming (Indianapolis, IN: Sams).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1157

GILLESPIE, R., 2000, German federal government to support Open Source Software.
Internetnews.com 5 July 2000. Available online at: http://www.internetnews.com/
bus-news/article.php/6_408271 (accessed December 2005).

GOULDE, M. and BROWN, E., 2006, Open Source Software: A Primer for Health Care Leaders
(California HealthCare Foundation). Available online at: http://www.chcf.org/
documents/ihealth/OpenSourcePrimer.pdf (accessed August 2006).

HERBSLEB, J.D., ATKINS, D.L., BOYER, D.G., HANDEL, M. and FINHOLT, T.A., 2002,
Introducing instant messaging and chat into the workplace. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Computer–Human Interaction, 20–25 April 2002, Minneapolis, MN,
pp. 171–178.

HERBSLEB, J.D. and MOCKUS, A., 2003, An empirical study of speed and communication in
on Software

IEEE Transactions

globally-distributed software development.
Engineering, 29, pp. 1–14.

HERBSLEB, J.D., MOCKUS, A., FINHOLT, T.A. and GRINTER, R.E., 2000, Distance,
dependencies, and delay in global collaboration. In Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, 2–6 December 2000, Philadelphia.

HERBSLEB, J.D. and MOITRA, D., 2001, Global software development. IEEE Software, 18, pp.

HIGGS, G. and GOULD, M., 2001, Is there a role for GIS in the ‘new NHS’? Health and Place,

16–20.

7, pp. 247–259.

HOECK, PA.E., RAMBERG, F.B., MERRILL, S.A., MOLL, C. and HAGEDORN, H.H., 2003,
Population and parity levels of Aedes aegypti collected in Tucson. Journal of Vector
Ecology, 28, pp. 1–9.

HOEGL, M. and GEMUENDEN, H.G., 2001, Teamwork quality and the success of innovative
projects: a theoretical concept and empirical evidence. Organization Science, 12, pp.
435–449.

HOLCK, J., PERSEN, M.K. and LARSEN, M.H., 2005, Open Source Software acquisition:
Beyond the business case. In 13th European Conference on Information Systems, 26–28
May 2005, Regensburg, Germany. Available online at: http://csrc.lse.ac.uk/asp/
aspecis/20050130.pdf (accessed August 2006).

HOLLAND, P., 2001, Global perspective of NGDI. GIS Development: The Geospatial Resource
Portal. Available online at: http://www.gisdevelopment.net/policy/international/
interna005.htm (accessed December 2005); and also at: https://www.ga.gov.au/pdf/
auslig/global.pdf (accessed December 2005).

HOLMES, C., DOYLE, A. and WILSON, M., 2005, Towards a Free and Open Source (FOSS)
Spatial Data Infrastructure. In From Pharaohs to Geoinformatics, FIG Working Week
2005 and GSDI-8, 16–21 April 2005, Cairo. Available online at: http://www.eogeo.org/
Projects/gsdi8paper-folder/holmes-doyle-wilson-gsdi-8.pdf (accessed December 2005).
HOMEDES, N. and UGALDE, A., 2003, Globalization and health at the United States–Mexico

Border. American Journal of Public Health, 93, pp. 2016–2022.

HYMAN, G., PEREA, C., REY, D.I. and LANCE, K., 2003, Survey of the development of
national
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), Cali, Colombia. Available
(accessed December
online at: http://www.procig.org/downloads/ESRIpaper.pdf
2005).

spatial data infrastructures

IMPERATO, P.J., 2001, Commentary: Global health. Journal of Community Health, 26, pp. 77.
JAKOBOVITS, R.M., ROSSE, C. and BRINKLEY, J.F., 2002, WIRM: An Open Source toolkit for
building biomedical Web applications. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 9, pp. 557–570.

JARVENPAA, S.L. and LEIDNER, D.E., 1999, Communication and trust in global virtual teams.

Organization Science, 10, pp. 791–815.

KA¨ FERSTEIN, F.K., MOTARJEMI, Y. and BETTCHER, D.W., 1997, Foodborne disease control:

A Transnational Challenge. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 3, pp. 503–510.

KAY, M., 2001, XLST Programmers Reference (Chicago: Wrox Press).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1158

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

KEMEL, W., 1996, Health dilemma at the borders: a call for global action. In Proceedings of
the 34th Session of the WHO Advisory Committee on Health Research, October 1996,
Geneva, Switzerland (Geneva: World Health Organization).

KLOPFER, M.

(Ed.), 2005, Interoperability and open architectures: An analysis of existing
standardization processes and procedures. Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. White
Paper document 05–049. Available online at: http://www.opengeospatial.org/press/
?page5papers (accessed December 2005).

KOLODZIEJ, K., 2003, OGC’s WMS cookbook: recipes for web mapping. Geospatial solutions,
10. Available online at: http://www.geospatial-online.com/geospatialsolutions/article/
articleDetail.jsp?id570779&sk5&date5&&pageID51 (accessed January 2006).

KOLODZIEJ, K. (Eds), 2004, OpenGIS Web Map Server Cookbook (Wayland, MA: Open
Geospatial Consortium Inc.). Available online at: http://www.opengeospatial.org/
resources/?page5cookbooks (accessed December 2005).

KOMBE, G.C. and DARROW, B.A., 2001, Revisiting emergency infectious diseases: The

unfinished agenda. Journal of Community Health, 26, pp. 113–122.

KOTLARSKY, J. and OSHRI, I., 2005, Social

ties, knowledge sharing and successful
collaboration in globally distributed system development projects. European Journal
of Information Systems, 14, pp. 37–48.

KROPLA, B., 2005, Beginning MapServer Open Source GIS Development (Sebastopol, CA:

O’Reilly & Associates).

LAGESSE, D., 2002, Out the Windows: Breaking with Microsoft gets a little easier. US News &
World Report, 14 January 2002, pp. 54–56. Available online at: http://www.usnews.
com/usnews/culture/articles/020114/archive_020018.htm (accessed December 2005).

LEA, C., CHOI, W., KENT, A., PRASAD, G. and ULLMAN, C., 2000, Beginning PHP 4

(Hoboken, NJ: Wrox).

LAKHANI, K. and WOLF, B., 2005, Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation
and effort in Free/Open Source Software projects. In Perspective on Free and Open
Source Software, J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, S. Hissam and K.R. Lakhani (Eds)
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of Management). Available online at: http://
freesoftware.mit.edu/papers/lakhaniwolf.pdf (accessed December 2005).

LOWE, J., 2002, Spatial on a shoestring: Leveraging free Open Source Software. Geospatial

Solutions, 12, pp. 42–45.

MACLEHOSE, L., MCKEE, M. and WEINBERG, J., 2002, Responding to the challenge of

communicable disease in Europe. Science, 295, pp. 2047–2050.

MARSON, I., 2005, Europe and the US philosophically divided on open source? ZDNet UK, 28
November 2005. Available online at: http://insight.zdnet.co.uk/software/linuxunix/
0,39020472,39235707-4,00.htm (accessed December 2005).

MCDONALD, C.J., SCHADOW, G., BARNES, M., DEXTER, P., OVERHAGE, M., MAMLIN, B. and
MCCOY, M., 2003, Open Source software in medical informatics/why, how and what.
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 69, pp. 175–184.

MCKEE, L., 2000, Implications of the OpenGIS specification for regional science. Open
Geospatial Consortium Inc. White Paper. Available online at: http://www.
opengeospatial.org/press/?page5papers (accessed December 2005).

MCKEE, L., 2003, The spatial web. Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. White Paper. Available
online at: http://www.opengeospatial.org/press/?page5papers (accessed December
2005).

MCKEE, L., 2005, The importance of going ‘Open’. Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. White
at: http://www.opengeospatial.org/press/?page5papers

Paper. Available online
(accessed December 2005).

MITCHELL, T., 2005, Web Mapping Illustrated (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).
MOCKUS, A. and HERBSLEB, J.D., 2002, Expertise browser: a quantitative approach to
identifying expertise. In 24th Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Engineering, 19–25 May 2002, Orlando, FL, pp. 503–512.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1159

MOMJIAN, B., 2000, PostgreSQL: Introduction and Concepts (Upper Saddle River, NJ:

Pearson Education).

MORENO, R., RUTTENBER, J., THOMAS, D., EGBERT, M. and HAYDEN, M., 2002, Check up!
GIS supports diverse human health applications. GeoWorld, 15, pp. 28–30.
MORENO-SANCHEZ, R., HAYDEN, M., JANES, C. and ANDERSON, G., 2006, A web-based
multimedia spatial information system to document Aedes aegypti breeding sites and
dengue fever risk along the US–Mexico border. Health & Place, 12, pp. 715–727.

MORENO-SANCHEZ, R., MALCZEWSKI, J. and BOJORQUEZ-TAPIA, L.A., 1997, Design and
development strategy for multi-media GIS to support environmental negotiation,
administration, and monitoring at the regional level. Transactions in GIS, 1, pp.
161–175.

MU¨ LLER, H., RUCH, P., SQUIRE, D.M., LOVIS, C. and GEISSBUHLER, A., 2004, Using open
source software for medical image retrieval. In Proceedings of the 11th World Congress
on Medical Informatics Volume 107 Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, M.
Fieschi, E. Coiera and Y.-C.J. Li (Eds) (Amsterdam: IOS Press), p. 1764.

NARONHA, F., 2002, Open Source Software opens new windows to third-world. Linux
Journal, 3 May 2002. Available online at: http://www.linuxjournal.com/article/6049
(accessed December 2005).

NARONHA, F., 2003, Developing countries gain from Free/Open Source Software. Linux
Journal, 20 May 2003. Available online at: http://www.linuxjournal.com/article/6884
(accessed December 2005).

NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), 2005, Geospatial interoperability
return on investment. NASA Geospatial Interoperability Office. Available online at:
http://gio.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/ROI%20Study.pdf (accessed December 2005).
NICHOLS, D.M. and TWIDALE, M.B., 2002, Usability and Open Source Software. Working
Paper 10/2 December 2002, Department of Computer Science, The University of
Waikato, Hamiltion, New Zeland. Available online at: http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/
,daven/docs/oss-wp.html (accessed December 2005).

ORLIKOWSKI, W.J., 2002, Knowing in practice: enacting a collective capability in distributed

organizing. Organization Science, 13, pp. 249–273.

PINHEIRO, F.P. and CORBER, S.J., 1997, Global situation of dengue and dengue hemorrhagic
fever, and its emergence in the Americas. World Health Statistics Quarterly, 50, pp.
161–169.

RAJANI, N., REKOLA, J. and MIELONEN, T., 2003, Free as in Education Significance of the
Free/Libre Open Source Software for Developing Countries (Helsinki, Finland:
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Finland) Available online at: http://www.itu.int/
wsis/docs/background/themes/access/free_as_in_education_niranjan.pdf
(accessed
December 2005).

RAMSEY, P., 2005, The State of Open Source GIS. Refractions Research Inc. Available online

at: http://www.refractions.net/white_papers/ (accessed December 2005).

RASMUS, L., 2000, PHP pocket reference (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).
RAYMOND, E.S., 2001, The Cathedral & the Bazaar Musings on Linux and Open Source by an

Accidental Revolutionary (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).

REICHARDT, M., 2004, The havoc of non-interoperability. Open Geospatial Consortium Inc.
White Paper. Available online at: http://www.opengeospatial.org/press/?page5papers
(accessed December 2005).

RICHARDS, T.B., CRONER, C.M., RUSHTON, G., BROWN, C.K. and FOWLER, L., 1999,
Geographic Information Systems and public health: mapping the future. Public
Health Reports, 114, pp. 359–373.

RICKETTS, T.C., 2003, Geographic Information Systems and public health. Annual Review of

Public Health, 24, pp. 1–6.

RODRIGUEZ-GARCIA, R., 2001, The health-development link: travel as a public health issue.

Journal of Community Health, 26, pp. 93–112.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1160

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

RUIZ-BELTRAN, M. and KAMAU, J.K., 2001, The socio-economic and cultural impediments to
well-being along the US–Mexico border. Journal of Community Health, 26, pp.
123–132.

SARKER, S. and SAHAY, S., 2004, Implications of space and time for distributed work: an
interpretive study of US–Norwegian system development teams. European Journal of
Information Systems, 13, pp. 3–20.

SCHENKER, J.L., 2003, Open Source Software gets boost at UN. International Herald Tribune,
The IHT Online, December 11, 2003. Available online at: http://www.iht.com/articles/
2003/12/11/dividea_ed3_.php (accessed December 2005).

SCHUTZBERG, A., 2005, MapServer community, AutoDesk announce MapServer Foundation.
Directions Magazine, November 28, 2005. available online at: http://www.
directionsmag.com/article.php?article_id52037 (accessed December 2005).

SEREON RESEARCH, 2003, The market for Open Source Software in Germany. Research and
Markets, July 2003. Available online at: http://www.researchandmarkets.com/
reportinfo.asp?report_id5222224 (accessed December 2003).

SMARR, L., 2005, Panel on Open Source Software for High End Computing. President’s
Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC). Available online at: http://
www.nitrd.gov/pitac/meetings/2000/20000225/oss/oss.pdf (accessed December 2005).
SMITH, P.G. and BLANCK, E.L., 2002, From experience: leading dispersed teams. The Journal

of Product Innovation Management, 19, pp. 294–304.

STINSON, B., 2001, PostgreSQL Essential Reference (Indianapolis, ID: New Riders).
STONES, R. and MATTHEW, N., 2001, Beginning Databases with PostgreSQL (Chicago: Wrox

STORCK, J., 2000, Knowledge diffusion through ‘strategic communities’. Sloan Management

Press).

Review, 41, pp. 63–74.

TIANGCO, A.F., STOCKWELLB, A., SAPSFORD, J., REINERB, A. and SWANTON, E., 2005, Open-
source software in an occupational health application: the case of Heales Medical Ltd.
In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Open Source Systems, M.
Scotto and G. Succi (Eds). 11–15 July 2005, Genoa, Italy, pp. 130–134.

TIM, U.S., 1995, The application of GIS in environmental health sciences: opportunities and

limitations. Environmental Research, 71, pp. 75–88.

UK OFFICE OF COMMERCE, 2004, Open Source Software use within the UK government.
Cabinet Office, e-Government Unit. Available online at: http://www.govtalk.gov.uk/
documents/oss_policy_version2.pdf (accessed December 2005).

WADE, T., 2005, Brazil reshapes debate on intellectual property. Reuters Foundation, Alert
Net, 1 Febrary 2005. Available online at: http://www.freepress.net/news/6503
(accessed December 2005).

WAMBUI, M., 2004, Africa should make more use of Free and Open Source Software. United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa. Available online at: http://www.uneca.org/
eca_resources/news/042805disdcodi_dna.htm (accessed December 2005).

WANG, H. and WANG, C., 2001, Open Source Software Adoption: A Status Report. IEEE

Software, 18, pp. 90–95.

WATERS, N., 1999, Is XML the answer to internet-based GIS? GeoWorld, 12, pp. 32–33.
WHEATLEY, M., 2004, The Myths of Open Source. CIO Magazine, 1 March 2004 Issue.
(accessed

http://www.cio.com/archive/030104/open.html

online

at:

Available
December 2005).

WHEELER, D.A., 2005, Why Open Source Software/Free Software (OSS/FS)? Look at the
Numbers! Available online at: http://www.dwheeler.com/oss_fs_why.html (accessed
December 2005).

WHO (World Health Organization), 2005, WHO resolution on eHealth. 58th World Health
Assembly 23 May 2005 Geneva. Available online at: http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/
pdf_files/WHA58/WHA58_28-en.pdf (accessed December 2005).

WILLIAMS, S., 2002, Free as in Freedom: Richard Stallman’s Crusade for Free Software

(Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1161

WOODS, D. and GULIANI, G., 2005, Open Source for the Enterprise Managing Risks, Reaping

Rewards (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates).

Appendix A. Useful sources of information and recent applications of
Open Source Software in health informatics

OSS is not new in the area of health informatics. In the late 1970s, the source code
for COSTAR medical records and billing system (http://costar.net/costar.htm) was
distributed at no cost. The same was done by the Department of Veterans Affairs
for the DHCP system (Decentralized Hospital Computer Program) now known as
DHCP/VistA (http://www.hardhats.org/dhcptovista.html). Several OSS have been
developed for keeping patient and health records, for billing operations, and for
delivering and sharing clinical documents (McDonald et al. 2003).

Considerable interest and activity exist in the area of medical and health OSS
initiatives. The following sources are useful to obtain information about OSS
projects and initiatives: the Open Source Health Care Alliance (OSHCA http://
the Open Health Care Group (http://www.openhealth.org/),
www.oshca.org/),
the Open Source Health Care Resources
(http://www.openhealth.com/en/
healthlinks.html), Minoru (http://www.openhealth.com/), and Linux-MedNews
(http://www.linuxmednews.com/).

Besides the OSS applications listed by McDonald et al. (2003), OSS have been
applied to medical image retrieval (Mu¨ ller et al. 2004), occupational health (Tiangco
et al. 2005), and syndromic surveillance (Espino et al. 2004), and closer to the subject
of this paper, to biomedical Web applications (Jakobovits et al. 2002).

Appendix B. Information on the OSS and OS used and references to useful
resources used during the development of the WBMMGIS

Red Hat Linux: This is one of the most popular Linux distributions of the open
source, multitasking operating system,
featuring outstanding reliability and
flexibility. All documentation is online (http://www.redhat.com/docs/manuals/).
(http://searchopensource.techtarget.com/)
The
website
provides news and advice to assist users in making migration,
integration,
interoperability, administration, and security decisions regarding Linux and open
source technologies.

SearchOpenSource

Apache Web server: This is a HTTP Web server for Unix-like systems (BSD,
Linux, and UNIX systems), Microsoft Windows, and other platforms (http://
www.apache.org/). It is the most widely used Web server: as of December 2005
70.98% of the websites on the Internet were run on Apache Web Server (http://
www.netcraft.com/survey/).

UMN_Mapserver: This is an OSS development environment for building Web-
mapping applications (http://mapserver.gis.umn.edu/). It facilitates the display and
browsing of geographic data in commonly used vector and raster formats, and also
supports connections to databases capable of storing spatial data tables. The
documentation and how-to guides are online (http://mapserver.gis.umn.edu/docs).
There are different UMN MapServer user communities’ mailing lists (http://
mapserver.gis.umn.edu/community/MUGs/),
(http://
mapserver.gis.umn.edu/community/conferences/MUM3). The books by Kropla
(2005) and Mitchell (2005) discuss several of the technical
issues and provide
how-to guides to solve several of the issues we dealt with during the system’s
development.

conferences

users’

and

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 1162

R. Moreno-Sanchez et al.

PostgreSQL: This is a sophisticated Object-Relational Database Management
System (RDBMS), supporting almost all SQL constructs,
including subselects,
transactions, and user-defined types and functions. Together with MySQL (http://
www.mysql.com/), it is the most advanced and popular OSS RDBMS available
today (Stinson 2001, Stones and Matthew 2001, http://www.postgreSQL.org/).
PostGIS, also an OSS, is an extension of the PostgreSQL RDBMS that adds
support for geographic objects (http://postgis.refractions.net/). In effect, PostGIS
spatially enables the PostgreSQL server, allowing it to be used as a backend spatial
database for GIS, much like ESRI’s Spatial Database Engine (SDE) or Oracle’s
Spatial extension. During the development of the system, we used pgAdminIII (an
OSS graphic interface for administration and development in PostgreSQL http://
www.pgadmin.org/?locale5en_US) to facilitate the testing of SQL statements. The
PostgreSQL and PostGIS manuals and how-to guides are online (http://
www.postgresql.org/docs/
respectively).
There are also users’ conferences (e.g. http://conference.postgresql.org/Wrap_Up)
and users’ communities’ mailing lists (http://www.postgresql.org/community/lists/
and http://postgis.refractions.net/mailman/listinfo). We also found the books by
Momjian (2000) and Geschwinde and Schoenig (2002) useful during the develop-
ment process.

and http://postgis.refractions.net/docs/

PHP: This is a server-side, HTML-embedded, cross-platform scripting language
(Rasmus 2000, http://www.php.net/). We found the following sources of informa-
tion useful during the development: Lea et al. (2000), Geschwinde and Schoenig
(2002), and a large number of websites and forums that offer tips and tricks, and
http://
in PHP (e.g.
sample
www.phpfreaks.com/smarty_manual/page/tips.html).

http://www.lerdorf.com/tips.pdf

code

and

OGC Web Map Service (WMS): A WMS produces map images in PNG, GIF or
JPEG formats, or occasionally as vector-based graphical elements in Scalable
Vector Graphics (SVG) format, or Web Computer Graphics Metafile (WebCGM)
format (http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wms). This specification standar-
dizes the way in which maps are requested by clients and the way that servers
describe their data holdings. Individual map layers can be requested from different
servers. The WMS specification thus enables the creation of a network of distributed
Map Servers from which clients can build customized maps. A particular WMS
provider in a distributed WMS network need only be the steward of its own data
collection. The following resources were useful during our development: The OGC’s
WMS Cookbook (Kolodziej 2004, we used version 1.0 of this document from 2003),
the Canadian Geospatial Data Infrastructure Online Training (http://www.
geoconnections.org/publications/training_manual/e/06/06_00/06_00_00.htm);
and
the OGC forum (http://feature.opengeospatial.org/forumbb/). Also, the UMN_
MapServer manual explains how to integrate WMS into MapServer applications.
XML: This is a World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) open specification (http://
www.w3.org/XML/). XML uses pairs of text-based tags, enclosed in parentheses,
to describe the data. These tags make the information passed across the Internet
‘self describing’ (Waters 1999). We use Boumphrey et al. (1998) as reference
forums (e.g. http://www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/
and several developers’
forums/dw_forum.jsp?forum5185&cat511
http://www.jguru.com/forums/
home.jsp?topic5XML).

and

XLST (Extensible Stylesheet Language: Transformations): This is a W3C open
is an XML-based

specification (http://www.w3.org/Style/XSL/). Essentially,

it

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 OSS and OS in creating health information systems

1163

language for transforming the structure of XML documents for display on screen,
on paper, or spoken word (Kay 2001). Also, XLST is commonly used to transform
data from one data model (e.g. text) in one application to the data model used in
another (e.g. SQL statements to create a table in a Relational Database
Management System). The XLST formatting code contained in a text file is known
as a Style Sheet. The book by Gardner and Rendon (2002) and several XLST
developers’ forums (e.g. http://p2p.wrox.com/forum.asp?FORUM_ID579) were
useful during our work.

Appendix C. Details of the IT infrastructure found in Sonora Mexico

The health IT infrastructure (software, hardware, people, data, and procedures) in
Sonora Mexico has the following characteristics. The Information Technology
Department (ITD) oversees and maintains over 1000 computers, 30 networks, and
four Internet servers in hospitals, clinics, and health administrative offices state
wide. The ITD has 80 IT professionals with backgrounds in RDBMS, program-
ming, networks, and Web development. Most of these personnel are concentrated in
the capital of the State of Sonora, Hermosillo.

The ITD uses the following software: RDBMS (Microsoft SQL Server, Access),
programming (C#, Visual Basic, Visual FoxPro, ASP), and specialized health
software (Epi-Info http://www.cdc.gov/epiinfo/). Currently, they do not have access
to or use any GIS software. Previous to our project, they were already using the
following OSS: The RDBMS MySQL (http://www.mysql.com/), PHP, and Apache
Web server all running on Windows operating systems. They have had positive
experiences in the use of these OSS. Their interest and positive experiences with
Open Technologies contributed to their willingness to participate in the deployment
of the prototype WBMMGIS.

The Public Health Ministry in the State of Sonora recently established a state-
wide contract with Microsoft to provide operating systems, and desktop software
(such as MS Office). This agreement has discouraged further exploration of OSS
alternatives in the ITD.

Downloaded by [University of Connecticut] at 02:51 09 October 2014 