This article was downloaded by: [University of Kent]
On: 07 December 2014, At: 06:48
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

From named place to naming event:
creating gazetteers for history
R. Mostern a & I. Johnson b
a School of Social Sciences , Humanities and Arts , University of
California , Merced, CA, USA
b Archaeological Computing Laboratory , University of Sydney ,
Sydney, Australia
Published online: 19 Aug 2008.

To cite this article: R. Mostern & I. Johnson (2008) From named place to naming event: creating
gazetteers for history, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22:10, 1091-1108,
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851438

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701851438

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 10, October 2008, 1091–1108

Research Article

From named place to naming event: creating gazetteers for history

R. MOSTERN*{ and I. JOHNSON{
{School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts, University of California, Merced, CA,
USA
{Archaeological Computing Laboratory, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia

(Received 24 November 2007; in final form 25 November 2007 )

For historians and other scholars of the human past, gazetteers are best seen as
records of events in the histories of places, rather than as indexes of named places
per se. This paper discusses the episodic nature of historical temporality, the
narrative form of reasoning in history, and the value of using events as the basis
for gazetteers in order to reflect the character of knowledge about historical
places. It identifies the attributes of a historical event and introduces the idea that
a historical event gazetteer must build networks of relationships among events in
order to effectively represent historical narrative. It reviews relevant bodies of
literature and proposes a procedure for identifying chronological, mereological,
and causal relationships among historical events. Finally,
it suggests new
directions in spatiotemporal visualization of history, with reference to a
prototype developed by the authors.

Keywords: Gazetteer; Event; Chronology; History; Narrative; Spatiotemporal
visualization

1. Gazetteers as historical event databases

The impulse to organize information by named place is old and very widespread.
Gazetteers originate with traditions of place name cataloguing and description that
are ubiquitous in history, dating to the nineteenth century in Britain and at least to
the seventh century in China (Hargett 1996). In the digital age, gazetteers owe their
importance and the activity developing around them to their potential to spatially
index information, allowing for spatial contextualization, the analysis of spatial
relationships, spatial searching, and mapping. Digital gazetteers have become an
essential
infrastructure for many types of planning, marketing, research, and
location-based services.

Gazetteers are generally conceptualized as spatial indexes. However, in recent years,
scholars have called for gazetteers to record temporal change by date-stamping place
names, spatial footprints, and feature types, and to record alternative place names and
source citations that reflect both temporal change and multiple nomenclatures (Crane
2004, Buckland et al. 2007, Mostern 2008). The concept of a date-stamped gazetteer,
particularly in a knowledge organization systems (KOS) context (Hill 2006: 92), opens
the way for a new approach to the genre. Rather than serving as databases of spatially
located places to which time-stamps are attached as attributes, gazetteers can record
historical events that describe the existence of named places.

*Corresponding author. Email: rmostern@ucmerced.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851438

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1092

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

In an insightful exposition of the cultural meaning of place, Yi-fu Tuan (1975)
notes that place may be studied either as a location in a hierarchy of units or as a
unique artefact. As an artefact, he regards place as ‘a center of meaning constructed
by experience.’ A place may be significant to any individual or group, and may exist
at any scale (Tuan 1975: 152). As Tuan notes, the number of such places is
hypothetically infinite. However, not all possible places are in fact named and
defined as places. Locations become places only when events occur that cause them
to become imbued with meaning. Historical gazetteers therefore need to record the
occurrences that have made places into centres of meaning.

An effective historical event gazetteer needs to represent the interpretive and
integrating episodes of spatial change through
narrative nature of history,
chronological and causal relationships. Existing approaches, discussed in section
2, tend to focus either on the properties and behaviour of spatiotemporal objects, or
on event chronologies and relationships with limited spatial context. This paper
makes the case for reconceiving historical gazetteers as databases of spatially and
temporally located events. It reports introductory work on a historical event data
model that incorporates time, location, and event relationships, and describes a
prototype application developed from this perspective.

1.1 Defining historical events

in defining an event as

follows Conkin and Stromberg (1989)

We define a historical event as the instantiation of information about the past in the
form of a named, spatially located, temporally circumscribed entity. Griffin (1993:
‘a
1096)
distinguishable happening, one with some pattern or theme that sets it off from
others, and one that involves changes taking place within a delimited amount of
time.’ While less cumbersome than the definition proposed in this paper, Griffin’s
definition does not adequately underscore the fiat character or entity orientation
that we find essential. This definition underscores an important attribute of
historical information. Namely, historical events are fiat objects (Grenon and Smith
2004: 149) derived from a particular perspective on the human record. Even when
they refer to physical or otherwise tangible objects, events themselves have no
extrinsic existence beyond the individuals or communities that define their
significance.

The definition also suggests a number of core attributes of historical events. As
Feinberg et al. (2003) have observed, the description of a named event is analogous
to the structure of place attributes in a gazetteer. Robinson (2005) and Petras et al.
(2006) have developed content standards for named events. Extending from this
research, we note that historical events:

N have names: an event may have many names, each reflecting a particular
perspective, as in the European Settlement or the European Invasion of Australia;
N have a structure which follows a standard grammar (Hobbes 2002, Pustejovsky
et al. 2003): a fully articulated historical event consists of an agent performing
an action on an object using an instrument (Heise 2005);
N are spatially delimited: all historical events occur over some geographical
though the spatial extent of an event may also be diffuse or
N are temporally delimited: every historical event exists continuously between a start
and end time, though the temporal scope of an event is often diffuse or ambiguous;

extent,
ambiguous;

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history
1093
N exist in relation to other historical events: part–whole relationships link
discrete instances to spatially and temporally continuous parent events, and
causal relationships establish prior events as prerequisites for subsequent ones.1

The existence of any named place and its attributes is an event, since no place in the
real world is eternal, and no place has static attributes. A historical gazetteer records
the geographic footprints of named places that are permeable, fluid, contingent, and
arbitrary. To paraphrase Tuan, places persist only as people make meaning in and
around them. For this reason, their existence can and should be described as events.
A historical event gazetteer can accommodate characteristics of historical
information and historical practice that are difficult to manage in a place-name
gazetteer. Recorded historical knowledge comprises episodes, not a constant stream
of data. Individuals relate historical events to one another to make meaning, and the
narratives they create from them arise through a filter of interpretation, bias, and
error. Any historical episode can be represented as a multitude of possible events
according to the diverse interpretations of individuals and groups with particular
perspectives and the level of detail with which it is recorded. Its existence depends on
inferences concerning events and the relationships among them.

Historical data are thus partial

in both senses: they represent a particular
perspective, and they are fragmentary and incomplete. Even in our contemporary
culture of obsessive and autobiographical documentation, the historical record
includes only the information that has been considered meaningful, recorded, and
saved. Documentation of the more distant past, of daily life, and of subaltern
viewpoints tends to start out more sparse than that for more recent periods,
prominent events, and orthodox society, and its rate of attrition is greater.

1.1.1 An example. A brief example may help to explain how a historical event
gazetteer allows for a more effective representation of historical geographical
information, and provides a better model of named places, than either a GIS or a
place-name gazetteer with date-stamping, neither of which adequately captures the
dynamism or context of historical spatial organization, or the interpretive character
of historical practice.

The region south of the Caspian Sea has had a complex political history. Historians
might begin with the Achmenaeid Persians, architects of the world’s first great empire;
trace the history of the region through its dominion by the Greek speaking Selucid and
Parthian empires; chart its return to Persian rule during the Sasanian Empire; and note
its conquest by the Arab Umayyad Caliphate and their Buwayhid successors. In
medieval times, the region was occupied by the Turkish Khanate of Khwarizm, the
Mongol Il-Khanate, and the Turko-Mongol Timurids before its reversion to Persian
rule under the Safavids in the sixteenth century. With the emergence of nation-states in
the eighteenth century, the region south of the Caspian became known as Persia, a
name it maintained until the founding of Iran in 1921.

As imperial fortunes shifted, the boundaries around and within this region south
of the Caspian Sea changed dramatically. As suzerainty over the region changed
hands between overlords of many linguistic backgrounds, place names changed as
well. So, too, did religious practices, the distribution of ethnic groups, and patterns

1 The ISO 19108 spatial temporal standard, developed by the ISO TC/211 Secretariat, also describes spatial data.
However it is concerned strictly with defining the temporal primitives (intervals, duration, instances and events ) that
collectively constitute all temporal objects and with describing and using calendars and clocks to describe temporal
primitives (ISO TC/211 Secretariat 2002).

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1094

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

of trade and urbanization. Often, places in this region were known simultaneously
by names in many languages at the same time; naming systems that could represent
different and conflicting perspectives about power and dominion.

This narrative summary is derived from a series of maps in a historical atlas (Black et
al. 2005, figure 1). Much of the information portrayed on these maps depicts spatially
located political, cultural, military, and economic events. The genre of the historical
atlas is characterized by a highly communicative and visually compelling combination
of historical and geographical data in a spatial framework. While specific applications
of historical GIS have demonstrated the capacity of GIS to analyse particular historical
issues and present the conclusions of these analyses in compelling ways, the genre of the
paper-based historical atlas still provides a more effective means of presenting historical
geography than any digital genre. This observation reflects the fact that scholars have
not yet developed adequate methods for describing and presenting historical events of
any complexity on digital maps. A historical event gazetteer incorporating temporal and
spatial information connected by relationships inferred from historical interpretation,
and the visualization of these data through linked maps and timelines, is an important
step towards a new digital genre for presenting history.

This is evident through an example. In a traditional gazetteer, the Abbasid

Caliphate might be treated as a named place:
N Abbasid Caliphate (750 CE–1517 CE).

During the seven centuries of its existence, the spatial extent of the Caliphate varied
dramatically. Although that can be accommodated in a conventional gazetteer by
multiple time-stamped footprints, the inevitable loss of information is significant. A list
of footprints does not capture the history of invasions of and by the Abbasids, the

Figure 1. A century of Persian spatial history. Note the extent to which the spatial
information represented on this map concerns events: invasions, boundary changes, and
battles (after Black et al. 2005).

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history

1095

rebellions of subject peoples, or the declining authority of an increasingly factionalized
ruling house gradually fracturing into autonomous states. All of this information is
essential to understanding the character of the Abbasid Caliphate as a place.

A historical event gazetteer, on the other hand, can represent the events that
caused the territory and spatial attributes of the Abbasid Caliphate to change, such
as:

N Abbasids seize power from Umayyads (750 CE);
N Abbasid military campaign to Cairo (899 CE–905 CE);
N Abbasid capital Baghdad sacked by Mongol commander Hu¨ legu¨ (1258 CE);
N Last Caliph, Muhammad Al-Mutawakkil III, deposed by Ottoman Sultan

Selim I (1517 CE).

Such events link spatial changes with a historical narrative by recording
information about reasons for the change in spatial footprint of the empire, not
simply by chronicling geography per se. A historical event gazetteer can also
accommodate events that are spatially referenced to the entire Caliphate or beyond:

N Abbasid Caliphate in power (750 CE–1517 CE);
N Islamic Golden Age (ca 750 CE–ca 1250 CE);
N Harun Al-Rashid becomes Abbasid Caliph (786 CE).

2. Approaches to event modelling

The following brief review of research on spatiotemporal information looks at two
disparate approaches that have not yet been brought together. We begin by discussing
approaches to historical knowledge emerging from historical sociology and media
studies. These paradigms respect
information but are
insufficiently explicit about time and space. These contrast with entity models from
the GIScience community that model spatial change over time with great sophistication,
but do not accommodate the inferential and narrative traditions of history.

the nature of historical

In addition, current activity in event modelling has also benefited from efforts to
model the structure of individual events. There have been at least two efforts to
develop XML schemas for historical events. The Historical Event Markup and
Linking Project (HEML) describes individual events,
links them with source
materials, and generates timelines and maps from them (Robinson 2005). An
initiative from the UC Berkeley Information School has produced a schema for
event-based library catalogue search, which is based on the Alexandria Digital
Library (ADL) gazetteer content standard (Feinberg et al. 2003, Petras et al. 2006).
In the field of GIS-based crime mapping, attention has focused on events as discrete
location (Buetow et al. 2003, Chainey and
entities with spatial and temporal
Ratcliffe 2005). In the recent book Representations of Space and Time, Donna
Peuquet has issued a call for ‘‘a more human-centred approach to representation’’
that better handles spatiotemporal phenomena (Peuquet 2006: 209). Finally,
researchers in natural language processing have sought to identify the grammar
that allows events to be identified in free text (Hobbes 2002, Pustejovsky et al. 2003).
However, these projects treat events as isolated occurrences, and are thus not
immediately relevant to our discussion of events and their relationships.

Event Structure Analysis (ESA) is a methodology developed by historical
sociologist David Heise in the 1980s and extended by Heise and others in the past 20
years. ESA creates sequences of social events that are grounded in chronology and

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1096

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

linked together to create historically and temporally based causal interpretations of
history (Heise 1991, 2005, Griffin 1993). ESA has been successfully used to analyse
real-world phenomena at many temporal and spatial scales, including the history of
white supremacy in 300 years of United States history, trade union organizing in
New England, the formation of an academic research field, and a case of elementary
school peer-group formation.

specifying logical

into chronologies,

ESA analysis entails defining discrete events from source material, formulating
events
relations among events, and
stipulating particular events as prerequisites for subsequent events. Ethno, the
computer software developed by Heise for performing ESA analysis, transforms a
chronological sequence of events into a narrative by a series of elicitations about
whether or not events in a sequence have a causal relationship with one another.
The process of answering these questions maintains what Griffin calls ‘the
interrogatory spirit’ underlying historical reasoning (1993: 1106). Ethno is
intended for use by experts working in an interpretive mode with unstructured
text. The end product of ESA analysis is a model specified in terms of defined
events, a diagram of the logical relations among events, and delineation of the
assumptions that turn a logical structure into a generative system (Heise 1991:
142). Dealing with causal relationships among vast numbers of entities is almost
impossible for humans but is trivial for computers. Ethno simply encodes and
tracks causal relationships, as revealed by expert knowledge, in the order of their
occurrence.

In addition to the sociologists associated with ESA, researchers from other
disciplines have noted that focusing on relationships between events can expose
multiple participant and authorial perspectives. These are critical to revealing the
diversity of voices and the politics of information dispersal that must be visible in
historical narrative. Drucker and Nowviskie’s (2005, n.d.) pilot Temporal Modeling
Project (TMP) assembled many possible chronologies of the Salem Witch Trials into
a single workspace, with separate and parallel timelines representing calendar time,
moon phases, each courtroom trial, and the accusations against each presumed
witch. Matt Jensen’s (2004) SemTime displayed two perpendicular timelines that
related, respectively, the events that led to and included the exposure of CIA agent
Valerie Plame in 2001–2003, and the chronology by which these activities were
gradually revealed in 2005. In both of these examples, interrelating multiple versions
of the ‘same’ event made it possible to model which elements of a complex event
were visible to its different participants.

ESA, TMP, and SemTime reproduce the textual, interrogative, and iterative
character of historical research. ESA, in particular, permits historical knowledge to
be structured into discrete events, chronological sequences, and narratives of
causality that are computationally legible. However, none of these approaches
incorporates spatial information. The Ethno event structure (Heise 2005) does not
permit location to be recorded or coded as an event attribute. And while temporal
sequence is fundamental to ESA, calendar time is not (Ethno does not allow for
dates or duration to be specified for an event). Thus, while ESA represents
exceptionally important work on the semantics of inferred historical relationships, it
is not a spatiotemporal system. Future research and tool development would be
needed to extend it into the spatiotemporal domain, and to determine whether the
notion of the prerequisite event is adequate for modelling more spatially informed
and temporally articulated historical causality.

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history

1097

In the GIS domain, a number of approaches to spatiotemporal entities have been
advanced in recent years. Yuan (1999) describes spatiotemporal entities as composite
objects integrating semantic, spatial, and temporal attributes. In recent years,
spatiotemporal research in GIScience has focused on the development and application
of ontologies, with the SNAP-SPAN model being particularly influential (Bittner and
Smith 2003a, b, Grenon and Smith 2004). Grenon and Smith (2004), Worboys and
Hornsby (2004), and Worboys (2005) articulate a distinction between entities that exist
in the world as enduring objects (continuants) which preserve their identity over time
(examples might include the Abbasid Caliphate, the city of Baghdad, and Caliph
Harun al-Rashid), and those that are dynamic events, processes or activities (occurents)
which unfold through time (examples might include the decline of the Caliphate, the
sack of Baghdad or the coronation of Harun al-Rashid). Enduring objects are
managed through the SNAP ontology, while processes are managed through the
SPAN ontology. Trans-ontologies allow SNAP objects to be linked with SPAN
processes (Grenon and Smith 2004: 146). In a related example, Lagoze and Hunter’s
(2001) ABC Ontology, which emerges from a museological perspective, distinguishes
between entities (museum objects, collections, exhibitions, and individuals, for
instance) and the events that transition these entities from one state or situation to
another. Worboys (2005) extrapolates from this literature to argue for a fully event-
based view of spatiotemporal processes.

Any spatiotemporal ontology can potentially describe historical events. Indeed,
the various ontologies are largely reducible to one another. Determining the best
structure for an abstract ontology of historical processes is beyond the scope of this
paper. Given our desire to develop a practical framework for representing historical
data, we find Worboys’ event-based view particularly compelling, since it effectively
depicts the processual character of historical entities.
(Though the Abbasid
Caliphate persisted for hundreds of years, its spatial and other attributes transmuted
continuously, and often radically, throughout that time.) Worboys demonstrates
that event-based reasoning is applicable to geographical information, and suggests
that Allen’s (1983) temporal logic can be used as the basis for understanding event
chronology. We focus particularly on his mereological approach, that large and
complex events may be modelled in terms of smaller and simpler components
(Worboys 2005: 23). Further research is needed to extend Worboys’ event-based
view to incorporate the notion of causality developed in ESA.

3. Modelling history with events

If historical knowledge is abstracted into events, it is necessary to create a dense
network of links that describes the relationships of these events to one another. For
a number of reasons, specified relationships are much more important to a historical
event gazetteer than they are to a conventional place-name gazetteer.

First, there is no external reference for historical event naming analogous to a
geographic names authority. Historical events reflect particular perspectives, and
only a very small percentage of events are of interest to any one classifying body. As
a result, events are not meaningful as isolated entities.

Second, they are only significant in the context of narratives describing networks
of sequence and causality that link them to one another. People make sense of their
worlds by telling stories that build relationships among events. As Drucker and
Nowviskie (n.d.: 14) conclude, ‘the relations among events separated by time, rather
than an experience of time itself, is the focus of [subjective] experience’.

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1098

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

Third, as we have already suggested, a historical event may exist at any temporal
and spatial scale. To an archaeologist, the identification of a single fibula at a
particular site may have to act as a proxy for the entire Bronze Age and its extent
into a broad region. By contrast, on the timeline of Eurasian history, the flowering
of the Renaissance in Florence might receive only a tic mark, yet it is an event that
has rated thousands of pages of scholarship in many languages. In both of these
examples, events must nest inside one another to make meaning. Even entities at the
scale of the social historian’s longue dure´e—or the history of the universe, for that
matter—can be conceptualized as events built up from other, constituent events. The
historical event gazetteer approach allows scholars and students to make even
abstract notions—the emergence of a Chinese scholar-gentry class, the fin de sie´cle—
tangible by populating these events with concrete instances that are referenced by
time and place and selected in accordance with a particular perspective.

Fourth, a given historical event should be reusable in the context of many
different, sometimes incompatible, narratives. The completion of Pablo Picasso’s
famous painting Guernica is an event in both the history of Cubism and the history
of the Spanish Civil War, each of which may be events in the history of Modernity.
At the same time, Picasso’s painting and naming of Guernica itself can be construed
as a series of events which provide another narrative: Picasso was already working
on the mural under commission by the Spanish Republican government when the
town of Guernica was bombed on 17 April 1937, and at that point, he altered his
plans for the work and changed its name. All of these events can be located in space
and in time, and each of these narratives intersects (at least) at the moment of
completion of the painting.

Finally, events also need to be linked to one another to establish spatiotemporal
settings (Worboys and Hornsby 2004), which are essential to a sophisticated
representation of history. The Balkan War, seen as a single event, has a relatively
straightforward spatial footprint. But its 10-year duration embraced a potential
infinity of subordinate and related events: battles, atrocities, population movements,
diplomatic initiatives, and the creation of new political boundaries. Different
perspectives on the history of the Balkan War also suggest different geographies.
Indeed, many event names are meaningful and unambiguous only in spatial and
temporal context. The term civil war appears in Library of Congress subject
headings in relation to geographical headwords and, in the twentieth century alone,
references conflicts in Serbia, Angola, Morocco, Vietnam, Greece, Spain, and many
other nations.

Two of a series of timelines in David Christian’s (2005) Maps of Time: An
Introduction to Big History,
illustrated in figure 2, help to make the point. In
chapters of ever-diminishing temporal scale, Christian relates the history of the
universe, the Earth, life on Earth, human life, agrarian civilization, cities and states,
industrialization, and the twentieth century. As the graphics reproduced here depict,
Christian envisions ‘Big History’ as a set of nested events that can be visualized as a
series of classic timelines.

Beyond the question of event relationships, other issues characteristic of all
humanistic knowledge must be incorporated into a historical event gazetteer. The
most notable are temporal and spatial uncertainty, the provenance and referencing
of
support. The principal challenge of any
spatiotemporal methodology for history and the humanities is to render qualitative
sources into a generic data model. In a similar vein, Willard McCarty has recently

information, and multilingual

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history

1099

Figure 2. Two timelines based on David Christian’s (2005) Maps of Time: An Introduction
to Big History, each of which expands a small section of the previous one. These timelines
illustrate the extent to which historians operate in an event-based paradigm even when dealing
with the time frames of astronomy and evolutionary biology.

suggested that the twin computational requirements of complete explicitness and
absolute consistency are at odds with earlier practices in the humanities, and create
the challenge for the new field of humanities computing (McCarty 2005: 5). See also
Schreibman et al. (2004) for a general discussion of issues in humanities computing.
In non-digital humanistic research, scholars have approached uncertainty by
creating richly descriptive text and extensively attributing and assessing their
sources. It is essential that any spatiotemporal system for the humanities recognize
and accommodate the disciplinary requirement of rich documentation and source
referencing. This paper puts aside further discussion of these issues, as none of the
questions they raise are unique to the historical event gazetteer that is the focus here.

3.1 Event relationships

An effective historical event gazetteer requires a sound and practical grammar of
event relationships. The following discussion outlines a preliminary approach to
building relationships among historical events, based on a sequence of steps that
logically and operationally succeed one another. We believe that this procedure can
be used to create an effective historical event gazetteer.

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1100

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

The first step is to determine temporal geometry, described as a set of two-
dimensional
logical conditions proposed by Allen (1983). In Allen’s relations,
Interval A may precede, meet, overlap, start with, exist during, finish with, or equal
Interval B. Applying temporal geometry to a database of historical events arranges
them chronologically and reveals all potential relations, including succession and
causality, part–whole relationships, and simultaneous occurrences. Temporal

Figure 3. Three steps in the analysis of historical event relationships. First, a group of events
are ordered according to temporal geometry. Next, they are linked into chronologies. Finally,
causality is ascribed to certain relationships (depicted by arrows).

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history

1101

geometry must precede further analysis: event A cannot cause event B unless it has
begun prior to it; event A cannot be a part of event B unless it exists during its
extent.

The second step establishes the spatiotemporal setting (Worboys and Hornsby
2004), the agents, and the processes associated with any event. It includes concepts
such as ParticipatesIn, Uses, BelongsTo, and OccursAt. It groups events that concern
the existence of people, places, and things with events that describe processes, and it
groups multiple events
into common chronologies. Creating a meaningful
chronology is an expert judgement that requires human knowledge and a particular
perspective. Events that can be linked by the rules of temporal geometry may or may
not be incorporated into a given chronology, even when they occur in the same
location or include the same actors. Thus, while potential relationships can be
established in the first step using strictly computational methods, this step relies on a
combination of machine and human reasoning.

The third step addresses concepts of causality. This step transforms a simple
chronology of events into a narrative, creating a ‘grammar of action that accounts
for event order’ (Heise 2005). As in ESA, causality is defined by specifying prior
events as prerequisites for subsequent events. To return to an earlier example:
Abbasids Seize Power from Umayyads is clearly a prerequisite (although not the only
one) for Abbasid Caliphate in Power. However, Abbasid Caliphate in Power may or
may not be a prerequisite for the Islamic Golden Age. That is an expert judgement,
and many finer-grained events would have to be included in order to make a case for
it. The previous steps make it possible to manage large quantities of information and
arrange them so that experts can see where causal relationships may exist, but fig.3
about here determining causality is an entirely inferential task.

4. Temporal visualization

As in many gazetteer applications, one desirable output from a historical event
gazetteer is a compelling visual representation of spatiotemporal processes. This is
critical if historical event gazetteers are to serve as an infrastructure for digital
historical atlases. A full review of temporal visualization is beyond the scope of this
paper. However, it is instructive in this context to mention four approaches that are
particularly relevant for modelling history: interactive timelines, spatiotemporal
applications, and timelines that represent relationships and narrative. There are no
projects that we are aware of that integrate all three of these features in a single
system, which is the aim of our pilot project described in section 5.

Interactive timelines have long been an area of interest for computer scientists.
Several projects in the 1990s described necessary system requirements (Karam 1994,
Allen 1995, Kullberg 1995, Dionisio and Cardenas 1998, Kumar et al. 1998, Zuern
2001). More recently, a number of working prototypes have appeared which model
events in a database and generate interactive timelines from them. These include the
HEML timeline visualization (heml.org), the George Mason Center for History and
New Media Timeline Builder (chnm.gmu.edu/tools/timelines), and the SIMILE
timeline tool
from MIT (http://simile.mit.edu/timeline). Their visual point of
departure is the familiar historical chart on which parallel ribbons with tic marks
represent the time spans of historical events, most often grouped thematically (e.g.
rulers, religion, warfare, economy, inventions). None of these allow for the depiction
of relationships beyond very simple thematic and co-existence relationships.

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1102

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

Historical event gazetteer visualization requires methodologies that tightly and
effectively integrate timelines and maps, and show relationships between events. A
number of projects have taken useful steps in that direction. The TimeMap spatial
browser incorporates a time slider bar, temporal distribution graph and visualiza-
tion of the temporal distribution of objects on a map (http://www.timemap.net;
Johnson 2002, 2004). The ESRI ArcGIS Network Extension also provides time
filtered maps and temporal distribution graphs. The GeoTime prototype links a 2D
map and a time slider, with temporal change represented as a third dimension
(Kapler and Wright 2004, Shuping and Wright 2005). Pattern Browser
(Hewagamage and Hirakawa 2000) experiments with visualizing a journey through
both space and time in the form of a three dimensional ribbon of activities.

The University of Arizona CopLink prototype represents an exemplary use of
linked views incorporating both a linear time-slider and a periodic temporal browser
that depicts events in a cyclical context, as well as a chronological view of a large
dataset, and a spatial browser (Buetow et al. 2003). A number of projects at the
GeoVista Center, Pennsylvania State University (http://www.geovsita.psu.edu) have
built tools for exploratory visualization based on multiple coordinated views. The
most recent are GeoVista and Improvise, which allow users to assemble their own
set of views with little or no programming. The Human Computer Interaction
Laboratory at the University of Maryland (http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/) has also
conducted important work in this domain. GeoWise InstantAtlas (http://www.
instantatlas.com) and GapMinder (http://tools.google.com/gapminder) offer similar
highly interactive, multi-faceted views on spatiotemporal data.

The visualization of relationships among events is not well supported in current
visualization models; least of all in the spatial dimension. Some examples of projects
which do attempt to record and visualize relationships between events are Lenoir’s
Stanford HPS Timeline (which allowed users to build links between events on two
separate timelines and attach comments to those links), network models like
Krempel and Schnegg’s historical diffusion diagrams (Krempel and Schnegg, 2005),
Drucker and Nowviskie’s Temporal Modeling Project (n.d., 2005) and Jensen’s
(2006) SemTime. The HPS Timeline, developed in 2003, is no longer available online
and was never discussed in print. However, none of these examples incorporate
spatial Fig. 4 about here data or visualization on maps.

5. Pilot implementation

Our pilot historical event gazetteer, which drives coordinated map and timeline
visualizations,
illustrates some of the features of the historical event gazetteer
proposed in this paper. The gazetteer is populated with a set of events and
relationships for the medieval history of Central Asia along the Silk Road, and is
implemented in the Heurist collaborative database (http://HeuristScholar.org),
developed by the second author. Approximately 100 events of diverse temporal and
spatial scale and complexity are recorded in the database. The events include battles
regimes
(Hulegu’s Army Defeated by Mamluks),
(the Khwarizm Empire),
inventions and their diffusion (the
biographies (the Life of Khubilai Khan),
Development of Gunpowder), and ideas (the History of Buddhism).

The Heurist-based gazetteer supports collaborative creation, editing, and annota-
tion of events, and the relationships between them. Both events and relationships can
be tagged and annotated through personal bookmarks and through public, workgroup
and private wiki pages attached to each record. Users can create a personal collection

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history

1103

of events and relationships using private records, or tag public records to create a
personal view of a public collection. The results can be retrieved through a search that
generates time-filtered map output using Google Maps (http://maps.google.com) and
the MIT Media Lab’s SIMILE timeline tool (http://simile.mit.edu/timeline/). The
search results also generate a KML feed that can be opened in Google Earth, and a
GML feed for TimeMap (http://www.timemap.net; Johnson 2002, 2004).

The historical event gazetteer pilot visualization, illustrated in figure 4, combines
an event relationships browser, map and timeline in a framework of multiple
coordinated views. The event browser shows all events related to a selected event;
the map and timeline depict the spatial and temporal coordinates of those events.
Objects on the map, timeline, and event browser are linked back to corresponding
database records to allow immediate correction or annotation.

5.1 Database structure

The historical event gazetteer implemented in Heurist uses a flexible data value
instance methodology, first developed for the Minark DBMS (Johnson 1989). Data
records of many different types are stored in a single resources table, and data values
related to each resource are stored in an instances table. Resource record structures
are soft-coded within the database, making it possible to create an unlimited variety
of record types and immediately modify record structure without losing existing
data. Geographic objects are stored as spatially indexed compound binary objects.

Figure 4. Pilot visualization of a historical event gazetteer. The coordinated event
relationships browser, map, and timeline are driven from events modelled in a web-editable
collaborative database (HeuristScholar.org).

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1104

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

Temporal information is currently stored in a number of date fields representing
limiting estimates (terminus post quem, terminus ante quem), best estimates, and
attested dates, but in the future will use a compound temporal object. While this
flexibility is achieved at the cost of complexity, it is of great value for the pilot phase
of the historical event gazetteer, where it supports efforts to incrementally refine
event and relationship descriptions and visualizations.

Individual events and the relationships which connect them are both stored as
records in the resources table. They inherit the standard features of Heurist
resources: bookmarking, tagging, rating, personal notes, discussion, wiki pages
(personal, workgroup, and public) and multimedia attachments. Records in the
resources table can be open to all or can be privately owned and hidden. Personal
tags, ratings, notes, and a wiki page for each record for each user are stored as
records in the bookmarks table, allowing each user to create a personal view of a
shared event or relationship record. Figure 5 illustrates the high-level historical event
gazetteer structure as implemented in Heurist.

Three significant characteristics distinguish this prototype:
N Each event is linked to other events in the database through typed, dated,
directional relationships. Events and relationships are both treated as primary
resources with a full suite of collaborative content functions.
N The database allows for creation and publication of personal views of events
and relationships within a collaborative space. Every event and relationship
displayed is linked back to its database record, allowing for immediate
annotation.
N Events and their relationships are visualized in three coordinated interactive

views: a map, a timeline, and an event relationship browser.

The database is inherently extensible, as it is not limited to any particular period or
theme. The Silk Road pilot is simply a cluster of events, linked not by coding but by
relationships. Users can link these events in different ways, create new versions of
events, or add new events. The database can be extended, without modification, to
include geological events over millions of years or a cluster of events in a military
encounter lasting an hour. The clusters are permeable, so events from one cluster
can easily be linked into another simply by defining relationships between them.
There is no implication of uniform or comprehensive coverage. The database allows
the development of arbitrary levels of detail in specific spatial, temporal, or thematic
areas corresponding with particular topics or applications, such as a course in world
or regional history, a museum exhibition, or a narrative history about Buddhist
monks or windmills.

6. Conclusion

The pilot historical event gazetteer is the first step in a new project, Rethinking
Timelines, funded by the Australian Research Council from 2007 to 2010. The pilot
application is being used as a platform for further research, including pedagogical
research on student collaboration and historical event visualization. Future work
will focus particularly on:

N refinement of the data model, notably by formalization of relationship types
and their attributes, and the development of methods for recording spatial and
temporal uncertainty in accordance with historical practice;

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history
1105
N development of strategies and tools for parsing historical narrative into events
and relationships, and for building multiple narratives from events and
relationships in the gazetteer;
N exploration of alternative methods of visualizing the gazetteer data,
particularly event relationships and the representation of spatiotemporal
uncertainty, within the coordinated view framework;
N assessment of the effectiveness of collaborative content creation and multiple
coordinated views in developing students’ understanding and engagement with
history, in both museums and the classroom.

This article emerges from research on historical gazetteers, with a strong focus on
the character of historical information and on practical applications. Extending the
logic for rigorous time-stamping in gazetteers, it is possible to recognize that the
existence and attributes of named places are historical events. An approach that
foregrounds historical narrative rather than place is essential to understanding the
geography of religion, empires, migrations, and other cultural and social landscapes.
Therefore, it is particularly valuable to focus on the event per se rather than on the
place as it exists in time. Taking spatially situated events as the basic unit of
historical modelling retains the distinct character of a gazetteer as a knowledge
organization system for historical locations. A historical event gazetteer can fulfil
the requirements of a gazetteer by generating queries against name, time and
location. With the addition of appropriate services, the historical event gazetteer can
generate a place-name view of events analogous to that of a standard gazetteer. At
the same time, it allows scholars to study spatiotemporal entities using the methods
of narrative enquiry appropriate to history.

Conceiving a historical event gazetteer as a socially authored system with strong
visualization capabilities has particular potential for classroom applications (Gilbert
and Boulter 1998, Reimann 2005) but also opens up new possibilities in historical
research. Given a database populated with events at many different scales, it should

Figure 5. Historical event gazetteer structure centred on events and relationships. User
bookmarks attached to every record carry personal annotations.

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1106

R. Mostern and I. Johnson

be possible to analyse the structural similarities among thematically related events
(the timeline of each eighteenth century voyage in the South Pacific), or analogous
events in different times and places (the history of the Chinese overseas community
in Australia and California). If such complex events are sufficiently rich in high-
quality and well-chosen spatiotemporal data, it may be possible to further frame
general questions about causality, such as what makes wars occur or regimes
collapse. This approach offers a possibility for initiating new scholarly and
pedagogical practices that bring history and geography together.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Tom Murtagh, Kim Jackson, Artem Osmakov, Maria Shvedova,
Tobias Peirick and Hanna Chamoun (Sydney University Archaeological Computing
Laboratory) for development of the software for the pilot historical event gazetteer,
Andrew Wilson (Sydney University Archaeological Computing Laboratory) for
assistance with graphics, and Elijah Meeks (University of California, Merced) for
collection of data for the Silk Road pilot and bibliographical research. The work
was supported by a grant from the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and a
short-term Visiting Fellowship from the University of Sydney.

We would also like to acknowledge Google Docs and Skype, which allowed us to
write this paper on the move and across four continents in a truly cooperative mode
of simultaneous editing and discussion.

Finally, we are grateful to Michael Buckland, Peter Reimann, Jeff Yoshimi, and the
anonymous journal referees for valuable comments and pointers to additional literature.

References
ALLEN, J.F., 1983, Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals. Communications of the

ACM, 26, pp. 832–843.

ALLEN, R.B., 1995, Interactive Timelines as Information Systems Interfaces. Available online
(accessed 26

at: http://www.ischool.drexel.edu/faculty/ballen/PAPERS/TL/tl.html
March 2008).

BITTNER, T. and SMITH, B., 2003a, Granular spatio-temporal ontologies. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Spring Symposium on Foundations and Applications of Spatio-Temporal
Reasoning (FASTR) (Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press), pp. 12–17.

BITTNER, T. and SMITH, B., 2003b, A theory of granular partitions. In Foundations of
Geographic Information Science, M. Duckham, M. Goodchild and M. Worboys (Eds),
pp. 117–150 (London: Taylor & Francis).

BLACK, J. (Ed), 2005, World History Atlas (London: Dorling Kindersley).
BUCKLAND, M., CHEN, A., GEY, F.C., LARSON, R.R., MOSTERN, R. and PETRAS, V., 2007,
Geographic search: Catalogs, gazetteers, and maps. College and Research Libraries,
68, pp. 376–387.

BUETOW, T., CHABOYA, L., O’TOOLE, C., CUSHNA, T., DASPIT, D., PETERSEN, T.,
ATABAKHSH, H. and CHEN, H.C., 2003, A spatio temporal visualizer for law
enforcement. Intelligence and Security Informatics, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science.

CHAINEY, S. and RATCLIFFE, J., 2005, GIS and Crime Mapping (Indianapolis, IN: Wiley).
CHRISTIAN, D., 2005, Maps of Time: An Introduction to Big History (Berkeley: University of

California Press).

CONKIN, P. and STROMBERG, R.N., 1989, Heritage and Challenge: The History and Theory of

History (Arlington Heights, IL: Forum).

CRANE, G., 2004, Georeferencing in historical collections, D-Lib Magazine, 10. Available online

at: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may04/crane/05crane.html (accessed 14 August 2007).

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 Creating gazetteers for history

1107

DIONISIO, J.D.N. and CARDENAS, A.F., 1998, A unified data model for representing
multimedia, timeline, and simulation data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 10.5, pp. 746–767.

DRUCKER, J. and NOWVISKIE, B., n.d., Temporal modeling: conceptualization and
visualization of temporal relations for humanities scholarship. Available online at:
http://www3.iath.virginia.edu/time/reports/ (accessed 14 August 2007).

DRUCKER, J. and NOWVISKIE, B., 2004, Speculative computing: Aesthetic provocations in
humanities computing. In Companion to Digital Humanities, S. Schreibman, R.
Siemens and J. Unsworth (Eds), pp. 431–447 (Oxford: Blackwell).

FEINBERG, M., MOSTERN, R., STONE, S. and BUCKLAND, M., 2003, Application of digital
gazetteer standards to named time period directories. Available online at: http://
ecai.org/imls2002/time_period_directories.pdf (accessed 14 August 2007).

GILBERT, J.K. and BOULTER, C.J., 1998, Learning science through models and modeling. In
International Handbook of Science Education, B.J. Fraser and K.G. Tobin (Eds), 2,
pp. 53–66 (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic).

GRENON, P. and SMITH, B., 2004, SNAP and SPAN: Toward dynamic spatial ontology.

Spatial Cognition and Computation, 4, pp. 69–104.

GRIFFIN, L.J., 1993, Narrative, event-structure analysis, and causal interpretation in historical

sociology. American Journal of Sociology, 98, pp. 1094–1133.

HARGETT, J.M., 1996, Song dynasty local gazetteers and their place in the history of difangzhi

writing. Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 56, pp. 405–442.

HEISE, D., 1991, Event structure analysis: A qualitative model of quantitative research. In
Using Computers in Qualitative Research, N. Fielding and R. Lee (Eds), pp. 136–163
(Newbury Park, CA: Sage).

HEISE, D., 2005, Event structure analysis: A short ethno tutorial. Available online at: http://

www.indiana.edu/,socpsy/ESA/Tutorial.html (accessed 14 August 2007).

HEWAGAMAGE, K.P. and HIRAKAWA, M., 2000, Pattern browser: Spiral-based interactive
visualization using timelines on a geographical map. IEICE Transactions on
Information and Systems, E83D, pp. 1679–1686.

HILL, L., 2006, Georeferencing: The Geographic Associations of Information (Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press).

HOBBES, J., 2002, A DAML Ontology of Time. Available online at: http://www.cs.rochester.

edu/~ferguson/daml/daml-time-nov2002.txt (accessed 26 March 2008).

ISO TC/211 Secretariat, 2002, Text of 19108 Geographical Information—Temporal Schema

(Oslo: Norwegian Technology Centre, ISO TC/211 Secretariat).

JENSEN, M., 2006, Visualizing complex semantic timelines. In Proceedings of the ACH-ALLC,

July 2006, Paris.

JOHNSON, I., 1989, MINARK: a database for archaeologists. In Sites & Bytes: Recording
Aboriginal Places in Australia, J. Flood, I. Johnson and S. Sullivan (Eds), pp. 295–302
(Canberra: Australian Heritage Commission).

JOHNSON, I., 2002, Contextualizing archaeological information through interactive maps.
Internet Archaeology, 12. Available online at: http://intarch.ac.uk/journal/issue12/
johnson_toc.html (accessed 26 March 2008).

JOHNSON, I., 2004, Putting time on the map: Using TimeMap for map animation and web

delivery. GeoInformatics, July/August, pp. 26–29.

KAPLER, T. and WRIGHT, W., 2004, GeoTime information visualization. Available online at:
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/VASTcontest06/SUBMITTED/Oculus-nSpace&GeoTime/
Oculus-nSpace&GeoTime/ref%20papers/KaplerWright_GeoTime_InfoViz_Final_Conf.
pdf (accessed 15 August 2007).

KARAM, G.M., 1994, Visualization using timelines. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), 1994 (SIGSOFT, ACM
Software Engineering Notes).

KREMPEL, L. and SCHNEGG, M., 2005, About the image: Diffusion dynamics in a historical
network. Structure and Dynamics: eJournal of Anthropological and Related Sciences,

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 1108

Creating gazetteers for history

1.1, Article 10. Available online at: http://repositories.cdlib.org/imbs/socdyn/sdeas/
vol1/iss1/art10 (accessed 14 August 2007).

KULLBERG, R., 1995, Dynamic timelines: Visualizing historical

information in three

dimensions. MA thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Laboratory.

KUMAR, V., FURUTA, R. and ALLEN, R., 1998, Interactive timelines as interfaces to
at: http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/,vijayk/

information systems. Available online
timelines.html (accessed 15 August 2007).

LAGOZE, C. and HUNTER, J., 2001, The ABC ontology and model. Journal of Digital
Information, 2. Available online at: http://jodi.tamu.edu/articles/v02/i02/lagoze
(accessed 26 March 2008).

MCCARTY, W., 2005, Humanities Computing (New York: Palgrave Macmillan).
MOSTERN, R., 2008, Historical gazetteers: An experiential perspective, with examples from

Chinese history. Historical Methods, 41.

PETRAS, V., LARSON, R. and BUCKLAND, M., 2006, Time period directories: A metadata
infrastructure for placing events in temporal and geographic context. In Proceedings
of the Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, pp. 151–160.

PEUQUET, D., 2002, Representations of Space and Time (New York: Guilford Press).
PUSTEJOVSKY, J., CASTAN˜ O, J., INGRIA, R., SAURI´, R., GAIZAUSKAS, R., SETZER, A. and
KATZ, G., 2003, TimeML: Robust specification of event and temporal expressions in
text. In IWCS-5, Fifth International Workshop on Computational Semantics. Available
online at: http://www.timeml.org/site/publications/pubs.html
(accessed 26 March
2008).

REIMANN, P., 2005, Co-constructing artefacts and knowledge in net-based teams:
Implications for the design of collaborative learning environments. In Proceedings
of the 29th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics
Education (PME 29), 1, H.L. Chick and J.L. Vincent (Eds), pp. 53–68 (Melbourne:
University of Melbourne).

ROBINSON, B., 2005, Introduction to HEML. Available online at: http://heml.mta.ca/

heml-cocoon/description (accessed 15 August 2007).

SCHREIBMAN, S., SIEMENS, R., and UNSWORTH, J. (Eds), 2004, A Companion to Digital

Humanities (Oxford: Blackwell).

SHUPING, D. and WRIGHT, W., 2005, GeoTime visualization of RFID providing global
visibility of the DoD supply chain. Available online at: http://www.rfidexchange.com/
downloadfiles/geotimeRFID.doc (accessed 15 August 2007).

TUAN, Y., 1975, Place: An experiential perspective. Geographical Review, 65, pp. 151–165.
WORBOYS, M., 2005, Event-oriented approaches to geographic phenomena. International

Journal of Geographic Information Science, 19, pp. 1–28.

WORBOYS, M. and HORNSBY, K., 2004, From objects to events: GEM, the geospatial event
model. In GIScience 2004, M.J. Egenhofer, C. Freksa and H.J. Miller (Eds), LNCS,
3234, pp. 327–343.

YUAN, M., 1999, Use of the three-domain representation to enhance GIS support for complex

spatiotemporal queries. Transactions in GIS, 3, pp. 137–159.

ZUERN, J., 2001, Timelines online: Spatial rhetoric,

information architecture, and the

representation of history. Text Technology, 10, pp. 1–24.

Downloaded by [University of Kent] at 06:48 07 December 2014 