This article was downloaded by: [Columbia University]
On: 11 October 2014, At: 14:39
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Reflections on Geographic Information
Science: special issue in honor of
Michael Goodchild
Nina S. Lam a & Karen K. Kemp b
a Department of Environmental Sciences , Louisiana State
University , Baton Rouge , LA , USA
b Spatial Sciences Institute , University of Southern California ,
Holualoa , HI , USA
Published online: 22 Nov 2012.

To cite this article: Nina S. Lam & Karen K. Kemp (2012) Reflections on Geographic Information
Science: special issue in honor of Michael Goodchild, International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 26:12, 2193-2196, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2012.721556

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2012.721556

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 14:39 11 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 26, No. 12, December 2012, 2193–2196

EDITORIAL

Reﬂections on Geographic Information Science: special issue in honor
of Michael Goodchild

In May 2012, Professor Michael F. Goodchild formally retired from his faculty position
and is now Professor Emeritus of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara.
Professor Goodchild is a pioneer in Geographic Information Science (GIS) and is cred-
ited with naming the ﬁeld that this journal honors. In 1990, at a conference in Zurich,
Goodchild presented a keynote speech in which he proposed that our ﬁeld is much more
than a technology (GISystems), that we should recognize our academic endeavors under
the name ‘Geographic Information Science.’ His naming of our ﬁeld, later published in
this journal as Goodchild (1992), became a unifying force, leading all of us to think more
scientiﬁcally and holistically in our research and our practice. This special issue is offered
in recognition of this impact on the ﬁeld and our academic lives.

Altering our ﬁeld’s domain to ‘science’ from ‘systems’ is not just a name change,
rather, it signals a signiﬁcant paradigm shift of the ﬁeld from predominantly applica-
tion oriented to increased emphasis on vigorous theoretical and scientiﬁc investigations.
Mike’s contributions to our ﬁeld in the past 40-some years are wide and deep, with top-
ics ranging from location/allocation modeling, fractals, and spatial interpolation to errors
and uncertainty, spatial–temporal modeling, volunteered geographic information, cyber-
infrastructure, and much more. Through his 540-some articles and over 15 books, Mike
has brought theory, analysis, and geographic content to GIScience, thus leading GIS into
what might now be seen as a focal point in academia. At the same time, his work has
generated interest in GIScience and spatial analytical methods from both geographers
and non-geographers. More and more economists, statisticians, computer scientists, envi-
ronmental scientists, geologists, engineers, and epidemiologists are engaged in research
involving spatial analysis and are increasingly aware of the need for a spatial perspective in
their research. In this respect, Mike brings honor and rigor to our ﬁeld, and his contributions
are transdisciplinary.

To provide a focus for this special issue, we invited a select set of Mike’s colleagues,
collaborators, and former graduate students to prepare articles that reﬂect on or are inspired
in some way by Mike’s article on ‘Geographic Information Science’ published in 1992. Just
as his naming of our ﬁeld gave us a way to articulate our academic efforts, each of the arti-
cles in this issue draws on that work as a foundation for individual research contributions
over the past 20 years.

Mike received his B.A. degree in Physics from Cambridge University in 1965 and
his Ph.D. in geography from McMaster University in 1969. He was a faculty member at
the University of Western Ontario for almost 20 years before joining the University of
California at Santa Barbara in 1988. Over the years, Mike has assumed key leadership
positions and led large-scale research projects that have impacted the academy far beyond
geography and GIScience. Mike directed the NSF-funded National Center for Geographic

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2012.721556
http://www.tandfonline.com

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 14:39 11 October 2014 2194

Editorial

Information and Analysis (NCGIA) in the 1990s, which set the stage for GIScience
research and education for the next 20 years. As Director of the Center for Spatially
Integrated Social Science (since 1999) and of the Center for Spatial Studies (since
2007), Mike has effectively engaged a large academic and a non-academic community
in investigations that utilize spatial thinking and GIScience.

The ﬂyer for Mike’s retirement celebration in Santa Barbara in May 2012 noted
that ‘after 43 years of academic excellence and research, and with 6,000,000 miles and
12,000 hours of airline travel, 521 publications, 536 presentations, and $55,335,816 in
research grants behind him, Michael Goodchild will retire from the University of
California, Santa Barbara.’ These numbers will continue to grow, even after Mike retires.
While it would be impossible to list all the recognitions and contributions that Mike has
garnered over the years in this brief editorial, we can point out that Mike is the only
academician on the Earth who is an elected member of the US National Academy of
Sciences and Foreign Member of the Royal Society of Canada (2002), member of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2006), Foreign Member of the Royal Society,
and Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy (2010). In 2007, he received the pres-
tigious Prix Vautrin Lud. In addition, to date, Mike has been awarded with honorary
doctorates from four universities.

Mike has contributed tirelessly and effectively to his profession through his high-
proﬁle services. He was editor of Geographical Analysis between 1987 and 1990 and
the Methods, Models, and Geographic Information Sciences section of the Annals of the
Association of American Geographers from 2000 to 2006. He serves on the editorial boards
of 10 other journals and book series. Mike was Chair of the National Research Council’s
Mapping Science Committee from 1997 to 1999 and of the Advisory Committee on Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences of the National Science Foundation from 2008 to 2010.
At the same time, Mike’s contributions to GIScience education have been phenomenal.
The publication of the NCGIA Core Curriculum in GIS in the 1990 helped popularize GIS
throughout the world; this was especially useful to institutions that had not yet established
GIS programs. Mike has served as major professor of over 27 Ph.D. and 30 masters stu-
dents; we are honored to be among those who had an opportunity to work with Mike in this
capacity.

The collection of articles in this special issue documents the diversity of themes and
research approaches that fall under the domain of GIScience envisioned by Mike. There is
no intention to be comprehensive in coverage of Mike’s work or of the ﬁeld as that would
be impossible in a single issue, but we feel this collection provides an apt illustration of the
effectiveness of the vision. Integrative science is the cornerstone of this ﬁeld – both helping
others integrate and integrating other sciences into ours to see where the technology and
science are lacking.

This issue has eight articles. It opens with a reﬂection by Wright, ‘Theory and appli-
cation in a post-GISystems world,’ on the enduring theme of the dichotomy between the
roles of theory versus tools in our ﬁeld, as pointed out in Goodchild (1992). Wright’s arti-
cle provides the context in which the question of GIS as science or as systems has evolved
and offers a view of what GIS should be in a ‘post-GIS’ world using examples from marine
and coastal sciences.

The following article by Anselin and Rey, ‘Spatial econometrics in an age of
CyberGIScience,’ presents an excellent example of the rich theory that is required by our
more advanced tools and how this theory is being carried forward into tool development.
As the authors point out, spatial statistics and spatial data analysis constituted a core ele-
ment in the research agenda for GIScience proposed in Goodchild (1992). The tremendous

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 14:39 11 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

2195

growth in recent years in spatial econometrics, a subset of spatial statistics, can be
attributed to the synergy between GIScience and applied economics. This mutual interac-
tion has beneﬁtted both ﬁelds and led to new theoretical and methodological developments,
with CyberGIS being the latest innovation in spatial econometrics.

Longley’s article, ‘Geodemographics and the practices of geographic information
science,’ turns the focus to the analysis of people by the places in which they live, a tradi-
tional theme in geography. The timeliness of the theme is apparent in current discussions
about the use of traditional, statistically understood sources such as census data alongside
more recent sources such as consumer data streams from credit card purchases and loyalty
cards. The uncertain statistical basis of the latter reﬂects concerns held about the broader
theme of Volunteered Geographic Information, another of Mike’s named progeny.

Janelle’s article, ‘Space-adjusting technologies and the social ecologies of place:
review and research agenda,’ broadens the discussion from a consideration of where peo-
ple are to an examination of where people move and communicate across space. This
extends our focus into the space and time theme that has emerged in much of Mike’s
research. This article provides a concise review of how new forms of transportation
and information–communication technology, such as mobile phones and social networks,
have fundamentally transformed social environments and how this transformation presents
signiﬁcant challenges and opportunities for GIScience research.

Going one step further, Shekhar et al., in their article, ‘Experiences with evacua-
tion route planning algorithms,’ reﬂect on Mike’s contributions to the transportation and
emergency planning domains. The authors identify three future trends of evacuation plan-
ning research; one of which is how to incorporate Volunteered Geographic Information
in the modeling. This is an excellent illustration of how Mike’s abstract ruminations on
opportunities for further enquiry prompted others to pursue the research suggested.

The article by Kuhn, ‘Core concepts of spatial information for transdisciplinary
research,’ turns the focus to information theory. It is an example of research conducted by
the large Spatial Information Theory (SIT) community that was also spawned by NCGIA
and other activities Mike headed. This theme is revisited biannually at the Conference
on Spatial Information Theory (COSIT), the ﬁrst of which was held in Elba, Italy, in
1993. Unlike other articles in this issue, this article does not reﬂect on practical research
completed. Rather, as an example of the kind of methodical semantic analysis many
GIScientists use in theory building, it lays out a logical argument for the identiﬁcation
of a small set of core concepts that may provide a means of communicating about spa-
tial information among those working in disparate disciplines – a modus operandi for
GIScience.

In ‘Spatial data quality and beyond,’ Li et al. take the information theory focus in a
more practical direction by presenting a review of research on spatial data quality under-
taken in both China and abroad. This article is a useful addition to this collection as it
reﬂects the important roles that Mike has played outside the United States and Europe
in encouraging the development of strong scientiﬁc programs. Mike has spent signiﬁcant
amounts of time over the past two decades in China. His presence as an honored visiting
scholar, keynote speaker, and government liaison has been extremely important in helping
our Chinese colleagues establish the importance of GIScience in China.

The issue ends with an article by Couclelis that, rather than examining her own
research, reﬂects on Goodchild’s career as a leader, educator, and scholar. ‘Climbing on
a milestone for a better view: Goodchild’s “Geographical Information Science” paper as
vantage point and ground for reﬂection’ is a contemplative piece that might have been
placed at the beginning of this issue to provide a context that illustrates how all of the

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 14:39 11 October 2014 2196

Editorial

authors included here may have interacted with and been inspired by Mike. However, we
have chosen to leave it to the end as it is an articulate summary of Mike’s contributions so
far and, since Couclelis presented a version of this at the retirement celebration in Santa
Barbara in May 2012, it is a ﬁtting closing to this issue. Of course, Mike has much more to
offer yet and we look forward to participating in his vision in the future.

We would like to thank the Editor of this journal, Brian Lees, who suggested that
we develop this special issue and helped us throughout the editing process. We thank the
authors for their contributions and the reviewers for their prompt reviews. Each article was
subjected to the standard review of this journal, which requires double-blind reviews by at
least two reviewers. All articles were signiﬁcantly improved as a result of these reviews.
Most of all, we would like to thank Michael Goodchild for his many signiﬁcant contri-
butions to the ﬁeld. Without these, this issue would not exist. Finally, although this is a
special issue in honor of an individual, a giant in the ﬁeld, we see it also as an opportunity
to celebrate as a community the success of GIScience. We have made signiﬁcant advances
in the past 20-plus years, including important innovations in academia and industry, and
in our engagement with the general public around improvements in spatial thinking and
the use of geographic information. Without the large GIScience community’s enthusiasm
and collaboration, we would not now be enjoying the many transformations that Mike has
instigated and will continue to inspire through his efforts as a scholar, educator, and leader
in the ﬁeld.

Nina S. Lam
Department of Environmental Sciences, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA, USA
Email: nlam@lsu.edu

Karen K. Kemp
Spatial Sciences Institute, University of Southern California,
Holualoa, HI, USA
Email: kakemp@usc.edu

Reference
Goodchild, M.F., 1992. Geographical information science. International Journal of Geographical

Information Systems, 6, 31–45.

Downloaded by [Columbia University] at 14:39 11 October 2014 