This article was downloaded by: [University of California Santa Cruz]
On: 05 November 2014, At: 14:42
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Geodemographics and the practices of
geographic information science
Paul A. Longley a
a Department of Geography , University College London , London ,
UK
Published online: 26 Sep 2012.

To cite this article: Paul A. Longley (2012) Geodemographics and the practices of geographic
information science, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26:12, 2227-2237,
DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2012.719623

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2012.719623

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 26, No. 12, December 2012, 2227–2237

Geodemographics and the practices of geographic information science

Paul A. Longley*

Department of Geography, University College London, London, UK

(Received 29 September 2011; ﬁnal version received 1 August 2012)

At the core of geographic information science (GIScience) lie enduring organising
principles and concepts that have been developed using research methods that are
robust, transparent and scientiﬁcally reproducible. Yet it is also a science of real-world
problem solving, which has come to prominence at a time in which the nature and
volume of geographic information (and the human activities that generate it) are pro-
foundly changing. This article assesses and interprets these changes in the context of
Goodchild’s assessment of challenges to GIScience, using examples from ‘geodemo-
graphics’ – the analysis of people according the places where they live. The conclusions
have repercussions not only for the way that we think about neighbourhood proﬁling,
but also for the practice of GIScience itself, speciﬁcally with regard to reconciling new
sources of ‘big’ spatial data and understanding the inherent vagaries of citizen science;
linkage of conventional social, economic and demographic geographies to patterns of
virtual interactions at ﬁne levels of spatial granularity; and improving understanding of
the ways in which ‘open’ geodemographics are speciﬁed, estimated and tested.

Keywords: geodemographics; neighbourhood proﬁling; data synthesis;
practice; big data

research

Introduction

1.
Goodchild’s (2010) geographic information science (GIScience) provides a framework
within which the inherently human desire to generalise about people and places can be
achieved. In signiﬁcant part, it draws upon methods and techniques that have deep roots
in analytical human geography, nowhere more evident than in the ﬁeld of neighbourhood
‘geodemographics’ – deﬁned as the classiﬁcation of people by where they live (Harris
et al. 2005). The conceptual challenge to representation in GIScience is well known: how
to select, assemble, organise, manage and analyse tuples of spatio-temporal information
(locations, attributes and time) in ways that encourage enquiry, speculation or reasoning
(Berry 1964), given that there are an inﬁnite number of ways of doing so. The closely
related ﬁeld of geocomputation (Abrahart and Openshaw 2000) has developed in a period
during which our ability to assemble and manage greater and greater volumes of data
continues to improve – seemingly without limit. GIScience and geocomputation are
each underpinned by geographic information systems (GIS) – the technology of spatial
problem solving – which when successfully deployed can deepen our understanding of
spatial phenomena through rendering explicit the choices and conventions that we use to
represent them.

*Email: p.longley@ucl.ac.uk

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2012.719623
http://www.tandfonline.com

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 2228

P.A. Longley

The ‘geo-’ preﬁx makes explicit the fundamental concern of geographic information
science with real-world problem solving, yet it is well known that there are few if any
general laws to guide the creation of real-world representations of attributes, spaces and
times. Instead, the world’s places are the unique sites of relations between attributes at
particular times that relate to wider spatio-temporal settings (Harvey 2006). Methods of
spatial analysis provide ways of generalising about and between places, albeit in a context
sensitive manner. There are many methods to choose from, although methods alone do
not engender generic solutions to many applied geographical problems. Thus, Green and
Flowerdew (1996) suggest that 60 years of numerical experimentation have not brought
any purely analytical solution of the modiﬁable areal unit problem of spatial analysis that
is independent of the requirement to explicitly understand issues of scale in formulating
research hypotheses; Monti et al. (2003) come close to demonstrating that there is no
‘best’ analytical solution to the clustering of attributes in data reduction; Adnan et al.
(2010) demonstrate the sensitivity of some clustering solutions to initial conditions; and
the half century that has elapsed since Clark’s (1962) conjecture that ‘the cross sections
which geography cuts through the dimension of time . . . must have a certain thickness
or duration, to provide a representative picture of the existing situation’ has yielded no
explicit guidelines as to how transience or its accumulated effects may be accommodated
within GIS.

Geodemographics is the ‘analysis of people by where they live’ (Harris et al. 2005)
and as such entails representing the individual and collective identities that are manifest
in observable neighbourhood structure. In this article, we both revisit some of the fun-
damental motivations for building geodemographic representations and reﬂect on some
of the achievements of GIScience to date in representing people and places. Looking
prospectively, we identify key respects in which geodemographic representation may be
becoming less scientiﬁc and suggest some ways in which concerns with the idiographic
and the nomothetic might be rethought in the practices of neighbourhood proﬁling.

2. The achievements of geodemographics
Human identity is deﬁned by the conﬁguration of characteristics that make any individ-
ual or group distinctive. Identities can be conceived in social, economic and demographic
terms, and axiomatic to geodemographics is the observation that ‘birds of a feather, ﬂock
together’ (Harris et al. 2005). Thus, it is reasonable to postulate that administrative units
that equate to small neighbourhood areas (e.g. unit postcodes or census output areas in the
United Kingdom, zip + 4 codes or census blocks in the United States) are homogeneous
with respect to resident household structure. Retrospectives on the 80-year-long study of
residential differentiation have been undertaken elsewhere (e.g. Batey and Brown 2007),
and the challenges to geodemographic analysis of people according to the places where
they live embody many of the broader challenges to GIScience. Here, we begin by reﬂect-
ing upon the achievements of geodemographics over recent decades before examining the
ways in which these achievements crystallise some of these challenges.

2.1. The speciﬁcation of social similarity
The very earliest studies of socio-spatial neighbourhood differentiation were founded upon
direct observation: working in the 1930s, the sociologist Park made much of the impor-
tance of ‘walking the streets’ and assembling observations in map form, in ways that today
might be redolent of use of Picasa in qualitative GIS. However, the quest for consistent

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

2229

generalisation across space and time subsequently motivated quantitative analysis of sec-
ondary data sources – speciﬁcally small area block statistics from decennial censuses of
population – and use of data reduction techniques. Research has typically entailed reduc-
ing the number of variables in a data set by grouping them into a smaller set of factors
and mapping the results (e.g. through principal components analysis or factor analysis) or
reducing the number of observations by grouping them into a smaller set of mappable clus-
ters. The rationale for selecting, standardising and sometimes weighting the raw variables
has not always been clear, leading to criticisms of uninformed empiricism – Shevky and
Bell famously post facto rationalised the constructs that ‘emerged’ from their reconstructed
social area analysis in 1955, while much more recently Webber (2007) has provided a
post facto rationale for a commercial geodemographic system in terms of Bordieu’s social
mileux.

Throughout, the enduring achievement of neighbourhood classiﬁcation remains the
generality and inclusiveness of the representations that have been created, founded as
they are upon population censuses that attain near universal population coverage. Even so,
the deployment of quantitative geographical techniques to neighbourhood analysis has not
been unproblematic: numerous geographers have rehearsed (but rarely demonstrated) the
potential vulnerability of aggregate data to ecological fallacies at the neighbourhood scale,
while there are general concerns with the use of statistical inference with census data, given
that census enumeration of entire populations does not, by deﬁnition, yield samples that are
obviously amenable to inferential statistical modelling. Broader-based academic disdain
for geodemographic analysis has periodically focused upon the repetitive and uncritical
procedures of classiﬁcation that have been used in applied geographical analysis.

In terms of data inputs, a menu of standard census variables provided an adequate
representation of identity when populations were less afﬂuent and less differentiated in
terms of consumption than today. Taking a long-term retrospective on the development of
geodemographics, it is tenable to assert that restrictive menus of census variables provided
adequate representations of identity during much of the Twentieth Century – for the simple
reason that populations were less afﬂuent or differentiated than today in terms of consump-
tion, social attitudes or lifestyles. In seeking to accommodate these secular developments,
it is necessary to reach out to the far wider range of digital georeferenced ‘big’ data sources
that have become available, in recognition that censuses account for a decreasing real share
of all available data. The best contemporary classiﬁcations require the best data, and the
choices and conventions that governed past practices need to be rethought. The alterna-
tive is to acquiesce to Goss’s (1995) conceptual critiques of GIS and geodemographics,
in what amounts to an admonishment of systematic attempts to represent neighbourhood
conditions using quantitative indicators.

If the challenges inherent in identifying and summarising the salient characteristics
of neighbourhoods have multiplied, so too have the data sources that can be used to
characterise them. The advent of government ‘open data’ initiatives in several countries
has led to a plethora of new sources of geographically referenced information, while
developments in software and web services empower more users to build geographic rep-
resentations (see Haklay 2010b). These developments have also broadened the remit of
geodemographics from exclusive concerns with residential location characteristics to activ-
ity patterns encompassing workplaces and leisure activities (Debenham et al. 2003). The
academic outreach of GIScience to these applications has, perhaps inevitably, been less
pronounced, leading to potential problems in establishing the validity of geodemographic
classiﬁcations assembled from the ﬂotsam and jetsam of social media, lifestyle surveys and
telecommunications traces. Neighbourhood classiﬁcations based upon comprehensive and

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 2230

P.A. Longley

inclusive (but infrequently collected) census data are becoming less central as increasingly
afﬂuent, fast-changing and unequal societies become differentiated by lifestyle indica-
tors that lie outside the domain of censuses. This has led the developers of commercial
geodemographic systems to supplement the basic diet of census data with ad hoc market-
ing sources in order to discriminate between niche consumer groups. Yet this is problematic
from a scientiﬁc standpoint, in that the provenance of such sources is usually unknown (in
the extreme, they may pertain to no clearly deﬁned population whatsoever), and commer-
cial restrictions on data availability prevent others reproducing (and hence validating) the
analysis that underpins classiﬁcation.

Commercial classiﬁcations are not only often partly founded upon data sources of
unknown provenance, but also use weightings or transformations that are closely guarded
secrets. Repeat purchasing of commercial classiﬁcations indicates that the inherent ‘black
box’ nature of these solutions does not frustrate niche marketing and indeed suggests
that commercially sourced data are more useful in differentiating degrees of afﬂuence
than census variable measures that depict more basic social needs. This tension between
richer content and less complete coverage looms ever larger as geodemographics begins to
assimilate social media data.

2.2. Collective consumption and locational proximity

Increasing differentiation of consumer-orientated societies has implications not only for
marketing of privately consumed goods, but also for collective consumption of goods
and services such as education, health and policing. Social attitudes to, and needs for,
public services have traditionally been identiﬁed using scientiﬁcally designed sample sur-
veys, which gather statistical robustness through aggregation to large geographic units.
Yet the clusters developed in geodemographics are based upon centroids in multivariate
(attribute) space rather than proximity in geographic space. Unlike the use of cluster anal-
ysis to form geographic regions (see Cheshire and Longley 2012), the cluster analysis
that underpins geodemographic classiﬁcations thus partitions elemental neighbourhood
units without regard to their wider geographic setting. It is nevertheless at this broader
contextual level that public services are supplied and consumed. Broader patterning in
attitudes to public services may be revealed by geocoding the individual records of (geo-
graphically sparse) social attitude surveys with geodemographic tags, in order to identify
commonalties between geodemographic types and a broader canvas of social attitudes.
Thus, for example, Ashby (2005) has coded a UK national survey of fear of crime
according to geodemographic type, in order to investigate broader patterning of this
phenomenon.

There are two distinctive problems with this approach, however. First, while aspatial
clustering techniques and census data provide convincing evidence that consumption of
private goods and services can vary sharply between small zones, research suggests that
the case is less clear cut for collectively consumed services such as health or education
(Harris and Johnston 2008). There is thus a clear need to accommodate locational proxim-
ity as well as social similarity in geodemographic classiﬁcation. While location proxies are
present in some geodemographic systems (e.g. as distance to metropolitan centres or to the
coast), low weighting is assigned to these vague and generic variables and they provide at
best limited indication of place effects. The second problem is speciﬁc to commercial clas-
siﬁcations and centres on the questionable ethics of using ‘black box’ solutions to guide the
allocation of public services between the citizens that fund them, since the classiﬁcations
are not scientiﬁcally reproducible by third parties (Goodchild and Longley 1999). Lack of

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

2231

transparency and reproducibility of commercial classiﬁcations stands in increasingly stark
contrast to the increasing use of open data and open scientiﬁc methods to analyse them.

2.3. Open geodemographics
Supply of data that are salient, up to date and at appropriate spatial resolution is funda-
mental to geodemographic classiﬁcation. In the past, the data cost recovery requirements
of many countries (although not the US) have led to punitive data charges and applied
restrictive licensing arrangements to many data sets. More recently, the term ‘open data’
has come to describe the outcomes of a range of different government initiatives to make
government data freely available and readily accessible, without restrictions from copy-
right, patents or other mechanisms of control. Such resources offer users the potential to
develop their own classiﬁcations, tailoured to the particular requirements of their appli-
cations. At the same time, web-delivered open source software, of which the R library is
probably the best contemporary example (Bivand et al. 2008), provides reusable routines
through which exploratory spatial modelling approaches to the creation of geodemographic
classiﬁcations may be developed (e.g. Adnan et al. 2010). Taken together, these develop-
ments very signiﬁcantly extend the menu of variables that are potentially available for area
classiﬁcation and the techniques that can be applied to achieve this.

Nevertheless, these developments do not amount to a panacea for neighbourhood clas-
siﬁcation for a number of reasons. In practice, rather few data are available at ﬁne levels
of granularity, and even the intermediate spatial scale data that are available are often
estimates and subject to conﬁdence interval measures. The data reduction methods that
are core to geodemographics are not designed to accommodate such uncertainties, and
errors may propagate in the process of data conﬂation using cluster analysis, for exam-
ple. Broader substantive considerations lie in the increasing differentiation of society, as
described above: in important respects, open data initiatives can be thought of as attempts
to keep pace with these secular changes, albeit outside the unifying data infrastructure pro-
vided by population censuses. It has long been understood that linkage of individual and
household attributes can be approximated for small census areas using microsimulation
methods (Birkin and Clarke 2011), yet simulated linkage of disparate single-issue open
data sources is likely to remain problematic for some little while. Indeed the full beneﬁts
of open data cannot be realised without a joined up strategy for linking individual data,
which in turn presume effective, socially acceptable procedures for data anonymisation
and protocols for access under conditions of pseudo-anonymity.

2.4. Spatial and temporal transferability

The quest to devise consistent geodemographic classiﬁcations that transcend devolved and
national boundaries is frustrated by the different zonal aggregations that are used in dif-
ferent jurisdictions. Differences also abound between jurisdictions in the ways in which
social phenomena are measured. These issues are exempliﬁed by the European Union’s
Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), which is based upon very differ-
ent standards for georeferencing the administrative divisions of countries for statistical
purposes, along with the attendant differences in data collection procedures and prac-
tices between different national and state jurisdictions. The inevitable consequence has
been a dearth of neighbourhood classiﬁcations that transcend jurisdictions and those that
have been created have been somewhat bland in their remit and coarse-grained in their
geographies. Experian’s Mosaic Global (http://www.experian.co.uk/business-strategies/

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 2232

P.A. Longley

mosaic-global.html) is a prominent example that exempliﬁes the tensions inherent in devis-
ing a usable set of just 10 distinctive demographic and lifestyle categories that can be found
in every one of the world’s prosperous economies.

With respect to temporal updating, recent years have seen the enrichment of data used
to proﬁle and update representation of small neighbourhood areas, notably by commercial
providers. Commercial business models are founded upon timely refresh of successive
updates of data, although in practice the concept of ﬁltering (ﬁrst envisioned by the Chicago
ecologists in the 1920s) does assert stability of neighbourhood structure. Viewed alongside
developments in open data, it may be that frequently collected data such as small area mid-
year population estimates can be used to gauge the temporal stability of geodemographic
proﬁles in different areas.

3. The prospects for scientiﬁc neighbourhood proﬁling
In assessing the prospects for geodemographics, we are guided by Goodchild’s
(2010) broader perspective on the challenges facing GIScience.

3.1. Knowing where everything is, at all times
With the proliferation of real-time spatio-temporal data sources and greater availability of
public sector data through open data initiatives, it is evident that ‘big’ data management
poses huge challenges in terms of data semantics, volume, updating and delivery. Yet the
scientiﬁc issues arising from this extend well beyond data management issues and strike at
the inherent selectivity of scientiﬁc representation. Alone or in combination, the multiplic-
ity of data sources available in the open data era presents only very partial and increasingly
disconnected representations of the world. A core task of the GIScientist is to prepare them
for purpose – since the challenges of data synthesis now surpass those of analysis. Today’s
data feeds are partial not just in their content, but also in their coverage, with the richest
data sets (e.g. harvested from social networking sites or grocery corporation store loy-
alty cards) being very much of unknown provenance. Meaningful engagement with issues
of choice and service delivery, for example, requires an information base comprising a
range of linked individual characteristics and neighbourhood attributes. By contrast, the
number of stand alone data sets available through government or other clearing houses
provides an almost irrelevant indicator of our ability to coherently represent salient aspects
of neighbourhoods.

Selective availability of GPS signals was turned off in 2000, following technical devel-
opments in differential GPS, greatly increasing the precision with which mobile objects
can be geolocated. Yet where human subjects are involved, the effects associated with
changing location are severely degraded if ethical and disclosure control concerns can-
not be successfully accomodated. At the time of writing (September 2011), the London
riots provide a recent illustration of the importance of ties between neighbourhood com-
munities. In London and other cities, diverse communities often live cheek by jowl with
one another, yet our ability to pursue any localism agenda is handicapped by our vague and
partial understanding of neighbourhood structure. Moreover, our understanding of small
area geography is also fundamentally shackled to night-time residence, and thus remains
largely ignorant of the temporal dimension, at scales ranging from the diurnal to the life
course (and beyond). It seems absurd to suggest that privacy strictures can be absolute in
these circumstances.

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

2233

In extending geodemographics to life course analysis, there is also an imperative to
focus upon the analysis of people according to their social interactions and the locations
where interactions take place – and not exclusively according to where they live. Over
longer time periods, the salient attributes of individual life courses must remain generalis-
able to known populations of interest – and these populations will increasingly move across
and between national and political boundaries. Underpinning these issues is the technical
task of understanding the source and operation of bias and the ways in which it propagates.

3.2. The role of the citizen
Irrespective of whether their focus is upon conditions that are adverse (as with deprivation)
or advantageous (e.g. upmarket purchasing patterns), contemporary geodemographic clas-
siﬁcations depict essentially inert geographies of social and physical conditions. In both
instances, neighbourhood geography is deemed to ‘contain’ particular conditions, with
possibly disparaging implications for policy – which might then respond by ‘administer-
ing’ welfare to recipients who are deemed to be passive, for example. In public policy, this
mode of operation is increasingly out of step with localism agendas founded upon com-
munity engagement and social enterprise. An early initiative to open up geodemographic
classiﬁcations to public scrutiny and feedback has been proposed in this journal by Longley
and Singleton (2009). Such consultation has been made possible through the wide diffu-
sion and improved usability of web technologies, and acquisition of consultative feedback
is becoming ever more readily attainable through use of social media content and networks.
An evident problem is that the results of scientiﬁc classiﬁcation merit evaluation by
a representative cross section of the public, yet there are often strong a priori reasons to
anticipate that those who proffer views are not representative of those who choose not
to do so. Self-selection is an enemy of robust and scientiﬁc generalisation, and crowd-
sourced consultation exercises are likely to contain inherent bias. Yet in practice, to eschew
consultative feedback where previously there was none is simply not sensible, and there
is clear evidence of the beneﬁts of the wider ‘Wikiﬁcation’ of GIS (see Sui 2008). With
regard to geodemographics, almost any ‘buy in’ from stakeholders is likely to make public
services more outward facing. A more catholic approach is to think of crowd-sourced data
as characterised by high levels of uncertainty and thus to seek to triangulate them with
sources of known provenance – Longley and Singleton (2009) assess the reliability of
reclassiﬁcation recommendations by comparing them with a conventional geodemographic
classiﬁcation, for example, and in another domain, Haklay (2010a) has established the
provenance of OpenStreetMap in relation to national mapping agency data. These can each
be thought of as akin to the role of differential GPS in establishing absolute precision
(rather than relative accuracy) in the period of selective availability. Future research will
likely entail establishing and assessing reliability indicators for individual crowd-sourced
responses – as with Wikipedia itself (Hardy 2010), the process of ratifying crowd-sourced
data look set to become more formalised in scientiﬁc investigations.

3.3. A technology of dynamics
As in GIS generally, dynamics have not received adequate attention in geodemographics.
While positing that overall urban structure is in a dynamic state of ﬂux, the original ﬁlter-
ing concept of Burgess and Hoyt assumed that ecological niche functions were enduring,
even if the identities of individual residents changed. This premise endures today, and

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 2234

P.A. Longley

periodic ﬁxation with the effects of population turnover should be considered alongside
evidence of stability in geodemographic structure. This said, there is growing realisation
that broader geographic context undoubtedly plays a role (Birkin and Clarke 2011). It may
be helpful to differentiate between the slow dynamics of city- and region-wide change and
the faster dynamics that characterise particular neighbourhoods or housing sub-markets.
In predictive terms, it is also helpful to contrast the controlled variation of repetitive travel
behaviour (Leung et al. 2010), for example, with the uncontrolled variation that develops
over longer time frames. Life chances and social mobility are heavily place bound, not least
because opportunities and outcomes depend upon communication and interaction patterns
that are usually dependent upon locational attributes. Low order settlements, for example,
rarely produce high-end jobs, with attendant implications for the opportunities for social
mobility.

All of this begs the question of how data-led empiricism can help to specify the unique
place effects that are the cumulative effects of past patterns of human interactions. It is
clear that geodemographics needs to reconnect with notions of fast and slow dynamics: a
‘stocks and ﬂows’ perspective might view the fast dynamics of migration and residential
mobility against a background of stable local and regional social structures. Place effects
arise from processes operating at a range of scales and over a range of time periods –
such as regional policy, successive waves of urban concentration and deconcentration and
national and international migration patterns. As such, place effects are an integral part of
human identity, and their speciﬁcation as part of geodemographic classiﬁcation will help
to address broader questions of life chances and social mobility.

3.4. The third, fourth and ﬁfth dimensions
The ﬁfth dimension (additional to the three geographic dimensions and time) has been
described as ‘the various attributes that may exist at locations in space-time’ (Goodchild
2010). Applied to neighbourhood proﬁling, it can be seen as posing the challenging task
of crystallising place effects as composite indicators. Uncertainty in representation is both
inevitable and rife: semantic uncertainty surrounds the choice of individual characteristics
and location attributes that are selected in order to best deﬁne ‘place’; semantic vagueness
in specifying indeterminate units of analysis (such as ‘pockets’ of unemployment or acci-
dent ‘hot spots’); ecological uncertainty when units of analysis are ﬁxed but within area
attribute distributions are unknown; and other long-established challenges to consistent
topological overlay in socioeconomic analysis. Ingenious techniques have been devised to
accommodate these issues, but the creation and the propagation of uncertainty remains
an issue whenever the success of geographic joins is inherently probabilistic. There is an
ongoing need for advanced visualisation tools of data exploration to provide the analytic
capability of ﬁnding data aberrations or hot spots in spatio-temporal datasets, and hence to
improve processing of raw data prior to data reduction.

Still further fundamental problems concern the geography of interactions: how is the
connectedness of individuals, households and communities to be measured, and how can
the Tobler’s Law (‘everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related
than distant things’) be invoked in order to accommodate interactions using different media
and channels? To date, geodemographic classiﬁcations have acknowledged connected-
ness only implicitly, without recourse to interaction data – Experian’s turn of Millennium
Mosaic classiﬁcation included the types ‘Global Connections’ and ‘Limited Horizons’,
for example, but was no more explicit than any other geodemographic classiﬁcation in
specifying the nature of neighbourhood connectivity.

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

2235

3.5. The challenge of education

Geodemographic classiﬁcation presents a scientiﬁc approach to understanding the pub-
lic, which is also capable of harnessing public interest in science through popular science
features and commercial marketing media. The technologies that underpin the recent rein-
carnation of neogeography (Turner 2006) allow users to envision how they as individuals
ﬁt into patterns of interaction, at spatial scales from the architectural to the global, over
time periods that merge geodemographics with geo-genealogy. Yet the very success of
geodemographics can lead to concerns about individual privacy and the effectiveness of
disclosure control in concatenating and conﬂating diverse datasets. Science seeks to repre-
sent and understand behaviour patterns, yet scientists are disinterested in establishing the
identities of the human agents that underpin them. Public understanding of this is important
since linkage and dissemination of anonymised data at appropriate scales are only possi-
ble with consent at the societal level. Geographic aggregation is of course one important
and established means of anonymising data, but leads to well-known zonation effects and
ecological fallacy. Geographic detail is also often one of the ﬁrst casualties when cost cut-
ting is applied to social research, and public understanding of these issues is important if
support for geographic detail is to be retained. The beneﬁts that can be obtained from data
linkage in the GIS age will only accrue if there is public understanding (and hence support)
of data anonymisation procedures. This sets an important priority for the wider agenda for
improving spatial literacy.

4. Conclusions: an empirical science for representing identity and human
interactions

In seeking to consolidate a new research agenda for geodemographics, we have raised
a number of wider issues for the practice of GIScience. Data clearing houses, new social
media, open data and volunteered geographic information each contribute to changes to the
wider practice of science. The lifestyles and activities about which we seek to generalise
are immeasurably more intricate than those represented by the Chicago urban ecologists
in the 1920s, but the rich digital sources that we can (sometimes) draw upon to represent
them are increasingly disparate and partial. This challenges our abilities to understand the
sources and operation of bias in the multiplicity of geodemographic classiﬁcations that
we are now able to build, the more so at a time in which commitment to geographically
disaggregate framework data sources (speciﬁcally censuses of population) is wavering in
many jurisdictions. ‘Bigger’, richer data offer the prospect of better geodemographic rep-
resentations, particularly if there exists societal level consent to issues of linkage of open
government data, and new data sources can be made available to represent important new
facets of identity such as virtual interactions.

GIScience remains an applied science of the real world that, like the underpinning
technology of GISystems, must be judged by the success or otherwise of its applications.
Together, the concepts, methods and techniques of GIScience allow us to investigate, but
only more rarely to solve, the important spatial analytical problems – such as zone design,
optimal clustering, measurement of spatial association and segregation – which are central
to geodemographic proﬁling of neighbourhoods. GIScience is also key to accommodat-
ing the vicissitudes of rich new data sources and attempts to anchor them to spatial data
infrastructures.

All of this helps us to understand the relations between the events and the occur-
rences that come together in unique places and provides a framework for understanding
how places change over different time periods. The speciﬁcation, estimation and testing

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 2236

P.A. Longley

of geodemographics is nevertheless fundamentally an empirical problem. The interactions
that deﬁne ‘place’ or ‘context’ concern much more than location, but this is not to say that
the uniqueness of place can only be investigated through idiographic investigations that lie
outside of the scientiﬁc tradition. Neighbourhood analysis through geodemographics has
been successfully used to portray the social similarities that link different places, but it is
increasingly clear that what is missing is explicitly spatial representation of the accumu-
lated effects of historical and cultural processes. New data sources, and novel applications
of existing sources, are all assisting in this quest.

Acknowledgment
This research was funded by Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council grants
EP/J005266/1 (The uncertainty of identity: linking spatiotemporal information between virtual and
real worlds) and EP/J004197/1 (Crime, policing and citizenship (CPC) - space-time interactions of
dynamic networks).

References
Abrahart, R. and Openshaw, S., 2000. Geocomputation. London: Taylor and Francis.
Adnan, M., et al., 2010. Towards real-time geodemographics: clustering algorithm performance for

large multidimensional spatial databases. Transactions in GIS, 14, 283–297.

Ashby, D.I., 2005. Policing neighbourhoods: exploring the geographies of crime, policing and

performance assessment. Policing and Society, 15, 435–469.

Batey, P. and Brown, P.J.B., 2007. The spatial targeting of urban policy initiatives: a geodemographic

assessment tool. Environment and Planning A, 39, 2774–2793.

Berry, B.J.L., 1964. Approaches to regional analysis: a synthesis. Annals of the Association of

American Geographers, 54, 2–11.

Birkin, M. and Clarke, G.P., 2011. The enhancement of spatial microsimulation models using
geodemographics. Annals of Regional Science, in press. DOI: 10.1007/s00168-011-0472-2.
Bivand, R.S., Pebesma, E.J., and Gómez-Rubio, V., 2008. Applied Spatial Data Analysis with R.

Berlin: Springer.

Cheshire, J.A. and Longley, P.A., 2012. Identifying spatial concentrations of surnames. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26, 309–325.

Clark, A.H., 1962. Praemia Geographiae: the incidental rewards of a professional career. Annals of

the Association of American Geographers, 52, 229–241.

Debenham, J., Clarke, G., and Stillwell, J., 2003. Extending geodemographic classiﬁcation: a new

regional prototype. Environment and Planning A, 35, 1025–1050.

Goodchild, M.F., 2010. Twenty years of progress: GIScience in 2010. Journal of Spatial Information

Science, 1, 3–20.

Goodchild, M.F., and Longley, P.A., 1999. The future of GIS and spatial analysis. In: P.A.
Longley, M.F. Goodchild, D.J. Maguire, and D.W. Rhind, eds. Geographical information systems:
principles, techniques, management and applications. New York: Wiley, 567–580.

Goss, J., 1995. Marketing the new marketing: the strategic discourse of geodemographic informa-
tion systems. In: J. Pickles, ed. Ground truth: the social implications of geographic information
systems. New York: Guilford, 130–170.

Green, M. and Flowerdew, R., 1996. New evidence on the modiﬁable areal unit problem. In: P.A.
Longley and M. Batty, eds. Spatial analysis: modelling in a GIS environment. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 41–54.

Haklay, M., 2010a. A comparative study of OpenStreetMap and ordnance survey datasets.

Environment and Planning B, 37 (4), 682–703.

Haklay, M., ed., 2010b. Interacting with geospatial technologies.Chichester: Wiley.
Hardy, D., 2010. Volunteered geographic information in Wikipedia. Dissertation (PhD). Available

from: http://gradworks.umi.com/3439644.pdf [Accessed 6 July 2011].

Harris, R. and Johnston, R.J., 2008. Primary schools, markets and choice: studying polarization and

the core catchment areas of schools. Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy, 1, 59–84.

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

2237

Harris, R., Sleight, P., and Webber, R., 2005. Geodemographics, GIS and neighbourhood targeting.

Harvey, D., 2006. Spaces of global capitalism. Towards a theory of uneven geographical develop-

Chichester: Wiley.

ment. London: Verso.

Leung, S., Martin, D., and Cockings, S., 2010. Linking UK public geospatial data to build
24/7 space-time speciﬁc population surface models. In: GIScience 2010: Sixth international
conference on Geographic Information Science. Zurich: University of Zurich, 7pp. Available
from: http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/164197/ [Accessed 6 July 2011].

Longley, P.A. and Singleton, A.D., 2009. Classiﬁcation through consultation: public views of the
geography of the e-Society. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23,
737–763.

Monti, S., et al., 2003. Consensus clustering: a resampling based method for class discovery and

visualization of gene expression microarray data. Machine Learning, 52, 91–118.

Sui, D., 2008. The Wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and the

future of GIS. Computers Environment and Urban Systems, 32, 1–5.

Turner, A., 2006. Introduction to neogeography. Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly Media.
Webber, R., 2007. The metropolitan habitus: its manifestations, locations, and consumption proﬁles.

Environment and Planning A, 39, 182–207.

Downloaded by [University of California Santa Cruz] at 14:42 05 November 2014 