This article was downloaded by: [University of Guelph]
On: 22 May 2012, At: 08:50
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Integrated modelling of population,
employment and land-use change with
a multiple activity-based variable grid
cellular automaton
Roger White a , Inge Uljee b & Guy Engelen b
a Department of Geography, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada
b VITO – Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Mol,
Antwerp, Flanders, Belgium

Available online: 17 Jan 2012

To cite this article: Roger White, Inge Uljee & Guy Engelen (2012): Integrated modelling
of population, employment and land-use change with a multiple activity-based variable
grid cellular automaton, International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
DOI:10.1080/13658816.2011.635146

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.635146

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,

demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
iFirst, 2012, 1–30

Integrated modelling of population, employment and land-use change
with a multiple activity-based variable grid cellular automaton

Roger Whitea *, Inge Uljeeb and Guy Engelenb

aDepartment of Geography, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada; bVITO
– Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Mol, Antwerp, Flanders, Belgium

(Received 24 June 2011; ﬁnal version received 08 October 2011)

A constrained cellular automaton (CA) framework is used to model both land use and,
at the same resolution, densities of population and economic activity. The multi-scale
processes determining the location of population, economic activity and land use are
captured in a variable grid CA, in which the neighbourhood of each cell includes the
entire modelled area. The transition rules generating the spatial dynamics incorpo-
rate both the land use and the activities, and because they cover the entire modelled
area, they represent interaction effects at all spatial scales; effectively, they are distance
decay functions. In general, any particular cell hosts a number of activities (population,
employment in various sectors) regardless of its land use, so in effect multiple land uses
are modelled as multiple activities, although activity levels are normally highest on cells
of the corresponding land use. The model is applied to both the urban-centred Greater
Dublin Region and the country of Belgium, which consists of the entire polycentric
urban system and its rural matrix. Results for both applications are good, as measured
by the errors of both predicted populations and fractal dimensions, and the model
outperforms the best existing models by these measures.

Keywords: cellular automaton; variable grid; activity-based model; multiple activity;
multiple land use; integrated modelling

Introduction

1.
Rapid growth leads to major challenges and opportunities for those who must manage or
react to the growth. For this reason, there is growing interest in ﬁnding ways to predict the
spatial manifestations of growth and incorporate this knowledge into the planning process.
In terms of the spatial planning that results in land development policies, zoning legislation,
transport policies and various sustainability initiatives, the focus has frequently been on
predicting the land-use changes that will accompany urban growth and ﬁnding ways of
guiding or mitigating these changes with appropriate policies. Cellular automaton (CA)
based models have perhaps been the most popular way to model land-use change (e.g.
Couclelis 1989, White and Engelen 1993, Batty and Xie 1994, Portugali and Benenson
1995, Xie 1996, Engelen et al. 1997, White et al. 1997, Clarke and Gaydos 1998, Wu
and Webster 1998, Li and Yeh 2000, Caruso et al. 2007) because (1) they are intrinsically
dynamic and thus represent change directly, (2) they have high resolution and thus produce

*Corresponding author. Email: roger@mun.ca

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.635146
http://www.tandfonline.com

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 2

R. White et al.

results with useful detail and (3) they outperform other models in realistically modelling
land-use change (Poelmans and Van Rompaey 2010).

Although land-use change is important in itself, it is often used as a surrogate for other
phenomena, such as population and economic activity, which are also of interest but more
difﬁcult to predict with useful spatial detail. In planning future wastewater treatment facil-
ities, for example, it is important to know where the wastes will be generated and in what
quantities. To this end, knowledge of future land use, such as that provided by a CA-based
model, would be useful, but it is actually the activities being carried out on the land, whether
residential or economic, that are producing the waste, and it would be even more useful to
know the amount of these activities that will be carried out on each cell, because activities
at higher densities will produce more waste.

Here we present a CA-based approach that models both activity levels and land use,
with land use driven by activity levels. In this approach, which makes use of a variable grid
CA, activities attract or repel each other at all spatial scales within the modelled area. These
interactions, together with other factors such as diseconomies of agglomeration, accessibil-
ity to the transport network and zoning restrictions, cause a continual relocation of activity
as the relative attractiveness of locations changes. They also determine the location of new
activity that appears as a result of the growth of the region being modelled. Land use is
essentially an expression of activity and is determined by it. However, in this model, each
cell, whatever its land-use class, may host a mix of activities, and its land use corresponds
to the dominant activity.

Two main modelling issues must be addressed: (1) How to handle, within the CA frame-
work, interactions among activities or land uses that can occur at all spatial scales. A
variable grid is the solution adopted. (2) How to model not just land use, represented by
cell states, but also levels of activity, such as resident population or employment, within the
CA. This is accomplished by allocating activity on the basis of cellular transition potentials.
In the following two sections, these aspects of the model are explained in detail.
Following that, two applications are presented. The ﬁrst pertains to the Greater Dublin
Region in Ireland. This is an urban-centred region in which Dublin is the only signiﬁcant
city. As the region has been previously modelled using another model, it is possible to com-
pare the performance of the two approaches. The second application pertains to the entire
country of Belgium. In this case the model must handle a complete urban system consist-
ing of a number of cities of various sizes, together with their rural matrix. The extreme
difference in the geographical structure of these two regions provides a strong test of the
extent to which the model is generic, and thus capable of being successfully applied in a
wide variety of situations.

2. The variable grid framework
Cellular automaton based models are deﬁned in terms of a set of transition rules applied to
a neighbourhood around a cell. In this sense, they are inherently spatial, and the rules are a
representation of interaction effects among cells. However, the standard CA models work
with very small neighbourhoods, often just the Moore neighbourhood consisting of the
eight cells surrounding any given cell. A few CA models (e.g. White et al. 1997) use much
larger neighbourhoods, containing up to 196 cells; but even a neighbourhood of this size
has a radius of just eight cells, or less than 1 km in an application with a cell size of 100 m.
Many local processes do operate at such a scale; for example, people and businesses tend to
perceive and evaluate their neighbourhood within a kilometre or so. But other phenomena,
such as land use and activity densities, are affected by interactions occurring over much

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

3

longer distances. If these phenomena are to be modelled adequately, the longer distance
interactions must be included in the model.

One way to do this is to model the longer distance interactions in a separate model, and
then to link that model with the CA. In the most fully developed example of this approach, a
macro-scale model is deﬁned on a set of regions that interact with each other on the basis of
classical spatial interaction equations which allocate activity among the competing regions.
The regional activity outputs are then translated into demands for land for the correspond-
ing land uses (e.g. regional population is converted to a demand for residential land) and
these land demands drive the CA model, which is thus constrained by the macro model.
This approach has worked well in a number of applications, for example Dublin (Engelen
et al. 2007, Shahumyan et al. 2011), Puerto Rico (van Vliet et al. 2009b, van Delden et al.
2010) and The Netherlands (White and Engelen 2000, Engelen et al. 2003), but there are
several disadvantages to the scheme. First, the number of parameters to calibrate is large,
because both the CA and the macro-model contain a number of parameters, with the link
between the models being structured by yet another set of parameters. Another problem is
that the regions may be too large or otherwise inappropriate: for example, each region must
be represented by a centroid, but some regions are polycentric, containing several widely
spaced towns, so no centroid location is really appropriate. Furthermore, if the regions are
few or large, the discrepancy in scale between the macro and CA models may leave rele-
vant intermediate spatial scales unrepresented. Finally, the approach does not address the
problem of multiple activities within a single cell at the CA level, and yet this is a signif-
icant phenomenon in many applications. For example, areas mapped as agricultural may
house signiﬁcant numbers of people who in a standard CA model must be attributed to a
residential land use.

The alternative approach, used here, is to include interactions at all scales within the
CA itself, by enlarging the cell neighbourhood to include the entire modelled area. In this
approach, the weighting scheme for cells within the neighbourhood in effect deﬁnes a
distance decay function for neighbourhood inﬂuence (Figure 1). But to keep computation
times reasonable, a variable grid is used (Figure 2) (Andersson et al. 2002a, 2002b, White

Figure 1. Weights for the inﬂuence of population on population constitute a distance decay function.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 4

R. White et al.

Figure 2. The variable grid.

2005, van Vliet et al. 2009a, White et al. 2011). Of course an activity-based CA can be
developed using a standard grid, but then it does not include long-distance interactions (van
Vliet et al. 2011). In the variable grid framework, the grid around each cell is deﬁned in
terms of successive rings of cells or supercells. The eight cells of the Moore neighbourhood
surrounding any given cell, as well as that cell itself, belong to the basic or level 0 (L0) grid.
The next ring of cells in the neighbourhood consists of supercells, each one containing
nine level 0 cells, and so on for subsequent rings. Thus each grid cell of level L contains
32 cells of the level L – 1 grid, or (32L) cells of the basic L0 grid. Using this approach, the
maximum number of cells needed for a cell neighbourhood covering the entire modelled
area of the Greater Dublin Region (discussed below) is 48, in contrast to the 196 cells in a
conventional neighbourhood with a radius of eight cells, which of course covers only a very
small portion of the modelled area (Figure 3). As the variable grid template is moved from
cell to cell to evaluate the neighbourhood effect for each cell on the map, only adjustments
at the leading and trailing edges of the grid cells are required, so calculations are efﬁcient
(White 2005). Distances to cells of L > L0 are deﬁned to the centre of the supercell. Only
rook and bishop locations are present, so only certain discrete distances exist. (In log base
3, the possible distances are −1, 0, 0.315, 1, 1.315, etc., with −1 used to represent the
distance from the cell to itself.)

The variable grid representation, adopted for its computational efﬁciency, is an approx-
imation and is therefore likely to give results that are inferior to what would be achieved
if each basic (L = L0) cell were treated individually in the neighbourhood calcula-
tion. However, because the degree of approximation introduced by the use of supercells
increases with distance from the centre of the neighbourhood, while inﬂuence weights
applied to the supercells become smaller in absolute value with distance, the approximation
errors generally remain reasonably small. However, the square structure of the supercells
does produce an artefact in the activity potential maps and hence in the land-use and

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

5

Figure 3. Variable grid applied to Dublin (left); traditional eight cell radius neighbourhood (right).

activity maps, but the effect is small and cannot readily be detected in the output maps. We
consider the trade-off between accuracy and runtime inherent in the variable grid approach
to be worthwhile, given that fast runtimes permit much better calibration and sensitivity
analysis.

3. Activity assignment and land-use transition
At the basic, L0, level, cell states are deﬁned both by dominant land use and by a vector of
activity levels. At levels Li > L0 states are represented only as an activity vector. Although
land use plays a role in the cell transition process and is also one of the outputs of the
model, model processes are deﬁned essentially in terms of activities. Land use corresponds
to the dominant activity on a cell, and while many land uses (e.g. pasture and forest) may
not have an activity level associated with them in a particular model application (in which
case the primary activity level on each such cell is set equal to one), they will nevertheless
have secondary activities (i.e. those not corresponding to the current land use) assigned
to them. For example, an application to an urban region may not include activity levels
corresponding to rural land uses such as pastures or forest, but cells with those land uses
will nevertheless be assigned activities such as population and commercial employment.

The scenario that drives a simulation provides for each activity K a proportion QK that
is located as primary activity, that is, it is located on cells of the land use that corresponds
to the activity. The remaining proportion of the activity, 1–QK, is located as secondary
activity, that is, located on cells that do not have the associated land use. Also provided as
input parameters are compatibility factors that express the relative compatibility of each
activity with each land-use type.

Land uses are divided into three categories: active, passive and ﬁxed. Active land uses
are those that have associated activities – for example, residential land use is associated
with population. These are the categories for which activity potentials are calculated for all
cells on the map. Activities are distributed and land uses are changed in function of these

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 6

R. White et al.

potentials. Passive land uses are those without associated activities and which therefore
do not have their own change dynamic; cells with these states change only when they
are converted to one of the active land-use states. Finally, ﬁxed states (such as parkland
and sea) are those which do not change at all as a result of the model dynamics. While
passive and ﬁxed land-use states do not have their own active dynamics, they can inﬂuence
the transition potentials of the active states by being included in the matrix of inﬂuence
weights used to calculate the neighbourhood effect. For example, if people prefer to live
near parks, then an inﬂuence function will be deﬁned for the effect of parks on residential
use that has positive weights at short distances.

The most important determinant of activity levels on a cell is the neighbourhood
effect – the combined effect of all activities on all cells within the neighbourhood of
the cell. As the neighbourhood is the entire modelled area here, the neighbourhood effect
includes all activity in the system. However, in actuality, other phenomena are also impor-
tant and must therefore be included in the model. Concentrations of activity tend to produce
negative externalities such as high land prices and congestion that inhibit further concentra-
tion, so a diseconomies effect is included in the assignment process. Also, real geographical
space is not homogeneous, and so these inhomogeneities are also represented in the model.
Speciﬁcally, zoning regulations, accessibility to the transport network and the intrinsic
suitability of a cell for an activity, reﬂecting such qualities as slope and soil quality, are
included in the model. All of these factors are combined to calculate a vector of activity
allocation potentials, or transition potentials – one potential for each activity – for a cell. A
vector of potentials is required because it is the relative magnitudes of the potentials that
determine the activity allocations to the cell, as well as the cell’s land use.

3.1. The neighbourhood effect

In principle, the distribution of any activity can be inﬂuenced by the distribution of all other
activities and land uses. In fact, however, normally only a few activities and a few other
land uses are signiﬁcant determinants of any particular activity, so an important step in any
application is choosing the set of activities and land uses that will be treated as having an
effect on a particular activity. The effects depend on distance and are deﬁned by a series of
weights that are speciﬁed for each activity and land use that is to be treated as inﬂuential.
For a particular pair, one weight is speciﬁed for each discrete distance in the variable grid.
Typically these weights are large at short distances and small at longer ones. The set of
weights for a pair of activities in effect deﬁnes a distance decay function for inﬂuence of
the one activity on the other. Usually the most important function for each activity is the
one representing the effect of the activity on itself.

The activity potentials that constitute the neighbourhood effect are calculated as

NKi = (cid:2)J (cid:2)jwJKdj

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

TJj
TJ

(1)

where

NKi = the neighbourhood effect on cell i for activity K
wJKdj = the weight applied to determine the contribution of activity J on a cell j located at

distance d, to the calculation of the neighbourhood effect for activity K
TJj = the total amount of activity J (both primary and secondary) on cell j
TJ = the total amount of activity J in the system.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

7

The division by total activity (TJ) is to normalize the contribution of the various activities,
which may be measured in very different units.

The weights wJKdj in effect deﬁne distance decay functions representing the inﬂuence
on one activity or land use on another at various distances; distance is important because
in general activities or land uses at greater distances have less impact than those nearby
(Figure 1). For example, the weights representing the inﬂuence of residential activity (i.e.
population) on itself are very high at short distances, expressing the fact that people gener-
ally tend to live where they have neighbours. Beyond a short distance, the weights become
very small and then decline slowly as distance increases. This long tail on the weight graph
captures the effect of population at greater distances on the desirability of living on the cell
for which the neighbourhood effect is being calculated. In all applications of the variable
grid models to date, the calibrated weight curves display this pattern of high but sharply
decreasing values for the innermost part of the neighbourhood (corresponding to distances
of 1–2 km) followed by a tail of low and slowly decreasing values. Ironically, this pattern
offers support for the previous strategy of linking a CA model for local phenomena to a
macro model handling long-distance interaction effects. The weight assigned to the inﬂu-
ence of an activity on itself at the −1 distance (i.e. to the cell itself) represents the locational
inertia assigned to that activity; the inertia reﬂects the cost and difﬁculty of relocating.

3.2. Diseconomies

The neighbourhood effect for population is also the basis for calculating diseconomies of
agglomeration. The inertia value (the weight at distance band −1) is excluded from the
neighbourhood effect during the calculation of the diseconomies factor. There is also an
option for using the population potential, which is the neighbourhood effect calculated
using only population, that is, excluding other activities or land uses, as the basis for the
diseconomies effect. The applications discussed in this article use this option. The dis-
economies factor, accounting for the effect of higher land costs and congestion in large,
densely settled areas, is calculated as

DKi =

(cid:4)

(cid:4)
KK,

max

1 + Vi,pop − Vcrit

(cid:5)(cid:5)λK

1

with Vcrit = ε < Vinit >

(2)

where

DKi = the relative level of diseconomies of agglomeration for activity K at the cell i
Vi,pop = the population potential at cell i for population (residential land use)
V crit = the critical level of population potential at which diseconomies appear
<V init> = the mean value of initial population potentials over all cells
λK = the relative importance of diseconomies for activity K
KK = (KK > 0) a parameter used to establish a ceiling on economies for activity K
ε = a parameter expressing the critical level for the appearance of diseconomies relative to
the initial mean population potential.

There are two options for modifying the calculation of the diseconomies factor. First, the
weights on the inner distance bands, out to a maximum distance of 2.315 (approximately 18
basic cells) may be excluded from the neighbourhood or population potential. This option
reﬂects the fact that diseconomies are a macro-scale phenomenon not strongly affected by

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 8

R. White et al.

very local characteristics, whereas local factors may strongly affect the precise location of
land-use changes, for example, by encouraging contiguous development. This scale sep-
aration in the diseconomies calculation is a reﬂection of the scale separation seen in the
pattern of weights. The second option permits the suppression of economies of disper-
sal. Equation (2) yields both diseconomies (DKi < 1), when Vi,pop > V crit, and economies
otherwise. The diseconomies only option sets DKi = 1 when Vi,pop < V crit.

The diseconomies factor D is used to calculate only the activity potentials that deter-
mine land-use transitions. The actual assignment of activity to cells uses potentials that
exclude the diseconomies factor. The rationale is that high costs around major agglomer-
ations may tend to dampen the conversion of land to certain uses, but once the land has
been converted, the high costs represented by the diseconomies factor will ensure a high
density of use, a density reﬂecting the high population potential that was the basis of the
diseconomies.

3.3. Other factors
Several other factors representing the real geographical space being modelled are also
included in the calculation of the activity assignment and land-use transition potentials.
The intrinsic suitability of the land (SKi) for the various activities and land uses is impor-
tant; consequently a series of maps of suitability values at the L0 resolution – one map for
each activity or land use – is included in the input data. Similarly a zoning (ZKi) map is
provided for each active land use. SKi are continuous values in the range 0–1, whereas ZKi
are binary numbers: 0 (not zoned for K) or 1 (zoned for K).

Accessibility to various elements of the transportation system (e.g. motorway junctions,
roads of different classes, rail stations and light rail) is also important. Consequently, an
accessibility factor for each activity is calculated for each L0 cell:

RKiy =

(cid:3)−1

(cid:2)
1 + dKiy
aK

RKi =

vKyRKiy

(cid:6)

y

(3)

(4)

where

RKi = accessibility factor for activity K on cell i
RKiy = accessibility to transport element y for activity K on cell i
dKiy = the Euclidean distance from the cell i to the nearest cell through which element type
y of the network passes
aKy = a coefﬁcient representing the importance of accessibility to element type y of the
network for land-use K; this is essentially a distance-decay parameter
vKy = weighting parameter representing the relative importance of network element type y
for activity K

Finally, it is essential that the model represent the variety of locational desires and require-
ments that can be observed in the region being modelled. People have very different desires
in terms of the type of neighbourhood they would like to live in and different require-
ments in terms of accessibility to employment or services. Similarly, economic activities

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

9

are generated by a wide variety of companies with very different locational needs. Without
moving to the level of individual-based modelling, these differences are accommodated in
the model by means of a random perturbation term which delivers a highly skewed dis-
tribution of random numbers: most perturbations are very small, whereas a few are large,
with the amount of skew controlled by a calibrated parameter. The greater the skew the
more scattered the location of active land-use cells. The perturbation, r, is generated as

r = 1 + (−ln [rand])α

(5)

where rand is a uniform random variate and α is the parameter that controls the skewness,
and hence the degree of scatter on the land use.

This perturbation is introduced to capture the variety in the behaviour of the underlying
(implicit) actors in the system. It does not represent other sources of uncertainty in model
outcomes. Most important of these is uncertainty in the values of the calibrated parameters.
In practical applications, the model should be run with a distribution of values for each of
these parameters to get a better idea of the likely degree of uncertainty or variability of
the model output; results are presented as probability maps for the various land uses. This
has been done for some applications of the Moland model, but not for the multiple activity
model presented here, because it would not add signiﬁcantly to the understanding of the
model behaviour but would require a very large number of simulation runs. A third source
of uncertainty is the structure of the model itself. Although we have begun to explore this
problem, for example, by varying the way in which diseconomies of agglomeration are
represented in the model, we do not address the issue here.

3.4. Activity assignment and land-use transition
The scenario that drives a simulation provides total activity levels and total cell counts for
the modelled area for each activity at the beginning and ﬁnal years of the simulation and
possibly some intermediate years as well. Values for intermediate years are interpolated
during the simulation. These values constrain the CA, which must distribute the activity
among cells and also change land-use states of cells so as to achieve the required number of
cells under each land-use category each year of the simulation. The procedure is as follows.

First, an activity potential for each activity on each cell is calculated as

VKi = r ZKiRKiSKiNK

(6)

where

VKi = activity potential for activity K on cell i
r = random perturbation (from Equation (5))
ZKi = zoning status for activity K on cell i
RKi = accessibility measure for activity K on cell i (from Equation (4))
SKi = suitability of cell i for activity K
NKi = the neighbourhood effect (from Equation (1))

The land-use transition potential is then

VTKi = DKi (VKi)mK + IK

(7)

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 10

where

R. White et al.

VTKi = the land-use transition potential for activity K on cell i
DKi = diseconomies factor (from Equation (2))
mK = a parameter to be calibrated for each activity K
IKi = inertia value for activity K on cell i.

On each cell, values of VTKi are ranked from largest to smallest, and then all cells are
ranked on the basis of their largest potential. Starting with the top-ranked cell, cells are
converted to (or retain) the land use for which they have the highest potential, VTKi. When
the required number of cells of land-use K has been achieved, no further cells are converted
to K even if their highest potential is for that land use.

When a cell is converted to a new active land use, it is assigned primary activity, that is,
activity corresponding to the land use. The total amount of activity K that is to be allocated
as primary activity is calculated as the product of the current total of activity K and the
proportion, QK, that is to be treated as primary activity; both quantities come from the
input scenario. Primary activity is then assigned to the newly converted cell according to
its activity potential as a proportion of the total activity potential of all cells with the same
land use:

AKi = AK

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

VKi
(cid:2)k∈K (VKk)

(8)

where

where

AKi = primary activity K assigned to cell i
AK = total amount of primary activity K in the modelled area
VKi = activity potential.

Then secondary activities are assigned to the cell, in each case in function of the activity
potential of the cell as a proportion of the total activity potential of all cells of all land
uses on which the activity would be a secondary rather than a primary activity. The amount
of activity to be allocated in this way depends on the numbers of cells of different land
uses on which the activity would be secondary and the compatibility of the activity with
these various activities as represented by the compatibility parameters. Speciﬁcally, the
allocation is according to

BJKi = BJ

(cid:9)

(cJKnK)
(cid:3)
K

(cJK,nK, )

,

(cid:2)

(cid:10) (cid:7)

(cid:8)

VJi
(cid:2)k∈K (VJk)

for all J (cid:4)= K, K(cid:3)

(9)

BJKi = amount of secondary activity J assigned to cell i which has land use (and primary
activity) K
BJ = total amount of activity J to be allocated as secondary activity
cJK = compatibility factor for activity J on land use K
nK = number of cells of land use K
K(cid:3) indexes all K (cid:4)= J

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

11

As the regional system evolves with growing activity levels and changing locations, the
relative potential levels of various areas change. Because activity levels were established
as a function of these potentials, in some areas current activity levels may, in a sense,
be out of date. In reality, activity levels tend to reﬂect changes in the relative desirabil-
ity of locations, measured here by potentials; for example, densities tend to increase in
areas that have become more central because of the growth in the region. To account
for this phenomenon, activity levels are adjusted to reﬂect changing relative activity
potentials:

(cid:9)

(cid:4)
VKi
(cid:4)
V(t−1)Ki

A(cid:3)(cid:3)
Ki

=

mK

mK/(cid:2)iVKi
mK/(cid:2)iV(t−1)Ki

(cid:5)

mK

(cid:5)

(cid:10)τ K

B(cid:3)(cid:3)
JKi

=

(cid:9)

(cid:4)
VJi
(cid:4)
V(t−1)Ji
A(cid:3)
K

(cid:5)

(cid:10)τ J

mJ

mJ /(cid:2)iVJi
mJ /(cid:2)iV(t−1)Ji

(cid:5)

mJ

= (cid:2)iA(cid:3)(cid:3)

Ki for all K

AKi

BJKi

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

AKi =

(AK + BK)
(cid:5)
(cid:4)
K + B(cid:3)
A(cid:3)

K

AKi

BJKi =

(AK + BK)
(cid:5)
(cid:4)
K + B(cid:3)
A(cid:3)

K

BJKi

B(cid:3)
K

= (cid:2)J (cid:2)iB(cid:3)(cid:3)

KJi for J (cid:4)= K; i ranges over all cells with land use K

Setting τ K = 0 removes this adjustment of activity levels. A(cid:3)
K are simulated values,
distinct from the exogenous or interpolated values AK and BK. Equations (14) and (15)
correct for excess activity that may be created when activity is placed on cells with changed
land use in Equations (8) and (9).

K and B(cid:3)

Finally, cellular activity levels for all activities are rescaled to correct the global

proportions of primary activity so that they are equal to the speciﬁed values, QK:

A∗
Ki

=

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

QK
Q∗
K

AKi

where

QK = the parameter value
Q∗

K = the calculated value corresponding to the current allocation of activity.

The excess (or deﬁcit) primary activity resulting from the application of Equation (16) is
distributed as secondary activity among cells in proportion to the cell’s proportion of total
secondary activity:

BKi = BKi +

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

BKi
BK

(cid:4)
AK − A∗

K

(cid:5)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 12

where

R. White et al.

(cid:6)

A∗
K

=

A∗
Ki

i

This multi-activity based CA based model is the full realization of an activity-based
approach. The ﬁrst step toward an activity-based CA was taken in earlier works (White
2007, White et al. 2011) and tested in both the Greater Dublin Region and Portugal. In
that approach, a one-to-one or one-to-many relationship between activity and land use
was required, so that activities were assigned to a single land use, or at most a single
activity was assigned exclusively to several land uses (e.g. population could be spread over
several residential classes). Consequently, there was no possibility for multiple activities
on a single cell; in other words, the approach did not accommodate multiple land uses.
Another difference concerned the treatment of activity densities. Unlike the current model,
cell totals for each land-use class for the ﬁnal year of the simulation were not part of the
input; instead, density parameters, which needed to be calibrated, were used to control cell
counts. When the number of these density parameters was limited to one for each activity,
the approach was essentially equivalent to specifying total cell counts. But when density
parameters were speciﬁed and calibrated for each region, they acted as ‘fudge factors’ and
permitted better, but suspect, calibration results.

Initialization

4.
The simulation model generates maps of activity at the basic cellular resolution. But to
do so, it must be initialized with maps of the activity densities at the same resolution.
However, activity data are generally only available for much larger areas, usually adminis-
trative areas for which statistical agencies compile data. Approaches are being developed
to estimate population densities from remotely sensed data or land-use maps (e.g. Gallego
and Peedell 2001, Harvey 2002, Wu and Murray 2007), and in some cases (e.g. the sim-
ulation of Belgium described below as Application 2) it is possible to use a dasymetric
mapping procedure to allocate activity at realistic densities to individual cells. Here, to
deal with this problem, the simulation software includes an initialization procedure that
reads in activity data by statistical areas and spreads it over the basic cells of the CA raster
on the basis of the activity potential.

To start, primary activity is divided equally among all cells with the corresponding land
use, and secondary activity is spread equally among the other cells but taking into account
the compatibility factors:

BKLi =

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

cKLnL(cid:11)

L cKLnL

BKfor all L (cid:4)= K

(18)

where

cKL = the compatibility factor for activity K on cells of land-use L
nL = the number of cells of land-use L

Next both primary and secondary activities are redistributed in proportion to a power m of
the activity potential as calculated in Equation (6); use of this equation implies a prelim-
inary or trial version of the inﬂuence weights used to calculate the neighbourhood effect.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

13

Activity is then summed within each statistical area and the error calculated. The value
of the exponent m is changed systematically, and the value that gives the lowest sum of
squares of errors is retained as the value to be used to give a ﬁnal distribution of activities
to cells. Activity at this point is essentially distributed as a smooth surface, but the activity
levels summed within each region are not, in general, correct. Thus, activity assignment to
cells is rescaled within each region by the factor pTKR to eliminate the errors:

pTKR = Tact−RK
Test−RK

(19)

where T act-RK and T est-RK are the actual and estimated levels of combined primary and
secondary activity K in region R.

This step introduces discontinuities at regional boundaries in the activity-density sur-
faces, but within each region density levels on cells remain scaled in proportion to the
activity potential. The problem of interpolating zonal data to a smooth surface is an old
one, and although some useful approaches have been developed (e.g. Tobler 1979), no
completely satisfactory solution exists. A discontinuity index is calculated to measure the
degree of departure from a smooth surface.

5. Application 1: the Greater Dublin Region
The ﬁrst application was to the Greater Dublin Region of Ireland, a region consisting of the
counties Louth, Meath, Kildare, Wicklow and the former county Dublin (county Dublin
has recently been divided into four counties). This area has been the focus of the Urban
Environment Project (UEP) carried out at the Urban Institute Ireland in collaboration with
the Joint Research Centre of the European Union, and as a consequence relevant land-use
and activity data are available for several periods. A further advantage is that the UEP used
the Moland model to forecast land-use change at a resolution of 100 m and activity total
at the county level. The Moland model consists of two linked models: (1) a macro-scale
spatial interaction-based regional model that allocates and re-allocates activity to the ﬁve
counties and (2) a linked CA-based land-use model that is driven and constrained by cell
demands generated in the regional model. It is thus possible to compare the performance
of the multiple activity, variable grid-based model described here to that of the Moland
model.

Both models employ Corine land-use data augmented by several essentially urban cate-
gories, speciﬁcally industry, commerce, public and private services and ports. However, the
multiple activity, variable grid-based model uses only a subset of the land-use categories
used in Moland; the four essentially residential categories in Moland – dense, medium
dense, discontinuous and discontinuous sparse urban land use – have been combined into
a single residential category. Also, for the application reported here, only population is
treated as an activity, because it was considered that the initialization process would not
produce sufﬁciently accurate spatial distributions of the four economic sectors to be use-
ful. (The application to Belgium, described in the next section, makes use of three activities
and their associated land uses.) Population data comes from the censuses of 1986, 1991,
1996, 2002 and 2006, interpolated to 1990 and 2000 to match the dates of the land-use
maps, which correspond to 1990, 2000 and 2006. The CA in the Moland model has a
resolution of 100 m; the resolution of the L0 level cells of the variable CA used in this
application is 200 m.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 14

R. White et al.

The initialization process generating the starting distributions of both primary popula-
tion (population located in residential cells) and secondary population (population located
in cells of other land uses) is based on census data for Electoral Districts (EDs). These
are small areas, typically with populations of 2000–3000. There are 629 of them in the
ﬁve-county Greater Dublin Region. The good spatial detail provided by the large number
of EDs produces a better cell-level population distribution; however, for calibration and
validation purposes, as well as comparison with the Moland results, counties are used.

5.1. Calibration and simulation results

Because the actual modelling is carried out at the cellular level and does not involve regions
at all, activity results can be aggregated in any way that is useful or convenient. Calibration
and validation also involve land use, and because densities at the basic cell level as well
as at larger units such as EDs and counties can vary, the relationship between the land-use
pattern and the population of EDs or counties is relatively loose. In other words, calibration
is an exercise in multi-criteria optimization, with both the land-use pattern – which can
itself be characterized in a number of ways – and the population distribution at the ED or
county level needing to be optimized concurrently.

The calibrated results presented here are only one of the several possible calibrations,
each with somewhat different outcomes in terms of predicted land use and population
density patterns, as well as county populations. The weights deﬁning the distance decay
functions that represent the inﬂuence of several activities and one land use on population
(Equation (1)) are shown in Table 1, and the weights for the effect of population on itself
are also displayed in Figure 4. Note that in this calibration most land uses have no effect
on the location of population. In reality, that may not be the case, but in this case the effect
of these other land uses is small enough that it can be ignored in the interest of keeping
the model simple. The effect of forests on population is also slight, but it is included as
an example of the role of natural land uses on the location of population. The effect of
population on itself is by far the most important, but all inﬂuence functions except that
deﬁning the effect of industry on population show the two part structure that separates
strong but very local effects from relatively weak but far-reaching effects. Industry has
its greatest effect at intermediate distances, where it is advantageous to population as a

Table 1.
(residential land use).

Inﬂuence weights for calculating the neighbourhood effect on population

Distance (log 3)

Population

Industry

Commerce

Services

Forest

−1
0
0.315
1
1.315
2
2.315
3
4
5
6
7
8

500, 000
600
400
100
60
5
4
2.5
1
0.42
0.41
0.41
0.4

0
0
5

0.5
0.3
0.2
0
0
0
0
0

70

10
3

0.2
0
0
0
0
0

50
35
5
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

50
30
15

5

0
0
0
0
0
0

Note: Blank values are interpolated.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

15

Figure 4. Weights for the inﬂuence of population on population. From Table 1.

source of employment but distant enough not to constitute a disamenity. The weight at −1
represents the inertia of residential land use. The value may seem very large, but when it is
compared to the activity potential calculated from the weighted sum of the 195,340 cells in
the modelled area, the value is proportional. Weights (not shown) are also deﬁned for the
inﬂuence of various activities and land uses on industry, commerce and public and private
services. Global parameters are shown in Table 2, and parameters for accessibility to the
transport infrastructure for population in Table 3 and Figure 5.

5.2. Results: residential land use and population density

The model produces reasonable land-use and activity-density maps when run over the cal-
ibration period of 1990–2000. Figure 6 shows a comparison of the actual and predicted
location of residential land use in 2000 for the central part of the modelled area (a por-
tion rather than the whole area is shown to make details visible). The most signiﬁcant

Table 2. Value of global parameters.

Parameter

m
τ
ε
λ
α
Band

Value

0.4
0.9
1.35
0.85
0.6
2

Notes: The global parameters modify the inﬂuence functions (m, τ ),
determine the diseconomies effect (ε, λ) and set the level of random
perturbation (α). Band = 2 signiﬁes that the neighbourhood con-
sisting of the inner two Moor rings (rook radius = 4 basic cells) is
excluded from the calculation of the diseconomies factor.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 16

R. White et al.

Table 3. Accessibility parameters applying to population.

Network element

Relative importance

Distance decay

Motorway
Motorway junction
Dual carriageway
National routes
Regional roads
Local roads
Railways
Railway stations
Light rail

0
0.99
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
0
0.99

0
9
9
4
4
4
0
1
2

Figure 5. Part of the accessibility surface for population deﬁned by the parameters shown in
Table 3. The gradient scale runs from red (high) to blue (low).

discrepancies are the excess growth of three towns west of Dublin as well as the displace-
ment of growth from the southern to the northern fringe of Dublin in the simulation. Most
other discrepancies are not signiﬁcant, because they represent local displacements: the test
of a good simulation is that the actual pattern of land use be reproduced, not that every cell
be correctly predicted (Engelen and White 2007). Of course the model contains a stochastic
perturbation term, and so each run of the same calibration will produce somewhat different
results. Thus any particular land-use or activity map can be considered only an example
of the range of outcomes. A more appropriate way of viewing land-use predictions is as
a probability map of outcomes. Figure 7 shows the probability of cells being occupied by
residential land use in 2000. The map shows that most cells are either very likely or very

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

17

Figure 6. Comparison of actual and simulated residential land use in 2000 of the Dublin region.
Map 1 is actual and map 2 is simulated land use.

Figure 7. Probability of a cell being occupied by residential land use in 2000.

unlikely to be occupied by residential land use in 2000 according to the model. Only a
relatively few small areas, mostly within the western fringe of Dublin proper, are difﬁcult
to predict in the sense that their probabilities for residential development are in the range
40–60%.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 18

R. White et al.

Figure 8. Predicted population density, 2000.

Figure 8 shows the predicted population densities. The green and yellow areas, with
densities in the range of 0–16 people per cell (i.e. up to 400 people per square kilometre),
are those where people are living in areas mapped as non-residential. These are largely
rural land uses like arable, pasture, mixed agriculture and forest, but some are urban land
uses like parks. The most densely populated of these low-density non-residential cells are
those which are becoming denser and are likely to be converted soon to residential land
use; they tend to be located on the fringe of Dublin and the larger towns. Some cells with
high population densities are also non-residential; this is especially true of commercial
cells in the centre of Dublin.

Figure 9 shows the activity potential for population in 2000. It is on the basis of these
potentials that the densities would be updated for 2001 and cells converted to residential
land use. An area of higher potential in a large zone around Dublin is evident, along with
much smaller zones around peripheral towns. Bands of higher potential along major roads
are also clearly visible.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

19

Figure 9. Activity potential, population, 2000.

5.3. Validation: land use

The model as calibrated for the period 1990–2000 was run forward to 2006. In general, this
is a more difﬁcult test than the usual one of applying the calibration from the earlier period
to data for a later start date, which would be 2000 in this case, because the simulation enters
the later time period with errors accumulated in the earlier years of the simulation, rather
than beginning it without those errors. The resulting land-use map is shown in Figure 10.
The main difference from the actual land use is the excessive spread of residential land use
in several towns to the west of Dublin proper, especially Maynooth, a phenomenon that
was already becoming visible in the simulation to 2000. Examination of the calibration
runs shows that this is largely due to the values of the parameters in the diseconomies
equation (Equation (2)) which are optimized for the entire region, while these three towns
represent very attractive nuclei just outside the zone of diseconomies. Cells for a particular
land use can be aggregated by ED or county and compared with actual counts in the ﬁnal
year of the simulation as a crude measure of the quality of the calibration. Errors for cell

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 20

R. White et al.

Figure 10. Actual (left) and simulated (right) land use, 2006, using the 1990–2000 calibration.

Table 4. Residential land use: simulation results for 10 runs to 2000.

County

Louth
Meath
Dublin
Kildare
Wicklow

Mean cells

561.3
687.4
4525.3
951.3
739.7

SD

4.31
5.94
9.13
8.78
8.90

Error (%)

−6.61
0.79
0.61
2.18
−1.77

counts by county (expressed as a percent of the actual county total) for the year 2000 are
shown in Table 4, together with mean cell counts and standard deviations (SDs).

Calibration and validation over short time periods is notoriously unreliable. Even
an empirically excellent calibration may be fundamentally in error either because over-
calibration tunes the model to idiosyncratic details of the particular data set used or more
fundamentally because the data set may be unrepresentative of the range of possibilities
present in the system being modelled (Brown et al. 2005, Engelen and White 2007). In this
context, running a model forward for a very long time period may be the most powerful
validation tool available. This is because the non-linearities present in the dynamics of all
reasonable models of complex systems mean that while the model output may be good
over short time periods in the long run the output will diverge exponentially from what is
realistically possible if the model or its calibration does not capture the fundamental prop-
erties of the system being modelled. As a test of the fundamental quality of the model and
its calibration, the model was run for a 60-year period, to 2050. For this purpose, the rel-
atively high actual 2000–2006 growth rate of the modelled region was assumed to persist.
Whether or not this is likely to be the case is not important for this test. What is important
is that there be a substantial growth of population, otherwise model stability cannot prop-
erly be tested because little will change. The results for land use and population density
are shown in Figure 11. The maps do not appear unreasonable, though the swollen tips on
the tentacular growth of Dublin may be suspect. These are produced by a growth history in

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

21

Figure 11. Land use (left) and population density (right), 2050.

which development proceeds somewhat faster around the towns on the periphery of Dublin
than it does along the radial transportation routes.

More speciﬁcally, the growth process of complex systems, including cities and regions,
tends to produce fractal structures. In particular, landscapes, both urban and rural, are
usually characterized by a linear cluster size–frequency relationship, independent of the
age of the system (White and Engelen 1993; White 2006). Also, urban areas, without
exception, show a bi-fractal structure in terms of the radial dimension for both the urban-
ized area and for the major individual land uses: when the log of the area is plotted against
the log of the radius, the relationship is linear but kinked, with a steeper slope in the inner
zone (Frankhauser 1991, 1994, White and Engelen 1993; White 2006). While the two
slope values for the urbanized area are very similar for most cities, values for residential
land use are more variable, at least for the inner zone. However, the inner zone usually
has a slope greater than 2, reﬂecting the relative absence of residential land use in central
areas, and its increasing dominance away from the centre. The outer zone, out to the outer
edge of the urbanizing area, usually has a slope within the range 1.0–1.2 (White 1993,
Frankhauser 1994). These relationships may be used in a validation process to identify bad
models or bad calibrations: speciﬁcally, if the cluster size–frequency relationship and the
radial dimensions of the simulation results do not conform to the empirically established
norms, then either the model is not correctly speciﬁed or its calibration is not good. These
tests are particularly effective at eliminating bad calibrations that may appear to be quite
good over normal calibration and validation periods, and such calibrations are surprisingly
common. However, it is possible to have bad calibrations that are successful in passing
these tests; for example, the cluster size distribution may be good, but the clusters may be
in the wrong locations.

Both relationships were calculated for the 2050 simulation shown in Figure 11. The
cluster size–frequency relationship is shown in Figure 12, together with the empirical rela-
tionship for 1990 for comparison purposes. It is normal that the largest clusters have very
low frequencies – one or two – and so the tail of the plot typically spreads out. These
points are excluded in calculating the trend line for the main part of the distribution, which
is highly linear at the start date and remains so to 2050, with the slope virtually unchanged

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 22

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
g
o
L

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

0

0.5

a
e
r
a
 
g
o
L

3.5

2.5

1.5

0.5

4

3

2

1

0

1990: Residential

2050: Residential

y = –2.0662x + 2.789
R2 = 0.9875

y = –2.0662x + 2.79711
R2 = 0.9709

R. White et al.

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
g
o
L

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

0

0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

0

1

Log cluster size

2

3

Log cluster size

4

5

Figure 12. Cluster size–frequency graphs for residential land use. Trend line excludes cluster sizes
with a frequency of 1 or 2, shown in grey symbols.

(1990: slope = −2.066; 2050: slope = −2.009). The model and this calibration are thus
strongly supported by this test.

Results of the radial dimension analysis are not as good. The kink is still present
(though much less pronounced), having moved much further out from the centre of the
city, from a radial distance of 25 cells to 60, as is to be expected in a rapidly growing urban
area. The slope of the inner zone remains greater than 2, and although its value is less, it
is still reasonable. However, the slope of the outer zone is much greater, and higher than
empirically observed values in existing cities. The greater slope reﬂects the bulging tips on
the ﬁngers of growth that are visible on the land-use map of Figure 11. This result suggests
that the calibration is not optimal. The spatial pattern of growth suggests that the relative
strength of the diseconomies effect may be too great, and it should be re-calibrated.

5.4. Validation: population estimates
Because the activity-based variable grid model is intended to replace two linked models,
it should produce an output corresponding to both models to retain a comparable func-
tionality. The results discussed so far correspond to the output of the cellular land-use
component of the Moland model, or more generally to any CA-based land-use model. But
because the output consists not only of land use but also of activity levels on each cell, the
model in effect produces predictions of activity levels comparable to those of the Moland

2006: Actual residential

2050: Simulated residential

y = 1.2998x–1.2689
R 2 = 0.9944

y = 1.6238x + 0.9177
R 2 = 0.9984

y = 2.5003x–0.4329
R 2 = 0.9969

1
Log radius

y = 2.2194x–0.1373
R 2 = 0.9981

1.6
Log radius

0

0.5

1.5

2

1.2

1.4

1.8

2

2.2

Figure 13. Area–radius plots for residential land use: actual data, 2006, left; simulation results,
2050, right. Plot for 2006 uses radial increments of ﬁve basic cells; plot for 2050, increments of
10 cells.

4.5

3.5

4

3

2.5

a
e
r
a
 
g
o
L

2

1

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

23

macro model, or of any inter-regional activity model – it is only necessary to aggregate the
cellular activity levels to the desired set of regions. Here we aggregate to the county level to
produce predictions of county populations. County population predictions were one of the
criteria used in the calibration process, together with the residential cell totals by region,
the cluster size and radial dimensions and the actual land-use pattern. Better county popu-
lation predictions than those shown for the calibration and validation periods could easily
be achieved, but at the expense of worse performance on the other criteria. Optimizing one
criterion is likely to produce a calibration which is fundamentally wrong and so will give
worse predictions over timescales beyond the calibration period than would more balanced
calibrations.

Figure 14 shows the percentage errors in the county populations as predicted by the
activity-based model, the Moland model and the constant share ‘null’ model. The results
shown for the activity-based model are the mean errors of 10 runs of the model; this is
necessary because of the stochastic nature of the model. SDs of predicted county popu-
lations are shown in Table 5. The constant share errors are calculated on the assumption
that each county maintains its initial share of the total population as the region grows. In
the results for the 1990–2000 calibration period, the multiple activity variable grid based
model outperforms the other two for all counties. The results for the 2006 predictions are
not strictly comparable, because for the multiple activity-based model the 2006 predictions
were made by running forward from 1990 using the calibration based on the 1990–2000
period, whereas for the Moland model the results were generated from a calibration over
the entire 1990–2006 period. Nevertheless, in spite of this advantage, the Moland model
was outperformed by the multiple activity-based model in four of the ﬁve counties.

6. Application 2: Belgium

The model has also been applied to Belgium as part of the MultiMode project of the
Belgian Federal Science Policy Ofﬁce (Belspo). This application is an interesting con-
trast to the Dublin case. Whereas the Greater Dublin Region is dominated by the Dublin
agglomeration, Belgium contains an entire urban system together with its rural matrix; the
system is thus completely polycentric. Because a good model should be generic, that is
applicable to a wide variety of situations, the Belgian application is a good test of whether
the model can be successfully applied in a variety of geographical contexts.

The Belgian application is at a resolution of 300 m and makes use of three urban
land uses – continuous urban fabric (essentially city centres), discontinuous urban fabric
(largely residential) and commercial and industrial units – together with their associated
activities. It was not necessary to run the initialization routine for this application, because
activity maps at the 300 m resolution of the simulation had already been prepared by a
dasymetric mapping procedure applied to the Corine land-use/land-cover data set. The
mapping distributed population data (available by small areas known as statistical sectors)
and data on employment by major economic sectors (available by commune or gemeente,
i.e. by NUTS 5 units). These maps are probably more accurate than the activity-density
surfaces that would have been produced by the initialization routine developed for the sim-
ulation software. Land-use maps, again based on the Corine classiﬁcation, were available
only for the years 2000 and 2006. Unfortunately, very little land-use change occurred over
this period, and some of the apparent changes, especially for continuous urban fabric, were
clearly classiﬁcation errors. Thus it was not possible to base a calibration on this data. Nor
was the complete road network available in the database for this simulation, so it was not
possible to properly calibrate the accessibility parameters. Finally, the boundary problem

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 24

R. White et al.

d
e
s
a
b
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A

d
n
a
o
M

l

e
r
a
h
s
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

d
e
s
a
b
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A

d
n
a
o
M

l

e
r
a
h
s
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

l
e
n
a
p
t
h
g
i
r

;
d
o
i
r
e
p
n
o
i
t
a
r
b
i
l
a
c
0
0
0
2
–
0
9
9
1
e
h
t

f
o
d
n
e

e
h
t

t
a

s
r
o
r
r
e

s
w
o
h
s

l
e
n
a
p
t
f
e
L

.
s
l
e
d
o
m
e
e
r
h
t

r
o
f

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
y
t
n
u
o
c
d
e
t
c
i
d
e
r
p
n
i

s
r
o
r
r
e

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

.
4
1
e
r
u
g
i
F

d
n
a

)
l
e
d
o
m
d
n
a
l
o
M

(

d
o
i
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
a
r
b
i
l
a
c

6
0
0
2
–
0
9
9
1

a

r
o
f

s
r
o
r
r
e

6
0
0
2

,
)
l
e
d
o
m
d
e
s
a
b
-
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
(

6
0
0
2

o
t

d
r
a
w
r
o
f

n
u
r

n
e
h
w
n
o
i
t
a
r
b
i
l
a
c

0
0
0
2
–
0
9
9
1

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
r
o
r
r
e

s
w
o
h
s

.
)
l
e
d
o
m
e
r
a
h
s

t
n
a
t
s
n
o
c
(

s
e
r
a
h
s

0
9
9
1
n
o

d
e
s
a
b
s
r
o
r
r
e

6
0
0
2

)

%

(
 

l

w
o
k
c
W

i

)

%

(
 
e
r
a
d

l
i

K

)

%

(
 
n

i
l

b
u
D

)

%

(
 
h
t
a
e
M

)

%

(
 
h
t
u
o
L

)

%

(
 

l

w
o
k
c
W

i

)

%

(
 

e
r
a
d

l
i

K

)

%

(
 
n

i
l

b
u
D

)

%

(
 

h

t

a
e
M

)

%

(
 

t

h
u
o
L

3
9
.
1

2
8
.
9

1
7
.
5

4
1
.
8
–

0
5
.
5
–

9
6
.
9
1
–

9
1
.
0

1
7
.
0
–

1
4
.
6

0
4
.
9
–

9
0
.
0
–

4
4
.
0
2
–

7
0
.
0
–

9
1
.
0
1

7
7
.
0

d
e
s
a
b
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A

e
r
a
h
s
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a
o
M

l

9
6
.
0

6
0
.
5

7
3
.
3
–

1
5
0
–

.

6
9
5
–

.

.

2
0
3
1
–

3
0
0

.

0
8
0
–

.

7
8

.

2

1
2
4
–

.

1
4
4

.

3
7

.

7
–

8
3

.

4

3
9

.

6

8
9

.

1

d
e
s
a
b
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A

e
r
a
h
s
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a
o
M

l

%
0
0
.
5
1

%
0
0
.
0
1

%
0
0
.
5

%
0
0
.
0

%
0
0
.
5
–

%
0
0
.
0
1
–

%
0
0
.
5
1
–

%
0
0
.
0
2
–

%
0
0
.
5
2
–

%
0
0
.
0
1

%
0
0
.
5

%
0
0
.
0

%
0
0
.
5
–

%
0
0
.
0
1
–

%
0
0
.
5
1
–

d
e
t
c
i
d
e
r
p
n

 

i
 
r
o
r
r
e
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

6
0
0
2
 
,
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
y
t
n
u
o
c

i

d
e
t
c
d
e
r
p
n

 

i
 
r
o
r
r
e

 

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

0
0
0
2

 
,

l

s
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
y
t
n
u
o
c

 

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

25

Table 5. SD of population and cell predictions (as percentage of county
value) from 10 runs of the activity-based model.

Population (%)

Cells (%)

County

Louth
Meath
Dublin
Kildare
Wicklow

0.75
0.50
0.08
0.77
0.71

0.72
0.87
0.20
0.94
1.18

was not considered in this application. In a more practical application, it would be neces-
sary to include data from neighbouring regions of The Netherlands, Germany, Luxembourg
and France.

For the simulation, activity values are available by the 43 arrondissements (NUTS
3 units) into which Belgium is divided; these are urban-centred regions, although some
agglomerations, notably Brussels, extend into several. Because the population data are
especially reliable, and the corresponding land use, discontinuous urban fabric is by far
the most important of the non-rural classes, a preliminary calibration was carried out using
arrondissement populations for 2000 and 2006. This was reﬁned by running the model
forward to 2060, the horizon speciﬁed in the MultiMode project, using MultiMode pro-
jections of total Belgian population and land use for the three urban classes for that year,
and then adjusting the inﬂuence weights and general parameters to keep the 2060 cluster
size–frequency relationship consistent with that for 2000. Calibrated values are shown in
Tables 6 and 7. A basic calibration was also carried out for employment in the sectors
corresponding to continuous dense urban fabric and industrial and commercial units.

Table 6. Weights for the effect of discontinuous urban
fabric on itself, Belgium.

Distance

0
0.315
1
1.315
2
2.315
3
6
6
8

Parameter

ε
λ
τ
m

Table 7. Global parameter values, Belgium.

Weight

10, 000
8000
1000
800
5
4
1.5
0.5
0.5
0

Value

0.5
1.2
0
0.6

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 Belgium 2000
Discontinuous Urban

Belgium 2060
Discontinuous Urban

26

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
g
o
L

3.5

2.5

1.5

3

2

1

0

0.5

R. White et al.

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
g
o
L

3.5

2.5

3

2

1

0

1.5

0.5

0

1

4

5

0

1

2

3

Log cluster size

2
Log cluster size

3

4

5

Figure 15. Cluster size–frequency distributions for discontinuous urban fabric, Belgium. Left:
actual, 2000; right, simulated, 2060.

The calibration for the application to Belgium is very approximate compared to that
for Dublin, but the results are nevertheless reasonable. Errors in predicted 2006 arrondisse-
ment populations were generally small. For 15 of the 43 areas, errors were less than 1%;
only 12 had errors of 2% or more. Errors were on average less in Flanders, the more
highly urbanized northern half of the country, where more than half of the arrondissements
(12 of 22) had errors of less than 1%. The land-use and activity patterns also look reason-
able (Figures 16–18), given that the total amount of discontinuous urban fabric projected
for 2060 by MultiMode and used in this simulation is probably excessive. The somewhat
blobby pattern of urbanization in the 2060 map results from the absence of the complete
road network in the input for the simulation, and the consequent lack of a proper calibration
of the accessibility parameters.

Several interesting phenomena emerge in the results. The urban system dynamics
implicit in the model generates an uneven distribution of growth, one favouring Flanders.
The 22 Flemish arrondissements together grew 19% more than the 20 arrondissements
of Wallonia (Brussels, the third region of Belgium, was excluded from this analysis).
In particular, the major urban areas of Flanders grew much more rapidly than those of
Wallonia: Antwerp (+20.5%), Ghent (+25.0%) and Leuven (+26.0%) clearly outper-
formed Charleroi (+8.4%) and Liège (+9.2%). The greater Brussels area, consisting of
the arrondissements of Brussels, Halle-Vilvoorde and Nivelles, grew by 20.4%. In light of

Figure 16. Land use, Belgium. Left, actual land use, 2000; right, simulated land use 2060.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

27

Figure 17. Population density, Belgium. Left, actual density, 2000; right, predicted density, 2060.

Figure 18.
predicted employment, 2060.

Industrial and commercial activities, Belgium. Left, actual employment, 2000; right,

these growth rates, it would seem that the extensive growth in the Sambre–Meuse urban
axis of Wallonia largely represents low-density urban sprawl rather than demographic
growth. These results illustrate, if not necessarily the probable future of the Belgian urban
system, at least the rich and suggestive behaviour of this modelling approach.

7. Conclusions
The model proposed here has both practical and scientiﬁc strengths. The practical advan-
tage is that it gives users a much richer output than the other approaches. The single model
produces not only detailed predictions of land use but also high-resolution predictions of
population and employment. Furthermore, these activity predictions, while associated with
land use, are not tied to it in a one-to-one relationship, for each cell, whatever its land use,
will in general host several activities, and activity densities vary continuously over the
region. Because activities are modelled at the same resolution as land use, it is possible
to aggregate activity estimates to any desired set of regions, even quite small ones, and
spatially detailed activity predictions can be particularly useful for planners. Of course
the smaller the regions, the larger, on average, the prediction errors will be, so there is a
trade-off between resolution and accuracy, or to put it another way, between spatial and
quantitative error. Currently, we are investigating the magnitude and distribution of errors

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 28

R. White et al.

in population predictions for the 629 EDs of the Greater Dublin Region. In general, having
high-resolution predictions of both land use and activities gives a much richer picture of
the possible futures of the region being modelled and permits a more thorough and nuanced
investigation of the consequences of various planning scenarios.

The Dublin application demonstrates that the model performs well enough to be useful
as a planning tool. In fact, it outperforms existing models like the Moland model, which is
being used in an experimental context by the Dublin Regional Authority in collaboration
with the Urban Institute Ireland to assess the adequacy of plans for future waste water
treatment infrastructure. If the multiple activity approach were to be used in place of the
Moland model, the spatially detailed predictions of population and employment generated
by it would permit a more accurate estimate of the future spatial distribution of wastewater
origins, and hence a better assessment of the plans.

The model performs well not only for the urban-centred region of Dublin but also
for the polycentric, national scale application to Belgium, even though because of data
limitations, it is not yet possible to fully calibrate the Belgian application. The fact that the
model gives good results in both of these very different settings is a strong indication that
it captures the generic spatial processes that underlie the formation of spatial structure in
urban and regional systems. Such a model is one that can be more conﬁdently applied to
other cases.

The multiple activity, variable grid based CA framework is efﬁcient, not only in the
sense that a single generic model can be applied to a wide variety of situations but also
in that it models two different classes of phenomena – land use and activities – with a
single mechanism. It thus replaces the two types of models that were developed to deal
with these phenomena independently, as well as the hybrid model created by linking those
models. In doing so, it produces richer results with a simpler algorithmic structure and
fewer parameters.

This efﬁciency means that it is a more ‘risky’ model in the Popperian sense. In other
words, it makes a greater number of testable predictions using fewer parameters. Such
a model is considered to be stronger scientiﬁcally than a less risky one, both in terms
of content and in terms of the degree of conﬁdence we can have in it, as long as it has
been empirically validated. In this case, the fact that it is possible to ﬁnd a calibration that
simultaneously gives good predictions of both land use and activity levels with empiri-
cally reasonable parameter values justiﬁes increased conﬁdence in the model. Again, this
is an indication that the model successfully captures the geographical processes generating
the phenomena being modelled. Such a model more reliably gives reasonable and useful
results.

Nevertheless, while we believe that the model does represent geographical processes, it
does so in a very general sense: it does not explicitly represent many of the underlying pro-
cesses, but captures their effects in the general equations that underlie the transition rules.
Thus, for example, the transition potentials calculated for each activity are in effect bid-
rent surfaces, up to a monotonic transformation. The transition potential equations could
therefore be replaced by a more explicit economic model, and for certain purposes this
would be a desirable, or even essential, step. An even deeper representation of the actual
processes captured by the CA could be had by augmenting or replacing the CA mechanism
with an individual-based model, so that location decisions are modelled explicitly. Again,
this would be a desirable step for the additional insights it would yield, but it would also
likely provide theoretical support for the more abstract CA approach used here. In other
words, the relatively generalized nature of the present model points to a whole research
agenda, one that should be pursued. In the meantime, the present model seems to perform

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 International Journal of Geographical Information Science

29

well for the purpose for which it was designed: providing useful insights into likely future
patterns of activity and land use under various growth and planning scenarios.

Acknowledgements
This work was carried out as part of the MultiMode project ﬁnanced by the Science for Sustainable
Development programme of Belgian Federal Science Policy Ofﬁce (Belspo), under contract
SD/TA/01B.

References
Andersson, C., Rasmussen, S., and White, R., 2002a. Urban settlement transitions. Environment and

Andersson, C., et al., 2002b. Urban growth simulation from ﬁrst principles. Physical Review E, 66,

Planning B, 29, 841–865.

1–9.

Batty, M. and Xie, Y., 1994. From cells to cities. Environment and Planning B, 21, 31–48.
Brown, D., et al., 2005. Path dependence and the validation of agent-based spatial models of land

use. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 19, 153–174.

Caruso, G., et al., 2007. Spatial conﬁgurations in a periurban city: a cellular automata-based

microeconomic model. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37, 542–567.

Clarke, K. and Gaydos, L., 1998. Loose-coupling a cellular automaton model and GIS: long-term
urban growth prediction for San Francisco and Washington/Baltimore. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 12, 699–714.

Couclelis, H., 1989. Macrostructure and microbehavior in a metropolitan area. Environment and

Planning B: Planning and Design, 16, 141–154.

Engelen, G. and White, R., 2007. Validating and calibrating integrated cellular automata based mod-
els of land use change. In: S. Albeverio, et al., eds. The dynamics of complex urban systems. An
interdisciplinary approach. Physica, 185–211.

Engelen, G., White, R., and De Nijs, T., 2003. Environment explorer: spatial support system for
the integrated assessment of socio-economic and environmental policies in the Netherlands.
Integrated Assessment, 4, 97–105.

Engelen, G., White, R., and Uljee, I., 1997. Integrating constrained cellular automata models,
GIS and decision support tools for urban and regional planning and policy making. In: H.
Timmermans, ed. Decision support systems in urban planning. London: E & FN Spon, 125–155.
Engelen, G., et al., 2007. The MOLAND modelling framework for urban and regional land use
dynamics. In: E. Koomen, et al., eds. Modelling land-use change: progress and applications.
Springer, 297–320.

Frankhauser, P., 1991. Aspects fractals des structures urbaines. L’Espace Géographique, 1, 45–69.
Frankhauser, P., 1994. La Fractilité des structures urbaines. Paris: Economica.
Gallego, J. and Peedell, S., 2001. Using CORINE land cover to map population density. Towards
agri-environmental indicators: integrating statistical and administrative data with land cover
information. Toward Agri-Environmental Indicators, EEA, Copenhagen (Topic Report 6/2001),
92–104.

Harvey, J., 2002. Estimating census district populations from satellite imagery: some approaches and

limitations. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 23, 2071–2095.

Li, X. and Yeh, A., 2000. Modelling sustainable urban development by the integration of constrained
cellular automata and GIS. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14,
131–152.

Poelmans, L. and Van Rompaey, A., 2010. Complexity and performance of urban expansion models.

Computers, Environment, and Urban Systems, 34, 17–27.

Portugali, J. and Benenson, I., 1995. Artiﬁcial planning experience by means of a heuristic cell-space
model: simulating international migration in the urban process. Environment and Planning A,
27, 1647–1665.

Shahumyan, H., et al., 2011. Urban development scenarios and probability mapping for the greater
Dublin region: the MOLAND model applications. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6782,
Part I, 119–134.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 30

R. White et al.

Tobler, W., 1979. Smooth pycnophylactic interpolation for geographic regions. Journal of the

American Statistical Association, 74, 519–536.

van Delden, H., et al., 2010. The Xplorah SDSS: supporting integrated planning on the island of

Puerto Rico. Maastricht: Research Institute for Knowledge Systems.

van Vliet, J., White, R., and Dragicevic, S., 2009a. Modeling urban growth using a variable grid

cellular automaton. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 33, 35–43.

van Vliet, J., et al., 2009b. Xplorah Municipio: a multi resolution spatial decision support system.
Sester, M., Bernard, L. and Paelke, V., eds.: Advances in GIScience: Proceedings of the 12th
AGILE international conference on geographic information science. Springer-Verlag.

van Vliet, J., et al., 2011. An activity based cellular automaton model to simulate land use dynamics.

Environment and Planning B, 29, 431–450.

White, R., 2005. Modelling multi-scale processes in a cellular automata framework. In: J. Portugali,

ed. Complex artiﬁcial environments. Springer, 165–178.

White, R., 2006. Pattern based map comparisons. Journal of Geographical Systems, 8, 145–164.
White, R., 2007. Multi-scale modelling with variable grid CA. Proceedings of the 15th European

colloquium on theoretical and quantitative geography, Montreux, Switzerland, 443–450.

White, R. and Engelen, G., 1993. Cellular automata and fractal urban form: a cellular modelling

approach to the evolution of urban form. Environment and Planning A, 25, 1175–1199.

White, R. and Engelen, G., 2000. High resolution integrated modelling of the spatial dynamics of

urban and regional systems. Computers, Environment, and Urban Systems, 24, 383–400.

White, R., Engelen, G., and Uljee, I., 1997. The use of constrained cellular automata for high-
resolution modelling of urban land-use dynamics. Environment and Planning B, 24, 323–343.
White, R., Shahumyan, H., and Uljee, I., 2011. Activity based variable grid cellular automata for
urban and regional modelling. In: D. Marceau and I. Benenson, eds. Advanced geosimulation
models. Bentham, 14–29.

Wu, C. and Murray, A., 2007. Population estimation using Landsat enhanced thematic mapper

imagery. Geographical Analysis, 39, 26–43.

Wu, F. and Webster, C., 1998. Simulation of land development through the integration of cellular

automata and multicriteria evaluation. Environment and Planning B, 25, 103–126.

Xie, Y., 1996. A generalized model for cellular urban dynamics. Geographical Analysis, 28, 350–373.

Downloaded by [University of Guelph] at 08:50 22 May 2012 