Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234
DOI 10.1007/s10707-006-7580-7

Handling High-Level Queries in Location-Based
Services for User Groups

Panayotis Partsinevelos & Nectaria Tryfona

Received: 24 November 2004 / Revised: 12 April 2005 /
Accepted: 27 September 2005
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2006

Abstract In this paper we deal with the high level management of data involved in
Location-Based Services in order to accommodate corresponding queries. A series
of techniques are employed on major components of an LBS, namely mobile users,
application environment and selected services. First, a grouping technique general-
izes the spatio-temporal data describing the mobile users’ movement. The
environment
is represented under a combined spatial and content hierarchy
according to the application at hand. Finally, in the service component, relational
operators are formed to support relative spatio-temporal queries, while lifeline data
types are constructed to extract and compare behavioral trend patterns among the
formed user groups. We show how all proposed techniques communicate under a
common database schema. Answers to characteristic queries demonstrate the ap-
plicability of this work.

Keywords Location Based Services . Generalization . Grouping . Trend exposure

1. Introduction

Location-Based Services (LBS) become increasingly popular as users worldwide use
mobile devices for a series of applications spanning from entertainment to business
and from learning to healthcare [2], [8], [12], [38], [44]. The mobile era that
unquestionably emerges is conﬁrmed by the increase of users and continuous

P. Partsinevelos : N. Tryfona
Research Academic Computer Technology Institute,
Data and Knowledge Engineering Group,
Research Unit 3, Athens, Geece

P. Partsinevelos
Technical University of Crete, Chania, Greece
e-mail: ppartsi@mred.tuc.edu

N. Tryfona (*)
Talent Information Systems, S.A., Athens, Greece
Url: www.talent.gr
e-mail: tryfona@talent.gr

Springer

214

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

expansion of supported services. LBS applications are directly associated with
moving object datasets portraying the location of users in space and time. GPS
receivers are the common spatial coordinate locators in LBS applications.

Moving object datasets generated from GPS receivers, are characterized by
abundance of data, which accumulate in volume by time and thus become demanding
in storage and processing. In addition, raw data are deprived of acute exploitation
towards the exploration of their implied information wealth. However, moving
objects often share similarities in behavior due to a series of reasons including
common goals (e.g., tourists visiting an archeological site), restrictions posed by
external factors (e.g., cars traveling according to the road network) or even simple
physics (e.g., attraction forces of particles). Finally, GPS receivers unfortunately carry
potential errors due to low accuracy, shadowing, malfunction etc. [23], [45].

Consider the example of a tourist LBS application, where several tourists (users)
are visiting an archeological area (application environment). In the case where some
of the tourists carry positioning devices, the LBS server accepts explicitly each and
every transmitted positioning data without any kind of sampling or processing
(redundancy). While the volume of data accumulates by time (storage demand) GPS
related errors alter these data (uncertainty). The activities of the tourists in the sense
of following the same schedule is depicted by their synchronized movement while
visiting the corresponding sites. This synchronization is inherited in the data
implicitly but remains hidden (unexploited information). In addition, a series of
datasets emerging from tourist applications over an extended period of time includes
pertinent information of their behavior which may prove critical for further processes
like history creation, prediction, and others. In summary, LBS applications are
characterized by data redundancy, uncertainty, and unexploited information wealth.
In order to contribute on solutions for the mentioned problems, this paper utilizes a
series of techniques that lead to data reduction in order to tackle storage demands,
generalization under which uncertainty is limited, and trend exposure to exploit the
implied information. The techniques and corresponding data are then related under
a common conceptualization framework which is applicable to a series of appli-
cations. Under the current paper we will accept these high level techniques as
Babstract^ means that focus on a simpliﬁed, less explicit representation of the original
dataset.

The boundaries between the components of an LBS are often vague. Detailed
discussion about the components and functions of an LBS are found in [22], [24].
For the purpose of this work, a simpliﬁed LBS architecture includes the mobile
users, the application environment and the service domain:

& Users, mobile customers, (e.g., tourists).

The movement of a mobile user can be represented by a 3-dimensional trajectory
evolving in spatio-temporal space, Fig. 3. In order to represent this trajectory in an
abstract way already developed techniques can be used [10], [33].

& Environment where users interact.

The environment containing spatial and content data is often described by a GIS,
geo-referenced maps, road networks, etc. Mutli-scale representation of space is carried
out by the GIS, including common generalization techniques [20], [27] or network type

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

215

models [19], [40]. The content dimension may be classiﬁed in a hierarchical or object
oriented approach [7].

Services including the servers’ network, support and communication of and to the

&
user.

The service domain carries out operations to aid users according to their
placement, environment and the application at hand. The operations are of content
and spatio-temporal nature and among others they refer to spatio-temporal relations
of the environment-users and to trend exposure.

In this work we primarily focus on providing abstract techniques over multiple user
spatio-temporal movement, content data, spatio-temporal relations and trend ex-
posure operators of the service component. In order to perform these operations, we
proceed to the following tasks:

a. Formation of groups of multiple moving objects and content environment

hierarchies.

b. Design of relative spatial and temporal operations to aid querying.
c. Design of trend similarities between groups of moving objects according to their

spatio-temporal behavior and content relations to aid querying.

In our tourist LBS paradigm if we could replace the series of single tourist be-
haviors with a group data type (user related abstraction), we could accomplish data
compression, information generalization, and form the basis for processing in a new
abstracted information level. In addition, we might be interested to compare in a form
of a query, the tourist’s behaviors between two cities that contain different ar-
chaeological sites (service related trend exposure). Thus, we would need to utilize a
higher content scale to change the speciﬁc archaeological sites (e.g., Acropolis of
Athens, Mycenae of Peloponnesus, Knossos of Crete) into the generalized notion of
Btourist site^ (content generalization). Finally, relations of the type Bnear Athens^ can
be facilitated (relative operation). By these abstract techniques, complex queries can
be addressed. Information under the proposed scheme, is not a simple space-facility
relation which reigns in current LBS applications, but expands to incorporate history
based and relative, generalized information. This information is not solely addressed
to the mobile users but also to decision makers and businesses (e.g., archaeological
site administrators, restaurants, etc.).

In Fig. 1 we schematically show the transition between available LBS to abstract-
level LBS modiﬁcation. In the three levels of LBS components we ﬁrst move from
Bmany^ users to groups of users.

In the environment domain, that shares its content to the other two components as
we will discuss later, the transition is performed between a detailed coordinate map to
a content-based thematic map or other types of maps that may be less precise co-
ordinate-wise. Finally, the relation between user and server according to the place-
ment of users is enhanced to include abstract relations of space and time, while the
server provides information and history-based reasoning both to the mobile users
and other interested parties.

The question is, what would be the motivation of such an extended abstract level
LBS data scheme? The answer is given by a series of partially complementary terms
that illustrate the focus of the presented motivation.

Springer

216

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

Fig. 1 From available LBS to abstract-level LBS

Service and Accuracy (i.e., global optimization): One may be more interested
in processing speed and application related proﬁciency,
than pure
accuracy. Thus, deterioration of accuracy due to generalization is acceptable
under a certain extent, since services will beneﬁt substantially. E.g., the museum’s
are interested when to anticipate the groups’ visits rather than when a single tourist
approaches.

rather

Existence and Interaction: Often, simple existence of a moving object is not of
primary importance when the focus is on trend analysis. On the other hand,
interaction of moving objects and their relations may become important in an
abstract level, where information is comparable in a broad level. E.g., restaurant
owners are concerned about the history of a typical rainy day and how tourists behave
according to historic data. How a single user will behave is indicative yet not
sufﬁciently considerable.

Time–space coordinates and relational time–space: Absolute time and space
coordinates are by default signiﬁcant, but again in a generalized framework where
behaviors and general activities are to be monitored, spatial and temporal areas and
relations seem more appropriate. E.g., restaurant owners are interested whether
tourists are in the close by area around noon time and not in their exact spatio-
temporal coordinates.

Related work in this area includes generalization issues, moving objects and LBS
applications. Generalization is a well-known cartographic process and substantial

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

217

research has been conducted both in classic cartography and GIS. Issues include line
and region generalization in model or visualization space using geometric, fractal
and other processes [5], [18], [25], [28], [29], [42]. Automatic generalization in
cartography is discussed in [21], [37]. As also seen in [36], generalization and data
reduction have different objectives; generalization aims at providing information at
different scales while data reduction leads to compression of data with minimal loss
of information accuracy. Under a similar course, trend exposure is an abstract data
process which leads towards the disclosure of behavioral patterns in multiple scales.
[9], [15]. The portion of information that is retained depends on the application at
hand and the attributes of the data involved that each time become Bsigniﬁcant.^
Many researchers give different deﬁnitions of information-reduction operations in
order to accomplish generalization [26]. User grouping in our work is similar to
clustering which is realized by grouping geometrically and semantically close objects
into cluster objects. We are not focusing on how these groups are extracted out of a
dataset [32] but we proceed to include relations and operations that make these
groups beneﬁcial for LBS applications.

The life and movement of a moving object in the spatio-temporal space is com-
monly depicted by a three dimensional poly-line termed spatio-temporal trajectory,
Fig. 3. [34] analyzes index schemes for moving objects using tree structures. Single
spatio-temporal movement generalization is discussed in [33]. More on spatio-
temporal processes may be found in [14], [31], [39]. In the current paper we further
generalize multiple spatio-temporal trajectories towards group formation.

Current applications on LBS systems tackle the problem of communicating and
exploiting information of single users in a one to one basis [6], [8], [13], [16], [17],
[46]. Most of the times, LBS spatio-temporal coordinates are given and processed in
their absolute values. In the current work spatio-temporal relations are incorporated
in the LBS query process so that less explicit queries can be answered. In addition,
we expand the architecture of LBSs to include group-based information. Objects
moving similarly create data that may prove redundant and thus can be represented
by a generalized group descriptor. Groups of objects are often anticipated in CS and
sociology related bibliography, under the speculation of the internal forces and
mechanics that lead the members of a group to retain relevant selected attributes
(smoothness in motion). We view groups under a different perspective, more based
on their generalized nature rather than on detailed internal mechanics. We further
focus on their behavior and relations in accordance to the outer environment.

The contribution of this paper is summarized in the following areas:

a. Abstract level modeling of moving object datasets under a scheme that

incorporates major data forms related to user, environment and service.
Introduction of group formation and group techniques in LBS systems.

b.
c. Exploration of trend behavior through a similarity framework.
d.

Integration of group and spatio-temporal abstract-level operations under a
reusable conceptual framework.

The main goal of this paper is to address the basic introductory and modeling
issues that would transfer processing from single to multiple-group objects in LBS
applications. To the best of our knowledge group formation has not been yet
examined in moving object LBS applications. The objectives of this work lead to the
support of abstract and scaled queries for mobile users and additional customers
(decision makers).

Springer

218

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

In the next section we provide the conceptual framework that links the abstract
level techniques and operations. Section 3 deﬁnes the concept of groups in LBS both
in S-T space and content, while Section 4 introduces the service based abstraction
operations. Section 4.1 discusses relative time and space operators while behavioral
trends of groups using lifeline data types are exploited in Section 4.2. Section 5
collates the discussed concepts by giving examples of supported queries. The paper
concludes with a brief discussion about future work in Section 6.

2. Conceptual Model Organization of the LB Database

The three LBS components, namely user, environment and service, share similar yet
distinguishable data coordinates. Users are of spatio-temporal nature and are
described by their spatio-temporal trajectory by spatial (x, y) and temporal (t)
coordinates. Their generalized extension, groups, are still of spatio-temporal nature,
however space becomes an area of inﬂuence rather than a single point.

The environment domain is materialized through a GIS or set of maps and
possible a priori additional information concerning the application, setting, etc.,
which deﬁne the content data. Again, space can take the form of a point or an area
and is characterized by a content description. To link the environment with the user
and service domain, combined spatial and content (spatial-content) coordinate data
types are used. Content data that describe the environment complement the group
coordinate types in order to describe the placement of a group in a spatio-content
area. At this ﬁrst approach, time is absent in the environment domain. Of course a
GIS including change updates etc. incorporates the temporal dimension in the
environment domain, yet is not going to affect the processes since it is undertaken by
the GIS software.

The service component processes the data originating from users and environment
and includes the processing manager that gives answers to queries and provides
information on demand, or stores important information for future reference. As a
data processor it is responsible to execute operations. These operations work under
space, time and content. and become the connection point between the service
domain and the actual data.

We put all three components under the same framework, to deﬁne the Moving
Object Database (MOD), [4]. Following the methodology of a database design,
including the phases of conceptual modeling, logical modeling and implementation,
we initially use conceptual modeling to capture the semantics of the aforementioned
concepts in an organized fashion. For the conceptual representation, we use the
class diagram of UML [3] due to its high-degree of comprehension and ex-
pressiveness. This conceptual framework is described through the model of Fig. 2.
User component is described under the user trajectory class. Accordingly, the group
of users corresponds to group of user trajectories (GoUT) that includes spatio-
temporal (x,y,t), content (c), and additional attribute (at1,at2,...) coordinates.
Environment is represented as a hierarchical set of spatial-content data. It may
take the form of point or area of interest with a speciﬁc content value. Service
components are implicitly represented through operations, both trend exposure
related and of spatio-temporal nature.

Between GoUT and environment further spatio-temporal operations may take
place like near, far, before, after, etc, discussed in Section 4.1. Between GoUTs a

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

219

Fig. 2 A UML class diagram for abstract-level LBS

series of trend exposure related operations can take place, namely, trend, match,
sim, etc., and are thoroughly discussed in Section 4.2. The UML class diagram proved
to be expressive enough to capture all the aforementioned elements and semantics.

3. User Related Abstract Representation

In order to comprehend the issues involved in group formation and behavior we
need to identify some special characteristics inherent to the group concepts. First,
according to the Bconscience^ of the objects deﬁning the group we consider two
categories of groups: Intentional and unintentional. Intentional groups are those
formed by members who act under the sense of following each-other or under the
same force, or following a common leader towards the same goal and are usually
deﬁned a priori. Examples of intentional groups are ﬂocks of birds, convoys of
military vehicles etc. Unintentional groups are comprised of members that behave
similarly but may not know or care about the existence, actions or intentions of the
others. This is mostly an a posteriori group formation since the outcome of object
actions deﬁnes the group. Examples of unintentional grouping include groups of
cars moving throughout a city on relevant paths.

Additionally, we distinguish between the dynamics that associate to group
into internal or external. Internal forces include speed, orientation,
behaviors,
spread, density, or attraction dynamics between the members of a group. A moving

Springer

220

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

ﬂock of birds is retaining a medium speed and direction by intercommunication of
its members. External dynamics include the external forces that affect the group’s
behavior and form or alter their decisions, paths, etc. Changes on weather, road
networks etc. are examples of such forces.

These informal deﬁnitions give just a general overview of group functioning and
they do not mean to portray the exact mechanics that form and retain groups. In this
paper we are interested mainly on group behavior itself and its relation to external
factors. Internal architecture preservation is assumed to exist. Groups are already
formed if intentional or are formed by the methods described in Section 3.3 if
unintentional.

3.1. Groups of Moving Users

Applications of group formation include, tourist LBS, commuter and consumer
behavior, trafﬁc management, army applications, etc. Modeling this type of
information in a group fashion rather than explicitly considering each moving
object is performed in order to accommodate query and prediction frameworks.
Groups enable us to focus on generalized behavior rather than concentrate on and
maintain all moving object’s proﬁles. The valuable nature of grouping is evident due
to the following facts:

a. Grouping is useful to reveal trends and behavioral patters. In a tourist LBS
some members of the group might be spending their time in a site while some
might be visiting a nearby site. By comparing explicitly each member’s actions
we will detect many differences. Nevertheless, as a group their proximity in
movement and actions is preserved.

b. Grouping provides a means to overcome uncertainty since the relation retained
in time or space is of an extent that permits a certain ﬂuctuation. Errors or
information gaps and irregularities can be exceeded. Therefore, an object may
gain the properties of its group when there is an information gap. Under this
attribute for a tourist LBS, trafﬁc lights, minor stops, or slight deviations from
strict military-like marching may be lost in grouping.

c. Generalization can be accomplished as a means of better communicating
information. Multi-scale representation for further processing is useful informa-
tion for map production, map animations, etc.

d. Data reduction and compression is another factor enhanced by group con-

sideration but is not further discussed in the present paper.

Focusing on LBS applications, communication of abstracted information through
LBS systems is fundamentally important due to the reduction of information
volume that needs to be transferred. In addition a group can be represented by a
single positioning device. This differentiates group-based LBS analysis from
available LBS applications which consider the assumption that each and every
moving object carries a device equipped with a GPS. Groups may be represented by
a few or even a single device complemented with some additional characteristics of
the group such as population, density, spatial spread of members, etc. In addition
queries can be addressed in a group information level and thus provide generalized
tendencies which are important for many applications. For example, restaurants
might be interested to know how groups of tourists usually travel along an area and

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

221

when to anticipate consumers. Exploiting these characteristics leads us to link
groups with behavioral patterns and generalized proﬁles.

3.2. Group Deﬁnitions

As seen in [35] and [33], object movement is of spatio-temporal nature and for each
object it can be represented by a 3-dimensional line in the (x,y,t) space termed as
spatio-temporal (S-T) trajectory. GPS measures provide points in the S-T space and
their sequential linking depicts a 3-dimensional poly-line as shown in Fig. 3. We
represent corresponding objects like humans or cars forming groups as point objects
without any information about their spatial extent.

In our tourist LBS example the involved dimensions that inﬂuence the formation
of a group are space, time and content. To better illustrate the formation of a group
we further discuss each of the involved coordinates:

& Grouping of moving objects in space.

Spatial dimension S, commonly comprises of (x, y) coordinates. A single object i is
mapped by a point of (x, y)(i) coordinates. More objects may form 2-dimensional
clusters which can be represented by groups in space. Representation of the spatial
mapping of a group merely relates objects in a spatial-proximity basis which means
that objects traveled across an area but there is no information on when. High density
would mean a highly visited spatial site throughout an unknown temporal interval.
Spatial grouping alone wouldn’t be expressive to on an LBS. Even when objects are
spatially close they may not act accordingly so they wouldn’t form a group. For
example, two cars moving in the same road but in the opposite direction.

& Grouping of moving objects in time.

Under the 1-dimensional temporal space an object i is mapped as a single point by
ti coordinate. High point density would mean high occupation of objects in a temporal
increment throughout an area as a whole but there would be no information on where.
In other words, we would just know a number of moving objects present in a scene
corresponding to a temporal instance, but their spatial distribution would be un-

Fig. 3 Trajectories in the spatio-
temporal space

Springer

222

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

known. Grouping merely in the temporal space could be achieved with 1-dimensional
clustering techniques.

&

Spatio-temporal grouping of objects.

Combination of spatial and temporal proximity indicates a similar moving near-
future and near-space behavior through time. In our content, if a set of objects keeps
this S-T relation under a bandwidth of uncertainty in time and space it forms a S-T
group indicative of a generalized tendency, Fig. 4. The S-T group comprises of a
medium S-T trajectory produced by the embraced S-T trajectories forming the
group.

& Grouping of moving objects in content space.

There are applications in which users frequently refer to speciﬁc locations for
which, they neither know their absolute coordinates nor they care about them. For
example, the notion of Fwork_ and Fhome_ are obvious to everyone and a realistic
service has to be able to Fsend me all my SMS as approaching work_ or to Fdownload
mail when going home._ By content we identify the verbal description of the areas
that the group correlates with. In the tourist LBS according to user proﬁle and area
proﬁle, content information becomes available. Under the content space, object i
is considered as a point by c(i) coordinate which may be part of a hierarchical
or relational or multi-dimensional content space that is deﬁned and speciﬁed by
the application [7]. High density of points would mean that many objects visited
the site described by c(i). Proximity is deﬁned according to the hierarchical ar-
chitecture if exists. Content is also apparent in the member’s attributes like age,
ownership, etc.

Now we can deﬁne as a group of moving objects the set of objects that retain a
series of similar attributes in space, time and/or content. In other words, when a set
of moving objects preserves a series of selected attributes under a series of deﬁned
restraints then it forms a group. The mentioned attributes are selected according to
the application at hand.

Formally and for representation purposes, we deﬁne a group as follows. A group
{G} is a subset of a moving objects set {A} described by 3 dimensions {s},{t},{c}, where
s, t are the spatial and temporal dimensions of the medium representative S-T group
respectively, and c represents the content information. Yet, we further need to
include additional attributes of the group that are lost by merely using the S-T group
representation. The additional data relate to the internal state of the group and may

Fig. 4 Spatio-temporal groups of objects

Springer

223

ð1Þ

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

be medium–maximum speed, orientation, population, density, area of effect etc.
Thus a group of moving objects in an LBS application is given by Eq. 1:

G ¼ S; t; c; gp

f

g ¼ x; yð
f

Þ; t; c; pop; aoe; . . .
Þ

ð

g;

where x, y are the spatial coordinates of the S-T group’s medium spatial trace, t is
the temporal medium trace of the corresponding S-T group, c describes the content
space that the group interacts with, and gp relate to the group additional properties.
The additional properties deﬁning the group (gp) may include population ( pop)
area of effect (aoe), density or other user deﬁned properties. These coordinates can
be selectively deﬁned according to application and data.

3.3. Formation of Groups

According to the application and available data types, different techniques are
examined for the formation of groups. In the tourist LBS with post-knowledge of the
group consistence their attributes are deﬁned a priori. On the other hand, when
groups need to be extracted from a moving object dataset without knowledge of
a group identity, queries [4] or spatio-temporal-content techniques can be used.
For spatio-temporal data we can proceed according to [32]. Constraints in space
and time for moving objects can be represented by a spatio-temporal unit surface
that moves in time and its trace in time deﬁnes a group inclusive surface as seen
in Fig. 4. All objects that remain inside this surface remain in relative S-T distance
and form a group of objects. The unit surface is termed S-T group unit while its trace
on time is termed as S-T group surface. According to the dimensions of these surfaces
generalization is performed in different scales. A group in S space is represented by
an area whose dimensions are selected according to application and scale require-
ments. This area may be different for each temporal instance in order to delineate
the special attributes of the speciﬁc application. Thus an S(t) function may be used
to describe spatial group extent. To complement the S-T groups, content data as
descriptions of visited places and attributes of inner group dynamics, are linked
with spatial and/or temporal coordinates. Thus, content rich S-T groups are formed
with separable coordinates which can be used for further processing.

4. Service Related Abstract Representation

Service component is tackled implicitly through the handling of operations leading
to generalized forms of query processing. Two initially unrelated types of operations
are utilized; ﬁrst spatio-temporal operations which relate groups of users and the
environment and second trend exposure operations between distinct groups.
Furthermore, both types of operations can be integrated in order to form more
complex relations.

4.1. Spatio-Temporal Operations

In the tourist LBS, when tourists are in the Acropolis area they may want to know
its history, without providing any further details about their own exact position.

Springer

224

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

Similar issues hold in the temporal dimension. Consider the example in which a
tourist is interested in an event, e.g., a jazz concert in the Athens Music Hall at
19:00. He/she may be interested in what he can do before or shortly after the concert
in the surrounding area. A suitable system would allow him/her to declare his/her
preferences in terms of keywords, such as Fbefore_ F19:00_ or Fclose_ to FAcropolis._
These examples call for the concept of relative position and relative time, which are
related to the user’s interest in space and time, and not to the explicit spatial or
temporal coordinates [1], [11].

In order to accommodate cases like these and to avoid the problem of unknown or
indifferent coordinates and/or exact time, we propose the use of a limited, speciﬁc
number of unambiguous spatial and temporal relations in LBS, reﬂecting the
association between the moving objects and reference marks in space and time,
(e.g., places of interest, or time of interest). The relations are derived based on
common geography sense that may be anticipated in tourist-like applications.
According to application at hand, these relations may be enriched to satisfy speciﬁc
situations. Relations include:

& Topological: IN/OUT.

An object is IN an area when its location is Finside_ or on the border of the place of
interest. Otherwise, it is OUT. For example, I am IN the Acropolis Area, or car A is
IN the road segment F100–110._ As reference spatial relations, we use the ones in
Egenhofer (1991), since they are well-known and mathematically sound. However,
any other, clear description of spatial relationship would do for this purpose.

& Directional: NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, WEST.

An object is NORTH of a place when its location is North, NorthEast and
NorthWest of it, and so on, based on the hierarchical reasoning on directional
relations [30]. For example, I am NORTH of Acropolis.

& Proximity: FAR/NEAR.

An object is FAR or NEAR to a place in spatial and temporal terms, based on

the expert’s decision. For example, I am NEAR Acropolis.

& Temporal: BEFORE/AFTER/DURING.

An object is BEFORE, AFTER or DURING a time of interest (e.g., event)
when the objects time is before, after or during [1] of the time of the event. For
example, restaurants to go 3 hours BEFORE the jazz concert.

& Metric: DISTANCE.

An object has a spatial and temporal DISTANCE (indicated as S_DISTANCE
and T_DISTANCE) from a place of interest or a time of interest. For example, car
A is 10 km or 20 min DISTANCE from Acropolis.

The approach we propose here captures relative position and relative time as it
associates position to the surrounding environment with spatial and temporal

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

225

relations. Also, combinational relations are served. For example, the query Fdid the
tourist visit or pass through the Acropolis area?_ is answered by considering visit as a
combination of IN and DURING > threshold, where threshold is deﬁned by the
system (e.g., the tourist stayed long in an area), and pass through as a combination
of IN and DURING < threshold. Through the content hierarchy that describes the
environment a relative content weighted distance can be also established to measure
the semantic distance between areas of interest.

4.2. Trend Exposure Operators

In order to facilitate a series of queries on the groups and their correlations in a
scene, properties of the data involved are discussed. Equation 1 deﬁnes a group
through a series of coordinates. Apart from these readily given coordinates, inferred
attributes can be retrieved including velocity of the group or the cardinality of the
group’s movement between two temporal
instances. The area of effect group
property can be described by a circle (center: x, y, radius: r). Unless the application
explicitly requires detailed information under the generalization procedure, a circle
subtly represents the area of effect.

Lifelines constitute the basis of the proposed data analysis which introduces several
operations upon group data. We do not provide a closed query-language environment
but we introduce a series of supported operations that unravel the signiﬁcance of the
group analysis. Given a group Gi, a lifeline [41] ALN(Gi) is deﬁned as a projection
of a group attribute Aj unto the spatial or temporal 1-dimensional axis (S, t), where
S is further decomposed to the x and y axis (Eq. 2). For the next equations we use S
instead of the (x, y) spatial coordinates and we infer that lifelines are composed on
x, y, or distance axis.

ALNAj

S;t Gi
ð

Þ ¼

Y

(cid:2)

(cid:1)

Aj

S; t

For the temporal axis projection Eq. 2 becomes:

ALNAj

t Gi
ð

Þ ¼

Y
t

(cid:1)
Aj

(cid:3)
(cid:2) ¼ t0;

(cid:1)

t1; Aj1

(cid:1)

(cid:2);

t2; Aj 2

(cid:2); . . . ;

(cid:1)

tend; Ajend

(cid:2)

(cid:4)

Where (ti, Aji) are the tuples describing that the value Aji of the attribute Aj is valid
on the temporal increment (tij1, ti). The values Aji between the temporal increments
can be equal. t0 describes the temporal origin of the lifeline.

Fig. 5 Representation of a life-
line in space and time

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

Springer

226

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

For the spatial axis projection Eq. 2 becomes accordingly:

ALNAj

S Gi
ð

Þ ¼

Y
S

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:2) ¼ S0; S1; Aj1

(cid:3)

(cid:1)

(cid:2); S2; Aj2

(cid:2); . . . ; Send; Ajend

(cid:1)

Aj

(cid:2)

(cid:4)

ð4Þ

Where (Si, Aji) are the tuples describing that the value Aji of the attribute Aj is valid
on the spatial distance (Si). S0 describes the spatial origin of the lifeline. A schematic
representation of a lifeline is shown in Fig. 5.

& Absolute similarity operation of lifelines:

Let us assume two groups G1 and G2 and their corresponding lifelines. The
segments of the lifelines that have common attribute values (A) are given by
Eq. 5:

(cid:1)
common ALN1;2

(cid:2) ¼ ALNA

S;t G1
ð

Þ

ALNA

S;t G2
ð

Þ

the spatial or temporal extent unto which the lifelines are compared is:

(cid:1)
duration ALN1;2

(cid:2) ¼ ALNA

S;t G1
ð

ALNA

S;t G2
ð

Þ

Thus, the similarity metric between the lifelines of the groups Gi and Gj in their
common overlap area is given by the property SIM (i,j), (Eq. 7):

\

A

\
Þ

S;t

or according to the ﬁrst lifeline (i) the similarity is (Eq. 8):

SIMA

S;t i; jð

Þ ¼

(cid:2)
(cid:1)
common ALN1;2
(cid:2)
(cid:1)
duration ALN1;2

SIMA

S;t i; jð

Þ ¼

(cid:1)
common ALN1;2
S; t
ð

Þ (cid:1) S; t
ð

Þi endð

Þi 0ð Þ

(cid:2)

ð5Þ

ð6Þ

ð7Þ

ð8Þ

where (S, t)i(end) j (S, t)i(0) is the duration (spatial or temporal) of the ﬁrst lifeline.

By substituting the property variable (A) with cardinality, content or additional
group attributes like population, density, area of effect, places of interest that the
group visited, etc. we get the corresponding similarities on the selected attributes
evolving through time or space. For different types of variables describing the
attributes, we may follow corresponding comparison techniques:

& Boolean types:

Similarity between variables is either True or False. Thus the similarity operation
for each comparison increment yields either 1 or 0. Such variables can be
acceleration or deceleration on movement or string content descriptions of areas
visited by the groups.

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

227

Fig. 6 Cardinality similarity between two lifelines

& Correlated types:

For variables that follow a hierarchy and some values are conceptually (or
arithmetically) closer than others, we use weight factors for each pair of comparisons.
Population and cardinality are correlated variables. E.g., in cardinality comparison
North is conceptually closer to East than to South. The following Fig. 6 shows an
example of weight assignment for cardinality (crd) comparison:

& Application-speciﬁc types:

For additional attributes that may take a plethora of forms we follow different
techniques according to the application to deﬁne similarity criteria. For example, for
the area of effect depicted as a circle, the abstract comparison may take the form of
Eq. 9:

$area ALN1; ALN2

ð

Þ ti;tiþ1
ð

Þ ¼ (cid:1)(cid:2) R2

ti (cid:1) R2
tiþ1

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

1

(cid:5)
; (cid:1)(cid:2) R2

ti (cid:1) R2
tiþ1

(cid:6)

2

ð9Þ

where $area is the relative area change between the temporal increment (ti, ti+1) of
comparison for each lifeline. The comparison between the values of the second part of
Eq. 9 takes place according to a weighted application-deﬁned metric.

& Relative similarity operation of lifelines:

For groups that are distant in time and/or space we can translate the cor-
responding lifelines under a common origin in order to make them comparable.
Translation in time/space is accomplished by subtraction of t0 and S0 from Eqs. 3 and
4. Equation 10 becomes:

ALNAj

t Gi
ð

Þ ¼

Y
t

(cid:1)

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:2) ¼ t1; Aj1

(cid:2);

(cid:1)

Aj

t2; Aj2

(cid:2); . . . ;

(cid:1)

tend; Ajend

(cid:2)

(cid:4)

ð10Þ

The relative similarity property is depicted by the symbol RSIM.

&

Similarity metric:

All the above similarity metrics can be put together on a weighted formula which

will include all the group’s attribute values on the spatial and temporal axis:

SIMAll

S^t G1; G2

ð

S (cid:2)wA1
Þ ¼ SIMA1
n
(cid:5)
X

¼

i¼1

S þ SIMA2

SIMA ið Þ
S

(cid:2)wA ið Þ

S þ . . . þ SIMA1
t (cid:2)wA1
(cid:6)

S (cid:2)wA2
S þ SIMA ið Þ

(cid:2)wA ið Þ

t

t

t f þSIMA2

t (cid:2)wA2

t

. . .

(11)

Springer

228

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

by modifying the weight factors or nullifying them we get the corresponding single
lifeline similarity operations. Additional operations are:

& Match operation:

For matching purposes sliding of a given ALN throughout another ALN takes
place in order to expose their maximum possible similarity. For lifelines of attribute
(A) in the temporal axis we have the Eq. 12:

MATCHðALNA

t ðGiÞ; ALNA

t ðGjÞÞ ¼ max SIM ðALNA

t ðGiÞ;

ALNA

t ðGjð$tÞÞ : 8$t 2 ½t01

(cid:1)! tend2 (cid:1) tend1(cid:3)Þ
step¼$t

(12)

which means that MATCH property gives the maximum similarity of the lifelines
upon the attribute (A) when the second lifeline shifts in the temporal axis with steps
equal to $t.

& Trend operation:

Trend operation yields spatial or temporal increments where attributes of multiple
lifelines are common and its deﬁnition is described by Eq. 13. In addition, a statistical
operation may be estimated which shows for every spatial, temporal or content
Bincrement^ of the lifelines the percentage of similar and dissimilar behavior. E.g.,
BWhich percentage of tourist groups visited Acropolis in the between 10:00 and
11:00 AM?^

TRENDA
(cid:7)

S; t ALN G1

ð

ð

Þ; ALN G2

ð

Þ; . . . ; ALN Gn

ð

Þ
Þ

¼ ALNA

S; t G1
ð

ALNA

S; t G2
ð

ALNA

S; t Gn
ð

Þ . . . T
A

ÞT
A

(cid:8)
Þ

(13)

& Further concepts:

We deﬁne a reference point as an area which may or may not be part of the
content infrastructure. It can be an archeological site or even a user deﬁned area
like an intersection, a sketch etc. and is described by Eq. 14:

R ¼ aoe; c
f

g ¼ x; y; r
ð
f

Þ; c

g

ð14Þ

The reference point and a query can obviously take the form of a lifeline which may
depict spatial, temporal, content and attribute restrictions and relations. For example
the following operation VIS answers when a group visited a reference point.

(cid:1)

VIS ALNx^y

t

Rð Þ; ALNx^y

(cid:2) ¼ ðALN Rx^y
t Gð
Þ

(cid:1)

t

ALNx^y

t Gð

Þ:

ð15Þ

(cid:2)\

t

&

Story–sequence:

Springer

For content based comparisons we may not be interested on temporal or spatial
information but just for the sequence of visited areas. Thus, from the lifeline

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

229

ALN c
t (G) we nullify the t coordinates from the tuples (t, c)i, where ci is the content
attribute showing the visited areas. We will indicate such a sequence with the
notation SEQ(c, G).

Instead of nodes with deﬁned x, y, or t coordinates we may use uncertainty or
relational measures. The comparison increments are a key variable that deﬁne the
abstraction volume that takes place in the operations.

5. Providing Services

Experimentation of the above mentioned operators was conducted on synthetic
datasets of moving objects and formed groups. We assumed sets of tourists that
interacted in an area including archaeological sites, dinning facilities, and lodging.
After the construction of lifelines, similarity indices and trend measures in all
components were successfully carried out. For viewing purposes, ﬁgures of the form
of Fig. 6 were constructed to visually check the correspondence of the results.
Primarily for demonstration purposes, two characteristic queries which include some
of the discussed concepts could be the following:

a.

b.

BFind similarities in behavior between two groups of tourists visiting an
archaeological area A between different days.^ This could be a decision makers’
set of queries in order to examine possible patterns in behavior.
BWhat is the schedule that tourist groups usually follow in an area B (ar-
chaeological sites, hotels, dinning)?^ This could be a tourists guide query in
order to plan his own schedule accordingly.

By breaking down the different parts of the queries we discuss their individual

responds:

& Group(s) (user generalization)

Groups are formed a priori or are extracted. Thus, in Fig. 2 the class of Groups of

User Trajectories is known.

& Find similarity in behavior (service trend exposure operation)

We compare the lifelines of group (a) to group (b). In Fig. 2 the operation is shown
under the class GoUT/GoUT as a comparison of two groups of user trajectories.
According to the speciﬁc needs of the queries we accordingly focus on a corre-
sponding type of similarity. We may incorporate absolute or relative comparison. For
a holistic similarity metric we use:

SIMAll

S^t Ga; Gb

ð

Þ ¼

SIMA ið Þ
S

(cid:2)wA ið Þ

S þ SIMA ið Þ

t

(cid:2)wA ið Þ

t

(cid:6)

n
X

(cid:5)

i¼1

where S is absolute since the comparison refers to a speciﬁc archaeological site, and t
is relative since the comparison is performed between two different days. By altering
the nature of the variables we may ﬁnd different types of similarity. E.g., directional,
relative in time, etc.

Springer

230

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

For the second query we have:

& Archaeological sites, hotels, dinning (environment generalization)

BArchaeological sites, hotels, dinning^ are content related terms under the
environment component based on a content hierarchy schema which classiﬁes areas
according to their use. Thus, we search our GIS or content map to ﬁnd the
corresponding areas.

ð

c1; c2; c3

Þ ¼ string1; string2; string3

ð

Þ ¼ Archaelogical Site; Hotel; Dinning
Þ

ð

Schedule that tourist groups usually follow in an area B (service trend exposure

&
operator)

This is a TREND operation upon a content based Story-sequence (SEQ) oper-
ation which yields the behavioral trends of the groups that already visited area B
in a percentage mode.

TRENDA
 

S;t ALN G1

ð

ð

Þ; ALN G2

ð

Þ; . . . ; ALN Gn

ð

Þ
Þ

¼ SEQ c1; c2; c3; G1
ð

Þ

SEQ c1; c2; c3; G2

ð

Þ . . .

SEQ c1; c2; c3; Gn

ð

\

c

\

c

!
Þ

Variations of such queries are numerous and are useful both for users and decision
makers, while historic data can be stored under a behavioral mode for further
processing.

6. Conclusions and Future Work

We introduced a framework that transferred common management of LBS related
data into an abstract level. In general, the transition from single objects to groups of
objects led to data reduction and facilitated trend exposure. The contribution of this
paper is summarized in the following areas: First, we introduced group based
techniques in LBS systems, handling a series of uncertainty and generalization
issues. We also introduced a series of relative spatio-temporal and content related
operators to facilitate abstract querying of LBS datasets. In addition, we supported
trend exposure of group behavior under a similarity framework. All these abstract
level techniques, were integrated under a reusable conceptual framework to support
abstract and scaled querying of LBS data.

Extensive implementation on a real application should be established to validate
and quantify the discussed processes. Beyond the applicability which contains many
technical issues, extensions of this work in the future may include the following
topics: First, a model should be constructed to allow interrelations between groups
and/or single users quantifying their interaction and correlation in LBS environ-
ments. Additional spatial and temporal relational expressions would associate
groups with the content space and additional attributes. There exists a connection
between group dynamics and external dynamics which is not always obvious to
detect. The clariﬁcation and representation of such association may facilitate

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

231

prediction of group behavior, according to different external factors (e.g., corre-
lation of weather to tourist groups). Data mining techniques and multidimensional
data processes may provide useful tools to enrich pattern identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation [43]. Finally, a framework should be modeled in order to describe
and quantify under different information scales, similarities of events comprising of
group dynamics that would reveal similarities between different types of informa-
tion and seemingly irrelevant data collections.

Acknowledgment Dr. Partsinevelos is partially supported from the Greek National Scholarship
Foundation.

References

1. J.F. Allen and G. Ferguson. BActions and events in interval temporal logic,’’ Journal of Logic

and Computation, Vol. 4(5):531–579, 1994.

2. C. Bisdikian, J. Christensen, J. Davis II, M. Ebling, G. Hunt, W. Jerome, H. Lei, S. Maes, and D.
Sow. BEnabling location-based applications,’’ in M. Devarakonda, A. Joshi, and M. Viveros
(Eds.), ACM Int. Workshop on Mobile Commerce, Rome, Italy, ACM Press: New York, pp. 38–
42, August 2001.

3. G. Booch, J. Rumbaugh, and I. Cobson. BThe Uniﬁed Modeling Language User Guide,’’

Addison-Wesley, 1999.

4. S. Brakatsoulas, D. Pfoser, and N. Tryfona. BModeling, storing and mining moving objects
databases,’’ in Int. Database Engineering and Applications Symposium, Coimbra, Portugal,
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 68–77, July 2004.

5. K. Brassel and R. Weibel, BA review and conceptual framework of automated map general-
ization,’’ International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, Vol. 2(3):229–244, 1998.
6. K. Cheverst, N. Davies, K. Mitchell, A. Friday, and C. Efstratiou. BDeveloping a context-aware
electronic tourist guide: Some issues and experiences,’’ in Proc. of the SIGCHI Conf. on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Hague, Netherlands, ACM Press: New York, pp. 17–24, April
2000.

7. Content indexing, as of Sep. 2004. www.dmoz.org.
8. T. D’Roza and G. Bilchev. BAn overview of location-based services,’’ BT Technology Journal,

9. T. Dietterich and R. Michalski. BDiscovering patterns in sequences of events,’’ Artiﬁcial

Vol. 21(1):20–27, 2003.

Intelligence, 25:187–232, 1985.

10. D. Douglas and T. Peucker. BAlgorithms for the reduction of the number of points required to
represent a digitized line or its caricature,’’ The Canadian Cartographer, 102:112–122, 1973.
11. M.J. Egenhofer. BReasoning about binary topological relations,’’ in O. Gunther and H.-J. Schek
(Eds.), Proc. of 2nd Int. Symposium on Advances in Spatial Databases, Zurich, Switzerland,
LNCS 525, Springer, pp. 143–160, August 1991.

12. M.F. Goodchild. BFinal report of specialist meeting on location-based services,’’ (Online report).
Santa Barbara: Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science and the University Consortium for
Geographic Information Science, 2001.

13. P.L. Guth, O. Oertel, G. Be´ nard, and R. Thibaud. BPocket panorama: 3D GIS on a handheld
in M. Bertolotto (Ed.), Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Web and Wireless
device,’’
Geographical Information Systems, Rome, Italy, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 92–96, December
2003.

14. R.H. Guting, M. H. Bohlen, M. Erwig, C. S. Jensen, N. A. Lorentzos, M. Schneider, and M.
Vazirgiannis, BA foundation for representing and querying moving objects,’’ ACM Transactions
on Database Systems, Vol. 25(1):1– 42, 2000.

15. S. Hibino and E.A. Rundensteiner. BA visual query language for identifying temporal
in Proc. of the Int. Workshop on Multimedia Database Management
trends in video data,’’
Systems, Blue Mountain Lake, New York, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 74–81, August 1995.
16. A. Hinze and A. Voisard. BLocation- and time-based information delivery in tourism,’’ in
(Eds.), 8th Int.

T. Hadzilacos, Y. Manolopoulos, J.F. Roddick, and Y. Theodoridis

Springer

232

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

Symposium in Spatial and Temporal Databases, Santorini Island, Greece, LNCS 2750, Springer,
pp. 489–507, July 2003.

17. C.S. Jensen, A.F. Christensen, T.B. Pedersen, D. Pfoser, S. Saltenis, and N. Tryfona. BLocation-
based services: A database perspective,’’ in J.T. Bjorke and H. Tveite (Eds.), Proc. of 8th
Scandinavian Research Conf. on Geographical Information Science, As, Norway, Seattle,
Washington, pp. 59–68, June 2001.

18. C. Jones and I.M. Abraham. BDesign considerations for a scale-independent cartographic
database,’’ D. Marble (Ed.), Second Int. Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, pp. 384–398,
June 1986.

19. K.-S. Kim, S.W. Kim, T.W. Kim, and K.J. Li. BFast indexing and updating method for moving
objects on road networks,’’ in M. Bertolotto (Ed.), Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Web and
Wireless Geographical Information Systems, IEEE Computer Society, Rome, Italy, pp. 34–42,
December 2003.

20. R. Lee, H. Shiina, H. Takakura, Y.J. Kwon, and Y. Kambayashi. BOptimization of geographic
area to a web page for two-dimensional range query processing,’’ in M. Bertolotto (Ed.), Proc.
of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Web and Wireless Geographical Information Systems, Rome, Italy,
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 9–17, December 2003.

21. D. Lee, BGeneralization within a geoprocessing framework,’’ in Proc. of the Int. Workshop on

Semantic Processing of Spatial Data, Mexico City, Mexico, 2003.

22. Z. Liu. BA Java-Based Wireless Framework for Location-Based Services Applications,’’ M.Sc.

thesis, University of Calgary, Canada, June 2002.

23. A. Leick, GPS Satellite Surveying, Wiley: New York, 1995.
24. A. Magon and R. Shukla. (2001). BLBS, the ingredients and the alternatives,’’ (Online Paper).

Available: http://www.gisdevelopment.net/technology/lbs/techlbs006.htm, February 2003.

25. R.W. McMaster and J. Comenetz. BProcedure and quality assessment measures for cartographic

generalization,’’ in GIS/LIS Proc., Denver, Colorado, pp. 775–785, November 1996.

26. R. B. McMaster and S. Shea. BGeneralization in digital cartography,’’ American Association of

Geographers, Washington, 1992.

27. J. Muller, R. Weibel, J. Lagrange, and F. Salge (Eds.), BGeneralization: State of the art and
issues,’’ in GIS and Generalization–Methodology and Practice, Taylor and Francis: London,
3–17, 1995.

28. A. Nakos. BFractal geometry theory in performing automated map generalization operations,’’
Position Paper for the Second Workshop on Progress in Automated Map Generalization, Ga¨ vle,
Sweden, 1997.

29. P.V. Oosterom. BThe GAP-tree, an approach to Fon-the-ﬂy_ map generalization of an area
partitioning,’’ in J.C. Muller, J.P. Lagrance, and R. Weibel (Eds.), GIS and Generalization—
Methodology and Practice, Taylor & Francis: London, pp. 120–147, 1995.

30. D. Papadias, M. Egenhofer, and J. Sharma. BHierarchical reasoning about directional relations,’’
in S. Shekhar and P. Bergougnoux (Eds.), Proc. of the 4th ACM Workshop on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems Rockville, Maryland, ACM Press: New York, pp. 107–114,
November 1996.

31. B. Parent, S. Spaccapietra, and E. Zima´ nyi. BSpatio-temporal conceptual models: data structures +
space + time,’’ Proc. of the 7th ACM int. Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, Kansas City, Missouri, ACM Press: New York, pp. 26–33, November 1999.

32. P. Partsinevelos. BDetection and generalization of spatio-temporal trajectories for motion

imagery,’’ PhD, University of Maine, USA, 2002.

33. P. Partsinevelos, A. Stefanidis, and P. Agouris, 2001. BAutomated spatiotemporal scaling for
video generalization,’’ Int. Conf. on Image Processing, Thessaloniki, IEEE Computer Society,
Greece, pp. 177–180, October 2001.

34. D. Pfoser, C. Jensen, and Y. Theodoridis. BNovel approaches in query processing for moving
object trajectories,’’
in A. El Abbadi, M.L. Brodie, S. Chakravarthy, U. Dayal, N. Kamel, G.
Schlageter, and K.-Y. Whang (Eds.), Proc. of the 26th Int. Conf. on Very Large Databases, Cairo,
Egypt. Morgan Kaufmann: San Fransisco, pp. 395–406, September 2000.

35. D. Pfoser and Y. Theodoridis. BGenerating semantics-based trajectories of moving objects,’’ Int.
Workshop on Emerging Technologies for Geo-Based Applications, Ascona, Switzerland, pp. 59–
76, May 2000.

36. A. Renolen. BConceptual modeling and spatiotemporal information systems: How to model the
real world,’’ in Hans Hauska (Ed.), Proc. of the 6th Scandinavian Research Conference on
Geographical Information Systems, Stockholm, Sweden, June 1997.

Springer

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

233

37. A. Ruas. BAutomating the generalization of geographical data: The age of maturity?’’ in Proc. of

the 20th Int. Cartography Conference, Beijing, China, pp. 1943–1953, August 2001.

38. J.H. Schiller and A. Voisard (Eds.). BLocation-Based Services,’’ Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
39. S. Spaccapietra Editorial. BSpatio-temporal data models and languages,’’ GeoInformatica, Vol.

5(1), 2001.

40. L. Speicys, C.S. Jensen, and A. Kligys. BComputational data modeling for network-constrained
in Proc. of the Eleventh Int. Symposium on Advances in Geographic
moving objects,’’
Information Systems, New Orleans, Louisiana, ACM Press: New York, pp. 118–125, November
2003.

41. A. Stefanidis, P. Partsinevelos, and P. Agouris. BUsing lifelines for spatiotemporal summaries,’’
in Proc. of the 1st Nat. Conf. on Digital Government Research, Los Angeles, California, Digital
Government Research Center, pp. 1–8, May 2001.

42. J.G. Stell and M.F. Worboys. BGeneralizing graphs using amalgamation and selection,’’ in R.
Gu¨ ting, D. Papadias, and F. Lochovsky (Eds.), Proc. of the 6th Int. Symposium, (SSD ’99), Hong
Kong, China, LNCS 1651, Springer, pp. 19–32, July 1999.

43. I. Timko and T.B. Pedersen. BCapturing complex multidimensional data in location-based data
warehouses,’’ in Proc. of the 12th ACM int. Workshop on Geogrraphic Information Systems,
Washington DC, ACM Press: New York, pp. 147–156, November 2004.

44. S. Winter, E. Pontikaskis, and M. Raubal. BLBS for real-time navigation: A scenario,’’

Geoinformatics, 4:6–9, 2001.

45. M. Winter and G. Taylor. BModular neural networks for map-matched GPS positioning,’’ 4th
Int. Conf. on Web Information Systems Engineering Workshops, Roma, Italy, IEEE Computer
Society, pp. 106 –111, December 2003.

46. S. Yu, M.A. Aufaure, N. Cullot, and S. Spaccapietra. BA collaborative framework for location-
based Services,’’ in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Databases and Applications, Innsbruck, Austria,
February 2004.

Panayotis Partsinevelos
acquired his diploma in surveying engineering from the National Technical
University of Athens (NTUA, 1996). He received his PhD in Spatial Information Science & Engineering
from the University of Maine (2002). He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the Academic and Research
Computer Technology Institute (CTI, 2004). Currently he is teaching remote sensing and geodesy in the
Technical University of Crete. He has received several scientific awards and he has authored several
refereed publications. His research interests include geographic information science, image processing and
spatio-temporal data management.

Springer

234

Geoinformatica (2006) 10: 213–234

Dr. Nectaria Tryfona
is an engineer of research and development in Talent Information Systems SA,
Greece and a teaching faculty of the Hellenic Open University. Her research interests are in the area of
Database Modeling, Geographic Information Systems, Mobile Databases and E-Learning. She is the author
of various articles in books, journals and conference proceedings. She has received her Dipl. Eng. and Ph.D
from the Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics, University of Patras (Greece) in 1991 and
1994, respectively. She was an R&D Engineer (2002-2005) in Computer Technology Institute, associate
professor (2002-2000) and assistant professor (1997-2000) in the Department of Computer Science at the
University of Aalborg, Denmark, and a post-doctoral research associate (1995-1997) at the National Center
of Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA), USA. She continuously serves as program committee
member in ACMGIS, STDBM, IDEAS, and as external reviewer in ICDE, CaiSE, COSIT, SSDBM,
GeoInformatica Journal and International Journal of GIS.

Springer

