Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353
DOI 10.1007/s10707-008-0070-3

Application of a model to the evaluation of flood damage

F. Luino & C. G. Cirio & M. Biddoccu & A. Agangi &
W. Giulietto & F. Godone & G. Nigrelli

Received: 1 August 2007 / Revised: 23 May 2008 /
Accepted: 23 October 2008 / Published online: 14 April 2009
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2009

Abstract This paper presents the initial results of a common methodology for the
evaluation of damage produced by a flood. A model has been developed for flood damage
estimation based on a geographic information system (GIS). It could be used by land
administration bodies and insurance companies to manage flood-related damage data. The
model simulates flood scenarios and evaluates expected economic losses from the impact of
floodwaters on exposed elements,
through the application of a computational model
elaborated by GIS. During the development of the model, the Boesio Stream, a small
watercourse flowing into Lake Maggiore (Lombardy, northern Italy) which was recently
affected by a flash flood, was used as case study to test and calibrate the methodology. The
method could be used either as a forecasting tool to define event scenarios, utilizing data
from events simulated with a hydraulic model, or for real-time damage assessment after a
disaster. The approach is suitable to large-area damage assessment and could be appropriate
for land use planning, civil protection and risk mitigation.

Keywords Flood . Damage evaluation . Stage–damage curves . Hydraulic modelling . GIS

1 Introduction

As they are the most common form of natural disaster, floods are of great interest to the
general public. Every year, severe flooding affects many regions of the world. The
International Emergency Disasters Database EM-DAT recorded 238 floods in Europe
between 1975 and 2001 [3]. In the decade 1980–1989, 1,940 people died as a result of
floods and 417,000 were made homeless [4]. In August 2002, floods in the Elbe, Moldava
and Danube Basins provoked damage estimated at more than three billion Euros in the
Czech Republic and more than nine billion in Germany. The European Union defined the
F. Luino (*) : C. G. Cirio : M. Biddoccu : A. Agangi : W. Giulietto : F. Godone : G. Nigrelli
Italian National Research Council, Research Institute for Geo-hydrological Protection,
Strada delle Cacce 73, 10135 Turin, Italy
e-mail: fabio.luino@irpi.cnr.it

340

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

event as a “severe catastrophe” and for the first time created a solidarity fund. The EU
granted 728 million Euro to the regions of Germany, Austria, the Czech Republic and
France affected by floods.

Several institutions have developed methodologies designed to quantify flood losses in
their specific domains; however, there is no standard procedure to determine a global figure
for economic impact. Nevertheless, in 2004 the European Union inaugurated the ‘Damage’
Project [2] in response to the need of European civil protection services to have a common
methodology for the evaluation of damage produced by disaster. One of the project’s goals
is to provide public administrations such as municipal, provincial and regional governments
with a tool designed to help them obtain and manage information on damage. For this
purpose a GIS-based model was created to simulate flood events and evaluate consequent
economic losses. The traditional approach to damage assessment consists of detailed field
survey with the aim of establishing the actual loss. In recent years, attempts have been made
to define methodologies for the rapid assessment of damage in the aftermath of a disaster.
The main objective of the present study was to devise a method that could enable real-
time assessment of potential economic direct loss due to a natural process. The method
requires a thorough knowledge of the local area coupled with descriptions of some physical
aspects of natural events. When a catastrophic natural event of a given intensity affects a
particular area, the value of economic losses connected to direct damages to goods depends
on the number and economic value of the units of each element in the area and on the
degree of damage to the exposed units, commonly defined as vulnerability (varying from
0 = undamaged to 1 = completely destroyed). The economic worth of loss can be defined as:

DIRECT ECONOMIC LOSS

¼ Σi UNIT VALUEi (cid:1) No: of units EXPOSED ELEMENTi (cid:1) DAMAGE DEGREEi %½

ð

Þ:
(cid:2)

2 Description of the methodological model and its application to a case study

The methodology for flood damage estimation can be summed up by the following points
(Fig. 1):

&

&
&

&
&

description of the event: definition of flooded area and water level (this definition will
be implemented by real-time measurements or by simulation of events with a hydraulic
model),
identification of damaged assets in the flooded area,
evaluation of the degree of damage to the exposed elements as a function of the
magnitude of event as identified from measurement of floodwater depths,
attribution of economic value to exposed assets,
quantification of economic losses by multiplying the economic value of damaged assets
and the degree of damage.

The method can be used to estimate the damage from the impact of floodwaters on
exposed elements (direct damage) and to quantify the resulting economic loss (tangible
damage). Indirect and intangible damage assessment is beyond the scope of this model.

During the development of the model, a case study was utilised to test and calibrate the
methodology. Because of its relatively small extent (45 km2), the Boesio basin of northwest

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

341

Fig. 1 Conceptual model of flood damage assessment

Lombardy Region was chosen as the study area (Fig. 2). The basin has suffered intense
human pressure on its environment and a recent severe flooding event, for which
information about damage was well documented. It also has good availability of territorial
data and historical information about the damages from past disasters. The methodology
was applied to the case study in order to estimate flood damage to structures. Damage to
agriculture and mobile goods was not taken into account.

Fig. 2 3D location map of Boesio basin: the boundary is shown as a red line

342

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

2.1 Geological data base

The application of the study methodology was restricted by the availability of data, which
needed to be organised into a GIS database for the study area. The data were gathered and
divided in two categories: (a) layers containing spatial information on topography, altimetry
(digital
layers pertaining to
anthropogenic presence, exposed assets and land use. As a rule, the more detailed the
information, the greater the precision of the assessment of potential losses.

terrain model), hydrography and hydrology; and (b)

2.2 Typology of flood events

The method can be applied to two types of floods. First, real events can be used by
measuring flooded area and inundation depths in the field. This method permits a
quick estimate to be obtained of the approximate extent of damage during or imme-
diately after an event. Secondly, scenarios of the event can be founded on hydrological
analyses. The characteristics of the event are obtained through hydraulic models and
the methodology is applied in order to forecast the consequences of a given future
event.

In May 2002 the Boesio basin was struck by a severe hydrometeorological event. The
main stream and its tributaries overflowed across urbanised and rural areas and severe
damage occurred to houses and factories. This flood event was chosen as the reference
event in order to test and refine the methodology. A back analysis was performed to verify
process validity and check the reliability of the results. For this reason, the event was
investigated thoroughly using surveys,
inhabitants, and data
acquisition from the data bases of local administrations. The inundation limits and levels
reached by floodwaters were identified and graphically represented as GIS layers. Data
about event-related damage and losses were collected and processed. For each inundated
building, information was gathered about its structural typology and use, the ground-floor
surface area, its economic value, flood levels reached on the ground floor, damage levels
and consequent economic losses.

interviews with local

2.3 Hydrologic–hydraulic study

Territorial and hydrological data for the Boesio basin were used to create a rainfall–runoff
model for the Cittiglio area. The model made it possible to calculate stream discharge
resulting from rainfall amounts of given return periods. The expected discharge value was
then input to a one-dimensional hydraulic model in order to determine floodwater levels
and thus create an event scenario. Past
in setting the
parameters for the model.

inundation data were essential

2.3.1 Step 1: territorial and hydrologic data collection

Territorial data Topographic information about the Boesio basin was obtained from a
digital terrain model (DTM) with a 20 × 20 m mesh size, and from topographic maps at a
scale of 1:10,000 created by the Regione Lombardia (Regional Government of Lombardy).
The stream basin was divided into six sub-basins according to the position of minor
tributaries and confluences. The morphological characteristics of each sub-basin, and of the
whole basin, were then identified, with emphasis on those features that would influence the
hydrological behaviour of the stream, especially the concentration time.

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

343

In order to perform both a hydraulic analysis of the Boesio Stream and flood scenario
modelling, an accurate description had to be made of the riverbed geometry and adjacent
floodable areas. A DTM was obtained by processing photogrammetric data from aerial
photographs taken in April 2005 over the Boesio Stream and its floodplain. In order to
create a topographic map with elevation points and contour lines at 0.5 m intervals, the
DTM (.dxf 3D format) was interpolated using “break-lines” that mark sudden changes in
slope on the topographic surface. Upstream and downstream of Cittiglio, 237 sections were
marked every 20–30 m across the riverbed, including the entire floodplain (Fig. 3). Others
were marked upstream and downstream of bridges, protective embankments, bends and
confluences. Sections were exported as a .dxf file that could be used in CAD and GIS
environments. For use in the hydraulic modelling software HEC-RAS®, the file was
converted into an .xyz file.

Hydrologic data The simulation of a real event needs discharge measurements during the
flood or, if these are not available, rainfall data measured by raingauges located in the basin
or in the adjoining catchments. If rainfall measurements only are available, a rainfall–runoff
model must be applied during the hydrological analysis. The simulation of a hypothetical
event requires the use of past series of discharge or rainfall data. Serial data sets on intense
rainfall
intense
in the past were not available for the Boesio catchment. Therefore,
precipitation was analysed for adjoining basins, where intense rainfall data had been
collected by raingauges. In some cases, the old recording raingauges were replaced with
automatic ones that record data every 15 or 30 min. Measurements about past flood events
are also useful for setting the hydraulic parameters of the model and for testing it.

2.3.2 Step 2: hydrological analysis

Hydrological analysis aims to predict the expected discharge of the Boesio Stream for a
given return period, using a rainfall–runoff model
if only rainfall measurements are
available.

Inflow definition In defining a rainfall–runoff model and calculating the rainfall intensity–
duration curves, the lack of 30 years of intense rainfall measurements in the Boesio basin

Fig. 3 Cittiglio municipality: a
3D view of the Boesio valley
bottom, represented by contour
lines. The cross sections of the
Boesio Stream and floodplain are
shown in red

344

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

was a considerable disadvantage. Two approaches were utilised to define these curves: (a)
interpolation methodology [8], using Kriging of the regularised series of rainfall measure-
ments, as recorded by raingauges in the adjacent basins; and (b) the methodology
developed by the VAPI Project (a CNR-GNDCI project for flood evaluation in Italy, [2]),
consisting of a regional statistical model based on a TCEV (Two Component Extreme
Value) distribution, which uses geostatistical estimation of rainfall or discharge at sites
without raingauges.

Runoff coefficient. This essential parameter was defined for each sub-basin according to
two methodologies: (a) the ‘rational’ method uses information about land use and slope in
the basin; and (b) the method proposed by the US Soil Conservation Service (SCS) [12] is
based on the determination of the curve number, which is used in the SCS equation for peak
discharge. The curve number is based on the hydrological soil group and ground cover and
can be determined from a special table.

Determination of peak discharge values. The final phase in the application of the
rainfall–runoff model is the calculation of the peak discharge values for given return
periods. It is essential to define the time of concentration. This can be determined according
to various equations that use morphologic parameters of the basin. In the present study, the
equations propounded in [6, 7, 9, 10, 14] and [12], were used for each sub-basin. The
results differed considerably, so that for each sub-basin the lower times of concentration,
and thus the higher discharge values, were used.

Two methodologies were used to determine peak discharge values: the ‘rational’ method
and SCS method [12]. Discharge values were calculated for each of the six sub-basins for
return periods of 20, 100 and 200 years. The rational equation required knowledge of
morphologic variables of the basin,
the time of
concentration Tc, and the a and n values (parameters of the “rainfall–intensity–duration
curves”). As input to the SCS equation, the SCS method needs the curve number of the
basin, the a and n values and the time of concentration.

including the runoff coefficient c,

2.3.3 Step 3: hydraulic steady flow modelling

In the study area, one-dimensional steady flow modelling was performed using HEC-RAS.
To execute the calculations, the software required data on the morphology of the riverbed
and adjacent floodable areas, along with cross sections, distances between sections,
Manning coefficients, discharge values and topographic contours. Modelling was carried
out using the discharge values calculated according to the rainfall–runoff model for floods
with 20- and 100-year return periods. The output was the absolute free water level in metres
above sea level. The flood levels were marked on all sections (in .dwg format). In order to
delineate the floodable areas, the intersection between the free water surface and the
topographic surface was drawn on a map.

2.3.4 Step 4: event scenarios

A three-dimensional model of the floodwater surface was created using data from the 237
sections: the result was a topographic representation of the flooded area for the scenario
under consideration. These data were used as a layer in a GIS application, making an
intersection with the DTM and thus obtaining a three-dimensional view of the valley
bottom during a flood. The model was calibrated with data from the flood that occurred
over the period 2–5 May 2002 and by comparing the estimated peak discharges with the
measured ones. A comparison was made between the flood-prone area obtained by the

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

345

model and the area flooded in May 2002, as reconstructed using aerial photographs and
surveys. The model corresponded closely to the real event (Fig. 4). In general, differences
were caused by flooding of some of the Boesio’s tributaries, which were not considered in
the model.

2.4 Building vulnerability and stage–damage curves

By definition, vulnerability can be described as the degree of damage to a group of
elements at risk resulting from a natural event with a given intensity. The degree of flood-
induced damage to structures is determined by many factors, including water level, flow
velocity, quantity of suspended and floating load, contaminants in the water and flood
duration. The published literature [5, 11, 13] reports that the depth of flooding is often
considered as the only factor indicative of the magnitude of flood events, which is a
common simplifying assumption. Given a particular type of exposed element, a relationship
can be defined between the depth of flooding and the losses incurred as a percentage of the
element’s total worth (i.e., the degree of damage, see Fig. 5).

Fig. 4 Comparison of the
flooded area resulting from: a the
output of the one-dimensional
model; b post-event surveys and
photo-interpretation

346

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

Fig. 5 Given a particular type of structure, different water levels are uniquely related to different degrees of
damage

Coupling the value of inundation depth with degree of damage enabled us to characterise
the direct effect of floodwater on different types of exposed elements and to define curves
which are generally referred to as stage–damage curves (they are also called loss functions
or vulnerability functions). Each curve should be studied in terms of the effect of floodwaters
on a particular type of exposed element (such as construction type, building dimensions
or road access conditions) and it can be utilised to simulate damage caused by potential
future floods. Nevertheless, it can be difficult to extrapolate data gathered from place to
place to different building types and contents. For this reason, different curves should
be created for different geographical areas and then applied to limited and relatively
homogeneous regions.

The data collected for each structure inundated by the May 2002 flood in the Boesio
basin were employed to develop stage–damage curves. Residential buildings with basements
made up the bulk of the structures damaged. Hence, a stage–damage curve was generated
only for this type of building (Fig. 6). An empirical approach was followed, using
information on losses measured after the flood combined with estimates of water depths.
The curves described the effect of floodwaters on masonry, floor, doors, windows and
installations associated with each structure, and did not consider mobile goods.

For each building the degree of damage was calculated by dividing the economic cost of
repairing structural damage by the value of the ground floor and basement (see section on
the economic evaluation of buildings), as follows:

damage degree (%) = loss ( ) / [ground floor value ( ) + basement value ( )]

About 100 pairs of values of water level and damage degree were plotted on a dispersion
diagram and a stage–damage curve was obtained by linear interpolation. The flood depth
required to develop the curves included both flood levels in basements (negative values)
and the depth of water above the ground surface (positive values).

2.5 Economic evaluation of buildings

If damage is to be quantified it is essential to make a preliminary evaluation of the elements
exposed to flood risk. With regard to buildings, a detailed evaluation was made of each
floodable structure. Estimation of the value of buildings and contents was based on
knowledge of the type of structure and its use. For this, the study area data base required a
layer designed to contain the information and characteristics of all buildings, including
usage, structural type, number of floors, presence or absence of a basement and ground
floor surface area.

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

347

Fig. 6 Stage–damage curves for residential buildings. Comparison between curves constructed by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the USA (after [5]) and the curve obtained for the Boesio Stream
in Lombardy

In Italy, considering only the structure and not the content, the unit value of buildings
(€/m2) is given by the Banca dati delle quotazioni immobiliari, (real estate and property
price database) published in 2005 by the Local Real Estate Market Analysis Services
(Osservatorio del Mercato Immobiliare dell’Agenzia del Territorio, [1]). The estimation of a
building’s unit value is based on its geographical
location, usage and typology. The
database furnishes a minimum and maximum value for each type of building and is updated
every 6 months. It was used to assign a unit value to the buildings in the Boesio basin,
calculating the average between the minimum and maximum values estimated for each type
of structure.

In the Boesio basin the ground floor and basement are the only parts of a building that
are vulnerable to flood damage. In general, floodwaters reach a maximum height of 2 m.
For this reason, and for each building in the flood-prone area, when estimating exposure
only the value of the ground floor plus the basement was considered. The value of the
ground floor was calculated by multiplying its surface area by the unit value. Following the
evaluation criteria of the US Federal Emergency Management Agency [5], the basement
value was expressed as a percentage of the total value of the building. In the study area, the
value of the basement (or cellar, boiler room or garage) was estimated to be about 25% of
that of the ground floor.

2.6 Calculation of expected building damage

During the development of the methodology, a computational model for the assessment of
expected flood damage was created in a GIS environment. Raster information layers in grid
format were employed for this purpose. Using ArcGIS software (ESRI©) and its Spatial
Analyst extension, a geographical analysis was carried out by comparing different raster

348

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

datasets to obtain information by means of superposition and combination. In order to
calculate economic damage to residential buildings caused to Cittiglio by the May 2002
flood, the computational model was applied to the study area

The following information layers stored in the database were utilised:

& Digital terrain model.
& Water surface elevation (expressed in metres above sea level), calculated by hydraulic
modelling. In this study calculated values of water depth were used because they were
more uniformly distributed than those measured in the field after the May 2002 flood.
Moreover, not enough data on floodwater levels were available for built-up areas and
buildings to enable a perform a reliable interpolation to be made.

& A polygonal layer of built-up areas, with buildings classified by usage, typology and
economic unit value in €/m2 (ground floor unit value plus basement unit value).

All the layers compiled as shapefiles were converted into a grid format. In order to
obtain a one-to-one ratio between the cells, the same cell size was set for each of them. This
enabled cells from different grids to be matched with one another directly and operations to
be computed between grid values. Considering the resolution of the data source, a cell
dimension of 1 m was chosen in the conversion of shapefiles to raster files. This is
appropriate to any object or land form with sufficient detail. The built-up area shapefile was
first divided into different layers, each of which contained structures that belonged to a
single category of use, such as residential, production or trade. Only the shapefile of
residential buildings was used subsequently. For all flooded locations, the ground surface
elevation grid (DTM in metres above sea level) was subtracted from the calculated water
surface elevation grid (also expressed in metres above sea level), which resulted in a grid
that contained the flood levels above the mean ground surface (metres).

The expected economic loss was then calculated using the following operations

(see Fig. 7):

(a) The shapefile of residential buildings was used as an analytical mask over the raster
dataset of water depths. This produced a grid of the depths of flooding inside the buildings.
(b) To compensate for the average difference in height between the ground surface level
and the road level, 0.2 m was subtracted from the grid. This produced a grid of flood
levels above the ground floor.

(c) The representation of the vulnerability of residential buildings was accomplished
through a reclassification of the grid of the depths of flooding inside buildings. This
operation allowed a degree of damage to be assigned to each water level according to
the values of the stage–damage curve for residential buildings.

(d) The shapefile of residential buildings was converted to raster format by selecting the
field of the related unit values, in €/m2 (ground floor plus basement unit values). This
produced a grid of the value of buildings.

(e) The raster datasets of unit values and degrees of damage were combined by
multiplying their values. The resulting grid defined the potential loss values in every cell
and its attribute table contained the loss value classes and the related number of cells.
(f) The table related to the loss grid was exported and processed in a spreadsheet. Using
simple addition and multiplication, it was possible to appraise the loss value for
residential buildings in Cittiglio.

The computed loss amounted to €181,000. Losses related to structural damage to
residential buildings and officially declared by Cittiglio Municipality amounted to

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

349

Fig. 7 Calculation of expected flood damage losses

350

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

€110,000. Taking into account the level of approximation of the calculation model and the
need to calibrate the method with other case studies, the difference between the real loss
and the calculated value is ascribable to the damage assessment criteria. Only damage to
principal residences that cost more than €2,500 for was considered refundable and hence
reported, which makes a total loss of €110,000 clearly an undervaluation.

3 Findings

The proposed methodology meets the need of public administrators to obtain a rapid but
approximate estimate of damage after a disaster. It was designed to be used in different
geographical contexts, and where different basic information is available. With the aid of
improvements, such as the elaboration of new stage–damage curves for new types of
exposed elements and the application to other case studies, this method could become a
useful tool for decision-making in land management. It could be used as a forecasting tool,
to define event scenarios or for rapid assessment of damage after a disaster caused by a
natural hazard.

Acknowledgements We would like to thank A. Zamperone for the hydrologic–hydraulic study and D.
Alexander for their suggestions and revising the English text. A particular thanks for the collaboration to
Philip J. Schneider, Director of the Multihazard Loss Estimation Program, National Institute of Building
Sciences, Washington DC.

References

1. Agenzia del Territorio—Osservatorio del Mercato Immobiliare (2007) Banca Dati delle Quotazioni
Immobiliari, Agenzia del Territorio: Italy. Available at www.agenziaterritorio.it/servizi/osservatorioim
mobiliare

2. CNR-GNDCI (1988) Progetto Speciale per la Valutazione delle Piene in Italia: Italy. Available at http://

3. Damage Project (2004) Développement d’Actions pour le Marketing et la Gestion post-évènements,

caronte.gndci.cs.cnr.it/GNDCI/Vapi.htm

Programme INTERREG IIIB Medocc, EU

4. EM-DAT (2007) International Disaster Database, Université Catholique de Louvain: Brussels, Belgium.

5. FEMA (2003) Hazard MH—Multi-hazard Loss Estimation Methodology, Federal Emergency Manage-

Available at www.em-dat.net

ment Agency: USA

6. Giandotti M (1934) Previsione delle piene e delle magre dei corsi d’acqua, Memorie e studi idrografici,

Pubbl. 2 del Servizio Idrografico Italiano: Rome, Italy, Vol. VIII, p 107

7. Giandotti M, Visentini M (1938) Le sistemazioni di un bacino idrografico in generale, Biblioteca della

8. Kottegoda NT, Rosso R (1997) Statistics, probability and reliability for civil and environmental

Bonifica Integrale: Florence, Italy, Vol. 5

engineers. McGraw-Hill, New York

9. Pasini F (1914) Relazione sul progetto della bonifica renana, Bologna, Italy
10. Pezzoli G (1970) Schemi e modelli matematici in idrologia, Libreria editrice universitaria Levrotto &

Bella: Turin, Italy

Australia, p 111

11. Queensland Government (2002) Disaster loss assessment guidelines, Illycroft Pty Ltd: Queensland,

12. U.S. Soil Conservation Service (1986) Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,

13. Van der Sande C (2001) River flood damage assessment using IKONOS imagery, E.C. Joint Research

USDA (U.S. Department of Agriculture): USA

Centre & S.A.I.: Ispra, Italy, p 77

14. Ventura G (1905) Sulla bonifica della bassa pianura Bolognese, Giornale del Genio Civile: Italy

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

351

Dr. Fabio Luino He received a degree in geology from Turin University in 1987, and is an Expert with the
National Civil Protection and Emergency Service, studying urbanized areas affected by natural processes and
evaluating geological risk in urban planning. He is also in charge of the “Territorial Data Management”
section, including the library, photographic and film libraries, historical archive and map collection. Scientific
Secretary and Editor of the Conference Proceedings for the International Conference “Prevention of
Hydrogeological Hazards: the role of scientific research” (Nov. 1996). The 1999 visiting scientist in the ITC
of Enschede (The Netherlands). He is currently a researcher of the Italian National Research Council,
Research Institute for Geo-hydrological Protection located in Turin. His research interests include floods,
landslides and muddy-debris flows. He is studying these natural processes from a geomorphological and
historical perspective with an emphasis on urban planning applications.

Chiara Giorgia Cirio She graduated in Geology with first-class honours at the University of Turin in
November 2002. Since 2004 she has collaborated as fellowship holder at
the Research Institute for
Geohydrological Protection of Turin (IRPI Turin) of the Italian National Research Council. Her research
interests include geomorphological studies in fluvial dynamic and muddy-debris flow processes, flood risk
evaluation and damage estimation, and development of spatial and spatio-temporal databases. All her studies
are based on GIS-based application and modelling.

352

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

Marcella Biddoccu Environmental engineer and fellowship holder at the Research Institute for Geo-
hydrological Protection (IRPI-CNR) of Turin since 2005. Her research uses data collection and analysis to
develop a methodology for flood damage evaluation and to create a data base of debris flow phenomena in
Lombardy.

Andrea Agangi He graduated in Geology. His research interests include hazard and risk assessment, fluvial
the Research Institute for Geo-
evolution in Alpine environment. He was a fellowship holder at
hydrogeological Protection (IRPI-CNR) of Turin from 2004–2006.

Walter Giulietto Geologist and fellowship holder at
the Research Institute for Geohydrogeological
Protection (IRPI-CNR) of Turin from 2004–2006. He is studying the interaction between ground instability
in natural processes and human activities in fluvial environments.

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:339–353

353

Franco Godone Specialized technician at Research Institute for Geohydrogeological Protection (IRPI-CNR)
of Turin since 1972. He is engaged in topographical and aerophotogrammetrical surveys and data analysis in
the alpine regions.

Guido Nigrelli He is a Naturalist, studying pluviometric and climatic aspects of the hydrographic basins in
northern Italy. He is also analyzing meteor-hydrologic characterization of extreme events.

