bs_bs_banner

Research Article

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00): 00–00

Identifying Environmental and Human Factors Associated
With Tick Bites using Volunteered Reports and Frequent
Pattern Mining

Irene Garcia-Mart(cid:2)ı,(cid:2) Raul Zurita-Milla,(cid:2) Arno Swart,†
Kees C. van den Wijngaard,† Arnold J.H. van Vliet,‡
Sita Bennema† and Margriet Harms†
(cid:2)Faculty of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation (ITC), University of Twente,
Enschede
†Centre for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven
‡Environmental Systems Analysis Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen

Abstract
Tick populations and tick-borne diseases like Lyme borreliosis have been steadily increasing since the mid-
1990s. Realizing the threat that ticks pose to public health, two Dutch citizen science projects have collected
tick bite reports since 2006. This unique volunteered geographical dataset, which currently has nearly
35,000 reports, was used to identify environmental and other circumstantial factors associated with tick
bites. For this, we ﬁrst enriched the tick bite reports with temperature, precipitation, vegetation and volun-
teered data associated with the location of the tick bite. Using this enriched dataset, we then derived a series
of features to characterize the environmental and volunteer-related conditions in which each tick bite
occurred. Next, we discretized these features using the Jenks Natural Breaks algorithm and, after that, we
mined frequent environmental patterns associated with tick bites using the AprioriClose algorithm. Finally,
we checked that these patterns are speciﬁcally associated with the tick bites by comparing them with the fre-
quent patterns mined from pseudo-random locations. The frequent patterns were visualized using heat maps
and ring maps and two representative patterns associated with tick bites were projected into geographic
space to study their spatio-temporal distribution. Our results show that factors linked to human activity are
more relevant to model tick bites than seasonal accumulations of temperature, vegetation or precipitation. In
particular, the number of warm and dry days per season are present in a signiﬁcant number of patterns and
the majority of tick bites are produced within a distance of half a kilometer of a forest, recreational or built-
up area. The study of patterns in the time-series revealed that there are several persistent patterns consistently
occurring each year and the validation process showed that the volunteer tick bites collection is capturing
environmental conditions associated with tick bites, suggesting that these reports have a high scientiﬁc value.
These results support the creation of a Dutch tick bite risk map that, in turn, will open the door to the design
of public health interventions to reduce the incidence of Lyme disease.

1 Introduction

Tick populations and tick-borne infections like Lyme borreliosis have been steadily increasing
since the mid-1990s. This concurrent increase has been observed in different European coun-
tries (Heyman et al. 2010; Jaenson et al. 2009), in the US (Subak 2003; Tuite et al. 2013) and
in Canada (Ogden et al. 2014). In the Netherlands, more than 20,000 people per year develop

Address for correspondence: Irene Garcia-Mart(cid:2)ı, Faculty of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation (ITC), University of Twente
Geo-Information Processing, PO Box 2177500 AE Enschede, Overijssel, Netherlands 7500. E-mail: i.garciamarti@utwente.nl

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/tgis.12211

2 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

Lyme borreliosis (Hofhuis et al. 2015), and its disease burden is substantial, especially in
patients that develop long-term persisting symptoms.

Global environmental change is pushing the distribution of ticks northwards, modifying its
spatio-temporal dynamics and increasing the abundance of ticks in nature (Medlock et al.
2013). Previous research efforts in the ﬁeld of mathematics, biology and environmental model-
ing have found a tight relationship between wildlife (Ostfeld et al. 2006), environment condi-
tions (Swart et al. 2014; Tack et al. 2013), weather (Medlock et al. 2013) and tick populations.
However, the increase of tick populations does not necessarily translate into more tick bites,
because we need to account for outdoor human recreational activities, which are a crucial fac-
tor in Lyme disease monitoring. Outdoor recreational activities (e.g. visits to natural areas,
parks or gardens) increase the exposure of humans to ticks and also increase the chances of get-
ting a tick bite while engaged in outdoor activities. Thanks to advances in ICT it is now possi-
ble to collect geospatially-enabled tick bite reports and start citizen science projects with
information directly provided by people who have been bitten by a tick. This geospatially-
enabled data is also known as Volunteered Geographic Information or VGI (Goodchild 2007).
Despite the well-known problems associated with VGI, such as quality and accuracy
(Goodchild and Li 2012; Mehdipoor et al. 2015), a remarkable number of volunteer projects
have been created or re-invigorated in the last decade. Comparatively however, the number of
efforts incorporating volunteer information to a scientiﬁc workﬂow is still limited (Mehdipoor
et al. 2015; Rosemartin et al. 2015). In 2006, Wageningen University started collecting volun-
teer tick bites through the educational phenology platform Natuurkalender (NK; “nature’s cal-
endar”, http://www.natuurkalender.nl), gathering nearly 10,000 volunteered tick bites in six
years. This pioneering project attracted the attention of the Dutch National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM) and in 2012, the platform Tekenradar (TR; “tick radar”,
http://www.tekenradar.nl) was launched together with Wageningen University. TR is a web
platform especially conceived to inform citizens about the risk and prevention of tick bites and
at the same time a citizen science platform to collect volunteer tick bites and observe erythema
migrans (red rash around the tick bite, indicative of infection). In slightly more than three
years, TR has collected nearly 25,000 volunteer observations. Both projects, to the best of our
knowledge, are the ﬁrst citizen science projects in the world that speciﬁcally focus on ticks and
tick-borne diseases.

At present there is an insufﬁcient understanding of the factors that determine tick bite risk.
Previous research efforts based on volunteered tick bite reports have identiﬁed risky landscapes,
activities and vulnerable age groups (Mulder et al. 2013). However, no studies have simultane-
ously analyzed the importance of weather data and remotely sensed vegetation indices, and vol-
unteered data to identify the environmental and human factors associated with tick bites to
map them in the geographic space. In this research we will tackle these issues by identifying fre-
quent environmental patterns associated with tick bite reports. This research opens the way for
creating a national tick bite risk map and for designing interventions that will decrease the
number of tick bites and reduce the incidence of Lyme disease.

2 Data and Methods

2.1 Volunteered Tick Bite Reports

This study is based on the collection of tick bite reports collected by the NK and the TR initia-
tives. The NK dataset contains 9,256 observations registered between 2006 and 2012 and the
TR dataset contains 24,584 observations registered from March 2012 to November 2014. This

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

3

relatively large number of tick bites reports was achieved because both initiatives received sub-
stantial media attention in the Netherlands (http://bit.ly/1zmutLX; Tekenradar.nl, een webplat-
form over tekenbeten en de ziekte van Lyme) (van Vliet et al. 2014). The TR attracted more
observations than NK mainly due to the fact that TR also provided the possibility of sending in
ticks for analysis and because it included a daily and dynamic spatially speciﬁc tick activity
forecast that attracted a lot of media and visitors.

The tick bite reports were ﬁrst ﬁltered to remove records without a geographic coordinate
(i.e. volunteer did not specify a location) and to remove records outside of the boundaries of
the Netherlands. After that, a total of 28,865 valid observations were found. Figure 1 shows
the geographical distribution of all the reports for the period 2006–2014. There is a clear spa-
tial clustering along the coast and in the center part of the country, which are likely driven by
human activity patterns during leisure time in combination with tick densities in nature. De
Hoge Veluwe National Park, the Utrechtse Heuvelrug forest, the recreational areas of the West
Frisian Islands and along the coast, are typical tick habitats and have a high human recreational
pressure.

The ﬁltered collection of tick bite reports was used to extract the volunteered-related data
reported along with the tick bite report: date, year of birth, address, type of environment where
the tick bite occurred (e.g. forest, garden, park) and activity the person was carrying out when
he/she got bitten by a tick (e.g. walking, picking fruits, gardening). See Section 2.3.1.1 for more
details about these categories. The address ﬁeld is free-text and volunteers report their home
address with more or less detail. Therefore, some records contain a postal code with six digits
(which identiﬁes a range of houses or buildings in the same street) and some others have a
coarser resolution, by only indicating the neighborhood in a city or the city itself. To create a
more standardized data set, we used geocoding services to extract the postal code, street
address, municipality subdivision, municipality and province whenever possible. More speciﬁ-
cally, we used the geocoding service from the Dutch National Spatial Data Infrastructure
(PDOK) (https://www.pdok.nl/). This service exposes a REST interface that receives a string of
data and returns a XML ﬁle with the structured address belonging to this string.

Finally, we re-projected the original coordinates of the TR dataset, which were in decimal
degrees
the Netherlands
(EPSG:28992, RD_New). The reason for this change is that NK reports were already in
RD_New and also because GIS software is usually faster with projected coordinates.

to the ofﬁcial coordinate system of

(EPSG:4326, WGS84),

2.2 Environmental Data

The tick-related literature indicates that temperature, precipitation, soil moisture, air humidity
and vegetation type determine both tick presence and tick dynamics in a given area. In the fol-
lowing sections we describe the environmental datasets used to represent these variables.

2.2.1 Weather data

Weather data was obtained from the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)
(https://data.knmi.nl/portal/KNMI-DataCentre.html#). Concretely, we used daily gridded
(1 km) temperature and precipitation data for the period 2006-2014. These weather layers are
an interpolation of 34 automatic weather stations scattered across the country. Temperature
determines the start of the questing season, tick population development rate and the survival
probability through winter (Ogden et al. 2006; Randolph et al. 2008). Precipitation is neces-
sary during the hot summer season to sustain tick populations (Bennet et al. 2006). Besides
that, precipitation during spring (especially in May) may contribute to increasing the

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

4 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

Figure 1 Geographic projection of the volunteer tick bites observations for the period 2006–2014.
Each black dot represents a tick bite report

prevalence of tick bites and Lyme disease during summer (Jore et al. 2014). Lyme disease cases
in the northeastern US were positively correlated with precipitation during May and June of
the same years, but not with the precipitation of the previous ones (McCabe and Bunnell
2011).

2.2.2 Vegetation indicators

Ticks are particularly sensitive to the thickness of forest canopy and soil moisture at the litter
level (Medlock et al. 2013). Earth observation satellites enable monitoring these environmental
conditions over large areas. This is why tick populations have been modeled by combining
weather variables and satellite-derived vegetation indices (Barrios et al. 2012; Estrada-Pe~na
et al. 2012). In this research, we used three vegetation indices: (1) the Normalized Difference

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

5

Vegetation Index (NDVI); (2) the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI); and (3) the Normalized
Difference Water Index (NDWI).

NDVI has traditionally been used to measure vegetation greenness and density. Previous
studies have shown that the ﬂuctuations in NDVI correlate well with the number of nymph and
adult ticks at different moments of the year (Estrada-Pe~na 2001; Randolph 2000). More recent
studies show that novel vegetation indices like the EVI are better indicators of tick abundance
(Estrada-Pe~na et al. 2011) and that indices that measure the water content of vegetation (e.g.
the NDWI) might outperform NDVI and EVI for tick population modeling (Barrios Gonz(cid:2)alez
2013).

All three vegetation indices were obtained for the period 2006-2014 from the Google
Earth Engine (GEE) platform (https://ee-api.appspot.com/; https://earthengine.google.org/
#intro). GEE is a free image processing cloud platform for environmental analysis, which
aggregates products coming from different Earth observation sensors, such as the Moderate-
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS). MODIS provides daily global imagery at
250, 500 and 1000 m of spatial resolution. However, due to the persistent cloud coverage over
the Netherlands we used MODIS composite products. In particular, we used the MCD43A4
product, which provides the NDVI, EVI and NDWI indices as derived from daily surface reﬂec-
tance at 500 m spatial resolution and using data of the previous 16 days. This product is
released every eight days so there is a 50% temporal overlap between each composite.

2.2.3 Land use and soil data

Previous works have shown the inﬂuence of land use and landscape composition on the spatial
distribution of Lyme disease (Lambin et al. 2010). Land use is related to human exposure
because it determines human presence in a particular location, e.g. recreation, agriculture,
urban area (Linard et al. 2007). The chances of humans being bitten by ticks depend on the
exposure and interaction of people with different land uses, especially forested areas (Vanwam-
beke et al. 2010). Soil type favors the growing of certain species of trees that, in turn, are more
or less capable of sustaining wildlife. For example, previous works have shown that coniferous
stands tend to present lower tick densities than deciduous forests (Tack et al. 2012).

In this study, land use information was obtained from a map produced by the Dutch Cen-
tral Bureau for Statistics (CBS). This map (BBG2008) contains 14 different types of land use;
here, however, we grouped classes referring to transportation and built-up areas and several
agricultural land uses to create a map with the following categories: agriculture, built-up, dry
terrain, forest, recreation, transportation, water and wet terrain. We also used the national soil
type map produced by Alterra (http://www.geodata.alterra.nl/Grondsoorten.htm), a research
institute at Wageningen University. This map contains 10 different types of soil, which were
also reduced to seven classes: clay, built-up, gravel, loam, peat, sand, and water. We also
included a Physical Geography layer that contains the 10 main physiographic units: clay area,
dunes, fenlands, Dutch hills, inlets, intertidal zone, river lands, sandy soils, North Sea and
other.

2.3 Mining Frequent Patterns

The data mining workﬂow designed to identify frequent patterns in the tick bite reports con-
sisted of three main steps: (1) generation of features from the environmental datasets and vol-
unteered tick bite reports; (2) classiﬁcation of the features with the Jenks Natural Breaks
algorithm in order to discretize the input data; and (3) extraction of the most frequent patterns
using the AprioriClose algorithm.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

6 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

2.3.1 Feature engineering

Feature engineering is a typical machine learning process to obtain new variables that incorpo-
rate the knowledge of a particular domain to create prediction and classiﬁcation models. In our
case, we obtained features from the original data sources mentioned in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
The aim of these features is to characterize each tick bite report using the environmental and
volunteered datasets. In this work we are using 39 features (Table 1) classiﬁed in six different
types: Temperature (T), Precipitation (P), Vegetation (V), Volunteer (R), Soil (S) and Distances
(D). In addition to the type, each of the features can be continuous or discrete, depending if
they are representing a variable aggregated in a particular time window or expressing a point
value, respectively. The following subsections detail the features used in this experiment.

2.3.1.1 Features derived from the volunteered tick bites reports. Features directly derived
from the volunteered reports (indices 29-33, Type R) and from the location of the tick bites
(indices 37-39, Type D) are shown in Table 1. First we extracted the type of environment and
activity the volunteer reported and we encoded both of them in eight different categories. The
environment-related categories which the volunteer can report online, comprise the following
ﬁxed categories: dunes, forest, garden, heath lands, meadow, urban park, wetland and other.
Note that this feature is subject to the user knowing where the tick bite occurred and about his/
her perception/knowledge of natural spaces. The activities the volunteer can report online con-
sist of the following categories: gardening, picnic, picking fruits, playing, walking, walking
with the dog, other and not reported. The ages of the volunteers were classiﬁed in three catego-
ries: children (0-17), adults (18-60) and elderly (>60). This process of aggregating data to a
coarser level of detail eases the process of ﬁnding patterns in data. We also extracted the day of
the week when each tick bite occurred and we calculated the distance to the closest forest
patch, recreational area and urban area with the aim of identifying risky areas.

2.3.1.2 Features derived from environmental data. The weather and satellite-derived vege-
tation indices were aggregated to a seasonal scale (i.e. spring, summer, autumn and winter),
with the intention of capturing intra annual clusters in tick bites reports. Using this temporal
scale allowed us to obtain two different types of climatic and vegetation features: continuous
accumulative features and discrete features. The accumulative features consist of obtaining the
seasonal accumulation of the variable by adding the daily values for each tick bite location
using the weather (temperature and precipitation) and vegetation (NDVI, EVI and NDWI)
datasets. This accumulation captures the seasonal variability in each tick bite location and pro-
vides hints about if this place is “greener” or “warmer” than other places in the Netherlands.
In this way, we obtained 20 accumulative features (indices 1-5, 9-12 and 17-28 in Table 1;
Type T, P and V, respectively). We also calculated the temperature accumulation between 1st
January until the date of the tick bite, with the aim of capturing the temporal structure associ-
ated to each tick bite report. For instance, tick bites occurring in spring have a smaller tempera-
ture accumulation than those from autumn.

Discrete features are counters of days where a particular condition was matched (indices
6-8, 13-16 in Table 1; Type T and P, respectively). Human activities in nature might be the
main driver for tick bites occurrence, therefore, being able to identify if good weather condi-
tions are directly linked with tick bites, could provide solid hints on how to model this phenom-
enon in the future. For each tick bite location in the dataset, we used the daily weather data to
count the number of days per season above three temperature thresholds (i.e. 20, 25 and 308C)
and we counted the number of days per season with no rain registered. Finally, we also
extracted the type of land use, soil type and physiographic unit (indices 34-36, Type S in Table

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

7

Table 1
tion), V (Vegetation), R (Volunteer’s reports), S (Soil), D (Distance)

List of features used in this work. Column type stands for: T (Temperature), P (Precipita-

ID

Feature Name

Short Description

Type

1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

Accspr
Accsum
Accaut
accwin
Accd

d20
d25
d30
precspr
precsum
precaut
precwin
norainspr
norainsum
norainaut
norainwin
ndvispr
ndvisum
ndviaut
ndwiwin
evispr
evisum
eviaut
eviwin
ndwispr
ndwisum
ndwiaut
ndwiwin
weekday
Woy
Env
Actv
agegroup
landuse
Soil
Fisio
dforests
drecreation
dbuiltup

Accumulation of spring mean temperature
Accumulation of summer mean temperature
Accumulation of autumn mean temperature
Accumulation of winter mean temperature
Accumulation of temperature from 1st January until

the date of the tick bite

Number of days in a year with temperature over 208C
Number of days in a year with temperature over 258C
Number of days in a year with temperature over 308C
Accumulation of spring precipitation
Accumulation of summer precipitation
Accumulation of autumn precipitation
Accumulation of winter precipitation
Number of days in spring without precipitation
Number of days in summer without precipitation
Number of days in autumn without precipitation
Number of days in winter without precipitation
Accumulation of NDVI in spring
Accumulation of NDVI in summer
Accumulation of NDVI in autum
Accumulation of NDVI in winter
Accumulation of EVI in spring
Accumulation of EVI in summer
Accumulation of EVI in autumn
Accumulation of EVI in winter
Accumulation of NDWI in spring
Accumulation of NDWI in summer
Accumulation of NDWI in autumn
Accumulation of NDWI in winter
Day of the week when the tick bite occurred
Week of the year when the tick bite occurred
Type of environment where the tick bite occurred
Type of activity carried out when the tick bite occurred
Age group of the volunteer
Type of land use in the location of the tick bite
Type of soil in the location of the tick bite
Physiographic unit in the location of the tick bite
Distance to the closest forest
Distance to the closest recreation area
Distance to the closest built-up area

T
T
T
T
T

T
T
T
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
R
R
R
R
R
S
S
S
D
D
D

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

8 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

1). These three features contain discrete data in the form of class label categories (e.g. sandy
soil, agricultural lands or built-up area).

2.3.2 Classiﬁcation of features

The feature engineering process (Section 2.3.1) resulted in a table with 39 features (Table 1)
where each row is unique and, therefore, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd frequent patterns. To overcome
this problem, we used the Jenks Natural Breaks (Jenks 1967) algorithm to convert all non-
categorical features into discrete classes, because categorical features (e.g. land use, soil type,
activity carried out by the volunteer) are already classiﬁed.

The Jenks Natural Breaks (JNB) algorithm ﬁnds optimal class thresholds by minimizing
the intra cluster variance and maximizing the distance between classes in continuous features.
The chosen Python implementation of this algorithm (https://github.com/perrygeo/jenks) needs
an initial parameter to ﬁnd the number of breaks in data. The optimal number of classes was
found by iteratively testing all values between 2 and 10 and calculating the goodness of var-
iance ﬁt (GFV) of the resulting classiﬁcation. The GFV measures how well a statistical linear
model ﬁts data by yielding a value between 0 (worst ﬁt) and 1 (best ﬁt). We selected as optimal
the ﬁrst classiﬁcation that yielded a GFV equal or larger than 0.8. Results were visualized using
a stacked bar graph (Figure 2) that shows the classes found for each of the features.

2.3.3 Frequent patterns in tick bite locations

Frequent environmental conditions associated to tick bites were mined using the closed form of
the Apriori algorithm. This version applies a closure operation to features, by limiting the search
space to frequent closed item sets, which is usually smaller than the frequent item sets. This
means fewer operations need to be done, improving the performance of the original algorithm.

The Apriori algorithm (Agrawal and Srikant 1994) is one of the most popular algorithms
for discovering frequent association rules in large datasets. A frequent association rule is
deﬁned as an ordered item set that appears in data in, at least, minsup percent (0-100%) of the
data. The notion of this minimum support, minsup, is an important concept in the Apriori algo-
rithm. Support is the number of repetitions an item set has been seen in input data. For each
tick bite observation (item set) appearing in data, a new node is created and propagated down
the tree to a leaf or root position. Each node contains a “hit counter” with the number of repe-
titions of the item set that is updated as long as new tick bite observations are read. The mini-
mum support deﬁned by the user implies that only nodes containing a number of repetitions
bigger than this threshold are kept for the patterns extraction. Thus, if this parameter is set to
low values, it means that the threshold to include a pattern is also low, and the patterns
obtained are longer in number of items. Contrarily, if the parameter is set to high values, it
means that the user is only interested in keeping patterns with a very high frequency, and this is
prone to produce shorter patterns.

One of the major drawbacks of Apriori is its slow performance for moderately big input
transactions. The number of candidates generated grows exponentially and thus its efﬁciency is
low. Therefore, we have used in this work an enhanced version of the original algorithm that
limits the search space to item sets that accomplish a closure property, improving its general
performance. AprioriClose (Pasquier et al. 1999), works by only generating candidates that are
not included in any superset having exactly the same support. Thus, the output of this algo-
rithm guarantees that only the maximal superset values are generated, reducing the number of
patterns obtained.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

9

Figure 2 Number of tick bite reports per classiﬁed feature. For each feature, the numbers repre-
sent the upper and lower thresholds of the classes identiﬁed by the JNB algorithm. Temperature
thresholds are expressed in degrees Celsius, precipitation in millimeters, vegetation indices in sea-
sonal accumulations, discrete features are expressed in either categories or in number of days
and distances are in meters. For a complete description of the features see Table 1

The chosen platform for the frequent pattern mining operation is SPMF (http://www.phil-
ippe-fournier-viger.com/spmf/index.php) (Fournier-Viger et al. 2014), which is a Java-based
open-source platform specialized in pattern ﬁnding. The closure operation in the AprioriClose
algorithm implies that an operation with two frequent patterns yields a pattern that is also a
frequent pattern. This rule reduces the search space and, therefore, the number of operations
performed by the algorithm, improving its performance compared to the original algorithm.

AprioriClose requires a matrix of integers, therefore the discretized table with JNB was
encoded accordingly for the processing. For this purpose, we encoded each observation in 39
items of six digits as follows: the ﬁrst pair of digits was ﬁxed to 99, to avoid ﬁlling with zeros
the header of the number; the second pair of digits indicated which of the 39 features is in use
and the last pair of digits indicated the class within the feature. In this work we used a

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

10 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

minimum support of minsup 25%, because constraining the algorithm more by increasing
minsup only produced patterns of length 1 or 2, which are not informative.

To study the effect of data imbalance, we performed the frequent pattern operation in
both collections separately with two goals: (1) to see if both collections consistently identify the
relevant features; and (2) to analyze if there is any transference of information from NK to TR
that can set up time-persistent patterns. Both points are required to know if the data imbalance
favorable to TR is actually driving the tick bites phenomenon. The same process of feature
engineering described in Section 2.3.1 was applied to NK and TR separately to obtain the cor-
responding table of features. After this, we applied the same Jenks Natural Breaks classiﬁcation
used with the tick bites reports and mined the most frequent patterns using AprioriClose with
the same input parameter (minsup525%). To ease the visual exploration of patterns, we have
used three types of graphical elements: (1) heat maps in Python to summarize the patterns pro-
duced in each experiment; (2) interactive ring maps in Javascript to give a general overview of
the relevance of features in patterns; and (3) maps to display two selected patterns in geo-
graphic space. Heat maps offer a compact representation of patterns, useful to explore the fre-
quency of appearance of the features and its classes. Ring maps provide a quick overview of the
type of the patterns produced by AprioriClose. Ring maps depict patterns in a series of concen-
tric rings, where each ring represents a feature identiﬁed in the pattern. Each ring is divided in
segments that will contain the type of a speciﬁc feature. We have assigned to each type of fea-
ture a different color: (1) Red represents temperature features (Type T); (2) blue is precipitation
(Type P); (3) green are the vegetation indices (Type V); (4) pink are the volunteer features
(Type R); (5) yellow are distance features (Type D); and (6) brown represents soil type and
land use (Type S). The size of the segments is variable, depending on the number of patterns
found using a particular feature. Thus, interpreting ring maps requires moving from the inner
to the outer ring, only moving to a new segment if it is adjacent to the previous one, to under-
stand the combinations of features found in data. Maps are helpful to explore the spatio-
temporal distribution of the tick bites reports associated with a particular pattern. For this pur-
pose, we have selected two time-persistent patterns (i.e. occurring every year in the time series)
and projected them in geographic space.

2.4 Frequent Environmental Patterns in the Netherlands

The patterns mined from the tick bites reports collection are patterns expected to be capturing
environmental conditions associated with tick bites; however, they might also contain typical
conditions found in the Netherlands. To be able to remove such patterns that are just typical or
average Dutch conditions we mined patterns in a pseudo-random locations dataset and com-
pared the patterns yielded by the two collections. The underlying idea is that patterns occurring
in both the tick bite reports and the random locations are likely a reﬂection of the average situa-
tion in the Netherlands and thus, are not discriminating and should be removed from further
analysis.

The pseudo-random locations were generated by choosing a random point within a 10 km
buffer around each tick bite location. For the calculation of the features as described in Section
2.3.1, this random point was assigned the date of the corresponding tick bite report. We thus
generated the “validation” random dataset keeping a certain spatio-temporal structure resem-
bling the tick bites distribution; this is stricter than generating random points in space and
time, as these might fall on land types that clearly are non-tick habitats and/or in time intervals
that fall outside of the typical activity period – e.g. hard freeze periods. It is important to

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

11

highlight that volunteered-based features (Type R, Table 1) were not included in this validation
experiment, due to the impossibility of knowing them for these particular locations.

The features obtained from the pseudo-random locations were ﬁrst discretized using the
JNB classiﬁcation obtained for the tick bite reports and then we mined the most frequent pat-
terns using AprioriClose with a minsup of 25%. As with the tick bites, results are shown using
heat and ring maps.

3 Results

3.1 Classiﬁcation of Features

The application of the JNB algorithm to the non-categorical features deﬁned in Section 2.3.1
yielded both the optimal number of classes for each feature and their upper and lower break
values. Using these break values we created a discretized version of the features. Figure 2 shows
the number of tick bite reports per feature and per class. Features are presented in the same
order shown in Table 1 (i.e. temperature, precipitation, vegetation, volunteer, soil and distan-
ces) and, for readability reasons, seasonal temperature accumulations were divided by 90
(number of standard days in a season) to calculate averages, as these are easier to interpret.

Figure 2 also shows JNB discretized most of the non-categorical features into three classes,
although some of them were discretized into two (i.e. d25) or four classes (i.e. NDWI indices).
Additionally, it shows that accumulative features tend to have a similar number of tick bites
reports per class whereas discrete features have differing numbers of tick bites per class. For
instance, temperature and precipitation accumulations in spring, autumn and winter contain a
similar number of tick bites per class. Therefore, it is not possible to study the effect of a warm/
cold or rainy/dry seasons over the number of tick bites reports using this kind of feature. How-
ever, discrete features seem to be more discriminative. For instance, the features that count the
number of days with a temperature over a threshold (i.e. d20, d25, d30 in Table 1), show
classes that contain a signiﬁcant portion of the tick bites reports. Here we see the expected posi-
tive correlation between warm summers and the number of tick bites. Moreover, features that
count the numbers of non-rainy days (i.e. norainspr, norainsum, norainaut, norainwin in
Table 1) show that the drier the season, the more the tick bites.

Vegetation features show that most of the tick bites occurred either close to the peak of
greenness of deciduous and mixed forests or in evergreen forests, because the NDVI and EVI
values are relatively high. The NDWI-based features indicate that most tick bites occur in
medium-to-high moisture levels, which is in line with the fact that ticks need moisture condi-
tions to survive (Barrios et al. 2012). In addition, the fact that people tend to engage in recrea-
tional activities in nature during the summer break (when there is in an advanced state of
greenness), could also explain that the majority of tick bites reports are produced in similar
vegetation and moisture conditions.

The feature landuse shows that most of the reports come from forests, built-up areas
(including gardens and parks) and agricultural lands. Landuse also shows that tick bites are dis-
tributed evenly across these three classes, meaning that not only forests, the natural habitat for
ticks, pose a risk for humans. The features soil and physio show that most of the tick bites
occur in sandy soils. Distance features, dforests, drecreational and dbuiltup, show that the
majority of tick bites occur quite close to these types of land uses. Concretely, most volunteers
report their tick bites from locations that are at a maximum distance of 450 m of a forest,
525 m of a recreational area or 575 m of a built-up area. In fact, the number of tick bites pro-
duced in built-up areas and the information derived from the distance-based features, suggest

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

12 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

that most of the tick bites occur in peri-urban residential areas, where different types of land-
scape are mixed.

Regarding the volunteer features, the week of the year in which the tick bite was reported
(woy) shows that most tick bites occur between weeks 19 and 26 (i.e. May to mid-June) and
weeks 26 to 34 (i.e. mid-June to mid-August). Remarkably, the number of tick bite reports for
these two periods is similar. The feature dayofweek shows that most of the observations are
reported on Saturday and Sunday, when people have more time for outdoor leisure activities,
as conﬁrmed by the features actv and env, which show that most volunteers were gardening,
playing or walking in forests. The feature agegroup shows that most of the reports refer to chil-
dren (below 18 years of age) and elderly people (older than 60 years of age). These results
might be used by decision-makers to target further Lyme-disease prevention campaigns.

3.2 Mining Frequent Patterns

This section presents the results of applying the AprioriClose algorithm to the features associ-
ated with the complete tick bites collection (NK1TR). After that, and to evaluate and validate
these patterns, we present the results of separately mining the patterns associated with the NK
and TR datasets to study the impact of data imbalance and mining the patterns associated with
random locations to determine common environmental conditions in the study area.

3.2.1 Frequent patterns associated with all the tick bites reports

The application of AprioriClose to the JNB-classiﬁed features associated with tick bites loca-
tions resulted in a total of 429 patterns with lengths ranging from one to four items. Notice
that patterns with one and two items are deemed uninteresting. The list of patterns yielded
shows that there is an apparent tie between continuous (i.e. accumulations and distances) and
discrete (i.e. counters and categories) features. Out of the 62 patterns with three and four items,
31 contain two or three continuous features and 31 contain two or three discrete features.
However, out of the 31 with continuous features, only four contain temperature accumulations
and the remainder mainly contain distance features. Regarding the discrete features, the combi-
nations of the number of warm days with non-rainy days appear eight times in patterns. This
means that spring and summer seasons with little rain and warm weather, which are more
favorable conditions for outdoor activities, are related to a higher number of tick bites regard-
less of temperature accumulations. In this case, distance features also appear in a large number
of patterns, a behavior in line with the large number of tick bites produced at a maximum dis-
tance of 500 m (Figure 2) away from a forest, recreational or built-up area. Figure 3a shows a
heat map summarizing the 62 patterns produced with all tick bites locations. The horizontal
axis represents the 39 features used in this work (Table 1) and the vertical axis the classes that
JNB identiﬁed (Figure 2). The grayscale assigns a frequency to the features and classes found
frequent after mining patterns with AprioriClose. Note that feature soil has been moved to a
different position to make the chart more compact.

Figure 4 provides a general overview of the patterns found by AprioriClose using ring
maps. There is a clear difference between both images: while patterns with three items present
more heterogeneity in the features they contain, patterns with four items are clearly dominated
by accumulative temperature features. It is important to highlight that Figure 4 (left) show that
distance, temperature and soil type features are present in most of the combinations and precip-
itation features appear a reasonable number of times. Figure 4 (left) shows two patterns
marked with a white dot (patterns 5 and 6, Table 2). Each feature in the pattern corresponds to
one of the segments starting from the inner ring and moving to the outer ring.

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

13

Figure 3 Heat maps showing the frequency of features and classes for NK1TR (a), TR (b), NK (c)
and random locations (d) for patterns with three and four items. The horizontal axis lists all the
features created for this work (Table 1) and the vertical axis indicates the class that has been iden-
tiﬁed in the frequent patterns (Figure 2)

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

14 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

Figure 4 Ring maps for the patterns of length 3 (left) and 4 (right) that have a minimum support
of 25% in the complete tick bites collection (NK1TR). Each ring represents a feature identiﬁed in
each pattern, the width of the segment the number of times a feature has appeared in the pat-
terns and segments marked with a white dot illustrate how to interpret ring maps, by moving
from the inner to the outer rings

Table 2
tures see Table 1. The frequency refers to the number of times each pattern appears in NK1TR

Patterns of length 3 found in NK, TR and NK1TR. For a complete description of the fea-

#

Feature

Class

Feature Class

Feature

Class

Frequency

0C–3C
0C–3C
0C–3C
5C–8C
2–6 days

D25
1 Accwin
D25
2 Accwin
D25
3 Accwin
D20
4 Accwin
Drec
5 D30
soil
6 Weekday Weekends
Fisio
Soil
Sandy soil
7
Drec
Fisio
Sandy soil
8
0–463 meters drec
9 dforests

14–41 days
14–41 days
14–41 days
37–55 days
0–525 meters Dbuiltup
dforest
Sandy soil
dforests
Sandy soil
0–525 meters Dbuiltup
0–525 meters Dbuiltup

D30
Norainsum 49–69 days
Dforests
D25

2–6 days

9669
8357
0–463 meters 8026
8277
0–14 days
0–571 meters 7332
0–463 meters 8755
0–463 meters 11823
0–571 meters 7407
0–571 meters 8161

3.2.2 Frequent patterns associated with NK and TR reports

The application of AprioriClose to the features associated with the NK reports produced 453
patterns, ranging from one to four items. The same operation applied to TR features resulted in
762 patterns, ranging from one to seven items. The difference in the length of the patterns
stems from the imbalance in the number of volunteers sampling tick bites in the NK and TR
collections: TR collection has nearly four times more tick bites reports than NK, so the variabil-
ity it contains is higher and this subsequently turns into longer patterns. Figure 3a-c graphically
points out the data imbalance: the resemblance between NK1TR (Figure 3a) and TR

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

15

(Figure 3b) heat maps is remarkable, indicating that the TR collection is strongly inﬂuencing
the pattern mining for the NK1TR experiment described in Section 3.2.1.

Following this line of inquiry, we have depicted the patterns extracted from the NK and TR
in Figures 5 and 6, respectively. Figure 5 shows that the most relevant features in the NK collec-
tion contain temperature, precipitation and distance features. Figure 6 reveals the importance of
temperature and distance features in TR and, to a less extent, precipitation. As seen, both data
collections tend to converge in the identiﬁcation of relevant features to monitor tick bites

Figure 5 Ring maps for the patterns of length 3 (left) and 4 (right) that have a minimum support
of 25% in the NK collection

Figure 6 Ring maps for the patterns of length 3 (left) and 4 (right) that have a minimum support
of 25% in the TR collection

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

16 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

phenomenon. However, if we compare these two ﬁgures with Figure 4, we can see that the ring
maps produced for the patterns of all tick bites is losing the relevance of precipitation features
and increasing the relevance of soil features. This means that data imbalance has a certain effect
on the patterns produced, because it is still identifying relevant conditions, but there is some
information loss with the process of mining frequent patterns from the NK1TR collections.

Persistent patterns found in the NK and TR collections are shown in Table 2. These nine
patterns have occurred along all years in the time series and this can provide hints about the
main drivers of the tick bites phenomenon: the proximity to built-up area, forest and/or recrea-
tional area, and temperature thresholds have a strong presence, unlike temperature accumula-
tions. These ﬁndings are in line with results described in Section 3.1 and reveal recurrent
reported conditions that might be used to identify tick bite risk conditions for humans.

3.2.3 Frequent patterns associated with random locations

The application of AprioriClose to the features associated to the pseudo-random locations pro-
duced 744 patterns ranging from one to ﬁve features. The comparison of these patterns with
the patterns associated with tick bites yielded zero coincidences. This means that the frequent
patterns associated with the tick bite reports truly represent conditions linked to tick bites and
not the common environmental conditions in our study area. Figure 3d shows the summary of
the patterns obtained for the random locations. As seen, the difference between this plot and
the three above is substantial in the features identiﬁed as frequent and also in its frequency,
explaining the zero coincidences between this data collection and the tick bites collection. Fig-
ure 7 shows the ring maps for patterns with three and four items for the random dataset. As
seen, temperature features are clearly dominant in both maps, however, an interesting charac-
teristic in both ring maps is the relatively large number of patterns yielded using vegetation
indices, in contrast with the patterns depicted in Figures 4, 5 and 6. This means the common
patterns in the Netherlands are associated with the “greenness” levels of the country.

Figure 7 Ring maps for the patterns of length 3 (left) and 4 (right) that have a minimum support
of 25% in the pseudo-random locations collection

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

17

3.3 Spatio-temporal Visualization

Figures 8 and 9 illustrate the spatio-temporal distribution of tick bites associated with two of
the persistent patterns (i.e. frequent patterns found in NK1TR, NK and TR). We chose these
features identiﬁed by
two patterns because they contain several of the most

frequent

Figure 8 Spatio-temporal projection of pattern: weekday, soil, dforests per year. This pattern
shows tick bites that occurred at a maximum distance of 525 m of a recreational area, 571 m of a
built-up area and in a year with 14-41 days with a temperature above 258C

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

18 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

Figure 9 Spatio-temporal projection of pattern: d30, drec, dbuiltup per year.This pattern shows
tick bites that occurred during weekends, in sandy soil and at a maximum distance of 463 m of a
forest

AprioriClose. More precisely, these ﬁgures illustrate the patterns: d30, drec, dbuiltup (Pattern
5, Table 2) and weekday, soil, dforests (Pattern 6, Table 2). At the level of classes in the feature,
the ﬁrst pattern shows tick bites that occurred at a maximum distance of 525 m from a
recreational area, 571 m from a built-up area and in a year with 14-41 days with a temperature

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

19

Table 3
Percentage of tick bites that occur under the environmental and/or human factors
depicted by the selected persistent patterns (patterns 5 and 6, Table 2). Pattern 5 shows tick bites
occurring at a maximum distance of 525 m of a recreational area, 571 m of a build-up area and in
a year with 14–41 days contains with a temperature above 258C, and Pattern 6 shows tick bites that
occurred during weekends, in sandy soil and at a maximum distance of 463 m of a forest The total
percentage was calculated using the number of unique tick bites in the selected patterns

Pattern 5

Pattern 6

Year

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

52%
9%
26%
21%
37%
10%
23%
44%
3%

32%
29%
28%
32%
30%
34%
31%
29%
30%

Total

53%
33%
39%
40%
45%
38%
40%
46%
32%

above 258C. The second pattern shows tick bites that occurred during weekends, in sandy soil
and at a maximum distance of 463 m of a forest.

The inclusion of distance features shows the tick bites reports to be clustered around any
of the selected land uses (i.e. forest, built-up, recreational area). For each year, this clustering
effect reveals locations with a high recreational pressure in the conditions speciﬁed by the pat-
terns. Thus, popular places for recreation (i.e. areas along the coast and forested areas in the
center of the country) consistently tend to accumulate observations, due to the higher human
recreational pressure.

The imbalance in the number of tick bite reports is appreciated in both ﬁgures where we
can see that there are more tick bites from 2012 (the year when TR was launched) onwards.
However, it is important to note that 2014, a year particularly rich in tick bite reports, does
not contribute many tick bites to Pattern 5 (Table 2) represented in Figure 9. In fact, we observe
that 2006 contains more tick bites reports than 2014. This may indicate that other features
(e.g. number of non-rainy days) were the major drivers of tick bites for 2014.

Table 3 shows the percentage of tick bites reports associated with each pattern per year
and the total percentage of tick bites reports per year represented by the combination of these
two patterns. As seen, Pattern 6 consistently explains around 30% of the tick bites reports per
year. This is produced because this pattern includes a soil feature, which is something tempo-
rally constant in a country. Pattern 5 shows a more variable representation of the tick bites per
year, due to the temperature feature included: years with a lower percentage of tick bites
reports (e.g. 2007, 2011 and 2014) may be linked to a year that was colder or when there were
wetter conditions that prevented people from going out into nature.

4 Discussion

Citizen science projects allow the collective monitoring of a wide range of (environmental) phe-
nomena at detailed spatio-temporal scales. Therefore, these projects have the potential to

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

20 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

accelerate scientiﬁc discovery. However, it remains challenging for researchers to work with
volunteered data because of its heterogeneous character and its ever-questioned quality. In our
case, we had to deal with an imbalanced inter-annual distribution of tick bites reports, as the
NK dataset contains appreciably fewer reports than the TR dataset. This means that TR reports
may be over represented in the results. A possible way to mitigate this problem is to sample the
TR reports so as to have a similar number of reports per year. However, this leads to data
(information) loss and we took the decision to analyze the complete tick bite collection. The
impact of data imbalance was studied by mining frequent patterns in the NK and TR datasets
separately. This analysis showed that there are NK and TR speciﬁc patterns that do not appear
when mining the complete tick bite collection. However, a similar set of relevant features and
classes were mined from both datasets. In fact, this analysis also showed that there are persis-
tent patterns in both collections. Tekenradar.nl is an ongoing project that collects about 8,000
tick bites reports each year. If this amount remains stable, data imbalance will not play a major
role in future analysis.

Contrarily to tick modeling studies, this study revealed that days above a certain tempera-
ture threshold or precipitation threshold and the proximity to a forest, recreational or build up
areas, are more relevant to model tick bites than the accumulation of environmental (e.g.
weather) features. We believe that this is because these features are closely related to human
behavior (e.g. outdoor activities). Our results also show that there is not a strong link between
seasonally accumulated environmental factors and tick bites. This suggests that shorter time
frames (e.g. weeks, months) could be tested as environmental features are known to explain
tick distributions and activity (Estrada-Pe~na et al. 2012; Ostfeld et al. 2006). That said, the
incorporation of landscape fragmentation indices in further studies could prove useful since
previous research has found a link between landscape, tick densities and Lyme disease inci-
dence (Lambin et al. 2010; Li et al. 2012). In the current study, around 65% of the tick bites
reports are produced in locations that are less than 575 m from a forest, built-up area or recrea-
tional area and 25% of the tick bites are produced in agricultural lands. The fact that a few
land use types concentrate most of the tick bites, and the remarkably high number of patterns
with features on proximity to forest, built-up or recreational area, suggests that landscape frag-
mentation could indeed be useful to explain tick bite occurrences.

The analytical engine of this study is the AprioriClose algorithm, which is an unsupervised
method of exploring large and complex datasets. The unsupervised character makes it hard to
perform a traditional validation of the results. Therefore, to determine the validity of these pat-
terns we generated a random locations dataset in a 10 km buffer around each tick bite report so
as to keep the spatio-temporal distribution of the original reports. This method can be seen as a
strict validation of the patterns because it prevents the random points from falling far from both
the tick habitat and the tick season. This allows conﬁrming whether the mined patterns are
indeed strongly associated to tick bites, conditional on the area under investigation being suitable
for ticks and without taking into account the volunteered-based features. We found that most of
the patterns mined in random locations stem from vegetation and temperature features and that
there was no overlap between the patterns produced when mining tick bite locations and random
locations. This means the collective “sampling” effort carried out by the thousands of volunteers
who support the NK and TR initiatives, captures well the occurrence of tick bites in space and
time. In turn, this means that the tick bite dataset used in this study has high scientiﬁc value.

From a geographic perspective, mapping two of the persistent patterns revealed that the
corresponding tick bites are scattered across the country and tend to be clustered in forested
areas. The minimum support threshold applied to the AprioriClose algorithm makes sure that
each pattern represents at least 25% of the tick bites. Therefore, the two chosen patterns could

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

21

represent up to 50% of all the tick bites. With the six features identiﬁed with the selected pat-
terns we are capable of explaining an average of 40% of the tick bites phenomenon per year.
The reason not to reach this 50% is due to the overlapping between the tick bites reports asso-
ciated with each pattern. Adding a new persistent pattern to the initial selection may increase
the representational accuracy of the tick bites phenomenon.

5 Conclusions

Tick bites are the result of two interrelated geographic phenomena: (1) tick abundance and
activity; and (2) human presence. The volunteered tick bite datasets used in this work report
the intersection of these two phenomena in a particular location and time. Here we used fre-
quent pattern mining to characterize the environmental and human factors associated to
“where” and “when” tick bites occur. In particular, the individual and combined analysis of
the NK and TR datasets revealed the following main ﬁndings: (1) there are temporally persis-
tent patterns in the tick bite datasets; (2) there is a positive correlation between the number of
warm days or non-rainy days and the number of tick bites; (3) proximity to forest, recreational
or built-up area appears a remarkably high number of times in the patterns yielded; and (4) in
tick-suitable areas, vegetation features do not seem to be sufﬁcient to explain the tick bites phe-
nomenon. Thus, we conclude that human-related factors are more important to model tick
bites than using environmental variables that characterize the environmental conditions of a
given location for a particular time frame.

Regarding the methods, to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that applies the
frequent pattern mining method to a volunteered dataset that pertains to the public health
domain. This work proved that frequent pattern mining is an efﬁcient form of extracting infor-
mation from crowdsourced geo-information. This is important as grass-root campaigns involv-
ing citizens (may) overcome the limitations of traditional statistical surveys and observational
sensor networks by providing a high amount of data that allows the study of geographical phe-
nomena at unique spatio-temporal resolutions.

In the public health domain, the identiﬁcation of environmental and human factors associ-
ated with tick bites not only opens the way for modeling and mapping tick bite risk but also
demonstrates the scientiﬁc value of volunteered geographical information for public health
applications. Further work will focus on the development of an improved forecasting model for
tick bite risk. This new model could be linked to the current Tekenradar website to provide spe-
ciﬁc spatio-temporal information that, hopefully, contributes to the reduction of the number of
tick bites and of Lyme borreliosis in the Netherlands.

References

Agrawal R and Srikant R 1994 Fast algorithms for mining association rules. In Proceedings of the Twentheith

VLDB Conference, Santiago, Chile: 487-99

Barrios Gonz(cid:2)alez J M 2013 Spatio-temporal Modelling of the Epidemiology of Nephropathia Epidemica and

Lyme Borreliosis. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, KU Leuven

Barrios J M, Verstraeten W W, Maes P, Clement J, Aerts J M, Farifteh J, Lagrou K, and Coppin P 2012 Remotely
sensed vegetation moisture as explanatory variable of Lyme borreliosis incidence. International Journal of
Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 18: 1–12

Bennet L, Halling A, and Berglund J 2006 Increased incidence of Lyme borreliosis in southern Sweden following
mild winters and during warm, humid summers. European Journal of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases 25: 426–32

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

22 Garcia-Marti, Zurita-Milla, Swart, van den Wijngaard, van Vliet, Bennema, and Harms

Estrada-Pe~na A 2001 Distribution, abundance, and habitat preferences of Ixodes ricinus (Acari: Ixodidae) in

Northern Spain. Journal of Medical Entomology 38: 361–70

Estrada-Pe~na A, Ayll(cid:2)on N, and de la Fuente J 2012 Impact of climate trends on tick-borne pathogen transmission.

Frontiers in Physiology 3: 64

Estrada-Pe~na A, Ortega C, S(cid:2)anchez N, Desimone L, Sudre B, Suk J E, and Semenza J C 2011 Correlation of Bor-
relia burgdorferi sensu lato prevalence in questing Ixodes ricinus ticks with speciﬁc abiotic traits in the west-
ern palearctic. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 77: 3838–45

Fournier-Viger P, Gomariz A, Gueniche T, Soltani A, Wu C-W, and Tseng V S 2014 SPMF: A Java open-source

pattern mining library. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15: 3389–93

Goodchild M F 2007 Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of Web 2.0. Interna-

tional Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research 2: 24–32

Goodchild M F, and Li L 2012 Assuring the quality of volunteered geographic information. Spatial Statistics 1:

110–20

Heyman P, Cochez C, Hofhuis A, van der Giessen J, Sprong H, Porter S R, Losson B, Saegerman C, Donoso-
Mantke O, Niedrig M, and Papa A 2010 A clear and present danger: Tick-borne diseases in Europe. Expert
Review of Anti-Infective Therapy 8: 33–50

Hofhuis A, Harms M, van den Wijngaard C, Sprong H, and van Pelt W 2015 Continuing increase of tick bites

and Lyme disease between 1994 and 2009. Ticks and Tick-Borne Diseases 6: 69–74

Jaenson T G T, Eisen L, Comstedt P, Mejlon H A, Lindgren E, Bergstr€om S, and Olsen B 2009 Risk indicators for
the tick Ixodes ricinus and Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato in Sweden. Medical and Veterinary Entomology
23: 226–37

Jenks G F 1967 The data model concept in statistical mapping. International Yearbook of Cartography 7: 186–90
Jore S, Vanwambeke S O, Viljugrein H, Isaksen K, Kristoffersen A B, Woldehiwet Z, Johansen B, Brun E, Brun-
Hansen H, Westermann S, Larsen I-L, Ytrehus B, and Hofshagen M 2014 Climate and environmental change
drives Ixodes ricinus geographical expansion at the northern range margin. Parasites and Vectors 7: 11

Lambin E F, Tran A, Vanwambeke S O, Linard C, and Soti V 2010 Pathogenic landscapes: Interactions between
land, people, disease vectors, and their animal hosts. International Journal of Health Geographics 9: 54
Li S, Hartemink N, Speybroeck N, and Vanwambeke S O 2012 Consequences of landscape fragmentation on

Lyme disease risk: A cellular automata approach. PLOS One 7(6): e39612

Linard C, Lamarque P, Heyman P, Ducoffre G, Luyasu V, Tersago K, Vanwambeke S O, and Lambin E F 2007
Determinants of the geographic distribution of Puumala virus and Lyme borreliosis infections in Belgium.
International Journal of Health Geographics 6: 15

McCabe G J and Bunnell J E 2011 Precipitation and the occurrence of Lyme disease in the northeastern United

States. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases 4: 1–7

Medlock J M, Hansford K M, Bormane A, Derdakova M, Estrada-Pe~na A, George J C, Golovljova I, Jaenson T
G, Jensen J K, Jensen P M, Kazimirova M, Oteo J A, Papa A, Pﬁster K, Plantard O, Randolph S E, Rizzoli A,
Santos-Silva M M, Sprong H, Vial L, Hendrickx G, Zeller H, and Van Bortel W 2013 Driving forces for
changes in geographical distribution of Ixodes ricinus ticks in Europe. Parasites and Vectors 6: 1

Mehdipoor H, Zurita-Milla R, Rosemartin A, Gerst K L, and Weltzin J F 2015 Developing a workﬂow to identify
inconsistencies in volunteered geographic information: A phenological case study. PLOS One 10(10):
e0140811

Mulder S, van Vliet A J H, Bron W A, Gassner F, and Takken W 2013 High risk of tick bites in Dutch gardens.

Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases 13: 865–71

Ogden N H, Kofﬁ J K, Pelcat Y, and Lindsay L R 2014 Environmental Risk from Lyme Disease in Central and
Eastern Canada: A Summary of Recent Surveillance Information. Ottawa, ONT, Canada Communicable
Disease Report Vol. 40-5

Ogden N H, Maarouf A, Barker I K, Bigras-Poulin M, Lindsay L R, Morshed M G, O’Callaghan C J, Ramay F,
Waltner-Toews D, and Charron D F 2006 Climate change and the potential for range expansion of the
Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis in Canada. International Journal for Parasitology 36: 63–70

Ostfeld R S, Canham C D, Oggenfuss K, Winchcombe R J, and Keesing F 2006 Climate, deer, rodents, and acorns

as determinants of variation in lyme-disease risk. PLOS Biology 4(6): e145

Pasquier N, Bastide Y, Taouil R, and Lakhal L 1999 Discovering frequent closed itemsets for association rules. In
Beeri C and Buneman P (eds) Database Theory: ICDT ’99. Berlin, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence Vol. 1540: 398–416

Randolph S E 2000 Ticks and tick-borne disease systems in space and from space. Advances in Parasitology 47:

217–43

Randolph S E, Asokliene L, Avsic-Zupanc T, Bormane A, Burri C, Gern L, Golovljova I, Hubalek Z, Knap N,
Kondrusik M, Kupca A, Pejcoch M, Vasilenko V, and Zygutiene M 2008 Variable spikes in tick-borne
encephalitis incidence in 2006 independent of variable tick abundance but related to weather. Parasites and
Vectors 1: 44

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

Environmental and Human Factors Associated with Tick Bites

23

Rosemartin A H, Denny E G, Weltzin J F, Lee Marsh R, Wilson B E, Mehdipoor H, Zurita-Milla R, and

Schwartz M D 2015 Lilac and honeysuckle phenology data 1956-2014. Scientiﬁc Data 2: 150038

Subak S 2003 Effects of climate on variability in Lyme disease incidence in the northeastern United States. Ameri-

can Journal of Epidemiology 157: 531–38

Swart A, Iba~nez-Justicia A, Buijs J, van Wieren S E, Hofmeester T R, Sprong H, and Takumi K 2014 Predicting

tick presence by environmental risk mapping. Frontiers in Public Health 2: 238

Tack W, Madder M, Baeten L, Vanhellemont M, Gruwez R, and Verheyen K 2012 Local habitat and landscape
affect Ixodes ricinus tick abundances in forests on poor, sandy soils. Forest Ecology and Management 265:
30–6

Tack W, Madder M, Baeten L, Vanhellemont M, and Verheyen K 2013 Shrub clearing adversely affects the abun-

dance of Ixodes ricinus ticks. Experimental and Applied Acarology 60: 411–20

Tuite A R, Greer A L, and Fisman D N 2013 Effect of latitude on the rate of change in incidence of Lyme disease

in the United States. CMAJ Open 1: E43–E47

van Vliet A J H, Bron W A, and Mulder S 2014 The how and why of societal publications for citizen science proj-

ects and scientists. International Journal of Biometeorology 58: 565–77

Vanwambeke S O, Sumilo D, Bormane A, Lambin E F, and Randolph S E 2010 Landscape predictors of tick-
borne encephalitis in Latvia: Land cover, land use, and land ownership. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Dis-
eases 10: 497–506

VC 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Transactions in GIS, 2016, 00(00)

