The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 3
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 299–304 December 2003

299

S U R V E Y

Tactile and Audio-Tactile Maps within the Canadian
‘Government On-Line’ Program

Eva Siekierska* and Anita Mu¨ller**

Mapping Services Branch, Natural Resources Canada, Canada.
Email: *siekiers@nrcan.gc.ca; **amuller@nrcan.gc.ca

The internet provides almost unlimited opportunities for accessing information and on-line services. The government of
Canada is restructuring its services to take advantage of this medium. While web-based distribution of visual maps has
been a reality for several years, production of maps for people with special needs poses new challenges, as additional
accessibility requirements have to be met. This paper shares the Canadian experience of developing accessible tactile
and audio-tactile maps for blind and partially sighted people. `Government On-Line’ involves partnerships between
government departments to develop a portal speci®cally tailored to providing information and services for people with
disabilities, their families, care givers and service providers. The Mapping for Visually Impaired Web site is an integral
part of this broader initiative providing tactile maps for education, mobility training, transportation and tourism.
Additionally a Web-4-All project will facilitate learning about Canada’s geography and improve mobility options for
blind and partially sighted people.

INTRODUCTION

The 1999 ‘Speech from the Throne’ set the Canadian
government an ambitious goal of providing Canadians with
access to all government information and services online.
‘Cluster’ was one of these Government On-Line gateways
providing services and information useful to special needs
users (Persons with Disabilities Online). Mapping for Visually
Impaired (MVI) Web site is part of this. It contains tactile
and audio-tactile maps for education, mobility training,
transportation and tourism. It also includes guidelines and
procedures on how to both produce tactile and audio-
tactile maps, and make them accessible. This paper discusses
issues relating to the production of accessible tactile maps
in an internet environment. It also describes the content and
intended use of the MVI website, and recommendations
tabled by the governmental Accessibility Working Sub-
group established to address On-line Map Accessibility.
The paper concludes by highlighting future research issues
that still need to be addressed.

PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ONLINE

A portal within ‘Canadians’, one of three Government
On-Line (GOL) gateways, is dedicated to Persons with
Disabilities Online (URL 2). The goal of providing a portal
like this is to provide integrated, web based access to infor-
mation, programs and services for people with disabilities,
their families, care and service providers (Figure 1).

DOI: 10.1179/000870403225013050

Figure 1. Partners for Persons with Disabilities Online

Development of the portal involves a partnership between
several federal and provincial government departments, and
not-for-pro(cid:142)t organizations. Human Resources Develop-
ment Canada (HRDC) the leading department who provide
a program manager and secretariat, are largely responsible
for overall website development and also administer a site
providing disability web links (URL 3). However it is still
a collaborative venture undertaken by departments respon-
sible for Social Services at federal, provincial and territorial

300

The Cartographic Journal

level, and developed in consultation with representatives
from different disability groups. An Assistive Technology
Links website (URL 4) has been developed by Industry
Canada to help people with disabilities and employers (cid:142)nd
information and resources on adaptive computer technologies.
Transport Canada takes responsibility for developing an
Access to Travel website (URL 5) providing information
on accessible transportation and travel. Natural Resources
Canada,
is responsible for developing the Mapping for
Visually Impaired website (URL 6).

ACCESSIBILITY FEATURES FOR SPECIAL NEEDS
USERS: INCLUDING MAP ACCESSIBILITY

GOL insist on consistent web output and have established
Common Look and Feel (CLF) standards to ensure this
occurs. Additionally it is vital that all GOL websites are
universally accessible by all users, including visually impaired
people. As the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) check-
points for accessibility between interoperable technologies
fail to provide guidelines for publishing tactile and audio-
tactile maps in accessible web formats, a special committee
has been formed to address the needs of blind users and
establish rules relating to the presentation of cartographic
information for tactile purposes on the web.
This group has developed a set of

‘Best Practices’,
a working document that is currently being evaluated.
Initial recommendations suggest Web Accessibility Initiative
(URL 9) guidelines should be applied to maps as much as
possible, tactile map output should be useable, and spatial
data presented in multiple ways using multi-views. According
to a multi-view approach mapped information must be
presented using a minimum of three different methods.
These include a data view (e.g. coordinates, title, description
in table format), a textual view (e.g. information about
the map in text format) and a graphical view. In addition,
selected maps must also be suitable for tactile output,
designed according to tactile mapping principles, allowing
a print to be embossed.

MAPPING FOR VISUALLY IMPAIRED WEBSITE

The Mapping for Visually Impaired (MVI) website of(cid:142)cially
launched in 2002 (URL 6), with an overall goal of pro-
viding online access to maps for a group of users who
presently have limited access to geo-spatial
information.
Objectives included developing a site that made tactile
maps available on the internet via an accessible web browser;
developing different types of maps (interactive, multi-modal
maps (audio-tactile-haptic maps)); and publishing procedures
about how to make maps. The project also aims to investi-
gate tactile map issues such as awareness, accessibility and
usability. A description of the main sections of the MVI
website follows.

MAPS FOR EDUCATION

Each section of the MVI website is devoted to speci(cid:142)c
types of map. The section on Maps for Education contains
two groups of downloadable (cid:142)les; atlas maps and thematic

maps. Maps from the atlas were originally published as the
Tactile Atlas of Canada (Siekierska and Labelle, 2001).

The Tactile Atlas of Canada was developed in close
cooperation with users. Before publication the atlas was exten-
sively tested with visually impaired students and teachers at
schools in Ontario and Quebec. Further evaluation from
tactile map experts followed. The printed version received
good reviews. The Atlas is intended for use in primary
schools and contains basic information about Canada. It
comprises a general administrative map of the country,
showing international, provincial and territorial boundaries
with more detailed map of each province or territory,
including information on major cities, rivers and lakes.

Three versions of each map are published on the website.
A Braille version intended for blind users is supplemented
by a large text version for people with low vision. Finally
Braille and text are combined to provide a map for use
in classes that include both blind and partially sighted
students (Figure 2).

Thematic tactile maps are the second type to appear on
the Maps for Education section of the MVI website. This
tactile map output draws on graduate research conducted
by Anik Fortin (Fortin, 2003). Fortin has found that
students at secondary school level are unfamiliar with more
complex map concepts such as projection. Consequently
Fortin proposes using the Hammer–Aitoff projection for
tactile maps, primarily because its ability to horizontally
display landforms around a central meridian helps simplify
the information it presents. This is considered better than
the Lambert conformal conic projection for example, which
is used in the Tactile Atlas of Canada. Fortin also suggests
using simple graphic solutions, such as numbering areas
of common type and accompanying these with legends
that explain the numbering system, instead of in(cid:142)lling area
symbols with patterned textures. When tested in the class-
room environment, numbering area symbols was found to
be preferred (Figure 3).

All maps in this section are available for downloading
in two formats: as CorelDraw and PDF (cid:142)les. CorelDraw is
‘open format’ permitting the addition (insertion) of ancillary
information. In this case its intended use is by teachers
and instructors. The second, PDF is ‘closed format’, which

Figure 2. Example of a map for education, Ontario NRCan

The Canadian ‘Government On-Line’ Program

301

Figure 3. Climate regions map (maps are available in either alpha-
numeric text or Braille)

Figure 4. Example of a map for mobility, Ottawa, Ontario NRCan

assures downloading of completed maps for use by blind
students does not require special software other than a
freely available reader. These maps cannot be further
modi(cid:142)ed and constitute a (cid:142)nal authoritative representation
of a given region.

MAPS FOR MOBILITY

Maps for Mobility training are also provided through the
MVI website. These maps are produced in cooperation
with CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the Blind).
Mobility trainers found the maps helpful for explaining new
or complex spatial information to clients. Most mobility
maps are produced for individual users for independent
travel. An example of a mobility training map is given
(Figure 4). The map was produced for a high-school student,
who had recently moved to Ottawa, and wanted to learn
to use the rapid-bus transit system. It enabled the user to
memorize the street pattern in a very short time.

Mapping Services Branch recommend procedures for
producing tactile maps using cost effective methods. They
are based on using basic drawing software packages,
in
this instance CorelDraw, which most CNIB Institutes or
Independent Living Centres already possess. Software is
often donated free to CNIB centres. As many mobility
trainers however, are not familiar with using computer draw-
ing packages, a basic introduction to the principles of tactile
map production, as well as to map drawing packages is

necessary. The MVI section on Maps for Mobility provides
this. It contains samples of maps drawn by mobility trainers
in Ottawa and Halifax. Furthermore, instructions on how
to draw tactile maps and guidelines on their production
incorporating the principles for tactile map symbols recom-
mended by the ICA Commission on Maps and Graphics
for Visually Impaired People (Tatham, 2001) are also given.

MAPS FOR TRANSPORTATION AND TOURISM

Maps for Transportation and Tourism are being developed
in cooperation with Transport Canada. This section of
MVI website contains two types of map: city approach and
city core. Production of ‘city approach’ maps is based on
Canada’s National Topographic Maps at 1:250 000 scale.
Scale modi(cid:142)cations to accommodate different city sizes are
made. Canadian cartographers use different sets of speci(cid:142)-
cations to map areas north and south of the 60th parallel,
marking the divide between areas of heavy and sparse
concentrations of population. The depictions of cities on
tactile maps re(cid:143)ect these differences.

City approach maps inform users of the general outlines
of cities and their main geographical features, such as rivers
and lakes. They also show main roads leading to the city and
the location of airports, bus terminals and train stations in
order to indicate nodes of entry or possible arrival points
(Figure 5).

‘City core maps’ provide representations of downtown
city districts. This includes depicting street patterns and

302

The Cartographic Journal

Technology Resource Centre, Web-4-All’s ‘smart card’
technology helps users automatically con(cid:142)gure public access
terminals to meet individual needs, such as having type-
faces enlarged or text read aloud. A pilot project to install
technology on 1000 terminals in selected
Web-4-All
communities by March 2004 is planned (URL 12).

Some Web-4-All sites will have additional equipment
for downloading and producing tactile maps, as well as,
interactive capabilities for reading audio-tactile maps. The
production of tactile maps is based on using a thermal
image enhancer and specialized microcapsule or swell paper.
For interactive use of audio-tactile maps an electronic touch
tablet is provided (see below).

The Mapping for Visually Impaired project has supplied
‘city approach maps’ and ‘city core maps’
for the (cid:142)rst
‘champion’ accessibility locations. Users of these champion
sites will help evaluate maps produced by Natural Resources
Canada. To obtain on-going feedback from the user com-
munity on the usefulness of cartographic products published
on the web each Mapping for Visually Impaired website
section also has a ‘user’s corner’. This serves as a feedback
mechanism and as guidance for further development of
tactile maps. The goal of the MVI project is to provide
maps containing information most relevant to user needs.

WEB BASED MULTIMEDIA MAPS FOR VISUALLY
IMPAIRED PEOPLE

Paper and soft copy maps available on the web are generally
not accessible by people with visual impairment. However,
there are increasing moves in the Canadian cartographic
community to design and produce maps that can be used
by blind and partially sighted people in tactile and audio-
haptic formats.

Tactile Maps
Tactile maps (maps with embossed/raised features) avail-
able on the MVI website are reproduced using a thermal
image enhancer. User interaction with these tactile maps
occurs through the (cid:142)ngers placed directly on the map
surface. Maps of this kind are very generalized and thus
limited in terms of the information they convey. However,
corresponding to a reduction in visual complexity, is the
opportunity to compensate for this loss, using computers
to provide information in alternative formats, largely audio,
but also haptic. In order to take advantage of audio-
tactile-haptic maps, users require a special hardware and
software setup.

Hardware and Software Setup
Hardware includes the thermal image enhancer, a touch
sensitive tablet and/or haptic mouse. An image enhancer
(Figure 7) permits users to emboss maps downloaded from
the internet. Maps need to be printed on microcapsule
(also called ‘swell’) paper that has a layer of plastic contain-
ing tiny alcohol bubbles on top. When an image is passed
through a thermal-enhancer (infrared heating device), heat
absorbed under areas of back print reaches a suf(cid:142)cient tem-
perature to make the alcohol boil and expand. The black
image is hence raised. To include text that should rarely be
raised, blue ink is used.

Figure 5. City approach map of Vancouver, British Columbia NRCan

the location of tourist attractions (Figure 6). As city core
maps often contain larger amounts of information than
other map types available on the MVI website, they pre-
sent a greater cartographic challenge in order to portray
city centres in clear and non-ambiguous ways. Solutions to
this challenge have included a proposal for using audio
and tactile formats jointly, and coding street names by
numbers and attaching a legend.

MAPS FOR WEB-4ALL

The website also includes ‘Maps for Web-4-All’, a section
that publishes maps prepared for Industry Canada projects.
The main goal of Web-4-All (URL 11) is to facilitate the
use of the internet by users without computers at home or
workplace. The government of Canada, with the support
of several private sector organizations, is helping to pro-
vide computers in schools, libraries and community centres
across Canada.

‘Smart card’ readers accompany computers intended for
public use. Developed by University of Toronto’s Assistive

Figure 6. City core map of Winnipeg, Manitoba NRCan

The Canadian ‘Government On-Line’ Program

303

replaced by this recorded information. The recordings are
prompted by touch. An on screen map reproduced in
tactile form is placed on a touch sensitive tablet. This
in turn is linked to the computer where the recorded
information is stored. As the (cid:142)nger engages with a feature
representing a landmark on the tactile map a recording
providing information about that feature will be heard.
Alternatively environmental sounds might replace the voice
recording. For example, as the (cid:142)nger or cursor scans a
river, lake or sea, the sound of splashing water or breaking
waves will be generated. Some maps on the MVI website
are also audio-haptic. In addition to voice annotations haptic
mouse effects can be felt when interacting with a map.

Overcoming problems arising from the very large (cid:142)les
often associated with audio-haptic maps is paramount.
Oversize (cid:142)les lead to varying rates of information transfer
between the server and user’s computer, especially when a
modem connection is involved. A remedial solution is to
use Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG). This format has great
potential for providing accessible maps over the internet.
SVG transmits graphics as text (cid:142)les enabling descriptive
information stored in the graphic (i.e. place names) to be
‘read’ by screen reading software. Additionally, SVG format
is proposed as an open standard and should be available
soon on popular web browsers, bypassing the need to use
additional software.

CONCLUSION

Just as the internet provides convenient access to increasing
amounts of
information, especially of the image based
variety, so new assistive technology devices must make inter-
net use more feasible for people with special needs. The
Canadian government has initiated several projects under
the auspices of the Government On-Line program that
will provide information and services for people with dis-
abilities. Tactile and audio-tactile maps are being produced
within this program, promoting online access by blind
and partially sighted people. Technological advances mean
it is also possible with the addition of voice and touch
to further facilitate use and make even more information
available to special needs users.
The effective delivery of

the program depends on
collaboration between government departments, and partner-
ships with outside institutions. Links with universities
provide access to research that ensures new technologies and
methodologies are adopted. Bene(cid:142)ts of involving private
business who contribute to the cost effectiveness of methods
used must also be highlighted. Finally partnerships with
service providers ensure user needs are met, and products
and services are pro(cid:142)led within the user community.

Issues of

internet accessibility regarding the use of
multimedia audio-tactile maps have yet to be successfully
resolved. Until voice enabled web browsers become more
common, levels of interactive use of audio-tactile maps will
remain low, as many users are unfamiliar with special soft-
ware downloading procedures. Further resources are also
needed to develop a cost-effective electronic tablet that pro-
vides more (cid:143)exible solutions than the analog touch screen
tablet used in this project.

Despite an apparent lack of familiarity with tactile maps
blind and partially sighted people should not be denied the

Figure 7. Image enhancer

An alternative is to emboss maps on a regular Braille
printers using a graphic mode. Although trials with embossed
tactile maps of this kind have yet to take place within the
project, the process has been tested at other research centres,
such as the University of Oregon (URL 13).

Amongst other equipment essential for the interactive
use of audio-tactile maps on the internet is the electronic
touch tablet (Figure 8). The MVI project has selected an
analogue touch tablet, as it provides a minimum amount
of interaction necessary to read audio-tactile maps online.
As the tablet is relatively cheap, it makes tactile maps more
accessible to institutional users, educational communities
and the general public.

A haptic mouse, a new invention, can also provide
feedback to users. The mouse, which looks identical to a
regular computer mouse, provides resistance or vibrations
as the cursor is moved over the screen and encounters
elements on the map. Haptic mice are potentially useful as
another means of allowing people with visual impairment
to ‘feel’ what appears on a computer screen.

Audio-Haptic Maps
A component of the research into making maps on screen
accessible to visually impaired users has concentrated on
interactive verbal descriptions of graphics. In such cases
Macromedia Flash software has been used to annotate areas
of a map with voiceovers. Both text and many symbols are

Figure 8. Electronic touch tablet

304

The Cartographic Journal

opportunity of accessing geo-spatial information. As this
paper has described, new technology provides a range of
methods, and data sets exist that could improve visually
impaired peoples understanding of maps and hence their
knowledge of spatial phenomena. Presenting spatial infor-
mation in these simpli(cid:142)ed formats could also go some way
to helping sighted people understand maps and what they
represent better.

REFERENCES

Campin, B. (2003). SVG Maps for People with Visual Impairment,

http://www.svgopen.org/2003/papers/
svgmappingforpeoplewithvisualimpairments/#S4.3.1

Fortin, A. (2003). ‘Mapping For A Visually Impaired Audience: A
Case Study On The Legibility And Cognition Of Tactile Maps
For Education’, MA Thesis, Carleton University.

Siekierska, E. M., and Labelle, R. (2001). Project Report — Tactile
and Audio-Tactile Mapping. Internal Report, Mapping Services
Branch, Natural Resources Canada.

Siekierska, E. M., Labelle, R., and O’Neil, L. (2001). ‘Tactile Mapping
Project at Canadian Federal Mapping Agency — Mapping Services
Branch’, Proceedings of the 20th International Cartographic
Conference, Mapping the 21 Century, ICC 2001 Beijing, China,
6–10 August 2001, pp. 2932–42.

Tatham, A. F. (1991). ‘The Design Of Tactile Maps: Theoretical And
Practical Considerations’, Proceedings, ICA 15th Conference
‘Mapping the Nations’, ed. by Rybaczuk K., and Blakemore M.,
pp. 157–66.

URL’S

URL 1. Government of Canada: http://canada.gc.ca/
URL 2. Persons With Disabilities Online:

http://www.pwd-online.ca/

URL 3. Disability Weblinks:

http://www.disabilityweblinks.ca/

URL 4. Assistive Technology Links:

http://www.at-links.gc.ca/

URL 5. Access to Travel:

http://www.accesstotravel.gc.ca/

URL 6. Mapping for Visually Impaired:

http://tactile.nrcan.gc.ca/

URL 7. Common Look and Feel (CLF):

http://www.cio-dpi.gc.ca/clf-upe/
URL 8. World Wide Web Consortium (W3C):

http://www.w3.org/
URL 9. Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI):

http://www.w3.org/WAI/
URL 10. VisuAide: http://www.visuaide.com/
URL 11. Web-4-All: http://web-4-all.ca/
URL 12. Community Access Program:

http://cap.ic.gc.ca/

URL 13. The Science Access Project:

http://dots.physics.orst.edu/

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

