This article was downloaded by: [74.103.89.55]
On: 06 April 2014, At: 10:18
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Hierarchical fuzzy pattern
matching for the regional
comparison of land use maps
Conrad Power a , Alvin Simms b & Roger White b
a MATRIKS, Maastricht Technological Research
Institute for Knowledge and Systems, Maastricht
University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
b Department of Geography, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St John's, Canada.
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: Conrad Power , Alvin Simms & Roger White (2001)
Hierarchical fuzzy pattern matching for the regional comparison of land use
maps, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15:1, 77-100,
DOI: 10.1080/136588100750058715

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588100750058715

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and

Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 1, 77± 100

Research Article

Hierarchical fuzzy pattern matching for the regional comparison of
land use maps

CONRAD POWER
MATRIKS, Maastricht Technological Research Institute for Knowledge and
Systems, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands

ALVIN SIMMS and ROGER WHITE
Department of Geography, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John’s,
Canada

(Received and accepted 20 March 2000)

Abstract. The evaluation of the spatial similarities and land use change between
two raster maps is traditionally based on pixel-by-pixel comparison techniques.
However, a pixel-by-pixel comparison can register a small displacement in pixels
as land use disagreement even though the land use patterns may be essentially
the same. The techniques of unique polygons mapping and hierarchical fuzzy
pattern matching, where the maps are compared on both a local and global level,
are combined to provide a more robust alternative approach. Local matchings
determine the degree of containment of each unique polygon in the template map
in terms of fuzzy areal intersections. Formally, the local agreement values are
based on polygon property containments and are calculated from a fuzzy logical
Max-Min compositional algorithm. A global agreement value is derived by the
fuzzy summation of the local matchings. The uses of these basic methods are
discussed and further re(cid:142) nements and modelling possibilities are outlined.

1.

Introduction
The identi(cid:142) cation of categorical diŒerences between maps is the basis of much
land use dynamics research. Speci(cid:142) cally, a wide variety of remote sensing methods
have been developed for detecting land use change in bi-temporal categorical
and multi-spectral imagery (Weismiller et al. 1977, Wickware and Howarth 1981,
Hodgson et al. 1988, Abuelgasim et al. 1999). However, there are numerous examples
in the literature of concerns about the limitations of the traditional methods.
Conventional categorical change detection procedures, called post classi(cid:142) cation com-
parisons, perform a pixel-by-pixel overlay of two thematic maps to generate a
similarity map and associated statistics that indicate regions of disagreement (Jensen
et al. 1987, Hodgson et al. 1988, Dai and Khorram 1999). One problem with post
classi(cid:142) cation comparison is that the accuracy and usefulness of the comparison
results depend on the accuracy of the categorical classi(cid:142) cations and geometric
registration of the maps. A second, more important, limitation is that the traditional
methods can only compare maps that contain Boolean categories. By nature, land

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 78

C. Power et al.

use patterns are often inherently complex and can consist of an intricate intermixture
of land use types. Boolean maps must frequently simplify or otherwise misrepresent
land use patterns, so that the results of a post classi(cid:142) cation comparison may be
imprecise. The accuracy of a comparison procedure based on a more reliable and
robust approach could have a marked improvement in the ability to detect and
model real world change.

A third problem with the traditional approaches is that, because they are based
on a pixel-by-pixel comparison, they do not necessarily capture the qualitative
similarities between two maps—that is, the similarity of patterns. This problem
becomes important when map comparisons (e.g. of actual and predicted land use)
are used to evaluate the output of predictive spatial models such as cellular automata
based land use models. The predictive models are not expected to be accurate at the
pixel scale. They are, however, expected to predict the approximate shapes and
locations of land use regions. The lack of appropriate comparison techniques, spe-
ci(cid:142) cally, ones that can handle qualitative comparisons of complex land use maps for
the purpose of evaluating model output, is currently a major problem in the area of
cellular automata based predictive simulation modelling (White et al. 1997 ).

The purpose of this paper is to present a map comparison procedure based on
fuzzy set theory that can more fully capture both the complexity and the patterned
quality of spatial data while also addressing the limitations of traditional pixel-by-
pixel comparisons. The basis of the approach is a comparison of land use maps on
a polygon to polygon basis using unique polygons mapping. A fuzzy relational map
comparison model is then developed that produces qualitative and quantitative
descriptions of land use agreement on regional scales. The comparison model is
structured to emulate the human reasoning method of identifying a hierarchy of
map similarities. This requires that the map comparison be performed on both local
and global levels. Finally, the utility of hierarchical fuzzy pattern matching is illus-
trated by analysing two sets of results: (1) a comparison of simulation results from
a cellular automata based land use prediction model, and (2) a comparison of a
temporal sequence of forest inventory land use maps.

2. Background: traditional pairwise pixel-by-pixe l comparisons

The aim of a pairwise post classi(cid:142) cation comparison is to identify areas of
categorical disagreement between two maps by determining the pixels with a diŒer-
ence in theme. This involves overlaying the maps on a pixel-by-pixel basis to produce
a map and attribute table of site speci(cid:142) c diŒerences. From the information in the
table, summary agreement statistics are generated to give a measure of areal
disagreement.

Several authors (Singh 1989, Mas 1999, Dai and Khorram 1999) have expressed
the need for a better post classi(cid:142) cation change detection or map similarity procedure
because of the limitations of a pixel-by-pixel comparison. First, the procedure is
sensitive to image misregistration and the existence of mixed pixels. A pixel-by-pixel
comparison of multi-temporal maps will interpret any misalignment of one or both
of the maps as change. Furthermore, any misclassi(cid:142) cation of a pixel on either one
or both of the maps will be interpreted as a diŒerence in theme although the
disagreement is a result of the inherent errors in the dataset (Jensen 1981 ). Second,
the comparison techniques will often produce results that are signi(cid:142) cantly diŒerent
from the actual land use. This is due to their inability to account for the inaccuracies
in the maps throughout the comparison operation (Macleod and Congalton 1998).

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

79

In contrast, the (cid:143) exibility of a fuzzy representation of spatial data oŒers the
potential for avoiding the problems of traditional comparison procedures. First of
all, misregistration and locational inaccuracies can be accounted for by fuzzifying
the boundaries of the pixels or polygons of the input maps. Generally, the width of
the fuzzy boundaries will correspond to the level of uncertainty in each of the land
use maps. Using a fuzzy implication algorithm, fuzzy polygons can be compared to
determine the sections that are diŒerent due to error and those that are diŒerent
because of actual land use disagreement (Edwards and Lowell 1996). Second, fuzzy
set theory provides a method of dealing and comparing maps containing a complex
mixture of spatial information. A fuzzy map is more appropriate for representing a
complex land use type, such as vegetation coverage, because it enables the pixels or
polygons to have multiple memberships in the land use classes. Furthermore, a fuzzy
map comparison model can determine the agreement between fuzzy maps while
handling the complexity of the land use classes rather than simply ignoring it.
Therefore, the degrees and types of categorical diŒerences between maps should be
determined by a fuzzy post classi(cid:142) cation comparison.

2.1. T he fundamentals of fuzzy set theory

Zadeh (1965 ) (cid:142) rst introduced fuzzy set theory as a means of describing the
imprecision and vagueness of human reasoning in information communications. The
basis of fuzzy set theory is the notion of imprecise membership functions, which
provide ways of dealing with the limitations of traditional data classi(cid:142) ers (Klir 1988 ).
The rigid spatial models consisting of discrete, sharply de(cid:142) ned, homogeneous classes
ignore the geographic variability and complexity within nature and the error inherent
in the measurement of it (Burrough 1989). Thus, a considerable amount of informa-
tion is lost when sharp edged entities are combined. Fuzzy set theory provides more
appropriate classi(cid:142) ers, because it models cases whose attributes have soft transitional
rather than hard boundaries.

Mathematically, a fuzzy set A in x is described by a membership function as a

set of pairs

x ×X

A 5 {X, ua (x)}

(1)
where ua(x) is the membership grade of x in A and x ×x means that x is found in
the universe of discourse X. The membership value ua(x) ranges from zero to one,
with a gradual transition from full membership at 1 to no membership at 0. In
standard set theory, a membership function has only two values: 0 or 1. The selection
of the appropriate membership function for a fuzzy set is generally based on the
subjective opinion of the researcher (Zimmerman 1985). However, the structure of
the membership function will determine the extent to which the memberships change
away from the optimal value (MacMillian 1978).

Fuzzy set theory is gaining increasing support from spatial researchers. A number
of studies (Cannon et al. 1986, Wang 1990, Maselli et al.1996) utilizing fuzzy c-means
clustering for remote sensing image classi(cid:142) cation have shown that fuzzy set theory
can deal with images containing a complex mixture of spatial and spectral informa-
tion. Unlike the traditional classi(cid:142) ers, the fuzzy c-means clustering algorithm assigns
multiple memberships to a pixel to represent land use class mixtures and intermediate
conditions. Similarly, fuzzy rule based systems have used fuzzy membership functions
to represent and model the qualitative estimations of interpretation experts during
the image classi(cid:142) cation process (Blonda et al. 1991 ).

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 80

C. Power et al.

Fuzzy set theory has also been used in GIS applications, most notably in the
analysis of uncertainty propagation in GIS operations (Veregin 1989) and the devel-
opment and manipulation of fuzzy relational databases (Burrough 1989, Wang et al.
1990, Kollias and Voliotis 1991, Sui 1992 ). Fuzzy sets have also been used in the
development of a fuzzy method of accuracy assessment of thematic maps (Gopal
and Woodcock 1994).

Despite the increased use of fuzzy set theory in GIS and remote sensing, several
authors (Gong 1993, Gopal and Woodcock 1994) have expressed the need for
(1996 )
research involving fuzzy sets for map comparison. Edwards and Lowell
suggest that fuzzy set theory should also be used to develop a single measure of map
accuracy, such as a fuzzy Kappa statistic. Hierarchical fuzzy pattern matching
addresses both of these issues.

3. Methodology

Hierarchical fuzzy pattern matching is designed to emulate human reasoning
when comparing multiple maps. While performing a visual comparison of maps, a
person intuitively identi(cid:142) es a hierarchy of similarities between the maps. Speci(cid:142) cally,
he would (cid:142) rst notice the overall agreement between the maps but would eventually
recognize localized patterns of dissimilarities. To simulate a visual comparison of
maps, hierarchical fuzzy pattern matching is similarly performed on both a local and
global level.

3.1. L ocal matching

The preliminary step in the local matching process is to convert the input raster
land use maps into grouped polygon layers using unique polygon mapping. By
performing the local matching on a polygon-by-polygo n basis, the problems of a
pixel-by-pixel comparison are avoided.

The creation of the unique polygons maps (cid:142) rst involves the use of a grouping
algorithm to determine the contiguous groupings of identically valued pixels in a
raster map and assign them unique integer identi(cid:142) ers. The derived groups or polygons
are comprised of pixels that have the same attribute value and contact each other
in any of the eight possible directions: N, S, E, W, NE, NW, SE, or SW (Eastman
1992 ).

In unique polygons mapping the (cid:142) rst grouping map is overlaid with the second
to create an overlay image and a relational attribute table. The overlay process
generates a series of relational polygons from the intersection of both grouping maps
(Bonham-Carter 1994). A unique polygons map is illustrated in (cid:142) gure 1, which shows
the overlay of map one and map two producing the unique polygons map and table.
Each polygon on the map is assigned a unique identi(cid:142) er so that the table has the
same number of rows as there are polygons from the overlay process. A unique
polygons table is ideally suited to model land use change or map similarities because
each unique polygon in the table represents the degree of containment and intersec-
tion of the polygons on map one in the polygons on map two. The degree of areal
containment for each polygon in the attribute table is used to measure the local
matching between polygons on the land use maps.

The calculation of the areal polygon containment values depends on map one
being a template or reference map of the land use characteristics of a study area and
map two a predicted land use layer or an actual land use map at a later date. Note
that containment applies to both land use agreement and disagreement. In the local

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

81

Figure 1. Structure of a unique polygon map and attribute table.

matching scheme, the calculated areal intersection ratio will be the local agreements
between polygons while the areal complement ratio will represent
land use
disagreements.

The areal intersection ratio is computed by identifying the rows in the unique
polygons table with identical land uses for a speci(cid:142) c template polygon, summing the
unique areas for these rows, and dividing the summed agreement area by the total
area for the polygon on the template. An areal complement value is computed as
one minus the areal intersection ratio. The areal intersection and complement ratios
are only computed for the unique polygons on map one since it is the template for
the matching process.

The calculated intersections and complements ratios are Boolean values that are
computed on the assumption that the unique polygon maps are error free and that
real world land use data can be con(cid:142) ned to crisp borders. Realistically, a more
appropriate measurement of the local matching between the maps would involve
the computation of fuzzy areal intersections and complements.

3.2. Development of the fuzzy inference system for local matching

The purpose of the fuzzy inference system is to describe the regional similarities
between land use maps with linguistic membership functions. Formally, a linguistic
membership function is a mathematical curve that represents a person’s intuitive

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 82

C. Power et al.

perception of the degree of matching between sections of the input maps. By
converting the linguistic agreement expressions into membership functions, the fuzzy
pattern matching model quantitatively emulates human reasoning to produce an
output agreement value. The fuzzy inference system for this project was developed
with the Fuzzy Logic Toolbox from Matlab (1994) and is based on Mamdani
inferencing (Mamdani 1976 )

Many of the fuzzy inference systems in previous research are based on either
Mamdani or Takagi-Sugen o (TSK) inferencing (Simpson and Keller 1995, Jang et al.
1997 ). For this project, the advantage s of a Mamdani system lie in the diŒerences
of the consequents of the fuzzy rules and the aggregation and defuzzi(cid:142) cation proced-
ures of each system. Mamdani fuzzy inference systems are rule based decision models
that produce mathematical control statements as output membership functions to
handle the interactions of the inputs to the system (Jang et al. 1997). The design of
this system requires the developer to create both input and output membership
functions from linguistic interpretations of a subject. Through the compositional rule
of inference and a defuzzi(cid:142) cation algorithm, Mamdani systems produce an overall
output value from the output membership functions (Jang et al. 1997). The advantage
of Mamdani fuzzy inference systems is that the fuzzy input and output membership
functions are better suited to handle fuzziness and data uncertainty and work better
with human input. A disadvantag e is that the defuzzi(cid:142) cation process is computa-
tionally intensive and not easily subjected to rigorous quantitative analysis. Unlike
Mamdani systems, TSK fuzzy inference systems only contain fuzzy input membership
functions since the consequences of the rules are crisp polynomial functions. Thus,
the reasoning mechanism of a TSK system can not follow the compositional rule of
inference and produces a (cid:142) nal output value from the weighted average of the rule
consequences. By avoiding the mathematical complexities of the defuzzi(cid:142) cation
procedure, TSK systems are better suited for mathematical analysis. A signi(cid:142) cant
disadvantag e for this project is that the crisp rule outputs make a TSK model
counterintuitive due to the inability to propagate fuzziness from the input to outputs
in a appropriate manner (Jang et al. 1997). Also, the simpli(cid:142) cation of the consequents
with crisp polynomial functions can lead to loss of membership linguistic meanings.
Figure 2 is a (cid:143) owchart of the four basic elements of the Mamdani fuzzy inference
system for the matching of the unique polygons. The crisp input values are the
intersection and complement ratios from the unique polygons
calculated areal
mapping.

The output

local matching values depend on the fuzzy relational and
compositional algorithms that comprise and link the sections of the fuzzy inference
network.

3.3. Creation of the input and output membership functions

The creation of the input membership functions depends on the development of
a linguistic scaling of the local matchings for the unique polygons from the Boolean

Figure 2. Four stages of designing a Mamdani fuzzy inference system.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

83

areal intersection and complement ratios. Formally, the semantic expressions are
needed as answers to the question: ‘What is the possibility that the land use is similar
for a speci(cid:142) c localized comparison of unique polygons?’. A (cid:142) ve point scale is generated
ranging from ‘very low’ to ‘very high’. The linguistic values and their descriptions
are in table 1.

To transform the crisp intersection and complement numbers into linguistic
values, membership functions for each of the qualitative local matching scales are
subjectively devised. Figure 3 identi(cid:142) es the shape and parameters of the membership
functions for the (cid:142) ve linguistic scaling expressions for the areal intersection input
data. The same membership functions also apply to the areal complements since
they are computed from the intersection values. Two distinct types of membership
functions are evident: (1) the sigmoidal curve (very low and very high), and (2) the
generalized bell curve (low, medium, and high).

Simpson and Keller (1995) describe a sigmoidal membership function as a left
or right open curve, asymmetrical with respect to its crossover point. At the crossover
point the values of the membership function are rising toward (or falling from) a
plateau of complete membership. The asymmetric open structure of a sigmoidal
membership function makes it appropriate for representing concepts such as ‘very
low’ or ‘very high’ because values above or below a speci(cid:142) c point are assigned
complete membership or non-membership. In terms of localized map comparisons,
the sigmoidal curves depict instances where the land use agreement between maps
is known with a high degree of certainty. When an input value falls within the

Table 1.

Input linguistic local matching interpretations.

Scaling value

Description

Very low
Low
Medium

High
Very high

De(cid:142) nite land use diŒerences; Boolean areal intersection is very low
Land use diŒerences very likely; areal intersection is low
Possible land use diŒerences; areal
similar
Land use diŒerences very unlikely; areal agreement is high
Land uses are identical; areal agreement close to perfect

intersections and complements are

Figure 3. Membership functions for areal interesection linguistic values.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 84

C. Power et al.

plateau range of either sigmoidal curve, a person intuitively believes that the Boolean
area measurement represents the actual degree of agreement between the maps.

A generalized bell membership function is a symmetrical closed curve consisting
of two transitional membership slopes connected by a total membership plateau. At
the two crossover points, membership grades rise monotonically towards one plateau
while they fall from another. The generalized bell functions (low, medium, and high)
in (cid:142) gure 3 represent instances where the user believes that the Boolean areal informa-
tion does not accurately describe the local matching between two maps. A generalized
bell function is appropriate for these situations because its two transitional slopes
enable it to determine if a Boolean areal ratio value underestimates or overestimates
the actual local agreement. By shifting the emphasis of gradual membership to the
boundaries of the curves, a Boolean ratio value is fuzzi(cid:142) ed if it falls beyond the
lower or upper boundary of the total membership plateau.

Note that the membership functions in (cid:142) gure 3 overlap. The degree of overlap is
subjectively estimated to handle the uncertainty in the linguistic containment expres-
sions and allow values to have multiple memberships in the function set (Simpson
and Keller 1995 ).

Based on an analysis of the data and previous research on land use dynamics
(White et al. 1997), a third set of input membership functions is used to account for
the eŒect of the number of pixels comprising the unique polygons. There is a strong
possibility that many of the polygons identi(cid:142) ed by the grouping procedure will
consist of one or two pixels. The problem that arises is whether or not a single pixel
disagreement is actually change or a random artefact in the data. The calculation of
a global matching value could be adversely aŒected by assigning the same weight to
these small unique polygons as to the larger ones.

Figure 4 displays the pixel group membership functions, both being sigmoidal
curves. The input data ranges from one to four since the pixel information is divided
into four distinct categories: (1) one pixel, (2) two pixels, (3) three pixels, and
(4) > three pixels.

The output from the fuzzy inference system is a set of linguistic expressions that
describe the local matchings for the unique polygons. The output linguistic statements

Figure 4. Membership functions for pixel groupings.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

85

are based on a (cid:142) ve point evaluation scale (table 2) and require a membership function
for each linguistic value. The output membership set ((cid:142) gure 5) consists of two
sigmoidal and three Gaussian membership curves.

As with the input membership functions, the local matching output membership
functions overlap. There is no point in the set where the output local matching value
can have single membership in a linguistic value. Any derived output value will have
multiple membership in the linguistic set, which is necessary to account for any
uncertainties in the calculated local matchings.

3.4. Fuzzi(cid:142) cation

The second stage in the development of the fuzzy inference system is the fuzz-
i(cid:142) cation of the input data. Fuzzi(cid:142) cation of an input variable characterizing a unique
polygon involves locating the crisp input value on the x-axis of the membership
functions and estimating the corresponding memberships from the y-axis. The
resulting fuzzy vector consists of the memberships for each linguistic map agreement
expression arranged from left to right:

F 5

[ f1, f2, f3, ..., fn] such that (cid:158)

fi $ 1

(2)

N

i= 1

Since fuzzi(cid:142) cation produces as many vectors as there are input variables, in this
application three fuzzy vectors are generated for each unique polygon in a map
comparison analysis.

Table 2. Linguistic labels of the output membership functions.

Linguistic label

Output function type

Very Poor
Poor
Good
Very Good
Perfect

Sigmoidal
Gaussian
Gaussian
Gaussian
Sigmoidal

Figure 5. Local matching output membership functions.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 86

C. Power et al.

3.5. Rule based inference

The essential part of a fuzzy inference system is a set of fuzzy rules that are
related by means of a fuzzy implication function and a compositional rule of inference
(Jang et al. 1997). Fuzzy rules are a collection of linguistic If-Then statements that
describe how a fuzzy inference system makes a decision about categorizing an input
or controlling an output (Simpson and Keller 1995).

With fuzzy rule-based reasoning, the fuzzy rules are represented by a fuzzy
implication function. The implication process de(cid:142) nes the associations between the
input membership functions and determines the consequence of a rule. Furthermore,
the fuzzy implication of a rule depends on its If-Then connective operator, which
expresses how a fuzzy rule is delineated by a fuzzy relation (Jang et al. 1997 ). The
premise variables of the rules in the local matching rule-base are connected with a
conjunctive T norm which satis(cid:142) es the condition:

t(a, b) 5 Min(a, b)

(3)

where Min sets the upper boundary of the function as the intersection of a and b.
Formally, a T -norm refers to a logical AND connective so that fuzzy rules are
written as

If A and B then C

To ensure that the rule-base exhibited both consistency and completeness, ten
rules (table 3 ) are created for the rule-base of the local matching fuzzy inference
system. The rule-base only need include the rules for which the areal intersection
and complement ratios are opposites.

Under Mamdani inference, the critical step in the implication process is (cid:142) nding
the consequence of each rule by combining its strength and output membership
function (Jager 1995). The consequence of a rule is computed by clipping an output

Table 3. Rules for the local matching fuzzy inference system.

Rule #

Rule structure

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

If (Area_Inter is Very_Low) and (Area_Comp is Very_High) and (Pixel_Group
is Small ) then (Local is Poor)
If (Area_Inter is Very_Low) and (Area_Comp is Very_High) and (Pixel_Group
is Large) then (Local is Very_Poor)
If (Area_Inter is Low) and (Area_Comp is High) and (Pixel_Group is Small ) then
(Local is Good)
If (Area_Inter is Low) and (Area_Comp is High) and (Pixel_Group is Large) then
(Local is Poor)
If (Area_Inter is Medium) and (Area_Comp is Medium) and (Pixel_Group is
Small ) then (Local is Good)
If (Area_Inter is Medium) and (Area_Comp is Medium) and (Pixel_Group is
Large) then (Local is Good)
If (Area_Inter is High) and (Area_Comp is Low) and (Pixel_Group is Small ) then
(Local is Good)
If (Area_Inter is High) and (Area_Comp is Low) and (Pixel_Group is Large) then
(Local is Very_Good)
If (Area_Inter is Very_High) and (Area_Comp is Very_Low) and (Pixel_Group
is Small ) then (Local is Perfect)
If (Area_Inter is Very_High) and (Area_Comp is Very_Low) and (Pixel_Group
is Large) then (Local is Perfect)

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

87

membership function at the height equal to the fuzzy support of the premise of a
rule. For example, (cid:142) gure 6 is a graphical representation of the ten rules in the
database of the local matching fuzzy inference system. Note that the point of
intersection between the vertical lines and the membership functions determines the
membership value for each input variable in the rules. Depending on the pixel value,
the height of the output local matching curve is equal to the lowest value of either
the areal intersection or areal complement. For example, the height of the output
curve for rule 8 is equal to the areal intersection value.

Since the purpose of the fuzzy inference system is to map the input variables to
an output subset, the consequence of each activated rule needs to be combined into
a single output distribution (Jager 1995). The local matching fuzzy inference system
utilizes the Max-Min compositional rule of inference for the aggregation of fuzzy
rules. More speci(cid:142) cally, the inference scheme is applied as (Nguyen and Walker
1997 ):

M(x, u) 5 Max(Aj(x) MinBj(u)),

j 5 1, 2, ..., n

(4)

where Max and Min are the logical OR and AND fuzzy connective operators,
respectively.

With Max-Min composition as the inference rule, the local matching for unique

polygon Xi is expressed as:

L m(Xi) 5 Max[Min(Area_Inter (Xi), Area_Comp (Xi), Pixel Group(Xi))]

(5)

3.6. Defuzzi(cid:142) cation

To obtain a crisp local matching value, it is necessary to transform the output
membership function produced by the inference algorithm into a crisp number.
Although numerous defuzzi(cid:142) cation methods have been suggested (Jager 1995,
Nguyen and Walker 1997 ), the centroid of area defuzzi(cid:142) cation is used to calculate
the local matching numbers because the output fuzzy sets are one dimensional (Jager

Figure 6. Rule-base and inference structure of the fuzzy inference system.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 88

C. Power et al.

1995 ). The centroid of area calculates the crisp value of the output variable by
(cid:142) nding the centre of gravity value of the aggregated output membership function
(Nguyen and Walker 1997). This is computed as follows (Jager 1995 ):

Z(B) 5

Ÿ cub(y)y dy
Ÿ cub(y) dy

(6)

where Z is the centroid of area and ub is the membership value in the output
distribution B.

For example, see (cid:142) gure 6. The centroid of area defuzzi(cid:142) cation gives a local
matching value of 0.73 for this sample unique polygon. The vertical line through the
output membership function depicts the location of the centroid of area of the output
distribution.

3.7. Global matching

The computation of a fuzzy global similarity number that expresses the overall
areal agreement or estimation of change between two land use maps involves the
aggregation of each of the local matchings for the unique polygons. The logic behind
the aggregation procedure is that a local matching value is a measurement of areal
agreement between two land use polygons. By multiplying a local matching number
by the area of the unique polygon, an agreement area is calculated. Then, the
aggregation of the local matching areas relative to the total area of the unique
polygons map produces the global similarity value. This is computed as:

g 5

i

L m(xi) Area(xi)

T otal Area

,

i 5 1, 2, ..., n

(7)

where n is the number of unique polygons in the template layer.

4. Description of the datasets

The data sources for this paper consist of a set of atemporal urban land use
maps and a set of multi-temporal forest inventory maps. The fuzzy inference system
compares atemporal maps for a map similarity analysis and multi-temporal maps
for land use change detection.

Dataset one ((cid:142) gure 7), which will be referred to as Cinc1, is comprised of two
simulated land use maps of Cincinnati, Ohio. A cellular automata based model of
urban dynamics developed by White et al. (1997 ) produced these maps. From a set
of quasi-deterministic transition rules, the simulated map was generated by ten
iterations of the cellular model, with an antecedent land use map as the initial
con(cid:142) guration. Both maps are 80 rows by 80 columns rasters at a pixel resolution of
250 m. The problem is to determine how similar the two simulations are. Map 1 is
the template or reference layer in the matching process.

The two land use maps in dataset two ((cid:142) gure 8), called Forest 1, are classi(cid:142) ed
Landsat TM images that were acquired on 29 July, 1985 and 3 August, 1991,
respectively. The images were georegistered with less than 0.5 pixel RMS to the
UTM grid on NTS map sheet 12H/04 producing a pixel resolution of 30 m. A
maximum likelihood algorithm classi(cid:142) ed the images into forest inventory types based
on (cid:142) eld information. However, the forest inventory maps used in this paper are
subscenes containing 334 rows by 222 columns that were extracted from the original
imagery and are centred on a region to the Northwest of Pasadena, Newfoundland,

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 (cid:158)
Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

89

Figure 7. Land use maps of Cinc1.

Figure 8. Forest inventory maps of Forest1.

Canada. For the matching process, the 1985 map is the template, and the 1991 map
is the matching layer.

5. Results

The (cid:142) rst section of the results analyses the local matches and mismatches to
estimate the degree and nature of the land use agreement between the maps of the
datasets. The local matching values from the fuzzy inference system are the
membership values of the polygons on map two relative to a template map.

The local matching values for Cinc1 are illustrated in (cid:142) gure 9, which visually
indicates a relatively high degree of agreement between the two maps for most areas.
The low matching values generally consist of smaller polygons that are dispersed
throughout the study area. Along the lines of a traditional comparison matrix, the
incidences of land use agreement are measured by a table of frequency of matches
and mismatches for each land use category. Similar to the procedure presented by

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 90

C. Power et al.

Figure 9. Local template polygon matchings for Cinc1.

Gopal and Woodcock (1994 ), a fuzzy a cut of 0.70 is used to measure the frequency
of local matches. Formally,

Local Match (X, a) 5 G1

0

if uc > 0.7
otherwise

(8)

A land use polygon on a second map is similar to a template polygon if its local

matching membership grade is > 0.70.

Table 4 displays the results for Cinc1 using the fuzzy threshold agreement value.
The (cid:142) rst column shows the land use type, and the second column displays the total
number of polygons for each map category. The matches and mismatches are given
as numbers of polygons in columns three and four while the last column shows the
percentage of land use agreement for each land use class.

The similarity percentages for the rivers and transportatio n systems are in perfect

Table 4. Local matchings for land use polygons of Cinc1.

Land use type

# of Polygons

Match

Mismatch

Unclassi(cid:142) ed
Commercial
Industrial
Residential
River
Railway
Roads
Total

80
79
106
95
2
6
2
370

19
32
35
34
2
6
2
130

61
47
71
61
0
0
0
240

Evaluation of
similarity (%)

23.75
40.50
33.01
35.80
100
100
100
61.87

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

91

(100%) agreement, but the results for the other categories suggest that substantial
land use disagreement is evident. With 130 matches and 240 mismatches, the land
use maps should be considerably diŒerent, but this discrepancy is due to the pixel
resolution of the data. With a resolution of 250 m, most of the polygons in the
grouping template layer for Cinc 1 consist of one or two pixels. These small template
polygons account for most of the mismatches between the maps even though they
represent a small portion of the study area.

The matchings evaluations in table 5 show that the smaller number of matched
polygons accounted for 85.98% of the template area. In addition, 188 of the 240
mismatches were for one or two pixel polygons that combined occupy only 4.73%
of the template map.

The local matchings for Forest1 indicate that little land use change has occurred
from 1985 to 1991 ((cid:142) gure 10). A majority of the matchings range from 0.70 to 1,

Table 5. Evaluation of matches and mismatches for Cinc1.

De(cid:142) nite matches

De(cid:142) nite mismatches

130
32.43% of polygons
85.98% of total area
221 of 370 polygons are 1 pixel; 69 are
matched
41 of 370 polygons are 2 pixels; 5 are matched

240
67.57 % of polygons
14.02% of total area
152 are mismatched; 3.45% of the total area

36 are mismatched; 1.28% of the total area

Figure 10. Local template polygon matchings for Forest1.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 92

C. Power et al.

representing a high degree of containment of the 1991 map within the 1985
template layer.

The matching information in table 6 shows that there is a high degree of polygonal
land use pattern agreement between the maps. All of the land use categories, except
cleared and no data, have agreement percentages greater than 83.0%. Unlike the
previous datasets, the matched template polygons outnumber the mismatched poly-
gons. For example, 321 of the 402 template polygons (see table 7 ) matched their
counterparts on the 1991 map for an 81.4% overall areal agreement between the
maps. This diŒerence in matching results may be attributed to the 30-m pixel
resolution of the land use maps in Forest1. The smaller scale of the template resulted
in most of its unique polygons containing more than two pixels. Table 7 shows that
101 of the 401 polygons consisted of one or two pixels, of which 15 were mismatched.

5.1. Evaluation of Boolean versus fuzzy global similarity

The performance of the global matching procedure can be estimated by compar-
ing the global matching values to a number of standard Boolean similarity measures.
For this purpose, the global matching values are compared to the Coe(cid:141) cient of
Areal Agreement (CAA) (Taylor 1977), Kappa coe(cid:141) cient of agreement (Rosen(cid:142) eld
and Fitzpatrick-Lins 1986, Singh 1989), and the Tau coe(cid:141) cient of agreement (Ma
and Redmond 1995).

Firstly, note that the global matchings in table 8 fall between the calculated
Kappa and CAA numbers. For example, the global matching value for Cinc1 is 0.71,
which is between the Kappa value of 0.64 and the CAA of 0.75. This is the expected
result because of the problems with both Kappa and CAA. Foody (1992) found that
Kappa consistently overestimates chance agreement and underestimates map

Table 6. Local matchings for land use polygons of Forest1.

Land use type

Match

Mismatch

# of
polygons

Evaluation of
similarity (%)

No data
Water
Cleared
Non-forested
bF
MbF
MO
Spruce
Deciduous
Total

20
30
21
118
60
75
56
10
12
402

2
28
4
105
53
62
49
10
8
321

18
2
17
13
7
13
7
0
4
81

10.0
93.3
19.1
88.9
88.3
82.7
87.5
100.0
66.7
70.7

Table 7. Evaluation of the matches and mismatches of Forest1.

De(cid:142) nite matches

De(cid:142) nite mismatches

321 polygons
79.6 % of the polygons
81.4% of total area
62 of 402 polygons are 1 pixel; 56 are matched
39 of 402 polygons are 2 pixels; 30 are
matched

81 polygons
20.4% of the polygons
18.6% of total area
6 are mismatched; 0.48% of the total area
9 are mismatched; 0.60% of the total area

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

93

Table 8. Boolean and fuzzy global similarity statistics.

Dataset

Cinc1
Forest1

Fuzzy global
matching

0.71
0.78

Boolean
Kappa

0.64
0.76

Boolean
CAA

0.75
0.81

Boolean Tau

0.70
0.78

agreement. Congalton et al. (1983) state that the CAA is an unreliable measurement
of map similarity because it overestimates the agreement between maps by not
accounting for chance agreement. Based on this information, a preliminary require-
ment of an acceptable global similarity procedure is that its output value for a
particular map comparison fall between the computed Kappa and the CAA values.
The Tau coe(cid:141) cients and global matchings both satisfy the above requirement.
Furthermore, the Tau values of 0.70 and 0.78 are very similar to the global matchings
values of 0.71 and 0.78 (see table 8). Ma and Redmond (1995) describe how the use
of Tau over Kappa and CAA is justi(cid:142) ed for its ability to incorporate probabilities
into the calculations, which avoids overestimating the random agreement between
maps. However, the authors failed to consider that Tau depends on a pixel-by-pixel
comparison to obtain the observed agreements
the map categories.
Misregistration of one or both of the maps could decrease the computed agreement
value. By accounting for locational and attribute uncertainties in the computation
of the local matching, the fuzzy global matching procedure is an appropriate alternat-
ive to the Boolean methods for the analysis of map similarity. Unlike the Boolean
approach, chance agreement and misregistration problems are handled by the overlap
of the output membership functions for the local matchings.

for

5.2. Fuzzy versus Boolean land use comparison results

The advantage s of fuzzy pattern matching over the Boolean approach are di(cid:141) cult
to quantify because both procedures have diŒerent purposes. As a result, a visual
interpretation of the diŒerences between the fuzzy and Boolean agreement maps is
the basis of the discussion of the advantage s of fuzzy pattern matching as a map
comparison technique.

Figure 11 contains the fuzzy and Boolean land use similarity maps for Cinc1.
Map B is a Boolean agreement map containing discrete agreement and disagreement
categories. The fuzzy land use agreement layer (Map A) displays the land use
diŒerences between the input maps as a continuous range of possibilities of member-
ship in a land use disagreement class. The visualization of the disagreement possibil-
ities on the fuzzy map is based on a gradation in the intensity and hue of the colour
for the disagreement class with the possibility of disagreement between the maps
being highest for the darkest polygons and decreasing as the colour lightens.

The primary advantage of a fuzzy agreement map is that it contains more
information and gives a more realistic interpretation of the land use characteristics
of a dataset. The fuzzy agreement information allows the user to concentrate on
speci(cid:142) c characteristics of the results, such as whether a speci(cid:142) c land use type accounts
for most of the darker disagreement areas. Since a cellular automata land use
prediction model produced dataset one, an analyst can use the information about
the higher disagreement possibility areas to recalibrate the model to produce better
prediction results. This may be di(cid:141) cult or impossible with Boolean results because

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 94

C. Power et al.

Figure 11. Fuzzy (A) versus Boolean (B) agreement for Cinc1.

the Boolean approaches often lose agreement
dichotomous similarity categories.

information when producing

A second advantage of the fuzzy agreement map is that it retains the form of the
template layer. This gives a better visual impression of where land use diŒerences
are situated spatially. For example, the areas of lowest disagreement on (cid:142) gure 11
represent the river and transportatio n system of the study area. However, the Boolean
map consists of a patternless mixture of disagreement and agreement areas that
make it di(cid:141) cult to relate the result to the original land use maps. It is apparent that

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

95

the discrete classi(cid:142) cation from the Boolean model has simpli(cid:142) ed the land use
similarity results.

The comparison of the forest inventory maps in Forest1 demonstrate s how well
fuzzy land use pattern matching detected forest succession during the six year study
period. It should be mentioned that forest regeneration and succession are complex
and complicated processes that are often di(cid:141) cult to model with traditional Boolean
techniques. This is partially due to the inability of such techniques to represent
intermediate growth patterns. Unless a major event, such as a forest (cid:142) re, has occurred,
the patterns of change in forest inventory over six years will tend to be sporadic and
fragmented (Meades and Moores 1989 ).

The sensitivity of the fuzzy pattern matching model to complex growth patterns
was determined by concentrating the change detection analysis on the cleared and
non-forested categories ((cid:142) gure 12). These forest inventory types were considered to
be the ones most likely to produce mixed succession and regeneration results. The
Boolean classi(cid:142) cation identi(cid:142) es the discrete change and no change classes for each
forest inventory type but fails to (cid:142) nd areas of mixed change. The intermediate change
information is lost because the Boolean approach constrains and simpli(cid:142) es the
change detection process.

The transitional range of change on the fuzzy land use possibility map ((cid:142) gure 13)
shows that the fuzzy model detected intermediate and de(cid:142) nitive change patterns.
Several areas for the non-forested category have an intermediate possibility of change
and are displayed in a medium grey on the disagreement membership map. These
are regions where the matching process has determined that approximatel y half of
a template polygon is contained within the 1991 map. Consider the large polygon
that is outlined in the Northwest corner of the study area. The Boolean model
subdivides this region into areas of de(cid:142) nite change and no change. This suggests
that entire sections have undergone a complete land use change while other regions
have remained unchanged. It is unrealistic that a Boolean boundary could separate
where forest succession has taken place. In contrast, the intermediate change

Figure 12. Boolean change classes for cleared and non-forested.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 96

C. Power et al.

Figure 13. Fuzzy change possibilities for cleared and non-forested.

possibility classi(cid:142) cation on the fuzzy map indicates that gradual forest in(cid:142) lling has
occurred, but there has not been a complete transformation in forest inventory type.
In this case, the fuzzy map has more information about the change characteristics
of the study area and gives a more appropriate interpretation of dynamics of forest
species succession.

A further advantage of using fuzzy change possibilities rather than Boolean
categories is that there are visually fewer one pixel agreements and disagreements
on the fuzzy map. With the resolution of the input data being 30 m, the fuzzy
inference system is sensitive to the possibility of random disagreements between the
maps while the Boolean model identi(cid:142) es every pixel-by-pixel disagreement as change.

6. Conclusion

Historically, the comparison of thematic maps has been the basis for many land
use change detection procedures. Traditional pixel-by-pixel map comparison tech-
niques are suspect because of possible map registration and error propagation
problems. These Boolean similarity operations often can not adequately account for
the uncertainty and complexity inherent in spatial information. A fuzzy regional
polygon-by-polygo n comparison methodology mitigates these di(cid:141) culties.

In this paper it has been demonstrate d that Hierarchical Fuzzy Pattern Matching
can be successfully used to measure both map similarities and land use change
between maps while accounting for the uncertainties in the datasets. It has been
shown that a fuzzy local polygon-by-polygo n land use comparison is less aŒected
by possible map registration problems because the fuzzy inference system indirectly
fuzzi(cid:142) es the boundaries of the polygons. The local matching results from the fuzzy
inference system for the project datasets demonstrate the advantage of the fuzzy
approach over the Boolean comparison methods. Speci(cid:142) cally, the fuzzy land use
change possibility maps provide a better interpretation of the land use agreement
characteristics of a dataset than do Boolean maps. The transitional change categories
on a fuzzy map contain more change information and better represent the complex
and intermediate change conditions. In addition, fuzzy maps give a better visual
representation of where change has occurred spatially by retaining the form of the

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

97

template layers. The global matching results for the datasets analyzed outperform a
number of commonly used overall similarity statistics.

The work presented in this paper is a (cid:142) rst attempt at developing a fuzzy map
comparison model that is a viable alternative to the Boolean map comparison
procedures. Future research should be directed at several issues in order to expand
the applicability of the model. First of all, the local matching process can be extended
beyond the areal comparison of maps. The fuzzy inference system can be restructured
to include membership functions for the matching of complex polygonal properties,
such as shape and fractal dimension. These additional variables could aid in the
explanation and description of the diŒerences between maps. For example, an increase
in fractal dimension from one year to the next may be the result of an increase in
the complexity of the land use pattern due to urban expansion.

Secondly, the reliability of the fuzzy map similarity results and the performance
of the fuzzy pattern matching model should be (cid:142) eld tested against a ground truthing
dataset. Boolean comparison procedures generally assess the accuracy of change
detection results with an error matrix and Kappa analysis. However, Foody (1995)
states that a standard error matrix is inappropriate for computing the accuracy of
a fuzzy change detection analysis because of its inability to accommodate the fuzziness
in both the land use maps and the ground data. Ground data can rarely be assumed
to be error free and often contain attribute and locational uncertainty. Therefore, a
fuzzy accuracy assessment should handle the uncertainty in the agreement maps and
ground data during the similarity analysis. For this project, the accuracy assessment
will be a soft estimation of the closeness of the qualitative fuzzy labels assigned to
the change maps and (cid:142) eld test sites. Note that fuzzy agreement labels will have to
be qualitatively assigned to the test sites for the closeness measurement to be possible.
Since the agreement maps and ground data will be fuzzy, the entropy of each data
source can be calculated and used to determine an index of accuracy based on cross-
entropy (Zhang and Foody 1998). Cross-entropy will use the entropy values to
measure the distance or closeness of the probability distribution of the agreement
map to the probability distribution of the ground data. Formally, the closer the
agreement map to the ground data, the lower the cross-entropy and the higher the
map similarity accuracy. For a detailed discussion of cross-entropy see Foody (1995)
and Chang et al. (1994). As a single index value, cross entropy can be readily
interpreted to evaluate how well the fuzzy agreement and disagreement patterns
represent change on the ground.

Thirdly, research is required into the implementation of optimization techniques
to obtain the best structure for the fuzzy inference system. It is possible that the
local matching results are inaccurate because the shape of the membership curves
and the amount of overlap between the functions are less than optimal. Preliminary
research suggests that the solution may be to replace the fuzzy inference system with
an Adaptive Neural Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS). An ANFIS is functionally
equivalent to a fuzzy inference system except that it uses a backpropagatio n neural
network algorithm to (cid:142) ne tune the internal structure of the system. Using fuzzy
agreement training data, the connective updating capabilities of the ANFIS would
continually shape the membership functions of the matching system until a learning
error threshold is reached (Jang et al. 1997). It is important to recognize that other
fuzzy neural network systems, particularly fuzzy ARTMAP, are also applicable for
the optimization process. The viability of fuzzy ARTMAP should be investigated
because it avoids the problems of over(cid:142) tting and learning forgetfulness associated

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 98

C. Power et al.

with backpropagatio n (Carpenter and Grossberg 1997, Carpenter et al. 1999, Gopal
et al. 1999, Abuelgasim et al. 1999). More importantly, the membership values in
the activation level of the network can approximate the values of the membership
curves in the fuzzy inference system. During the learning process, ARTMAP would
change the activity patterns and adjusts the network weights until it reached vigilance,
thus indicating a match between the input areal values and a land use agreement
pattern. From a trained network, the membership values in the activation node for
each agreement category could be used to optimize the corresponding membership
functions in the fuzzy inference system.

Finally, future research must address the spatial dependency between the land
use maps. The spatial autocorrelation values between the template and comparison
polygons should be calculated and represented as membership functions in the fuzzy
inference system. The inclusion of spatial autocorrelation into the fuzzy areal map
comparison could expand the similarity analysis beyond the direct comparison of
polygons to a comparison of the surroundings of the template polygons. This would
be similar to a remote sensing analysis of texture or context on multi-temporal
images. By enabling the model to be sensitive to spatial dependencies, the map
comparison could be performed on highly segmented and fragmented land use
patterns that are comprised of a complex intermixture of unique polygons.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada under grant 410-95-140 9 and by the Land Water Environment
Information Technology Programme (LWI/ICES) of the Dutch government. Also,
the helpful suggestions of two anonymous reviewers are greatly acknowledged.

References
Abuelgasim, A. A., Ross, W. D., Gopal, S., and Woodcock, C. E., 1999, Change detection
using fuzzy neural networks: environmental damage assessment after the Gulf War.
Remote Sensing of Environment, 70, 208–223.

Blonda, P., Pasquarello, G., Losito, S., Mori, A., Posa, F., and Ragno, D., 1991, An
Experiment for the integration of multitemporal remotely sensed images based on a
fuzzy logic approach. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 12, 463– 476.

Bonham-Carter, G., 1994, Geographic Information Systems for Geoscientists: modelling with

GIS (Oxford; Pergamon Press), pp. 235–238.

Burrough, P., 1989, Fuzzy mathematical methods for soil survey and land evaluation. Journal

of Soil Science, 40, 477– 492.

Cannon, R. L., Jitenda, V. D., Bezdek, J. C., and Trivedi, M. M., 1986, Segmentation of a
Thematic Mapper image using the fuzzy c-means clustering algorithm. IEEE
T ransactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, GE24, 400– 408.

Carpenter, G., and Grossberg, S., 1997, Fuzzy art, In Fuzzy Engineering, edited by B. Kosko

(Carmel: Prentice Hall), pp. 467–497.

Carpenter, G., Gopal, S., Macomber, S., Martens, S., and Woodcock, C., 1999, A neural
network method for mixture estimation for vegetation mapping. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 70, 138– 152.

Chang, C., Chen, K., Wang, J., and Althouse, M., 1994, A relative entropy-based approach

to image thresholding. Pattern Recognition, 27, 1275–1289.

Congalton, R. G., Oderwald, R., and Mead, R. A., 1983, Assessing Landsat classi(cid:142) cation
accuracy using discrete multivariate analysis statistical techniques. Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing, 49, 1671–1678.

Dai, X. L., and Khorram, S.,1999, Remotely sensed change detection bBased on arti(cid:142) cial

neural networks. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 65, 1187–1194.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

99

Eastman, R. J., 1992, Idrisi T echnical Reference Manual

(Clark University Publishing),

pp. 77–80.

Edwards, G., and Lowell, K., 1996, Modelling uncertainty in photointerpreted boundaries.

Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 62, 337–391.

Foody, G. M., 1992, On the compensation for chance agreement in image classi(cid:142) cation
accuracy assessment. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 58, 1459–1460.
Foody, G. M., 1995, Cross-entropy for the evaluation of the accuracy of a fuzzy land cover

classi(cid:142) cation with fuzzy ground data. ISPRS Journal of Remote Sensing, 17, 2–12.

Gong, P., 1993, Change detection using Principal Components Analysis and Fuzzy Sets

Theory. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing, 19, 22–29.

Gopal, S., Woodcock, C. E., and Strahler, A. H., 1999, Fuzzy neural network classi(cid:142) cation
of global land cover from a 1ß AVHRR Data Set. Remote Sensing of Environment,
67, 230–243.

Gopal, S., and Woodcock, C. E., 1994, Theory and methods for accuracy assessment of
Thematic Maps using fuzzy sets. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing,
60, 181–188.

Hodgson, M. E., Jensen, J. R., Halkard, E. M., and Coulter, M., 1988, Monitoring wood
stork foraging habitat using remote sensing and geographic information systems.
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 54, 1601–1607.

Jager, R., 1995, Fuzzy L ogic in Control (Delft, The Netherlands: Delft University of Technology

Publishing), pp. 44–147.

Jang, J. S. R., Sun, C. T., and Mizutani, E., 1997, Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft Computing: An
Computational Approach to L earning and Machine Intelligence (Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey: Prentice Hall), pp. 73–93.

Jensen, J. R., 1981, Urban change detection mapping using Landsat digital data. T he American

Cartographer, 8, 127–147.

Jensen, J. R,, Ramsey, E. W., Halkard E. M., Christensen, E. J., and Sharitz, R. R., 1987,
Inland wetland change detection using aircraft MSS data. Photogrammetric Engineering
and Remote Sensing, 53, 521–529.

Klir, G., 1988, Fuzzy Sets, Uncertainty, and Information (New Jersey: Prentice Hall ), pp. 2–50.
Kollias,V. J., and Voliotis, A., 1991, Fuzzy reasoning in the development of geographical
information systems FRSIS: a prototype soil information system with fuzzy retrieval
capabilities. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5, 209–223.

Ma., Z., and Redmond, R. H., 1995, Tau coe(cid:141) cients for accuracy assessment of classi(cid:142) cation
of remote sensing data. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 61, 435– 439.
Macleod, R. D., and Congalton, R. G., 1998, A quantitative comparison of change detection
algorithms for monitoring eelgrass from remotely sensed data. Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing, 64, 207–216.

MacMillian, W. D., 1978, An introduction to the theory of fuzzy sets in the context of the
construction of representational spatial economic theory. In T owards the Dynamic
Analysis of Spatial Systems, edited by R. L. Martin, N. J. Thrift, and R. J. Bennett
(London: Pion Limited), pp. 36–52.

Mamdani, E. H., 1976, Advances in the linguistic synthesis of

fuzzy logic controllers.

International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 8, 669–679.

Mas, J. F., 1999, Monitoring land-cover changes: a comparison of change detection techniques.

International Journal of Remote Sensing, 20, 139–152.

Maselli, F., Rudolph, A., and Conese, C., 1996, Fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation of spatially degraded
Thematic Mapper data for the estimation of sub-pixel components. International
Journal of Remote Sensing, 17, 537–551.

MATLAB, 1994, Fuzzy Logic Toolbox Software, 1994, Mathworks Inc., 5-40.
Meades, W. J., and Moores, L., 1989, Forest Site Classi(cid:142) cation Manual: A Field Guide to the

Damman Forest T ypes of Newfoundland (Forestry Canada), pp. 1.1–3.6.

Nguyen, H. T., and Walker, E. A., 1997, A First Course in Fuzzy L ogic (Boca Rafon, FL:

CRC Press), pp. 21–60.

Rosenfield, G. H., and Fitzpatrick-Lins, 1986, Coe(cid:141) cient of agreement as a measure of
Thematic Classi(cid:142) cation accuracy. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing,
48, 131–137.

Simpson, J. J., and Keller, R. H., 1995, An improved fuzzy logic segmentation of sea ice,

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 100

Fuzzy regional comparison of land use maps

clouds, and ocean in remotely sensed Arctic imagery. Remote Sensing of Environment,
54, 290–315.

Singh, A., 1989, Digital change detection using remote-sensing data. International Journal of

Remote Sensing, 10, 989–1003.

Sui, D., 1992, A fuzzy GIS modelling approach for urban land evaluation. Computers,

Environment, and Urban Systems, 16, 101–115.

Taylor, P., 1977, Quantitative Methods in Geography (Boston: Houghton Mi‚ in Company),

pp. 177–179.

Veregin, H., 1989, Error modelling for the map overlay operation. In T he Accuracy of Spatial
Databases, edited by M. Goodchild and S. Gopal (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 3–18.
Wang, F., 1990, Improving remote sensing image analysis through fuzzy information repres-

entation. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 56, 1163–1169.
Wang, F., Hall, G. B., and Subaryano, P., 1990, Fuzzy information representation and
processing in conventional GIS software: database design and application. International
Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 4, 261– 283.

Wickware, G. M., and Howarth, P. J., 1981, Procedures for change detection using Landsat

digital data. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 2, 277–291.

Weismiller, R. A., Kristof, S. J., Scholz, D. K., Anuta, P. E., and Momin, S. A., 1977,
Change detection in Coastal Zone environments. Photogrammetric Engineering and
Remote Sensing, 43, 1533–1539.

White, R., Engelen, G., and Injee, I., 1997, The use of constrained cellular automata for
high-resolution modelling of urban land use dynamics. Environment and Planning B,
24, 323–343.

Zadeh, L., 1965, Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8, 338–353.
Zhang, J., and Foody, G. M., 1998, A fuzzy classi(cid:142) cation of sub-urban lland cover from

remotely sensed imagery. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 19, 2721–2738.

Zimmerman, H., 1985, Fuzzy Set T heory and its Applications (Boston: Kluwer Nijhaft

Publishing), pp. 1–150.

Downloaded by [74.103.89.55] at 10:18 06 April 2014 