The Cartographic Journal
# The British Cartographic Society 2014

Vol. 51 No. 3

pp. 189–190

August 2014

Editorial
Landmarks in Mapping

In 1963 the ﬁrst British Cartographic Society Council
selected an editorial committee, appointed J. S. Keates as
Editor, and in November of that year bestowed the title
‘The Cartographic Journal’ to a new publication. The
ﬁrst issue was published in June 1964 and carried a
foreword by the new Society’s Chairman, Brigadier D.
E. O. Thackwell, who announced The Journal’s inten-
tion ‘to give news of all general cartographic activities, to
include reports of symposia, meetings, and of their
discussions, to publish articles of cartographic interest,
and to review maps, atlases and books on cartography’.
The past 50 years has seen hundreds of articles on all
aspects of cartography published as The Journal con-
tinues to set the standard in its ﬁeld. The diverse nature
of cartography has been well represented throughout
The Journal’s history with articles on every aspect of the
subject. Far more than providing a barometer of change
in cartography, together they offer a fascinating insight
into the inﬂuence of maps and mapping on society and
the evolution and impact of technology, particularly
with respect to digital media, dynamic mapping and the
upsurge in GIS.

The Journal contains numerous papers that explore
speciﬁc areas of work such as computational approaches
to new map projections, alternative generalization
algorithms and mapping for users with speciﬁc needs,
as well as papers that explore customized content,
international map products and the changing landscapes
of commercial and academic cartography. The broad
scope of work published remains a key feature of The
Journal in both its refereed and non-refereed sections
that encourage high-quality academic research and
interest papers. Many eminent cartographers
general
and cartographic scholars have chosen The Cartographic
Journal as a vehicle for disseminating their work,
establishing the publication’s distinguished reputation
and contributing to the development of many careers as
well as to cartography as a discipline.

Over the course of the last year or so, Assistant Editor
Alex Kent and I have been working hard to bring to bear
a book celebrating the 50th Anniversary of The
Cartographic Journal. We’re delighted to announce that
the book, entitled Landmarks in Mapping, launched at
the British Cartographic Society Annual Symposium in
June. Published by Maney, the book is a celebration of
the very best articles that have appeared in The Journal
during its ﬁrst 50 years and Alex and I were joined by

DOI: 10.1179/0008704114Z.000000000139

Maney’s Managing Editor Laura Bradford at a special
reception to celebrate the launch (Figure 1).

Figure 1.
Journal Editor Kenneth Field, Maney Managing Editor
Laura Bradford and Journal Assistant Editor Alex Kent celebrate
the launch of Landmarks in Mapping at a special reception

As the ﬁrst general distribution journal of cartography
to appear in English we felt it was important to mark the
ﬁrst 50 years with a landmark. In fact, this eventually
became the title of the book which seemed appropriate
both to mark the anniversary but also as a description of
the papers contained within. The process of selecting the
papers for inclusion was no easy task and involved
countless iterations and discussions among the 30 or so
members of our distinguished Editorial Board. Needless
to say, everyone has their own favourite papers, perhaps
that align with a certain interest and inevitably there was
no best method to compile a collection that matched all
tastes. We hope we’ve captured something of the ﬂavour
of The Journal’s contribution to cartographic research
and thinking and initial reviews have been extremely
positive. We’ve brought together papers that won the
annual ‘best paper’ award, some classics that perhaps
began rather more modestly and those papers that
remain core to cartographic discourse. The intent was
very much to provide a compendium that brings
together classic and contemporary papers that reﬂect
The Journal in a single, accessible issue. But a collection
of re-printed papers doesn’t sufﬁce so each reprinted
paper is accompanied by an invited reﬂection article
authored by one of the Editorial Board members. These

190

The Cartographic Journal

original papers present the original work in a context,
discuss a little of their value to cartographic discourse
and share interesting stories. The book, then, provides a
window into the very best work published in The Journal
alongside original pieces to create a genuine landmark of
the ﬁrst 50 years of publication.

This issue of The Journal brings a further 8 papers to
add to the collective works. First, Claudia Knust and
Manfred F. Buchroithner explore the way in which the
term ‘3D’ has become synonymous with a wide variety
of cartographic output and used to broadly explain a
range of different techniques. They bring much of this
reasearch together to provide a timely point of reﬂection
and help frame what 3D actually means for cartography.
Jan D. Bla´ha and Zbyneˇk Sˇteˇrba present an interesting
discussion of how Swiss expressionist painter Johannes
Itten’s principles of colour might have a practical value
to cartography. In so doing, they extend the palette (pun
intended!) that we might use beyond the traditional
colour models more formally associated with carto-
graphic practice. I never thought I’d be introducing an
article on cartographic vandalism yet Andrea Ballatore
introduces us to an emerging issue relating particularly
to the generation and curation of online volunteered
geographic information. This data is at the mercy of
intentional defacement which could very easily propa-
gate unwittingly into other map products. The way in
which this issue may be recognised, seen and addressed
is the focus of Ballatore’s paper. Most cartographers will
agree that a beautiful hill-shading adds value to a map,
albeit perhaps in an aesthetic way that is difﬁcult to
quantify. But what of the impact of different techniques
for relief representation on map use? Do they add to the
map or, perhaps, in some way detract from map reading
tasks. Katja Putto et al. present the ﬁndings of their
study into how different relief representations affect
visual search, area selection and route navigation tasks.
Attention turns
to historical cartography with Elri
Liebenberg’s ﬁne analysis of the struggle to survey
South Africa in the early-mid 1900s and the eventual
production of the ﬁrst consistently surveyed topographic
map at 1:500,000. Alexander Nossum tackles the widely
known issues of usability of Ha¨gerstrand’s space-time
cube by employing a novel approach using eye tracking

analysis. He takes two-dimensional projections of the
space-time cube and then demonstrates how visualising
through an XT and YT plane can improve identiﬁcation
of patterns in the data often obscured in the three-
dimensional original. Finally, we include a two-part
paper by Brian Robson who explores the life and works
of the little known 19th century cartographer John
Wood. Robson makes a case for a wider recognition of
Wood’s contribution to British cartography by uncover-
ing more of his work than was previously known.

While we celebrate past papers through the new book,
this issue of The Journal adds to the canon with a range
of diverse and fascinating papers in their own right…-
some of which may very well be considered for the
second volume of Landmarks in Mapping slated for
sometime around 2064. We look forward to the next
50 years and wonder on the fantastic changes that will
shape cartography in the coming years.

Kenneth Field
July 2014
Redlands, CA

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Dr Kenneth Field works
in Cartographic Re-
search and Develop-
ment at Esri Inc and
was formerly Principal
Lecturer and GIS Course
Director at Kingston Un-
iversity London. He
holds a PhD in GIS from
Leicester University and
has presented and pub-
lished widely on map
design. He is a Fellow
the British Car-
of
tographic Society, Royal Geographic Society and a
Chartered Geographer (GIS). He is also Chair of the
ICA Commission on Map Design (mapdesign.icaci.
personal blog (cartonerd.com)
org), maintains
forget you can
and tweets
follow
Twitter
(@CartoJnl).

(@kennethﬁeld). Don’t

The Cartographic

Journal

on

a

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

