International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 20, No. 5, May 2006, 469–490

Research Article

Multidimensional visualisation of degrees of relevance of geographic
data

GOBE HOBONA*, PHILIP JAMES and DAVID FAIRBAIRN
School of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK

(Received 18 January 2005; in final form 1 December 2005 )

The ever-increasing number of spatial data sets accessible through spatial data
clearinghouses continues to make geographic information retrieval and spatial
data discovery major challenges. Such challenges have been addressed in the
discipline of Information Retrieval through ranking of data according to inferred
degrees of relevance. Spatial data, however, present an additional challenge as
they are characteristically made up of geometry, attribute and, optionally,
temporal components. As these components are mutually independent of one
another, this paper suggests that they be ranked independently of one another.
The representation of the results of the independent ranking of these three
components of spatial data suggests that representation of the results of the
ranking process requires an alternative approach to currently used textual ranked
lists: visualisation of relevance in a three-dimensional visualisation environment.
To illustrate the possible application of such an approach, a prototype browser is
presented.

Keywords: Geographic Information Retrieval; Geospatial metadata; Ontology;
Multidimensional visualisation; Ranking

1.

Introduction

Advances in geospatial data collection techniques and the uptake of the spatial data
infrastructure (SDI) initiative have led to improved geospatial data availability
(Crompvoets et al. 2004). A major challenge has become how to enable spatial data
discovery systems to help the user in finding the most relevant data sets in the ever-
growing global SDI. A key component of any SDI is a catalogue of metadata—
formal descriptions of data—that can be queried to search for data and resources
using space, time and thematic attributes (Maguire and Longley 2004). To help users
locate, browse, select and access metadata and geospatial information, an SDI can
implement a geoportal which is a website where geographic content and resources
can be discovered (Tait 2005). Geoportals use approaches from Geographic
Information Retrieval (GIR), which in turn is concerned with retrieving documents
in response to a spatially related query (Bucher et al. 2005).

Ranking of geographic data is carried out during GIR to help users determine
potentially useful information and to quantitatively compare the relevance of that
data to a query. In particular, ranking spatial data sets during data discovery allows
geoportals to list spatial data sets in a manner such that the user can quickly

*Corresponding author. Email: G.E.Hobona@ncl.ac.uk

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2006 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810600607634

470

G. Hobona et al.

Figure 1. The process of retrieving information (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto 1999).

determine inferred relevance. Where the user is searching very large collections of
data sets, ranking helps avoid densely cluttered listings during data discovery. The
context of ranking within an Information Retrieval (IR) system is shown in figure 1.
As illustrated, the ranking process takes place between the visual interface and the
searching components.

The high dimensionality of the relevance of documents, in general, has long been
a subject of research in IR. Salton et al. (1975) proposed the Vector Space Model
(VSM) for computing relevance where each document is represented by a t-
dimensional vector with t being the number of index terms describing that
document. Since then, standards for structured geospatial metadata (OpenGIS
Consortium 2001), formal specifications of ontology (Rodriguez and Egenhofer
2003) and multidimensional graphics technologies (Web3D Consortium 2004) have
been developed. This paper proposes a model for the multidimensional visualisation
of the degree of relevance of a geographic data set based on its geographic metadata.
It formalises the axes of the VSM with particular reference to geospatial data. The
approach is offered as a complement to textual ranked lists that are widely used by
geoportals today. Relevance ranking algorithms cannot provide the final judgement
on relevance as searchers themselves must be the ultimate judges as to the relevance
of a listed document (Chen 2004). As a result, different algorithms have been
developed for ranking different forms of media according to inferred relevance; for
example, the temporal document ranking approach by Yamuna and Candan (2000)
or the Scattered Ranking algorithms for geographic information (van Kreveld et al.
2005).

In this paper, an approach to visualising the degree of relevance of geospatial data
sets, based on information extracted from geographic metadata, is proposed. We
highlight the fact that current standards for geospatial metadata not only describe a
single data set but also collections of data sets or any other source of geospatial
information. As the model proposed in this paper mines geospatial metadata, it is
thus not limited to individual data sets; instead, it can be extended to collections of
data sets as well. The modelling of relevance is based upon spatial, temporal and
ontology-based semantic parameters and the results are presented in a Spatio-
(STORM). The use of STORM is
Temporal Ontological Relevance Model

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

471

illustrated through a case study based on the implementation of a browser. The
nature of the browser, its technology and its relationship to general geoportal
architectures are examined. We also discuss the limitation of representing relevance
of geographic information as single-valued measurements.

2. STORM in context

scales

Since the advent of IR research, there have been attempts at using visualisation
approaches in IR systems. The development of two- and three-dimensional graphics
technologies allowed researchers to investigate how the high dimensionality of
document space could be mapped in two- or three-dimensional device space. One of
these studies is by Leuski and Allan (2004). In their work, they use spring-embedded
visualisation to visualise documents that have been ranked according to a clustering
algorithm. Their approach, named Lighthouse,
the multidimensional
similarities of documents down to Euclidean space and attempts to create a set of
points in a Euclidean space such that the distances between the points correspond to
the dissimilarities between original objects as closely as possible (Leuski and Allan
2004). Figure 2 shows a simplified depiction of the Lighthouse system. Their study
concluded that although 3D spring-embedded visualisations were more accurate
than 2D visualisations in their portrayals of inter-document similarity, users
still found it easier to use 2D visualisations for their IR tasks. This was evidenced
through a user study, carried out to evaluate their prototype,
in which users
constantly pointed out that accurate identification of the inter-document distances
in 3D required frequent rotations of the structure thus making the visualisation task
more difficult. This disadvantage of 3D visualisation is echoed by Nielsen
(2000) who attributes users’ preference for 2D visualisation to the navigation and
interaction complexity inherent on most 3D user
interfaces. Without any
statistical evidence, he suggests that visualising 100-dimensional information space
in 3D does not improve on visualisation in 2D. In contrast, Ware and Frank (1996)

Figure 2. Depiction of the Lighthouse visualisation (Leuski and Allan 2004).

472

G. Hobona et al.

observed improvements of a factor of three in support of stereo-enabled 3D
visualisations over their 2D counterparts. General comparison of 2D and 3D
visualisations continues to be an active area of research but is beyond the scope of
our study.

Several similarity measures for Geographic Information Retrieval have been
developed to date. Some of these similarity measures are discussed in van Kreveld
et al. (2005) and others in Larson and Frontiera (2004). One common characteristic
of the similarity functions is that they return probabilistic measures between zero
and one (inclusive), ensuring normalised comparative measures. In Rodriguez and
Egenhofer (2003) an approach to the determination of semantic similarity between
different entity classes is proposed. The approach is based on a matching process
(Tversky 1977) that uses the available information from various ontology libraries.
Results from the study showed that synonym sets and semantic neighbourhoods are
good components to use for detecting equivalent or most similar entity classes
across ontologies. However, distinguishing characteristics are suitable for detection
of entity classes that are not synonyms and that are at different levels in a
hierarchical structure; for example, a stadium and an athletic field (Rodriguez and
Egenhofer 2003).

An evaluation of a project integrating semantic similarity of geo-ontology with
is discussed in Bucher et al. (2005). The
spatially aware information retrieval
research is part of the SPIRIT (SPatially aware Information Retrieval on the
InterneT) project, which is a European Union-funded project aiming to develop a
web-based GIR application. SPIRIT has been developed to retrieve documents
using both spatial and thematic information from a large collection of unstructured
web data for a variety of locations in Europe (Bucher et al. 2005). The idea is to
build a search engine that has a degree of spatial intelligence such that it can process
basic spatial operations such as close to, North of, adjacent to, and inside (van
Kreveld et al. 2005). It uses a two-dimensional scoring system for geographic data
sets, using spatial and term indices. Whereas SPIRIT will mine unstructured web
documents, the aim of our study is to mine semi-structured fields of geospatial
metadata based on the international standard ISO19115 or the Federal Geospatial
Data Committee (FGDC) Content Standard for Digital Geographic Metadata
(CSDGM). The FGDC Clearinghouse Registry currently lists over 400 participating
clearinghouse nodes from around the world (Sengupta and Bennett 2003), each of
which serves geospatial metadata which at times is formatted in semi-structured ‘free
text’ as prescribed by the ISO19115 and the CSDGM.

TM

Having discovered relevant data sets, IR systems in general attempt to score each
data set according to how relevant it is to the user’s query. Some systems provide
textual ranked lists of relevance scores. However, Brown (1999) was among the first
to suggest the value of the Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML) and
-based multidimensional virtual environments for representing the relevance
Java
and GIR
of a geospatial data set in GIR. Our approach develops this as both Java
and ontology-
have significantly advanced through the introduction of Java3D
assisted GIR, respectively. Furthermore, VRML has been superseded by the
eXtensible 3D (X3D) format which offers more functionality than its predecessor
(Web3D Consortium 2004). Other advances in Java and the possibilities they offer
GIR are exhibited by the Java Interface for Geographic Information (JIGI), which
is the web-based client application for accessing the Alexandria Digital Library
(ADL) (Frew et al. 2000).

TM

TM

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

473

3. Dimensionality of geographic metadata

The approach to GIR presented in this study relies on parameters extracted from
spatio-temporal properties of geographic metadata. The geographic metadata
standard used is the ISO19115 to which the currently more widely used FGDC
CSDGM is being migrated. Geographical metadata conforming to the ISO19115
standard has the following two characteristics: (i) it is highly dimensional with
several hundreds of attributes (dimensions), (ii) attributes are represented in various
data formats (numerical, nominal and ordinal data types as well as free-text fields)
(Podolak and Demsˇar 2004). This multidimensionality of geographic metadata is
also noted by van Kreveld et al.
(2005), who propose the application of
multidimensional Scattered Ranking for documents that have two or more scores
in GIR. Using existing multidimensional IR techniques such as VSM, an accurate
description of query-document or inter-document similarity would require that we
consider similarity among all hundred or so fields of the ISO19115. Given that users
find it difficult to visualise spaces of more than three dimensions (Fabrikant and
Buttenfield 2001, Ferreira de Oliveira and Levkowitz 2003), this study is limited to a
discussion of only three properties of geospatial metadata.

An obvious major property of geographic metadata is the definition of the spatial
footprint of a data set, in a metadata field labelled geographic extent or spatial
domain. This spatial footprint information usually describes a Minimum Bounding
Rectangle (MBR) or more ideally (although seldom used) a Minimum Bounding
Polygon (MBP). This property shows that each geographic metadata set contains
geometry. Also, a fundamental property of 2D geographic data is that the
characteristics of an area are usually influenced by the characteristics of
neighbouring areas. A geographic metadata field that reflects such spatial auto-
correlation is the spatial footprint of a data set in a series (termed geographic extent
in the ISO19115 standard). A series in metadata terms is a collection of data sets
sharing the same product specification (OGC 2001). In the same way, topographic
and other spatial data sets in a series tend to have adjoining or similar (equal)
boundaries (for example, surveyors try by all means to survey in a systematic
manner; and adjoining administrative data sets share a common boundary).
Furthermore, versions of the same data set tend to have similar boundaries.

To describe the semantics of a geospatial data resource, each geographic metadata
set contains descriptive information in the form of abstract, keywords, titles and so
on. The multiple, and sometimes orthogonal, variables mean that semantic
similarity between two data sets or between a data set and a query is highly
dimensional. However, it becomes difficult for the user to visualise more than three
dimensions concurrently and to reduce multiple dimensions into fewer dimensions
without losing some of the information embedded in the data (Fabrikant and
Buttenfield 2001). These constraints have led to the use of methods such as
multidimensional scaling (MDS) and self-organising maps (SOM) in reducing the
dimensionality of multivariate relevance in IR. MDS is a statistical technique that
allows similarity among objects to be represented as proximity among points in n-
dimensional space (Sullivan 2001), whereas SOM is an unsupervised-learning
neural-network method that produces a similarity graph of input data (Kohonen
et al. 2000). For the purposes of this study, semantic similarity is reduced to a single-
valued measure through a similarity computation. This is consistent with traditional
similarity models by Tversky (1977) and more recent models by Rodriguez and
Egenhofer (2003).

474

G. Hobona et al.

Spatial data clearinghouses and geo-portals are used to advertise and access both
contemporary and historic data. The temporal description of the data can be shown
by the ISO19115’s CI_Date field, which may be used to describe the dates of
creation, publication or revision. The value of the field can either be defined as a
single date or a range of dates using a start and end date pairing. This ability to
describe an entity (data set) using both spatial and temporal aspects of the entity
shows that geographic metadata is generically spatio-temporal data as it describes
geometry, attributes and temporal aspects of an entity.

This section has highlighted at least three major properties of geographic
metadata: geometry, descriptive attributes and time. On the basis that a geospatial
metadata record links these three properties into a single entity, we propose that it is
appropriate to regard a geographic metadata record as a geographic data set. This is
consistent with the description of geographic data by Longley et al. (2001), who
describe an atom of geographic data as linking a place, a point in time and some
descriptive property. We base our choice of geospatial metadata fields on this
definition of an atom of geographic data by Longley et al. (2001). However, we
acknowledge that there are over a hundred more fields described in geospatial
metadata standards, including the type of data, resolution, originator and others
which may interest some users.

4. Currently used models

This section will discuss two of the most notable approaches to visualising degrees of
relevance of geographic data sets and how textual ranked lists limit each of the
approaches and also illustrate the currently widely used method for representing
ranked lists of geographic data.

Larson and Frontiera’s (2004) model, based on original work by Cooper et al.
(1992), uses Logistic Regression (LR) for ranking spatial data sets. LR is a statistical
method for predicting the probability of an occurrence as a function of independent
variables. A limitation of its use as implemented by Larson and Frontiera (2004) is
that it only considers spatial footprints and ignores other metadata, such as keywords
and dates of creation. Geographic data by the definition in Longley et al. (2001)
contain both attributive data and spatial data and consequently textual metadata
describing a geographic data set has to be taken into consideration during GIR.

Other models for ranking spatial data sets include the Scattered Ranking
algorithms, as noted in section 3. These algorithms recognise the multidimensional
nature of spatial data as they rank spatial data according to a spatial and textual
score. It is possible to extend Scattered Ranking algorithms to consider two spatial
scores and a single textual score. The two spatial scores are measured based on
references to two other separate entities. This approach helps to resolve situations
where two spatial data sets may be the same distance from a query extent, but in
different directions: for example, one being north and another south of the query
extent. Both the Scattered Ranking algorithms and the Logistic Regression
approach to ranking spatial data sets
ignore the temporal characteristics
of geospatial metadata and consequently fail to include the time-based fields of
geographic metadata in computing and visualising the degree of relevance of
geographic data. Temporal fields of spatial metadata such as the dates of creation
are becoming increasingly important as data sets covering the same spatial extents
are being updated. The date of creation metadata field in ISO19115 offers a way to
manage different versions of the same data.

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

475

Another limitation of current multidimensional approaches to the ranking of
geographic information is in the method of representation of the relevance score.
The majority of geoportals use textual ranked lists for representing ranked or
unranked spatial data sets, for example most nodes on the FGDC Clearinghouse
registry. Textual ranked lists are characteristically one-dimensional as they list
data sets from top to bottom according to a single value. This means that the
different dimensions of spatio-temporal data are ‘lost’ during the computation of
a single integrated relevance score. Figure 3 shows the results of two examples,
linearly combining three measures into a single relevance measure. Although
the illustrations linearly combine the spatial, temporal and semantic parameters,
they are representative of any multi-parameter IR function that returns a single
value, including logistic regression and least squares. In this case, the textually

Figure 3(a). Multidimensional relevance scores using set 1 of weights.

476

G. Hobona et al.

Figure 3(b). Multidimensional relevance scores using set 2 of weights.

listed scores are the results of a linear combination of the score sets 1 and 2
(figures 3(a) and 3(b)).

From figure 3 it can be seen that a one-dimensional representation of values can
lead to misinterpretation of similarity measures. For example, Data set 5 has the
lowest spatial relevance. However, because of the weightings used in the linear
model it appears to have the second-highest integrated degree of relevance. This
paper contends that any GIR system that returns results as a ranked list is subject to
such limitation, hence the development of the multidimensional visual STORM
model.

Representing multidimensional degrees of relevance using one-dimensional
ranked lists is not a very efficient method for presenting multidimensional degrees
in the computation of that
of relevance. The individual parameters are ‘lost’

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

477

ranking, so a user is not able to determine how each parameter contributed to the
final result. A method for representing the degree of relevance in a multidimensional
visual environment is required to simultaneously represent the values of each
parameter used in computing the relevance of geographic data.

5. Proposed approach

(dimensions)

As highlighted in section 3, geographic metadata is highly dimensional with several
hundreds of attributes
represented in various data formats
(Podolak and Demsˇar 2004) and users find it difficult to visualise spaces of more
than three dimensions (Fabrikant and Buttenfield 2001, Ferreira de Oliveira and
Levkowitz 2003). These two constraints lead us to propose 3D vector space as an
appropriate metaphor for representing the degree of relevance of a geospatial data
set. This approach has been named the Spatio-Temporal Ontological Relevance
Model (STORM) as a result of its use of the spatial, temporal and attributive
characteristics of geographic metadata. This section describes STORM in more
detail.

5.1 STORM vector space

The STORM model assigns values of each similarity measure to each axis of a 3D
visual environment. The spatial, temporal and semantic similarity measures are
normalised to ensure that the values can be scaled within a 3D field of view. As the
measures are such that one represents maximum relevance and zero represents
minimum relevance, then in three-dimensional space the most relevant data set
possible would be at coordinate (1,1,1) and the least relevant at (0,0,0). As described
in section 2, such normalisation allows for comparative results to be presented
efficiently. A number of candidate data sets can be plotted together within the 3D
space. They are represented by thumbnails of the actual data, capable of being
interactively zoomed into and viewed in real time. The geometric sizes of the
thumbnails representing each data set are all equal and the user interprets the
relevance of a data set depending on how near or far away it is from the (1,1,1)
corner of the grid. The size of the thumbnails is intentionally kept constant so as to
help the user detect distance easily; thumbnails closer to the viewer’s position appear
larger than those that are further away. Consequently, this approach uses the visual
depth cue of size. Alternatively, the depth cue of focus could also be used through
functionality offered by most 3D
(LOD)
implementation of Level-Of-Detail
graphics technologies. LOD allows geometries or textures to be replaced depending
on the distance the model is away from the viewing camera. The axes of the STORM
vector space are shown in figure 4.

Visualised with current on-line 3D graphics, a 3D visual STORM model allows
users to view relevance from an arbitrary position and as a result provide
more control over the definition of relevance. Furthermore, the normalised nature
of the parameters allows the STORM model to use various similarity models
provided they return values from zero to one (inclusive). This makes STORM
independent of the models used to calculate each of the similarity parameters. It
is easier to visually identify inter-document relationships in multidimensional
space as it provides more degrees of freedom and therefore it has a higher
chance of representing the inter-document similarity accurately than a lower
dimensional space (Leuski and Allan 2004). The next section discusses three models

478

G. Hobona et al.

Figure 4. The STORM vector space model for representing the relevance of geographic
data.

used to compute the parameters of spatial, semantic and temporal similarity for this
model.

5.2 The axes

Imagine a query that includes spatial coverage, date of creation and a search term.
Computations of the models for ranking described in this section are invoked after a
list of data sets has been returned from a search operation, as previously shown on
figure 1. The search term may be a keyword or title and the spatial coverage may be
defined by minimum bounding rectangle or polygon. Similarities between the spatial
coverage, date constraint and search term of the query and the candidate data sets
are computed using the following approaches.

The value for spatial similarity is computed using one of several spatial similarity
measures available. Here, the Logistic Regression model suggested by Larson
and Frontiera (2004)
is employed for ranking data sets according to their
spatial footprints. In this LR model, ratios of the overlaps of the query region
and the candidate geographic information objects (GIO) are assigned to each
independent variable of the ‘log odds’ which is shown in equation (1). A summation
of the weighted independent variables (Ci) is then added to a constant (Co) to
log O(R|Q, D) which represents the degree
produce the dependent ‘log odds’
of relevance of the data set D to the query Q. The ‘log odds’ is then converted to
a standardised probability (which forms the scale for the spatial axis) using
equation (2).

log O R Q, Dj
ð

m

Þ~C0z X
i~1

CiXi

P R Q, Dj

ð

Þ~

elog O R Q, Djð
1zelog O R Q, Djð

Þ

Þ

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

where:

N X15area of overlap (query region, candidate GIO)/area of query region
N X25area of overlap (query region, candidate GIO)/area of candidate GIO
N Ci are coefficients for assigning weights to variables

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

479

The temporal similarity of the query to the candidate data sets is determined in the
model by comparing the amount of overlap between the time period specified in the
query and the time period specified in the metadata record. This approach is
adopted from the intentional temporal document similarity approach defined in
Yamuna and Candan (2000). It is facilitated by the fact that both the ISO19115 and
the FGDC CSDGM specify the ‘time period of content’ as a mandatory metadata
field. This field, in both standards, may be represented either as a single date or as
two dates representing the beginning and end of data set creation (OpenGIS
Consortium 2001). Alternatively, the date of creation could be replaced by the date
of publication, depending on the user’s requirements. Where C is the amount of
overlap between two time periods, A and B are two independent time periods,
Yamuna and Candan (2000) define the intentional temporal similarity of documents
DOCl and DOC2 as:

similarity DOC1, DOC2

ð

Þ~

Cj
jz Bj

j
jz Cj

j

Aj

ð3Þ

As with the spatial and temporal similarity measures proposed in this paper, the
semantic similarity measure is normalised such that it ranges from zero to one
inclusive, with one representing maximum similarity and zero representing
minimum similarity. For this study, STORM adopts the ratio model suggested by
Tversky (1977), which takes into consideration both the similarities and the
dissimilarities between two objects and is well suited to binary attributes
equation (4). The ratio model is a normalised version of Tversky’s contrast model
(Rodriguez and Egenhofer 2003), which is simply the denominator of equation (4).
In set theory notation, the ratio model for calculating semantic similarity S is:

S A, Bð

Þ~

f A\B
Þ

j
jza f A{B
Þ
ð
Þ

j
jz 1{a
ð

ð

j

j

f A\B

ð

Þ f B{A
Þ
j

ð

j

for 0ƒaƒ1

ð4Þ

where:

N A and B are two separate objects,
N the set of all features that are common to both A and B is (A>B),
N the set of all features that belong to A and not to B is (A2B),
N a and (12a) are weights reflecting the relative importance of A and B.

As mentioned in section 2, there have been previous studies using 3D visualisation
in IR. One of these studies, by Leuski and Allan (2004), involved the use of a
document clustering algorithm for positioning spherical representations of docu-
ments in a spring-embedded visualisation. In their paper, they concluded that even
though 3D visualisation was more accurate in portraying inter-document
similarities, users still found it more difficult to identify these inter-document
similarities in 3D than they did in 2D. The STORM approach attempts to address
this limitation as it calibrates and labels the three axes to assist the user in
interpreting distances within the 3D graph. It is further different to the approach by
Leuski and Allan (2004) in that it focuses on geographic information sources,
specifically geospatial metadata. A further distinction is that the three axes are
assigned to three of the most important properties of geographic information,
namely space, time and thematic properties. The ability to identify inter-document
similarity is further addressed through the use of inexpensive stereo glasses which

480

G. Hobona et al.

significantly improve the users’ perception of depth while looking at a 3D
visualisation.

6.

Implementation of a prototype

A system was developed to investigate the concepts of STORM. The system adopts
a three-tier client–middleware–server model. On the server side are metadata
servers. The middleware consists of the metadata harvesting tool which processes
requests and responses between the server and the client. Figure 5 illustrates the
architecture adopted. The following sections describe the components and
functionality of the system as a whole, however, the processes can be summarised
as follows:

1. The client browser receives query constraints from the user.
2. The browser expands the query with related concepts extracted from an

3. The browser accesses a metadata collection to retrieve documents satisfying

ontology library.

the expanded query.

4. The browser ranks the results according to the query constraints.
5. The results are presented to the user.

6.1 Metadata harvesting

Through initiatives of the US National SDI, the FGDC hosts a clearinghouse
registry that publishes the status, connection properties and schema details of over
400 clearinghouse nodes. Each of those nodes is implemented using the Z39.50

Figure 5. The STORM architecture.

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

481

TM

protocol for information retrieval (ISO 1998). Also known as the ISO23950, this
protocol allows client applications to send search requests to a remote server and
have the server return the results in a platform-independent ASCII format. The
FGDC takes the clearinghouse initiative further by offering free download of a
Z39.50 client and server application called Isite. A key consideration for the design
of our system was that it should be possible to integrate it with existing geospatial
metadata systems, thereby making it possible for existing geoportals to incorporate
it into their user interfaces. The server-side web application was developed using
Visual C Sharp (C#). The web application accepted eight HTTP
Microsoft
parameters; the server’s Uniform Resource Locator (URL), the meta-database name,
the search title, keyword, bounding east, bounding west, bounding north and
bounding south coordinates. A query statement is automatically constructed by the
harvesting tool which then sends the query to the external clearinghouse node. The
clearinghouse node then returns a result set of metadata records. A major problem
encountered during development of the harvesting tool was that most of the
clearinghouse nodes implement the FGDC CSDGM, so our metadata harvesting tool
had to be capable of mapping fields from the CSDGM to the ISO19115 which our
study had adopted for reasons of international standardisation. Another problem
encountered was that some of the metadata records harvested had erroneous entries,
for example start dates that occur after end dates or coincident boundary coordinates.

6.2 Ontology library access

Recent research in IR and data integration has emphasised the use of ontology and
semantic similarity operations as mechanisms for comparing objects that can be
retrieved or integrated across different repositories (Rodriguez and Egenhofer 2003).
The SPIRIT project, discussed briefly in section 2, exemplifies such research. These
systems are based on the notion that the user’s query may not represent precisely
what the user wants, so it is up to the system to also query terms related to those in
the original query. Likewise, the STORM metadata harvesting tool was developed
to mine relationships between search terms and related ontology. If the user’s query
includes a thematic keyword, the metadata harvesting tool expands the query by
sending a request to the Ontological Query Expansion tool which then returns a list
of related terms. As shown in figure 5, the query expansion tool is an integral part of
the STORM system. Its main function is to retrieve related terms from an ontology
database and include them as search constraints. The discovered terms are used in a
new query forwarded to the Z39.50 servers. The discovered terms are then assigned
lower weighting values, as per equation (4), to reflect the difference in the semantics
between the discovered terms and the user’s original query. For example, for a
query term skyscraper with a weight of 1.0, a discovered term of building would be
assigned a weight of approximately 0.7; this is because even though a skyscraper is
a building, a building may not be a skyscraper. The actual value of the weight
of derived terms depends on the user’s preferences. To avoid the additional
ontological search overwhelming the user with more choices of data sets to choose
from, the system has been enabled to allow or disallow ontological expansions
during runtime. This means that it is up to the user to expand or leave the query as
is. The system uses the well known WordNet database, a linguistic ontology
containing over 50,000 words and 40,000 phrases, collected into over 70,000 sense
meanings and developed by the Cognitive Science Laboratory at Princeton
University (Chen 2004, Agarwal 2005).

482

G. Hobona et al.

6.3 The STORM-enabled browser

As the deployment platform of the system was to be any spatial data clearinghouse,
it was important to ensure that the application could be deployed on the World
Wide Web. For this purpose, the client application was developed using Sun
Microsystems’s Java Developer Kit. This also ensured that the application was
platform independent, as Java programs can be run on most platforms with little or
no need for modifications. The Graphical User Interface (GUI) contains three
panels; a table for the ranked list, a 3D graphics panel for the STORM axis and an
HTML panel for presenting the geospatial metadata. Mouse clicks on the STORM
panel automatically select the corresponding record on the table and output the
record’s metadata onto the metadata panel. Likewise, selections on the table output
metadata and highlight the corresponding thumbnail on the STORM panel. This
inter-communication between the STORM and the ranked list panels provides an
integrated experience for the user exploring the system.

As the ISO19115 allows specification of time periods for date-typed fields, the
STORM user interface allowed for entry of start and end dates as constraints
for the query. Although these temporal constraints are excluded from our
Z39.50 HTTP request, they are, however, included in the ranking of retrieved
records. The ranking algorithm computes the amount of overlap between the
start and end dates in the query and the start and end dates in the metadata
record using equation (3). The spatial constraints of the search may be entered either
from a map panel, as shown in figure 6, or by directly editing the bounding
coordinates. Similarly, the spatial measure is computed using equations (1) and (2).
Lastly, the user enters a series of keywords to search for into a textfield. Before
the keywords are sent to the metadata harvesting tool, stop words such as ‘a’,
‘the’, ‘for’ or ‘of’ are first removed from the query string. If the user has chosen to
append related terms, these are extracted from the ontology library and appended
to the query statement. Once ranking has been performed, the minimum and
maximum spatio-temporal and semantic scores are determined from the search
results to avoid clutter within the STORM graph. All the scores are then scaled to
fit the 3D STORM graph more efficiently. Figures 7(a) and (b) show example
screenshots of the GUI. The GUI contains a panel for displaying the metadata of a
selected data set.

7. Testing and evaluation

To date there have been a number of different approaches proposed for evaluating
the effectiveness of an IR system. Some evaluations adopt a system-centred
approach and others adopt a user-centred one. Experimental results of a system-
driven approach are influenced by control over the experimental variables and the
repeatability of the experiments. Comparatively, results from a user-oriented
approach are a function of the effect of the system development, design and the end-
user’s search and retrieval behaviour in relation to the information need (Borlund
2003). The basis of our evaluation was to assess the effectiveness of the STORM
system as a whole (visualisation and retrieval components) as opposed to only the
retrieval components. We therefore chose to use a system-oriented approach to
obtain an evaluation of the system performance followed by a qualitative assessment
of usability. Given that user studies are expensive and time consuming (Leuski and
Allan 2004) and that 8 users are enough for a user evaluation to discover 85% of

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

483

Figure 6. Dialog for entering search constraints. # Crown Copyright.

usability issues (Nielsen 2000), we chose to involve 10 users in our evaluation. We
therefore hypothesise that:

1. The STORM system is more effective than a traditional geoportal.
2. Users find the STORM visualisations an acceptable GIR visualisation

approach.

7.1 System-centred evaluation

System-based evaluation in IR is based on the concept of relevance. Relevance
judgements are made on the retrieved sets of documents to compute generally two
performance measures; precision and recall. Precision is defined as the proportion of
relevant documents among retrieved documents and recall as the proportion of
retrieved relevant documents among all relevant documents in the document
collection. Unfortunately, as our study accesses real-world geospatial metadata
collections through a Z39.50 interface, time and technological constraints limit us
from determining all variables needed for calculating recall. However, more users
require only a few relevant documents and do not care about high recall (Hearst

484

G. Hobona et al.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.

(a) Viewing from an arbitrary angle (axis). (b) Viewing along the Spatial50.5 axis.

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

485

1999). We therefore only evaluated precision. Further, we contend that calculating
precision is sufficient for addressing the first of our hypothesis because it is trivial
that when comparing two systems A and B, if A returns more relevant documents
and fewer non-relevant documents than B, then A is more effective than B. In
traditional IR evaluation, the number of relevant documents from a document pool
for particular queries is known prior to evaluation; due to the technological
limitation already stated our study relies on the user to be the ultimate judge of
relevance once the system has carried out
the
normalised precision Pi for a document Di is:

its ranking. Mathematically,

Pi~

Ri
j
j
jz Ni
j

j

Ri
j

ð5Þ

where:

N Ri is the number of relevant documents retrieved
N Ni is the number of non-relevant documents retrieved.

Taking the UK’s national spatial data clearinghouse (GIgateway 2005) as a
comparative case study, the STORM browser was connected to different document
collections, including the British Atmospheric Data Centre (BADC) catalogue, the
main GIgateway catalogue, the British Geological Survey (BGS) catalogue, the
Central Government metadata archive (IGGI) and others. GIgateway was selected
for comparison because (i) it is the national spatial data clearinghouse; (ii) it adopts
the widely used YAZ Z39.50 client (West and Scofield 2005); and (iii) it harvests
from clearinghouse nodes that implement the widely used CNIDR zserver (FGDC
2005). A set of pre-defined queries were carried out by the group of users. Some
users had geo-computing experience, others rarely used computers and the rest used
computers at work but were not from a geospatial background. For each query, the
users independently noted down the number of documents in the top 50 ranked set
that they regarded as being relevant to the query. Although the same queries were
carried out on both STORM and GIgateway, some of the queries did not return the
same numbers of documents from both systems. This is because the STORM system
expands the user’s query with related terms. Further, three-dimensional visualisa-
tion makes it easy to detect clusters of related documents (Leuski and Allan 2004),
therefore thumbnails of highly relevant documents are likely to be within the vicinity
of one another.

Table 1 shows a few examples of the queries that were used for retrieving
documents. As illustrated, these are conventional queries that can be entered into

Table 1. Some of the queries used. All temporal ranges were from 1995 to 2005.

Spatial footprint

Collection

Keyword

borehole

census

seismic

macrofossils

microfossils

north554.955, south553.024
west523.244, east520.87
north556.624, south554.67
west523.178, east521.51
north555.592, south552.628
west523.947, east520.895
north555.329, south552.65
west523.508, east50.597

BGS

BGS

BGS

Central Government (IGGI)

486

G. Hobona et al.

Table 2. Sample results from two of the users.

Query

STORM Gig

Diff (%)

Query

STORM Gig

Diff (%)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Average

50
30
10
50
27
27
24

50
2
10
50
22
17
4

(i)

0
56
0
0
10
20
40
18.000

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Average

50
0
11
50
23
0
17

50
0
10
50
20
0
2

(ii)

0
0
2
0
6
0
30
5.429

most geoportals. Table 2 shows observations for a few of the users. One of the ten
users completed only five of the seven controlled queries. This means that there were
a total of 68 queries entered by all ten users. Results showed that 29 of all 68 queries
exhibited higher precision by STORM; only 5 of all 68 queries resulted in higher
precision by GIgateway; the rest of the users recorded an equal return from both
systems. The difference in precision per query, for the top 50 ranked documents, is
shown on the Diff column as a percentage and is calculated using the formula
Diff5((STORM-GIgateway)/50)*100. Positive values
indicate more relevant
returns from STORM and negative values indicate more relevant returns from
GIgateway. Table 3 shows a summary of all observations for all ten users. As we are
benchmarking STORM against another system, we highlight that the integrity of the
evaluation is upheld by the following points:

1. The same metadata collections are searched by both systems.
2. The same queries, in number and form, are entered into both systems.
3. The same users take part in the evaluation.
4. The users have varying degrees of both geospatial and computer-based skills.
5. Eight out of ten of the users show an improvement in favour of STORM.

As shown in table 3, the average improvement in precision was approximately
9.9%. Most users were able to return a higher precision value, for the same queries,
on STORM than on the ranked list. Whereas the positive precision values ranged

Table 3. Summary of results from comparison of STORM and GIgateway geoportals.

User

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Average

Improvement (%)

7.714
4.286
20.286
20.286
18.000
5.4286
12.286
6.571
6.800
38.856
9.938

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

487

from 4.3% to 38.9%, the negative precision values recorded (for User C and D) were
both 20.3%. This observation supports our first hypothesis that the STORM
browser is more effective than a traditional geoportal. From the complete set of
results, it was also observed that queries with domain-specific search terms such as
‘macrofossils’ or ‘seismic’ generally returned higher improvements in precision than
the more general search terms such as ‘census’ or ‘borehole’. This suggests that with
a more domain-specific ontology, a higher improvement in precision could be
attained.

7.2 User-centred evaluation

Using the same evaluators that took part in the system performance, a more
qualitative comparison was carried out. Users were asked to fill in a questionnaire
that had responses ranked from 1 to 5. This allowed us to compare the user’s
responses with the recorded measures of precision for each user. Among the
comparative questions, a value of 3 showed an equal preference for both STORM
and GIgateway, a value higher than 3 showed a preference for STORM, while a
value lower than 3 showed a preference for GIgateway. The usability questions on
the survey were based on related studies by Bucher et al. (2005) and Leuski and
Allan (2004) and included:

1. How easy was it to identify the top 20 ranked data sets?
2. Does STORM require more or less effort than the traditional ranked list to

find the most relevant data sets?
Is STORM a better way to search for geographic data than the ranked list?

3.
4. How easy was it to navigate the 3D graph?
5.

Is STORM a more attractive and interesting way for finding geographic data
on the web than the ranked list?

6. How often do you play computer games?

From table 4, it is observed that responses to Question 1 show that only User E
found it difficult to identify the top 20 ranked documents. Most of the users found
the ease of identification average. Despite this, the increase in precision shows that
they still managed to discover more relevant documents using STORM. Responses
to Question 2 show that there was agreement amongst most of the evaluators that
the STORM browser made it easier to discover the most relevant data sets with

Table 4. Averaged results from the usability questionnaire.

User

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Average

Q1

5
4
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3.1

Q2

3
5
5
5
5
5
3
5
3
4
4.3

Q3

3
4
4
3
5
3
4
4
4
3
3.7

Q4

3
4
5
4
4
3
5
4
4
4
4

Q5

5
5
5
4
5
3
3
5
5
4
4.4

Q6

5
5
3
3
3
3
1
3
5
3
3.4

488

G. Hobona et al.

minimal effort. The responses for this question averaged 4.3. This observation is
consistent with observations by Leuski and Allan (2004, p 282) as they concluded
that ‘users have no difficulty grasping the idea of spatial proximity as the metaphor
for inter-object similarity’. Reponses to Question 3 show that 6 out of 10 users rated
STORM a better way to search for geographic data, whereas the rest of the users
rated it similar to the ranked list. This suggests that STORM may be a possible
complement to the ranked list approach. Responses to Question 4 suggest that most
of the users found navigating STORM easy. This included User G, the most
infrequent user of computer games as per responses to Question 6. This observation
suggests that the potential user-domain for STORM is not limited to users already
proficient with 3D navigation through computer games. Further, results to Question
4 contradict suggestions that ‘2D visualisation is always better than 3D visualisation
because of difficulties in interaction and navigation’ (Nielsen 2000). Responses to
Question 5 show that most evaluators considered the STORM graph as being ‘more
attractive and interesting’ than the conventional ranked list. The results of the user
evaluation thus support the second of our hypotheses that users find STORM an
acceptable GIR visualisation approach.

8. Conclusions and future work

This study has presented an approach for retrieving, ranking and visualising
geographic metadata according to spatial, temporal and semantic relevance. The
feasibility of developing such a system has been demonstrated through the
implementation of a web-based 3D visualisation tool. The architecture of the web-
based tool allows
the system to be integrated with existing spatial data
infrastructure. The results of an evaluation study have been presented and based
on the results we conclude that STORM provides a useful complement to the
traditional one-dimensional ranked list as used on conventional geoportals. We
acknowledge that with more participants in the user evaluation, the results could
have been different. However, as 8 out of 10 of the users recorded improvements in
favour of STORM, we conclude that even with more users the STORM browser
would still have had a higher precision rating.

To advance this research, further work needs to be carried out into how the
complete range of facilities within 3D graphics technologies may be used to
communicate degrees of relevance during geographic information retrieval: enhance-
ments such as LOD, morphing, audio and stereo capabilities can be examined. In
terms of series of data sets or data sets which are co-located within the proposed
STORM grid, it may be possible to use animation. Some of the observations made by
evaluators suggested that using different geometries for representing the data sets may
be more efficient, hence future research should investigate how the size and shape of
geometries affect the users’ cognition. Visualisation in immersive environments could
have a significant effect on cognition as well. Future work could also include a study
to determine the correlation between the number of domain-specific semantic
relations in the database and the average precision of the GIR system. Predictions of
system performance could then be made from such a study.

Acknowledgements
This paper is produced from PhD research jointly funded by the University of
Newcastle upon Tyne and the Universities UK Overseas Research Students Awards
Scheme.

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

489

References
AGARWAL, P., 2005, Ontological considerations in GIScience. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 19(5), pp. 501–536.

BAEZA-YATES, R. and RIBEIRO-NETO, B., 1999, Modern Information Retrieval (Boston, MA:

Addison-Wesley-Longman).

BORLUND, P., 2003, The IIR evaluation model: a framework for evaluation of interactive

information retrieval systems. Information Research, 8(3), paper no. 152.

BROWN, I., 1999, Developing a Virtual Reality User Interface (VRUI) for geographic
information retrieval on the internet. Transactions in GIS, 3(3), pp. 207–220.
BUCHER, B., CLOUGH, P., JOHO, H., PURVES, R. and SYED, A.K., 2005, Geographic IR
systems: requirements and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Cartographic Conference, A Corun˜ a, Spain, 9–16 July.

CHEN, C., 2004, Information Visualization: Beyond the Horizon (London: Springer).
COOPER, W.S., GEY, F.C. and DABNEY,, 1992, Probabilistic retrieval based on staged logistic
regression. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
Research on Developments in Information Retrieval, Copenhagen, Denmark, 21–24
June, pp. 198–210 (New York: ACM Press).

CROMPVOETS, J., BREGT, A., RAJABIFARD, A. and WILLIAMSON, I., 2004, Assessing the
worldwide developments of national spatial data clearinghouses. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 18(7), pp. 665–689.

FABRIKANT, S.I. and BUTTENFIELD, B.P., 2001, Formalizing semantic spaces for information
access. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 91, pp. 263–280.
FERREIRA DE OLIVEIRA M. and LEVKOWITZ, H., 2003, From visual data exploration to visual
data mining: a survey. IEEE transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
9(3), pp. 378–394.

FEDERAL GEOSPATIAL DATA COMMITTEE (FGDC), 2005, FGDC Clearinghouse Registry.

Available at: http://registry.gsdi.org/, accessed 12 July 2005.

FREW, J., FREESTON, M., FREITAS, N., HILL, L., JANEE, G., LOVETTE, K., NIDEER, R.,
SMITH, T. and ZHENG, Q., 2000, The Alexandria Digital Library architecture.
International Journal on Digital Libraries, 2, pp. 259–268.

GIGATEWAY, 2005, The GI Gateway Portal Website. Available at: http://www.gigateway.co.uk,

accessed 2 July 2005.

HEARST, M., 1999, User interfaces and visualization. In Modern Information Retrieval, R.

Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto (Eds) (Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley-Longman).

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION (ISO), 1998, Information Retrieval

(Z39.50)–Application service definition and protocol specification, ISO23950:1998.

KOHONEN, T., KASKI, S., LAGUS, K., SALOJARVI, J., HONKELA, J., PAATERO, V. and
SAARELA, A., 2000, Self organization of a massive document collection. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 11(3), pp. 574–585.

LARSON, R. and FRONTIERA, P., 2004, Ranking and representation for geographic
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Geographic Information
Retrieval, SIGIR 2004, 25–29 July 2004, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

LEUSKI, A. and ALLAN, J., 2004, Interactive information retrieval using clustering and spatial
proximity. User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction, 14(2–3), pp. 259–288.
LONGLEY, P.A., GOODCHILD, M.F., MAGUIRE, D.J. and RHIND, D.W., 2001, Geographic

Information Systems and Science (Chichester: Wiley).

MAGUIRE, D.J. and LONGLEY, P., 2004, The emergence of geoportals and their role in spatial

data infrastructures. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 29(1), pp. 3–14.

NIELSEN, J., 2000, Designing Web Usability (Indianapolis: New Riders Publishing).
OPENGIS CONSORTIUM (OGC), 2001, OpenGIS Metadata : ISO/TC211 DIS 19115. Available

at: http://www.opengis.org/docs/01-111.pdf, accessed 5 July 2004.

PODOLAK, I. and DEMSˇ AR, U., 2004, Discovering structure in geographical metadata. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Geoinformatics, University of
Ga¨ vle, Sweden, 7–9 June 2004.

490

Degrees of relevance of geographic data

RODRIGUEZ, M. and EGENHOFER, M., 2003, Determining semantic similarity among entity
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data

from different ontology.

classes
Engineering, 15(2), pp. 442–456.

SALTON, G., WONG, A. and YANG, C.S., 1975, A vector space model for information retrieval.

Communications of the ACM, 18(11), pp. 613–620.

SENGUPTA, R.R. and BENNETT, D.A., 2003, Agent-based modelling environment for spatial
decision support. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 17(2), pp.
157–180.

SULLIVAN, T., 2001, Locating question difficulty through explorations in question space. In
Proceedings of the 1st ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital libraries, Roanoke,
Virginia, pp. 251–252 (New York: ACM Press).

TAIT, M.G., 2005, Implementing geoportals: applications of distributed GIS. Computers,

Environment and Urban Systems, 29(1), pp. 33–47.

TVERSKY, A., 1977, Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, pp. 327–352.
VAN KREVELD, M., REINBACHER, I., ARAMPATZIS, A. and VAN ZWOL, R., 2005, Multi-
for geographic information retrieval.

scattered ranking methods

dimensional
Geoinformatica, 9(1), pp. 61–84.

WARE, C. and FRANK, G., 1996, Evaluating stereo and motion cues for visualizing
information nets in three dimensions. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 15(2), pp.
121–140.

WEB3D CONSORTIUM, 2004, X3D. Available at: http://www.web3d.org/, accessed 5 August

2004.

WEST, L. and SCOFIELD, L., 2005, Gigateway

2004–2005: a year in review. Available at:
http://www.gigateway.org.uk/pdf/annual_report/GIgateway_Yr_Review0405_final.pdf,
accessed 12 July 2005.

TM

YAMUNA, P. and CANDAN, K.S., 2000, Similarity-based retrieval of temporal documents. In
Proceedings of the 2000 ACM workshop on Multimedia, Los Angeles, United States, 30
October–4 November 2000, pp. 243–246 (New York: ACM Press).

