This article was downloaded by: [University of North Dakota]
On: 18 December 2014, At: 19:58
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Developing geographic information
infrastructures: the role of access
policies
B. van Loenen a
a Delft University of Technology, OTB Research Institute for
Housing, Environment and Mobility Studies , The Netherlands
Published online: 04 Mar 2009.

To cite this article: B. van Loenen (2009) Developing geographic information infrastructures: the
role of access policies, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23:2, 195-212,
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851412

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701851412

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 23, No. 2, February 2009, 195–212

Research Article

Developing geographic information infrastructures: the role of access
policies

B. VAN LOENEN*
Delft University of Technology, OTB Research Institute for Housing, Environment and
Mobility Studies, The Netherlands

(Received 22 October 2007; in final form 7 December 2007 )

the commercial sector,

Within societies, information availability is a key issue affecting society’s well-
being. For geographic information, a geographic information infrastructure
(GII) facilitates availability and access to geographic information for all levels of
government,
the non-profit sector, academia, and
ordinary citizens. Although the importance of access policies in the development
of a GII is commonly understood, research that has assessed the impact of access
policies on this development is scant. This article adds this perspective. Based on
information acquired from case-study and literature research, the author argues
that open-access policies do not always promote GII development and in specific
instances are counter-productive. These findings may explain why many nations
still adhere to cost-recovery policies instead of
following access policies
recommended by research. The article provides alternatives for changing current
policies into new access policies that promote GII development.

Keywords: Geographic information infrastructure; SDI; Access policy;
Development

1.

Introduction

In the information age, access to information has become of vital importance to the
economic and social development of a country. Information technology has
increased the availability of and improved access to information. It allows us to
access and share information in a relatively unfettered fashion across digital
networks ignoring jurisdictional borders.

The infrastructure underlying the foundation of an information society can be
referred to as the information infrastructure, which is defined as ‘a technical
framework of computing and communications technologies, information content,
services, people, all of which interact in complex and often unpredictable ways’
(Borgman 2000, p. 30). Since the information infrastructure provides the foundation
of an information society, the development of this infrastructure and the way it
functions are critical for society. An adequate information infrastructure allows for
information to be collected and distributed efficiently to a wide range of users, and
provides reliable information for effective use in decision-making processes at all
levels.

Within the information infrastructure, geographic information is a special type of
information. The linkage of information to the Earth gives general information

*Email: b.vanloenen@tudelft.nl

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2009 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851412

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 196

B. van Loenen

extra value (BDO Consultants 1998). It makes the object or subject easy to identify,
and as a result easy to reach. Another speciality is that geographic information is
multidimensional (x, y), voluminous (large databases), and often represents a 3D
world on a flat (2D) surface (Longley et al. 2001, p. 6). Further, to integrate and
analyse the many varied types may be time-consuming, and the process of updating
is complex (Longley et al. 2001). Another speciality of geographic information is the
costly collection and processing of geographic information. Unlike many other types
of
the collection, maintenance, and publication of geographic
information require qualified human expertise and equipment to process, manage,
and use it. Also, the creation of geographic products or services from geographic
information typically requires advanced human and computer skills (see also
Longley et al. 2001). This speciality has resulted in the emerging of geographic
information infrastructures (GII) within or outside the concept of an information
infrastructure.

information,

A GII facilitates availability and access to geographic information for all levels of
government, the commercial sector, the non-profit sector, academia, and ordinary
citizens (Onsrud 1998a). Although the importance of access policies in the
development of a GII is commonly understood (see McLaughlin and Nichols
1994, Masser 1999, Tosta 1999, Borgman 2000, STIA 2001), research assessing the
impact of access policies to GII development is scant. Consequently, the question of
which funding model allows ready access to high-quality information and low-cost
geographic information necessary to advance GII development (Lopez 1998)
remains unanswered.

Based on a literature study and case-study research (Van Loenen 2006, Van
Loenen et al. 2007), this article assesses the impact access policies may have on
geographic information quality in general and on the GII itself, and provides
alternatives for changing current policies to more beneficial access policies. The
article argues that an appropriate access policy for GII development is linked to the
stage of GII development.

The outline of the article is as follows. First, two common access policies are
provided, and their positives and negatives described. This is followed by the section
on stages of GII development and the role of users in GII development. Then, stages
of GII development, user needs, and access policies are linked and recommendations
made. The final part introduces an alternative policy option that overcomes barriers
of currently utilized access policies. This alternative access policy promotes ready
access for all users to high-quality low-cost geographic information, which is the
necessary foundation for our information society.

2. Two common access policies

Although, in practice, a wide variety of access policies exist, ranging from open
access to cost-recovery policies, in the literature discussions have focused on the
poles of open access and cost recovery (see, for example, Onsrud 1992a, b, Weiss
and Pluijmers 2002). The open-access approach assumes
that government
information is available for a price not exceeding the cost of reproduction and
distribution, with as few restrictions to use as possible. In the cost-recovery
approach, the price of government information covers at least the cost of creation
and dissemination, and may include a return on investment. The use of the
restricted, and government may choose to have exclusive
information is
arrangements.

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

197

2.1 Open access

In the open-access model, information within governments is accessible by those
outside government for a price not exceeding the cost of reproduction and
distribution (marginal cost of dissemination) with the imposition of as few
restrictions as possible. The information is available to all (non-exclusive) on a
non-discriminatory basis. Accepted restrictions include information concerning
national security, trade secrets, and information relating to an individual’s privacy.
Under open-access principles, geographic information suppliers in the public
domain do not compete with the commercial sector.

The economic reasoning behind the open access model is presented in figure 1.
Government agencies, responsible for collecting government geographic informa-
tion, are funded with public funds to accomplish their public tasks. The use of these
government data sets is promoted through a limited fee of a maximum of the
marginal cost of dissemination, and lack of restrictions in the use. As a result, it is
supposed that enterprises initiate a wide variety of value-adding activities. The
information on customized products is used by a variety of end users who can
choose between providers of similar products. The revenue and jobs the private
sector generates will partly flow into the treasury of the state through income tax
and company tax. Further, end users will pay value-added tax (VAT) when they buy
information or a product. In this way, ‘an open access policy fosters a process for
adding value to raw government information resources’ (Lopez 1998). This spin-off
effect promotes the use of the information, which results in higher quantities of
(income, company, or value-added) taxes flowing into government.

It has been argued that all leading economic studies indicate that current open-
access policies should remain in place to take full advantage of the potentials of a
GII (Onsrud 2004; cf. Perritt 1995). Open access fosters academic and scientific
research and effective public sector planning, as well as stimulating potential
commercial development (Onsrud 1998b, KPMG 2001).

On the other hand, the open-access model is continually under discussion with its
precepts changing and being challenged as technology and society change overtime
(Van Loenen and Kok 2004). An open-access policy may make government entities

Figure 1. Economic reasoning behind the open-access model (based on Weiss and Pluijmers
2002).

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 198

B. van Loenen

fully (financially) dependent of high-level bureaucrats outside the geographic
information sector, which are not necessarily aware of the value geographic
information has for society. In a US context, Joffe (2005) has found: ‘Most local
jurisdictions currently selling geographic information would prefer to give it away if
there were realistic alternatives for gaining political credibility with high-level
budget approvers for funding their GIS operations.’

2.2 Cost recovery

Cost-recovery approaches seek profits from the sale of information to support the
development and maintenance of the data sets (Onsrud 1992b, Lopez 1998).
Information collection, maintenance, and dissemination are not fully provided by
public funds, and the costs must be covered through other means. The government
agency is forced to generate income from the sales of information or products or
through the provision of services. As a consequence, access to information is
restricted to cope with the financial conditions established by the amount of central
government funding provided. In practice, this implies a charge for the information
at more than the marginal costs of dissemination, and restrictions are imposed on
the use of the government information through the action of copyright and database
rights. Further use restrictions are often imposed through contractual or licensing
provisions. The cost-recovery approach may also result in government agencies
competing with private sector entities either on a level playing field basis or not. The
expertise within government may be used to respond to private requests for specific
geographic products.

The cost-recovery model further presumes that government employees are likely
to respond better to citizen requests for geographic information services and
products when a reasonable fee may be asked (Onsrud 1992b). In addition, research
found that reasonable prices for information give an incentive to providers to meet
the needs of users and give the users an opportunity to influence what and how
information is collected (Coopers Lybrand 1996); it allows for tailor-made solutions
for individual end users.

Some of

include net

the drawbacks of

the cost-recovery model

losses in
hidden costs, such as extra administrative cost in managing such a policy (to
cash the checks and to enforce the use restrictions) (see, for example, in the UK:
HM Treasury 2000). Further, the result of cost-recovery policies may be that
other parties decide
to use
identical
substitutes, or to use inferior information from others. In an extreme situation,
the user will do without the required data. Another potential major drawback is
when government agencies that have a monopoly or near monopoly of some
information product act also as commercial players and thus distort competition
(see Statskontoret 2005).

information themselves,

to collect

Figure 2 shows

information. In addition,

the economic reasoning behind the cost-recovery model.
Government agencies creating geographic data sets generate income from the sales
of
they add value to the information and create
information (products), which are sold on the information market. In many
existing cost-recovery models, individual government agencies are in control of their
budget, making them independent of fluctuating budgets in national government
(see also Onsrud 1998b). The cost-recovery model may provide sustainable funding
to individual government agencies, allowing them to maintain their information
collection activities overtime (Onsrud 1992b). It thus may allow for the advantage of

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

199

Figure 2. Economic reasoning behind the cost-recovery model (based on Weiss and
Pluijmers 2002).

having (access to) accurate, consistent, standardized databases that provide national
coverage (Lopez 1998, Aslesen 2002, GITA 2005).

3. Geographic information infrastructure development

A GII may be defined as a framework continuously facilitating the efficient and
effective generation, dissemination, and use of needed geographic information
within a community or between communities (after Kelley 1993). The definition
describes the facilitating function of the GII and provides its components, and the
focus on needed geographic information presupposes interaction between users and
suppliers, addressing the dynamic nature of the GII. The framework consists of five
interdependent components: (framework) data sets, policy (including institutional
framework and financial resources), technology, standards, and people (see also
McLaughlin and Nichols 1994, GSDI 1997, Rajabifard and Williamson 2002).
These components interact, which is a condition for the further development of the
infrastructure.

Although, ultimately, all GIIs should strive to contribute significantly to
economic growth and the establishment of preferred social and environmental
objectives (see Masser 1999), the objectives of today’s GIIs differ. The differences
may be explained by the stage of development of a GII. In their assessment of
currently evolving GIIs, Masser (2000, 2007) and Rajabifard et al. (2002) found two
distinguishing types of GIIs: the first-generation and second-generation GIIs. Here,
we confine ourselves with a description of the key characteristics of these two GII
generations.

3.1 First-generation GII

First-generation GIIs are typically resulting from government organizations starting
to think more strategically about information needs, collection, and the resources
needed to deliver information to a wider group of users (see Masser 1998). Due to
increased pressures to operate efficiently and the development of new technology,
government organizations realize that greater use of other organizations informa-
tion resources may be more efficient and effective than the internally supplied

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 200

B. van Loenen

information (cf. Williamson 1975). ‘Outsourcing’ some information supply allows
the organization to concentrate on its core activities and to build on other
organizations for the subordinate information.

In addition, society’s challenges require solutions that go beyond specific
organizations’ focus and capabilities. Citizen’s demand and changes in society
require ‘integration of underlying processes not only across different levels of
government, but also different functions of government [….]—a one-stop-shopping
concept. Also, from the viewpoint of all levels of government, this could eliminate
redundancies and inconsistencies in their information bases for citizens’ (Layne and
Lee 2001). Cooperation between departments, and between organizations is
required to provide the necessary multidisciplinary or interorganizational solutions.
Awareness among professionals in the geographic information sector grows that
together they can make a difference. The concept of a GII may be an answer to the
issues that need to be resolved: the first generation GIIs has come into being (see
Masser 1999).

information integration, and reducing duplication:

The dominant role of the public information producers in these GIIs results in
GII strategies that focus primarily on standardization, digitization (see Graafland
1993),
the product-based
strategies (see Rajabifard et al. 2002, 2003). Significant investments are made to
create a framework data set for an entire jurisdiction, either by integrating existing
data sets or through new information collection. Data set development and
continuation of the existence of the data set are the key driver for GII development
(cf. Masser 1999, 2000, Rajabifard et al. 2002, 2003).

3.2 Second-generation GII

In the second generation, the islands of organizations are becoming a network of
organizations. The key organizations in this stage have changed from internally
centred towards organizations open to external developments, and the individual
organizations’ strategies increasingly align with the GII vision (cf. Graafland 1997).
Government, private sector, and academia increasingly cooperate in the GII
network.

Participants in the GII start to realize the potential of the network now
information is available for and is used in multiple subject areas. Issues of use are
addressed, such as barriers for using framework data sets. These barriers may be
technical of nature, but awareness grows that policy issues need to be resolved to
meet the needs of users.

Consequently, the GII strategy is focusing on information creation and exchange,
but also aims to address the GII from a broader society perspective. Capacity
building, coordination, and meeting user needs are central to these GIIs: the so-
called process model (Rajabifard et al. 2002). Identifying and understanding
different user groups and their specific needs has become critical.

The main driving forces behind the process model are the desire to reuse data
collected by a wide range of agencies for a great diversity of purposes and a shift
from centralized structures to the distributed networks of the Internet (Masser 2007,
p. 80, Masser et al. 2007, Van Loenen 2006). Especially the existence of Web services
and other information applications are regarded as one of the main technological
drivers or indicators because ‘such services are partly able to fulfil the needs of users
and improve the use of data’ (Crompvoets et al. 2004; see also Rajabifard et al.
2003).

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

201

In specific instances, other drivers may also be found. In the European Union, for
example, both the process towards acceptance of the Infrastructure for Spatial
Information in Europe (INSPIRE) (since 2002) and the implementation of the
INSPIRE Directive (since 2007) has been and is a major driver for GII development in
EU Member States. Through INSPIRE, GII development has gained significant
awareness and commitment at high levels of national governments.

4. Role of users in GII development

Linking users to geographic information is at the core of GII development (see, for
example, Masser et al. 2007). Users of the GII, however, ‘will probably be the most
mentioned group and yet actually the least considered’ (McLaughlin and Nichols
1994). Discussions on access policy often focus on the user without specifying
different types of users and use. In practice, this has resulted often in a single access
policy for a data set. Obviously, a wide variety of policies can be applied to a specific
data set, depending on the needs of a user, the type of use, the number of users, and
the frequency of use, among others. In Sweden, as in many other countries, citizens
can access geographic information through a model that can be categorized as open,
as the model for private sector GI users is restrictive.

From a GII perspective,

it is important to acknowledge that within a GII,
different types of users exist, which may require a user-group specific policy. We
distinguish between four user groups:

1. Primary users, which are users that use the data set in line with the initial
purpose of information collection on a continuous basis. They are typically
members of the organization that have collected and processed the information.
2. Secondary users are incidental users for similar purposes as the primary user.
3. Tertiary users are those that add value to the framework data set. Tertiary use
may be integrating several data sets into one layer for a jurisdiction, the
linkage of a framework geographic data set with several thematic layers, or
providing user-friendly access to the data set
(adding search facilities,
explanation, or a help desk functionality), or simply intermediaries that help
information resources in distributing the data set without adding anything
other than providing distribution channels. Tertiary use may also be referred
to as value-added use or re-use.

4. End-users consist of citizens, decision-makers, and others that use the end
product of geographic information, for example, an animation, a map or a
plain answer, mostly through services provided by the tertiary users.

Each of these user groups can be found in government and administrations, in utility
and public services, in private sector, in research institutions, in NGOs and not-for-
profit organizations. Each of these groups, and even users within a group, may have
unique needs, in terms of both data quality and access policy.

Figure 3 shows some insight in the relation between user groups and the value of
geographic information. Primary users would typically value a data set at its
production cost. Not all users value a data set at its production cost, however (see
Krek and Frank 2000). Tertiary users, for example, will not value the framework
data set at cost-recovery prices. End users might be willing to pay a few euros for a
specific aspect of a data set, or otherwise turn to alternatives.

Figure 3 also shows that the commercially interesting market is in value-adding
products. Often, government cannot develop such value-added products, since this

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 202

B. van Loenen

Figure 3. Paradox of the value creation (based on Micus 2001a, p. 12).

is outside its public task. Therefore, government agencies that bear the high cost of
framework data collection often cannot take advantage of the framework data set
commercially through value-added products. If government agencies then attempt
to recover their costs by selling their information to value-adding resellers (VARs)
against cost-recovery prices, they will fail, since the VARs do not value a data set at
its cost-recovery prices. The ‘one policy fits all’ principle will not work.

5. How access policies may promote GII development

Section 3 has described two generations GII with distinguishing characteristics. The
product-based strategies in the first generation focus on data set development and
continuation of the existence of the data. These strategies are typically addressing
primary and secondary users’ needs. In the second generation, the process model,
fulfilling the needs of tertiary users is at the core of GII strategies.

In this section, we will link the different objectives of the two GII generations to
the characteristics of the access policies as described in section 2. Findings from case
studies performed in Van Loenen (2006) and Van Loenen et al. (2007) are used to
support the arguments.

5.1 First-generation GII

In the first generation, users of geographic information are typically primary and
secondary users; users that use the information in harmony with purposes for which
it was collected. Tertiary use is limited primarily due to the insufficient quality of the
data for value-adding purposes. New public-sector objectives require further data
set development, and also private sector needs require this (although this may not be
recognized at this point).

Guaranteed public funding for improving the data set is one option to meet the
needs. However, for most data sets, such a guarantee would be unattainable; the
awareness at the decision-making levels for a specific data set is insufficient for
guaranteed public funding. Consequently, general budgets dedicated to costly data-
set development may not always be sufficient. In these instances, government can
satisfy its needs through cooperation with other parties. Substantial gains may be
found in public–private or public–public cooperation, for example for information
collection.

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

203

5.1.1 Public–private partnerships. Cost-recovery policies for public sector informa-
tion may promote cooperation with the private sector to share the cost of
information collection. Private entities are only willing to partner with the public
entity if their investments are not flowing towards their competitor(s): they will
require restrictive policies in exchange for their investment. If cooperation between
public and private parties implies that information collected is subject to open-
access policies, the private party is unlikely to invest in such cooperation, since
potentially competitors may acquire the data set under an open records request (cf.
Holland 1994). Cost-recovery policies may lead to the availability of geographic
information to a limited group of users (those in the private and government entities
involved), whereas the information otherwise may not have been available at all.

Examples of successful partnerships are found in the public–private partnerships
in collecting topographic information in the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, the
US Metropolitan region of Minneapolis of St. Paul, and, to a smaller extent, in the
US state Massachusetts and the German state Northrhine Westphalia. Utilities play
in these jurisdictions a critical role in the collection, creation, and maintenance of
large-scale topographic information (see Van Loenen 2005). Through public–private
partnerships, or independent of government, they support the respective GIIs
through collecting, creating, and maintaining digital
large-scale topographic
information. In the instances of no partnerships, the public party in the mentioned
cases often lacked current and accurate large-scale topographic information.

In the Netherlands, the status of the large-scale topographic base map (GBKN),
developed through a public–private partnership, has become such that it was
considered to become part of the core of the Dutch Information Infrastructure
(Besemer et al. 2006). Government was to compensate the private partners for their
investments in exchange for full public sector control over the data set. Such an
opportunity would not have been there without private sector involvement.

local and regional

requirements. Use of

5.1.2 Public–public cooperation. In instances where the quality of data sets is
sufficient for primary users, but where other categories of use require a higher
quality, public–public partnerships using cost-recovery policies may also promote
GII development. For example,
in the German state Northrhine Westphalia,
information collection is largely decentralized and carried out mostly on the regional
and local levels. The processing and maintenance of information is mostly tailored
to these
‘Automatisierten
Liegenschaftskarte’ (ALK, the parcel and topographic data set) is primarily with
the primary users in the public sector. For the use part, Micus’s findings of 2001 are
still valid: the incomplete availability and currency of information, the lack of
transparency, and the high price and restrictive use rights have for most customers a
frightening effect (Micus 2001a, p. 13, Micus 2001b, p. 8). Only based on a full
coverage of Northrhine Westphalia, the value-added market will develop geographic
information products and services (Micus 2001b, p. 8). As a result, the state
authority and the local authorities started to work together towards a single parcel
and topographic layer for Northrhine Westphalia. In the beginning of 2007, this
harmonized ALK data set had 96% digital coverage (LVA 2007). Through a cost-
recovery policy, the revenues generated are being shared between the participating
authorities.

the

Another example stems from Massachusetts (US). The parcel data sets in
Massachusetts are locally managed in the 351 towns and cities. Despite the open-
access policies, mainly primary users use the data sets. The heterogeneous quality of

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 204

B. van Loenen

the 351 local parcel data sets at the state level is a major cause for this limited use
(see Van Loenen 2006). Public–public cooperation in Massachusetts may result in
harmonized parcel quality at the state level; the use of harmonized data models and
adherence to the same standards.

However, individual local government may not be willing to invest in a statewide
harmonized data set which it does not need, but from which other levels of
government and private sector may benefit significantly. Open-access policies do not
allow for recovering the cost of the integration and harmonization of data sets. It is,
in these instances, questionable whether local governments bound to open-access
policies will invest in harmonizing their data set with state standards, since the (tax)
benefits will be received by the state or federal budget and not by the town bearing
the cost. Potentially, the beneficiaries (i.e. state or federal treasury) may compensate
local government. However, the likelihood of compensation decreases with the
extent to which the value of geographic information is understood at the decision-
making levels. With a cost-recovery policy in place, local government will control
the use (and revenues) of its data set. Cost-recovery policies may provide some
financial relief and help justify the investment with the local decision-makers.
Therefore, local government is, with cost-recovery policies in place, more likely to be
willing to invest in integrating its data sets in jurisdiction-wide harmonized data sets.

5.2 Second-generation GII

In the second generation, the use of framework data sets is in the primary and
secondary user groups. Contrary to the previous stages, the cause for the limited
tertiary use is not in the quality of the framework data sets, but rather in the
restrictive access policies that are associated with the data set (see Brox et al. 2002).
Such a situation has been found in several European GIIs (see Van Loenen 2006,
Van Loenen et al. 2007). Potential tertiary users assess the restrictive use conditions
including cost-recovery prices as insufficient to develop viable commercial value-
added products based on the framework information: the value-added market that
would be based on framework data sets does not develop. Maintaining full cost-
recovery policies for all user groups may be against the interest of the GII.

5.2.1 Promoting value-added use. It has been suggested that a change from cost-
recovery to open-access policies would be beneficial for a society, as it would
stimulate the information economy (e.g. Onsrud et al. 1996, Lopez 1998, Pira et al.
2000, Ravi bedrijvenplatform 2000, Berenschot et al. 2001, KPMG 2001, Weiss and
Pluijmers 2002).

Still, the vast majority of public geographic information suppliers stick to cost-
recovery policies. The reluctance of these public data providers to convert to open
public information policies may be owing to the absence of guarantees that the
public-sector information supplier will be compensated for the expected loss of
income when cost-recovery policies are converted to open ones (see EU, European
Parliament and the Council of the European Union 2002). Research has assessed
that a price change for the Dutch 1:10 000 topographic data set from partly cost
recovery to the marginal cost of dissemination would result in a yearly budget deficit
for the national mapping agency of J1.18 million. A change to completely free
access was assessed to ‘cost’ J3.36 million per year (Berenschot et al. 2001). These
from a
numbers are small
microeconomic perspective, a policy change is likely to have a major impact on

from a macroeconomic perspective. However,

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

205

the national mapping agency and the information it provides. For example, in the
US, USGS suffered from significant real budget reductions that have caused USGS
to scale back updates of the 1:24 000 map series (NRC 2003, p. 22).

income

loss of

enterprise

for public

the public

This is what may be called ‘the dilemma of the public enterprise’. A policy
change would benefit
(society) macroeconomically
through promoting the development of value added services, including creating
new jobs and generating tax income from these new products. However, the
potential
for
providing geographic information needs to be addressed by other means of support.
If such means are uncertain or unavailable, the public-sector entity (as a public
enterprise) may be forced to collect less comprehensive information with lower
frequencies; the existence of information currently available can no longer be
guaranteed (see van Loenen et al. 2006). The quality may then become insufficient as
a basis for value-added products (see first-generation GII). In these instances of
uncertain resources also, open-access policies may be counter-productive for GII
development.

sector organizations

responsible

Both cost-recovery and open-access policies do not seem to be the panacea
for further GII development in this stage. Policy makers still struggle to develop an
appropriate policy (see Van Loenen et al. 2007). Continuing the battle
between advocates of the two funding models will not abolish the status quo,
however. Alternative approaches may help overcome the dilemma of the public
enterprise by addressing the deficiencies of both the cost-recovery and open-access
model.

5.2.2 Overcoming the dilemma of the public enterprise. Three alternative options to
address the dilemma of the public enterprise are presented. All of them assume user-
group-specific policies. One option is described in the US Federal Technology
Transfer Act (FTTA), which allows the public sector to withhold data sets for 5
years from the public domain that were produced together with private companies
(see also Pluijmers 1998, p. 54). The disadvantage of such an approach is that the
data set is relatively old before value-added users can use it. Large-scale information
products require current information to be most useful (see Van Loenen 2006).
Therefore, this option may not be feasible for most value-added products for large-
scale geographic framework data sets.

A more promising model may be found in the Data Lending Facility in Finland
(see Toivonen et al. 2006). After subscribing to the facility (and agreeing to the terms
of use), users can freely download data for a 1-year period. After this 1 year in which
the user can test the data, they are asked to buy the data, delete the data, or extend
the subscription for another year. This model allows value adding companies to use
the data without cost, for example, to test the software and to assess the data set. A
similar approach is found in Northrhine Westphalia, where a new law allows
government to provide private sector companies free access to geobasisdaten to
explore the commercial opportunities (Van Loenen et al. 2007). If the value adding
of these companies appears to be successful, a contract between state authority and
the private partner will be negotiated.

The third alternative acknowledges that different users value identical informa-
tion differently (Van Loenen et al. 2006). This alternative model maintains current
cost-recovery policies for the primary and secondary users but promotes tertiary use
by providing free access to framework data sets for those willing to add value to the
framework information. Free access implies only access at no start-up cost. The

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 206

B. van Loenen

Figure 4. Alternative funding model.

value-adding company compensates the information provider through royalties
based on a small percentage of the turnover of the new product or service (see
figure 4) or through returning improved information quality. Intellectual property
rights remain with the information provider, and additional use restrictions should
guarantee that the data set is only used for value-adding activities, and not for
purposes of primary or secondary use.

Current use by primary and secondary user groups remain constant under the
model, while it encourages tertiary use. This results in a GII with high-quality
framework data sets that provide the basis for a wide variety of government and
private tasks. In addition, the GII functions as the foundation for a large variety of
value-added products and services. Through this hybrid access policy approach, the
alternative funding model bridges the open access and cost-recovery models. In this
way, this alternative model resolves the ‘dilemma of the public enterprise’. It will
result in a win–win situation, with new products and new users. This model may also
generate new revenues for the information producers. National government benefits
from increased employment in the value-added sector, and it collects more income
tax, value-added tax, and company tax.

An example of the third alternative is in the UK’s Ordnance Survey (OS) where
primary users are bound to a collective licensing agreement and VARs can enter into
a partnership programme with VAR-specific licences. This has allowed OS to go
into partnerships with over 140 VARs. The overall principle of market segmentation
is very well understood, but the implementation by OS seems to be over-restrictive
with respect to sharing and displaying data; that is, sharing of data is only possible
with agencies with a similar licensing agreement, which has resulted in dissatisfied
primary users in government (Van Loenen et al. 2007). In addition, not all value-
added resellers are satisfied with OS’s policies. Some claim unfair discriminating
practices of OS in the terms upon which basic (raw) information is made available to
different entities within the public and private sectors (see APPSI 2007).

looks
5.2.3 Barriers for implementation. Although the third alternative model
promising, there may be several roadblocks to the alternative model. In Europe, for

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

207

sector

the European directive on re-use of public

information
example,
the European Union 2003)
(EU, European Parliament and the Council of
‘Any applicable conditions for the reuse of documents shall be non-
states:
discriminatory for comparable categories of reuse’ (article 10.1). Reuse is defined as
reasons for using the public-sector information other than that which the public-
sector bodies had in fulfilling their public tasks. It
is not clear whether
using framework data sets for tertiary use, for example, as a basis for value-added
services, and using the framework data sets for secondary use as a background
map are comparable categories of reuse. If the two reuses are not comparable, the
public information supplier can continue to enjoy significant payments from
secondary users, while it promotes tertiary use that returns some income
from royalties. If the two reuses are comparable, however, then the alternative
model disintegrates. The information supplier needs to keep its cost-recovery model
to maintain the income stream from secondary users, and consequently, the
European directive requires the imposition of identical policies for tertiary use,
which maintains the status quo and blocks further development of the GII. A
feasible, but fragile, way to promote value-added use is then to organise guaranteed
funding with primary and secondary users and provide open access to the
information to all users.

6. Future-generation GII

In future-generation GIIs, the GII may be a true network with players that
operate proactively (Van Kerkhoff et al. 1999). The organizations involved may
depend on each other because of shared responsibilities for the GII. The GII may
become a ‘multi-purpose system’ with well-integrated information from multiple
systems and sources (Watson et al. 2001, Masser 2005). Information is maintained at
the source. This implies that information is only collected at the largest scale needed
and generalized to smaller scales. Further, the dependencies require comprehensive
metadata documentation (Watson et al. 2001). Standardization has shifted from
supplier or product specific to adherence to international standards that are
supplier-independent (Bemelmans and Matthijsse 1995). The value of a framework
data set is well understood, and embedding it in legislation safeguards its future
existence. The legislation is conceptual in its wording, since framework data sets’
conceptual qualities are relatively constant (they exist and are complete, current,
accurate, and interoperable with other data sets), but the technical requirements
it is commonly understood that the value of
may change overtime. Further,
information comes from its use (see Onsrud and Rushton 1995).

In future-generation GIIs, awareness for the value of a geographic framework
data set is present at the decision-making levels, which may result in sufficient
financial resources ensuring that framework information will be collected and
maintained. Open-access policies support the development of GII by promoting
sharing information among government agencies and the high use of government
information in private-sector solutions. The income generated from the tax on
private-sector solutions flows back into the GII because of the high-level of GII
awareness. The open policies allow for a proactive geographic information sector
that, with best practice solutions, continues to enlarge support for the concept of the
GII.

Although some may argue that the approach of ubiquitous open access may be
naı¨ve or unlikely to happen, trends in Europe and Canada suggest that in the near

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 208

B. van Loenen

in Ireland (see Ryan 2007) and Canada (see,

future, access policies are more likely to be more open or adjusted to specific user
needs than most of today’s policies for geographic information. Geographic
information from the Dutch provinces and water boards can be freely reused (Van
Berkel 2006), and the Dutch Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water
Management has announced the introduction of a similar policy in 2009 (TK 2007).
Also,
for example, http://
www.geogratis.ca/), a similar trend evolves. In other countries, free access within
government is emerging. For example, in Catalunya (Spain) but also in Northrhine
Westphalia, access to public geographic framework data for government use has
since 2005 been without cost. In Norway, open access for public data sets for public
sector participating in Norge Digitalt has resulted in an increased use of these data
sets (Van Loenen et al. 2007).

7. Conclusions

This article has aimed to provide a balanced view on the role access policies may
play in developing geographic information infrastructures. Two stages of GII
development were utilized to assess the role of access policies.

An appropriate policy for a particular framework data set is likely to relate to the
stage of GII development. As long as there is insufficient awareness of the value of
geographic information for a specific jurisdiction within the decision-making levels,
cost recovery may be a way to allow for sustainable quality geographic information.
for GII
In the first-generation GIIs,
in
development. Cost-recovery policies allow for cost-sharing arrangements
public–private partnerships and return on investment for the responsible entity,
often the lower levels of government. The examples of public–private or public–
public partnerships
in the Netherlands, Denmark,
Massachusetts, and the Metropolitan region of Minneapolis and St. Paul), especially
between local governments and utilities, show the success of cost-recovery policies
for GII development.

information collection is

(topographic data sets

the driver

In more advanced stages, GII development aims at promoting use, without
endangering the funding mechanism underlying information collection. Open-access
policies are in these instances expected to address the objectives of the GII better
than cost-recovery policies. However, in instances where guaranteed public funding
for the GII is unattainable, which is likely for many geographic data sets, this article
recommends to adopt relatively open policies for value-added use, but to maintain
restrictive policies for those that do not intend to add value to the data set.

What Masser noticed in 1998 still holds today: the success of the GII strategies is
likely to be closely coupled with the extent to which they meet the requirements of
users (Masser 1998). Only user-group-specific access policies will meet
this
requirement of currently developing and future GIIs. Recent developments towards
open access in Europe and Canada suggest that the next generation of GIIs with
open-access policies for high-quality information may be much closer than many
recognize.

Acknowledgements
The author thanks especially the reviewers for their thorough reviews. Also, Joep
Crompvoets of Wageningen University, the Netherlands, Jaap Zevenbergen, and
Garfield Giff of Delft University of Technology are acknowledged for their
constructive suggestions on earlier versions of this article.

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

209

References
APPSI (ADVISORY PANEL ON PUBLIC SECTOR INFORMATION), 2007, Report in Relation to
Requests by Intelligent Addressing Limited and Ordnance Survey to Review Certain
Recommendations Made in the Report of the Office of Public Sector Information of 13 July
2006 Relating to a Complaint by Intelligent Addressing Limited (SO 42/8/4), 30 April.

ASLESEN, L., 2002, The US experience. In Data Policy & Legal Issues Position Paper,
Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe (INSPIRE). Available online at:
(accessed
http://inspire.jrc.it/reports/position_papers/inspire_dpli_pp_v12_2_en.pdf
10 September 2007).

BDO CONSULTANTS, 1998, Elektronische Bestanden Van Het Bestuur, Report prepared for the

Dutch Ministery of the Interior. (Electronic files of government)

BESEMER, J.W.J., LAARAKKER, P.M., MURRE, L., KROODE, R.B.M. ten. and ZUIDERVEEN
BORGESIUS, N.W., 2006, Basic registers for geo-information. In Shaping the Change, T.
Gollwitzer, K. Hillinger and M. Villikka (Eds), XXIII International FIG Congress.
Informatie-infrastructuren.

BEMELMANS, T.M.A. and MATTHIJSSE, R.P.H.M., 1995,

Informatie en informatiebeleid, 13, pp. 57–66.

BERENSCHOT and NEDERLANDS ECONOMISCH INSTITUUT, 2001, Welvaartseffecten van
Verschillende
Gegevensbestanden
(Prosperity Effects of Different Funding Models of Electronic Data Sets). Report
prepared for the Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties.
BORGMAN, C.L., 2000, From Gutenberg to the Global Information Infrastructure; Access to

Financieringsmethoden

Elektronische

van

Information in the Networked World (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

BROX, C., BISHR, Y., SENKLER, K., ZENS, K. and KUHN, W., 2002, Toward a geospatial data
infrastructure for Northrhine-Westphalia. Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 26, pp. 19–37.

COOPERS LYBRAND, 1996, Economic aspects of the collection, dissemination and integration
of government’s geospatial information. A report arising from work carried out
for Ordnance Survey by Coopers and Lybrand. Available online at: http://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/aboutus/reports/coopers/index.html
(accessed
September 2007).

CROMPVOETS, J., BREGT, A., RAJABIFARD, A. and WILLIAMSON, I., 2004, Assessing the
worldwide status of national spatial data clearinghouses. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 18, pp. 665–689.

EU, EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT and THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 2002, Proposal for
a Directive Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on
the Re-Use and Commercial Exploitation of Public Sector Documents, COM (2002) 207
final 2002/0123 (COD).

EU, EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT and THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 2003, Directive
2003/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 on the
Re-Use of Public Sector Information, 2003/98/EC.

GITA, 2005, Free or Fee: The Governmental Data Ownership Debate. Available online at: http://
www.gita.org/resources/whitepapers/Free_or_fee.pdf (accessed September 2007).
GRAAFLAND, A., 1993, Geo-informatievoorziening in Nederlandse gemeenten. PhD thesis,
(Geographic information supply in Dutch

Delft University of Technology).
Municipalities).

GRAAFLAND, A., 1997, Gemeentelijke Geo-Informatievoorziening (Geographic Information

Supply in Local Government) (Delft: Technische Universiteit Delft).

GSDI, 1997, Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Conference Findings and Resolutions, Chapel
at: http://www.gsdi.org/docs1997/97_gsdi97r.html

Hill, NC. Available online
(accessed September 2007).

HM TREASURY, 2000, Cross Cutting Review of the Knowledge Economy Review of Government
Information, Final Report. Available online at: http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/
spending_review/spending_review_2000/associated_documents/spend_sr00_ad_ccrcontents.
cfm (accessed 10 September 2007).

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 210

B. van Loenen

HOLLAND, W.S., 1994, Copyright,

licensing and cost recovery for geographic and land
information systems data: a legal, economic and policy analysis. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Law and Information Policy for Spatial Databases, 28–29 October 1994,
Tempe, AZ.

JOFFE, B., 2005, Ten ways to support GIS without selling data. URISA Journal, 16, pp. 27–33.
(accessed 15

Available online at: http://www.urisa.org/files/Joffevol16no2-3.pdf
January 2006).

KELLEY, P.C., 1993, A national spatial information infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 1993
Conference of the Australasian Urban and Regional Information Systems Association
(AURISA), Adelaide, Australia.

KPMG CONSULTING (GARRY SEARS), 2001, Canadian Geospatial Data Policy Study
(Executive Summary), Report Prepared for Geoconnections. Available online
at:
http://www.geoconnections.org/programsCommittees/proCom_policy/keyDocs/
KPMG/KPMG_E.pdf (accessed 10 September 2007).

KREK, A. and FRANK, A.U., 2000, The production of geographic information—the value
Information and Decision
ftp://ftp.geoinfo.tuwien.ac.at/krek/

tree. Geo-Informations-Systeme—Journal
Making, 13, pp. 10–12. Available online at:
3226_value-tree.pdf (accessed 10 September 2007).

for Spatial

LAYNE, K. and LEE, J., 2001, Developing fully functional E-government: A four stage model.

Government Information Quarterly, 18, pp. 122–136.

LONGLEY, P.A., GOODCHILD, M.F., MAGUIRE, D.J. and RHIND, D.W., 2001, Geographic

Information Systems and Science (Chichester, UK: Wiley).

LOPEZ, X.R., 1998, The Dissemination of Spatial Data: a North American–European
Comparative Study on the Impact of Government Information Policy (London: Ablex
Publishing).

LVA (Landesvermessungsamt), 2007, Erfassungsstand der ALK in NRW (Stand:
01.01.2007). Available online at: http://www.lverma.nrw.de/produkte/liegenschaftsin-
formation/katasterinfo/alk/images/erfassungsstand.pdf (accessed 10 September 2007).
MASSER, I., 1998, The first generation of national geographic information strategies. In

Proceedings of the GSDI Conference, Canberra, November.

MASSER, I., 1999, All shapes and sizes: the first generation of national spatial data
infrastructures. International Journal of Geographical Science, 3, pp. 67–84.
MASSER, I., 2000, What is a spatial data infrastructure? In 4th Global Spatial Data

Infrastructure Conference, Cape Town, South Africa.

MASSER, I., 2005, GIS Worlds; Creating Spatial Data Infrastructures (Redlands, CA: ESRI

MASSER, I., 2007, Building European Spatial Data Infrastructures (Redlands, CA: ESRI

Press).

Press).

MASSER, I., RAJABIFARD, A. and WILLIAMSON, I.P., 2007, Spatially Enabling Governments
through SDI Implementation. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 21, July, pp. 1–16.

MCLAUGHLIN, J. and NICHOLS, S., 1994, Developing a National Spatial Data Infrastructure.

Journal of Surveying Engineering, 120, pp. 62–76.

MICUS MANAGEMENT CONSULTING GMBH, 2001a, Market Survey: Boosting of

the
Geospatial Market in North Rhine Westphalia (Media NRW), 33. Available online
at: http://www.micus.de/pdf/micus_marktstudie_nrw_en.pdf (accessed 10 September
2007).

MICUS MANAGEMENT CONSULTING GMBH, 2001b, Aktivierung Des Geodatenmarktes in
Nordrhein-Westfalen Marktstudie (Media NRW). Available online at: http://
www.micus.de/pdf/micus_marktstudie_nrw.pdf (accessed 10 September 2007).
NRC (NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL), 2003, Weaving a National Map: Review of the U.S.
Geological Survey Concept of The National Map (Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press).

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 Developing geographic information infrastructures

211

ONSRUD, H.J., 1992a, In support of open access for publicly held geographic information.
GIS Law, 1, pp. 3–6. Available online at: http://www.spatial.maine.edu/,onsrud/
pubs/In_Support_OA.htm (accessed 10 September, 2007).

ONSRUD, H.J., 1992b, In support of cost recovery for publicly held geographic information.
GIS Law, 1, pp. 1–7. Available online at: http://www.spatial.maine.edu/,onsrud/
pubs/Cost_Recovery_for_GIS.html (accessed September 2007).

ONSRUD, H.J. and RUSHTON, G., 1995, Sharing Geographic Information (New Brunswick, NJ:

CUPR Press).

ONSRUD, H.J., 1998a, Survey of national and regional spatial data infrastructures activities
around the globe. In Third Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Conference, 17–19
November 1998, Canberra, Australia. Available online at: http://www.spatial.maine.
edu/,onsrud/GSDI.htm (accessed September 2007).

ONSRUD, H.J., 1998b, The tragedy of the information commons. In Policy Issues in Modern
Cartography, D.R.F. Taylor (Ed.), pp. 141–158 (Oxford: Elsevier Science).
ONSRUD, H.J., 2004, The US spatial data infrastructure; Legal & economic issues and
developments. In Spatial Data Infrastructure and Policy Development in Europe and
the United States, B. van Loenen and B.C. Kok (Eds), pp. 87–100 (Delft: Delft
University Press).

ONSRUD, H.J., JOHNSON, J.P. and WINNECKI, J., 1996, GIS dissemination policy: two surveys
and a suggested approach. Journal of Urban and Regional Information Systems, 8, pp.
8–23.

PERRITT, H.H., 1995, Should local governments sell local spatial databases through state

monopolies? Jurimetrics, Journal of Law, Science and Technology, 35, pp. 449–469.

PIRA INTERNATIONAL LTD, UNIVERSITY OF EAST ANGLIA, and KNOWLEDGE VIEW Ltd, 2000,
Commercial exploitation of Europe’s public sector information. Final Report For the
European Commission Directorate General for the Information Society. Available
online at: ftp://ftp.cordis.lu/pub/econtent/docs/commercial_final_report.pdf (accessed
10 September 2007).

PLUIJMERS, Y., 1998, Legal protection of geo-information in the United States and the
Netherlands. In Free Accessibility of Geo-Information in the Netherlands, the United
States and the European Community, J.A. Zevenbergen (Ed.), pp. 49–57 (Delft,
Netherlands: Delft University Press).

RAJABIFARD, A., FEENEY, M.-E.F. and WILLIAMSON, I.P., 2002, Directions for the future of
International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and

SDI development.
Geoinformation, 4, pp. 11–22.

RAJABIFARD, A., FEENEY, M.-E.F., WILLIAMSON, I.P. and MASSER, I., 2003, National SDI
initiatives. In Developing Spatial Data Infrastructures: From Concept to Reality, I.
Williamson, A. Rajabifard and M.-E.F. Feeney (Eds), pp. 95–110 (London: Taylor &
Francis).

RAJABIFARD, A. and WILLIAMSON, I.P., 2002, Spatial Data Infrastructures: an initiative to
facilitate spatial data sharing. In Global Environmental Databases—Present Situation and
Future Directions. Volume 2 (Hong Kong: International Society for Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing (ISPRS-WG IV/8), GeoCarto International Centre).
Laagdrempelige
BEDRIJVENPLATFORM,
Beschikbaarstelling Van Overheidsinformatie (Economic Impact of Readily Available
of Government Information). Ravi publicatie 00–02.

Economische

Effecten

2000,

RAVI

Van

RYAN, E., 2007, Natural Resource Deposit Locations, Licence Areas & Groundwater
Information Now Available Online, Press release of
the Irish Department of
Communications, Energy and Natural Resources. Available online at: http://
www.dcmnr.gov.ie/Press + Releases/Ryan + announces + free + online + access + to +
Departmental + spatial + data.htm (accessed 18 October 2007).

STATSKONTORET, 2005, Competition at the Public/Private Interface (Stockholm: The Swedish
Agency for Public Management). Available online at: http://www.statskontoret.se/
upload/Publikationer/2005/200519A.pdf (accessed 10 September 2007).

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 212

Developing geographic information infrastructures

STIA (SPATIAL TECHNOLOGIES INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION), 2001, PHASE I REPORT; Increase
Private Sector Awareness of, and Enthusiastic Participation in the National Spatial
Data Infrastructure (NSDI).

TK, 2007, Vragen Gesteld door de Leden der Kamer aan de Minister van Verkeer en Waterstaat
over Navigatiesystemen (Parliamentary Questions to the Minister on Navigation
Systems), Aanhangsel der Handelingen 997, Tweede Kamer vergaderjaar 2006–2007.
TOIVONEN, T., KALLIOLA, R. and ENNOLA, E., 2006, Data Lending Facility—the Innovative
Download Service of the Finnish NSDI. In Proceedings of the 12th EC-GI&GIS
Workshop, K. Fullerton and K. To´ th (Eds). Innsbruck, Austria, 21–23 June 2006, pp.
110–112.

TOSTA, N., 1999, NSDI was supposed to be a verb; A personal perspective on progress in the
evolution of the U.S. National Spatial Data Infrastructure. In Integrating Information
Infrastructures with GI Technology, B. Gittings (Ed.), pp. 13–24 (Philadelphia: Taylor
& Francis, 1999).

VAN BERKEL, F., 2006, Geen drempels meer voor hergebruik provinciale geodata (No barriers
left for reuse of provincial geo-data (also water boards provide free access to their
information) (Ook waterschappen geven geo-info vrij). VI Matrix, 103, pp. 6–8.

VAN KERKHOFF, J., GROOTELAAR, H.B.A. and WIELENGA, R., 1999, Sturen, Besturen en

Gestuurd worden (Zeist: A-D Druk).

VAN LOENEN, B., 2005, The impact of access policies on the development of local SDIs: the
special role of utilities. In Proceedings of the FIG Working Week 2005 and 8th
International Conference on the Global Spatial Data Infrastructure (GSDI-8), Cairo,
Egypt. Available online
at: http://www.fig.net/pub/cairo/papers/ts_50/ts50_01_
vanloenen.pdf (accessed September 2007).

VAN LOENEN, B., 2006, Developing Geographic Information Infrastructures; the Role of

Information Policies (Delft: DUP Science).

VAN LOENEN, B. and KOK, B.C., 2004, Spatial data infrastructures; Legal and economic
issues. In Spatial Data Infrastructure and Policy Development in Europe and the United
States, B. van Loenen and B.C. Kok (Eds), pp. 1–14 (Delft, Netherlands: Delft
University Press, 2004).

VAN LOENEN, B., ZEVENBERGEN, J. and dE JONG, J., 2006, Access to government information
unnecessary remains a case of professional elite. In Conference proceedings Shaping
the Change XXIII FIG Congress, Munich, Germany, 8–13 October, 2006.

VAN LOENEN, B., ZEVENBERGEN, J., GIFF, G. and CROMPVOETS, J., 2007, Open
Toegankelijkheidsbeleid voor Geo-Informatie Vergeleken: het gras leek Groener dan
het was (Executive summary & country reports in English), Ministry of the Interior and
Kingdom Relations. Available online at: http://www.minbzk.nl/aspx/download.aspx?
file5/contents/pages/87285/opentoegankelijkheidsbeleidvooroverheidvergeleken.pdf
(accessed 10 September 2007) (Open access policies for geo-information compared).
WATSON, H., ARIYACHANDRA, T. and MATYSKA, R.J., 2001, Data warehousing stages of

growth. Information Systems Management, Summer, pp. 42–50.

WEISS, P. and PLUIJMERS, Y., 2002, Borders in cyberspace: conflicting public sector
information policies and their economic impacts. Available online at: http://www.
spatial.maine.edu/GovtRecords/cache/Final%20Papers%20and%20Presentations/
bordersII.htm (accessed September 2007).

WILLIAMSON, O.E., 1975, Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A

Study in the Economics of Internal Organization (New York: Free Press).

Downloaded by [University of North Dakota] at 19:58 18 December 2014 