Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289
DOI 10.1007/s10707-008-0060-5

A preliminary method for the evaluation
of the landslides volume at a regional scale

Ivan Marchesini · Corrado Cencetti · Pierluigi De Rosa

Received: 14 July 2007 / Revised 19 June 2008 /
Accepted: 23 October 2008 / Published online: 4 December 2008
© Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2008

Abstract Dealing with the evaluation of the risk connected to the formation of
landslide dams at regional scale, it is important to estimate the volume of the
depleted material that can reach the riverbed. This information, combined with
other elements (river dimensions, valley width, landslide velocity, etc.) allows making
predictions on the possibility of river blockage. One of the problems of this approach
is the lack of data concerning the shape and position of the sliding surface; this does
not permit us to estimate the volume of the landslide material. The IFFI (Inventario
dei Fenomeni Franosi in Italia, i.e. Landslide Inventory in Italy) project furnishes
information, at different levels of precision, on nearly totality of the landslides
existing in Italy. The ﬁrst level of the IFFI (compiled for all slides) does not contain
information on the depth of the sliding surface but contains data regarding the type
and the activity of the slope movement. Along with this information the IFFI project
also furnishes vector maps containing the boundary of each landslide and the main
sliding direction. This paper describes the implementation of an algorithm aimed to
deﬁne, with an adequate approximation, the 3D geometry of the sliding surface of
rotational slides for which, on the basis of geologic maps available at regional scale,
some geotechnical parameters can be known or estimated. The work also required
the creation of a computer code useful for the 3D analysis of slope stability (3D safety
factor) using the simpliﬁed Janbu method. All computer code has been created on
a GNU-Linux OS and using shell scripting, based on GRASS GIS and R statistical
software.

Keywords GRASS GIS · Landslide volume · 3D slope stability analysis

I. Marchesini (B) · C. Cencetti · P. De Rosa

Civil and Environmental Engineering Department, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy
e-mail: marchesini@unipg.it

C. Cencetti
e-mail: corcen@unipg.it

P. De Rosa
e-mail: pierluigi.derosa@unipg.it

278

1 Introduction

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

1.1 The evaluation of sliding volume at a regional scale

The evaluation of landslide volume is strictly linked to slope stability analysis.
Normally it is necessary to study in detail only a single landslide case, but it can also
happen that it is necessary to evaluate the landslide volume at a regional scale. In
our case we had to estimate the volume at a regional scale for hundreds of landslides
in order to calculate the territorial vulnerability for landslide damming phenomena,
that are linked to the volume of depleted material [3]. It was not necessary to
have an exact estimation of volume but just an estimate of order of magnitude.
This estimation should be done iteratively for more than one hundred slides, so
the integration of this slope stability model into a Geographical Information System
(GIS) allows us a simpler and more efﬁcient analysis.

1.2 GIS approach to 3D stability analysis models

Trying to determine the sliding surface of a landslide is a hard task because each
landslide is usually a complex combination of a lot of small movements. In order
to solve this problem many different modeling approaches have been used. The
majority of these models performs a two dimensional (2D) modeling of slope
stability, using the limit equilibrium method within the domain of geotechnical
engineering. The safety factor is commonly assessed using a 2D representation of
the slope.

While the results of the 2D analysis are usually conservative, 3D analysis tends to
increase the safety factor. The failure surface is assumed to be inﬁnitely wide in 2D
modeling, omitting the 3D effects. Some studies conclude that the 3D safety factor
is usually greater than the corresponding 2D safety factor calculated for the most
critical 2D [4].

Since the 1970s, the development of 3D stability models has attracted growing
interest, so the advent of a 3D approach for slope stability analysis has produced a
great number of computer programs. The most representative one is CLARA [6],
which is commercially available, and can compute both 2D and 3D slope stability
analysis. TSLOPE3 [9] is another code that performs 3D slope stability analysis
but CLARA satisﬁes more equilibrium conditions using different methods of 3D
analysis.

The Geographical Information System (GIS), with capacities ranging from con-
ventional data storage to complex spatial analysis, is becoming a powerful tool to
implement slope stability models. Since the usual slope stability models are able
to evaluate the sliding surface but cannot precisely place the sliding surface into a
geographic reference system, the GIS approach can improve the analysis and the
overall usefulness of the obtained data.

3D analysis provides a better way to model slope stability than 2D analysis and a
GIS approach allows the user to assess with precision the extent of the landslide and
its position.

One of the ﬁrst GIS approaches to slope stability analysis was performed by Xie
et al. [11, 12] and was ﬁnalized to create the landslide susceptibility map of a region.

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

279

Recently the same authors improved their algorithm using the Monte Carlo method
to generate the centroids of the ellipsoids representing the sliding surfaces [13].

In this study, a 3D deterministic slope stability analysis is combined with a GIS
based grid system to create a procedure useful to determine the volume of the slope
movements reported on a landslide inventory map. It was developed to work with a
large number of landslides (>1000) but, at the moment, it has been tested only over
a small subset of them (we present the results from 5 landslides). Moreover a stand-
alone procedure was created to perform a classical 3D stability analysis of a slope.
Both procedures have been implemented using two free/open source softwares,
GRASS GIS [5], [8] and R [10] running on a GNU-Linux OS (Debian Testing). The
interoperability among three elements is guaranteed by the GNU-Linux Bash Shell.
The code is available under the terms of the GNU-GPL license at the website:

http://www.unipg.it/~ivanm/scripts/.

2 The procedure to estimate landslide volume at regional scale

The procedure has been developed according to the available italian landslides
inventory map and in particular the recently published data of the IFFI Project
(Inventario dei Fenomeni Franosi in Italia). The IFFI contains a vector area map,
a database of attributes of all the known italian landslides, and also a vector line map
representing the main directions of the landslides (see Fig. 1). The lines always start
at the top of the landslide. The structure of the algorithm is shown in Fig. 2, where
the code is represented by means of three nested rectangles representing the three
phases, or cycles, of the algorithm. In the ﬁgure, the developed Bash shell scripts are
also indicated. In general the main script (represented by the outer rectangle) is a
simple cycle through all the area features in the landslide inventory map.

In particular, at the moment, the procedure can be only applied to a sampling
of landslides performed by means of a geographical intersection with a geologically
homogeneous area (limestones, sandstones and marls, geological formations, etc.).
This allows working with the same average values of geotechnical parameters
(volume weight, friction angle, cohesion) that can be used by the procedure as
input data. Moreover the algorithm considers a single layer and assumes completely
saturated conditions.

Fig. 1 Subset of the IFFI
dataset

280

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

Fig. 2 Procedure structure

For each landslide area the script calculates the elevations and the direction of the
movement. The azimuth.c code (http://www.igc.usp.br/pessoais/guano/downloads/
azimuth2.c) is used to calculate the azimuth from the linear features representing
landslide directions. Moreover, an approximation of the planar shape of each slide
to an ellipse is performed. This allows the deﬁnition of the semi-axes “a” and “b”, as
shown in Fig. 2. It has to be pointed out that the length associated with the “a” axis is
the 3D length (estimated by means of DEM data) and not its projection on the plane.
The intermediate rectangle represents the second phase of the procedure. Here a
ﬁrst value for the “c” semi-axis is hypothesized (assuming the landslide shape as a
portion of an ellipsoid) and passed on to the third and last phase of the procedure.
More precisely, the value of the “c” semi-axis, initially set to a ﬁxed value of 0.5 m,
is progressively doubled before to be passed to the third phase. In the last phase the
ellipsoid for the “a”,”b”,”c” values is calculated and oriented, in the GIS reference
system, in such a way that the “a” semi-axis is parallel to the landslide direction,
passes through the centroid of the landslide area and is inclined at an angle equal
to the mean slope angle of the DEM. In Fig. 3 an example of the lower half of
a similar ellipsoid is shown (the grid represents the DEM and the closed line the
mapped slide area). During the third phase of the procedure slope stability analysis
is also performed. The Janbu [7] simpliﬁed method is used to estimate the safety
factor (F) for well deﬁned “a”,”b”,”c” semi-axes. The procedure ends when the “c”
length determining the minimum F is found; the corresponding hemiellipsoid is then
considered as the sliding surface and used to calculate the volume of the sliding mass.

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

281

Fig. 3 Example of the
ellipsoidic sliding surface

In the following paragraphs some details regarding the implementation of the

procedure are given.

3 Ellipsoid creation and orientation

As already explained, the procedure assumes that the shape of the sliding surface can
be described by an hemiellipsoid. It is simple, inside the R workspace, to write the
standard equation describing an ellipsoid (local reference system).

x2
1
a2

+ y2
1
b 2

+ z2
1
c2

= 1

The problem arises when we must describe the ellipsoid in a different reference
system (global reference system), like the italian Gauss–Boaga Roma40 we were
working with using GRASS GIS (Fig. 4). This task has been addressed, among
others, by Xie et al. [12] with an equation that allows the expression of the three
coordinates of a point in a reference system (x1, y1, z1) by means of the coordinates
of the same point in another system (x,y,z):

⎤

⎡

⎦ =

⎣

⎡

⎣

x1
y1
z1

a11 a12 a13
a21 a22 a23
a31 a32 a33

⎤

⎡

⎦ x

⎣

⎤

⎦

x − x0
y − y0
z − z0

(1)

(2)

where

x0, y0, z0 are the known coordinates of the centroid of the landslide area,
a11, a12, ....., anm are constants. The constants can be easily calculated and depend
on the direction and inclination of the “a” axis.

Since the x,y coordinates where the ellipsoid must be calculated (i.e. the cells
bounded by the landslide perimeter) are known, it is possible to create an R
dataframe containing the pairs of these x,y values. This means that, for each cell
and from the equation of Xie et al. [12], one can express x1, y1, and z1 as a function
of z only.

Substituting such three new equations into the ellipsoid standard equation, a
second order equation in z may be obtained. The smallest values from this equation

282

Fig. 4 Global and local
reference system

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

represent, for each x,y pair, the elevation (z) of the lower part of the ellipsoid
oriented along the slope affected by the slide movement and characterized by
well deﬁned “a”,”b”,”c” semi-axes. Hence it represents the elevation of the sliding
surface.

4 Evaluation of the safety factor (F)

The simpliﬁed Janbu method was applied on the basis of the discrimination of the
landslide in n prismatic elements. The projected area of the base of each prism is
deﬁned by the resolution adopted by the user in GRASS GIS. The real area of the

Fig. 5 Prismatic element of
the landslide

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

283

base of each prism depends on the inclination of the ellipsoidal sliding surface. The
aspect (dip direction) and inclination (α) of each cell constituting the sliding surface
are simply derived by the terrain analysis instruments of GRASS GIS (r.slope.aspect
module). In Fig. 5 a single prism is represented. Since the simpliﬁed Janbu method
assumes that the internal forces among the prisms are purely normal, we assume that
the tangential forces on the vertical sides of the prisms are null, i.e. XL1 = XL2 =
XR1 = XR2 = 0.

At the base of each prism we have normal (Nk) and tangential (Sm,k) forces related
to the gravitational forces (Wk). On the vertical sides of the prisms the normal forces
(EL1, EL2, ER1, ER2) act respectively counterbalancing each other. Only along the
“a” semi-axis the dip-direction of the cells (s1) corresponds to the landslide direction
(s). In all other cases there is an angle (λ) between the two directions (see Fig. 6).
This means that to evaluate the contribution of each prism to the instability of the
landslide volume we have to calculate the component along “s” direction of the
sliding force acting at the base of each prism by Nsin(α)cos(λ). The same is true for
the tangential forces. Obviously, when λ is greater than 90° the prism acts to stabilize
the landslide.

The safety factor is evaluated by means of the equation of global equilibrium to

the horizontal translation:
(cid:7)
n(cid:6)

k=1

F=

ck Ah + (Nk − uk Ak)tanϕk

cosαkcosλk

(cid:8)

n(cid:6)

k=1

Nksinαkcosλk

where
Ak and αk are respectively the area and the inclination of the kth prism base,
ck is the cohesion,
uk is the hydraulic head;

(3)

Fig. 6 The angle between the
landslide direction and cells
direction

284

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

and by means of the equation of the local equilibrium of each prism to the vertical
translation:

(cid:9)

Nk = 1
mα

Wk − 1
F

(ck Ak − uk Aktanϕk) sinαk

(4)

(cid:10)

where

Nk is the normal force acting on the base of the kth prism,
Wk is the weight of the prism, φk is the friction angle,
mα,k depends on αk, φk and F:

mα,k = cosαk

tanαktanϕk

(5)

(cid:11)

1 + 1
F

(cid:12)

Substituting the normal forces into the equation of global equilibrium to horizon-
tal translation, a non linear equation that determines the safety factor in implicit form
is obtained. The solution of this equation is obtained using an iterative algorithm
implemented into R. The iterative process stops when the difference between the
assumed F and the calculated one is less than 0.001.

Since the simpliﬁed Janbu method tends to underestimate the safety factor as the
depth of the sliding surface increases, the obtained value of F is corrected by means
of a coefﬁcient f0 which depends on a coefﬁcient k that is equal to 0.5 (cohesive
materials) or 0.31 (non cohesive materials):

f0 = 1 + k

− 1.4

(cid:9)

c
2a

(cid:10)

(cid:14)

2

(cid:13)

c
2a

(6)

The simpliﬁed Janbu procedure can sometimes be numerically instable due to the
value assumed by the mα,k coefﬁcient. In particular some problems arise when mα,k
is really small, null or negative, because this determines inﬁnite or negative values
of the normal forces Nk. This can happen when αk is negative and contemporary
tanφ/F is large or when αk is large but tanφ/F is small.

A solution to this problem is to limit the inclination (αk) of the sliding surface into

the range deﬁned by the theory of the active and passive state of Rankine [1].

4.1 Deﬁning the “c” semi-axis length

We can deﬁne “critical c”: the value of “c” semi-axis for which the calculated F
is minimum. As we said before, we decided to hypothesize values progressively
doubled for the length of the “c” semi-axis. For each hypothesized value, the F safety
factor is calculated. When the last obtained F value (corresponding to the cn semi-
axes length) is larger than the previous one (F(cn−1), the algorithm returns to add
1 meter to the cn−1 value. If the F(cn−1+1) is larger than F(cn−1) then the algorithm
stops and assumes the cn−1 length as the “critical c”; on the opposite, if the F(cn−1+1)
is smaller than F(cn−1), the calculation continues adding 2, 4, 8,..meters to the cn−1
length.

An example of this procedure is shown in Fig. 7 where the F values are plot-
ted against the “c” values. The “critical c” is equal to 79 meters and is found in

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

285

Fig. 7 Safety factor vs c
semi-axis

correspondence of a F value of 0.42. The “critical c” corresponds to the minimum
of the function “F vs c”. It could happen sometimes that the function “F vs c” does
not reach a minimum into the range from a minimum of “c”=0 to a maximum of
“c”=”b” . In this case, the minimum F is obviously assigned for “c”=”b”.

5 Application

The procedure was applied to ﬁve landslides located in the Umbria region (Central
Italy). All landslides are located on the same geological homogeneous formation
(“Marnoso-Arenacea Formation”, a marly-arenaceous fractured lithological com-
plex). The geotechnical parameters used came from a previous study [2] concerning
a landslide located on the same geological formation and close to the 5 landslides
analyzed. The results of the stability analysis performed using the procedure just
described are summarized in Table 1. The table shows that, for each landslide,
a safety factor less than one was found, as expected. To better understand this
point, we should consider that every landslide is classiﬁed as an active or quiescent
landslide and the soil moisture hypothesis (terrain completely saturated) is strictly
conservative. In Fig. 8 an example of a calculated sliding surface is shown.

Table 1 Results of the stability analysis

Landslide id

X center

Y center

b (m)

c (m)

2316944
2317430
2316146
2316306
2316493

4813433
4813421
4813302
4813415
4813764

a (m)

137.9
147.3
93.3
138.7
217.4

78.3
53.0
30.0
26.1
41.4

46.5
78.5
34.5
33.5
70.5

F

0.76
0.41
0.59
0.44
0.52

Volume (m3)
1012445
1129841
213714
390441
1387780

1
2
3
4
5

286

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

Fig. 8 Example of calculated
sliding surface

6 The stand-alone script for 3D slope stability analysis

A new stand alone script was written to perform a 3D slope stability analysis. Starting
from the scripts described before, we tried to create a model to analyze slope stability.
The new bash script asks the user for a vector line map deﬁning the direction along
which we need to perform the slope stability analysis. Such direction should be egual
to the more tilted slope direction because here is where we usually expect to ﬁnd
landslide phenomena. The vector line map represents the domain where the model
has to perform the slope stability analysis. We call this line “domain line” (Fig. 9).
The script splits this line into an equal number of segments as deﬁned by the user.
The user also has to provide an anisotropy ratio between the major semi-axis (a)
and the semi-axis (b). The model iteratively centers the corresponding ellipsoid at
the connection of two consecutive segments and on the basis of the anisotropy ratio,
it assigns a starting value for “a” and “b” semi-axes (Fig. 10).

Then the script starts to increase the semi-axis “c” in order to ﬁnd the minimum
safety factor, as already explained in the Section 4.1. Once the “critical c” is found,
the script doubles the “a” value and starts again to increase the “c” value. The
safety factor calculated with the new “a” value is then compared to the previous
one. If the new F is smaller than the previous F, the script continues to double the

Fig. 9 Example of a “domain
line”, along which we need to
perform the slope stability
analysis

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

287

Fig. 10 Schema of the
increasing ellipsoid
dimensions, at the junction of
consecutive segments, along
the “domain line”

“a” value; conversely it stops, writes “c” and F values on a text ﬁle and passes on
to the next connection between segments. The output of the module is a text ﬁle
containing, for each centroid position, the coordinates, the minimum safety factor
and the corresponding landslide volume.

7 Conclusions

The study of the risk connected to the formation of landslide dams cannot neglect the
sliding volume parameter. The GIS approach to 3D analysis of slope stability allows
modelling the sliding surfaces at a regional scale and to evaluate the sliding volume
for each landslide; moreover it improves the management of the input data and of
the results obtained. Performing this kind of analysis is a hard task and, due to the
scale of the analysis, it must be accomplished with some approximations concerning
geotechnical parameters and terrain saturation. The availability of a detailed land-
slide inventory map, of a DEM and of a numerical geological map of the target area,
gave us the chance to build a computer procedure which allowed the approximate
estimation of the mass of a large number of slope movements. The ﬁrst results
obtained on a subset of landslides have shown that the calculated safety factors
and the corresponding sliding volumes are realistic. The planned application of the
algorithm to well known and monitored landslides will allow further veriﬁcations
of its effectiveness. This goal could be also achieved by applying the stand alone
procedure developed for a 3D stability analysis along a slope. Although the work is
still in progress and the developed code needs to be improved to optimize the velocity
of execution and to consider stratiﬁed materials with different conditions of water
saturation, the approach seems to be promising and the interoperability between
Grass Gis and R allows researchers with a limited programming experience to test,
update and improve the code. The GNU-GPL License guarantees the freedom to
execute, study, copy and alter the code if later code is released under the same
license.

References

1. Berti M (1999) Soluzione del metodo dell’equilibrio limite globale per l’analisi di stabilità dei

versanti. http://www.geomin.unibo.it/geoappl/downloads/oger_stabilitaversanti.pdf, 18–19

2. Cencetti C, Fredduzzi A, Marchesini I, Naccini M, Tacconi P (2006) Some consideration
about the simulation of breach channel erosion on landslide dams. Comput Geosci 10:201–219.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10596-005-9019-x (Special issue “Hazard evaluation and mapping
through modelling and simulations”)

288

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

3. Costa JE, Schuster RL (1988) The formation and failure of natural dams. Geol Soc Amer Bull

4. Duncan JM (1996) State of the art limit equilibrium and ﬁnite-element analysis of slopes.

5. GRASS Development Team (2008) Geographic resources analysis support system (GRASS)

100:1054–1068

J Geotech Geoenviron Eng 7:577–596

software, version 6.3.0. http://grass.osgeo.org

Research, West Vancouver

Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, Oslo

6. Hungr O (1998) CLARA: slope stability analysis in two or three dimensions. Geotechnical

7. Janbu N, Bjerrum L, Kjaernsli B (1956) Soil mechanics applied to some engineering problems.

8. Neteler M, Mitasova H (2007) Open source GIS: a GRASS GIS approach. Springer, New York
9. Pyke R (1991) TSLOPE: users guide. Taga Engineering System and Software, Lafayette
10. R Development Core Team (2008) R: a language and environment for statistical computing.

http://www.R-project.org

11. Xie M, Esaki T, Zhou G, Mitani Y (2003) Three-dimensional stability evaluation of land-
slides and a sliding process simulation using a new geographic information systems component.
Environ Geol 43:503–512

12. Xie M, Esaki T, Cai M (2004) A GIS-based method for locating the critical 3D slip surface in a

slope. Comput Geotechnics 31:267–277

13. Xie M, Esaki T, Qiu C, Wang C (2006) Geographical information system-based computa-
tional implementation and application of spatial three-dimensional slope stability analysis.
Comput Geotechnics 33:260–274

Ivan Marchesini received a degree (cum laude) in Geology and a PhD in Applied Geology in 2003
at University of Perugia. His current position is post-doc researcher. His research interests concern
the sediments transfer from the basin to the river system, and the application of Open Source GIS
instruments to the ﬁeld of environmental sciences.

Geoinformatica (2009) 13:277–289

289

Corrado Cencetti Geologist and Ph.D. in Geomorphology, is currently Associate Professor in
Engineering Geology (Faculty of Engineering) and Environmental Geology (Faculty of Mathemat-
ical, Fisics and Natural Sciences) of Perugia University, in Italy. His background includes ﬂuvial
dynamics under different morphoclimatic conditions, slope dynamics (landslides) and the relations
amongst them (i.e. landslide dams).

Pierluigi De Rosa received a degree cum laude in Environmental engineering from University of
Perugia in 2004, in November 2005 he got a Master’s degree in Environmental Geotechnologies
from University of Siena. He is pursuing a PhD in Earth Science and Geotechnologies from
University of Perugia (graduation expected in February 2009). His background includes knowledge
and implementation of open source geographic information system, geostatistical analysis, landscape
environmental modeling.

