Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4): 421–434

Research Article

Full Positional Accuracy Analysis
of Spatial Data by Means of
Circular Statisticstgis_1223 421..434

María-Eugenia Polo
Centro Universitario de Mérida
University of Extremadura

Ángel M. Felicísimo
Escuela Politécnica
University of Extremadura

Abstract
The positional error in spatial data is deﬁned as a vector by comparing the coordi-
nates between the true position and the measured position. The standard tests to
assess the positional accuracy use only the magnitude of the vector and omit the
azimuth. This article suggests that the use of both values allows a much more
complete analysis of the positional error. A set of tests is proposed that are relevant
for this purpose and demonstrate that some important features are not identiﬁed by
the common procedures. The test samples come from two datasets. The ﬁrst is
obtained from the comparison of 100 homologous points in two conventional maps,
and the second one comes from the geometric calibration of a photogrammetric
scanner. The results are analyzed and discussed, showing that important issues such
as error anisotropy are detected only by means of the circular statistics tests and
density maps of distribution. Therefore, tests that assess the goodness of ﬁt for
uniform distribution in azimuths, such as Rayleigh and Rao tests, give low prob-
abilities (P = 0 and P > 0.01). Moreover, density maps working with both magnitude
and angle can locate the outlier candidate and offer more information about the
spatial distribution of error.

1 Introduction

Analysis of uncertainty is an essential task before using any spatial database (Zhang and
Goodchild 2003), especially concerning the positional accuracy of data. There has been
a fair amount of research into this topic in recent decades (Maune 2007, Shi 2009,
Veregin 1989) and several statistical methods have become accepted for widespread use,

Address for correspondence: María Eugenia Polo, Centro Universitario de Mérida, Universidad de
Extremadura, 06800 Mérida, Spain. E-mail: mepolo@unex.es

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2010.01223.x

422 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

such as the National Map Accuracy Standard (USBB 1947), the Accuracy Standards for
large-scale maps (ASPRS 1989), the Engineering Map Accuracy Standards (ASCI 1983)
and the National Standards for Spatial Data Accuracy (FGDC 1998). These statistical
tests have a similar operating pattern: (a) assessment of the quality of the database is
performed by comparing it with a more accurate data source; (b) a minimum of 20 points
to be used are identiﬁed in both databases (to obtain 20 pairs of homologous points); (c)
distances or displacements are calculated for each pair of points; and (d) statistical tests
are calculated assuming Gaussian distributions of errors. Some features of this general
procedure are that these tests deal only with a scalar magnitude (the distance between
homologous points), and that the statistics are applicable to the overall study area,
assuming that the error is uniform (ASPRS 1989), although certain studies disagree
(Zandbergen 2008). Furthermore, the analysis is intrinsically non-spatial because the
spatial distribution of the errors is not considered.

Alternatively, we can interpret the comparison between points as an operation that
generates a vector having the initial node in the true position and the end-node in the
measured position. The error vector therefore has two metric properties, displacement or
magnitude and azimuth, and a topological property, the direction (from–to). It is pro-
posed that this vectorial approach allows a more in-depth analysis and that it can clarify
some error properties that may go unnoticed in the classical analysis. This approach can
be applied to both two- and three-dimensional vectors. This article deals only with the
two-dimensional case.

In brief, the two main differences between classical tests for positional accuracy
analysis and our proposal are as follows: (a) introduction of a speciﬁc analysis of the
angular properties of the errors; and (b) the proposal of a non-parametric method that
allows detection of outliers and analysis of the error spatial patterns. Thus, the aim of
this work is to use both magnitudes of the error vector (displacement and azimuth) for
a complete analysis of the positional error and to present the relevant methods to achieve
this goal.

2 Methods

The term “spatial data” refers to data deﬁned by their coordinates in a reference system.
In this context, the error of a point is deﬁned by the vector connecting the location at the
true coordinates and that at the measured coordinates. To deﬁne this error vector, we
consider the initial node to be at the true point and the end node to be at the measured
point. Thus, the displacement (d) and azimuth (q) of each vector can be calculated from
the respective coordinates.

Using these values, the positional error analysis is performed in three stages: (a)
analysis of displacements or distances (scalar values); (b) analysis of azimuths (angular
values); and (c) joint study of displacements and azimuths. Classical tests only analyze
the ﬁrst stage by means of the estimation of statistics such as arithmetic mean, standard
deviation, and root mean square error (RMSE). This is a known problem, which will not
be discussed here but is explored in a later section.

The method presented in this article is an extension of the one presented in Spanish
(Polo and Felicísimo 2008). An upgraded version is presented here with different appli-
cations and a more extensive discussion.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

Analyzing the Positional Error in Spatial Data

423

2.1 Analysis of Azimuths

Circular data are a type of directional data used in many disciplines, such as meteorology
(winds) (Jammalamadaka and Lund 2006), geology (dip slopes) (Dey and Ghosh 2008),
biology (animal movements) (Tracey et al. 2005), environmental sciences (Arnold and
SenGupta 2006), and geography (Corcoran et al. 2009).

Statistical analysis of circular data requires managing certain elements that are
different from analysis of linear data (Batschelet 1981, Chrisman 1998) requiring the use
of speciﬁc statistical methods: (a) the origin in circular data is an arbitrary direction
(North, X axis, etc.); (b) relationships between circular data are not the same as between
linear data (for example, 180° is not “bigger” than 120°); and (c) operations on circular
data are within the 0°–360° interval, in case of using angles (or 0–24 interval when using
hours, for example). In this article, we consider North as the origin and values to be
increasing clockwise.

Circular statistics have some limitations for our proposals because they are designed
to deal with angular values but consider only unitary vectors. Some useful results can be
obtained from this analysis, but it is possible to improve the analysis by introducing
non-unitary displacements, as shown in Section 2.2.

The use is proposed of the following statistical methods and tests, which are

sufﬁcient to characterize the azimuth distribution and properties.

2.1.1 Basic circular statistics

Considering a sample of n circular data or azimuths (q1, q2, . . . qn), the vectorial sum of
all n data to obtain the resultant length (R) can be calculated. The basic circular statistics
for the sample of this circular data are as follows (Fisher 1995):

• The mean direction (θ) is the azimuth of the vector sum (R) of the n data.
• The resultant length (R) allows us to calculate the mean resultant length (R) by:

=

R

R
n

• As we work only with unit vectors, the mean resultant length is observed in the range
(0, 1). R = 1 implies that all azimuths are coincident, but R = 0 does not signiﬁes an
angular uniform distribution.

• The circular standard deviation (u) is a similar statistic to the standard deviation for

linear data.

• The von Mises parameter (k) is a measure of the concentration of the data around a
preferred orientation. If the azimuth distribution is uniform, then k = 0, increasing
with the data concentration.

2.1.2 Testing the data distribution

In this section, a brief account is given of the main probability distributions for circular
data (Jammalamadaka and SenGupta 2001, Mardia and Jupp 2000). The more useful
probability distributions for circular data are the following:

• Uniform distribution, where all directions from 0 to 360° are equally probable and
the distribution is spread uniformly around the circle. Consequently, there is no mean
direction and the mean resultant length is 0.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

424 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

• The von Mises distribution is a symmetric unimodal distribution that can be consid-
ered as a circular analog of the Gaussian distribution in linear data. Two parameters
deﬁne this distribution: the mean direction (θ) and the von Mises parameter (k).

Several tests can be applied to determine whether the distribution of the data conforms
to a uniform or a von Mises distribution. The uniform distribution can be tested by
means of the Rayleigh test or the Rao test. The von Mises distribution can be studied by
the Watson test or the Kuiper test (Batschelet 1981, Fisher 1995, Mardia and Jupp 2000).

2.2 Joint Analysis of Displacements and Azimuths

The independent analysis of displacements and azimuths provides useful but incomplete
information, and several tests are proposed for a more complete error characterization,
dealing with both displacement and azimuth data. The ﬁrst test is an estimation of the
circular–linear correlation coefﬁcient (Mardia and Jupp 2000). This parameter gives the
correlation between a circular variable and a linear one, and ranges from 0 to 1. This
coefﬁcient works under the assumption of the Gaussian distribution of linear data;
therefore, it should be used and interpreted with caution. To deal with this problem, a
complementary analysis is necessary, for which a graphical procedure called the “density
map” is proposed. The density map was built as follows: (a) error vectors are moved to
a common origin without changing its azimuth and displacement; (b) thus, end-nodes
perform a point cloud of varying density that depends on the accumulation of errors with
similar properties; (c) end-nodes are used to calculate the “density map” as a surface with
values depending on the end-node accumulation per area unit. The density map provides
information about the joint distribution of displacements and azimuths and allows the
detection of errors or outliers. The harmonic mean method (Dixon and Chapman 1980)
is used as the density algorithm. The harmonic mean (Hm) of n real numbers is deﬁned
by:

Hm

=

>

0

r
i

n

n
∑ 1
r
iX

=

1

i

As riX is the distance between the x point and the remaining i points, an Hm value is
calculated for each point. The density map represents the true error distribution in the
common space and provides tools for analyzing the particular cases without any assump-
tion about theoretical distributions or statistical properties. Furthermore, points with the
largest Hm value which will be considered as outliers can be detected, as will be seen
later.

3 Study Cases

The proposed methodology is applicable to any set of vector data and two very different
datasets are used to explain and comment on the analysis.

Dataset 1: data were collected for an area (9 ¥ 15 km) located in southwestern
Spain. Two digital maps of the same area were used to evaluate the correspondence
between homologous points at different scales. Points were compared from the

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

Analyzing the Positional Error in Spatial Data

425

1:25,000 digital national topographic map and the 1:50,000 digitized national topo-
graphic map. The current standards suggest a sample size of at least 20 points, although
some authors recommend a larger size (Ariza and Atkinson 2005, Li 1991). To avoid
potential problems derived from an insufﬁcient sample size, 100 homologous points were
identiﬁed, the coordinates of which were extracted from both maps. As expected, the
coordinates do not match exactly, and the displacement vectors were calculated, using
them to characterize the error of correspondence between the maps. Measurement units
in this case were meters.

Dataset 2: for the second test error vectors were provided by the geometric calibra-
tion procedure of a ﬂatbed photogrammetric scanner designed for digitalizing aerial
imagery (negatives or paper photographs) (UltraScan 5000 by Vexcel). The geometric
calibration is a measurement and adjustment process aimed to reduce the spatial errors
in the scanning process to obtain the required nominal accuracy (Baltsavias 1994). The
geometric calibration is performed by scanning a template with crosses (46 ¥ 46 in this
case) over the entire scan area. The crosses are automatically detected and measured and
compared with the known reference values. An afﬁne transformation was calculated
that allows computing the displacements between true (theoretical) and measured loca-
tions, providing a sample of 2,116 error vectors. Measurement units in this case were
micrometers.

4 Results

4.1 Results for Dataset 1: The Need for Azimuth and Azimuth/displacement
Analysis

Dataset 1 reﬂects the differences between two maps of different scales. It is expected as
the null hypothesis that the errors treated as vectors are random and isotropic. As a
consequence, the analysis of displacement should show null arithmetic means, Gaussian
distributions in both X and Y vector components and a moderate RMSE value, according
to the uncertainty speciﬁcations of the map scales. Consequently, it is expected that the
azimuth analysis shows an isotropic (random) distribution, with marginal points distrib-
uted without preferred direction. These hypotheses can be veriﬁed using the previously
proposed tests.

The NSSDA test was calculated and the results revealed 43.973 m horizontal accu-

racy at 95% conﬁdence level for dataset 1.

4.1.1 Analysis of distances

The results of the analysis of the X and Y coordinates and the displacement (arithmetic
mean, maximum and minimum values and RMSE) are shown in Table 1. The frequency
distribution of the displacement is displayed in Figure 1. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test
provides a P-value of 0.37; thus, the hypothesis of normality cannot be rejected despite
the distribution being bimodal. This issue emphasizes the need for large samples if robust
results are needed. Furthermore, the errors show a systematic component in both in X
and Y axes.

4.1.2 Analysis of azimuths
The basic statistics for circular data (mean direction θ, mean resultant length R, circular
standard deviation u, and von Mises parameter k) are shown in Table 2. The mean

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

426 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

Table 1 Basic linear statistics for dataset 1 (n = 100)

X axis

Y axis

Module

Arithmetic mean
Maximum value
Minimum value
RMSE

13.0 m
65.0 m
-22.6 m
17.3 m

-3.5 m
33.9 m
-39.5 m
14.0 m

22.3 m
65.0 m
2.1 m
13.2 m

Table 2 Basic circular statistics for dataset 1 (n = 100)

Mean direction (θ)
Mean resultant length (R )
Circular standard deviation (u)
Von Mises parameter (k)

108°

0.45
73°
1.00

Figure 1 Histogram of the displacements in dataset 1

direction is 108°, and the mean resultant length R is 0.45, a large value, as R is
observed in the range (0, 1). The circular standard deviation has a value of 73°, showing
a moderate dispersion around the mean value. Finally, the von Mises parameter has a
value of 1.0, showing some aggregation.

The uniformity and von Mises tests provide more information as the Rayleigh and
Rao tests conﬁrm that azimuths are not uniformly distributed (see Table 3). As azimuths
do not follow a random distribution, we can look for a preferred direction; therefore,
two tests for von Mises distribution were performed. The P-values do not allow rejection
of the null hypothesis: 0.15 < P < 0.25 and P < 0.15, supporting the possibility of ﬁtting
a von Mises distribution.

The plot of raw data in Figure 2 shows an arrowhead for each azimuth in a unit
circle. This ﬁgure allows assessment of the size of the sample and the distribution of the

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

Analyzing the Positional Error in Spatial Data

427

Table 3 Tests for uniform and von Mises distributions in
dataset 1 (n = 100)

Tests for uniform distribution

Test for von Mises distribution Watson
Kuiper

Rayleigh
Rao

P << 0.001
P < 0.01
0.15 < P < 0.25
P < 0.15

Figure 2 Circular histogram of azimuths for dataset 1. Every arrowhead represents an
azimuth. The mean direction is 108°

data. The mean direction (108°) is plotted with a line. From these tests it can be
concluded that the error distribution is not isotropic; moreover there is a signiﬁcant data
concentration around the mean direction. This is a relevant result that cannot be inferred
from a single distance analysis.

4.1.3 Joint analysis of displacement and azimuths

At this stage, it is known that the error displacement is statistically signiﬁcant and that
the azimuths are not randomly distributed. From Figure 3 a correlation is expected
between the azimuth and error displacement. Nevertheless, the circular–linear correla-
tion coefﬁcient is not an appropriate statistic in this case because it works under the
assumption of a Gaussian distribution of linear data, a condition that is not satisﬁed here.
Figures 3 and 4 (density map) clearly show a strong relation between displacement and
azimuth: the mean direction agrees with the larger vector errors, and from the density
map, it can be observed that the biggest arrow concentration is not centered at the origin

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

428 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

Figure 3 Vector diagram from dataset 1. Every arrow corresponds to a single error
vector. The mean direction is 108°

Figure 4 Density map from dataset 1. The density map is created by placing every error
vector on a common origin (0, 0) and calculating the end-node density. Outliers (5%) are
plotted as triangles

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

Analyzing the Positional Error in Spatial Data

429

of coordinates but is obviously biased. The density map allows locating the outlier
candidates that do not clearly show a preferred direction (see dataset 2).

These results indicate that the difference between the maps is not just due to the
scales and their respective uncertainties, but that there is a bias that shifts the maps along
the mean direction, introducing a complementary error.

4.2 Results for Dataset 2: The Need for the Density Map

The photogrammetric scanner provides internal methods to calibrate the hardware and
to optimize the accuracy of the measurements. If these methods work well, the residuals
would be expected to show a Gaussian pattern for both X and Y axis components of
displacement, a non-Gaussian distribution for the displacement (the zero left limit tends
to generate asymmetric distributions), null mean displacement values and values of
RMSE according to the scanner accuracy speciﬁcations (uncertainty of about 2 mm).
Azimuths should be randomly and isotropically distributed.

4.2.1 Analysis of displacements

Figure 5 shows the distribution of the errors treated as a linear magnitude. This distri-
bution is not Gaussian (P << 0.001); consequently the mean value is not an unbiased and
suitable statistic. The test for gamma distribution gives a P-value of 0.42.

The results for the X and Y error components are shown in Table 4. The mean errors
are null for both the X and Y axis; these results and the very low value of RMSE (1.6 mm)
reﬂect an apparently optimal accuracy, as the spatial resolution that the provider guar-
antees for the template is about 2 mm. Further analysis revealed that this conclusion is not
accurate.

4.2.2 Analysis of azimuths

The basic statistics for circular data are shown in Table 5. The mean direction is 180° and
the mean length has a very low value of 0.08 mm. As R is observed in the range (0, 1),
this is evidence of a uniform distribution of azimuths. As expected, the circular standard

Figure 5 Histogram of the displacements in dataset 2

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

430 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

Table 4 Basic linear statistics for dataset 2 (n = 2,116)

X axis

Y axis

Module

Arithmetic mean
Maximum value
Minimum value
RMSE

0.0 mm
4.8 mm
-4.7 mm
1.5 mm

0.0 mm
9.6 mm
-6.7 mm
2.7 mm

2.6 mm
9.6 mm
0.1 mm
1.6 mm

Table 5 Basic circular statistics for dataset 2 (n = 2,116)

Mean direction (θ)
Mean resultant legnth (R )
Circular standard deviation (u)
Von Mises parameter (k)

180°
0.08
129°
0.16

Table 6 Tests for uniform and von Mises distributions in
dataset 2 (n = 2,116)

Tests for uniform distribution

Test for von Mises distribution

Rayleigh
Rao
Watson
Kuiper

P << 0.001
P < 0.01
P < 0.005
P < 0.01

deviation is a very high value, 129°; therefore there is no evidence of preferred direction.
The von Mises parameter may be considered signiﬁcant for k (cid:2) 2; here, its value is 0.16.
All of the basic circular statistics suggest a circular uniform distribution, but this must be
conﬁrmed by applying the complementary tests.

The uniformity and von Mises tests were applied to dataset 2 (see Table 6). The
P-values are P < 0.005 (Watson test) and P < 0.01 (Kuiper test), and the null hypothesis
can be rejected (adjusting to a von Mises distribution) at these signiﬁcance levels.
Nevertheless, both Rayleigh and Rao tests for uniform distribution show that azimuths
are not uniformly distributed (P << 0.001). Partial results show a distribution with no
preferred direction but not randomly distributed.

The plot of raw data in Figure 6 shows an arrowhead symbol for each azimuth. The
mean direction (180°) is plotted with a line. The distribution is not isotropic; moreover,
there is a bimodal distribution with a 0°–180° preferred direction. This relevant feature
is not apparent from the displacement analysis and in the basic circular tests.

4.2.3 Joint analysis of displacements and azimuths

Figures 7 and 8 more clearly show the error pattern in this dataset. The density map
allows the location of most of the outlier candidates in the upper sector of the map: the
largest errors are in the 0° direction. The 2% outliers were calculated by means of the

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

Analyzing the Positional Error in Spatial Data

431

Figure 6 Circular histogram of azimuths for dataset 2. Every arrowhead represents an
azimuth. The mean direction is 180°[Q2]

Figure 7 Vector diagram from dataset 2. Every arrow corresponds to a single error
vector. The mean direction is 180°

harmonic mean (plotted as triangles) which cannot be performed using methods based on
the error magnitudes. As a practical result, it can be conﬁrmed that the scanner has a
serious mechanical problem that is hidden if you use the qualiﬁcation methods proposed
by the manufacturer.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

432 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

Figure 8 Density map from dataset 2. The density map is created by placing every error
vector on a common origin (0, 0) and calculating the end-node density. Outliers (2%) are
plotted as triangles and are located in the upper sector of the density map

5 Discussion and Conclusions

Linear statistics provide an incomplete description of error characterization. The ﬁrst
example shows an anisotropic pattern that is not described by conventional statistics.
This pattern is suggested by the von Mises aggregation parameter and evidenced by the
displacement/azimuth analysis. Error characterization reveals that the two maps are
affected by a bias or a systematic error because the vectors have a statistically signiﬁcant
preferred direction.

The second example suggests a mechanical problem that affects the scanner, intro-
ducing a bias in the direction of sensor movement. While this issue is not revealed by
linear statistics, it is suggested by the circular statistics (showing a non-von Mises and a
non-circular uniform distribution), and it is veriﬁed by the density map procedure. The

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

Analyzing the Positional Error in Spatial Data

433

cause remains unknown, but the present authors believe it to be a consequence of the
acceleration of the sensor head, generating errors at the beginning and end of scanning
lines.

The complementary procedures for the analysis of positional accuracy have a low
cost in practice. The core of the procedure is the introduction of statistical analysis of
circular data and density maps and the use of tests to verify the uniformity and isotropy
of errors. The study of the azimuths allows detection of the concentration of errors.
Because linear data are not always Gaussian-distributed, non-parametric methods such
as density maps should be a solution for these cases. The density map allows objective
detection of errors or outliers and reﬂects the real data patterns without assumptions
about the data distribution. The joint analysis of displacements and azimuths by means
of a density map is due to the limitation of circular statistics in analyzing vectors with
non-unitary displacements.

Therefore,

it is suggested that the accuracy/quality spatial metadata could be
improved by adding records to cover these features, providing more complete informa-
tion about the quality of the data. Future work will deal with spherical data for a
complete accuracy analysis of spatial databases.

References

Ariza F J and Atkinson A J 2005 Sample size and conﬁdence when applying the NSSDA. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-second International Cartographic Conference, La Coruña, Spain
Arnold B C and SenGupta A 2006 Recent advances in the analyses of directional data in ecological

and environmental sciences. Environmental and Ecological Statistics 13: 253–56

ASCI 1983 Map Uses, Scales and Accuracies for Engineering and Associated Purposes. New York,
American Society of Civil Engineers, Committee on Cartographic Surveying, Surveying and
Mapping Division

ASPRS 1989 Accuracy standards for large scale maps. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote

Sensing 56: 1038–40

Baltsavias E P 1994 Test and calibration procedures for image scanners. International Archives of

Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 30: 163–70

Batschelet E 1981 Circular Statistics in Biology. London, Academic Press
Chrisman N R 1998 Rethinking levels of measurement for cartography. Cartography and Geo-

graphical Information Systems 25: 231–42

Corcoran J, Chhetri P, and Stimson R 2009 Using circular statistics to explore the geography of the

journey to work. Papers in Regional Science 88: 119–32

Dey S and Ghosh P 2008 GRDM: A digital ﬁeld-mapping tool for management and analysis of ﬁeld

geological data. Computers and Geosciences 34: 464–78

Dixon K R and Chapman J A 1980 Harmonic mean measure of animal activity areas. Ecology 61:

FGDC 1998 National Standards for Spatial Data Accuracy. Washington, D.C., Federal Geographic

Fisher N I 1995 Statistical Analysis of Circular Data. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
Jammalamadaka S R and Lund U J 2006 The effect of wind direction on ozone levels: A case study.

Environmental and Ecological Statistics 13: 287–98

Jammalamadaka S R and SenGupta A 2001 Topics in Circular Statistics. Singapore, World Scien-

1040–44

Data Committee

tiﬁc Publishing

Li Z 1991 Effects of check points on the reliability of DTM accuracy estimates obtained from

experimental tests. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 57: 1333–40
Mardia K V and Jupp P E 2000 Directional Statistics. Chichester, John Wiley and Sons
Maune D 2007 Digital Elevation Model Technologies and Applications: The DEM Users Manual.

Falls Church, VA, American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

434 M-E Polo and Á M Felicísimo

Polo M E and Felicísimo Á M 2008 Propuesta de metodología para el análisis del error de posición
en bases de datos espaciales mediante estadística circular y mapas de densidad. Geofocus 8:
281–96

Shi W 2009 Principles of Modeling Uncertainties in Spatial Data and Spatial Analyse. Kowloon,

The Hong Kong Polytechnical University

Tracey J A, Zhu J, and Crooks K 2005 A set of nonlinear regression models for animal movement
in response to a single landscape feature. Journal of Agricultural, Biological and Environmen-
tal Statistics 10: 1–18

USBB 1947 United Stated National Map Accuracy Standards. Washington, D.C., U.S. Bureau of the

Veregin H 1989 A Taxonomy of Error in Spatial Databases. Santa Barbara, CA, National Center

for Geographic Information and Analysis Technical Paper No. 89-12

Zandbergen P A 2008 Positional accuracy of spatial data: Non-normal distributions and a critique

of the National Standard for Spatial Data Accuracy. Transaction in GIS 12: 103–30

Zhang J and Goodchild M F 2003 Uncertainty in Geographical Information. London, Taylor and

Budget

Francis

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2010, 14(4)

