Transactions  in GIs,  1990, vol.  I ,  no. 2, p  1 I  T 

Data models - progress towards their 
. 
using 

description 

HUGH BUCHANAN 

Department of Surveying, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK. 
mail: hugh.buchanan@ncl.ac.uk  Phone: (+44) 0191-222-635 1, Fax:  (+44) 0191-222-8691 

Data  models  are  used  in  conjunction  with  geographic  information.  However,  the 
tools  for describing such data  models have been  limited  in their capabilities.  Data 
description  languages  that  have  been  developed  elsewhere offer  a  set of tools  for 
describing  data  models  for  geographic  information.  O n e   of  these  Ianguages  is 
EXPRESS, which has recently been used for describing geographic information data 
models  in  a  project  concerned  with  creating a  European  standard for  geographic 
information  data exchange. This paper discusses three of the imponant issues that 
need to be addressed to utilize EXPRESS with geographic information. The first was 
whether  to  characterize  real  world  phenomena  as  fearures  classified  by  their 
geometric  characteristics  or  alternatively whether  to  characterize  them  as named 
object types. The second was whether to insist that all data conformed  to a common 
semantic  data  model,  or  whether  to  leave  this  flexible  in  order  to  minimize  the 
restrictions  on users, and thereby encourage use.  Finally, a method was  required to 
ensure that the EXPRESS description  of a dataset is always associated with the data 
set  irself, and  therefore  that  the  inrerpretation  of  the  data  set  is  made  with  all 
available information. 

Introduction 

One of rhe most commonly used terms in geographic 
information  is  a  data  model.  Systems  have  data 
models,  users  define  data  models,  and  customers 
require data  models.  However, there is  no  uniformly 
agreed way  of describing such data  models. It  is  also 
true that many users are unaware that they even  have 
a  data  model  until  they  try  to  compare  their 
information with  that of another  user.  Until  they  try 
to  undenake  rhat  process,  they  simply assume rhac 
they represent the real world  in their data in the only 
possible  way,  and  cannot  envisage chat  anyone will 
have a different view. 

Much  of  rhe  terminology  of  data  models  is 
common  across  many  users  and  area  of  use.  For 
example, rhe rerms topologiraldzta rnohland network 
data  model  are widely  used, and  their definitions are 
generally  agreed. Therefore  it  is  usually assumed that 
the  terms are  being  used  to  refer  to  rhe  same thing. 
However,  in  many  cases  rhey  are  nor,  and  as  a 
consequence misunderstandings grow and multiply. 

There  are  clear  advantages  if  these  difficulties 
could be avoided. One step towards this woulcl be  to 
have  a  method  of  describing the  contents  of  a data 
model  in  an  unambiguous  way.  This paper  looks  at 
the application  of a  data  description  language called 
EXPRESS  to  describing and  exchanging geographic 
information. 

Data description languages 

There  is  a  family  of  tools  that  can  help  with  the 
process of describing a data model which are known 
as  data  description  languages.  These  are  similar  to 
programming languages in their general appearance, 
bur  have  a completely different purpose. Whereas a 
programming  language  gives  a  set  of  instructions 
that  a  machine  can  follow,  a  data  description 
language  describes  phenomena  in  che  real  world 
(which  may  be  called  features,  objects,  entities,  or 
simply  things)  and  the  relarionships  between  such 
phenomena  in  an  unambiguous  way  chat  can  be 
understood  by sohvare. One such language is called 

1 1 1  

H Buchonon 

EXPRESS,  which  has  been  developed  over  a 
number  of  years  by  rhe  manufacturing  industry 
(where it is used  for product description), driven by 
rhe US Narional  Insrirure for Standards and Tesring 
(NIST). Although  this may seem very  remote  from 
the world  of  geographic  informarion,  many  of  rhe 
issues  are  rhe  same:  description  of  objecrs,  rheir 
geometry,  and  their  relationships,  borh  spatial  and 
non-spatial,  wirh  other  objects.  A  derailed 
descriprion  of EXPRESS, and an  overview of some 
orher dara descriprion languages is given  in Schenck 
and Wilson  (1994). 

from 

EXPRESS has  been  developed  by  raking  ideas 
from  many programming  languages,  including both 
procedural  and  object-oriented  languages.  Where 
necessary, new facilities have been added chat are not 
present  in  programming  languages.  T h e  result  is  a 
strictly  defined  syntax  rhar  is  reasonably  intuitive. 
Thar  is  to  say,  it  is  possible  to  gain  a  significant 
reading  an 
amounr  of  understanding 
EXPRESS  description  of  a  model,  wirhour  having 
any  [raining  in  EXPRESS.  Wriring  syntactically 
correcr  EXPRESS is  much harder, since, as wirh any 
compurer  language,  rhere  are  many  derails  of  the 
synrax ro  be learned. T h e  process of describing a data. 
model in  EXPRESS can be assisred by the use of one 
of  rhe  s o h a r e  tools  rhar  have  been  developed  for 
this purpose. O n e  of rhe elements of NIST's support 
for EXPRESS  has been  that  they provide a listing of 
whar  s o f v a r e   tools  are  available  char  is  updated 
periodically. 

Figure  1  gives  an  example  of  an  EXPRESS 
description  of  a  very  simple  data  model.  Such  a 
descriprion of a data model is always rermed a schema 
in  EXPRESS. As well as having a textual  form, which 
is  excellenr  for  completeness  and  clarity,  EXPRESS 
also  has  a  graphical  form  (known as EXPRESS-G). 
T h e  graphical form  is  very good at giving an overall 
view  of  rhe  strucrure  of  a  dara  model,  bur  is  less 
effecrive  at  conveying  all  the  fine  detail.  Figure  2 
gives rhe EXPRESS-G  version of the example. 

EXPRESS was published  in  1994 as Part  11 of 
rhe Inrernacional Standard I S 0  10303 ( I S 0  1994a). 
Thar  inrernational  standard  is  concerned  wirh 
'Product  data  represenrarion  and exchange'. 

EXPRESS  allows  the  descriprion  of  a  data 
model.  Ir  may  also  be  inrended  ro  exchange  actual 
data: rhar  is, instances  of the objecrs described  in  rhe 
data model. This is a  separare  rask: a file format  has 
been  defined  along  wirh  EXPRESS  ro  allow  this. 

112 

SCHEMA  farmer; 
ENTITY  tree 

ABSTRACT SUPERTYPE OF  (ONEOF 
(apple-tree, walnut-tree) ) ;  
date-ofglanting  : 
OPTIONAL  STRING; 
height  :  tree-height; 
position  :  coordinate; 

in-field:  field FOR  trees; 

INVERSE 

END-ENTITY; 
ENTITY  apple-tree 

SUBTYPE OF  (tree) ; 
colour  : apple-colour; 

END-ENTITY; 
ENTITY walnut-tree 

SUBTYPE OF  (tree) ; 
place-of-origin  :  STRING; 

END-ENTITY; 
ENTITY  field; 

name  :  STRING; 
position  : 
LIST  [ 3 : ? ]   OF  coordinate; 
owner  :  farmer; 
trees  :  SET OF  tree; 

END-ENTITY; 
ENTITY  farmer; 

name  :  STRING; 
address  :  STRING; 

INVERSE 

owns-fields  : 
SET OF  field FOR owner; 

END-ENTITY; 
TYPE  tree-height  =  INTEGER; 
WHERE 

limit  :  0 < =   SELF  <=  40; 

END-TY PE ; 
TYPE apple-colour  =  ENUMERATION OF 

(red, green) ; 

END-TYPE; 
ENTITY  coordinate; 
x-coordinate: 
REAL ; 
y-coordinate : 
REAL ; 
z-coordinate: 
OPTIONAL REAL; 

END-ENTITY; 
END-SCHEMA; 

Figure  1. A  simple exaniple of an EXPRESS 
description  of a dara model. 

This  file  formar  is  known  as  STEP  Part  21  ( I S 0  
1994b).  This  allows  a  user  to  supply  data  ro  a 
recipienr,  which  when  read  rogerher  wirh  the 
EXPRESS descriprion  of rhe  data model, allows rhe 

in-$3 

trees 
SIO:?] 

Data mode/ descriptions  using EXPRESS 

owner  0  EXPRESS-G  description 

example of an 

owns-fields 
S[O:?] 

of a data model. 

h 
(ABS) tree 

I 

1 

position 

n 
farmer 

A 
I apple-tree 

] 

d 
I wal n ut-tree  J 

position 
LI3:?] 

n 

n 

recipient  to  interpret  the  meaning  of  the  data 
correctly. 

It  is  important  to  understand  that  EXPRESS 
does  not  itself  impose  a  data  model,  but  instead 
makes a set of constructs available with which a data 
model can be described. In  EXPRESS, a class of real 
world  objects  is  described  as  an  entity.  Each  entity 
can  have any number of attributes, which  represent 
the characteristics or traits  of the class of real-world 
objects. For each attribute, the set of possible values 
that  it  can  take  is  defined,  and  referred  to  as  a 
domain.  A  domain  can  be  a  basic  type  such  as  a 
string or  a  real  number,  or  can  be  another  entity. 
The  values  in  the  attribute  domains  that  any 
instance of an entity can  take can be constrained  by 
domain  rules.  Entities  can  be  sub-types  or  super- 
types of each  other. This is often  appropriate where 
the  relationship  between 
two  entities  can  be 
characterized  in  plain  English  as ‘is a’. A  sub-type 
inherits the attributes of the super-type. 

As  has  been  mentioned,  the  domain  of  an 
attribute can be of certain basic types. Where a more 
precise  constraint  can  be  given,  then  this  can  be 
achieved  by  the  definition  of  a  new  type.  For 
example,  the  height  of  a  tree  may  be  given  as  an 
integer.  Clearly  it  cannot  be  negative.  Therefore it 
to  define  a  new  rype  called 
may  be  useful 
‘tree-heighr’  which  is  defined  as  being  a  positive 
integer. This  has  the  added  advantage  over  simply 
using an inreger that the semantic significance of the 
artribuce value is  made clearer. 

EXPRESS can easily be  used to represent  data 

models built  upon  the relational approach, and can 
also  be  used  for  data  models  that  use  the  object- 
oriented  approach,  through,  for  example,  sub-type 
and super-type  relationships. 

Adapting EXPRESS to geographic 
information 

During  1995 the  author  participated  in  a  project 
team that had  the task of finding an appropriate use 
of  EXPRESS  for  geographic  information.  The 
other  members  of  the  project  ream  were  Pascal 
Etienne,  then  of  Apic  Systtmes,  France;  David 
Skogan of Sintef, Norway; and Agosrino Corradino 
of Ipermediale,  Italy. This work was  commissioned 
by the C o m i d  EuropCen de Normalisation  (CEN), 
through 
the  Technical  Committee  covering 
geographic information (TC287), with the purpose 
of creating a European standard for the exchange of 
geographic information. 

CEN, whose headquarters are in Brussels, co- 
ordinates  de jure  standardization  for  Europe. The 
members of CEN are the national standards bodies 
of  European  countries,  and  it  conducts  its  work 
through technical  committees (TC), each of which 
has  expertise  in  a  particular  area.  TC287  was 
established  in  late  1991  in  response  to  a  request 
from  France.  T C 2 8 7   has  established  a  work 
programme that included standards for geographic 
standards 
information, 
( 1 )   reference  model;  ( 2 )   geometry; 
concerning: 

among  which 

are 

113 

H  Buchanan 

(3) position;  (4) indirect  positioning;  (5) time;  (6) 
metadaca;  (7) qualiry; (8) query and update; and (9) 
transfer  (Buchanan  1995).  An  overview  of  the 
rationale  and  some  of  the  basic  concepts  of  the 
TC287 work is given  in  David et al (1996). 

This work programme has been organized by a 
series of Working Groups, and many of the resulting 
draft  standards  are  currently  available  for  public 
consultation.  T h e   Working  Groups  have  either 
prepared  draft  standards  themselves  or,  for  cerrain 
tasks,  Project  Teams  have  been  employed  to 
complete  a  drafi  standard,  and  present  it  to  the 
relevant  Working Group for consideration. 
International 

for 
Standardization  (ISO)  has  also  embarked  o n   a 
programme  of  work 
in 
geographic  in format ion,  th rough 
their  Technical 
Committee  T C 2 1 1   Geographic  Information  / 
Geomatics.  T h a t   committee  has  adopted  a 
programme  of work  that  covers  much  of  the  same 
ground as the C E N  work (0stensen  1995). 

for  standardization 

Organization 

T h e  

This paper studies three significant areas where 

the project  team  had  to make technical  choices: 

whether  to continue the traditional geographic 
fenrure-based  view of the world or not 
whether  it was necessary  to enforce a single 
semantic data model  for any exchange of data 
that was to use  this format 
binding the description  of a data model with  the 
representation  of instances from  it 

One  of  the  concepts  that  runs  through  this 
work is that of an application schema. This term refers 
to  a schema that a  user  has  constructed  to  describe 
the data model char they have adopted in a particular 
application. 

Obiect- and feature-based approaches 

In  this  discussion,  two  general  approaches  that  can 
be  taken  to  the  representation  of  the  real  world  in 
two 
geographic  data  are  considered.  These 
approaches  are  labelled  as a feature-based  approach, 
and an object-baredapproach. In this section the word 
object is  used  in  the sense of object  orientation,  not 
in  its everyday  English  sense. 

Traditionally the geographic community takes 
what can be called a ‘feature-based approach. In  this 
i n  
the  real  world  are 
approach,  phenomena 
features.  which  have 
characterized  as  being 

114 

attributes.  T h e   nature  of  the  feature  is  often 
identified  by the use of a feature  code which allows a 
user to look up a definition ofwhar that feature code 
is  used  to  represent.  For  the  purpose  of  exchanging 
data, these codes can be standardized, or alternatively 
can be created and interpreted by individual users.  It 
is  usually  the case  that  the  geometric characteristics 
of  a  phenomenon  are  an  intrinsic  part  of  its 
definition  as a  feature.  With  this  approach,  point 
features are quite distinct from line features, and area 
features  are  quite  distinct  from  each  of  these. 
Phenomena  that  have  a  combination  of  these 
geometric  characteristics  are  often  placed  in  a 
separate category of hybrid or combined features.  In 
addition  to  the  feature  code  and  the  geometric 
representation  of  a  phenomenon,  a  number  of 
attributes  represent  any  other  information  of 
significance.  In  this  approach  the  geometry  of  a 
fundamental 
phenomenon 
therefore 
importance  in  representing  its  existence.  Therefore 
when data are exchanged, if the data supplier and the 
data recipient  have a different view  of the geomerric 
characteristics  of  a 
real-world  phenomenon, 
misunderscandings can  arise.  For  example,  if a  data 
supplier has represented  rivers as line features but the 
data  recipient  treats  rivers as  area  features,  then  the 
data recipient’s s o h a r e  may not recognize  the rivers 
that  have  been  supplied.  An  alrernative  approach 
that  tries  to  avoid  these  difficulties  is  discussed  by 
Kuhn  (1994). 

of 

is 

T h e  alternative approach  can  be  characterized 
as being an ‘object-based’ approach. In  this approach 
the name of the real-world  phenomenon becomes of 
central  importance, while the geometry takes  on the 
status  that  is  comparable  to  chat  of  the  other 
attributes. For example, a river would be represented 
by  an  instance of an object type named river, which 
would have a number ofattributes associated with it, 
one of which would be its geometry. A change in the 
geometry  associated  with  an  object  is  much  less 
significant  here  than  with  the  approach  previously 
discussed.  This  approach  is  closer  to  that  taken  by 
computer  science  in  general,  although  as  noted 
above,  it  is  not  the  approach  commonly  used  in 
information.  When 
modelling 
considering the representation of a data set using this 
second approach,  i t  becomes  clear  that  it  results  in a 
multiplication  of  object  types  within  a  set  of  data. 
For  example,  a  tree  and  a  drain  cover  would  be 
identified  as  difyerenr  object  C V P K ~ ,  whereas  with  a 

geographic 

feature-based  approach 
represented as  point features. 

they  would  both  be 

In  considering  the  benefits  of  each  of  these 
approaches, the project team considered the matters 
mentioned  above,  namely:  ( I )   current  geographic 
information  practice  contrasting  with  mainstream 
IT;  (2) geometry-dominated  characterization;  and 
(3) proliferation  of objecr  rypes. 

In  addition, there  were  two other factors  that 
were imporrant considerations in data exchange that 
suggested  the  choice  of  a  feature-based  approach. 
Firstly,  in  designing  a  standard  for  use  across 
countries  using many different languages  it was felt 
to be imporrant to minimize the complications that 
would arise from the use of those different languages 
these 
during  the  exchange  process.  Avoiding 
difficulties  favoured the adoption of a fearure-based 
approach since in  that approach all phenomena are 
represented as instances of a small number of feature 
rypes categorized by their geometry.  Secondly,  there 
was  seen  to  be  a  need  for  consistency  between 
different data sets. That  is  to say, if data were  to be 
supplied o n  one occasion  that represenred  roads and 
electricity  cables,  and  o n   another  occasion  data 
representing  polygons of  different land  use,  then  it 
is  important  to  achieve  some degree  of consistency 
of  appearance  of  the  data  for  these  two  different 
purposes. 

O n  the other hand, the object-based approach 
was suggested by consideration  of current  trends  in 
in formation  technology.  There is  a significant move 
towards  object-based methods in all areas,  including 
geographic  information. This suggests  that taking  a 
purely  feature-based  view  will  fail  to  support  the 
needs of users of modern software. This can already 
be  seen  to  be  the  case,  in  the  difficulties  of 
transferring  data benveen  GI software  that takes an 
object-oriented  approach,  and  other  software  that 
does not. 

W h e n   all 

these  factors  were  considered 
together,  a  hybrid  approach  that  used  a  limited 
vocabulary,  while  still  allowing  users  the  flexibility 
of  using  an  object  view  to  model  their  data,  was 
adopted. 

Semantic  data models 

There  have  been  many  attempts  to  categorize  the 
rypes of geographic data  that we  use: such attempts 
can  be characterized by questions such as ‘What is a 

Data mode/ descriptions  using EXPRESS 

the 

feature?’. The results of such discussions are referred 
to  as  semantic data  models. A  semantic data  model 
usually  encapsulates  some  of 
inherent 
assumptions of a certain family of data models.  For 
example, a relational structure might tend to suggest 
a  different  data  model  than  a n   objecr-based 
structure.  For  example,  the  object-based  semantic 
data  model  would  incorporate  such  concepts  as 
inheritance and behaviour, whereas a  relational one 
would not. 

At  the  outset  of  the  CEN  project-  being 
described  here  it  was  suggested  that  a  common 
semantic  model  would  be  adopted  for  geographic 
data  in  this  context.  This  reflected  the  practice  of 
most  of  the  exchange  formats  that  have  been 
developed  by  individual  countries.  Typically,  the 
semantic  model  being  used  established  that  the 
world  was  made  up  of  a  series  of  features,  which 
each could possess: 

geometry - location and extent information  in 
an appropriate co-ordinate  system 
topology - spatial relationships with other 
features 
plain  attributes - textual or numeric data 
associated  with the feature 
associations - non-topological  relationships with 
other features 

For  exchange  this  approach  presented  two 
significant  dificulties: firstly,  it  imposed  a  view  of 
the  world  upon  users  of  the  proposed  exchange 
standard which could constrain  them; and secondly, 
it   negated  many  of  the advantages  of  using  a  data 
description  language.  We will  examine each of these 
two  issues in  turn. 

T h e  type ofsemantic model described above is 
an  extension  of  the  feature-based  approach  KO data 
modelling  described  in  the  previous  section.  It  is 
straightforward  to  map  data  from  a  relational 
database into a data  model  of this sort.  However, it 
is  much  harder  to  map  data  stored  in  an  object- 
based  database  into  this  type  of  model,  since  the 
for  example,  of 
model  makes  no  mention, 
inheritance  between  different  objects,  and  of  the 
behaviour  of  objects,  which  are  both  important 
parts of object-based  databases.  I t   became apparent 
to  the  project  team,  whose  backgrounds  differed 
significantly,  that  it would be  impossible  to develop 
a  common  semantic  data  model  that  woiild  be 
satisfactory  for all  users. 

115 

H  Buchanori 

Regarding  the  second  point,  one  of  the 
strengths of the  EXPRESS language is  its  abiliry  to 
encapsulate a significant amount of the semantics of 
the  relationships  between  different  objects.  For 
instance,  cardinaliry,  domain  constraints,  and 
inheritance  are all  Fundamental parts  of  EXPRESS. 
To  make  use of these  facilities,  it is  necessary for the 
user  to  describe  their  data  model  by  writing  an 
application schema using rhe  language, and for that 
description  to  be  transmitted  to  the  recipient.  T h e  
use of a common semantic data model interposes  an 
additional level of abstraction between  the real world 
and  the dara  model  for  that  particular data set, and 
thereby substantially reduces  the completeness of the 
representation of semanrics. 

It  is  true that the adoption of EXPRESS does, 
of  itself,  impose  the  semantic  data  model  that 
EXPRESS itself uses:  namely,  that the world is made 
up of entities that have attributes. However, this data 
model  is  a  minimal  one,  and  places  a  minimal 
constraint  on  the  data  models  that  EXPRESS  can 
encompass. 

Taking into account these different factors, the 
projecr  team  concluded  that  the  advantages  of  a 

common  semantic  model  were  outweighed  by  irs 
disadvantages.  and  that  users should  be  allowed  to 
describe  their  own  data  model  in  an  application 
schema  without  such  a  model.  Although  this 
decision  could  theoretically  lead  to  a  p r o h i o n   of 
varied  application  schemas,  it  is  expected  that  user 
groups, defined either by common technical  interest, 
or by geographical proximity,  will choose to develop 
common application schemas. 

Binding data description and data 
instances 

The project team recognized that an exchange ofdata 
ofien  fails if  the data are  not  clearly  associated  with 
the description that makes them intelligible. To avoid 
this,  the decision was taken  to allow  the descriprion 
of the data to be included within the file containing 
representations  of  the instances of  objects  from  the 
data  model.  In  chis way  the  description  of  the data 
cannot  be  separated  from  the  data  themselves.  A 
previous  decision  of  the  Technical  Committee 
guiding  the  project  team’s  work  was  that  the  file 
format  for  an  exchange  should  be  STEP  Part  21. 

ENTITY entity-declaration; 

name  : 
is-a-super-of  : 
is-abstract  : 
is-a-sub-of  : 
at tributes : 
derived-attributes : 
inverse-attributes  : 
uni queness-ru 1 es  : 
where-rules  : 

valid-identifier; 
SET OF entity-declaration; 
BOOLEAN; 
LIST OF UNIQUE entity-declaration; 
LIST OF UNIQUE attribute-declaration; 
SET OF derived-attribute-declaration; 
SET OF inverse-attribute-declaration; 
SET OF unique-rule-declaration; 
SET OF domain-rule-declaration; 

Figure 3. Fragment of 
EXPRESS  ‘language 
schema’.  This fragmenr 
represents an entity 
declaration in  an 
EXPRESS application 
schema. 

INVERSE 

i s-aqart-o f  : 

schema-declaration 
FOR entities; 

UNIQUE 

unique-own-name  : 

name ; 

WHERE 

not-own-super  : 

not-own-sub  : 

END-Enticy; 

116 

(SIZEOF (is-a-super-of) =  0) OR 
(NOT (name IN  is a-super-of))  ; 
(SIZEOF (is-a-sub-of) =  01  OR 
(NOT (name IN is-a-sub-ofll  ; 

Dato model descriptions using EXPRESS 

Figure 4 .  Use of 
language schema to 
represent definition  of 
entiry tree. 

name  : 
i s-a-super-o  f  : 
is-abstract  : 
is-a-sub-of  : 
attributes  : 
derived-attributes 
inverse-attributes 
uniqueness-rules  : 
where-rules  : 

tree 
(apple-tree, walnut-tree) 
TRUE 
-none- 
(date-ofglanting, height, position) 
-none- 
(in-f ield) 
-none- 
-none - 

This file  format is  designed  to  contain  instances  of 
objects  that  have  been  described  in  an  EXPRESS 
representation of a data model, and nothing else. 

in 

To allow such a  file  to  include  the  EXPRESS 
representation  of  the  data  model  itself,  it  was 
to  develop  a  representation  of  the 
necessary 
EXPRESS  language  written  in  EXPRESS.  This  is 
the  same  way  as  the  process  of 
recursive 
developing  a  compiler  for  a  compiler.  Those 
responsible  for  developing  the  EXPRESS language 
have also recognized  this need, and at the time of the 
project 
they  had  commenced 
development  of  such  a  representation  within  the 
I S 0   committee  responsible  for  developing  the 
STEP  standards. T h e   oil  exploration  industry  had 
also been active in this area (POSC 1994). However, 
the  time  scale  of  the  project  team’s work  was  such 
that  it was  impossible to wait  for  the  conclusion  of 
the I S 0  work, and it was felt that the oil exploration 
related  work  was  unlikely  to  be  easily  adapted  to 
general-purpose geographic information  use. 

ream’s  work, 

T h e   project 

team  therefore  developed  an 
EXPRESS schema for the EXPRESS language itself. 
The EXPRESS description  of the data  model  could 
then  be  represented  in  the  STEP  Part  21  file  as 
instances of the entities from this ‘language schema’. 
Figure  3  contains  a  small  fragment of chis schema, 
created  to  represent an encity that has  been  declared 
within  an  EXPRESS  application  schema.  Instances 
of  the  enticy  ‘entity-declaration’ 
the 
declarations  of 
individual  entities  within  an 
application  schema.  For  example,  the  entity  ‘tree’ 
shown  in  Figure  1  is  mapped  to  an  instance  of 
‘entiry-declaration’  with  the values shown  in  Figure 
4.  In 
that  figure,  no  particular  notation  or 
convention  is  used  to  show  the  values  of  the 
instance. 

represent 

The consequence of this development is  chat a 
file  can  be  created  chat  contains  both  instances  of 
objects,  together with  all  [he  information  necessary 

to interpret the data of those  instances correctly. 

Implementation issues 

While the work described has identified appropriate 
tools  and  techniques,  and  established  a  general 
approach,  further  work  will  be  required  to 
implement  these ideas. 

O n e   major  area  is 

the  development  of 
guidelines  for  application  s c h e m a   chat  are  to  be 
common  across  an  area  of  activiry.  Although  the 
techniques described are capable of exchanging data 
berween widely diverse application areas, the quality 
of the information  conveyed  may be  improved  if a 
common approach  to data modelling can be agreed. 
I t   should  be  noted  that  this  does  not  mean 
restricting  users  to  either  a  relational  or  object- 
oriented  approach.  Instead,  guidelines  would 
identify  modelling  approaches  to  be  taken  for  the 
purposes of exchange. 

A  number  of  software  tools  exist  to  support 
EXPRESS.  For  the  techniques  described  in  this 
paper to be used, these tools will need to be adapted 
for  use  in  sofrware used  to  handle geographic:  data. 
This  will  largely  be  work  to  be  completed  by 
software developers, but in turn they are likely to do 
so only when  their  customers identify a need. 

A 

fundamental 

that  needs  to  be 
issue 
addressed by  those  handling  geographic  data is  the 
extent  to  which  they  need  improved  exchange  of 
data.  Such  an  assessment  will  help  in  establishing 
the  quantity  of  resources  that  it  is  appropriate to 
commit.  Implementation  of  these  techniques  will 
require  some  commitment  of  resources,  but  will 
provide  benefits measured  in terms of the improved 
semantic understanding of data that are received. 

Conclusions 

As  with  all 

languages  (be  they  programming 

117 

References 

Buchanan  H  J  1995  BS7567  ( N T F )   and  the 
emerging  European 
transfer 
standard.  In  Tschangho  Kim  (ed)  1995 
International  Symposium  on  GIs Standards 
27-28  October  1995. Seoul,  National  GIS 
Standards Committee: H 1-H9 

(CEN) 

David B, van den Herrewegen  M and SalgC F  1996 
Conceptual models for geometry and quality 
of geographic information.  In  Burrough P A 
and Frank A U  (eds)  1996 Geographic objects 
with  indeterminate  boundaries.  London, 
Taylor  & Francis:  193-206 

I S 0  1994a IS010303. Industrial automation systems 
and  integration - Product data  representation 
and  exchange.  Part  1 I :   Description  method: 
The  w(pRESS  language  reference  manual. 
Geneva,  International  Organization  for 
Standardization 

I S 0  1994b I S 0 1  0303. Industrial automation systems 
and integration - Product data  representation 
and  exchange.  Part  21:  Implementation 
method:  Clear  text  encoding  of the  exchange 
struct ti re. 
International 
Organization  for Standardization 

Geneva, 

Kuhn  W  1994 Defining semantics  for  spatial  data 
rransfers.  In  Waugh  T  C  and  Healey  R  G 
(eds)  1994  Advances  in  CIS  Research. 
Proceedings  of 
International 
the  Sixth 
Symposium  on  Spatial  Data  Handling. 
London, Taylor  & Francis:  973-87 
Bsrensen  0  1995  GIS  standards  - international 
response  : I S 0  / TC 2 1 1.  In Tschangho Kim 
(ed)  I995  International Symposium  on  CIS 
Standards  27-28  October  1995.  Seoul, 
National  GIS  Standards  Committee: 
CI-Cl4 

POSC  1994  POSC  exchange format  version  1.0. 
Englewood Cliffs,  NJ, Prentice-Hall 
Schenck  D  A  and  Wilson  P  R  1994  Information 
modelling:  the  EXPRESS  way.  New  York, 
Oxford  University Press 

H  Buchanan 

languages or  human  languages)  there  are  examples 
of  clear  and  easy-to-understand  EXPRESS,  and 
examples of wordy and obscure EXPRESS. It  is  not 
a  panacea.  It is, however,  a significant step forward 
on  the  tools  that  are currently  used  for  describing 
data models. 

the  progress 

Regardless  of 

in  de  jure 
standardization  for  geographic  information,  the 
rype  of  approach  that  has  been  taken  during  the 
C E N  TC287  project  work  offers  a  valuable  new 
approach  to  the description  of  geographic  data.  In 
this  project  the  technique  has  been  applied  to 
description  for  the  purpose  of  exchange  of  data; 
however,  the  same  technique  can  be  applied  to 
description  of a data model  for any other purpose: 
formal  record  keeping,  meradaca  provision,  needs 
analysis, automated data handling. 

T h e  weight  of  the  community  that  is  using 
EXPRESS in other fields will ensure that it is  a tool 
that will  continue to be available in  the future, and 
may  help  geographic  information  to  retain  and 
the  mainstream  of 
strengthen  its 
information  technology. 

links  with 

in 

T h e   work  described  has  resulted 

the 
creation  of  some generic  tools  for  the exchange  of 
data.  This  work  can  be  furrher  developed  by  the 
creation  of  standardized  application  schema  that 
users  can  easily  relate  to.  T h e  existence  of  generic 
tools  provides  a  sound  framework;  however,  most 
users are seeking ready-made solutions applicable to 
their data. 

Another significanr area of  development  that 
is  related  to  this work  is  the work of the Open GIS 
Consortium  ( O G C )   in  developing  their  O p e n  
Geodara  Interoperability  Specification  (OGIS). 
While sofrware interoperability will ease some of the 
problems 
that  traditional  data  exchange  has 
addressed,  there  are  differences  benveen  the  two 
approaches. 

Acknowledgements 

T h e  author gratefully acknowledges the support of 
the ComitC EuropCen  d e  Normalisation TC287 for 
this work. 

118 

