Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2): 177–190

Research Article

Supporting Accessibility for Blind
and Vision-impaired People With a
Localized Gazetteer and Open Source
Geotechnology

Matthew T. Rice
Department of Geography and
Geoinformation Science
George Mason University

R. Daniel Jacobson
Department of Geography
University of Calgary

Fabiana I. Paez
Department of Geography and
Geoinformation Science
George Mason University

Ahmad O. Aburizaiza
Department of Geography and
Geoinformation Science
George Mason University

Brandon M. Shore
Department of Geography and
Geoinformation Science
George Mason University

Abstract
Disabled people, especially the blind and vision-impaired, are challenged by many
transitory hazards in urban environments such as construction barricades, tempo-
rary fencing across walkways, and obstacles along curbs. These hazards present a
problem for navigation, because they typically appear in an unplanned manner and
are seldom included in databases used for accessibility mapping. Tactile maps are a
traditional tool used by blind and vision-impaired people for navigation through
urban environments, but such maps are not automatically updated with transitory
hazards. As an alternative approach to static content on tactile maps, we use
volunteered geographic information (VGI) and an Open Source system to provide
updates of local infrastructure. These VGI updates, contributed via voice, text
message, and e-mail, use geographic descriptions containing place names to describe

Address for correspondence: Matthew T. Rice, Department of Geography and GeoInformation
Science, 4400 University Drive, MS 6C3, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030-4444, USA.
E-mail: rice@gmu.edu

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2012.01318.x

178 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

changes to the local environment. After they have been contributed and stored in a
database, we georeference VGI updates with a detailed gazetteer of local place names
including buildings, administrative ofﬁces, landmarks, roadways, and dormitories.
We publish maps and alerts showing transitory hazards, including location-based
alerts delivered to mobile devices. Our system is built with several technologies
including PHP, JavaScript, AJAX, Google Maps API, PostgreSQL, an Open Source
database, and PostGIS, the PostgreSQL’s spatial extension. This article provides
insight into the integration of user-contributed geospatial information into a com-
prehensive system for use by the blind and vision-impaired, focusing on currently
developed methods for geoparsing and georeferencing using a gazetteer.

1 Introduction

Few geospatial activities are as directly essential and fundamental as the regular, daily
navigation and wayﬁnding tasks that help a person travel between workplace, appoint-
ments, errands, and home. For blind and visually impaired people these daily navigation
tasks are nearly always challenging and occasionally impossible, particularly in unfamil-
iar environments. Our modern built environment is, with very few exceptions, designed
for the sighted.

During a commencement address delivered at Simon Fraser University in 2001,
Reginald Golledge, a pioneer in assistive geotechnology, outlined the various obstacles to
navigation and wayﬁnding encountered by the blind and visually impaired. Described by
Golledge as movement barriers, these obstacles consist of real impediments in the built
environment as well as metaphorical barriers that present disincentives to full participa-
tion in employment and society. With this context in mind, our goal is to use Open
Source geospatial software, tools, and techniques to help blind and visually impaired
members of society overcome these movement barriers and therefore, more fully partici-
pate in society. This article presents our work in designing a system with Open Source
software that uses volunteered geographic information (VGI) to augment ofﬁcially-
sourced infrastructure datasets. This is accomplished through the use of a gazetteer and
geoparsing system that obtains and displays spatial footprints for VGI stored as text in
a database.

1.1 Approaches for Accessibility Mapping and Assistive Geotechnology

The International Cartographic Association’s (ICA) Commission on Maps and Graphics
for Blind and Partially Sighted People has been an important outlet for research on maps,
graphics, and geotechnology for the blind, with historic focus on tactile maps and graphics.
Perkin’s (2001) review of tactile map production techniques, and Tatham’s (1991) review
of tactile map design principles are primary sources of information on the subject of tactile
map production and non-visual map symbolization for the blind and visually impaired.
Taylor (2001) and more recently Przyszewska and Szyszkowska (2011) described the
signiﬁcant challenges and difﬁcult production tasks in large tactile mapping projects. As
they and many ICA presenters have attested over the last 20 years, production of tactile
maps and graphics can be difﬁcult, time-consuming, and expensive.

In an earlier ICA conference proceeding, Coulsen et al. (1991) described a different
approach to mapping and accessibility for the blind and visually impaired. Coulsen

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

VGI and Geotechnology

179

Figure 1 Dr. Reginald Golledge using the UCSB Personal Guidance System, circa 1997

described a future where geographic information systems (GIS) could be used to more
quickly and efﬁciently generalize, simplify, and prepare geospatial data for inclusion on
a tactile map. The vision espoused by Coulsen et al. (1991) is one in which geotechnology
is used to assist with the difﬁcult production of tactile maps and graphics for the blind
and visually impaired. Noteworthy for its time period – before GIS was being used as a
tool for mapping for the blind – Coulsen et al. described a future assistive geotechnology
that has begun to emerge. In an approach similar to Coulsen et al., Miele and Marston
(2005) described an approach for automated tactile map design using GIS street center-
line ﬁles and a Braille embosser, a central component of Miele’s Tactile Map Automated
the Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute (2011). The
Production project at
approaches suggested by Coulsen et al. (1991) and those presented by Miele and
Marston (2005) are signiﬁcant because of their integration of standard tactile mapping
approaches with GIS and geotechnology, and in the case of Miele and Marston, the
extension and use of this production approach for navigating through unfamiliar
environments.

Extending the idea in Coulsen et al. (1991) from the domain of tactile navigation
aides to general aides for navigation and wayﬁnding, a few researchers, notably Reginald
Golledge, have used GIS in innovative ways to provide technological navigation aids for
the blind (Golledge et al. 1998). Golledge’s Personal Guidance System (PGS) is built
using a combination of simple GIS functionalities, a global positioning system (GPS) for
positioning, an electronic compass for orientation, and earphones for receiving auditory
cues (Figure 1). This system allows blind and visually impaired people to navigate
through unfamiliar environments, receiving auditory and text-to-speech cues for posi-
tioning relative to the sidewalk centerlines, warning cues for objects, and text-to-speech
announcements for buildings and infrastructure directly in front of the end-user. While
under development, the Personal Guidance System and related system extensions incor-

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

180 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

porated some novel sensory communication systems such as a vibro-tactile pointer
interface (Marston et al. 2008, Golledge et al. 2007), auditory infrared signage (Marston
et al. 2006), and advanced auditory displays.

The Personal Guidance System was a signiﬁcant advance in navigation for blind and
visually impaired individuals, particularly with respect to innovations in interface design
and methods of robust ﬁeld testing. However, it was, in essence, a closed system with
respect to the underlying geospatial data. Similary, much of the work presented and
published by the ICA, including Perkins (2001) and Tatham (1991) adopted an approach
to tactile map design based on static data and a static product. An ideal system for
mapping and navigation for the blind and visually impaired would incorporate some
element of rapid update, reﬂecting the constant changes in the built environment. Two
research efforts that address dynamic content in assistive geotechnology systems are
Nuernberger (2008) and Barbeau et al. (2010), who devised practical approaches for
improving accessibility through the use of cell phones. Nuernberger (2008) devised
methods for rapidly disseminating information about changes in an environment to
mobility impaired individuals through the use of supplemental verbal information deliv-
ered over a cell phone. Similarly, Barbeau et al. (2010) demonstrated the effectiveness of
a travel assistance device based on GPS-enabled smart phones by public transportation
users with disabilities. Both research projects demonstrate the feasibility of delivering
real-time geospatial information and location cues to disabled end-users, and as such,
represent a improvement from past paradigms associated with static tactile maps and
assistive devices using ﬁxed base data.

1.2 Volunteered Geographic Information and Assistive Geotechnology

A contemporary approach for building a more dynamic assistive geotechnology system
involves the use volunteered geographic information (VGI) contributed by community
members, to augment ofﬁcial sources of geographic information. The general usefulness
and effectiveness of VGI has been highlighted by a number of authors. Goodchild
(2007b) introduced the term volunteered geographic information to deﬁne the emerging
inexpensive and functional methods for the collection of geographic data through the
active participation of end-users and community members. Furthermore, Zook et al.
(2010) and Goodchild and Glennon (2010) have examined the results of using commu-
nity members as an immediate and real-time source of information during emergencies.
Both of these articles support the notion that user-generated content can effectively
supplement traditional and ofﬁcial sources of geospatial information during emergencies
and disaster management. Transitory hazards, such as construction barricades and
frequent changes in the landscape, put blind and vision-impaired people in danger and
represent the same type of signiﬁcant hazard envisioned by these authors.

Like many public institutions, George Mason University has a population of blind,
visually impaired and mobility impaired students and visitors. It is also the setting for
several very large constructions projects, resulting in frequent obstructions within the
pedestrian corridors and a serious disruption for students, staff, and visitors that navigate
across campus. Our interest and experience with assistive geotechnology led to the early
conceptual design of a system that would overcome the weakness of having a closed and
static design. Speciﬁcally, we planned a system for geospatial data collection, analysis,
routing and delivery, built with free and Open Source software, that would allow for
rapid ingestion of information about temporary obstacles in the public rights-of-way.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

VGI and Geotechnology

181

Figure 2 Conceptual process ﬂow for integrating VGI with an assistive geotechnology
system

After considering the many options, we decided to design our system using VGI, noting
the many beneﬁts of such an approach, such as local geographical expertise in data
collection and description, and increased temporal coverage (Goodchild 2007a). We
developed a conceptual design to show what the ﬂow of information would look like
(Figure 2). Our system would focus on the integration of volunteered or user-contributed
geospatial data with assistive geotechnology, using a detailed, locally-centered gazetteer.
The sequence of events in such a system would include observation, contribution,
geoparsing and georeferencing using a gazetteer, plotting and routing using infrastructure
and network data, and ﬁnally, the delivery of maps and proximity alerts to mobile
assistive devices, including alerts using auditory cues and text-to-voice translation. We
have used this conceptual design to guide our development.

Because most of the VGI incorporated into our system is based on unstructured,
text-based descriptions of obstacles received via email and text messaging, we recognized
a critical need for geoparsing and georeferencing capabilities. During the early develop-
ment of our system, we developed a comprehensive locally-focused gazetteer for use in
georeferencing VGI that incorporates detailed place-naming for the local area. Because
humans rely heavily on place-naming for geographic descriptions, and few potential
contributors would have a detailed understanding of metric geoferencing systems, the
gazetteer was perceived to be, and continues to be, a central element in our system.

The use of VGI, and our development of geoparsing and georegistration algorithms
for use with unstructured VGI, is a central focus of this research, and an important
contribution within the framework of assistive geotechnology. Our current system

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

182 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

extends approaches suggested by Coulsen et al. (1991) and the state-of-the-art work by
Golledge et al. (1998) and recent advances by Nuernberger (2008) and Barbeau et al.
(2010), by incorporating VGI contributed by community members. This allows infor-
mation about temporary obstacles to be incorporated into maps and mobile alerts
delivered through our system, and provides a demonstration of the utility of VGI within
the assistive geotechnology community. The important elements of our system, including
our gazetteer development, geoparsing capability, and Open Source design will be pre-
sented, followed by a discussion of our results, experiences, and conclusions.

2 Gazetteer Data Model and Geoparsing

The two most important functions of our present system are: (1) the ability to identify the
use of place names within VGI; and (2) the assignment of metric georeferencing to
volunteered content through the use of a detailed local gazetteer. Because people fre-
quently communicate about their surroundings using place names and because the place
name usage is sometimes non-standard, we have spent several months building and
populating a comprehensive gazetteer for the college campus and surrounding neighbor-
hoods, based on the georeferencing and gazetteer development principles outlined by Hill
(2006).

Our evolving gazetteer data model includes naming characteristics for buildings,
sidewalks, streets, intersections, parking lots, neighborhoods, landmarks, parks, gardens,
plazas, and a variety of miscellaneous features used in local geographic descriptions. As
implemented, we are currently providing gazetteer data for nearly 1,200 separate geo-
graphical entities in a 2 square mile area centered on the George Mason University
Campus in Fairfax, Virginia. Table 1 shows some of the naming characteristics for
buildings, the primary geographic feature used in local geographic descriptions related to
navigation. Being both the origin and destination of most pedestrian events on our
campus, establishing a comprehensive set of naming characteristics and naming varia-
tions for buildings is an important precursor to integrating VGI with ofﬁcially-sourced
campus datasets. In our gazetteer, we record each building’s ofﬁcial name (Table 1,
Ofﬁcial Name), as well as the name used on campus drawings and publications (Table 1,
Ofﬁcial Drawing Name), which is, in most cases, a shortened form. We also record
numerical designations, abbreviated variants of the building name, slang names, jargon
or technical names, and any previous or former names, reﬂecting the frequent name
changes as building occupants change and features are renamed. We also store several
commonly-used non-English language variants of feature names in our gazetteer, focus-
ing on the most commonly spoken languages by students on our diverse campus whose
national origins and primary languages are from China, India, Korea, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, Egypt, Vietnam, and Latin America.

An important, but often overlooked aspect of naming conventions and gazetteers in
small projects, is the need to store association characteristics for features. Buildings on
our local campus are often aggregated into geographical clusters (buildings in the same
area with a common group name) and functional clusters (buildings sharing a common
functional purpose, such as dormitories). Buildings and other geographic features are
commonly referenced by their individual name and, where they exist, by the name of any
functional and geographical groupings. Buildings also commonly contain separately
named constituent parts, which we reference in our gazetteer using a contains element.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

VGI and Geotechnology

183

Table 1 Gazetteer data model: Building naming
characteristics

Item

Description

Ofﬁcial Name
Original Drawing

Name

Designated ofﬁcial name
Text label from ofﬁcial map or

Building Code

Numerical designation for

Geographic Cluster

Name of geographical grouping

Contains

Names of sub-elements of the

Functional Cluster

Name of functional grouping of

Abbreviation
Vernacular1

Standard feature abbreviation
Slang or informal name for

Vernacular2

Jargon or technical name for

Vernacular3

Coded or numbered name for

Formerly named
Foreign language 1–8

Previous feature name
Name in foreign language

drawing

building

of buildings

building

buildings

feature

feature

feature

In order to provide a method for detecting spelling variation, which is common in
unstructured VGI, we also store a name variant based on a consonant-only version of the
ofﬁcial feature name. The naming characteristics and footprints for campus geographic
features are stored in a database, and used in conjunction with geoparsing algorithms,
which look for uses of the names or any name variants within text. The geoparsing
algorithms allow us to identify relevant geographical entities whose footprints are
recorded in our gazetteer and, therefore, facilitates the routing, mapping, and alert
functionalities of our system. Some additional details about our gazetteer entity relation-
ship and association characteristics can be found in Rice et al. (2011).

3 Open Source System Implementation and Design

3.1 Free and Open Source Software

We have designed our system using free and Open Source software due to the ﬂexibility
inherent in the Open Source geospatial tools and the ease with which they can be
obtained and utilized by non-proﬁt groups that are commonly interested in accessibility
issues. The low-cost of implementing a system in free and Open Source software is a
signiﬁcant factor in our own development and at least anecdotally, in the ability of local
non-proﬁt groups interested in mirroring our approach. The balance between free and

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

184 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

Open Source geospatial technology and off-the-shelf commercial and proprietary soft-
ware is a complex, delicate, and difﬁcult one to achieve. For the wider user community,
the initially prohibitive cost of purchasing commercial software is potentially offset by
the beneﬁts of support from the software vendor. The ﬁnancial cost of commercial
software and the requisite utility it may or may not provide for a project such as ours
needs to be offset against the “invisible” cost of free and Open Source geospatial
technology. This invisible cost is the payment for an in-house expert, consultant or
similar person to develop and implement the system. Along this continuum of software
with overt ﬁnancial costs and free software with hidden costs, the development decisions
can be difﬁcult, as noted by Steiniger and Bocher (2009). In our case, we have the
requisite expertise to deploy Open Source tools and the expertise to support end-users
and have adopted them for use based on the low cost. We routinely reconsider the
possible beneﬁt to be derived from a mature commercial product and associated support
structure and explore those options when they arise, and have no aversion to using
commercial products in our development when they present a clear advantage in utility
or total cost.

3.2 System Implementation and Design

There are ﬁve general areas of functionality in our geoparsing and georeferencing system:
(1) reading the VGI message (often a warning message about an obstacle); (2) manipu-
lating the warning message; (3) scanning the gazetteer database; (4) editing the database;
and (5) outputting the results. The technologies utilized to implement the system are:
HTML, JavaScript, AJAX, Google Maps API, PHP and PostgreSQL//PostGIS.

The heart of the system is a PostgreSQL database, an Open Source database that has
the advantage of being free to install and use. The PostgreSQL extension, PostGIS,
enables spatial capabilities and compared to other Open Source spatial databases, has
advanced functionality that we have found useful. PostGIS spatial functions are used
inside the SQL statements, as spatial queries, and range from geometry construction and
editing functions to spatial operations. PostGIS is also relatively easy to implement and
capable of being mashed-up with other GIS desktop and web technologies. In our system,
we use a variety of spatial functions such as point extraction from polygons, convex hull
creation, polygon buffering, binary geometry format to KML string conversion, binary
geometry format to text conversion, and multipolygon object creation from smaller
polygons.

To date, our system database contains four tables: the gazetteer table, the contains
table, the convexhulls table, and the users’ table. The gazetteer table has 26 possible ﬁelds
for feature description, including the primary building name characteristics noted in
Table 1. Moreover, the gazetteer contains feature names in eight languages, allowing
geoparsing of feature names from the common languages used on campus. The contains
table provides detailed information about feature entity relationships and allows for
georeferencing objects that are contained as a sub-element within another feature, which
helps associate building footprints with commonly referenced constituent parts. The
convexhulls table is used to store convex hull geometry of geographic entities geoparsed
from user-contributed VGI, in both binary and KML string formats. It also stores the
time stamp of the VGI message, to enable the system to distinguish between old and new
VGI entries and to assist in establishing temporal relevance. The users’ table is for
registering end-users who are interested in receiving any relevant generated warning

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

VGI and Geotechnology

185

Figure 3 End-user contributed text and associated spatial footprints

messages. Cell phone numbers and their carriers are also stored to send the warning
messages to the users.

PHP, along with JavaScript and AJAX, plays the major role of reading and manipu-
lating warning messages, editing the database, and creating the output. When a VGI
message (or warning message) is received, the gazetteer table and contains tables in the
database are scanned to match any feature names in the warning message. The IDs of the
named features are collected in the code. Points are then collected from relevant feature
geometries and used to create and buffer a convex hull to cover all possible areas relevant
to any obstacles or warnings reported by the originator of the VGI. The buffered convex
hull polygon is then inserted in the convexhulls table in the database in both KML string
and binary formats.

Figure 3 shows an example of four different hypothetical warning messages to our
system, to highlight some of the designed features. Because the local college campus is
very diverse, and because we intend to capture verbal and textual information from the
largest possible community of VGI contributors, we felt a need to incorporate foreign
place name variants in our gazetteer and to develop robust geoparsing capabilities for
place names, including misspelled place names. For instance, the Arabic words in the ﬁrst

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

186 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

message (Figure 3) reference the Fenwick Library and the Chinese logograms in the
second message represent Lecture Hall. In the third message, an end-user references the
computer store, which is contained inside the Johnson Center building, and in the fourth
message, an end-user references the Fine Arts Building using the abbreviation FAB. In
each case, including those with misspellings, the system identiﬁes a geographic feature
named in the message and forms a buffered convex hull from the relevant feature
geometries. We have trained the system to catch a number of common spelling errors in
English by storing the consonant-only variants of the place names and using PHP to
match them to possible place name references.

As an additional step, our system generates several KML ﬁles from the convexhulls
table based on the time stamp of each convex hull. The KML ﬁles are posted on a map
using Google Maps API V3. Each KML ﬁle is associated with a speciﬁc temporal domain,
helping establish relevance and allowing for visual sorting of the most recent messages.
At present, one of the KML ﬁles is used to represent warnings received within the past
24 hours. A second KML ﬁle is for warnings received within the last week, and so on.
Figure 4 shows a scenario where two warning messages were received through VGI
sources and processed according to the procedures outlined in this article. If the ﬁrst
warning message was received ﬁve days ago, and the second warning message was
received only today, the messages can be sorted and displayed according to temporal
relevance. Both messages are currently found in the KML ﬁle for the past week, but only
the second message is found in the KML ﬁle of the past 24 hours.

4 Discussion and Conclusions

The system we have outlined and discussed was designed to ﬁll a gap in some useful
assistive geotechnology systems, such as the Personal Guidance System developed by
Golledge and colleagues (Golledge et al. 1998), as well as to develop an approach
suggested Coulsen et al. (1991) where a geographic information system could be used to
enhance the utility and speed of tactile map production. In our case, the focus of the
system is not in generating, designing, and using tactile maps or other accessible maps (a
topic addressed by Tatham 1991, Rice et al. 2005 and Golledge et al. 2005), but rather
to develop a way of incorporating information about temporary obstacles and barriers
into an existing system for the purposes of identifying hazards to blind, visually impaired,
and mobility impaired individuals. Our approach uses volunteered geographic informa-
tion to identify temporary obstacles in our local environment. Because most accessibility
maps and related systems are designed with a closed architecture using static data or
using an analog cartographic process, they cannot provide information about the tem-
porary hazards that present a signiﬁcant impediment to navigation and wayﬁnding. Our
system is built with ofﬁcial infrastructure data but allows for the contribution and display
of VGI and beneﬁts from local geographic expertise, a characteristic of VGI noted by
Goodchild (2007a). Two central capabilities that are required to effectively use VGI in
our system are: (1) the ability to geoparse contributed information for the presence of
geographical place names and other geographical identiﬁers; and (2) the ability to
georeference the contributed information using a comprehensive local gazetteer, facili-
tating mapping and other GIS functionality.

A required element of our system (or any system based on voice or text-based
geographical descriptions) is a gazetteer containing, among many other things, the

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

VGI and Geotechnology

187

Figure 4 Red and green tagging of the KML footprints for temporal relevance

names, abbreviated name variants, and footprints or any object in the built environment
used in referencing geographic position. In our local application, the primary features in
the gazetteer include buildings, parking lots, walkways, and prominent landmarks (such
as bell towers, clocks, fountains, etc.). The naming characteristics for these items are
extensive, but as a basic minimum include the ofﬁcial name, an abbreviated form of the
name, and a footprint or geometry for the feature. Assembling a gazetteer containing the
level of detail described here is not a trivial task, even for a small geographical area with
a strong central authority with up-to-date infrastructure data and associated metadata.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

188 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

We conclude that the most difﬁcult task in utilizing our approach is building a detailed
gazetteer for a local area. This task can be accomplished in any area with existing GIS
data for buildings, streets, and landmarks, but many of the useful features of our system,
such as the ability to detect misspelled placenames, slang variations of placenames, and
foreign language variants of placenames requires a signiﬁcant investment in time, effort,
and expertise.

Our research demonstrates, within our limited geospatial domain, the mechanisms
for using volunteer geographic information, georeferenced using a local gazetteer, to
providing information about temporary barriers and obstacles in the local environment.
Our approach, using free and Open Source geospatial software, could be implemented in
any similar local geographic setting, given the existence of enough interested support
personnel and developers to create a detailed gazetteer. Our approach could be further
extended to build upon information in local datasets rapidly during times of disasters or
natural hazards where volunteer geographic information is both necessary and needs to
be validated in a critical manner to ensure its reliability.

4.1 Future Development Directions

Our system is being reﬁned and extended in a number of ways, recognizing important
elements which have not been developed. First, we have developed proﬁciency in iden-
tifying regions of interest from VGI based on the convex hull geometry of the named
features, and the creation of a KML and binary representation of the convex hull
geometry. We recognize that local geographic descriptions contain references to objects
that the VGI contributor is nearby but not necessarily inside, so as a positional accom-
modation we use a simple buffer to increase the diameter of the convex hull around the
region of interest. We plan on developing methods for creating more geographically
speciﬁc regions of interest based on other infrastructure items such as sidewalks, which
typically constrain the movement of pedestrians between buildings in the local area. We
also plan on creating methods for validating the position of a VGI contributor based on
ancillary data present in the geotags of contributed photographs, as well as location data
communicated with consent through GPS-enabled mobile applications.

A second area of future development is in our need to accommodate complex
spatiotemporal dynamics and spatiotemporal relationships contained in geographical
descriptions from VGI contributors making observations as they are moving. We are also
interested in geographical descriptions where the points of reference are changing, and
geographical descriptions of obstacles and barriers that use positioning descriptions
relative to the observers position and orientation, which may be unknown. As noted, we
can capture some information about a VGI contributor’s position with permission from
mobile device parameters, and that information can be used to validate geographical
descriptions. Capturing user orientation, however, is more challenging due to uncertain-
ties in bearing and the lack of embedded orientation information in contributed media
and orientation data from mobile devices. Text-based descriptions of geographic phe-
nomena referencing positions relative to user orientation will be more difﬁcult to capture
and use in our system.

A third important area for future work is in user recruitment, user training, data
validation, and the development of reliability measures. We plan on implementing a user
registration system and user rating system to allow development of methods for tracking
the reliability of VGI contributions to our system. At present, the system is open and

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

VGI and Geotechnology

189

most contributors are students, staff, and faculty who are aware of the project and are
moderately trained. We have had little problem with malicious content or misleading
entries, but with an open system that will change as the numbers of contributors and
potential liabilities for malicious content increase. At present, we rely on the general
feelings of altruism expressed by our contributors, who have an interest in contributing
useful information about obstacles and hazards. Elwood (2010) notes how the social
dynamics and boundaries between experts and non-experts change and adjust in projects
like this, and we plan on documenting any noteworthy developments associated with the
behavior of the community of end-users and the community of VGI contributors, and
interactions between the two groups, noting that this would be a positive contribution of
our project.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the George Mason University College of Science for their support
in funding the early stages of this research, the Army Engineer Research and Develop-
ment Center (ERDC), for generously funding the continued work under BAA #AA10-
4733, and William C. Hammill (George Mason University), for his assistance with the
conceptual system design. Finally, we acknowledge the advice and encouragement of Dr.
Reginald Golledge (1937–2009) during the inception of the project.

References

Barbeau S J, Labrador M A, Georggi N L, Winters P L, and Perez R A 2010 The travel assistance
device: Utilizing GPS-enabled mobile phones to aid transit riders with special needs. Intelligent
Transportation Systems 4: 12–23

Coulsen M, Riger M, and Wheate R 1991 Progress in creating tactile maps from Geographic
Information Systems output. In Mapping the Nations, the Fifteenth Conference and Ninth
General Assembly of the International Cartographic Association, Bournemouth, United
Kingdom

Elwood S 2010 Geographic information science: Emerging research on the societal implications of

the geospatial Web. Progress in Human Geography 34: 349–57

Goodchild M F 2007a Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal 69:

Goodchild M F 2007b Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of Web

2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research 2: 24–32

Goodchild M F and Glennon J A 2010 Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster

response: A research frontier. International Journal of Digital Earth 3: 231–41

Golledge R G 2001 Convocation Address, Simon Fraser University (6 June 2001). Unpublished

211–21

presentation

Golledge R G, Klatzky R L, Loomis J M, Speigle J, and Tietz J 1998 A geographic information
system for a GPS based personal guidance system. International Journal of Geographical
Information Systems 12: 727–49

Golledge R G, Marston J R, Loomis J M, and Klatzky R L 2007 Wayﬁnding without sight: The
haptic pointer interface. Invited paper presented at Annual Meeting of the Association of
American Geographers, San Francisco, California

Golledge R G, Rice M T, and Jacobson R D 2005 A commentary on the use of touch for accessing
on-screen spatial representations: The process of experiencing haptic maps and graphics. The
Professional Geographer 57: 339–49

Hill L L 2006 Georeferencing: The Geographic Associations of Information. Cambridge, MA, MIT

Press

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

190 M T Rice, A O Aburizaiza, R D Jacobson, B M Shore and F I Paez

Marston J R, Golledge R G, Loomis J M, Klatzky R L, and Giudice N A 2008 Substituting for
vision: Field experiments with several orientation and navigation devices. Invited presentation
at the Vision Research Seminar Series, Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia

Marston J R, Loomis J, Klatzky R L, Golledge R G, and Smith E L 2006 Evaluation of spatial

displays for navigation without sight. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception 3: 110–24

Miele J A 2011 Tactile Map Automated Production (TMAP): Using GIS Data to Automatically
Generate Raised-Line Street Maps. WWW document, http://www.ski.org/Rehab/TMAP/
Miele J A and Marston J R 2005 Tactile Map Automated Production (TMAP): Project update and
research summary. In Proceedings of the CSUN Twentieth Annual International Conference:
Technology and Persons with Disabilities, Los Angeles, California

Nuernberger A 2008 Presenting Accessibility to Mobility-Impaired Travelers. Unpublished Ph.D.

Dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara

Perkins C 2001 Tactile campus mapping: Evaluating designs and production technologies. In
Proceedings of the Twentieth International Cartographic Conference (ICC2001), Beijing,
China: 2906–13

Przyszewska K and Szyszkowska K 2011 Atlas of the world for the blind and visually impaired. In

Proceedings of the Twenty-ﬁfth International Cartographic Conference, Paris, France

Research Unit on Spatial Cognition and Choice 2011 Reg Walking with Original System (1997;
Archived Image). WWW document, http://www.geog.ucsb.edu/pgs/images/Reg_1997.jpg
Rice M T, Hammill W C, Aburizaiza A O, Schwarz S, and Jacobson RD 2011 Integrating
user-contributed geospatial data with assistive geotechnology using a localized gazetteer. In
Ruas A (ed) Advances in Cartography and GIScience. Berlin, Springer: 279–91

Rice M T, Jacobson R D, Golledge R G, and Jones D 2005 Design considerations for haptic and
auditory map interfaces. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 32: 381–91
Steiniger S and Bocher E 2009 An overview on current free and open source desktop GIS
developments. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 23: 1345–70
Tatham A F 1991 The design of tactile maps: Theoretical and practical considerations. In Mapping
the Nations: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference and Ninth General Assembly of the
International Cartographic Association, Bournemouth, United Kingdom: 157–66

Taylor D R F 2001 Tactile atlas of Latin America. In Proceedings of the Twentieth International

Cartographic Conference (ICC2001), Beijing, China: 2894–98

Zook M, Graham M, Shelton T, and Gorman S 2010 Volunteered geographic information and
crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of the Haitian earthquake. World Medical and
Health Policy 2(2): 7–33

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2012, 16(2)

