International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 25, No. 9, September 2011, 1371–1388

Agent-based simulation for a dual-diffusion process of inﬂuenza and
human preventive behavior

Liang Maoa* and Ling Bianb

aDepartment of Geography, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; bDepartment of
Geography, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Amherst, NY, USA

(Received 3 October 2010; ﬁnal version received 12 January 2011)

Inﬂuenza disease diffuses from one individual to another through their close contacts,
while preventive behavior propagates through inter-personal inﬂuences. These two dif-
fusion processes take place simultaneously and interact with one another in opposite
directions. Many current inﬂuenza studies consider the diffusion of inﬂuenza, but few
of them have incorporated the diffusion of human preventive behavior. This article pro-
poses an original dual-diffusion model to couple these two diffusion processes. The
conceptual framework of the model incorporates these two opposite processes into
a human contact network. An agent-based approach, network theory, disease model,
and behavioral model are integrated to formulate the conceptual framework. Model
implementation simulates an inﬂuenza epidemic in an urbanized area of one million
individuals. The simulation results suggest that the proposed model offers a close rep-
resentation of the observed data. The research ﬁndings will provide a more rational
basis for inﬂuenza control.

Keywords: diffusion process; inﬂuenza transmission; preventive behavior; contact
network; negative feedback loop

Introduction

1.
Every year in the United States, inﬂuenza (commonly known as ‘ﬂu’) is typically respon-
sible for more than 30,000 deaths and about 200,000 hospitalizations (Thompson et al.
2004). In the past decade, inﬂuenza has obtained unprecedented attention due to the
widespread occurrence of novel viruses, such as the Bird Flu in 2004 and the Swine Flu
in 2009. Concern about their impacts to public health has stimulated an upsurge of inter-
est in modeling inﬂuenza dynamics and predicting their health outcomes (Dutta 2008).
These models have offered a better understanding of disease dynamics and have provided
valuable suggestions for control strategies (Coburn et al. 2009).

Recent advances in computing power and data availability have further enabled the
development of models for real populations at the city, national and cross-national scales
(Ferguson et al. 2005, Germann et al. 2006, Halloran et al. 2008). These models, how-
ever, have only considered the diffusion of inﬂuenza. Few of them explicitly represent
the preventive behavior of individuals in response to inﬂuenza. When inﬂuenza breaks
out, individuals will not passively wait to become infected but actively adopt preventive

*Corresponding author. Email: liangmao@uﬂ.edu

ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2011.556121
http://www.tandfonline.com

1372

L. Mao and L. Bian

behaviors to protect themselves, such as receiving vaccinations, taking antiviral drugs, and
washing their hands frequently (CDC 2008). Preventive behaviors diffuse over a popula-
tion through interpersonal inﬂuences (Langlie 1977, Sanders and Suls 1982, Gottlieb 1985,
Brown and Reingen 1987, Baron et al. 2001, Lankford et al. 2003, Zimmerman et al. 2003,
Pressman et al. 2005, Funk et al. 2009). Any model that fails to account for individual pre-
ventive behaviors may not effectively portray their inﬂuence on the dynamics of inﬂuenza
epidemics and public health outcomes.

The diffusion of inﬂuenza and the diffusion of preventive behavior take place simul-
taneously and interact with one another in opposite directions. In one direction, the
transmission of inﬂuenza motivates preventive behavior. In the other direction, the adop-
tion of preventive behavior limits the transmission. From a perspective of system theory,
these two population-level diffusion processes emerge from a massive number of interac-
tions between individuals. These interactions can be seen as a large number of negative
feedback loops at an individual level. The two diffusion processes at the population level
depend on the non-linear behavior of these microscale loops. In the current literature, few
models have supported dual-directional processes or a massive number of microscale feed-
back loops. For example, a variety of generic models are involved in disease simulation,
including the random network, exponential random graph model, small-world network,
lattice model, scale-free network, and pair-wise approximation model (Keeling and Eames
2005). These models have been primarily designed to support processes in a single direc-
tion. In contrast, the classic Ising models used to describe spin systems in physics can
support the representation of a large number of microscale feedback loops. Atoms on
a lattice may spin in an opposite direction to that of nearby atoms to reach a dynamic
equilibrium at the system level (Brush 1967). However, because all atoms are at ﬁxed
locations and interact only with one set of atoms nearby, these models are not appropriate
for modeling multiple sets of interactions performed by mobile individuals in an urban
environment.

This article proposes a simulation model to couple the transmission of inﬂuenza and the
adoption of preventive behavior into a massive number of interactive dual-diffusion pro-
cesses. This study has several objectives. The ﬁrst is to establish a conceptual framework to
identify the model components (Section 2). The second is to formulate these components
into a design (Section 3). The third is to simulate a seasonal inﬂuenza epidemic carried
out in the urbanized area of Buffalo, New York, USA, with nearly 1 million individuals
(Sections 4 and 5).

2. Conceptual model and principal assumptions

2.1. Conceptual model
The principles behind the dual-diffusion model are illustrated in Figure 1. Two compet-
ing diffusion processes, the diffusion of inﬂuenza and the diffusion of preventive behavior,
propagate through a simpliﬁed contact network of four individuals. The ﬁrst individual has
contact with the second and third individuals, both of whom have contact with the fourth
individual. Inﬂuenza is transmitted through the network by close physical contact between
individuals. If the ﬁrst individual is initially infected, the inﬂuenza virus can be transmit-
ted to the second and third individuals and subsequently to the fourth (black arrows in
Figure 1). In the meantime, the adoption of preventive behavior also propagates through
the contact network by interpersonal inﬂuences (gray arrows) that tend to deter the propa-
gation of inﬂuenza. The adoption of preventive behavior is due to two types of pressures.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1373

Individual no. 1

Individual no. 2

Contact
network

Diffusion of
influenza

Diffusion of
preventive
behavior

Individual no. 3

Individual no. 4

Figure 1. A schematic representation of the dual-diffusion process in an inﬂuenza epidemic.
Initially, individual no. 1 carries the inﬂuenza virus (in black), whereas the other three individuals
are healthy (in gray).

The ﬁrst is the pressure of perceived risk. For example, the second and third individuals, as
the contacts of the ﬁrst infectious individual, may voluntarily adopt preventive behavior to
protect themselves because of perceived infection risk. The second is the pressure of a per-
ceived social standard. The fourth individual, for instance, may adopt preventive behavior,
because he/she perceives the adoption of preventive behavior by the second and third indi-
viduals as a social standard, independent of their health status. This is the widely known
‘social learning process’ (Rosenstock et al. 1988). The dual processes interact simulta-
neously and collectively contribute to the spatial and temporal patterns of an inﬂuenza
epidemic.

2.2. Principal assumptions
The conceptual model suggests four components to represent an inﬂuenza epidemic: the
contact network, the diffusion of inﬂuenza, the diffusion of preventive behavior, and the
interaction between the two diffusion processes. Corresponding to these components, a
number of assumptions are put forward for modeling purposes. First, both inﬂuenza and
individual preventive behavior diffuse through a contact network. Second, the diffusion of
inﬂuenza between individuals depends on the likelihood of them acquiring an infection and
the natural history of the disease. Third, the adoption of preventive behavior by individuals
is based on their own characteristics and their interpersonal inﬂuences. Fourth, the risk of
being infected by inﬂuenza may motivate individuals to adopt preventive behavior, which
in turn reduces the likelihood of subsequent infections. Of the four assumptions, the ﬁrst
provides the basis for both the diffusion processes, whereas the second and third consider
the two diffusion processes, respectively. The last assumption is the key to the interac-
tive dual process, that is, the interactions between the two diffusion processes. These four
assumptions lay the foundation for the following formulation.

3. Model formulations
3.1. Contact network

Corresponding to the ﬁrst assumption, an urban contact network is modeled as a basis for
the dual-diffusion process. A conceptual model proposed by Bian (2004) and the agent-
based modeling approach are used to represent unique individuals, the individualized

1374

L. Mao and L. Bian

contacts among them, and how these contacts change with time and location. Each individ-
ual is represented as a discrete agent, and they are linked with one another through daily
contacts. The individualized contacts are assumed to take place during three time periods
of a day at four types of locations. The three time periods include daytime, pastime, and
night-time, whereas the four types of locations refer to homes, workplaces, service places,
and neighbor households. Individuals travel between the three time periods and between
the four corresponding types of locations to undertake their daily activities, have contact
with different groups of individuals, and expose themselves to inﬂuenza infection.

Under this framework, individuals have two types of contacts: close contacts and
occasional contacts. The two types differ in the duration and closeness of the contact.
Speciﬁcally, close contacts happen at homes (with family members), workplaces (with
coworkers), and neighbor households (with friends). These contacts last for signiﬁcant
amounts of time. Occasional contacts happen at service places (with clerks and other
consumers), where an individual encounters only a limited number of individuals for a
short period of time. These spatio-temporally dependent contacts link all individuals into
a population-wide network.

3.2. Diffusion of inﬂuenza

The diffusion of inﬂuenza depends on the likelihood of infection and the natural history of
the disease. To formulate this diffusion, each modeled individual is assigned an attribute
of infection status and two actions that may change this attribute. At any given time, an
individual’s infection status is described as one of four infection status: susceptible, latent,
infectious, or recovered (Anderson and May 1992). This attribute indicates individuals’
susceptibility to the infection or the ability to infect others. The two actions are having con-
tact and being infected. The action of having contact identiﬁes those who have contact with
an infectious individual, whereas the action of being infected changes some of the identi-
ﬁed individuals’ infection status from susceptible to latent. Individuals in the latent status
may further progress to the infectious status, which enables them to transmit inﬂuenza to
their susceptible contacts. Eventually, the infectious individuals either die or recover from
inﬂuenza. In particular, the action of being infected is modeled as a probabilistic event, and
the probability of infection P is formulated as

P = Econtact × Iage

(1)

Here, Econtact is the effectiveness of a contact to transmit an infection, relevant to the close-
ness and duration of the contact. This research formulates the Econtact as a real number
between [0, 1]. I age is termed as an age-speciﬁc infection rate also denoted by a real num-
ber between [0, 1]. The parameters Econtact and I age are calibrated based on the observed
characteristics of inﬂuenza. Details of calibration are described in a later section. By spec-
ifying I age and Econtact, the probability P can be calculated and a Monte Carlo method is
used to randomize the infection probability of individuals.

3.3. Diffusion of preventive behavior
The diffusion of preventive behavior depends on an individual’s characteristics and two
types of interpersonal inﬂuences, the perceived infection risk and the perceived social
standard. The diffusion process is formulated by a threshold behavior model proposed
by Granovetter (1978). For adoption motivated by perceived infection risk, individuals

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1375

evaluate the proportion of inﬂuenza cases (individuals with symptoms) among their con-
tacts. Once the proportion of inﬂuenza cases reaches a threshold (hereinafter called the
threshold of infection risk), an individual will be convinced to adopt preventive behavior.
For adoption motivated by a perceived social standard, individuals evaluate the proportion
of adopters among their contacts, which is referred to as the pressure of social standard.
Once the pressure of social standard reaches a threshold (hereinafter called the threshold
of social standard), an individual will decide to adopt preventive behavior. The threshold is
the proportion of adopters in an individual’s contacts, which is necessary to convince the
individual to adopt preventive behavior (Valente 1995).

To formulate these two threshold effects, each modeled individual is associated with
three attributes and two actions. The three attributes involve an adoption status (an adopter
or not an adopter), the threshold of infection risk, and the threshold of social standard. The
two threshold attributes are determined by the personal characteristics of individuals. The
two actions are the individuals’ evaluation of infection risk and social standard, respec-
tively. These two actions reﬂect interpersonal inﬂuences between individuals, and either
action can determine whether an individual would adopt. The preventive behavior begins
with a small number of adopters and ﬁrst diffuses over the low-threshold individuals and
then the high-threshold individuals.

3.4.

Interactions between the two diffusion processes

The formulation of individualized inﬂuenza transmission and adoptive behavior establishes
a massive number of negative feedback loops at homes, workplaces, service places, and
neighbor households during the corresponding night-time, daytime, and pastime, respec-
tively. The transmission of inﬂuenza motivates individuals to take the evaluation actions to
assess their surrounding infection risk and social standard, whereas the subsequent adop-
tion of preventive behavior reduces the probability of infection P (Equation 1). These
microscale feedback loops are further combined into the spatio-temporally varying contact
network (Section 3.1) and collectively lead to the population-level interactions between the
two diffusion processes. In such a manner, an interactive dual-diffusion model is estab-
lished. The model is then implemented in a large urban population by specifying and
calibrating a number of parameters.

4. Model implementation, calibration, and evaluation

4.1. Simulating individuals and their contact network
The proposed dual-diffusion model is implemented in the urbanized area of Buffalo, New
York, USA, with a population of 985,001 (see Appendix A1 for details of the study area).
Each individual in the study area is implemented as a software agent. A complete list
of their attributes, associated values, and actions are shown in Table 1. Besides a unique
identiﬁer, each individual has ﬁve groups of attributes. First, network attributes include
the contacts and the effectiveness of these contacts for infection. The ‘contacts’ link an
individual with other individuals in the network, whereas the associated ‘effectiveness’
determines whether an infection may happen when individuals interact. Second, a num-
ber of demographic attributes, such as age group, gender, occupation, are used to simulate
the characteristics of individuals. Third, spatial temporal attributes include the ‘current
time’ and ‘current location’ of individuals, which vary as individuals take the ‘movement’
action. The assignment of time and location to individuals is described in the next para-
graph. Fourth, group of attributes is related to the inﬂuenza infection. The ‘infection time’

1376

L. Mao and L. Bian

Table 1. Attributes, values, and actions of an individual as a software agent

Descriptions

Values

Attributes

ID

Personal identiﬁcation

Contacts

A list of IDs of contacts

Effectiveness of contacts

Close contact or occasional

Real number between

Demographics

Age group, gender, occupation,

Integer number

between 1 and
985,001
Integer number

between 1 and
985,001

0 and 1

Integer

Integer
(x, y) coordinates

Integer

Integer
0–100%

0–100%

1 or 0
Integer

contact

etc.

Daytime, pastime, or night-time
Home, workplace, service place,

or other household

Susceptible, latent, infectious,

recovered

Day of receiving infection
The risk of infection necessary

for adoption

The pressure of adoption
necessary for adoption
An adopter or not an adopter
Day of adoption

Change (x, y) coordinates over time
Trace individuals who have contact with an infectious

individual

Being infected
Evaluation of infection

Simulate inﬂuenza transmission with the Monte Carlo method
Calculate the proportion of inﬂuenza cases in the contacts

Reduction of infection

Adjust the infection rate of inﬂuenza after adoption

Calculate the proportion of adopters in the contacts

Current time
Current location

Infection status

Infection time
Threshold of infection

risk

Threshold of social

standard

Adoption status
Adoption time

Actions

Movement
Having contact

Evaluation of social

standard

risk

rate

labels the starting time of inﬂuenza development and is used to calculate the progress of
the ‘infection status’ of an individual. Lastly, group of attributes is concerned with the
adoption of preventive behavior. Among them, the two threshold attributes are determined
by characteristics of individuals, and the value assignment is described later. The ‘adoption
status’ indicates whether individuals have adopted preventive behavior and whether they
can inﬂuence other individuals’ behavior. The ‘adoption time’ records the time of adoption
for an individual and is used for subsequent analysis on diffusion dynamics.

The contact network is realized by assigning values to the demographic and network
attributes of individuals using algorithms developed by Bian et al. (2008) and Wheaton
et al. (2009). The value assignment involves a large amount of geo-referenced data, includ-
ing census data, business data, land parcel data, and results of a household travel survey.
Statistical distributions derived from these datasets, such as distributions of family size,
workplace size, and household daily trips, are used to ensure the validity of assignments.
The completion of assignments forms three populations, including a night-time population
at homes, a daytime population at workplaces, and a pastime population at service places

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1377

or neighbor households. These three populations represent the same set of individuals at
different locations and time periods of a day. Every individual has contact with a number
of other individuals at a same time period and location. This results in an average of 16.9
daily contacts for an individual, close to the observed value of 16.8 by Edmunds (1997)
and Fu (2005).

4.2. Simulating diffusion of inﬂuenza
The discretized individuals and their contact network allow for the modeling of inﬂuenza
transmission as a stochastic process. A number of inﬂuenza parameters are calibrated and
are subsequently fed into the model for the stochastic simulation.

First, the latent, incubation, and infectious periods are set according to the established
literature (Table 2). Second, the two parameters in Equation (1), the age-speciﬁc infection
rate I age and the effectiveness of a contact Econtact, are calibrated to ensure that the derived
values of R0 (basic productive number) are consistent with observed R0 in previous epi-
demics. The R0 indicates the number of individuals who are directly infected by the ﬁrst
infectious individual (Diekmann et al. 1990). Empirically, the observed R0 of inﬂuenza
ranges from 0.9 to 2.1 with a mean value of 1.3 (Mills et al. 2004, Ferguson et al. 2005,
Chowell et al. 2007). The values of I age and Econtact are adjusted to ﬁt the modeled R0
within this observed range. For seasonal inﬂuenza, I age for children (younger than 6 years),
youth and adults (between 6 and 64 years), and seniors (older than 64 years) are set to 0.1,
0.08, and 0.09, respectively. Meanwhile, the effectiveness of occasional contacts for infec-
tion Eocassional_contact is calibrated to 0.2, given that the value of close contacts Eclose_contact is
predeﬁned as 1. The product of I age and Econtact is the probability of infection through one
contact and is subsequently used for simulating inﬂuenza transmission.

To further approximate reality, the model considers a background immunity of the pop-
ulation and the withdrawal-to-home behavior of individuals when developing inﬂuenza
symptoms. The background immunity is set by immunizing 62.7% of seniors, 15.6%
of adults, and 17.9% of children, according to reported national immunization coverage
(Euler et al. 2005, Molinari et al. 2007). This results in 24% of the overall population
being immunized. To simulate the withdrawal-to-home behavior, the model assumes that
50% of infectious individuals develop symptoms, whereas the remaining 50% of infectious
individuals remain asymptomatic, following the assumption by Ferguson et al. (2005) and a
recent report by Miller et al. (2010). All children with symptoms are assumed to withdraw

Table 2. Key parameter settings for inﬂuenza diffusion

Values

Literature

2 days
3 days

Children: 7 days Youth and

adults: 4 days Senior: 4 days

1.2–1.3

Heymann (2004)
Heymann (2004); Halloran

et al. (2008)

Heymann (2004); CDC

(2008)

Mills et al. (2004); Chowell

et al. (2007)

Calibrated based on R0

Infection rates

Children: 0.1 Youth and adults:

0.08 Senior: 0.09

Eclose_contact: 1 Eocassional_contact: 0.2

Calibrated based on R0

Parameters

Latent period
Incubation period

Infectious period

R0

Effectiveness of

contacts

1378

L. Mao and L. Bian

to home and are cared for by parents. An estimated 33% of symptomatic adults would
withdraw to home based on a health behavior survey (Metzger et al. 2004), whereas all
symptomatic seniors are assumed to withdraw according to survey statistics of elder people
(Stoller et al. 1993).

4.3. Coupling diffusion of inﬂuenza and preventive behavior

Another set of parameters is speciﬁed to simulate the diffusion of preventive behavior and
couple it with the diffusion of inﬂuenza disease. These parameters include the effects of
preventive behavior on infection and the two adoption thresholds.

To specify the effects of preventive behavior on inﬂuenza infection, the use of antivi-
ral drugs is taken as a typical behavior among others, because their effects are already
known from many clinical studies. Both symptomatic and susceptible individuals may take
antiviral drugs, which in turn limits their ability to transmit inﬂuenza virus to others. For
symptomatic individuals, the probability of taking antiviral drugs is set to be 75% based on
health surveys by Stoller et al. (1993) and McIsaac et al. (1998). Their consequent prob-
ability of infecting others is set to be reduced by 40% (Longini et al. 2004). Susceptible
individuals may also take antiviral drugs due to the perceived infection risk or social stan-
dard (discussed in the next paragraph). If they use antiviral drugs, the probability of being
infected is set to be reduced by 70% (Hayden 2001).

To estimate the threshold of infection risk and that of social standard, a health behav-
ior survey was conducted among adult residents in the study area. An online survey and a
postal mail survey were carried out to recruit participants. An electronic questionnaire was
posted on a professional survey website for 1 month, while hard copies of questionnaire
were simultaneously mailed to 500 residents (50 zip code areas × 10 residents per area).
Besides age group and gender, survey participants were invited to answer two questions:
(1) ‘Suppose you have 10 close contacts, including household members, colleagues, and
close friends, when how many of them GET INFLUENZA may you consider using antivi-
ral drugs?’ and (2) ‘Suppose you have 10 close contacts, including household members,
colleagues and close friends, when how many of them start to USE ANTIVIRAL DRUGS
may you consider using antiviral drugs yourself?’. The ﬁrst question is designed to estimate
the threshold of infection risk, whereas the second question is for the threshold of social
standard. A total of 381 respondents participated in the survey, including 262 respondents
in the online survey (out of 273 visitors, a 96% response rate) and 119 in the postal mail
survey (out of 500 questionnaires, a 24% response rate).

The survey results indicated that about 40–50% of respondents would not use antiviral
drugs unless they develop inﬂuenza symptoms, even when all their close contacts develop
symptoms (an extremely high threshold of infection risk). Most of the remaining respon-
dents may take antiviral drugs at the threshold of infection risk between 20 and 50%, that
is, when 20–50% of their contacts develop inﬂuenza symptoms. Similarly for the thresh-
old of social standard, about half of the respondents were not willing to adopt unless there
was an illness, indicating an extremely high threshold. For the rest of respondents, most
of them may be convinced to adopt preventive behavior when 10–60% of their contacts
have done so, that is, a threshold of social standard between 10 and 60%. Based on these
two statistical distributions, a Monte Carlo method is used to assign threshold values to all
adults and seniors. Children are assumed to adopt following their householders’ behavior,
because they are often cared for by parents.

Upon the completion of parameter setting and estimation, the dual-diffusion model is
then programmed for the computer simulation. The dual-diffusion process is simulated

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1379

over 150 days, covering a general inﬂuenza season from December to April. At the begin-
ning of simulation, all individuals are put into the susceptible status and no individuals
take antiviral drugs for prevention. To initialize the dual diffusion, ﬁve infectious indi-
viduals were introduced into the study area at the ﬁrst day. Both the diffusion processes
were simulated concurrently for the same time period of a day and at the same location.
The simulation took a tri-daily time step and was performed for 100 realizations. In each
realization, the ﬁrst ﬁve infectious individuals, their contacts, and the infections of these
contacts were randomized.

4.4. Model evaluation

To evaluate the dual-diffusion model, weekly reports of laboratory-conﬁrmed specimens
in 2004–2005 were obtained from the New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH
2005). The 2004–2005 inﬂuenza season was chosen because the reports indicated an
inﬂuenza epidemic taking place in the study area at that time. These data served as a bench-
mark to evaluate the model results. An inﬂuenza-only model commonly seen in the current
literature was also implemented for comparison purposes. This inﬂuenza-only model had
the same parameter settings as the dual-diffusion model, except that individual preventive
behavior was not considered. The simulation results from both the dual-diffusion model
and the inﬂuenza-only model were compared with the laboratory-conﬁrmed data as shown
in Figure 2. To be comparable, the laboratory-conﬁrmed data and the simulation results
from the two models were standardized to a weekly infection rate (the y-axis), that is, the
percent of weekly infections to the total number of infections during the season.

The gray bars in Figure 2 show that the number of laboratory-conﬁrmed cases started
to rise in January 2005, peaked in the middle of February, and then declined until the end of
April. Compared to the inﬂuenza-only model, the dual-diffusion model ﬁts the laboratory-
conﬁrmed data better, because it produces a curve with a lower and later peak and a
slower decline. The curve from the inﬂuenza-only model peaks about 1 week earlier than
the laboratory-conﬁrmed data and also declines more quickly. The dual-diffusion model,

Figure 2. Comparison of simulation results to laboratory-conﬁrmed inﬂuenza data by week during
2004–5. The y-axis indicates the percentage of weekly infections in total infections of the season.

1380

L. Mao and L. Bian

Figure 3. Variations of network structures during the course of the dual-diffusion and inﬂuenza-only
diffusion, respectively.

therefore, provides a closer representation of an inﬂuenza epidemic than the inﬂuenza-
only model. The comparison analysis also implies that current inﬂuenza-only models may
overestimate the impacts of inﬂuenza epidemics because human preventive behavior is not
taken into account.

A network analysis is carried out to examine how the structure of contact network
evolves during the course of dual diffusion and inﬂuenza-only diffusion, respectively. The
network structure is measured by the average number of daily contacts of an individual,
implying how efﬁciently the network diffuses the disease (Albert et al. 2000). Figure 3
indicates that the average number of daily contacts gradually declines over time. After
individuals develop immunity or adopt preventive behavior, they can no longer transmit
inﬂuenza and are removed from the network. The number of daily contacts decreases
faster in the dual-diffusion model than the inﬂuenza-only diffusion model. This is prob-
ably because, in addition to the recovered individuals, the voluntary adoption of preventive
behavior removes more individuals from the network, thus reducing the number of possi-
ble channels for inﬂuenza diffusion. The comparison of network changes also explains why
the dual-diffusion model produced a lower and later peak. It is worth mentioning that the
manner in which inﬂuenza or preventive behavior diffuses may vary in contact networks of
different structures, for example, the small-world and scale-free networks. The sensitivity
of dual-diffusion process to different networks warrants further investigation.

5. Spatial-temporal dynamics of dual-diffusion
5.1. Methods for analyzing dynamics

The model simulation produces a large number of point events (infections or adoptions)
that occur during the three time periods in a day and four types of locations. For ease of
description, the simulation results are aggregated from the three daily time periods into

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1381

Figure 4. Simulated temporal dynamics of the dual-diffusion process. The y-axis on the left shows
the daily new cases, whereas the y-axis on the right indicates the daily new adopters.

a full day and from point locations into cells, with each cell showing the kernel density
of point events. The purpose of aggregation is to provide clear spatial-temporal patterns
for analysis. Otherwise, the results are difﬁcult to interpret due to a very large number of
points. The temporal dynamics of dual-diffusion are described by an epidemic curve and an
adoption curve (Figure 4). The epidemic curve depicts the number of daily new infection
cases during the course of the epidemic. Similarly, the adoption curve describes the number
of daily new adopters during the behavioral diffusion process.

The spatial dynamics of dual-diffusion are displayed as a series of intensity maps for
every 30 days during the total 150-day simulation. For spatial dispersion of inﬂuenza, the
simulated point events of infections are aggregated into cells that indicate the intensity of
infections. A high-intensity value indicates that a large number of infections occur at the
corresponding cell during that time interval. Kernel density estimation is used to create the
map series of inﬂuenza diffusion. The cell size is set to 50 × 50 m because it approximates
the average extent of a land parcel in the study area. Similar to the inﬂuenza diffusion,
the intensity maps of adoption are created to display the spatial dispersion of individual
preventive behavior. The time interval and cell size used for generating adoption intensity
maps are the same as those for infection intensity maps. Figure 5 displays the diffusion of
inﬂuenza on the left and the diffusion of preventive behavior on the right. The intensity of
infections and adoptions at each cell location is categorized into six levels, expressed as the
number of infections or adoptions per km2: rare (0–5), extremely low (5–10), low (10–50),
moderate (50–100), high (100–200), and extremely high (200–500).

5.2. Spatial-temporal dynamics of dual-diffusion
During the simulated epidemic (Figure 4), 7.49% of the population developed inﬂuenza
symptoms, which is a reasonable estimation given that the observed rates are between 5
and 20% (Cox and Subbarao 2000). Meanwhile, about 40% of the population adopted
the preventive behavior during the course of the epidemic. Although the two curves have

1382

L. Mao and L. Bian

different magnitudes, they follow a quite similar trend over time. Both begin with a slow
increase until Day 40 and then rise dramatically before peaking around Day 78. After
the peak, both curves decline quickly at a similar rate until the end of the epidemic. The
resultant similarity in temporal trends is consistent with other empirical studies that have
reported a 90% correlation between the number of diagnosed inﬂuenza cases and antiviral
drug sales (Magruder 2003, Das et al. 2005). The number of diagnosed cases reﬂects the
diffusion of inﬂuenza, whereas the antiviral drug sales reﬂect the diffusion of preventive
behavior, as the use of antiviral drugs is treated as a typical preventive behavior in this
research. The consistency between the simulated and observed trends further demonstrated
the validity of the dual-diffusion model.

In addition to the temporal synchrony, the two coupled diffusion processes also evolved
in a similar spatial pattern. For the ease of description, the study area was divided into
three zones, including a central business district (CBD), a transition zone and suburbs
(see Appendix A1 for details). During the ﬁrst 30 days of the epidemic (Figure 5a), the
two diffusion processes start around the same locations in the transition zone and quickly
expand over the entire study area during the second 30 days (Figure 5b). In the third 30-day
period (Figure 5c), both diffusion processes reach their peak, and the highest number of
infections and adoptions simultaneously dominate the CBD. In the fourth 30-day period
(Figure 5d), the epidemic starts to decline and so does the adoption of preventive behavior.
In the ﬁnal 30 days (Days 121–150), these two diffusion processes approach their end and
only a small area in the CBD retains a low level of infections and adoptions (Figure 5e). It
is not surprising that where the high level of infections occurs, the adoption of preventive
behavior is also intensiﬁed. This is because the inﬂuenza transmission and the interpersonal
inﬂuences for adoption often happen at the same locations, such as homes and workplaces.
An individual being infected at home, for instance, would motivate other family members
to immediately adopt preventive behavior to protect themselves.

6. Conclusions and implications

This article presents an innovative dual-diffusion model and discusses its conceptual frame-
work, formulation, and implementation in an urbanized area with a large number of
individuals. The conceptual framework integrates two opposing processes, the diffusion
of inﬂuenza and the diffusion of preventive behavior, into a contact network. The model
design integrates approaches from agent-based modeling, network analysis, and behavioral
studies to support the dual-diffusion modeling. The model results reasonably replicate the
observed trends of inﬂuenza infection and antiviral drug use, and offer a close represen-
tation of the laboratory-conﬁrmed data as well. The spatial-temporal synchrony between
the dual-diffusion implies a possibility of predicting one based on the information of the
other. This possibility has been suggested in a number of empirical studies (Butler 2008),
but this research is the ﬁrst attempt to demonstrate it from a modeling perspective and in a
spatially explicit manner as well.

Besides its implications in devising public health policies, this research also con-
tributes to system modeling, network analysis, and GIScience. First, this research advances
the approaches to modeling complex systems, particularly those with a massive num-
ber of feedback loops. These systems widely exist in physical and human environments,
and the proposed dual-diffusion model should have broader applications than evaluating
infectious disease patterns. Second, previous network studies have been primarily focused
on processes in a single direction, whereas other interrelated processes are often simpliﬁed
or overlooked. This research is one of the ﬁrst attempts to model competing processes in

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1383

Figure 5 a–e. Spatial dispersion of dual-diffusion over 150 days with a 30-day interval. The infec-
tion and adoption intensity at each cell location is the average over 100 model realizations. (a) days
1–30; (b) days 31–60; (c) days 61–90; (d) days 91–120; and (e) days 121–150.

a network structure. The proposed model provides a promising methodology for studying
complex network systems.

Lastly, data-intensive geospatial computing has been seen as a new direction for
GIScience and Geo-computation. This research employs a large volume of geospatial data
and heavy computing power to deal with massive spatial interactions in urban systems. The
good match between the simulated model results and the reported data demonstrates the
remarkable power of data-intensive computing and its profound effects in future GIScience
research.

1384

L. Mao and L. Bian

Figure 5.

(Continued).

Acknowledgements
The authors thank three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions. This
research was supported in part by the Mark Diamond Research Fund and the Hugh Calkins Applied
GIS Award from the University at Buffalo.

References
Albert, R., Jeong, H., and Barabasi, A.L., 2000. Error and attack tolerance of complex networks.

Anderson, R.M. and May, R.M., 1992. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control. New

Nature, 406 (6794), 378–382.

York: Oxford University Press.

Baron, G., De Wals, P., and Milord, F., 2001. Vaccination practices of Quebec family physicians.
Inﬂuenza vaccination status and professional practices for inﬂuenza vaccination. Canadian
Family Physician, 47 (11), 2261–2266.

Bian, L., 2004. A conceptual framework for an individual-based spatially explicit epidemiological

model. Environment and Planning B, 31 (3), 381–395.

Bian, L., et al., 2008. Explicit Spatial-Temporal Simulation of a Rare Disease. Proceedings of the
11th Joint Conference on Information Sciences, Shenzhen. China: Atlantis Press. Available
online at http://www.atlantis-press.com/php/download_paper.php?id=1678 (accessed 10 June
2010).

Brown, J. and Reingen, P., 1987. Social ties and word-of-mouth referral behavior. Journal of

Consumer Research, 14 (3), 350–362.

Brush, S., 1967. History of the Lenz-Ising model. Reviews of Modern Physics, 39 (4), 883–893.
Butler, D., 2008. Web data predict ﬂu. Nature, 456 (7220), 287–288.
CDC, 2008. Preventing Seasonal Flu [online]. Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Available

from: http://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/protect/preventing.htm [Access Date 24 March 2009].

Chowell, G., Miller, M.A., and Viboud, C., 2007. Seasonal inﬂuenza in the United States, France, and
Australia: transmission and prospects for control. Epidemiology and Infection, 136 (6), 852–864.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1385

Coburn, B.J., Wagner, B.G., and Blower, S., 2009. Modeling inﬂuenza epidemics and pandemics:

insights into the future of swine ﬂu (H1N1). BMC Medicine, 7 (30), 1–8.

Cox, N.J., and Subbarao, K., 2000. Global Epidemiology of Inﬂuenza: Past and Present. Annual

Reviews in Medicine, 51 (1), 407–421.

Das, D., et al., 2005. Monitoring over-the-counter medication sales for early detection of disease

outbreaks – New York City. Morbility and Mortality Weekly Report, 54 (Suppl), 41–46.

Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J.A.P., and Metz, J.A.J., 1990. On the deﬁnition and the computation of
the basic reproduction ratio R0 in models for infectious diseases in heterogeneous populations.
Journal of Mathematical Biology, 28 (4), 365–382.

Dutta, A., 2008. The Effectiveness of Policies to Control a Human Inﬂuenza Pandemic: A Literature
Review. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4524. Social Science Research
Network.

Edmunds, W.J., 1997. Who mixes with whom? A method to determine the contact patterns of adults
that may lead to the spread of airborne infections. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 264 (1384), 949–957.

Euler, G.L., et al., 2005. Estimated inﬂuenza vaccination coverage among adults and children-United
States, September 1, 2004–January 31, 2005. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 54 (12),
304–307.

Ferguson, N.M., et al., 2005. Strategies for containing an emerging inﬂuenza pandemic in Southeast

Asia. Nature, 437 (7056), 209–214.

Fu, Y., 2005. Measuring personal networks with daily contacts: a single-item survey question and the

contact diary. Social Networks, 27 (3), 169–186.

Funk, S., et al., 2009. The spread of awareness and its impact on epidemic outbreaks. Proceedings

of the National Academy of Sciences, 106 (16), 6872–6877.

Germann, T.C., et al., 2006. Mitigation strategies for pandemic inﬂuenza in the United States.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103 (15), 5935–5940.

Gottlieb, B., 1985. Social networks and social support: An overview of research, practice, and policy

implications. Health Education & Behavior, 12 (1), 5–22.

Granovetter, M., 1978. Threshold models of collective behavior. American journal of sociology, 83

(6), 1420–1443.

Halloran, M.E., et al., 2008. Modeling targeted layered containment of an inﬂuenza pandemic in the

United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105 (12), 4639–4644.

Hayden, F.G., 2001. Perspectives on antiviral use during pandemic inﬂuenza. Philosophical

Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, 356 (1416), 1877–1884.

Heymann, D.L., 2004. Control of Communicable Diseases Manual, 18th ed. Washington, DC:

American Public Health Association.

Keeling, M.J., and Eames, K.T.D., 2005. Networks and epidemic models. Journal of the Royal Society

Interface, 2 (4), 295–307.

New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

Knox, P.L., and Marston, S.A., 2004. Places and Regions in Global Context: Human Geography.

Langlie, J.K., 1977. Social networks, health beliefs, and preventive health behavior. Journal of Health

and Social Behavior, 18 (3), 244–260.

Lankford, M.G., et al., 2003. Inﬂuence of Role Models and Hospital Design on Hand Hygiene of

Health-care Workers. Emerging infectious diseases, 9 (2), 217–223.

Longini, I.M., et al., 2004. Containing pandemic inﬂuenza with antiviral agents. American Journal

of Epidemiology, 159 (7), 623–633.

Magruder, S.F., 2003. Evaluation of over-the-counter pharmaceutical sales as a possible early

warning indicator of human disease. Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, 24, 349–353.

McIsaac, W.J., Levine, N., and Goel, V., 1998. Visits by adults to family physicians for the common

cold. Journal of Family Practice, 47 (5), 366–369.

Metzger, K.B., et al., 2004. How many illnesses does one emergency department visit represent?
Using a population-based telephone survey to estimate the syndromic multiplier. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 53 (Suppl), 106–111.

Miller, E., et al., 2010. Incidence of 2009 pandemic inﬂuenza A H1N1 infection in England: a cross-

sectional serological study. The Lancet, 375 (9720), 1100–1108.

Mills, C.E., Robins, J.M., and Lipsitch, M., 2004. Transmissibility of 1918 pandemic inﬂuenza.

Nature, 432 (7019), 904–906.

Molinari, N.A.M., et al., 2007. The annual impact of seasonal inﬂuenza in the US: measuring disease

burden and costs. Vaccine, 25 (27), 5086–5096.

1386

L. Mao and L. Bian

NYSDOH, 2005. 2004–2005 Inﬂuenza Season Statewide Summary Report

[online]. New
York State Department of Health. Available from: http://www.health.state.ny.us/diseases/
communicable/inﬂuenza/surveillance/ [Access Date 1 June 2009].

Pressman, S., et al., 2005. Loneliness, social network size, and immune response to inﬂuenza

vaccination in college freshmen. Health Psychology, 24 (3), 297–306.

ReferenceUSA, 2009. U.S. Business Databases [online]. Omaha, NE: ReferenceUSA Inc.
Available from: http://www.referenceusa.com/Static/Home#businessDatabases [Access Date
15 February 2008].

Rosenstock, I.M., Strecher, V.J., and Becker, M.H., 1988. Social learning theory and the health belief

model. Health Education & Behavior, 15 (2), 175–183.

Sanders, G.S., and Suls, J., 1982. Social support, interpersonal relations, and health: Beneﬁts and
liabilities. Social psychology of health and illness. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
255–277.

Stoller, E.P., Forster, L.E., and Portugal, S., 1993. Self-care responses to symptoms by older people.

A health diary study of illness behavior. Medical Care, 31 (1), 24–42.

Thompson, W.W., et al., 2004. Inﬂuenza-associated hospitalizations in the United States. JAMA, 292

(11), 1333–1340.

USCensus, 2000. Census 2000 Data Releases [online]. http://www.census.gov/main/www/

cen2000.html [Access Date 27 February 2008].

Valente, T.W., 1995. Network Models of the Diffusion of Innovations. Cresskill: Hampton Press.
Wheaton, W.D., et al., 2009. Synthesized population databases: a US geospatial database for agent-
based models. Methods report RTI Press, 2009 (10), 905. Available from: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2875687/ [Access Date 10 August 2010].

Zimmerman, R., et al., 2003. What affects inﬂuenza vaccination rates among older patients? An
analysis from inner-city, suburban, rural, and Veterans Affairs practices. The American journal
of medicine, 114 (1), 31–38.

Appendix A1: Study area

Buffalo is the second largest urbanized area in New York State, United States, and is
surrounded by Lake Erie, Lake Ontario and rural areas (Figure A1-a). According to the
US Census taken in 2000, the estimated population is 985,001 individuals who are dis-
tributed in 400,870 households. Published business databases (by the ReferenceUSA Inc.
2009) indicate that 36,839 businesses are located in the study area (Figure A1-b), includ-
ing ofﬁces, factories, schools, service places, health care facilities, and so on. Individuals
travel between homes and business locations through a road system (Figure A1-b), under-
take their daily activities, and expose themselves to inﬂuenza viruses. The datasets of
individuals, and households, and business locations are major model inputs.

For ease of description, the study area is divided into three zones: a CBD, a transition
zone, and suburbs (Knox and Marston 2004). As shown in Figure A1-a, the CBD covers
downtown areas in the city of Buffalo and the city of Niagara Falls and is characterized
by signiﬁcantly higher densities of residents and businesses than the other two zones. The
transition zone is adjacent to the CBD and has the second highest densities of residents and
businesses. The rest of the urbanized area are suburbs with the largest numbers of residents
and businesses, but their densities are the lowest.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science

1387

Figure A1.
Study area and data: (a) The urbanized area of Buffalo (the inset map), the census
block groups, and its three-in-one spatial structure. (b) Spatial distribution of businesses locations
and transportation system

1388

L. Mao and L. Bian

Figure A1.

(Continued).

Copyright of International Journal of Geographical Information Science is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd

and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright

holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

