G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

                                         CYBERCARTOGRAPHY, TRANSITIONAL 
                    JUSTICE AND THE RESIDENTIAL
                    SCHOOLS LEGACY

Stephanie Pyne and D.R. Fraser Taylor
Geomatics and Cartographic Research Centre, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

The increased emphasis on ethics that emerged in the 1960s has given rise to a decolonizing trend in
research, policy and education that both acknowledges and aims to redress the injustices of colonization.
The Residential Schools Legacy provides a good example of assimilative attitudes underlying British and
later-Canadian government colonization policies, and of attempts to reform these attitudes. In cartography,
maps have a history of aiding colonizers with a thirst for power over land, resources, people and rights.
Reflecting the trend toward decolonization, many contemporary cartographers have adopted new attitudes,
and are seeking instead to understand and use cartography’s power to tackle complex social and economic
challenges.  The  Cybercartographic  Atlas  Framework  provides  a  useful  context  for  the  theoretical  and
applied  development  of  decolonizing  cartographic  projects,  including  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas.  The
Residential Schools component of the Atlas provides an innovative tool for transitional justice with respect
to  the  intergenerational  effects  of  Residential  Schools.  This  paper  begins  to  explore  the  benefits  of  this 
Atlas component to Residential Schools reconciliation processes by appealing to 
[1999]
transitional justice-oriented approach to reckoning with past wrongs as an interpretative framework.

David Crocker’s

L’importance  grandissante  de  l’éthique  qui  a  connu  un  essor  dans  les  années  1960  a  mené  à  une 
tendance de décolonisation en matière de recherches, de politiques et d’éducation qui reconnaît et vise à
réparer les injustices de la colonisation. L’héritage des pensionnats indiens est un bon exemple des attitudes
d’assimilation  découlant  des  politiques  de  colonisation  des  gouvernements  britannique  et  ensuite 
canadien,  et  des  tentatives  ultérieures  du  gouvernement  de  réformer  ces  attitudes.  En  cartographie, 
à  travers  l’histoire,  les  cartes  sont  venues  en  aide  aux  colonisateurs  assoiffés  de  pouvoir  sur  les  terres, 
les  ressources,  les  peuples  et  les  droits.  Reflétant  la  tendance  vers  la  décolonisation,  plusieurs 
cartographes  contemporains  ont  adopté  de  nouvelles  attitudes  et  cherchent  plutôt  à  comprendre  et  à  se
servir  du  pouvoir  des  cartes  pour  s’attaquer  à  des  enjeux  sociaux  et  économiques  complexes.  Le  cadre 
d’atlas cybercartographique offre un contexte utile pour le développement théorique et appliqué des projets
cartographiques de décolonisation, incluant l’atlas du traité du lac Huron. La composante de l’atlas qui
traite des pensionnats indiens fournit un outil innovateur pour la justice transitionnelle en ce qui a trait 
aux effets intergénérationnels des pensionnats. Cet article constitue une première exploration des bienfaits
de  cette  composante  des  atlas  pour  les  démarches  de  réconciliation  avec  les  victimes  des  pensionnats 
indiens en utilisant l’approche de 
[1999] à titre de cadre de référence interprétatif. Cette
démarche est axée sur la justice transitionnelle pour rectifier les préjudices subis par le passé.

David Crocker

Stephanie Pyne
sapyne@gmail.com

info@lhta.ca

or

D. R. Fraser Taylor
fraser_taylor@
carleton.ca

1. Introduction: Reckoning
with Past Wrongs in the
Residential Schools Legacy

The burden of this experience has been on
your shoulders for far too long. The bur-
den is properly ours as a Government, and
as a country. There is no place in Canada
for  the  attitudes  that  inspired  the  Indian

Residential Schools system to ever prevail
again. You have been working on recover-
ing  from  this  experience  for  a  long  time
and in a very real sense, we are now join-
ing you on this journey. The Government

                                                                                              dx.doi.org/10.5623/cig2015-204

GEOMATICA  

Vol. 69, No. 2, 2015, pp. 173 to 187

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

apologizes  and  asks

of  Canada  sincerely 
the forgiveness of the 

Aboriginal peoples
of  this  country  for  failing  them  so  pro-
The  Right  Honourable  Stephen
foundly  (
Harper, Prime Minister of Canada

, 2011).

On June 11, 2008, the Prime Minister formally
apologized  to  the  Indian  Residential  Schools 
survivors  in  Canada.  This  apology,  the  Indian
Residential  School  Settlement  Agreement,  and  the
creation  of  the  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commis-
sion  to  investigate  the  Residential  Schools  Legacy,
are  all  part  of  a  broader  international  trend  toward
acknowledging and redressing past wrongs, especially
those inflicted on generations of Indigenous peoples
by  colonial  or  imperial  systems.  Many  hope  these
efforts will be satisfactory to those whose rights are
being  redressed,  and  that  they  will  contribute  to
healthy  and  fair  intercultural  relationships  in  the
future. In referring to the survivors’ experience under
colonial rule as a “burden,” the prime minister’s apol-
ogy acknowledges Canada’s “failure” to contribute to
positive experiences in “Aboriginal peoples;” and the
desire  and  intention  to  change  the  attitudes  that
inspired  such  institutions  as  the  Indian  Residential
Schools system.

The  Residential  Schools  Legacy  provides  a
strong example of assimilative attitudes underlying
British  and  later-Canadian  government  colon-
ization  policies.  The  Truth  and  Reconciliation
Commission’s  website  provides  an  initial  glimpse
into the 139 government-funded, church-run schools,
recognized  in  the  Indian  Residential  Schools
Settlement  Agreement  that  operated  between
roughly 1870 and 1996; although the total number
of  similar  institutions  is  greater  and  information
concerning  opening  and  closing  dates  for  such
schools often varies. According to the Commission,
more than 150 000 First Nations, Métis, and Inuit
children were forcibly taken to residential schools,
and denied such things as their right to speak their
language,  practice  their  culture  and  communicate
with  their  brothers  and  sisters  while  at  school. 
At  the  last  count,  a  mere  80  000  former  students
were  currently  living,  a  significant  number  of
whom  reported  being  victims  of  physical  and/or
sexual abuse and several generations of survivors’
descendants  have  been  plagued  with  the  negative
intergenerational effects of their residential schools
http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcin
experiences  [see 
stitution/index.php?p=4

for more information].

The  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  is
pre-dated  by  the  1996  Royal  Commission  on 
Aboriginal  Peoples,  which  acknowledges  the  pre-
Confederation legacy of the Canadian government’s

assimilative policies respecting Indigenous peoples
in  Canada  and  extending  in  significant  ways  to 
education:

It was a policy designed to move communities,
and  eventually  all  Aboriginal  peoples,  from
their  helpless  ‘savage’  state  to  one  of  self-
reliant ‘civilization’ and thus to make in Canada
but  one  community—a  non-Aboriginal,
Christian  one  […]  Of  all  the  steps  taken  to
achieve  that  goal,  none  was  more  obviously 
a  creature  of  Canada’s  paternalism  toward
Aboriginal  people,  its  civilizing  strategy 
and  its  stern  assimilative  determination  than 
Canada,  Royal  Commission  on
education”  [
Aboriginal Peoples

1997, chapter 10]. 

Approaching  the  wind-up  of  the  Truth  and
Reconciliation  Commission’s  five-year  mandate,
James  Anaya, 
the  United  Nations’  Special
Rapporteur  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples,
intimated the need for continued effort in the area
of  righting  past  wrongs  with  respect  to  the
Residential  Schools  and  their  intergenerational
effects:

A  particularly  distressing  part  of  the  history
of human rights violations was the residential
school  era  […]  during  which  indigenous 
children  were  forced  from  their  homes  into
institutions, the explicit purpose of which was
to destroy their family and community bonds,
their  languages,  their  cultures  and  even  their
names.  Thousands  of  indigenous  children  did
not  survive  the  experience  and  some  of  them
are buried in unidentified graves. Generations
of those who survived, grew up estranged from
their  cultures  and  languages,  with  debilitating
effects on the maintenance of their indigenous
identity.  That  estrangement  was  heightened
during  the  “sixties  scoop,”  when  indigenous
children  were  fostered  and  adopted  into  non-
aboriginal  homes,  including  outside  Canada.
The  residential  school  period  continues  to 
cast  a  long  shadow  of  despair  on  indigenous
communities,  and  many  of  the  dire  social 
and  economic  problems  faced  by  aboriginal
Anaya
peoples  are  linked  to  that  experience  [
2014, 4–5].

The call for continued reconciliation efforts to
redress the effects noted by the Royal Commission
on Aboriginal  Peoples,  the  Truth  and  Reconcilia-
tion  Commission  of  Canada  and  the  UN  Special
Rapporteur  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples,
does  not  discount  the  education  and  outreach
efforts  of  countless  survivors  groups,  non-
governmental  organizations,  university  research

174

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Pyne

Harley

Nietschmann

1988,  1989; 

http://legacyofhope.org/

centres  and  other  groups  and  individuals—all
focused  on  Residential  School  reconciliation 
initiatives.  Examples  include  the  Legacy  of  Hope
],  the
Foundation  [see 
National  Centre  for Truth  and  Reconciliation  [see
http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/index.html
],  the
Shingwauk  Residential  Schools  Centre  (SRSC)  at
Algoma University and the Children of Shingwauk
Alumni  Association,  a  Shingwauk  Residential
School  survivors  group  that  guides  and  works
http://shingwauk.org
closely  with  the  SRSC  [see 
/srsc/

to  access  both].  A  good  example  of  an 
ongoing  outreach  project  involving  all  of  these
entities  is  the  collaborative  ongoing  multi-partner
work on the Residential Schools Map of the cyber-
2013].
cartographic Lake Huron Treaty Atlas [
Cartography  has  a  long  history  as  a  powerful
tool  for  colonizers  with  a  thirst  for  jurisdictional
control  over  land,  water,  resources,  people  and
rights  [
1995]. 
In  contrast,  many  contemporary  cartographers 
have  adopted  new  attitudes,  and  are  seeking  to
understand  and  use  cartography’s  power  in  a 
de-colonizing  context.  Since  at  least  the  eighties,
work  in  critical  cartography  has  extended  to  the
conceptual  and  ethical  arenas  with  a  new  post-
colonial  focus.  Instead  of  being  used  solely  as  a
means to exert authority over territory and people’s
understanding of it, mapping is increasingly being
thought  of  as  a  means  to  include  multiple  and 
previously  ignored  perspectives  in  a  global  effort
that  could  be  summarized  as  a  “justice  for  all”
movement: justice for the people, the land, the water
and for all the creatures on the earth. Concomitant
with  the  relatively  recent  shift  to  more  aware  and
engaged  research  processes  is  the  increase  in 
inter-,  multi-  and  transdisciplinary  approaches  to
understanding  and  addressing  complex  socioeco-
nomic and cultural political issues [
2001].
Cartographic approaches such as cybercartography
can be especially useful when it comes to organiz-
ing  this  knowledge,  and  documenting  knowledge
gathering  processes  in  intuitively  appealing  and
Brauen et  al.
epistemologically  effectual  ways  [
2011; 
2014]. In general, the past 50 years has
seen  a  dramatic  transformation  in  cartography’s
scope and methods in an effort to “reckon with past
wrongs”  [
1999]  and  to  contribute  to
healthy  relationships  in  the  present  and  future.
Today’s  cartography  extends  to  participatory 
collaborations  with  individuals  from  a  variety  of
knowledge communities. It can be “on the ground,”
and involve art, experience and immediacy, on one
hand;  and  involve  technologies,  on  the  other
Irwin  et  al
Carver
. 
[

Craig  et  al

.  2002; 

Crocker

Rescher

2003; 

Pyne

Parker

2014].

2009; 
2006].  There  is  increasing  practical
and  theoretical  attention  being  given  to  the  inter-
Caquard 
sections  between  art  and  cartography  [
and Taylor
Harmon
Pyne  et  al

. 2009;
2003; 
2005; 
.  2009]  and  there  is  growing  attention
towards  mapping  experience,  emotions,  and
Harmon
Indigenous  perspectives  [
2003; 
Pyne

Louis
2007; 
Taylor and Lauriault

Louis  et  al

Irwin et al

Caquard

.  2012;

2013; 

Hirt

2012; 
2013, 2014; 
Fraser  Taylor

[1991]  recognized  the  new 
digital  context  of  maps  with  his  definition  of 
cartography  as  “[t]he  organization,  presentation,
communication  and  utilization  of  geo-information
in  graphic,  digital  or  tactile  form.  [Cartography]
can  include  all  stages  from  data  presentation  to 
end use in the creation of maps and related spatial
information  products.”  This  broadening  of  car-
tography  has  given  rise  to  discussions  related 
to motivation, ethics, epistemology and ontology as
“a wider range of topics […] has opened academic
cartography’s doors to art historians, literary intel-
lectuals,  and  legal  scholars  as  well  as  experts  on
information technology and public administration”
Monmonier
[
2013]. Mapping practices are increas-
ingly  being  engaged  in  and  pursued  as  central 
components  of  the  solutions  to  complex  social 
and economic challenges, as critical cartographers
join  in  the  collective  quest  to  de-colonize  knowl-
edge  and  knowledge-gathering  processes.  To  this
end,  deconstructive  approaches  to  map  interpreta-
tion  generally  question  the  motives  and  context 
Harley
of  the  map  maker  [
1988,  1989]  while,
reconstructive  approaches  often  include  making
maps through participatory processes and commu-
Caquard
nity  collaboration  [
1999;
Crampton
Cosgrove
and Krieger
Fox et
Kitchin 
al
.  2005; 
Pearce and Louis
and Dodge
Taylor  and
Pyne

2013; 
2001,  2009; 

Elwood and Ghose

2006; 
Harmon

Crampton

Turnbull

Kitchin

Corner

Pearce

2003; 

2008; 

2005; 

2004; 

2007; 

2008; 

2007; 

2007; 
Lauriault

2013; 

2014].

David  Crocker

In “Reckoning with Past Wrongs: A Normative
Framework” 
[1999]  introduces  a
transitional  justice-oriented  approach  to  human
rights  abuses,  which  provides  a  useful  framework
for  illustrating  the  strengths  of  cybercartographic
approaches, such as that taken in the development
of  the  Residential  Schools  component  of  the 
Lake Huron Treaty Atlas. Crocker uses the phrase
“reckoning  with”  frequently  in  this  paper,  under-
scoring his commitment to a multidimensional and
holistic  approach  to  transitional  justice.  Going
beyond a uni-dimensional approach, which favours
either criminal or social justice measures or “tools”
such  as  trials  or  truth  commissions,  Crocker’s 

175

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

multidimensional  approach  to  transitional  justice
extends to both of these; in addition to other meas-
ures,  including  international  criminal  tribunals;
social  shaming  and  banning  of  perpetrators  from
public  office;  public  access  to  police  records; 
public apology or memorials to victims; reburial of
victims; compensation to victims or their families;
literary  and  historical  writing;  and  blanket  or 
individualized  amnesty  or  legal  immunity  from
Crocker
prosecution,  depending  on  the  context  [
1999]. As an example of a project undertaken with-
in  the  Cybercartographic  Atlas  Framework,  the
Residential Schools  map  component  of  the  cyber-
cartographic Lake Huron Treaty Atlas is consistent
with this approach, and can—if not provide another
tool—provide  a  valuable  medium  for  the  imple-
mentation  and  assessment  of  some  or  all  of  these
other tools.

2. Transitional Justice Goals

David  Crocker

[1999]  outlines  the  following
eight  multi-cultural  goals  of  transitional  justice
based  on  his  comprehensive  survey  of  “world-
wide  moral  deliberation  on  transitional  justice” 
Crocker
[
1999]: truth; providing a public platform
for victims; accountability and punishment; rule of
law; compensation to victims; institutional reform;
long-term development; reconciliation; and, public
deliberation.  There  are  three  types  or  dimensions 
of truth: 

1) forensic truth, which relates to the facts of 

moral and legal rights violations; 

2) emotional  truth  relating  to  psychological 

and physical impacts; and 

3) general truth concerning systemic injustices. 

Different  tools  tend  to  draw  attention  to 
different types of truth and applying more than one
tool in balance with the others, enhances the poten-
tial  for  accountability,  minimizes  the  potential 
for “whitewash or social amnesia,” fosters “respect
for  due  process”  and  compensates  victims  for 
previous unjust policies and practices. Institutional
reform  and  long-term  development  are  linked,
especially in terms of the potential for greater respect
of  due  process,  which  includes:  “the  judiciary,
police,  military,  land  tenure  system,  tax  system, 
and  the  structure  of  economic  opportunities”  are
important  “to  remedy  what  caused  human  rights
violations  and  protect  against  their  recurrence”
Crocker 

[1999]. 

Crocker  casts  “reconciliation”  in  terms  of 
relationships  and  distinguishes  between  minimal

and richer meanings of this goal. Going beyond the
minimal  requirement  of  “simple  coexistence”
Crocker 
[1999],  people  may  continue  to  maintain
different perspectives and understandings, although
they  must  “hear  each  other  out,  enter  into  a  give-
and-take about matters of public policy, and build
on areas of common concern […] to forge princi-
pled  compromises  with  which  all  can  live.”  The
richest form of reconciliation is the most difficult to
attain and includes “forgiveness, mercy (rather than
justice), a shared comprehensive vision, mutual heal-
ing, or harmony;” these features are more likely to
develop  in  transitional  approaches  to  justice  that
include  a  similarly  rich  approach  to  democracy 
featuring fair compromise and mutual intercultural
understanding.  Truth  commissions  and  other 
reconciliation mechanisms can be assessed accord-
Crocker
ing to the eight goals of transitional justice 
[1999]. 

Johnson  et  al

In  “Mapping  Indigenous  Perspectives  in  the
Making of the Cybercartographic Atlas of the Lake
Huron Treaty Relationship Process: A Performative
Pyne 
Approach  in  a  Reconciliation  Context”  [
and  Taylor

2012],  we  discussed  a  two-pronged
approach to  designing  and  developing  an  online,
interactive  multimedia—cybercartographic—atlas.
This  approach  is  similar  to  the  decolonizing
approach  put  forward  by 
.  [2006] 
in  “Critical  Cartographic  Literacies  in  Indigenous
Communities”  in  the  way  that  it  combines 
critical  academic  perspectives  with  Anishinaabe
approaches  to  ‘‘tell  the  story’’  of  the  Robinson
Huron Treaty process over time and across space.
The  project’s  motto,  ‘building  awareness  to 
bridge relationships,’ is linked to its aim to enhance 
awareness  of  Anishinaabe  perspectives,  while
exposing the epistemological and ontological roots
of  colonialism  [
2012].  The 
project’s  success  in  reflecting  Anishinaabe  per-
spectives  and  providing  the  basis  for  intercultural
understanding,  extends  to  the  Residential  Schools
component of the Lake Huron Treaty Atlas, which
could  itself  be  used  as  a  transitional  justice  tool, 
in  addition  to  being  useful  in  the  assessment  of
other approaches to reckoning with past wrongs.

Pyne  and  Taylor

3. Cybercartography and the
Lake Huron Treaty Atlas

A primary concern for cartography is whether
or  not  cartography  is  capable  of  meaningfully 
conveying  such  things  as  experience,  Indigenous
perspectives and knowledge, and critical academic

176

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Johnson  et  al

Taylor

Turnbull

1997,  2005; 

Taylor  and  Pyne

. 
approaches  to  the  status  quo  [
2006; 
2007]. The multimedia, multisenso-
ry,  multimodal,  interactive  and/interdisciplinary 
nature  of  the  cybercartographic  approach  to  atlas
Taylor  and  Caquard
making  [
2006; 
2010]  positions  itself 
well to be able to address this concern. Cybercar-
tography  takes  a  broad,  inclusive  approach  to 
both science and art, and acknowledges the holistic
relationship  between  science,  which  includes
geospatial  technologies,  and  art,  extending  to 
storytelling.  This  position  guides  the  design  and
development  phases  of  cybercartographic  atlas
projects  in  the  direction  of  more  adequately  con-
veying  multiple  perspectives.  An  important  part 
of  this  enabling  process  lies  in  the  reflexive 
integration  of  art  with  geospatial  technologies  in
order  to  address  the  challenges  associated  with
incommensurability  of  knowledge  systems,  or 
Turnbull
2007],  in  critically
multiple  ontologies  [
Caquard  and 
innovative  and  creative  ways  [
Taylor

2005].  The  collaborative  project  to  create
the  cybercartographic  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas
shares  cybercartography’s  main  features,  in  addi-
tion to critical cartography’s concerns with decon-
struction  and  ontological  skepticism.  The  project
puts some of the abstract ideas, such as “relational
space”  and  “performativity”  into  practice  in  the
context of its broadest aim: building awareness to
bridge  relationships  by  acknowledging  and  incor-
porating  Anishinaabe  ways  in  the  making  of  the
Atlas. Together, the framework and the Atlas have 
provided  the  basis  for  continuing  development  of
the  Residential  Schools  component  of  the  Atlas,
which  draws  on  each,  in  terms  of  its  form  and
approach [

2013].

Pyne

3.1 The Framework

In  2003,  a  year  after  receiving  a  $2.5  million
research  grant  from  the  Social  Sciences  and
Humanities  Research  Council  (SSHRC)  for  the
Cybercartography  and  the  New  Economy  Project,
Fraser  Taylor
[2003]  released  a  formal  definition
of cybercartography as, “... the organization, pres-
entation,  analysis  and  communication  of  spatially 
referenced information on a wide variety of topics
of  interest  and  use  to  society  in  an  interactive,
dynamic,  multimedia,  multi-sensory  format  with
the use of multimedia and multimodal interfaces.”
Cybercartographic atlases are transdisciplinary and
holistic in nature, with an emphasis on storytelling,
knowledge  sharing,  and  enhancing  awareness  of
different  perspectives.  The  name  of  the  software
developed  to  create  atlas  modules—Nunaliit—

illustrates the community orientation of the project.
The word “nunaliit” means “settlement,” “commu-
nity,” or “habitat” in Inuktitut; the name given to the
dialects of the Inuit language in Canada. This name
was  given  to  the  cybercartographic  framework  to
emphasize the community based approach that was
driving the development of the software in different
domains:  (1)  open  specification  approaches;  (2)
modularity;  (3)  “live”  data;  (4)  geospatial  story-
Caquard  et
telling;  and,  (5)  audio-visual  mapping  [
al

Hayes et al

. 2009; 

. 2014].

While at first glance, a cybercartographic atlas
may  be  seen  as  an  interactive  multimedia  website
with maps, it is much more and includes the collab-
orative  processes  that  go  into  making  the  Atlas
maps. Although  they  are  often  referred  to  simply 
as  “maps,”  these  webpages  are  more  accurately
described  as  “map  modules;”  they  have  generous
space for an interactive digital map, and side panel,
which  displays  information  and  media  (content)
that is relevant to particular points on the map. 

2006; 

Taylor

Hayes et al

Taylor et. al

Taylor and Pyne

http://nunaliit.org/

The  cybercartographic  Nunaliit  Atlas  Frame-
work,  which  underpins  this  type  of  website,  is 
Free and Open Source Software [
. 2014;
]. As  a  holistic  approach  to
see 
online  atlas  development,  cybercartography  is 
consistent  with  Indigenous  worldviews.  As  a 
relationship-focused approach, it involves recipro-
city  and  engaging  people  in  the  production  of 
maps to tell the stories they wish to tell, and giving
these  stories  back  to  communities  for  education 
1997, 2003, 2005, 2009;
and further input [
Taylor and Caquard
2010;
Pyne

2013; 
. 2014]. 
Cybercartography  “(1)  is  multimedia  using
vision,  hearing,  touch  and  eventually  smell  and
taste;  (2)  uses  multimedia  formats  and  new
telecommunications  technologies  such  as  the
World  Wide  Web;  (3)  is  highly  interactive  and
engages  the  user  in  new  ways;  (4)  is  applied  to  a
wide  range  of  topics  of  interest  to  society,  not 
only to location finding and the physical environ-
ment;  (5)  is  not  a  stand-alone  product  like  the 
traditional  map  but  part  of  an  information/
analytical  package;  (6)  is  compiled  by  teams  of
individuals  from  different  disciplines;  and,  (7)
involves new research partnerships and the private
sector” [

2003]. 

Taylor

While  listing  the  main  characteristics  of 
cybercartography is useful for providing a general
idea of the parameters of the approach, it is neces-
sary  to  “practice”  cybercartography  in  order  to 
get  a  fuller  understanding  of  what  cybercarto-
graphy  is  all  about.  Cybercartographic  atlases
develop  over  time  through  a  series  of  iterative

177

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Figure 1: Screenshot showing the Atlas module for Shubenacadie Indian Residential School in the Residential Schools Map of the
cybercartographic Lake Huron Treaty Atlas.

these 

developed 

processes  involving  design,  implementation  and
testing  phases.  Prototypes,  both  paper  and  digital,
are 
phases.
throughout 
Discussions of the cartographic possibilities occur-
ring around these prototypes result in alterations in
map structure and function over time. Discussions
between  team  members  with  differing  knowledge
specializations  result  in  design  and  development
decisions  that  give  rise  to  the  emergence  of  maps
Brauen et al
[

. 2011; 

2013].

Pyne

As  a  productive  theoretical  and  methodo-
logical  framework,  cybercartography  provides  a
satisfactory  framework  for  the  development  of
atlas projects, while remaining flexible enough for
individual  projects  to  evolve  in  unique  ways.  In 
Amartya
this  way,  cybercartography  is  similar  to 
Sen

’s  [1992,  1999]  capability  approach  to  human
development,  which  is  neither  too  over-specified
nor  too  underspecified  [
2013].  Just  as  the
capability  approach  has  provided  the  conceptual
conditions  for  the  emergence  of  a  wide  variety 
of  theoretical  and  applied  approaches  to  human 
2006],  a
development  [

Robeyns

Crocker

2003; 

Pyne

Keith et al

Payne et al
Ljubicic et al

growing  family  of  mutually  inter-related  atlases
and  atlas-related  prototypes  have  emerged  within
the  developing  cybercartographic  theoretical  and
methodological  framework.  The  flexibility  of
cybercartography’s  Nunaliit  Atlas  Framework
Hayes et al
. 2014] allows a range of atlas projects
[
to  share  technological  and  other  innovations
amongst  each  other.  Examples  include:  Views
. 2014]; the Inuit Siku
from the North [
. 2014]; the Kitikmeot
(sea ice) Atlas [
. 2014]; the Gwich’
Place Names Atlas [
in  Atlas  [
.  2014];  the  Arctic  Bay 
Atlas  [
.  2014];  and,  the  Lake  Huron
Treaty  Atlas  project,  which  was  funded  by  two 
successive SSHRC grants [
2013, 2014]. Each
cybercartographic  atlas  project  evolves  uniquely.
The cybercartographic research framework guides
all  projects  and  is  further  developed  through 
them.  Collaborative  relationships  are  essential  to
cybercartographic  atlas  development.  And  atlas
contributors  come  from  a  variety  of  diverse  yet
Pyne  and
inter-related  communities  of  practice  [
Taylor

Pulsifer  et  al

Aporta  et  al

Taylor  et  al

Pyne

.  2011].  In  the  case 

2012; 

178

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

of  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty Atlas  (the Atlas),  these 
contributions  result  in  a  diverse  range  of  map
themes  reflecting  a  complex  multidimensional
approach  to  treaty-related  history  that  extends  to
such  themes  as  the  Residential  School  Legacy
Pyne
[

2013].

3.2 The Atlas

Pyne

Caquard et al

Phase I of the Lake Huron Treaty Atlas project
involved  the  production  of  the  prototype  Treaties
Module  under  an  Inukshuk  Wireless  Foundation
. 2009].
Grant from May 2007–2008 [
The  initial  expansion  of  the  Treaties  Module 
into  an  atlas  occurred  in  phase  II  between  2009 
and  2012,  under  a  three-year  SSHRC  Standard
Research Grant, with the creation of the Atlas and
the  addition  of  27  new  working  maps  to  comple-
ment  the  three  prototype  maps  in  the  Treaties
Module;  and,  improvements  were  continued  in
terms of research relationships, content and techno-
logical  development  in  phase  III  under  a  2012–
2014  SSHRC  Outreach  Grant  [
2013].  The
Atlas maps include biography maps; maps related
to  Anishinaabe  language  and  culture;  detailed 
historical  background  maps;  and  maps  relating  to 
current affairs. The Atlas has been publicly accessi-
ble  via  the  World  Wide  Web  since  August  2012,
and  provides  a  broadly  geographical  research  and
education  framework  for  public  participation  in
both  learning  and  continuing  to  “grow  the  maps” 
Pyne 
in  a  distributed  and  collaborative  manner  [
and  Taylor

.  2011].  The  ethic 
of  inclusion  that  is  practiced  in  the  process  of 
providing  an  online  cartographic  space  for
Anishinaabe  perspectives  and  sharing  knowledge
across  disciplines  and  specialty  areas,  is  a  central
aspect  of  cybercartography,  and  an  important 
factor  in  enriching Anishinaabe  education,  renew-
ing  relationships  between  youth  and  Elders,
reviving  traditional  culture  and  language,  and 
intercultural  mutual  understanding 
fostering 
Pyne
[
2013].  The  emphasis  on  awareness,  inclu-
sivity,  reflexivity  and  emergence  in  the  project,
gives rise to synchronicity in collaborative research
relationships and empowerment both in individuals
and with respect to the project’s ability to contribute
to enhanced awareness and improved relationships
Pyne
[

Brauen  et  al

2013]. 

2012; 

In  the  spirit  of  reconciling  relationships,  the

Lake Huron Treaty Atlas project:

1) acknowledges “the power of maps” [

and Fels

1992] and mapping processes;

2) endeavors to direct this power in ways that 

Wood 

contrast with the colonial settler project; and,
3) adopts  a  critical  cartographic,  Indigenous, 
processual  approach  to  mapping  that 
includes: 

         i)   using old maps in new ways; 
        ii)   alternative mapping practices;
       iii)   collaborative mapping; and, 
       iv)   multimedia mapping. 

Described  as  a  reconciliation  tool  [

Pyne  and 

2013,  2014],  the  Atlas 

Taylor

2012; 
spatializes history by: 

Pyne

       1)   “revisiting”  the  historical  geography  of 
            Lake  Huron  Treaty-based  relationships 
            from  a  variety  of  perspectives  in  order  to 
            appreciate their various dimensions; 
       2)   questioning  the  epistemological  and  onto
            logical  assumptions  associated  with  the 
            colonial “world view;” 
       3)   using  Anishinaabe  teachings  (kinoomagi) 
            involving  the  past,  the  present  and  the
            future,  as  guides  in  the  Atlas  design  and 
            development process; 
       4)   employing  a  collaborative  investigative
            approach  involving  broad  community 
            participation, and 
       5)   taking  a  multidimensional  approach  to 
            reconciliation  that  recognizes  the  need  for 
            reconciliation  not  only  “between  peoples” 
            (intercultural  reconciliation),  but  also 
            between people and the land (environmental
            reconciliation),  in  addition  to  the  need  for 
            “epistemological and ontological reconcili-
2012]. 
            ation” [

Pyne and Taylor

2013; 

Pyne

Operating  at  the  intersection  of  critical  geo-
graphy  and  decolonizing  indigenous  studies,  an
important  goal  of  this  project  is  to  contribute  to 
the  reconciliation  of  treaty-based  relations  by
enhancing  awareness  of  the  historical  geography 
of  these  relations  in  a  way  that  transcends  the 
epistemological  and  ontological  vestiges  of  colo-
nialism.  As  a  virtual  geospatial  public  outreach 
and education interface, the Atlas is being designed
and developed to shed light on a variety of themes
over  time  and  across  space,  including  treaties, 
institutional processes, biographies and Residential
Schools.  In  addition  to  the  inaugural  Survey
Journeys  Maps,  which  provide  the  basis  for 
critically  tracking  the  survey  portion  of  the
Robinson Huron Treaty process, the Atlas includes
biography maps and other maps intended to reflect
contextual  details  relevant  to  understanding  the

179

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

treaty  story.  The  Residential  Schools  Map  is  a 
significant example of a context map that has taken
on a life of its own in terms of usage and relevance
to reconciliation processes that are part of the Truth
and  Reconciliation  Commission’s  mandate.  For
example, the map was used in the implementation
of  plans  to  carry  out  the  2013–2014  joint  Abor-
iginal  Healing  Fund-Assembly  of  First  Nations’
National  Indian  Residential  Schools  Commemora-
tion  Project,  and  could  serve  as  an  innovative 
interface  to  the  digital  archives  of  the  National
Centre  for  Truth  and  Reconciliation,  providing
geospatially organized access to various collections
Pyne
[

2013].

4. Evolution of the
Residential Schools Map
Component

The  Residential  Schools  Map  component  of
the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas 
the
Residential  Schools  Map  (see  Figure  1),  which
takes  a  comprehensive  approach  to  mapping

includes 

knowledge  and  the  E.F.  Wilson  Biography  Map
(see  Figure  2),  which  takes  a  more  personalized
approach  to  tracking  the  life  of  Edward  Francis
Wilson,  the  principal  of  the  Shingwauk  and
Wawanosh  schools  in  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Ontario
from  1873–1893.  Wilson  also  built  schools  at
Sarnia,  Garden  River,  Batchewana,  Nipigon,
Elkhorn  (Manitoba),  and  Medicine  Hat  (Alberta)
and  travelled  extensively  throughout  Canada  and
the United States visiting and studying Indian lan-
guages, cultures and education. 

This component has evolved within the broad-
er scope of the Atlas development project, which in
turn has evolved within the even wider context of
the  Cybercartographic  Atlas  Framework.  This 
section  will  take  a  closer  look  at  the  Residential
Schools  component  to  examine  its  potential  as  a
transitional justice tool that can also be applied as a
meta-tool in the implementation and assessment of
Crocker
other  tools  such  as  truth  commissions  [
1999; 

2015, in press]. 
The Residential Schools Map emerged in April
2011  as  a  function  of  new  relationships  between
Geomatics  and  Cartographic  Research  Centre
(GCRC)  team  members  and  members  of  the

Pyne and Taylor

2013; 

Pyne

Figure 2: Screenshot of the E.F. Wilson Map of the cybercartographic Lake Huron Treaty Atlas.

180

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Shingwauk  Residential  Schools  Centre  (SRSC)  at
Algoma  University.  After  describing  the  Atlas 
project  and  its  purpose  to  an  individual  from
Whitefish  River  First  Nation  during  an  atlas  field
trip  to  the  Shingwauk  University,  this  individual
suggested  immediately  that  we  meet  the  people
working across the lawn at the SRSC. So we did.
As  it  turned  out,  the  time  was  ripe  for  beginning
discussions  and  actions  toward  mapping  Residen-
tial  Schools.  That  day,  we  met  Tina  Priest,  an
undergraduate  intern  working  with  the  SRSC. We
suggested that if the centre was interested, it could
have  a  virtual  map  to  supplement  the  large  map 
on the wall in front of us, full of thumbtacks repre-
senting  schools.  This  initial  conversation  evolved
into  a  working  partnership  between  GCRC  and
the  SRSC  and  a  partnership  that  has  involved
development across several dimensions.

By June, Tina had been issued a username and
password and was able to make a visit in person to
the  GCRC  in  Ottawa,  along  with  others  from  the
SRSC  in  Sault  Ste.  Marie.  During  the  year  that 
followed, Tina worked from the SRSC in collabo-
ration  with  GCRC  team  members,  talking  over
issues  and  concerns  on  the  phone  and  in  person
from  time  to  time,  exchanging  email  correspon-
dence and interfacing through the online cybercar-
tographic Nunaliit Atlas Framework itself. Through
her  work  contributing  to  the  development  of  the
Residential  Schools  Map,  Tina  was  able  to  learn
through  practice  and  interaction  with  individuals
from  a  variety  of  knowledge  spaces,  including 
others  in  the  Residential  Schools  education,
research and healing community. The map develop-
ment  process  also  included  talks  and  email  corre-
spondence  with  the  SRSC’s  then-director,  Don
Jackson, concerning the potential for a Residential
Schools Atlas to grow from this pilot work. Such an
atlas would complement the work of the residential
schools  research,  education  and  reconciliation
community. In addition to drawing attention to the
geospatial  dimensions  of  the  Residential  Schools
Legacy,  such  an  atlas  could  aid  in  information 
dissemination, network building and public partici-
pation. During one of these talks, Don brought out
the  original  copy  of  a  sketchbook/diary  that  had
belonged to Reverend Edward Francis Wilson, the
founder  of  Shingwauk  Residential  School  along
with  Chief  Augustin  Shingwauk.  Soon  after  this
discussion, Tina was tasked with a second assign-
ment:  to  begin  the  journey  of  mapping  of  the  life 
of E.F. Wilson across time and space. As it turned
out,  Don  had  been  waiting  to  digitize  the  sketch
book,  which  lent  itself  well  to  mapping,  due  to 
E.F. Wilson’s extensive lifetime travels to Residen-

Caquard  et  al

tial  Schools  across  North America. The  technique
used  to  begin  tracking  Wilson’s  life—referred  to 
as  the  geo-transcription  method  of  documenting
Pyne
archival  documents  [
2013]—was  first  developed  in  the  iterative 
processes  that  included  Anishinaabe  ways,  social
interaction,  learning,  mapping  epiphanies,  and
evolving technology, leading to the creation of the
Survey  Journeys  Maps  in  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty
Atlas [

2013, 2014]. 

.  2009; 

Pyne

By the same time the next year, the Residential
Schools Map would include points accurate to the
community level for most of the schools in North
America,  going  beyond  the  139  schools  acknowl-
edged in the Indian Residential Schools Settlement
Agreement.  An  initial  “scour  for  any  and  all 
information”  approach  was  taken  to  the  Internet
search  portion  of  the  map-making  project.  This
approach  allowed  for  the  discovery  of  often 
inconsistent  information  concerning  opening  and
closing  dates  for  schools.  For  example,  another
important  inconsistency  concerned  the  number  of
buildings  associated  with  each  school  over  time.
After the launch of the Lake Huron Treaty Atlas in
August  2012,  Don  Jackson  gave  several  presen-
tations  on  the  Residential  Schools  component  of
the  Atlas  to  a  variety  of  individuals  in  the
Residential  Schools  education  and  reconciliation
community,  including  Trina  Bolam,  then-director
of  the  Aboriginal  Healing  Foundation.  In  April
2013,  Trina  contacted  us  at  the  GCRC  to  inquire
about  collaborating  on  the  map  component  of  the
National  Indian  Residential  Schools  Commemor-
ative  Marker  Project  with  the  Assembly  of  First
Nations as part of the commemorative phase of the
Indian  Residential  School  Settlement  Agreement
http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/11001000
[see 
15638/1100100015639

].

After our initial meeting, we (the GCRC team
members)  learned  of  the  general  desire  for  a 
comprehensive  set  of  site  specific  Residential
School locations amongst the reconciliation research
and  education  community.  Seeing  this  as  a  good
opportunity  to  improve  the  school  locations  in 
the  Residential  Schools  Map  and  to  explore  a 
public  participatory  approach  to  gathering  school
location  information,  we  initiated  pilot  partici-
patory  outreach  activities  for  gathering  school
location-related  information,  and  reviewed  and
refined  some  of  the  school  coordinates  in  the
Residential Schools Map. Through this process, we
became more aware of the diversity of school sites
and  the  rich  potential  for  education  and  outreach
associated  with  them.  Despite  our  awareness  of 
the need for a more in depth participatory mapping

181

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

project to implement this potential, we began pilot
outreach  activities  with  some  communities  to
engage  people  in  visiting  the  sites  to  obtain 
accurate  site  readings  and  media.  We  then  used
models from archaeology to generate a site survey
toolkit. Emerging from this process, the vision for
a  new  project  began  to  crystallize,  largely  due  to
conversations and collaborative mapping activities
with  the  survivors  who  participated  in  the  pilot 
outreach  activities;  and  throughout  the  year,  there
were  ongoing  discussions  with  various  people
working in the area of Residential Schools’ recon-
ciliation. The need to find more accurate locations
for  the  schools  provided  an  opportunity  to  both 
use  and  improve  the  Residential  Schools  Map. 
This inspired deeper questions regarding the role of
Residential School sites in reconciliation processes,
and  is  leading  to  new  opportunities  for  education
and collaborations. Exploring and developing these
opportunities  in  collaboration  with  others  is  the
subject  of  a  2014–2016  SSHRC  post-doctoral 
fellowship  devoted  to  expanding  the  Residential
Schools Map into an atlas of its own. 

5. The Residential Schools
Map Component as a
Transitional Justice Tool

According  to  Crocker,  “forensic  truth”  is  a
minimal requirement in order to meet the challenge
of reckoning with past atrocities. Public acknowl-
edgement  and  awareness  of  emotional  truth  is 
necessary to eliminate continued abuses comprising
the intergenerational effects of Residential Schools
such as homelessness, alcoholism and drug addic-
tion, suicide and missing and murdered Indigenous
women.  The  Residential  Schools  component  of 
the cybercartographic Lake Huron Treaty Atlas can
contribute  to  the  multi-cultural  goals  of  forensic,
emotional and general truth in both a direct and an
indirect  manner.  For  example,  with  respect  to
forensic truth, a map layer could be created in the
Residential Schools Map for court cases related to
the  abuses  of  Residential  Schools.  With  respect 
to  emotional  truth,  the  Truth  and  Reconciliation
Commission was tasked to gather testimonies from
Residential  School  survivors,  and  postdoctoral
research is underway to facilitate the creation of a
Residential Schools Atlas for public dissemination
of the results of the Commission’s efforts. While all
of  the  maps  created  as  part  of  the  Residential
Schools  Atlas  will  contribute  to  general  truth,  a
map  devoted  to  geo-transcribing  the  Royal

Commission  on  Aboriginal  Peoples  (chapter  10)
and  Residential  Schools,  would  provide  for  an
interesting  geo-referenced  interpretation  of  this
work  (in  addition  to  providing  a  precedent  for
future geo-transcriptions of the Royal Commission
on Aboriginal Peoples). At the same time the new
Residential  Schools  layers  and  maps  reflect  these
truth-gathering institutional processes, they provide
the  basis  for  the  assessment  of  these  tools. 
The  Residential  Schools  Map  component  can 
also contribute to the generation of all three types
of  truth  in  a  sometimes  more  personalized  way 
than  truth  commissions  or  trials  may  allow  for  as 
they  involve  the  unique  approach  to  cartography
developed through the processes designed to make
the  cybercartographic  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas
Pyne and Taylor
[

2013].

2012; 

Pyne

As both an online and an on the ground reflec-
tion  of  collaborative  map-making  processes,  the
interactive wiki potential of the Residential Schools
Map  component  by  definition,  provides  a  public
platform  for  victims  to  share  their  perspectives,
memories  and  understandings  of  the  Residential
Schools, including their buildings and sites. Despite
the  capacity  of  the  map  to  host  an  unlimited 
number  of  remote  users,  face-to-face  interactions
and  communication  via  other  media  have  been
important aspects of the collaborative map-making
process from the beginning. Involving a variety of
individuals  with  a  variety  of  perspectives  from 
the  start  of  a  map  idea,  makes  a  public  platform
“by” the people “for” the people more likely.

“Accountability  and  punishment”  and  “com-
pensation  to  victims”  are  certainly  two  relevant
goals  in  the  case  of  implementing  transitional 
justice  with  respect  to  the  Residential  Schools
Legacy. In using the geo-transcription approach to
document  archival  documents  referred  to  above
Caquard  et  al
[
.  2009],  progress  of  the  relevant
accountability  and  progress  tools  can  be  tracked
with a map layer in the Residential Schools Map, or
as a map of its own. This would be most useful as
meta-tools in the assessment process of other tools,
such  as  the  criminal  justice  system  and  the  Truth
and  Reconciliation  Commission.  While  work
remains  to  be  started  in  the  development  of  a 
map  layer  reflecting  the  criminal  justice  system’s
history, with respect to Residential Schools-related
punishments,  progress  has  been  made  since 
discussions  officially  began  in  the  spring  of  2014 
to  create  a  cybercartographic  extension  for  the
National  Centre  for  Truth  and  Reconciliation’s
project  to  disseminate  information  gathered  under
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s mandate.
In  addition  to  the  contributions  this  mapped 

182

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

component  will  make,  in  terms  of  drawing  atten-
tion  to  the  geospatial  aspects  of  compensation 
and accountability initiatives, it will provide a tool
in its own right for broad-based democratic public
deliberation and volunteered geographic input. 

Pyne

The  “rule  of  law”  requirement  of  transitional
justice  speaks  to  the  heart  of  its  transformative
nature.  Inherent  in  the  adjective  “transitional”  is
acknowledgement  of  systemic  culpability.  In  the
case  of  Residential  Schools  in  Canada,  their 
horrific legacy is primarily attributed to successive
government policies in corroboration with a variety
of  religious  organizations.  Work  to  design  and
develop  the  Governance  Paper  Trail  Map  of  the
Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas  provides  a  template  for
maps tracking government and church policies over
space and time with respect to Residential Schools.
These  maps  would  extend  to  the  present  and 
contribute  to  the  assessment  of  policy  trends 
and evidence of policy transformation to determine
whether they are consistent with the “rule of law”
goal  [
2013].  An  example  of  a  potentially 
useful and revealing map is the planned Residential
Schools  Food  Economy  Map,  a  multilayer  map
tracking  different  aspects  of  this  economy  includ-
ing  policies  at  various  government 
levels, 
inventory  records  such  as  invoices  and  financial
reports,  and  other  relevant  materials  and  then 
mapping  them  for  each  school  location.  This 
potential  cybercartographic  map  project  would
make an ideal research focus for a graduate student
interested  in  taking  a  multi-scalar  approach  to
understanding  an  important  dimension  of  the
Residential Schools Legacy in an innovative way.
Institutional  Reform  consistent  with  transformed
policies  should  naturally  follow,  if  the  tools  for
achieving  transitional  justice  in  the  case  of  the
Residential Schools Legacy are effective. 

Although  Crocker  may  not  have  intended 
such  a  broad  interpretation  of  long-term  develop-
ment,  a  broad  view  extends  to  the  individual  and
includes (personal) empowerment via research and
education in cybercartography (including econom-
ic  benefits,  self-esteem  enhancement,  enrichment
of knowledge, and the satisfaction of contributing
to  the  creation  of  a  social  justice  and  education
tool). This is relevant to the other goals, including
especially  public  deliberation  and  reconciliation
Pyne
[
2013].  For  example,  between  January  and
June 2010, a high school student who was experi-
encing difficulties succeeding in the school system
became  a  co-op  student  with  the Atlas  project.  In
addition to having a rich and challenging learning
experience, the student arrived at a new awareness
of  Anishinaabe  worldviews  and  contributed  to 

the  project  in  a  way  that  reflected  his  skills  and
interests. He also earned the final credits he needed
to graduate with honours, and gained the self-esteem
and  direction  to  proceed  to  college  in  a  program
related to his co-op assignment [

2013]. 

Pyne

Bhandar

Going beyond Crocker’s focus on the relation-
ship dimension of “reconciliation,” Brenna Bhandar
characterizes  reconciliation  as  “a  widely  accepted
objective and guiding principle in attempts to deal
with the aftermath of painfully repressive regimes
Bhandar 
around  the  world” 
[2004]. According  to
Bhandar,  reconciliation-oriented  initiatives  such 
as  commissions,  investigations  and  hearings  often
include  projects  aimed  at  producing  an  “official
truth”  or  “official  history”  [
2004].
However,  the  “official”  nature  of  fact-finding 
commissions  with  their  Crown  appointed com-
missioners  and  their  rather  formal  protocol  for 
providing testimony, has been critiqued as a further
manifestation  of  colonial  attitudes  in  the  guise  of 
a  quest  for  reconciliation.  Bhandar  expresses 
difficulties  with  the  extent  to  which  a  “single 
universe  of  comprehensibility”  can  be  created
through the official production of such knowledge;
and  asks  some  very  relevant  questions:  “Who 
actually  produces  the  knowledge?  Who  collects
and  interprets  the  data  that  come  to  form  the 
official  history?  Are  the  data  rendered  through 
testimonials  of  the  victims?  Are  they  rendered
through the testimony of those in power? What is
left  out?”  In  the  end,  Bhandar  questions  whether 
or  not  these  circumstances  will  lead  to  a  merely
“partial” reconciliation. 

Pyne  and  Taylor

In order for the richest form of reconciliation
identified  by  Crocker  to  be  realized,  history  must
be  “spatialized.”  In 
[2012],  we 
discussed  several  ways  the  cybercartographic 
Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas  “spatializes  history”  by
including  multiple  perspectives,  multiple  modes 
of  expression  and  multiple  dimensions  in  its
approach  to  mapping  socioeconomic,  cultural  and
political phenomena. Work completed so far in the
Residential Map component of the Atlas shares this
approach, by emphasizing the multidimensionality
of  the  Residential  Schools  Legacy  through  maps
that  highlight  social,  economic,  cultural  and 
individual dimensions over time and across space. 
The  transdisciplinary  approach  to  cybercarto-
graphic  atlas  development  extends  to  the  ongoing
design and development of the Residential Schools
Map  component  of  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty Atlas,
and  provides  an  example  of  applied  deliberative
democracy that gives rise to enhanced interpersonal
awareness  and  understanding,  and  personal  and
social  development. The  enhanced  awareness  that

183

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Lessard  et  al

results  from  participating  in  the  creation  and  use 
of  the  Residential  Schools  component  of  the 
Atlas  optimizes  communication,  expression  and
understanding,  which  are  key  aspects  of  the  rich
form  of  public  deliberation  required  for  success 
in  reckoning  with  past  wrongs  associated  with
Young
Residential  Schools  [
2000].  An  important
vehicle for deliberative democratic communication
is  storytelling.  One  of  the  deliberative  democratic
dimensions  of  cybercartography  is  its  inclusive
approach to narrative. Brenna Bhandar agrees with
John Borrows
[1999] and others on the significance
and  roles  of  “colonial”  stories  to  undergird 
current legislative and policy regimes. In response,
de-colonizing  story-making  and  sharing  is  fast
becoming  an  internationally  popular  pastime  (for
.  [2011]).  Keeping  up
example,  see 
with  the  pace,  digital  cartographies  are  providing 
a  powerful  medium  for  expressing  these  stories. 
In  this  regard,  the  approach  to  cybercartography
that  has  emerged  out  of  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty
Atlas  project  could  be  described  as  a  reflective,
investigative and emergent approach to collabora-
tive  cartographic  documentary  investigation.  This
approach has given rise to various forms of geonar-
rative  in  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas,  including 
the Residential Schools component, which provide
an effective medium for the expression of otherwise
incommensurable  perspectives.  Education  and
awareness are essential components of “deliberative
democracy,” especially when it comes to the need
for  transformation  in  attitudes  that  the  prime 
minister has vowed never to let prevail again. Over
the years, the cybercartographic Lake Huron Treaty
Atlas  project  has  expanded  to  include  students  of
2013].
all ages in these map-making processes [

Pyne

6. Conclusion:
Cybercartography and
Transitional Justice in 
an Unjust World

Transitional  justice  begins  with  the  premise 
of  an  unjust  world  in  need  of  reconciliation  and
Fung
rebalancing  in  understanding  and  practice  [
2006].  It  is  our  immense  need  for  reconciliation
that justifies it as one of the primary aims of transi-
tional  justice.  For  example,  the  intergenerational
effects  associated  with  the  Residential  Schools
Legacy  include  homelessness,  alcoholism  and 
drug  abuse,  suicide  and  missing  and  murdered
Indigenous  women  and  extend  to  continued  dis-

crimination  and  cultural,  social  and  economic
exclusion.  The  approach  to  spatializing  history 
initiated  in  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas,  and 
continued  in  the  project  to  expand  its  Residential
Schools  component,  provides  an  innovative  way 
to include multiple perspectives in a broad geospa-
tial context.

Crocker

There  is  a  reflexive  relationship  between  the
means  and  ends  aspects  of  the  eight  goals  of
transitional  justice  identified  by 
[1999];
this  is  evident  in  the  way  various  goals  become
implicated in the implementation of various tools.
For  example,  public  deliberations  in  determining
compensation  issues  are  more  successful  in 
deliberative relationships with richer approaches to
reconciliation, in contrast with weaker approaches,
which are bound to yield limited truths upon which
the  compensation  is  to  be  based.  The  iterative
processes involved in the design and development
of the Lake Huron Treaty Atlas provide a template
for  reflexive,  holistic  approaches  to  achieving 
reconciliation  and  the  other  seven  goals  of  transi-
tional  justice.  Cybercartography’s  emphasis  on
process  and  profiling  multiple  perspectives,  and 
the  ways  it  brings  these  perspectives  together, 
indicate  the  broader  potential  for  cartography  to
give  rise  to  a  different  kind  of  understanding  an
awareness than factual transmission [
2013;
Gartner

Monmonier

Cheers

Taylor

2013; 

2013; 

2013]. 

Jolly

1992; 

Belyea

It  is  important  to  overcome  challenges 
associated  with  misappropriation  of  Indigenous
knowledge  and  related  challenges  associated  with
intercultural  incommensurability  in  the  design 
and development of the Residential Schools Maps.
Inviting  Anishinaabe  input  in  the  design  and 
development  process  is  one  way  to  begin  to  do 
this,  departing  from  centuries  of  misappropriation
and  exploitation  of  Indigenous  knowledges  in  a
colonial  context  [
2007].  An
important aspect of this Atlas work in general, is its
concern  with  intercultural  relationships  where  it
does not study one culture or another ethnographi-
cally,  but  engages  with  all  [
.  2009;
Pyne and Taylor
2012]. It avoids the criticism often
directed at efforts to apply geospatial technologies
in  the  presentation  of  Indigenous  knowledge, 
and  phenomena  extending  to  experience,  by
emphasizing the importance of trails and journeys
rather than particular points on a map. Furthermore
[2007] and others referred to in
it follows 
this paper, in “rethinking knowing and mapping—
where  the  key  questions  relate  to  the  similarities
and  differences  in  the  ways  space,  time  and 
movement are performed and to how those similar-
2007].
ities and differences are handled” [

Caquard  et  al

Turnbull

Turnbull

184

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Turnbull

In the work to design and develop the Lake Huron
Treaty  Atlas,  including  the  Residential  Schools
component,  mapping  is  repurposed:  instead  of 
providing  reinforcement  for  colonial  or  other 
hegemonic  forms  of  domination  by  one  group  of
people or institution over others, the purpose of this
mapping is to track the development of knowledge
over time and space, in an effort to contribute to a
2007].
new space of mutual understanding [
These  are  exciting  and  challenging  times.
According  to  the  Seven  Fires  Prophecy  of  the
Anishinabek (Anishinaabe people), these are times
when  people  are  beginning  to  seek  healing  and
greater  understanding  in  their  relationships  with
each other, the land and themselves. This is evident
in  the  case  of  reconciliation  processes  that  have
begun  internationally  along  several  dimensions.
Crocker
Effective  reckoning  with  past  wrongs  [
1999]  requires  a  broader  scope  than  official 
commissions and legal proceedings, and a different
way  of  doing  things  to  avoid  misappropriation 
and  misrepresentation  of  knowledge,  perspectives 
and  ways.  This  will  involve  acknowledgement  of
the  links  between  our  “colonial  past”  and  our 
post-colonial  present,  which  must  be  constantly
tested  for  signs  of  relapse.  The  continuing  work 
on  the  Residential  Schools  component  of  the 
cybercartographic  Lake  Huron  Treaty Atlas  helps
to  establish  the  broader  relevance  of  cartography
to socioeconomic and cultural political policy in a
way  that  can  help  implement  transitional  justice,
with  respect  to  reckoning  with  the  past  wrongs,
including those associated with Residential Schools.

Acknowledgements

This  research  was  supported  by  the  Social
Sciences  and  Humanities  Research  Council  of
Canada.

References

Anaya,  J.  2014. 

UN  Human  Rights  Council,  Report  of
the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous
peoples,  Addendum:  The  situation  of  indigenous
peoples  in  Canada,  4  July  2014,  A/HRC/27/52/
Add.2.

Available  at  http://www.refworld.org/docid/

53eb3b774.html [Viewed December 19, 2014].
Aporta, C., I. Kritsch, A. Andre, K. Benson, S. Snowshoe,
W  Firth,  and  D.  Carry.  2014. The  Gwich’in Atlas:
Place  Names,  Maps,  and  Narratives.  In  Taylor, 
Developments  in
D.R.F.  and T.  Lauriault, T  (eds.), 
the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Cybercartography:
Applications and Indigenous Mapping

. Amsterdam:

Elsevier, Chapter 16.

Belyea,  B.  1992.  Images  of  Power:  Derrida,  Foucault,

Cartographica

Harley. 

. 29(2): 1–9.
Bhandar, B. 2004. Spatializing History. 

Planning D

Environment and

. Society and Space. 22: 831–845.

Borrows  J.  1999.  Sovereignty’s  Alchemy:  An  Analysis 
Osgoode Hall

of Delgamuukw v. British Columbia. 
Law Journal

. 37(3): 537–596.

Brauen,  G.,  S.  Pyne,  A.  Hayes,  J.P.  Fiset,  and  D.R.F.
Taylor.  2011.  Transdisciplinary  Participation  using
an  Open  Source  Cybercartographic  Toolkit:  The
Atlas  of  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Relationship
Process, 

. 65(1): 27–45.

Geomatica

Canada.  Royal  Commission  on  Aboriginal  Peoples.
Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  Abori-

1997. 
ginal  Peoples

.  (5):  Renewal:  A  Twenty-Year
Commitment.  In  For  Seven  Generations:  An
Information  Legacy  of  the  Royal  Commission 
on  Aboriginal  Peoples  [CD-ROM].  Ottawa:
Libraxus.

Caquard  S.  2013.  Cartography  1:  Mapping  Narrative
. 37(1):

Progress in Human Geography

Cartography, 
135–144.

Caquard, S., S. Pyne, H. Igloliorte, K. Mierins, A. Hayes,
and  D.R.F.  Taylor.  2009.  A  “Living”  Atlas  for
Geospatial  Storytelling:  The  Cybercartographic
Atlas  of  Indigenous  Perspectives  and  Knowledge 
.  44(2):
of  the  Great  Lakes  Region, 
83–100.

Cartographica

Caquard,  S.  and  D.R.F.  Taylor.  2005.  Art,  Maps  and
Cybercartography:  Stimulating  Reflexivity  among
Cybercar-
Map-Users,  in  Taylor,  D.  R.  F.  (ed.) 
tography:  Theory  and  Practice

.  Volume  4  in
Modern  Cartography  Series, Amsterdam:  Elsevier,
Chapter 12, 285–307.

Carver, S. 2003. The Future of Participatory Approaches
using  Geographic  Information:  Developing  a
Urban  and
Research Agenda  for  the  21st  Century. 
Regional Information Systems Association (URISA)
Journal

. 15, APA I: 61–72.

The Cartographic

Cheers, G. 2013. The Last Big Atlas? 

Journal

, 50(2): 161–165.

The  Agency  of  Mapping:  Speculation,

Corner,  J.  1999. 

Critique  and  Invention
Mappings

.  In  Cosgrove,  D.  (ed.),

. London: Reaktion Books: 213–252.

Cosgrove, D. 2005. Maps, Mapping, Modernity: Art and
Imago

Cartography  in  the  Twentieth  Century, 
Mundi

Craig,  W.,  T.  Harris,  and  D.  Wiener.  2002. 

Community
Participation and Geographic Information Systems
.

. 57(1): 35–54.

Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Crampton,  J.  2001.  Maps  as  Social  Constructions:
Progress

Power, Communication and Visualization. 
in Human Geography

. 25(2): 235–252.

Crampton,  J.W.  2009.  Cartography:  Performative,
in  Human

Progress 

Participatory,  Political. 
Geography

. 33(6): 840–848.

Crampton,  J.  and  J.  Krieger.  2006.  An  Introduction 
ACME:  An  International 

to  Critical  Cartography. 
E-Journal for Critical Geographies

. 4(1): 11–33.

185

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Crocker,  D.  1999.  Reckoning  with  Past  Wrongs:  A
Ethics  and  International

Kitchin,  R.  and  M.  Dodge.  2007.  Rethinking  Maps.

Progress in Human Geography

Normative  Framework, 
Affairs
. 13: 43–64.

Crocker,  D.  2006.  Sen  and  Deliberative  Democracy.  In
Kaufman,  A.  (ed.),  Capabilities  Equality:  Basic
Issues and Problems

. New York: Routledge.

Elwood, S., and R. Ghose. 2004. PPGIS in Community
Development Planning: Framing the Organizational
Context. 

. 38(3–4): 19–33.
Fox, J., K. Suryanata, and P. Hershock. 2005. 
Communities:  Ethics,  Values,  Practice

Cartographica

Mapping

.  Honolulu,

Hawaii: East-West Center.

Fung,  A.  2006.  Deliberation  before  the  Revolution:
Toward an Ethics of Deliberative Democracy in an
Unjust World, 

Political Theory

. 33: 97–419.

The Cartographic

Gartner, G. 2013. I like…Cartography. 

Journal

. 50(2): 109–111.

Harley,  B.  1988.  Secrecy  and  Silences:  The  Hidden
Agenda  of  State  Cartography  in  Early  Modern
Europe. 

Imago Mundi

. 40: 57–76.

Harley, B. 1989. Deconstructing the Map. 

Cartographica
.

26: 1–20.
Harmon, K. 2003. 

You Are Here: Personal Geographies

and  Other  Maps  of  the  Imagination

.  New  York,

N.Y.: Princeton Architectural Press.

Harper, S. (Right Hon.). 2011. Statement of Apology—
to Former Students of Indian Residential Schools on
Behalf  of  the  Government  of  Canada.  Ottawa,  11
June.  Available  at  http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/
eng/1100100015644 [viewed May 2, 2015].

Hayes, A., P. Pulsifer, and J.P. Fiset. 2014. The Nunaliit
Cybercartographic  Atlas  Framework.  In  D.R.F.
Developments  in 
Taylor  and  T.  Lauriault  (eds.), 
the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Cybercartography:
Applications and Indigenous Mapping

. Amsterdam:

Hirt,  I.  2012.  Mapping  Dreams/Dreaming  Maps:
Bridging  Indigenous  and  Western  Geographical
Knowledge. 
,  Special  issue  on
Indigenous  Cartography  and  Counter  Mapping.
47(2): 105–120.

Cartographica

Irwin,  R.,  B.  Bickel,  V.  Triggs,  S.  Springgay,  R.  Beer,
R.K.  Grauer,  G.  Xiong,  and  P.  Sameshima.  2009.
The City of Richgate: A/r/tographic Cartography as
Public Pedagogy.

. 28.1: 61–70.

Jade

Johnson,  J.,  R.  Louis,  and  H.  Pramono.  2006.  Critical
Cartographic  Literacies  in  Indigenous  Commun-
ACME:  An  International  E-Journal  for
ities. 
Critical Geographies

. 4(1): 80–98.

Jolly,  M.  2007.  Oceania:  Indigenous  and  Foreign
The  Contem-

Representations  of  Sea  of  Islands. 
porary Pacific.

19(2): 508–545.
Keith,  D.,  K.  Crockatt,  and  A.  Hayes.  2014.  The
Kitikmeot Place Name Atlas. In D.R.F. Taylor and
Developments in the Theory
T. Lauriault, T. (eds.), 
and  Practice  of  Cybercartography:  Applica-
tions and Indigenous Mapping

. Amsterdam: Elsevier,

Kitchin,  R.  2008. The  Practices  of  Mapping. 

Chapter 15.

phica

. 43(3): 211–216.

Cartogra-

. 31(3): 331–344.

Lessard,  H.,  R.  Johnson,  and  J.  Webber  (eds).  2011.
Storied  Communities:  Narratives  of  Contact  and
Arrival  in  Constituting  Political  Community

.  UBC

Press: Vancouver; Toronto.

Louis,  R.P.  2007.  Can You  Hear  Us  Now? Voices  from
the  Margin:  Using  Indigenous  Methodologies  in
Geographical  Research
.
Geographic  Research. 
45(2): 130–139.

Louis,  R.P.,  J.T.  Johnson,  and  A.H.  Pramono.  2012.
Indigenous  Cartographies  and
Introduction: 
Counter-Mapping. 
, Special issue on
Indigenous Cartography and Counter Mapping. 44:
77–79.

Cartographica

Ljubicic,  G.,  P.  Pulsifer,  A.  Hayes,  and  D.R.F.  Taylor.
2014.  In  D.R.F.  Taylor  and  T.  Lauriault  (eds.),
Developments  in  the  Theory  and  Practice  of
Cybercartography:  Applications  and  Indigenous
Mapping

. Amsterdam: Elsevier, Chapter 14. 

Monmonier,  M.  2013.  History,  Jargon,  Privacy  and
The Cartographic Journal
,

Multiple Vulnerabilities. 
50th Anniversary Special Issue. 50(2): 171–174.
Nietschmann,  B.  1995.  Defending  the  Miskito  Reefs
with Maps and GIS: Mapping With Sail, Scuba, and
. 18(4): 34–37.
Satelite. 
Parker,  B.  2006.  Constructing  Community  Through
Maps?  Power  and  Praxis  in  Community  Mapping,
The Professional Geographer

Cultural Survival Quarterly

. 58(4): 470–484.

Payne,  C.,  A.  Hayes,  and  S.  Ellison.  2014.  Mapping
Views from the North: Cybercartographic Technol-
ogy  and  Inuit  Photographic  Encounters.  In  D.R.F.
Developments  in 
Taylor  and  T.  Lauriault  (eds.), 
the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Cybercartography:
Applications and Indigenous Mapping

. Amsterdam:

Pearce,  M.W.  2008.  Framing  the  Days:  Place  and
Cartography  and  Geo-

Narrative  in  Cartography. 
graphic Information Science

. 35: 17–32.

Pearce,  M.  and  R.  Louis.  2007.  Mapping  Indigenous
American  Indian  Culture  and

Depth  of  Place. 
Research Journal

. 32(3): 107–126.

Pulsifer,  P.,  G.  Laidler,  D.R.F.  Taylor,  and  A.  Hayes.
2011.  Towards  an  Indigenist  Data  Management
Program:  Reflections  on  Experiences  Developing
The
an  Atlas  of  Sea  Ice  Knowledge  and  Use. 
Canadian Geographer

Pyne,  S.  2013. 

. 55(1): 108–124.
Sound  of  the  Drum,  Energy  of  the 
Dance:  Making  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas  the
Anishinaabe  Way

.  Unpublished  PhD  Dissertation,

Carleton University.

Pyne,  S.  2014.  The  Role  of  Experience  in  the  Iterative
Development  of  the  Lake  Huron  Treaty  Atlas. 
In  D.R.F.  Taylor  and  T.  Lauriault 
(eds.),
Developments  in  the  Theory  and  Practice  of
Cybercartography:  Applications  and  Indigenous
Mapping

. Amsterdam: Elsevier, Chapter 17.

Pyne,  S.,  D.R.F.  Taylor,  and  S.  Caquard.  2009.  The
Emerging  Role  of  Art  in  Cybercartography:
Conveying  Indigenous  and  Critical  Perspectives 

Elsevier, Chapter 9.

Elsevier, Chapter 13.

186

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

in  the Treaties  Module.  Paper  presented  by  D.R.F.
Taylor at ICC 2009 24th International Cartography
Conference, Santiago, Chile, November 15 to 21.

Pyne, S., and D.R.F. Taylor. 2015. Cybercartography and
International  Journal  of

Relational  Development, 
Cartography

, in press. 

Pyne, S., and D.R.F. Taylor. 2012. Mapping Indigenous
Perspectives  in  the  Making  of  the  Cybercar-
the  Lake  Huron  Treaty
tographic  Atlas  of 
Relationship Process. 
. Special Issue
on  Indigenous  Cartography  and  Counter  Mapping.
47(2): 92–104.
Rescher, N. 2001. 

Philosophical Reasoning: A Study in

Cartographica

the  Methodology  of  Philosophizing

.  Malden,

Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing Inc.

Robeyns,  I.  2003.  The  Capability  Approach:  An
Interdisciplinary  Introduction  Training  Course 
preceding  the  3rd  International  Conference  on  the
Capability Approach, Pavia, Italy, on 6 September.
Inequality  Re-examined
.  Cambridge,

Sen,  A.  1992. 

Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Development as Freedom

Sen, A. 1999. 

University Press. 

. Oxford: Oxford

Taylor,  D.R.F.  1991.  A  Conceptual  Basis  for  Carto-
graphy/New  Directions  for  the  Information  Era.
Cartographica

. 28(4): 1–8.

Taylor,  D.R.F.  1997.  Maps  and  Mapping  in  the
Information  Era,  Keynote  address  to  the  18th  ICA
Conference,  Stockholm.  In  Ottoson,  L.  (ed.),
Proceedings. 1: 1–10.

Taylor, D.R.F. 2003. The Concept of Cybercartography.
Maps  and  the  Internet
.

In  Peterson,  M.P.  (ed.), 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 405–420.

Cybercartography:  Theory  and

Taylor,  D.R.F.  2005. 

Practice

, Volume 4 in Modern Cartography Series,

Amsterdam: Elsevier, 574.

Taylor,  D.R.F.  2009.  Maps,  Mapping  and  Society: 
Proceedings  of  Global

Some  New  Directions.  In 
Map  Forum

,  Tskuba,  Japan:  Geographical  Survey

Institute. 32–35.

The

Taylor,  D.R.F.  2013.  Fifty  Years  of  Cartography. 

Cartographic Journal

. 50(2): 187–191.

Taylor,  D.R.F.,  and  S.  Caquard  (guest  eds.).  2006.
Cartographica
.

Special Issue on Cybercartography, 
41(1): 1–5.

Taylor,  D.R.F.,  and  S.  Pyne.  2010.  The  History  and
Development  of  the  Theory  and  Practice  of
International Journal of Digital
Cybercartography. 
Earth
. 3(1): 1–14.

Taylor,  D.R.F.,  and  T.  Lauriault. 

(eds.  2014.
Developments  in  the  Theory  and  Practice  of
Cybercartography:  Applications  and  Indigenous
Mapping

, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Taylor, D.R.F., C. Cowan, G. Ljubicic, and C. Sullivan.
2014. Cybercartography for Education: The Appli-
cation of Cybercartography to Teaching and Learn-
ing in Nunavut, Canada. In Taylor, D. R. F. and T.
Developments  in  the  Theory  and
Lauriault  (eds.), 
Practice of Cybercartography: Applications and Indig-
enous Mapping

, Amsterdam: Elsevier, Chapter 20.

Turnbull,  D.  2007.  Maps,  Narratives,  and  Trails:
Performativity,  Hodology, 
and  Distributed
Knowledges  in  Complex  Adaptive  Systems:  An
Geographical
Approach  to  Emergent  Mapping. 
Research

Wood, D., and J. Fels, J. 1992. 

The Power of Maps

. New

. 45: 140–149.

York: Guilford.

Young, I. 2000. 

Inclusion and Democracy

. Oxford; New

York: Oxford University Press.

Authors

Dr.  Stephanie  Pyne

is  a  Social  Sciences 
and  Humanities  Research  Council  Postdoctoral
Research  Fellow  at  the  University  of  Manitoba,
whose  research  focuses  on  working  with  others 
in  a  transdisciplinary  manner  to  expand  the
Residential Schools component of the Lake Huron
Treaty  Atlas  into  an  atlas  of  its  own.  The  Lake
Huron Treaty Atlas was developed collaboratively
with  the  GCRC  and  many  others  over  the  course 
of  Dr.  Pyne’s  doctoral  studies  in  Geography. 
This  was  followed  by  previous  studies  leading 
to  a  BA  Highest  Honours  in  Philosophy  and
Psychology  and  a  Masters  in  Philosophy,  both  of
which  focused  on  holistic  approaches  to  develop-
ment  and  integrating  theory  with  practice.  In  the
midst  of  her  academic  career,  Dr.  Pyne  devoted 
11  years  to  reporting  the  Debates  of  the  House 
of  Commons  of  Canada  and  revising  federal 
legislation  for  Justice  Canada,  and  consequently
developed  a  critical  understanding  of  policy  that
feeds into her academic work.

Dr.  D.R.  Fraser  Taylor

is  Distinguished
Research Professor and Director of the Geomatics
and  Cartographic  Research  Centre  at  Carleton
University, Ottawa, Canada, who is recognized as
one  of  the  world’s  leading  cartographers  and  a 
pioneer in computers and cartography. He received
the  Killam  Prize  for  the  Social  Sciences  in  2014,
and in 2013 was the first Canadian to be honoured
by the International Cartographic Association with
the award of the Carl Mannerfelt Gold Medal, the
highest  honour  in  cartography.  He  was  awarded 
the 3M/Royal Canadian Geographic Society Award
for Environmental Innovation in 2012, and elected
a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 2008.
Developments in the Theory
His latest edited book, 
and  Practice  of  Cybercartography:  Applica-
tions  and  Indigenous  Mapping

,  was  published  by
Elsevier  in  2014.  Dr.  Taylor  works  extensively 
with  northern  communities  in  the  creation  of 
cybercartographic  atlases  dealing  with  traditional
and local knowledge. 

q

187

Geomatica Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY on 02/18/19For personal use only. 