The Cartographic Journal
Vol. 40 No. 2
# The British Cartographic Society 2003

pp. 135–140

ICA Special Issue 2003

135

S E C T I O N 1

Aerial Photography for Mapping the UK

Alun Jones

The GeoInformation Group, Telford House, Fulborn, Cambridge CB1 5HB, UK

THE WINDS OF CHANGE

The UK aerial mapping industry has, since the middle of the
last decade, seen what can only be described as a series of
technology, business and market-led tornados rip through
it and its user base. This has transformed the industry from a
traditional local authority county-based, commission (cid:143)ying,
programme to a frenetic national, regional and city-based
multi-user, multi-temporal, market-driven industry.

The result is that imagery is now widely accepted as a
key mapping component in the UK and a key provider of
intelligent and content rich information; information that
is not always on a conventional map and is not readily
available.

UK MARKET DEVELOPMENT

This development of the UK aerial imagery market was
exempli(cid:142)ed in a recent industry survey (Allbrook, 2001) that
showed that only 3.5% of the users contacted had no
interest in aerial photography and more than 50% stated
that they were already using aerial imagery. The UK market
has evolved since the early 1990s to become a complex
and competitive one, and one that is fast leaving behind its
traditional roots and seeking out new and innovative
imagery solutions (Figure 2).

The developments in the aerial mapping industry in the
UK and for many other countries has largely been linked
to developments in computer technology. For the past 80
years our method of collecting imagery, namely via an
optical lens onto (cid:142)lm using a survey camera, has remained
unchanged. But our ability to scan, process, format, manage
and, perhaps most importantly, distribute has changed
signi(cid:142)cantly in the last eight years due to advances in
computer chip speeds, plasma screen displays and advances
in processing and GIS software.

One of the forerunners of the imagery products we
see today was Cities Revealed, released in 1995, by the
GeoInformation Group. It was the (cid:142)rst compressed aerial
image database on CD-ROM complete with viewing and
extraction software for windows. Prior to this, imagery had
largely been supplied as conventional prints or as large
multi-megabyte TIFF (cid:142)les.

In the UK our GIS technology has traditionally been
driven by vector mapping of large vector (cid:142)les, a few mega-
bytes in size, and linkages with underlying databases. Today

DOI: 10.1179/000870403235001485

however, it is common for them to directly read, display in
full 24 bit colour, compressed terabytes-size image (cid:142)les.
Most GIS software in the UK now read standard JPEG,
TIFF (cid:142)les with some form of georeferencing (cid:142)le supported,
although this is by no means standardized. Whilst the more
advanced GIS from companies such as Cadcorp, ESRI and
MapInfo do read one or both varieties of wavelet com-
pressed (cid:142)les, ERMapper’s ECW or Lizardtech’s MrSID,
along with the geographical referenced version of TIFF,
GeoTiff, however, in the UK right now the most com-
mon formats supplied seem to be JPEG and one of the
compressed wavelet formats, ECW or MrSID.

UK IMAGERY STANDARDS

the underlying computer

technology has been
Whilst
evolving, the standard by which the imagery is collected
in the (cid:142)rst place has remained, up until recently, relatively
unchanged for nearly two decades.

In the UK the standard by which aerial photography is
collected is commonly de(cid:142)ned by the RICS Speci(cid:142)cation
for Vertical Air Photography. It is well thought of and is
used by aerial companies, contractors and users alike to
specify and check aerial imagery collection.

First published in 1980 by the Royal Institute of
Chartered Surveyors the speci(cid:142)cation set out guidelines for
users to commission the collection of black and white
vertical aerial photography for photogrammetric mapping,
photomosaicing and general interpretation.

A revision (the third edition) in 1989 added guidelines for
Forward Motion Compensation cameras and other camera
design improvements. It was not however until the release
of the 2001 version that technological advances in the (cid:142)eld
of image scanning, (cid:142)le management and image processing
were recognised and incorporated. The speci(cid:142)cation did
not include any reference to digital cameras.

The 2001 version, titled Vertical Aerial Photography and
Derived Digital Imagery: Client Speci(cid:142)cation Guidelines is
a good base, however it does suffer from a lag in trying to
keep pace with continually evolving technology and market
changes.

The future development for the RICS speci(cid:142)cation is not
certain, as the one big challenge facing it and the industry
is the presence of the digital camera. Although there is
as yet no large format digital surveying camera operating

136

The Cartographic Journal

Figure 1. High resolution imagery that is commonly found in today’s UK imagery market (supplied by the GeoInformation Group)

commercially in the UK, the technological advances of
such cameras will make them a feature of the UK imaging
scene in the not too distant future.

The entry of the OS into the UK imaging market has
brought with it another standard, which attempts to pro-
vide a speci(cid:142)cation and Acceptable Quality Levels for new
imagery supplied to Ordnance Survey for inclusion into its
OSMastermap Imagery layer. Whilst this avoids anything
to do with digital cameras and uses the RICS speci(cid:142)cation
2001 as its guideline for imagery capture, it does contain a
highly comprehensive speci(cid:142)cation for the processing and
production of orthophotos.

CURRENT IMAGERY STATUS

The recent survey by Allbrook, 2001, noted a market
dominated by the GeoInformation Group, Getmapping and
UK perspectives. Two of these commercial organizations
are seeking to provide complete national cover on a 5-year
basis (Getmapping and UKPerspectives), whereas the Geo-
Information Group is targeting urban centres on an annual
basis. With the recent entry in April 2003 of the UK’s
National Mapping Agency, Ordnance Survey into the market
for national imagery cover, the UK can certainly be con-
sidered as one of the most active countries in the world.

Section 1: Aerial Photography for Mapping the UK

137

Figure 2. The 25 cm imagery adoption life cycle, adapted from Moore, 1998. This diagram shows how over time the UK imagery market has
evolved through a series of technology and business driven tornadoes. These have developed the market to such an extent that experienced users
are seeking higher resolution imagery and more information products so in turn creating new technology adoption life cycles as the existing 25 cm
one moves into maturity

Without doubt this recent entry of by the Ordnance
Survey into this competitive market place will cause further
changes and shifting by everyone in the aerial
industry.
The court action initiated in 2002 by Getmapping against
Ordnance Survey on a variety of competitive and technical
grounds is still to be resolved. But the very fact that such
action has taken place, in high court, and is still to be
resolved, has done nothing to develop a cohesive industry
and has if anything shown just what a competitive market
the aerial one is.

What is surprising about all this commercial

imagery
activity, and it is by no means con(cid:142)ned to these players
(see Table 1), is that it is happening on top of what is
considered to be the world’s best mapping base. This can
only be happening because of one reason, the market
demands it, but for the market to demand this it proves
the level of education in the market that seeks more
information than currently exists on traditional mapping
alone. In the UK right now we see a very diverse range of
users and applications beyond the traditional markets of
public sector and utilities (Table 2).

As we enter the twenty-(cid:142)rst century we see imagery
being viewed as content rich and offering something that
is not on a conventional map, even offering something
that is more updated, or simply provides a more intelligent
picture of what is really going on in our complex world.
This is backed up by the research of Allbrook, 2001, that
showed the majority of aerial photography being used
for gathering additional
information on ground assets
and for site planning and evaluation. However, whilst the

survey noted that imagery was still very much under-used,
over 60% of respondents had claimed it improved their
decision-making and 40% also claimed a greater ef(cid:142)ciency
and improved service.

But whatever it offers with so much imagery being
collected, so much demand in the market place for it and
so much technical innovation associated with it, one thing
we can be sure of is that it is here to stay and is fast
becoming the new UK map of the twenty-(cid:142)rst century.

MARKET TRENDS: IMAGE RESOLUTION

Perhaps the last 10 years can, in terms of aerial imagery,
be best characterized by the increase in the resolution of
imagery. For example, street engineers that were happy to
see roads and road markings back in the mid-90s today
expect to see lampposts, manhole covers and even count
the paving stones at the side of the road. The same is
true in the property market which has traditionally been
slow to adopt ‘new’ technologies. In the mid-1990s simply
seeing a building and its surrounding area was ample for
their needs. Today the property user wants to see the
fences in the garden and the house’s external furnishings,
e.g. conservatories and sheds.

The standard since the mid-1990s was 25 cm, and it
was not until the advent of 12.5 cm that the demands of
these new market applications could be met. Today we see
imagery being collected by the GeoInformation Group at
6.25 cm as a city product. It remains to be seen whether

138

The Cartographic Journal

Table 1. List of main UK imagery providers and a summary of their activites

Company

Imagery coverage

Resolution

Products

Further information

The GeoInformation
Group

www.citiesrevealed.com
www.historicairphotos.com

200+ towns, cities and unitary
areas, some counties covered
and specialized projects
undertaken
International cities also
available

England Wales and 40%
Northern Ireland, Scotland
with ongoing (cid:143)ying to
complete Scotland in
2003-03-29. High resolution
updates of some UK towns
International data with
Getmapping Spain

Mainly 12.5 cm with
some higher resolution,
6.25 cm

Cities revealed
Image to information
. Historical imagery
. Land use
. Building class
. Building height

Some 50 cm in Scotland,
but mainly 25 cm with
10 cm for high
resolution updates of UK
towns

The Millennium map
Wide range of
consumer books
Image Express and
Image Express Plus

Getmapping Plc

www.getmapping.com

UKPerspectives

Most of England and Wales

MAPS

www.UKperspectives.com

Ordnance Survey

25% UK by April 2003
100% target by end 2004

Imagery layer in
OSMasterMap

www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk

25 cm

25 cm

BKS

Project oriented but has an
archive of images in the UK,
Isle of Man and other selected
areas

Varies depending on
project

www.bks.co.uk

this is taken further, although (cid:143)ying and (cid:142)le volume
problems could naturally restrict further development in
this area. What is clear is that as the users become more
educated and require more information aerial companies
will need to meet the needs of the user base by producing
12.5 cm or higher resolution imagery.

MARKET TRENDS: ORTHORECTIFICATION VERSUS
GEORECTIFICATION

Another characterization of the UK industry over the past
decade has been the argument in the UK over the relative
merits, accuracies, etc. of orthorecti(cid:142)ed imagery compared

to that of georecti(cid:142)ed imagery. With georecti(cid:142)ed imagery
being controlled using points taken from Ordnance Survey
mapping and using terrain products for additional control.
Orthorecti(cid:142)ed imagery, on the other hand, derives its
control from GPS and is independent of OS mapping and
considered much more accurate than georecti(cid:142)ed databases.
In a recent survey (Albrook, 2001) some 57% of users
favoured georecti(cid:142)ed imagery compared to 24% in favour
of orthorecti(cid:142)ed. There have been vociferous arguments
in the trade press and even in the High Court over the
accuracies and need for imagery subjected to these two
different approaches. In general the user base is generally
ambivalent to which method is used as long as it (cid:142)ts with
the national mapping. However that in itself is undergoing

Table 2. A sample of applications of aerial photography in the UK market at this present time

Sector

Application

User

Academic
Agriculture
Architecture
Central government
Construction
Defence
Electric
Police
Fire
Engineering
Environment
Health
Insurance
Leisure
Local government
Property
Retail
Telco
Transport
Water

Teaching aid
Subsidy applications
Site visualization
Policy development
Site impact analysis, access mapping
Mission planning, intelligence
Network performance and safety management
Operational planning, incident analysis
Incident management, training
Road network infrastructure management
Marine conservation
Disease mapping
Risk assessment
Event management
Mineral and waste monitoring
Site assessment, property identi(cid:142)cation, site promotion
Site analysis, competitor analysis
Siting telecommunications masts
Site expansion management, security analysis, (cid:143)ight simulators
Network management and leak analysis

Kingston University
Reading Agricultural Consultants
Sir Norman Foster
North West Development Agency
AMEC
Ministry of Defence
Auila (East Midlands Electricity)
Metropolitan Police
Surrey Fire and Rescue
Mouchel Consulting
English Nature
Public Health Laboratory Service
Direct Line Insurance
Glastonbury Festivals Ltd
Cambridgeshire County Council
Bryant Homes
Asda
Ultramast
Stansted Airport
Thames Water

Section 1: Aerial Photography for Mapping the UK

139

a transformation currently under a National Positional
Accuracy Improvement programme from OS and it is yet
to be seen to what extent this will affect imagery registered
to it.

MARKET TRENDS: IMAGERY COVER

In terms of coverage the UK is still yet to be completely
covered by an up-to-date aerial survey.

Two commercial companies have since 1999 been
attempting to get complete cover, both at 25 cm resolution
from 1:10 000 (cid:143)ying. Getmapping is perhaps the one
closest to that goal, and if it completes (cid:143)ying over the whole
of Scotland in 2003 and the remaining 40% of Northern
Ireland, it will be the (cid:142)rst to claim full UK cover. However,
with the archive dating back to 1999, it faces the inevitable
conundrum of having to start doing it all over again to
maintain currency in the archive. The other commercial
company seeking a national programme is UKPerspectives,
though details of their cover are not available.

The Ordnance Survey launched its imagery programme
in April 2003, with 25% cover of Great Britain and plans to
have full cover, with the help of three industry partners (the
GeoInformation Group, UKPerspectives and Getmapping)

by the end of 2004. It too also intends to bring an archive
of 25 cm resolution imagery to market.

Also in the UK,

the GeoInformation Group, one
leading supplier of off-the-shelf imagery, has adopted a
different approach by ignoring a national programme and
concentrating on urban centres, and providing greater
resolution,
frequency of cover and derived information
databases from the imagery. It has over 200 urban centres
across the UK, covering some 175 local authority areas and
over 55% of the UK’s population.

MARKET TRENDS: IMAGERY DELIVERY

The availability of imagery within the UK has itself gone
through a considerable transformation. For the professional
surveyor and GIS user the traditional approach of supply-
ing data on a CD or DVD still remains. However the form
that data takes has changed from simple TIFF or JPEG (cid:142)les
to being compressed into a seamless database and wrapped
with software. Innovations such as the GeoInformation
Group Image Manager with blend and fade operations now
make it possible for users to immediately view and com-
pare their data on a CD without the need for additional
software (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. CRViewer

140

The Cartographic Journal

The Internet has provided a new means of

taking
data from traditional aerial survey repositories and placing
them to a wider audience. Internet mapping companies
such as Multimap.com and Streetmap.com have, since 2000,
offered imagery alongside their traditional mapping and
route-(cid:142)nding services. Getmapping provides their archive
on-line and offers a variety of application for the consumer
and professional markets alike through their web site, as
well as through more traditional routes such as books and
atlases. The GeoInformation Group Internet offering centres
around a professional service, with it partners GlobeXplorer
providing on-line access to its archive through ESRI,
MapInfo and AutoDesk plugins. Ordnance Survey also now
offers on-line access to subscribers for its OSMasterMap
product.

In the UK the Internet will continue to be a medium
for the delivery of imagery and will undoubtedly grow
as companies seek to expand the market, and their market
share for imagery.

FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

In terms of development the increase to 12.5 and beyond
will be a key future development for the industry as users
strive for more information. However, the derivation and
consolidation into geographic products or layers of infor-
mation held in the image will be a key feature for the
future. This is already evident with the GeoInformation
Group and its Image to Information programme, which
extracts out of
the image information on Land Use,
Building Class and Building Height.

Additional data will emerge and will principally come
from digital cameras and terrain scanning devices such as
INFASR and Lidar.

Already widely used in many parts of the world, digital
cameras of the type that can replace conventional (cid:142)lm-based

cameras are not in use commercially in the UK. Whether
trials are ongoing currently is not known, however in
such a highly competitive market arguments can be made
both for and against the use of such highly advanced digital
camera technology. The cost of such a system against the
quality and time to market the end digital product has
yet to be robustly tested and proven. Unless a speci(cid:142)c high
value project requiring such digital technology appears, it
is dif(cid:142)cult to see how digital sensors can make an impact
in the UK market.

One area that is receiving considerable attention and is
something that will impact the UK market in the next few
years is the presence of terrain imaging systems such as
Lidar and Infsar. One company, NextMap, has recently
completed (cid:143)ying over a substantial amount of England,
Wales and southern Scotland, to produce high resolution
DEM and DTM along with a 50 cm radar image. This
fusion of datasets is another trend that may well grow
in future years in the UK market with the combination of
terrain data gathering systems with digital imaging sensors,
to produce true vertical orthorecti(cid:142)ed image datasets
coupled with terrain information. With such a competitive
and educated market what does the future hold? One
thing for certain is that imagery has fast become the new
map of the UK. It is unlikely to replace the traditional
map, but technological innovation and market demand for
more and more detail — and ultimately information —
will ensure it remains a key geographic database for the
twenty-(cid:142)rst century.

REFERENCES

Allbrook, W. (2001). Survey of Vertical Aerial Photography,

Business Research Centre, Malmesbury, 34 pp.

Moore, G. A. (1998). Inside the tornado, Capstone Publishing,

Oxford, 244pp.

Copyright of Cartographic Journal is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or

emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

