Geoinformatica
DOI 10.1007/s10707-013-0197-8

An evaluative baseline for geo-semantic relatedness
and similarity

Andrea Ballatore · Michela Bertolotto · David C. Wilson

Received: 15 April 2013 / Revised: 12 October 2013 / Accepted: 28 November 2013
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract In geographic information science and semantics, the computation of semantic
similarity is widely recognised as key to supporting a vast number of tasks in information
integration and retrieval. By contrast, the role of geo-semantic relatedness has been largely
ignored. In natural language processing, semantic relatedness is often confused with the
more specific semantic similarity. In this article, we discuss a notion of geo-semantic relat-
edness based on Lehrer’s semantic fields, and we compare it with geo-semantic similarity.
We then describe and validate the Geo Relatedness and Similarity Dataset (GeReSiD), a
new open dataset designed to evaluate computational measures of geo-semantic relatedness
and similarity. This dataset is larger than existing datasets of this kind, and includes 97
geographic terms combined into 50 term pairs rated by 203 human subjects. GeReSiD is
available online and can be used as an evaluation baseline to determine empirically to what
degree a given computational model approximates geo-semantic relatedness and similarity.

Keywords Geo-semantic relatedness · Geo-semantic similarity · Gold standards ·
Geo-semantics · Cognitive plausibility · GeReSiD

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s10707-013-0197-8) contains supplementary material, which is available
to authorized users.
A. Ballatore ((cid:2)) · M. Bertolotto
School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland
e-mail: andrea.ballatore@ucd.ie

M. Bertolotto
e-mail: michela.bertolotto@ucd.ie

D. C. Wilson
Department of Software and Information Systems, University of North Carolina, Charlotte, NC, USA
e-mail: davils@uncc.edu

Geoinformatica

1 Introduction

Is lake related to river? Is road related to transportation? Are mountain and hill more related
than mountain and lake? While it may seem natural to answer yes to all of these questions,
the logical and computational formalisation of why this is the case has raised consider-
able interest in philosophy, psychology, linguistics and, more recently, in computer science.
The human ability to detect semantic relatedness is essential to perform key operations
in communication, such as word-sense disambiguation (e.g. interpreting bank as financial
institution or as the terrain alongside the bed of a river), reducing semantic ambiguity and
increasing efficiency in meaning-creation and sharing. The human cognitive apparatus pos-
sesses a remarkable ability to detect co-occurrence patterns that are not due to chance, but
that indicate the existence of some semantic relation between the terms.

Semantic similarity has been identified as a particular subset of this general notion of
semantic relatedness. While semantically related terms are connected by any kind of rela-
tion, semantically similar terms are related by synonymy, hyponymy, and hypernymy, all of
which involve an is a relation. In this sense, train and bus are intuitively similar (they are
both means of transport), whilst bus and road are related but not similar (i.e. they often co-
occur but with different roles). Semantic similarity relies on the general cognitive ability to
detect similar patterns in stimuli, which attracts considerable attention in cognitive science.
Notably, Goldstone and Son [15] stated that “assessments of similarity are fundamental to
cognition because similarities in the world are revealing. The world is an orderly enough
place that similar objects and events tend to behave similarly” (p. 13). Therefore, the vast
applicability of semantic similarity in computer and information science should come as no
surprise.

In geographic information science (GIScience), the theoretical and practical importance
of geo-semantic similarity has been fully acknowledged, resulting in a growing body of
research [2, 4, 23]. By contrast, the importance of semantic relatedness, which is widely
studied in the non-geographic domain, has been almost completely ignored, with the excep-
tion of the works by Hecht and Raubal [16] and Hecht et al. [17]. Computational measures
of semantic relatedness play a pivotal role in natural language processing, information
retrieval, and word sense disambiguation, providing access to deeper semantic connections
between words and sets of words. Despite the large number of existing measures, their
rigorous evaluation still constitutes an important research challenge [12].

This article contributes to geographic information science (GIScience) and semantics
in the following ways. First, we discuss in detail the notion of geo-semantic relatedness,
drawing on Lehrer’s theory of semantic fields, which consist of sets of terms covering a
restricted semantic domain. Geo-semantic relatedness is defined with respect to specifiable
geographic relations between terms, and is compared and contrasted with the more widely
studied geo-semantic similarity. Second, we have developed and validated the Geo Relat-
edness and Similarity Dataset (GeReSiD), tackling the complex issue of the evaluation of
computational measures of geo-semantic relatedness and similarity. In this new dataset,
we have collected psychological judgements about 50 pairs of terms, covering 97 unique
geographic terms, from 203 human subjects. The human judgements in GeReSiD focus
explicitly on geo-semantic relatedness and similarity between geographic terms.

The resulting dataset provides an evaluation test bed for geo-semantic relatedness and
similarity. This is compared against the existing human-generated gold standards used to
assess computational measures of semantic relatedness and similarity, highlighting the lim-
itations of such datasets. Such an evaluative baseline constitutes a valuable ground truth
against which computational measures can be assessed, providing empirical evidence about

Geoinformatica

the cognitive plausibility of the measures. GeReSiD can inform research in geo-semantics,
indicating to what degree computational approaches match human judgements. More
specifically the contribution of this evaluative baseline consists of the following aspects:

– GeReSiD covers a sample of geographic terms larger than existing similarity datasets,
including 97 natural and man-made unique terms, grouped in 50 unique pairs. Psycho-
logical judgements of geo-semantic relatedness and similarity were collected separately
on the 50 pairs.

– GeReSiD includes a sample of evenly distributed relatedness/similarity judgements,
ranging from near-synonymity to no relationship between the terms. Our methodology
is described explicitly and precisely, in order to provide practical guidelines to construct
similar datasets.

–

– Unlike existing datasets, the semantic judgements on the term pairs contained in
GeReSiD are analysed with respect to interrater agreement (IRA) and interrater
reliability (IRR).
The psychological judgements in GeReSiD can be observed as the mean of relat-
edness/similarity of the pairs, using correlation coefficients of relatedness/similarity
rankings (such as Spearman’s ρ or Kendall’s τ ). Alternatively, the data can be inter-
preted as categorical, using Cohen’s kappa or Fisher’s exact test [7] to evaluate the
computational measure.

– GeReSiD is an open dataset freely available online.1 Both raw data and the resulting

dataset are available.

The remainder of this article is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses in depth the
two key notions of geo-semantic relatedness and similarity, proposing a synthetic defini-
tion. Section 3 summarises existing datasets for semantic relatedness and similarity, with
particular attention to those restricted to the geographic domain. The new evaluative base-
line, GeReSiD, is outlined, analysed and discussed in Section 4. Conclusions and directions
for future research are indicated in Section 5.

2 Geo-semantic relatedness and similarity

This section introduces the notion of geo-semantic relatedness, comparing it and contrast-
ing it with geo-semantic similarity. In the natural language processing literature, several
terms are used inconsistently, including semantic relatedness, relational similarity, taxonom-
ical similarity, semantic association, analogy, and attributional similarity [53]. These terms
are often used interchangeably [9]. A striking example of this tendency is the article title
‘WordNet::Similarity: Measuring the relatedness of terms’ [39].

In natural language, terms are connected by an open set of semantic relations. Common
semantic relations are synonymy (A coincides with B), antonymy (A is the opposite of B),
hyponymy (A is a B), hypernymy (B is a A), holonymy (A is whole of B), meronymy (A is
part of B), causality (A causes B), temporal contiguity (A occurs at the same time as B), and
function (A is used to perform B). Khoo and Na [28] have surveyed these semantic rela-
tions, whilst Morris and Hirst [36] have explored other non-classical semantic relations. As
Khoo and Na [28] remarked, semantic relations are characterised by productivity (new rela-
tions can be easily created), uncountability (semantic relations are an open class and cannot

1http://github.com/ucd-spatial/Datasets (acc. Apr 10, 2013)

Geoinformatica

be counted), and predictability (they follow general, recurring patterns). In the geographic
domain, spatial relations such as proximity (A is near B), and containment (A is within B)
have an impact on semantics [49].

Before providing our definition of geo-semantic relatedness and similarity, it is bene-
ficial to review the semantics of these terms in the literature. In the context of semantic
networks, Rada et al. [40] suggested that semantic relatedness is “based on an aggregate of
the interconnections between the terms” (p. 18). To obtain semantic similarity, the observa-
tion must be restricted to taxonomic is a relationships between terms. Resnik [41] followed
this approach, and defined semantic similarity and relatedness as follows: “Semantic simi-
larity represents a special case of semantic relatedness: for example, cars and gasoline would
seem to be more closely related than, say, cars and bicycles, but the latter pair are certainly
more similar” (p. 448).

More recently, Turney [53] added a further distinction between ‘attributional’ and ‘rela-
tional similarity.’ Following the approach outlined by Medin et al. [32], ‘attributes’ are
statements about a term that take only one parameter, e.g. X is red, X is long. There-
fore, attributional similarity measures the correspondence between the attributes of the two
terms. ‘Relations,’ on the other hand, are statements that take two or more parameters, e.g.
X is a Y, X is longer than Y . Hence, relational similarity is based on the common rela-
tions between two pairs of terms [53]. On these assumptions, synonymy is seen as a high
degree of attributional similarity between two terms, e.g. < river, stream >. Analogy,
by contrast, is characterised as a high degree of relational similarity between two pairs of
terms, e.g. < boat, river > and < car, road >. The next sections discuss geo-semantic
relatedness and similarity in detail.

2.1 Geo-semantic relatedness

A general notion of relatedness in the geographic context was stated in Tobler’s first law,
which asserts that everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related
than distant things [51]. While this law was formulated to express intuitively the high spa-
tial autocorrelation of many geographic phenomena, it has generated several responses in
GIScience. For example, in the context of information visualisation, Montello et al. [35]
have proposed the first law of cognitive geography, which states that “people believe closer
things to be more similar than distant things” (p. 317). Applying the same intuition to
the domain of geo-semantics, we assert that two terms are geo-semantically related to the
degree to which they refer to entities or phenomena connected via specifiable relations
grounded in the geographic dimension.

To define a notion of geo-semantic relatedness, we rely on the notion of semantic field.
According to Lehrer [31], a semantic field is “a set of lexemes which cover a certain con-
ceptual domain and which bear certain specifiable relation to one another” (p. 283). While
a ‘domain’ is an epistemological notion referring to a subset of human knowledge and
experience (e.g. geography, politics, medicine, etc.), a semantic field is a more specific lin-
guistic notion that refers to a set of lexemes utilised to describe a domain. For example, a
semantic field might be formed by terms train, bus, trip, fare, delay, accident, etc., which
are all connected to the underlying term of transportation, and commonly used to generate
observations on the domain of mobility.

Terms appear to be semantically related to the degree to which they belong to the same
semantic field, and can indeed belong to different semantic fields. Semantic fields are nei-
ther static nor well-defined sets, but rather fuzzy configurations that shift over time, and

Geoinformatica

across different agents and information communities. The condition of specifiability of rela-
tions emphasises the fact that random co-occurrence has no impact on semantic relatedness.
If a relation is not specifiable, the co-occurrence of the two terms must be random. A term
has a certain degree of centrality in a semantic field, i.e. the density of connectedness with
other terms. For example, in the aforementioned semantic field on transportation, car is
more central than delay. Similarly, in a semantic field on social life, car is likely to be less
central than restaurant or pub.

Geo-semantic relatedness can therefore be defined as a specific sub-domain of seman-
tic relatedness, focusing on relations grounded in the geographic dimension, i.e. relations
in which at least one of the terms has a spatial dimension. Examples of geo-semantically
related terms are judge, trial, and tribunal, where tribunal has a strong geographic compo-
nent that grounds the other terms geographically. A computational measure of geo-semantic
relatedness has to aggregate and quantify the intensity of such relations between two terms,
providing a useful tool for several complex tasks. For example, terms river and flood should
be more geo-semantically related than vehicle and car, which possess a less prominent
geographic component. Acknowledging the fact that most terms in natural language have
some degree of geographic ground, we express this approach to geo-semantic relatedness
following Tobler’s first law of geography:

Every term is geo-semantically related to all other terms, but terms that co-occur with
specifiable geographic relations are more related than other terms.

In other words, every term can in principle have some degree of geo-semantic relatedness
to any other term, but terms that co-occur in observations bearing specifiable relations tend
to be more geo-semantically related than those that do not. This formulation puts terms in
relation to human spatial experience from which terms arise, suggesting indistinct, gradual,
and shifting boundaries between geo-related and unrelated terms.

In this sense, geo-semantic relatedness is intrinsically fuzzy, admitting a continuous spec-
trum of relatedness rather than a binary classification (i.e. related or unrelated). Highly
related terms belong to the same semantic field. The same terms can belong to several over-
lapping semantic fields. Relatedness involves all semantic relations, including synonymy,
antonymy, hyponymy, hypernymy, holonymy, meronymy, causality, temporal contiguity,
function, proximity, and containment. This law applies both to natural language, where geo-
graphic terms can be highly imprecise and vague, and to scientific conceptualisations, which
generally aim at stricter semantics.

Surprisingly, in GIScience semantic relatedness has been almost completely ignored,
with two notable exceptions [16, 17]. In order to explore semantically and spatially related
entities in Wikipedia, Hecht and Raubal [16] developed ExploSR, a graph-based related-
ness measure. ExploSR computes a semantic relatedness score of two articles by assigning
weights to spatially-referenced articles in the Wikipedia Article Graph. More recently, the
Atlasify system generates human-readable explanations of the relationship between terms to
support exploratory search [17].

Geo-semantic relatedness can be informed by ideas developed in the area of text min-
ing. The latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) adopts a probabilistic approach to cluster highly
semantically-related terms in a text corpus [8]. LDA was extended to include a geographic
dimension into the Location Aware Topic Model (LATM) [55]. LATM quantifies the geo-
semantic relatedness between keywords, topics, and geographic locations, adopting a fully
distributional approach.

Geoinformatica

2.2 Geo-semantic similarity

While geo-semantic relatedness of terms can be based on co-occurrence in observations,
geo-semantic similarity of terms can only be determined through the analysis of the terms’
attributes and relations. Geo-semantic similarity is a subset of geo-semantic relatedness: all
similar terms are also related, but related terms are not necessarily similar. The relations
considered for geo-semantic similarity include only synonymy, hyponymy, and hypernymy.
Unlike geo-semantic relatedness, geo-semantic similarity has been deeply explored by the
GIScience community, and is recognised as one of the key concepts of geo-semantics [29].
Several theories of similarity have been used to conceptualise and measure geo-semantic
similarity, including featural, transformational, geometric, and alignment models [22, 23,
47, 48]. Specific techniques have been devised for specific knowledge-representation for-
malisms [20, 44]. More recently, graph-based [5] and lexical techniques [3, 4] have been
investigated in the emerging area of volunteered geographic information (VGI). These
works tend to focus on the conceptual level, computing the similarity of abstract geographic
terms (e.g. city and river), rather than the instance level (e.g. New York and Danube).

Beyond the specificities of such approaches, we can state that terms A and B are seman-
tically similar with respect to C, where C is a set of attributes and relations, also known as
context [26]. The context C focuses on the typical spatial organisation and appearance of
the entity identified by the term (e.g. shape, size, material composition). Alternatively, the
similarity of A and B can be measured with respect to their affordances, i.e. the possibilities
that an entity offers to humans [19].

As observed in relation to geo-semantic relatedness, all terms can be geo-semantically
similar to some limited extent, and geo-semantic similarity is therefore best modelled as a
continuous spectrum, rather than a binary classification. For example, terms restaurant and
continent are similar with respect to the fact that they both refer to geographically-grounded
entities. To capture this idea at the linguistic level that is relevant to this discussion, we adopt
the approach outlined in [4]. Considering the terms used in lexical definitions of terms, we
state recursively that:

All terms are geo-semantically similar, but geographic terms described using the same
terms are more similar than other terms.

A geo-semantic similarity measure has to quantify the similarity of two terms into a score,
enabling a number of semantic tasks in information retrieval (IR) and information integra-
tion. For example, terms restaurant and pub are very similar because they share similar
spatial organisation and affordances. Houses and schools are geo-semantically similar with
respect to their spatial organisation of parts and can be described as having walls, win-
dows, doors, a roof, etc. Roads and rivers show similar affordances—they can be used for
transportation.

3 Semantic relatedness and similarity gold standards

Semantic similarity and relatedness measures can be evaluated against a human-generated
set of psychological judgements. This section gives an overview of published similarity
and relatedness gold standards, mostly from psychology and computational linguistics. The

Geoinformatica

term ‘gold standard’ is described by the Oxford Dictionary of English as “a thing of supe-
rior quality which serves as a point of reference against which other things of its type may
be compared.”2 In computer science, the term is used to describe high-quality, human-
generated datasets, capturing human behaviour in relation to a well-defined task. Such
datasets can then be used to assess the performance of automatic approaches, by quantifying
the correlation between the machine and the human-generated data.

3.1 Cognitive plausibility

In a seminal discussion on expert systems, Strube [50] argued that knowledge engineering
should strive towards increasing the cognitive adequacy of computational systems, defined
as their ‘degree of nearness to human cognition’ (p. 165). In the context of GIScience,
geo-relatedness or geo-similarity measures need not replicate the workings of human mind
in their entirety (defined as absolutely strong adequacy), but should aim at what Strube
called relatively strong adequacy, i.e. the ability of the system to function like a human
expert in a circumscribed domain. Following this approach, we adopt the notion of cognitive
plausibility to assess to what degree a measure mimics human behaviour [27].

In order to quantify the cognitive plausibility of a computational semantic relatedness or
similarity measure, two complementary approaches can be adopted: (1) psychological eval-
uations, and (2) task-based evaluations. In psychological evaluations, human subjects are
asked to rank or rate term pairs. These rankings or ratings are then compared with computer-
generated rankings, usually using correlation as an indicator of performance. Alternatively,
human subjects can perform a task based on the assessment of relatedness or similarity, such
as word sense disambiguation, and the cognitive plausibility of the measure is observed
indirectly in the results of the task, using for example precision and recall measures. Such
human-generated datasets are used as gold standards.

The usage of gold standards is common in natural language processing tasks, such as
part-of-speech tagging, entity resolution, and word sense disambiguation [10, 38, 46, 52].
Adopting this approach, a technique or a model can be deemed to be more or less plausi-
ble by observing its correlation with human-generated results. Such datasets are created by
combining the results from a number of human subjects who perform a given task, either
under controlled conditions, or through online forms. To be considered valid by a research
community, a gold standard needs to meet certain criteria, such as coverage, quality, preci-
sion, and inter-subject agreement. Disagreements about the validity of a gold standard are
quite common and, when weaknesses are uncovered, a gold standard can be demoted to a
golden calf (e.g. [24]).

The intrinsic high subjectivity of relatedness and similarity rankings makes the col-
lection and validation of gold standards complex and challenging. Although task-based
evaluations might appear more ‘objective,’ they are equally affected by subjectivity: ulti-
mately, relatedness-based or similarity-based tasks are generated, interpreted, and validated
by human subjects. Acknowledging the unlikelihood of total agreement, the reliability of a
similarity evaluation should be grounded in stability over time, consistency across different
datasets, and reproducibility of psychological results. Ideally, both evaluation approaches
should show convergent, cross-validating results: a strong correlation is expected between
the cognitive plausibility of a measure and its performance in similarity-based tasks.

2http://oxforddictionaries.com/definition/gold+standard (acc. Apr 10, 2013)

Geoinformatica

3.2 Comparison of relatedness and similarity gold standards

Over the past 50 years, several authors investigating semantic issues in psychology, lin-
guistics, and computer science created datasets focused on semantic similarity and, more
recently, semantic relatedness. The first similarity gold standard was published in 1965, in
a article in which Rubenstein and Goodenough [45] collected a set of 65 word pairs ranked
by their synonymy. Following a similar line of research, Miller and Charles [33] published
a similar dataset with 30 word pairs in 1991. More recently, Finkelstein et al. [13] created
the WordSimilarity-353 dataset, which contains 353 word pairs actually ranked by seman-
tic relatedness.3 The dataset was subsequently extended to distinguish between similarity
and relatedness [1].4 In a study of the retrieval mechanism of memories, Nelson et al. [37]
collected associative similarity ratings for 1,016 word pairs.

A smaller number of geo-semantic similarity datasets have been generated in the areas
of GIScience and geographic information retrieval (GIR). In this area, Janowicz et al. [21]
conducted a study on the cognitive plausibility of their Sim-DL similarity measure. How-
ever, the study was conducted in German on a very small set of terms, and for this reason it
is difficult to reuse in different contexts. In order to evaluate their Matching-Distance Sim-
ilarity Measure (MDSM), Rodr´ıguez and Egenhofer [44] collected similarity judgements
about geographic terms, including large natural entities (e.g. mountain and forest), and man-
made features (e.g. bridge and house). Before GeReSiD, the MDSM evaluation dataset was
the largest similarity gold standard for geographic terms. For this reason, this dataset was
utilised to carry out the evaluation of network-based similarity measures [5]. In contrast,
geo-semantic relatedness has been largely ignored in the geospatial domain.

The salient characteristics of these gold standards are summarised in Table 1, detailing
their human subjects, the terms and term pairs. For each dataset, the table shows whether
they focus on semantic relatedness (REL), semantic similarity (SIM), and exclusively on
the geographic domain (GEO). The existing datasets are compared with GeReSiD, the gold
standard described in Section 4, and have several limitations. First, the procedure followed
to construct the datasets is usually only sketched and not described in detail. Second, the
size of the datasets tends to be rather small.

The size of such datasets can be observed along three dimensions: number of human
subjects, number of terms, and number of term pairs. A clear trade-off exists between num-
ber of human subjects and number of term pairs. Furthermore, most datasets do not capture
the distinction between semantic similarity and relatedness, and do not analyse the IRA and
IRR. It is important to note that most authors did not have the explicit intention to construct
gold standards, but rather to analyse specific aspects of semantic similarity or relatedness.
However, in some cases, these datasets have been treated as gold standards in the subsequent
literature [33, 45]. To the best of our knowledge, only WordSimilarity-353 was explicitly
designed to be a generic gold standard.

Some of these gold standards have been extensively utilised to assess general term-to-
term similarity measures [13, 33, 45]. In the geographic context, only the MDSM evaluation
dataset is suitable to evaluate semantic similarity of geographic terms [44]. However, no
existing dataset focusing on geographic terms accounts explicitly for the difference between
semantic relatedness and semantic similarity.

3http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/∼gabr/resources/data/wordsim353 (acc. Apr 10, 2013)
4http://alfonseca.org/eng/research/wordsim353.html (acc. Apr 10, 2013)

Geoinformatica

Table 1 Semantic relatedness and similarity gold standards

Reference

Subjects

Terms & term pairs

REL SIM GEO

Rubenstein and

51 paid college

48 terms (ordinary

Goodenough [45]

undergrads: group

English words); 65 term pairs,

I (15 subjects),

ranging from highly

group II (36 subjects).

synonymous pairs to

semantically unrelated pairs.

Miller and

38 undergraduate

40 terms selected from Rubenstein;

Charles [33]

students. US English

and Goodenough [45]; 32 term pairs.

Finkelstein et al. [13], 13 experts for first

346 terms (manually selected

Agirre et al. [1]

set (153 pairs), 16 experts

nouns and compound

for second set (200 pairs).

nouns); 353 term pairs.

native speakers.

Near-native English

proficiency.

Rodr´ıguez and

72 paid undergrad students

33 geographic terms from

Egenhofer [44]

(two groups of 36 people). WordNet and SDTS; 10 sets

Nelson et al. [37]

94 undergraduate students

1,016 term pairs selected

US English native speakers. of 10 or 11 term pairs.

√

rewarded with academic

unsystematically from

credits.

a cued recall database

of 2,000+ pairs.

Janowicz et al. [21]

28 unpaid subjects

Six geographic terms

(20–30 years of age).

related to bodies of water.

GeReSiD

203 unpaid English

97 geographic terms

(see Section 4)

native speakers.

from OpenStreetMap;

50 term pairs.

√

√

√ √

√ √

√ √

√ √ √

4 Geo Relatedness and Similarity Dataset (GeReSiD)

This section presents the Geo Relatedness and Similarity Dataset (GeReSiD), a dataset of
human judgements that we have developed to provide a ground truth for the assessment
of computational relatedness and similarity measurements. GeReSiD captures explicitly
the difference between geo-semantic relatedness and similarity on a sample of geographic
terms larger than existing similarity datasets surveyed in Section 3, including both natu-
ral and man-made terms. In order to ensure its validity as a gold standard, it focuses on a
sample of evenly distributed relatedness/similarity judgements, ranging from very high to
very low. Section 4.1 describes our methodology precisely, in order to provide guidelines on
constructing datasets to ground the evaluation of measures of geo-semantic relatedness and
similarity. Subsequently, Section 4.2 outlines the results obtained from the online survey.

4.1 Survey design

The psychological judgements about geo-semantic relatedness and similarity were collected
via an online survey, through an interactive Web interface specifically designed for this

Geoinformatica

purpose. Online surveys constitute a powerful research tool, with well-known advantages
and disadvantages [57]. Given the focus of this study on generic terms found in web maps,
subjects involved in projects such as OpenStreetMap represent an ideal virtual community
of map users and producers to conduct a psychological evaluation. An online survey is an
inexpensive and effective way to reach these online communities.

A cross-disciplinary consensus exists on the fact that semantic judgements are affected
by the context in which the terms are considered [22, 44]. Rodr´ıguez and Egenhofer [44]
asked their subjects to rank geographic terms in the following contexts: ‘null context,’ ‘play
a sport,’ ‘compare constructions,’ and ‘compare transportation systems.’ The subjects’ atten-
tion was therefore focused on specific aspects of the terms being analysed, rather than on
the terms in an unspecified setting.

Although context affects the assessment of semantic similarity, in this survey we aim
at capturing the overall difference between semantic relatedness and similarity of terms,
without focusing on specific aspects of the conceptualisation. This comparison is an impor-
tant research topic, frequently mentioned but rarely addressed directly through empirical
evaluation. Introducing specific contexts into our survey would increase the complexity of
the study by introducing new biases, making the direct comparison between similarity and
relatedness problematic. For example, adding a specific context does not increase the inter-
subject agreement: in their evaluation, Rodr´ıguez and Egenhofer [44] report a considerably
lower association between subjects in the case of context-specific questions (mean Kendall’s
W being .5), than with a-contextual questions (mean W = .68). Moreover, specific con-
texts would introduce specific biases, which are beyond the scope of Geo Relatedness and
Similarity Dataset (GeReSiD).

As a solution to these issues, we frame the evaluation in the general context of popular
web maps, in which geographic terms are most frequently visualised and utilised by users.
This way, the subjects are induced to use their own conceptualisation of the geographic
entities. As happens with semantic judgements, subjectivity inevitably affects the subjects’
choices. In this study, subjects are free to choose what properties they consider most rele-
vant to the comparison, and the mean of their ratings quantifies the perceived inter-subject
similarity and relatedness of the terms. While the study of the context is beyond the scope
of this survey, it certainly represents an important direction for future work.

The geographic terms included in this survey are taken from the OpenStreetMap project.
In our previous work, we extracted the lexicon utilised in OpenStreetMap into a machine-
readable vocabulary, the OSM Semantic Network [6]. To date, the OSM Semantic Network
contains a total of about 4,300 distinct terms, called ‘tags’ in the project’s terminology. From
this large set of geographic terms, a suitable sample had to be selected. To be included,
a term had to be clearly intelligible, well defined on the OSM Semantic Network, as
culturally-unspecific as possible, and present in the actual OpenStreetMap vector map. Fol-
lowing these criteria, we manually selected a set C of 400 terms, including a wide range of
natural and man-made entities, such as ‘sea,’ ‘lighthouse,’ ‘landfill,’ ‘valley,’ and ‘glacier.’
Using the terms in C, we defined a set P containing all possible pairs of geographic terms
(cid:4)a, b(cid:5) where a, b ∈ C, for a total of 160,000 pairs. We subsequently removed from P
symmetric pairs (e.g. removing (cid:4)b, a(cid:5) when (cid:4)a, b(cid:5) is defined) and identities (e.g. (cid:4)a, a(cid:5)),
resulting in 76,000 valid pairs.

In order to detect issues in the survey, a pilot study was then conducted with 12 graduate
students at University College Dublin. A set Prand was constructed by selecting 100 pairs
randomly from P. Each pair was associated with a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from low
to high relatedness/similarity. The subjects were asked to rate each pair both for semantic
relatedness and similarity, and were then interviewed informally, to obtain direct feedback

Geoinformatica

about the survey. Several useful observations were obtained from this pilot survey. First,
most subjects found the test too long. A smaller sample size had to be selected, considering
a trade-off between number of pairs and the completion time, in order to ensure that enough
subjects would complete the task without losing concentration. Based on the opinion of
subjects, we identified 50 pairs as the maximum size of the task, with a completion time of
around five minutes, suitable for an unpaid online questionnaire.

In the OpenStreetMap semantic model, tags are made of a key and a value (e.g.
amenity = school). In the pilot survey, this formalism had to be explained to the subjects,
who generally found it confusing. For example, the psychological comparison between
amenity = school and amenity = community centre was influenced by the shared word
‘amenity,’ which is highly generic and ambiguous. To make the dataset independent from
the peculiar OpenStreetMap tag structure, we extracted short labels for all the 400 terms
from the terms’ definitions. For example, amenity = f ood court was labelled as ‘food
court,’ shop = music as ‘music shop.’ In order to increase their semantic clarity, the terms
were manually mapped to the corresponding terms in WordNet (see Table 2).

The fully random set of 100 pairs Prand used in the pilot survey obtained a distribution
heavily skewed towards low similarity and relatedness. To reach a more uniform distribu-
tion, we introduced a partial manual selection in the process. In order to obtain an even
distribution in the resulting relatedness and similarity scores, we manually extracted from
the pilot survey a set of 50 pairs rated by the 12 subjects as highly related/similar pairs
(Phigh), and 50 middle relatedness/similarity pairs (Pmed ). It is worth noting that while
the selection of highly related/similar pairs is intuitive, middle-relatedness/similarity pairs
is more challenging, and requires dealing with highly subjective conceptualisations. This
aspect is reflected in the survey results (see Section 4.2). The final set of 50 pairs for the
questionnaire Pq was assembled from the following elements:

–
–
–

16 high-relatedness/similarity pairs (random sample from Phigh)
18 middle-relatedness/similarity pairs (random sample from Pmed)
16 low-relatedness/similarity pairs (random sample from P)

The pilot survey also showed clearly that assigning both the relatedness and the similar-
ity tasks to the same subject was impractical, and was deemed confusing by all subjects
who did not possess specific expertise in linguistics. For this reason, we opted to assign

Table 2 Sample of terms in
GeReSiD

Term

bay

sea

basketball court

beauty parlor

floodplain

greengrocer

historic castle

motel

political boundary

school

stadium

. . .

OpenStreetMap tag

WordNet synset

natural=bay
place=sea
sport=basketball
shop=beauty
natural=floodplain
shop=greengrocer
historic=castle
tourism=motel
boundary=political
amenity=school
building=stadium
. . .

bay#n#1

sea#n#1

basketball court#n#1

beauty parlor#n#1

floodplain#n#1

greengrocer#n#1

castle#n#2

motel#n#1

boundary#n#1

school#n#1

stadium#n#1

. . .

The dataset contains 97
geographic terms

Geoinformatica

randomly only one task to each subject, either on relatedness or similarity, without trying
to explain to them the technicalities of this distinction. Instead, we relied on the subjects’
inductive understanding of the task through correct examples. Thus, in order to collect reli-
able judgements on similarity and relatedness, we defined two separate questionnaires, one
on relatedness (QREL), and one on similarity (QSI M ). The two questionnaires were identi-
cal, with the exception of the description of the task, and the labels on the Likert scale (one
with a ‘dissimilar-similar’ scale, the other with ‘unrelated-related’).

To avoid terminological confusion, the survey was named ‘Survey on comparison of
geographic terms,’ without mentioning either ‘similarity’ or ‘relatedness’ in the introduc-
tory text. The examples used to illustrate semantic relatedness (apples - bananas, doctor
- hospital, tree - shade) and similarity (apples - bananas, doctor - surgeon, car - motor-
cycle) were based on those by Mohammad and Hirst [34]. A random redirection to either
QREL or QSI M was then implemented to ensure the random sampling of subjects into two
groups, one for similarity and one for relatedness. As the similarity judgement was reported
as more difficult than relatedness, we set the probability of a random redirection to QSI M
at p = .65, to obtain more responders for similarity. Each subject was only exposed to one
of the two questionnaires.

Six general demographic questions about the subject were included: age group, mother
tongue, gender, and continent of origin. A textbox was available to type feedback and com-
ments about the survey. The core of each questionnaire was the seventh question, i.e. the
relatedness or similarity rating task. The subject had to rate 50 pairs of geographic terms
based on their relatedness or similarity, on a 1 to 5 Likert scale. Although the impact of size
of the Likert scale, typical options being 5, 7 or 10, is debated in the social sciences, it has
little impact on the rating means [11]. If the terms were not clear to the user, a ‘no answer’
option had to be selected.

Another aspect discussed in the similarity psychological literature is the counterintuitive
fact that similarity judgements tend to be asymmetric (e.g. sim(building, hospital) (cid:7)=
sim(hospital, building)) [54]. As this aspect is outside the scope of this study, the order
in each pair (cid:4)a, b(cid:5) was randomised to limit the symmetric bias, i.e. the potential difference
between sim(a, b) and sim(b, a) from the subject’s perspective. Moreover, a fixed presen-
tation order of pairs can trigger specific semantic associations between terms, and would
reduce the quality of the last pairs, rated when the subjects are more likely to be tired.
To reduce this sequential-ordering bias, the presentation order of the pairs was randomised
automatically for each subject at the Web interface level.

At the end of the design process, the survey dataset contained 50 pairs of geographic
terms to be rated on 5-point Likert scales, including 97 OpenStreetMap terms, with three
terms being repeated twice. The pairs were selected to ensure an even distribution between
low, medium and high relatedness/similarity. The rating was to be executed in two indepen-
dent questionnaires, one for semantic similarity (QSI M ) and one for semantic relatedness
(QREL), randomly assigned to the human subjects. In February 2012, the survey was dis-
seminated in OpenStreetMap and geographic information system (GIS)-related forums and
mailing lists.

4.2 Survey results

The online questionnaires on relatedness and similarity received 305 responses, 124 for
relatedness and 181 for similarity. Given the nature of online surveys, particular attention
has to be paid to the agreement between the human subjects, and the detection of unre-
liable and random answers. In this survey, raters expressed quantitative judgements on

Geoinformatica

geo-semantic relatedness and similarity on a 5-point Likert scale. Two important statisti-
cal aspects to be discussed are the interrater reliability (IRR) and the interrater agreement
(IRA) [30]. IRR considers the relative similarity in ratings provided by multiple raters
(i.e. the human subjects) over multiple targets (i.e. the term pairs), focusing on the order of
the targets. IRA, on the other hand, captures the absolute homogeneity between the ratings,
looking at the specific rating chosen by raters.

Several indices have been devised to capture IRR and IRA in psychological surveys
[7, 30]. Most indices range between 0 (total disagreement) and 1 (perfect agreement). For
example, the ratings of two raters on three targets {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} obtain a I RR = 1
and I RA = 0: the subjects agree perfectly on the ordering of the targets, while disagreeing
on all absolute ratings. LeBreton and Senter [30] recommend using several indices for IRR
and IRA, to avoid the bias of any single index. We thus include the following indices of IRA
and IRR: the mean Pearson’s correlation coefficient [43]; Kendall’s W [25]; Robinson’s A
[42]; Finn coefficient [14]; James, Demaree and Wolf’s rW G(J ) [18].

The 305 responders included both native (208) and non-native English speakers (97). We
observed a substantially lower inter-subject agreement when including non-native speak-
ers (rW G(J ) < .5): the wider variability in these results is due to the varying knowledge
of English of these subjects, who might have associated terms to ‘false friends’ in their
native language, i.e. expressions in two different languages that look or sound similar, but
differ considerably in meaning. For example, Italian speakers may confuse the meaning of
‘factory’ with ‘farm’ (‘fattoria’ in Italian). Hence, they were excluded from the dataset. Fur-
thermore, three subjects did not complete the task, and their responses were discarded. In
order to detect random answers, we computed the correlation between every individual sub-
ject and the means. This way, two subjects in the similarity test showed no correlation at all
with the mean ratings (Spearman’s ρ ∈ [−.05, .05]), and were removed from the dataset.

Of the resulting dataset, Table 3 summarises demographic information (age group, gen-
der, continent of origin, and self-assessed map expertise). As is possible to observe, the
subjects tend be young, male, European, and frequent users of web maps.5 Table 4 focuses
on the indices of IRR and IRA. Following Resnik [41], we consider an upper bound on the
cognitive plausibility of a computable measure to be the highest correlation obtained by a
human rater with the means (e.g. ρ = .92 for relatedness). The table shows these upper
bounds both for Spearman’s ρ and Kendall’s τ . All the IRR and IRA indices indicate very
similar results, falling in the range [.61, .67]. Given the highly subjective nature of seman-
tic conceptualisations, this correlation is satisfactory, and is comparable with analogous
psychological surveys [44].

Given the set of term pairs, and the set of human raters, we computed the related-
ness/similarity scores as the mean ratings, normalised in the interval [0, 1], where 0 means
no relatedness/similarity, and 1 maximum relatedness/similarity. As we have stated in the
survey objectives, the distribution of such scores should be as even as possible, to ensure
that a semantic measure performs well across the board, and not only in a specific region
of the semantic relatedness/similarity space. Several pairs in the dataset contain related
but not similar terms, and the scores confirm this difference. More specifically, <sea,
island> obtained a relatedness score of .74 and a similarity of .4. Similarly, <mountain hut,
mountaintop> obtained respectively .71 and .49 for relatedness and similarity.

5Although a better gender, age, and geographic balances would be desirable, we found it difficult to obtain
it in practice without drastically limiting the size of the sample.

Table 3 Demographics of
human subjects in GeReSiD

Geoinformatica

Relatedness
QREL

Similarity Overall
QSI M

–

Responders

Total N

Gender

Age

Male

Female

18–25

26–35

36–45

46–55

56–65
> 65

Africa

Asia

Europe

Continent

Web map

Never used

expertise

Occasional user

North America

South America

Oceania

Frequent user

Expert

81

72

9

28

14

12

15

7

5

–

–

58

11

–

12

6

18

37

20

122

93

29

39

41

23

10

9

3

1

95

20

3

14

33

39

36

–

–

A dimension that has not been addressed in existing similarity gold standards is that of
the pair agreement, i.e. the consistency of ratings expressed by all subjects on a single pair
(see Section 3). For this purpose, we adopt James, Demaree and Wolf’s rW G, a popular index
to measure IRA on a single target, based on the rating variance [18]. Each pair in QREL
and QSI M obtains an agreement measure ∈ [0, 1], where 0 indicates a squared distribution
(i.e. raters gave all ratings in equal proportion), and 1 is perfect agreement (i.e. all raters
assigned exactly the same rating to the pair). Table 5 shows the content of the resulting
dataset, including mean ratings and pair agreement.

Table 4 Indices for interrater reliability (IRR) and interrater agreement (IRA) in GeReSiD

Relatedness
QREL

Similarity
QSI M

IRR

IRA

Upper bound

*p < .001

Mean Pearson’s r

Kendall’s W

Robinson’s A

Finn coefficient
rW G(J )
Spearman’s ρ

Kendall’s τ

.64*
.65*
.62
.65*
.66
.92*
.79*

203

165

38

67

55

35

25

16

5

3

1

153

31

–

15

20

51

76

56

.65*
.64*
.61
.66*
.67
.93*
.82*

Geoinformatica

Table 5 Sample term pairs in GeReSiD, with mean geo-semantic relatedness, similarity, and agreement

Pair

Term A

Term B

Mean

Agreement

public transport station

railway platform

motel

stadium

theatre

art shop

. . .

hotel

athletics track

cinema

art gallery

. . .

water ski facility

office furniture shop

greengrocer

aqueduct

interior decoration shop

tomb

political boundary

women’s clothes shop

nursing home

continent

REL

SIM

REL

SIM

.93

.87

.85

.82

.78

. . .

.05

.04

.03

.02

.01

.90

.81

.76

.87

.75

. . .

.05

.03

.05

.02

.02

.86

.80

.74

.57

.58

. . .

.92

.91

.96

.96

.97

.82

.72

.63

.79

.60

. . .

.88

.95

.92

.93

.95

Figures 1 and 2 show several statistical characteristics of the resulting dataset, for the 50
pairs in QREL and QSI M . Figure 1a shows the density of the final relatedness/similarity
scores, i.e. the normalised mean rankings in range [0, 1]. While the similarity is skewed
towards the range [0, .4], the relatedness has slightly more scores in the range [.4, 1],
resulting in symmetrical densities. This clearly reflects the fact that semantic similarity
is a specific type of semantic relatedness, and semantic similarity is generally lower than
relatedness. This can be also observed in the sum of the 50 relatedness scores (sum =
22.01, mean = .44) against the similarity scores (sum = 19.5, mean = .39). The paired
Wilcoxon signed rank test [56] indicates that the relatedness scores are higher than the cor-
responding similarity ones, at p < .001. This trend is clearly visible in Fig. 1b. Overall,
these densities show that all the score range [0, 1] is satisfactorily covered, i.e. the dataset
does not show large gaps.

Figure 2a and b show the properties of pair agreement (index rW G), reporting the
relationship between relatedness and similarity, the density of pair agreement, and the

#

1

2

3

4

5

46

47

48

49

50

a

b

Fig. 1 GeReSiD: REL: semantic relatedness; SIM: semantic similarity. a Density of pair score; b scatterplot
of relatedness versus similarity

a

b

Geoinformatica

Fig. 2 GeReSiD: REL: semantic relatedness; SIM: semantic similarity. a Density of pair agreement; b
scatterplot of pair agreement and pair score

relationship between pair agreement and relatedness/similarity scores. In terms of pair
agreement, relatedness and similarity follow very close patterns, with a peak ≈ .5. This
agreement might seem low, but it is largely expected, due to the subjective interpretation of
the values on the Likert scale.

An explanation of this trend in the pair agreement lies in the fact that humans give consis-
tently different ratings to the same objects: some subjects tend to be strict, and some lenient,
resulting in different relative ratings, and therefore low absolute pair agreement [30]. In this
regard, a clear pattern emerges from Fig. 1b. Pair agreement tends to be high (> .7) at the
extremes of the scores, when the relatedness/similarity judgement is very low ([0, .25), no
relation) or very high ([.75, 1], strong relation). On the other hand, pairs with middle scores
(in the interval [.25, .75]) tend to have low pair agreement. Relatedness and similarity do
not show important differences with respect to pair agreement (sum = 30, mean = .6 for
relatedness, sum = 29.6, mean = .59 for similarity). This detailed analysis, in particular in
relation to IRR and IRA, confirms the statistical soundness of GeReSiD, which can be used
to assess the cognitive plausibility of computational measures of geo-semantic relatedness
and similarity.

5 Conclusions

To date, despite its great potential in GIR and information integration, geo-semantic relat-
edness has been only marginally studied. In this article, we have discussed a notion of
geo-semantic relatedness based on Lehrer’s theory of semantic fields, contrasting it with
the widely studied geo-semantic similarity. Despite the variety and importance of compu-
tational measures devised in natural language processing, the evaluation of such measures
remains a difficult and complex task [12].

In order to provide an evaluative baseline for geo-semantic research on relatedness and
similarity, we have designed, collected, and analysed the Geo Relatedness and Similarity
Dataset (GeReSiD). This dataset contains human judgements about 50 term pairs on seman-
tic relatedness and similarity, covering 97 unique geographic terms. To increase the dataset’s
usability and clarity, the terms have been mapped to the corresponding terms in WordNet.
The judgements were collected from 203 English native speakers, through a randomised

Geoinformatica

online survey. GeReSiD is freely available online, released under an Open Knowledge
license.6 The following points deserve particular consideration:

–

–

–

The human judgements have interrater agreement (IRA) and interrater reliability (IRR)
in the interval [.61, .67]. Considering the type of psychological test, this is a fair agree-
ment, indicating that the dataset can be used to evaluate computational measures of
semantic relatedness and similarity for geographic terms.

– Human subjects strongly agree on cases of very high and low semantic relationships,

and tend to have lower agreement on the intermediate cases.
Semantic relatedness and similarity are strongly correlated (τ = .84, ρ = .95). Fur-
thermore, semantic relatedness scores are consistently higher than semantic similarity,
confirming the more specific nature of semantic similarity.
The contribution of GeReSiD lies both in its design and validation methodology, as well
as the dataset itself. The raw data and the resulting dataset are available for analysis and
re-use under a Creative Commons license.

– GeReSiD constitutes an evaluative baseline to evaluate measures of semantic similarity
and relatedness. Furthermore, it permits the empirical determination of whether a given
measure better approximates similarity or relatedness through the direct comparison of
rankings or scores.

– A variety of techniques can be used to compare the rankings or scores generated by a
computational measure with GeReSiD, including correlation coefficients (Spearman’s
ρ and Kendall’s τ ), and categorical approaches (Cohen’s kappa or Fisher’s exact test).

Although GeReSiD provides a novel resource to evaluate computational measures of geo-
semantic relatedness and similarity, several questions remain open. GeReSiD distinguishes
between geo-semantic relatedness and similarity, but not among different contexts. As con-
text has been identified as a key aspect of semantic similarity [26], new datasets should be
generated to capture explicitly the differences in geo-similarity and relatedness judgements
with respect to different contexts, such as appearance and affordances. The investigation of
what specific geographic aspects are used by subjects in their judgements also constitutes
important future work. The dataset’s IRA and IRR are comparable to similar datasets, but
have a large margin for improvement.

As Ferrara and Tasso [12] point out, this evaluative approach has several limita-
tions. Human subjects understand intuitively semantic relatedness and similarity, but the
translation of such judgements into a number is very subjective. Different information com-
munities can express different judgements on the same term pairs. Alternative approaches to
the evaluation of computational measures should be investigated, aiming at cross-validating
the findings generated by GeReSiD. A promising route might consist of evaluating human-
readable explanations of relatedness measures, and not only numeric scores or rankings
[17]. Moreover, the collection of judgements was conducted through online surveys in an
uncontrolled environment, which have well-known issues [57].

Ultimately, the cognitive plausibility is assessed using correlation indexes such as
Spearman’s ρ and Kendall’s τ , which have specific limitations. For example, they tend to
attribute the same weight to high and low similarity rankings, whilst computational applica-
tions normally need more precision on highly-related/similar pairs, which tend to be utilised
in GIR and information integration. Using GeReSiD as input data, new techniques to assess
cognitive plausibility can be developed, offering tools tailored to the study of geo-semantic

6http://github.com/ucd-spatial/Datasets (acc. Apr 10, 2013)

Geoinformatica

relatedness and similarity. Fruitful future work, as geo-semantic similarity is a specific case
of geo-semantic relatedness, will consist of the generalisation of existing geo-similarity
theories to the framework of geo-semantic relatedness.

Acknowledgments The research presented in this article was funded by a Strategic Research Cluster grant
(07/SRC/I1168) by Science Foundation Ireland under the National Development Plan. The authors gratefully
acknowledge this support.

References

1. Agirre E, Alfonseca E, Hall K, Kravalova J, Pas¸ca M, Soroa A (2009) A study on similarity and
relatedness using distributional and WordNet-based approaches. In: Proceedings of human language
technologies: the 2009 annual conference of the North American chapter of the association for
computational linguistics. ACL, pp 19–27

2. Bakillah M, B´edard Y, Mostafavi M, Brodeur J (2009) SIM-NET: a view-based semantic similarity

model for Ad Hoc networks of geospatial databases. Trans GIS 13(5–6):417–447

3. Ballatore A, Wilson D, Bertolotto M (2012) The similarity jury: combining expert judgements on geo-
graphic concepts. In: Castano S, Vassiliadis P, Lakshmanan L, Lee M (eds) Advances in conceptual
modeling. ER 2012 workshops (SeCoGIS). LNCS, vol 7518. Springer, Berlin, pp 231–240

4. Ballatore A, Bertolotto M, Wilson D (2013) Computing the semantic similarity of geographic terms

using volunteered lexical definitions. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 27(10):2099–2118

5. Ballatore A, Bertolotto M, Wilson D (2013) Geographic knowledge extraction and semantic similarity

in OpenStreetMap. Knowl Inf Syst 37(1):61–81

6. Ballatore A, Wilson D, Bertolotto M (2013) A survey of volunteered open geo-knowledge bases in
the semantic web. In: Pasi G, Bordogna G, Jain L (eds) Quality issues in the management of web
information, intelligent systems reference library, vol 50. Springer, Berlin, pp 93–120

7. Banerjee M, Capozzoli M, McSweeney L, Sinha D (1999) Beyond Kappa: a review of interrater

agreement measures. Can J Stat 27(1):3–23

8. Blei DM, Ng AY, Jordan MI (2003) Latent Dirichlet allocation. J Mach Learn Res 3:993–1022
9. Budanitsky A, Hirst G (2006) Evaluating WordNet-based measures of lexical semantic relatedness.

Comput Linguist 32(1):13–47

10. Cimiano P, V¨olker J (2005) Towards large-scale, open-domain and ontology-based named entity
classification. In: Recent advances in natural language processing, RANLP 2005. ACL, pp 166–172
11. Dawes J (2008) Do data characteristics change according to the number of scale points used? Int J Mark

Res 50(1):61–78

12. Ferrara F, Tasso C (2013) Evaluating the results of methods for computing semantic relatedness. In:
Gelbukh A (ed) Computational linguistics and intelligent text processing. LNCS, vol 7816. Springer,
Berlin, pp 447–458

13. Finkelstein L, Gabrilovich E, Matias Y, Rivlin E, Solan Z, Wolfman G, Ruppin E (2002) Placing search

in context: the concept revisited. ACM Trans Inf Syst 20(1):116–131

14. Finn R (1970) A note on estimating the reliability of categorical data. Educ Psychol Meas 30(1):71–76
15. Goldstone R, Son J (2005) Similarity. In: Holyoak K, Morrison R (eds) Cambridge handbook of thinking

and reasoning. Cambridge University Press, New York, pp 13–36

16. Hecht B, Raubal M (2008) GeoSR: geographically explore semantic relations in world knowledge. In:
The European information society: taking geoinformation science one step further. LNGC, Springer,
Berlin

17. Hecht B, Carton SH, Quaderi M, Sch¨oning J, Raubal M, Gergle D, Downey D (2012) Explanatory
semantic relatedness and explicit spatialization for exploratory search. In: Proceedings of the 35th
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval. ACM, pp
415–424

18. James L, Demaree R, Wolf G (1984) Estimating within-group interrater reliability with and without

response bias. J Appl Psychol 69(1):85–98

19. Janowicz K, Raubal M (2007) Affordance-based similarity measurement for entity types. In: Spatial

information theory. LNCS, vol 4736. Springer, Berlin, pp 133–151

20. Janowicz K, Keßler C, Schwarz M, Wilkes M, Panov I, Espeter M, B¨aumer B (2007) Algorithm,
implementation and application of the SIM-DL similarity server. In: GeoSpatial semantics: second
international conference, GeoS 2007. LNCS, vol 4853. Springer, Berlin, pp 128–145

Geoinformatica

21. Janowicz K, Keßler C, Panov I, Wilkes M, Espeter M, Schwarz M (2008) A study on the cognitive
plausibility of SIM-DL similarity rankings for geographic feature types. In: Fabrikant S, Wachowicz
M (eds) The European information society: taking geoinformation science one step further. LNGC,
Springer, Berlin, pp 115–134

22. Janowicz K, Raubal M, Schwering A, Kuhn W (2008) Semantic similarity measurement and geospatial

23. Janowicz K, Raubal M, Kuhn W (2011) The semantics of similarity in geographic information retrieval.

24. Kaptchuk T (2001) The double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial: gold standard or golden calf?

applications. Trans GIS 12(6):651–659

J Spat Info Sci 2(1):29–57

J Clin Epidemiol 54(6):541–549

25. Kendall M, Smith B (1939) The problem of m rankings. Ann Math Stat 10(3):275–287
26. Keßler C (2007) Similarity measurement in context. In: Proceedings of the 6th international and
interdisciplinary conference on modeling and using context. LNCS, vol 4635. Springer, pp 277–
290

27. Keßler C (2011) What is the difference? A cognitive dissimilarity measure for information retrieval

result sets. Knowl Inf Syst 30(2):319–340

28. Khoo C, Na J (2006) Semantic relations in information science. Annu Rev Inf Sci Technol 40(1):157–

207

29. Kuhn W (2013) Cognitive and linguistic ideas and geographic information semantics. In: Cognitive and

linguistic aspects of geographic space. LNGC, Springer, pp 159–174

30. LeBreton J, Senter J (2008) Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability and interrater agreement.

Organ Res Methods 11(4):815–852

31. Lehrer A (1985) The influence of semantic fields on semantic change. In: Fisiak J (ed) Historical word

formation. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 283–296

32. Medin D, Goldstone R, Gentner D (1990) Similarity involving attributes and relations: judgments of

similarity and difference are not inverses. Psychol Sci 1(1):64–69

33. Miller G, Charles W (1991) Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Lang Cogn Process 6(1):1–28
34. Mohammad S, Hirst G (2012) Distributional measures of semantic distance: a survey. Comput Res

Repository (CoRR) 1–39. arXiv:1203.1858

35. Montello DR, Fabrikant SI, Ruocco M, Middleton RS (2003) Testing the first law of cognitive geography
on point-display spatializations. In: Kuhn W, Worboys M, Timpf S (eds) Spatial information theory.
Foundations of Geographic Information Science. LNCS, vol 2825. Springer, pp 316–331

36. Morris J, Hirst G (2004) Non-classical lexical semantic relations. In: Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL

workshop on computational lexical semantics. ACL, pp 46–51

37. Nelson D, Dyrdal G, Goodmon L (2005) What is preexisting strength? Predicting free association

probabilities, similarity ratings, and cued recall probabilities. Psychon Bull Rev 12(4):711–719

38. Pedersen T, Kolhatkar V (2009) Wordnet::senserelate::allwords: a broad coverage word sense tagger
that maximizes semantic relatedness. In: Proceedings of human language technologies: the 2009 annual
conference of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics, companion
volume: demonstration session. ACL, pp 17–20

39. Pedersen T, Patwardhan S, Michelizzi J (2004) WordNet::similarity: measuring the relatedness of
concepts. In: Proceedings of human language technologies: the 2004 annual conference of the north
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, companion volume: demonstration
session. ACL, pp 38–41

40. Rada R, Mili H, Bicknell E, Blettner M (1989) Development and application of a metric on semantic

nets. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern 19(1):17–30

41. Resnik P (1995) Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 14th international joint conference on artificial intelligence, IJCAI’95, vol 1. Morgan
Kaufmann, pp 448–453

42. Robinson W (1957) The statistical measurement of agreement. Am Sociol Rev 22(1):17–25
43. Rodgers J, Nicewander W (1988) Thirteen ways to look at the correlation coefficient. Am Stat 42(1):59–

66

44. Rodr´ıguez M, Egenhofer M (2004) Comparing geospatial entity classes: an asymmetric and context-

dependent similarity measure. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 18(3):229–256

45. Rubenstein H, Goodenough J (1965) Contextual correlates of synonymy. Commun ACM 8(10):627–633
46. Sch¨utze H (1998) Automatic word sense discrimination. Comput Linguist 24(1):97–123
47. Schwering A (2008) Approaches to semantic similarity measurement for geo-spatial data: a survey.

48. Schwering A, Kuhn W (2009) A hybrid semantic similarity measure for spatial information retrieval.

Trans GIS 12(1):5–29

Spat Cogn Comput 9(1):30–63

Geoinformatica

49. Schwering A, Raubal M (2005) Spatial relations for semantic similarity measurement. In: Perspectives

in conceptual modeling. LNCS, vol 3770. Springer, pp 259–269

50. Strube G (1992) The role of cognitive science in knowledge engineering. Contemp Knowl Eng Cogn

622:159–174

51. Tobler W (1970) A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region. In: Economic geogra-
phy. Supplement: proceedings. International Geographical Union. Commission on quantitative methods,
vol 46. Clark University, Worcester, pp 234–240

52. Toutanova K, Klein D, Manning C, Singer Y (2003) Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic
dependency network. In: Proceedings of the 2003 conference of the North American chapter of the
association for computational linguistics on human language technology, vol 1. ACL, pp 173–180

53. Turney P (2006) Similarity of semantic relations. Comput Linguist 32(3):379–416
54. Tversky A (1977) Features of similarity. Psychol Rev 84(4):327–352
55. Wang C, Wang J, Xie X, Ma WY (2007) Mining geographic knowledge using location aware topic
model. In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on geographical information retrieval. ACM, pp 65–70

56. Wilcoxon F (1945) Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biom Bull 1(6):80–83
57. Wright K (2005) Researching internet-based populations: advantages and disadvantages of online
survey research, online questionnaire authoring software packages, and web survey services. J Comput-
Mediated Commun 10(3). http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol10/issue3/wright.html, article 11

Andrea Ballatore received an MSc in Virtual Reality from the University of Turin (Italy) in 2006. He then
worked as software engineer in information systems and virtual reality in Italy and Ireland. In 2009, he began
a PhD at the School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin, Ireland. His research
interests include geographic information systems and science, geo-semantics, and media studies. He is part
of the strategic research cluster StratAG, funded by Science Foundation Ireland.

Geoinformatica

Michela Bertolotto received a PhD in Computer Science from the University of Genova (Italy) in 1998.
Subsequently she worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the National Center for Geographic Infor-
mation and Analysis (NCGIA) at the University of Maine, USA. Since 2000 she has been a faculty member
at the School of Computer Science and Informatics of University College Dublin, Ireland. Her research
interests include web-based and wireless GIS, the semantic geo-Web, spatio-temporal data modelling and
visualisation.

David C. Wilson is an Associate Professor in the College of Computing and Informatics at UNC
Charlotte. Dr. Wilson is an expert in intelligent software systems and a leading name in the field of Case-
Based Reasoning. Dr. Wilson’s research emphasizes the development of intelligent software systems to
bridge the gaps between human information needs and the computational resources available to meet them.
It involves the coordination of intelligent systems techniques (artificial intelligence, machine learning, etc.)
with geographic, multimedia, database, internet, and communications systems in order to elicit, enhance,
apply, and present relevant task-based knowledge.

