G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

IMPACT OF THE QUALITY OF SPATIAL 3D
CITY MODELS ON SENSOR NETWORKS
PLACEMENT OPTIMIZATION

Meysam Argany and Mir Abolfazl Mostafavi, Centre for Research in Geomatics
Department of Geomatics, Université Laval, Quebec

Vahab Akbarzadeh and Christian Gagné
Computer Vision and System Laboratory
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering
Université Laval, Quebec

Reda Yaagoubi, Department of Geomatics
Faculty of Environmental Design, King Abdulaziz University
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia

Sensor networks are increasingly used for tracking, monitoring, and observing spatial dynamic phe-
nomena in the real world (e.g. urban area). In order to ensure an efficient deployment of a sensor network,
several optimization algorithms have been proposed in recent years. Most of these algorithms often rely on
oversimplified sensor models. In addition, they do not consider information on the terrain topography, city
models, and the presence of diverse obstacles in the sensing area (e.g. buildings, trees, poles). Only some of
those optimization algorithms attempt to consider the terrain information in the optimization of a sensor net-
work deployment. However, most of these algorithms consider that the spatial models used for this purpose
are perfect representations of the reality and are not sensitive to the quality of the information. However,
spatial models are simplified representations of a complex reality, and hence are inherently uncertain. In
this paper we will investigate the impact of the spatial data quality on the optimization of a sensor network
and its spatial coverage in an urban area. For this purpose, we will investigate specific implications of spa-
tial data quality criteria for a 3D city model that will be used in sensor network optimization algorithms. Then,
we will analyze the impact of some of those criteria on the estimation of sensor network coverage. Afterwards,
a case study for sensor network deployment in an urban area will be presented. This case study will demon-
strate the impact of 3D city models quality on the estimation of coverage using global and local optimization
algorithms. Finally, the results obtained from this experimentation will be presented and discussed.

Les réseaux de capteurs sont de plus en plus utilisés pour le suivi, le contrôle et l’observation des phé-
nomènes spatiaux dynamiques dans le monde réel (p. ex., le secteur urbain). Afin d’assurer un déploiement
efficient d’un réseau de capteurs, de nombreux algorithmes d’optimisation ont été proposés au cours des
dernières années. La plupart de ces algorithmes reposent souvent sur des modèles de capteurs exagérément
simplifiés. De plus, ils ne tiennent pas compte de l’information sur la topographie du terrain, des modèles de
ville et de la présence de divers obstacles dans la zone de détection (p. ex., les édifices, les arbres, les poteaux).
Seuls quelques-uns de ces algorithmes d’optimisation tentent de tenir compte de l’information sur le terrain
dans l’optimisation du déploiement d’un réseau de capteurs. Toutefois, la plupart de ces algorithmes consi-
dèrent que les modèles spatiaux utilisés à cette fin sont des représentations parfaites de la réalité et ne sont
donc pas sensibles à la qualité de l’information. Cependant, les modèles spatiaux sont des représentations
simplifiées  d’une  réalité  complexe  et  sont  ainsi  intrinsèquement  incertains.  Dans  le  présent  article,  nous
examinerons l’impact de la qualité des données spatiales sur l’optimisation d’un réseau de capteurs et sa
couverture spatiale dans un secteur urbain. À cette fin, nous examinerons les conséquences particulières des
critères de la qualité des données spatiales pour un modèle de ville en trois dimensions qui sera utilisé dans
des algorithmes d’optimisation d’un réseau de capteurs. Ensuite, nous analyserons l’impact de certains de ces
critères sur l’estimation de la couverture du réseau de capteurs. Par la suite, nous présenterons une étude de
cas du déploiement d’un réseau de capteurs dans un secteur urbain. Cette étude de cas démontrera l’impact
de la qualité des modèles de ville en trois dimensions sur l’estimation de la couverture en utilisant des algo-
rithmes d’optimisation locaux et mondiaux. Finalement, nous présenterons et commenterons les résultats
obtenus à la suite de cette expérience.

Meysam Argany
meysam.argany.1@
ulaval.ca

Mir Abolfazl
Mostafavi

Vahab Akbarzadeh

Christian Gagné

Reda Yaagoubi

GEOMATICA Vol. 66, No. 4, 2012, pp. 291 to 305

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

1. Introduction

Sensor  networks  are  increasingly  used  for
tracking, monitoring, and observing spatial dynam-
ic phenomena of the real world [Nittel 2009]. The
benefit of using such networks is to access remote
or  harsh  areas  and  observe  phenomena  in  those
locations at the lowest cost as possible. The cost of
a  sensor  network  deployment  depends  mainly  on
the number of sensors used and how these sensors
are  placed  in  the  environment  to  be  monitored.
Hence, in order to maximize the spatial coverage of
such  networks,  optimization  algorithms  can  be
used to find the best position for each sensor in the
network. However, most of the proposed placement
algorithms do not consider the nature of real envi-
ronments  [Aziz  et  al.  2009;  Bharathidasan  et  al.
2003; Nittel 2009]. In addition, the few works that
take into account the environmental information in
their methods [Wang and Tseng 2008; Akbarzadeh
et al. 2011] do not consider the impact of the inher-
ent uncertainty of spatial data in the estimation of
sensor network coverage.

There  are  many  objects  and  obstacles  in  the
environment that may constrain the spatial coverage
of a sensor network. Therefore, it is necessary to con-
sider these elements in sensor network optimization
algorithms. For example, in an urban area, the pres-
ence  of  buildings,  roads,  streets,  trees,  and  poles
should be considered in sensor deployment. In a nat-
ural  area,  the  topography  of  the  terrain  and  other
properties  of  the  environment  such  as  vegetation
must be known. Spatial models are very rich sources
of geospatial information that can be used to improve
the results of optimization algorithms. However, spa-
tial models are simplified representations of a com-
plex reality, and hence are inherently uncertain. The
uncertainty in spatial data may be related to the meth-
ods used for the acquisition, processing, or manipu-
lating of spatial data, and it may significantly affect
the spatial coverage of a sensor network.

Some of the most important types of datasets,
which are used as spatial models in sensor network
deployment, are Digital Terrain Models (DTM) and
Digital  Surface  Models  (DSM).  The  quality  of
these models is varied and depends on the accuracy
of  the  initial  datasets,  which  are  used  to  produce
them as well as the instruments, which have been
used  to  collect  those  datasets.  For  example,  both
digital  terrain  models  and  digital  surface  models
may  have  some  inaccuracies  which  involve  some
unintentional errors in final results. Since we have
errors and inaccuracies within the initial datasets, it
is  inevitable  that  these  errors  will  be  propagated
when  these  datasets  are  used  for  deployment  of

sensor networks. So, accuracy of sensor placement
strongly  depends  on  the  quality  of  spatial  models
that will be used in optimization algorithms. Also,
the communication between sensors in a given net-
work may be affected by the quality of the data as
well. In fact, the position of sensors and their com-
munication  range  are  important  to  ensure  reliable
communication between sensors. 

In  this  paper,  we  investigate  the  data  quality
elements  with  an  emphasis  on  those  that  are  the
most relevant for 3D city models. We will study the
impact of those elements on sensor network cover-
age  estimation.  Then,  we  will  investigate  the
impact  of  the  3D  dataset  quality,  which  will  be
introduced  as  initial  input  in  the  sensor  network
deployment  optimization  algorithms  on  the  final
results. Our goal is to determine how sensitive dif-
ferent optimization algorithms are to the quality of
input datasets and what their behaviour will be.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 presents a literature review describ-
ing  various  models  and  solutions  of  the  sensor
deployment optimization based on 3D city models.
Local and global approaches for sensor deployment
optimization are discussed in this section. In Section
3, the quality elements for 3D city models are intro-
duced.  First,  standard  spatial  data  quality  elements
are presented and then most relevant data quality ele-
ments  for  3D  city  models  are  further  investigated
and their implications for sensor placement are dis-
cussed. Section 4 presents an analysis of the quality
impact  of  3D  city  models  on  the  sensor  network
deployment.  The  issue  of  how  3D  models  quality
affects  the  results  of  optimization  methods  will  be
discussed.  Section  5  contains  the  experimentations
and results. Several maps with different quality lev-
els  have  been  prepared  and  tested  with  three  opti-
mization algorithms. The sensitivity of the optimiza-
tion methods to the quality of input data is investi-
gated in that section. Finally, Section 6 concludes the
paper with discussion of the results and proposal of
new avenues for future work.

2. Sensor Network
Deployment Optimization
Based on 3D City Models

Efficient  sensor  network  deployment  is  an
important  issue  in  the  sensor  network  field,  as  it
affects  the  coverage  and  communication  between
sensors  in  the  network.  Nodes  use  their  sensing
modules to detect events occurring in the region of
interest (e.g. urban area). Each sensor is assumed to

292

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

have a sensing range, which may be constrained by
the phenomenon being sensed as well as the envi-
ronmental  conditions.  Hence,  obstacles  and  envi-
ronmental conditions affect network coverage and
may result in holes in the sensing area. The defini-
tion  of  coverage  differs  from  one  application  to
another [Aziz et al. 2009; Ahmed et al. 2005; Ghosh
et al. 2008; Huang and Tseng 2005; Megerian et al.
2005; Meguerdichian et al. 2001]. In this study, the
definition of coverage is based on a direct visibili-
ty between the observer and the target point (e.g.,
camera for traffic monitoring) (Figure 1). The cov-
erage of a point in a sensor network means that the
point is directly visible by at least one sensor and it
is located in its sensing range. The coverage area of
each node is usually assumed to be uniform in all
directions. In this case, the sensing range is repre-
sented by a disk around the sensor. Failing this con-
dition for some points in the region of interest will
result in coverage holes [Ahmed et al. 2005].

Hence, one important issue in sensor network
deployment  is  finding  the  best  sensor  position  to
cover  the  region  of  interest.  Regarding  the  men-
tioned definition of coverage in sensor network, the
coverage problem basically means placing a mini-
mum number of nodes in an environment, such that
every point in the sensing field is optimally covered
[Aziz et al. 2009; Ghosh and Das 2008]. Nodes can
either  be  placed  manually  at  predetermined  loca-
tions or dropped randomly in the environment and
then are repositioned to their optimal locations. It is
difficult  to  find  a  random  scattering  solution  that
satisfies all the coverage and communication con-
ditions between sensors.

There are several approaches in the literature to
solve  the  problem  of  sensor  network  coverage
[Niewiadomska  et  al.  2009;  Romoozi  et  al.  2010;
Ghosh et al. 2008]. In general, these approaches are
classified  into  global  and  local  optimization
approaches.  Global  optimization  approaches  are
used to find the global optima of a function (cover-
age  function)  or  a  set  of  functions  for  the  whole
study area. Conversely, local optimization methods
are  used  to  find  local  optima  among  a  number  of
candidate solutions. Candidate solutions here could
be the sensors positions or final coverage, which is
supposed to be optimized according to the coverage
function. Local methods start with an initial value
in the space of candidate solutions and then itera-
tively  move  to  neighbour  values  or  solutions  by
applying local changes until the optimal solution is
found or a time bound is achieved.

2.1 Global Optimization Approaches

Simulated  Annealing  (SA)  and  Covariance

Figure  1:  Direct  visibility  between  an  observer  and  a
target,  point  A  is  visible  while  point  C  is  invisible
because its line-of-sight is concealed at point B.

Matrix Adaption Evolutionary Strategy (CMA-ES)
are  two  examples  of  global  optimization  methods
used  for  sensor  network  deployment  [Akbarzadeh
et al. 2010, 2011]. These methods will be used in
Section 5 to compare the impact of data quality on
sensor  network  deployment  given  their  perform-
ance  and  popularity  among  global  optimization
methods [Akbarzadeh et al. 2011]. 

Simulated Annealing [Kirkpatrick et al. 1983]
is a classical metaheuristic optimization algorithm,
which is inspired by the annealing process of mate-
rial  in  metallurgy.  In  fact,  temperature  is  the  con-
trolling mechanism used to convert material from a
high-energy state into a low-energy solid condition.
This process is imitated in SA, where the tempera-
ture  controls  the  number  and  spread  of  accessible
solutions from a given solution in the search space.
SA  starts  with  random  sensor  positions  in  the  3D
study area with a high initial temperature to allow a
random walk in the search space. As the tempera-
ture  is  gradually  decreasing,  the  system  becomes
greedier,  only  to  allow  moves  in  the  search  space
which improve the performance of the solution to
find optimized positions with best served coverage.
The process is completed with a temperature close
to zero. To calculate the coverage, a coverage func-
tion,  which  will  be  introduced  in  Section  2.3,  is
supposed to be optimized by means of an optimiza-
tion algorithm. 

CMA-ES is part of the evolutionary algorithm
family.  It  is  a  black-box  stochastic  optimization
method, in which new candidate solutions (sensors
positions) are sampled according to a multivariate
Gaussian  distribution,  which  is  adapted  in  the
course of the optimization [Hansen and Ostermeier
2001].  For  sensor  network  deployment  optimiza-
tion, the initial position and orientation of sensors
in  a  3D  model  can  be  considered  as  a  candidate
solution.  So,  any  variations  or  inaccuracies  in  the
3D model affect the position and orientation of the

293

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

sensors and hence, directly impact the formation of
the  next  solutions.  The  sensor  positions  will  be
evolved  through  the  optimization  and  finally,  the
solution  with  the  best  coverage  is  selected  as  the
final result [Akbarzadeh et al. 2011].

2.2 Local Optimization
Approaches

The  second  category  of  optimization  algo-
rithms for sensor network deployment is the local
approaches. Some geometric solutions found in the
literature  are  taking  into  account  the  spatial  rela-
tions  between  the  elements  of  3D  models  (search
space).  When  there  is  not  enough  information
available  about  the  environment,  sensors  are
deployed randomly at the first placement, and then
some  deployment  strategies  take  advantage  of
mobility and try to relocate sensors from their ini-
tial  position  to  optimize  the  network  coverage.  In
these  cases  spatial  information,  sensor’s  positions
and movement strategies will be provided based on
3D  models.  VECtor-based  and  VORonoi-based
algorithms are two mobility-based methods that use
Voronoi diagram in their approaches [Argany et al.
2011]. The spatial coverage of sensor networks in
3D models is very related to the spatial distribution
of the sensors. In other words, these approaches try
to  distribute  the  sensors  in  the  environment  by
using 3D models so that as much coverage as pos-
sible is obtained. These approaches can be used to
detect  coverage  holes  in  3D  datasets  as  well  as
healing those holes.

The  VORonoi-based  algorithm  (VOR)  is  a
pulling strategy; this means that sensors cover their
local maximum holes. This method has been select-
ed for case studies in Section 5 because of its geo-
metrical performance and ability to model the envi-

ronment [Argany et al. 2011]. In this algorithm, each
sensor moves toward its farthest Voronoi vertex until
this vertex is covered. The disadvantage of the VOR
algorithm  is  that  each  sensor  may  be  selected  to
move  but  there  is  no  criterion  to  define  where  it
should stop moving. A 3D model of the environment
can  help  us  to  define  this  threshold,  which  means
that  sensors  stop  moving  when  they  arrive  at  the
point with a higher elevation than their initial posi-
tion. The line of movement corresponds to the line
between  the  initial  sensor  location  and  farthest
Voronoi vertex. In the rest of the paper we call this
approach  the  enhanced  VOR  algorithm.  Here,
Voronoi  cells  define  the  regions  in  the  study  area
which  should  be  covered  by  the  sensor  inside  the
cell.  Since  the  sensing  range  of  sensors  is  limited,
then some holes may exist beyond the sensing area
of the sensors (Figure 2).

2.3 Coverage Estimation Using
3D City Models

In this paper, coverage is defined based on the
concept  of  line-of-sight.  Line-of-sight  can  be
defined as the direct visibility between an observer
and a target point. Given the sensor position Pi, if
there  is  no  obstacle  between  the  Pi and  the  target
point q, then the latter is visible. Also, if q is in the
sensing  range  of  si,  the  coverage  is  achieved
(Figure 1). Viewshed is another term which is used
in optimization algorithms. It is defined as an area
in a map that is visible from a specific sensor posi-
tion.  Viewshed  algorithms  use  elevation  of  each
cell in a DTM to determine visibility to or from a
particular  cell  (sensor  positions).  The  visibility
depends  on  the  following  notions:  observation
points,  horizontal  and  elevation  coordinates  of  a
target point (xi, yi, zi), vertical offsets (the vertical
distance to be added to the z coordinate value of a
location on the surface), horizontal and vertical sen-
sor  orientation  (ξi,  θi),  and  the  sensing  distance
(Figure  3).  Line-of-sight,  viewshed,  visibility,  and
position  of  obstacles  are  essential  information,
which  can  be  directly  obtained  from  3D  models
provided by a geographic information system.

To  find  the  optima  in  the  category  of  global
optimization  methods,  it  is  necessary  to  define  a
coverage function. This function is expressed based
on the properties of the sensors and the environment
information. The sensing model in our investigation
is  related  to  distance  between  sensor  and  target
locations,  sensor  orientation,  and  visibility.  If  we
assume that Pi = (xi, yi, zi) is a sensor position, θ is
pan  angle  around  its  vertical  axe,  and ξ is  the  tilt
angle around the horizontal axes, then the coverage

294

Figure 2: Movement of a sensor in the VOR algorithm.

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

function  C(si,  q)  for  sensor  si at  point  q can  be
defined as a function of distance d(si, q) = ||pi – q||,
pan angle p(si, q) = ∠p(q – pi) – θι, tilt angle t(si, q)
= ∠t(q – pi) – ξi, and visibility v(si, q) from the sen-
sor [Akbarzadeh et al. 2011]:

C(si,  q)  =  f[µd(||pi – q||),  µp(∠p(q  – pi) – θi),
µτ[(∠]t(q – pi) – ξi), v(pi, q)]
(1)

Where (cid:144) p q – pi = arctan

is the angle

yq – y pi
xq – x pi

tal plane and (cid:144)t q – pi = arctan

zq – zpi
(cid:179)(cid:179)pi – q(cid:179)(cid:179)

is the

between the sensor si and the point q in the horizon-
angle between the sensor si and the point q in the
vertical plane. Parameters µd, µp, µt ∈ [0, 1]  repre-
sent membership functions that need to be defined
according to the coverage conditions.

In  order  to  cover  point  q by  sensor  si,  we
should  consider  the  sensing  range,  sensing  angle,
and  visibility.  These  three  parameters  can  be
extracted directly from the 3D model which will be
used to make the optimization. The parameters d(si,
q)  and  sensing  range  are  calculated  based  on  the
coordinates of the sensor (x, y, z) and target location
points which are provided by 3D model. Pan p(si,
q) and tilt t(si, q) angles are related to the orienta-
tion of the sensor as well as the distance to point q
which is calculated from the 3D model. 

As described in section 2.2, the enhanced VOR
algorithm  is  a  local  optimization  method,  which
attempts  to  move  sensors  and  “heal”  uncovered
areas. In each step of iteration, visibility, and then
viewshed  are  computed  based  on  the  line-of-sight
between the sensors and targets. The covered area
for  each  sensor  corresponds  to  the  intersection  of
its  sensing  range  and  the  viewshed  area. As  men-
tioned before, visibility and viewshed are obtained
from a 3D model of the study area. As a result, cov-
erage is affected by the quality of the 3D model of
the study area. 

3. Spatial Data Quality in
3D City Models

The  deployment  of  a  sensor  network  in  an
urban area requires the use of 3D city models. A 3D
city  model  may  contain  buildings,  water  bodies,
transportation  objects,  vegetation,  and  city  furni-
ture. Buildings  are the most detailed and frequent-
ly used thematic in a city model. Different types of

Figure  3:  Parameters  for  the  estimation  of  visibility
and viewshed for a sensor  in a 3D model.

buildings may exist in a city model, e.g. residential,
public, and industrial with different, height, shapes,
volumes,  and  levels  of  detail.  Usually,  transporta-
tion objects are represented as a linear network in
2D models, but, in 3D urban models, they are geo-
metrically described by 3D objects. In 3D models,
roads can be depicted by a traffic area accompany-
ing the auxiliary objects and obstacles, which may
affect  traffic  flow.  Vegetation  features  are  also
important features of a 3D city model which can be
represented  as  single  vegetation  objects  or  multi
solid objects in 3D city models. City furniture are
movable objects such as traffic lights, signs, flower
buckets, benches, and bus stops which can be found
in residential, traffic, and public areas. All of these
features  should  be  considered  in  sensor  network
optimization process in order to guarantee the effi-
ciency of the network and its spatial coverage.

The quality of spatial data in a 3D city model
that  may  be  used  in  sensor  networks  optimization
algorithms can undermine its efficiency. According
to  the  spatial  data  quality  literature,  spatial  data
quality  depends  on  several  factors;  the  “internal”
quality of spatial data is determined by its actuali-
ty,  geometric  and  semantic  accuracy,  genealogy,
logical  consistency,  and  the  completeness  of  the
data.  This  view  reflects  the  producer’s  perception
of quality, which differs from the notion of “exter-
nal quality”. External quality is focused on “fitness
for use”; it is defined as the level of fitness between
the  data  and  the  needs  of  users  [Mostafavi  et  al.
2004; Devillers and Jeansoulin 2006]. 

There  has  been  a  consensus  about  the  criteria
of  internal  quality  between  the  ISO,  FGDC,  and
CEN  to  use  the  same  criteria  for  geospatial  data
quality [Devillers and Jeansoulin 2006]. ISO 19113
(Quality principles) and ISO 19114 (Quality evalu-
ation  procedures)  are  two  pairs  of  standards  which
define the principles for describing the quality. The

295

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

ISO 19113 recommends five groups to subdivide the
data quality elements which can contain quantitative
information. These criteria are completeness, logical
consistency, positional accuracy, temporal accuracy,
and  thematic  accuracy  [Kresse  and  Fadaie 2004].
The ISO 19115 (Metadata) provides the procedures
for quality evaluation by defining a dictionary for the
data  quality  elements.  According  to  ISO  19115,
metadata contains both quantitative and non-quanti-
tative  information.  The  ISO  94  (Quality  manage-
ment and quality assurance - Vocabulary) addresses
the external quality elements. Investigations on the
criteria of external quality have been limited to just a
few authors. Among them, Wang and Strong [1996]
propose four groups for external quality dimensions:
intrinsic data quality, contextual data quality, repre-
sentation data quality, and accessibility data quality.
Bédard  and  Vallière [1995]  have  investigated  the
external  quality  for  geospatial  data  and  mentioned
these categories as the quality elements of geospatial
dataset:  definition,  coverage,  lineage,  precision,
legitimacy, and accessibility. Oort [2006] has done a
comprehensive study on data quality description and
applications. He has defined essential terms of spa-
tial data quality and introduced variable methods of
investigating the accuracy and errors in spatial and
land  cover  classification.  The  studies  presented  so
far  have  mostly  considered  2D  models.  Although,
they can be used for 3D models, Walter [2007] has
conducted  a  research  on  quality  control  of  3D
geospatial data. He mentioned the spatial data quali-
ty elements that have a clear meaning in 3D models.
He  also  proposed  an  automatic  update  method  for
the quality control of 3D models composed of laser
data,  aerial  and  terrestrial  images.  His  approach  is
processed with an image interpretation algorithm in
order  to  control  the  existing  objects  and  find  new
objects that are not in the database.

As discussed earlier, it is too difficult to find an
explicit study on the elements of data quality in 3D
models. So, in the following list we propose the most
relevant criteria of data quality for 3D spatial models. 

•

Positional  Accuracy: In  general,  accuracy
addresses  the  probable  differences  between  the
measured and true values. It can be divided into
relative and absolute accuracy. Positional accu-
racy is the accuracy of coordinate values and cat-
egorized  as  vertical  and  horizontal.  In  3D  city
models, compared to 2D models, apart from X
and Y  coordinates,  Z  values  should  be  consid-
ered in positional accuracy analysis. For exam-
ple, the accuracy of the height of buildings and
other 3D objects is important as well as horizon-
tal  positions  and  it  has  a  direct  impact  on  3D
issues such as shadow and visibility analysis.

•

•

•

Logical Consistency: Logical consistency of a
spatial database constitutes an important part of
the  determination  of  the  internal  spatial  data
quality. It may be defined as the degree of con-
sistency of the data with respect to its specifica-
tions.  It concerns  the  question  of  whether  col-
lected data are related to other data in a logical
sense. In the other words, it refers to the absence
of apparent contradictions in a database [Walter
2007]. For instance, in 3D datasets, logical con-
sistency  can  refer  to  topological  relations.  For
example,  extracting  building  footprints  and
extruding them is one of the simplest methods
to construct 3D city models from 2D data. So, if
the topological relations between the footprints
are not taken into account, the resulting 3D city
model may not be topologically and hence log-
ically consistent [Ledoux and Meijers 2009].

Lineage: It concerns the question of how the
data are collected and the method of how the
data have been entered in a computer program.
This information contains a short history of the
data producer, data source, data capturing, and
data  processing  methods.  In  3D  datasets,  the
lineage can refer to the historical information
about data acquisition, data representation, and
data processing. The question of which kind of
instrument  or  acquisition  method  has  been
used to collect the dataset will be answered in
the  data  acquisition  part  of  the  lineage  infor-
mation. In data representation we will find the
method  by  which  the  dataset  has  been  repre-
sented, e.g. regular grid, TIN, mesh, 3D faces.
In terms of data processing, lineage may con-
tain  information  about  processing  methods
such as different methods of interpolation (e.g.
nearest neighbour, bilinear, and bicubic). This
may  also  describe  the  methods  used  for  3D
modeling process.

Semantic Accuracy: It  addresses  the  question
of  whether  the  data  really  express  its  intended
meanings.  This  criterion  provides  information
on the difference between the values of spatial
attributes  and  their  real  values.  In  3D  models,
we  are  again  concerned  with  the  semantics  of
spatial  objects.  More  specifically  we  are  con-
cerned  with  the  semantics  of  3D  objects.  For
example  how  to  represent  buildings  regarding
their  definitions  and  shapes  (factory,  hospital,
residential, educational, etc.). What are the spa-
tial  integrity  constraints  that  exist  between  3D
objects  and  how  accurately  are  they  defined
with respect to the reality?

296

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.•

•

Completeness: It  indicates  the  question  of
whether  there  is  anything  more  to  add  to  the
data. This criterion is usually determined based
on the matrix of omission (abnormal absence)
and commission (abnormal presence) of some
objects  in  a  spatial  model.  This  can  also  be
related  to  the  levels  of  detail  (LOD)  used  to
represent  spatial  information  in  3D  models.
Omission or commission of some objects (e.g.
trees  and  buildings)  or  the  levels  of  detail  in
their representation (e.g. missing balconies in a
3D building model) in a 3D city model have an
impact  on  the  sensor  positions  obtained  from
the optimization algorithms. Also, it will have
a  significant  impact  on  the  estimation  of  its
spatial coverage. 

Temporal Accuracy: It concerns the question
of  whether  the  data  is  up  to  date  or  not.  For
example, are there some new constructions in
a 3D city model, which should be added to the
dataset, or it is necessary to delete some blocks
from the dataset.

4. The Impact of 3D City
Models Quality on Sensor
Deployment

As mentioned in Section 2, the sensor placement
optimization  algorithms  that  are  applied  in  our
experimentation  use  line-of-sight  and  viewshed  to
calculate spatial coverage. These two concepts allow
visible  and  invisible  objects  to  be  identified  and
hence,  define  covered  and  uncovered  areas  in  the
region of interest. The quality of 3D city models has
a direct impact on the estimation of these values. In
the  following,  we  will  present  and  discuss  these
impacts with respect to some of the quality criteria
that we have presented in the previous section.

Positional accuracy has a direct impact on the
estimation of the visibility in a 3D city model. The
positional  accuracy  may  be  presented  as  a  small
displacement in the position of the objects, which
can be either horizontal or vertical or both. Even a
few centimeters inaccuracy in horizontal or vertical
positions of objects or sensors can block the line-
of-sight  between  a  sensor  and  a  target.  Figure  4
shows  the  impact  of  positional  accuracy  of  build-
ings on the obtained coverage. In Figure 4(a) posi-
tions  of  three  buildings  have  been  displaced  and
overlaid at the same DTM. So, buildings at points
A,  B,  and  C  are  opaque.  Figure  4(b)  depicts  the
change  of  coverage  because  of  inaccuracy  in  the

G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

positions  of  those  buildings.  Figure  5  shows  the
impact  of  completeness  on  sensor  network  cover-
age.  In  Figure  5(a),  three  buildings  have  been
removed  from  the  dataset.  Figure  5(b)  depicts  the
impact of completness on the final coverage. This
situation may also occur in datasets due to tempo-
ral  accuracy  and  the  demolishing  of  some  build-
ings. Conditions have been considered in an exag-
gerated manner in both Figure 4 and 5.

In 3D city models, sensor nodes and 3D objects
should  be  logically  consistent.  In  order  to  respect
consistency  in  sensor  network  deployment,  the
topological  relationship  must  be  observed.  To
ensure logical consistency in a model, some logical
rules  should  be  defined  and  then  the  validity  of
those  rules  must  be  verified  in  the  model.  For
example a sensor node for monitoring the traffic in
a city could not be placed on the top private prop-
erty or area with a height lower than a predefined
threshold. Another  example  could  be  poles  in  the

(a)

(b) 

Figure 4: Impact of positional accuracy on sensor network coverage: (a)
small displacement of three buildings at positions A, B, and C shown on
DTM  (b)  area  which  will  be  covered  after  the  displacement  shown  in
light red.

(a)

(b) 

Figure 5: Impact of completeness on sensor network coverage: (a) elimi-
nation of some blocks at positions A, B, and C shown on DTM (b) area
which will be covered after elimination shown in light red.

297

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

city,  which  are  supposed  to  be  used  for  installing
sensors. If they stand at the right side of the street
but they are represented at the left side in 3D city
model, our model is not consistent with the reality
and optimization with this model would have a sig-
nificant impact on the coverage. The maximum dis-
tance of coverage and communication between sen-
sors should also respect logical rules when we try
to place sensors in the environment.

In addition to the importance of accurate geo-
metrical  and  topological  representations  of  spatial
information in 3D city models, semantic accuracy
of spatial features is also essential for efficient opti-
mization  of  a  sensor  network.  Semantic  accuracy
deals with precise definitions of spatial, temporal,

Figure  6:  The  five  Levels  of  Detail  in  3D  city  models  (LOD)
according  to  the  Open  Geospatial  Consortium  [Gröger  et  al.
2012].

Figure 7: The impact of completeness on the line-of-sight;
Point  B  is  visible  but  point A  is  invisible  because  of  the
presence  of  balconies  in  the  building  representation.
However,  both  points  would  be  visible  if  the  balconies
were omitted in the model.

298

and thematic properties of each feature represented
in  3D  city  models.  Spatial  features  such  as  build-
ings,  streets,  poles,  transportation  objects,  water
bodies,  and  vegetation  area  must  be  accurately
identified,  classified  and  specified  in  the  models.
Thematic  information  must  be  semantically  rich
enough  to  allow  consideration  of  all  possible
restrictions  in  the  optimization  process  of  sensor
deployment in a given urban area.

Another important spatial data quality criterion
that may have a significant impact on the coverage
estimation of a sensor network is the completeness
of spatial information in a 3D city model. As men-
tioned in the previous section, completeness of data
may have different implications in a 3D city model
including  omissions,  commissions,  and  Levels  of
Detail (LOD) in the representation of an urban area.
Open  Geospatial  Consortium  (OGC)  has  adopted
City Geography Markup Language (CityGML) as a
standard for representation of 3D city models (OGC
2008).  CityGML  introduces  five  levels  of  detail  to
support multi-scale modeling of an urban area. In a
3D city model, the same object may be represented
in different LOD simultaneously, enabling the analy-
sis and visualisation of the same object with regard
to different degrees of resolution. Hence, spatial rep-
resentation  of  an  object  may  have  some  details  in
one level that can disappear in another level of detail.
The roughest level, LOD0, is a two and a half dimen-
sion DTM and may be used for regional and land-
scape applications. LOD1 is the blocks model in the
city  or  region,  which  represents  buildings  with  flat
roofs. In LOD2, roof structures in buildings are dif-
ferentiated  and  vegetation  objects  may  also  be
shown. City districts may be represented in LOD2.
LOD3  contains  architectural  elements  of  buildings
with detailed walls, roofs and balconies. Other urban
structures such as detailed vegetation and transporta-
tion objects may appear in LOD3. LOD4 is a higher
resolution representation of LOD3 with information
on interior structures of 3D objects. Figure 6 depicts
the five levels of detail in an urban area.

In a sensor network deployment, the presence
of  some  details  directly  affects  the  line-of-sight
measurements  and  makes  a  specific  target  visible
or obscured. For example, consider a building with
balconies  which  has  been  represented  in  LOD1.
Consider  also  that  there  is  a  sensor  placed  on  the
top of such a building. As shown in Figure 7, the
omission of the balconies in the 3D representation
of  the  building  will  result  in  a  complete  coverage
area compared to the case where the balconies are
present in the 3D representation of the building.

Another  important  issue  that  has  a  significant
impact  on  the  sensor  network  optimization  is  the

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

on  the  spatial  coverage  of  a  sensor  network  that
will  be  introduced  to  the  optimization  algorithms.
Here,  the  completeness  implies  the  presence  of
some  details  in  higher  resolution  maps  that  are
omitted  in  the  maps  with  lower  resolution  as  dis-
cussed  in  previous  sections.  The  resolution  varia-
tion is from 500 cm (low resolution) to 50 cm (high
resolution) and a map with 10 cm resolution is con-
sidered  as  the  ground  truth  dataset  to  validate  the
results.  The  maps  dimension  is  180  m  by  170  m
from  an  urban  area  in  old  Quebec  City,  Canada.
Figure 9 depicts the 3D model of the study area.

This  experiment  consists  of  deploying  eight
sensors inside the study area, in order to obtain the
best possible coverage by means of an optimization
algorithm.  It  has  been  supposed  that  each  sensor
has a 35 meters sensing range, positioned one meter
height  above  the  surface  and  has  the  ability  to
rotate  360  degrees  horizontally  and  ±90  degrees
vertically at its position. 

As discussed in Section 2, two different types
of optimization algorithms have been used for sen-
sor  network  deployment:  global  and 
local
approaches.  In  order  to  compare  the  sensitivity  of

type  of  spatial  representation  of  the  real  world.
Vector and raster models are two fundamental rep-
resentation methods of the reality. Vector represen-
tations  of  the  reality  are  often  more  accurate  for
spatial features with well-defined limits such as in
buildings and streets (Figure 8). However, most of
the optimization algorithms are conceived based on
raster representation of the environment since using
raster models is less complex than vector models.
In addition to the accuracy of representation of 3D
objects,  sensors  could  be  more  accurately  posi-
tioned in vector maps. Indeed, an accurate determi-
nation of sensor positions in a raster representation
of the space is more difficult. In addition, we need
a very high resolution for 2D or 3D representation
of the space in order to achieve the required preci-
sion.  We  think  vector  representation  of  the  space
such  as  in  3D  city  models  will  help  to  more  pre-
cisely  estimate  spatial  coverage  of  a  sensor  net-
work,  because  visibility  could  be  estimated  more
accurately in vector data. However, in our knowl-
edge  development  of  optimization  algorithms  for
sensor networks using vector data models are poor-
ly investigated, and more research work is needed
in the field.

5. Experimentation and Results

As discussed in the previous section, the quali-
ty of 3D city models can be evaluated based on dif-
ferent criteria. In this section, we will carry out dif-
ferent experiments in order to show the impact of
the  map  resolution  and  sensor  configuration  of  a
3D model in the estimation of spatial coverage of a
sensor network. For this purpose, we have prepared
5  maps  with  different  resolutions  from  the  same
area.  Our  goal  is  to  investigate  the  impact  of  the
positional accuracy and completeness of the dataset

Figure  9: Sensor  locations  in  a
3D  city  model,  red  points  show
the assumptive positions of 8 sen-
sors  in  the  environment  and  the
circles depict their sensing area.

Figure 8: Raster versus vector representation of limits of a building; visibility and line-of-sigh can be computed
more accurately using vector model.

299

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

the  proposed  optimization  algorithms  to  the  input
dataset  quality,  we  have  chosen  three  optimization
methods.  For  global  approaches  we  have  selected
Covariance  Matrix  Adaptation  Evolutionary
Strategy (CMA-ES) and Simulated Annealing (SA).
Among  different  stochastic  optimization  methods,
these  two  methods  were  chosen  because  one  (i.e.
SA) is an example of simple stochastic methods and
the other one (i.e. CMA-ES) is an example of more
sophisticated  methods.  Among  local  methods,
enhanced VORonoi-based  algorithm  has  been  cho-
sen in order to consider the geometrical characteris-
tics of the study area. For all methods, each sensor

placement  optimization  scheme  was  run  32  times,
from  which  the  average  of  each  method  was  esti-
mated.  The  initial  positions  of  the  sensors  were
determined randomly for each method. 

To  assess  the  sensitivity  of  the  optimization
methods with respect to the quality of data set, we
have conducted several experiments and presented
the results in Tables II, III and IV. The experiments
were carried out as follow: 

1.

First, for the purpose of the experiments,
five maps with different resolutions from
the same area were created;

Table I: Initial information on the sensor network used in our experimentation.

Method

Num. of Sensors

Sensing range (m)

Num. of runs

Max. iteration

CMA-ES
SA
VOR

8
8
8

32
32
32

300
4200
200

Table II: Results obtained from the CMA-ES method.

Resolution (cm)

Avg. coverage (%)

Best coverage (%)

Table III: Results obtained from the SA method.

Resolution (cm)

Avg. coverage (%)

Best coverage (%)

Table IV: Results obtained from the enhanced VORonoi-based method.

Resolution (cm)

Avg. coverage (%)

Best coverage (%)

500
300
200
100
50

500
300
200
100
50

500
300
200
100
50

52.50
52.78
49.09
50.75
50.75

45.50
45.16
42.59
45.75
44.97

45.55
47.83
40.06
44.38
46.59

Best coverage 
over 10 cm 
resolution (%)
44.79
46.62
43.85
41.27
52.50

Average coverage
over 10 cm 
resolution (%)
45.09
47.75
46.34
46.50
47.85

Best coverage
over 10 cm
resolution (%)
47.40
46.10
49.09
42.33
47.12

Average coverage
over 10 cm
resolution (%)
40.06
40.97
41.28
41.85
43.35

Best coverage 
over 10 cm 
resolution (%)
43.14
45.87
42.43
44.25
45.64

Average coverage
over 10 cm
resolution (%)
42.21
45.37
40.51
42.83
44.32

35
35
35

52.96
53.79
51.33
52.77
52.72

51.73
49.98
48.95
48.07
47.55

47.19
51.07
43.82
45.77
48.16

300

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

methods have good stability when the resolution of
input maps are changed (between 5 meters to 50 cen-
timeters resolution). CMA-ES gives better coverage
in all resolutions while SA and VOR have returned
almost the same results. We presume that the reason
is that CMA-ES is a more sophisticated optimization
method, which derives a second order model of the
objective  function  while  SA  is  a  simple  stochastic
optimization method, which randomly searches for a
better solution in the search space. All three methods
suffer  the  worst  results  when  the  resolution  is  200
cm. The reason is related to the shape of objects in
this study area. Comparing other resolutions, build-
ing details and real shapes begin to appear in 200 cm
resolution,  which  causes  more  area  to  be  obscured
from  sensor  visibility.  At  lower  resolutions,  opti-
mization algorithms perform better due to the disap-
pearing of obstacles in the datasets. For higher reso-
lutions, the scenario is changed; optimization algo-
rithms perform better due to their inherent process to
find the optimum when the pixel size is smaller. So,
in this study area the resolution of 200 cm could be
considered as a critical resolution.

Figure 11 compares the configuration of sensor
positions and related coverage obtained over a map

2.

For  each  map,  we  have  conducted  the
optimization process using three methods
as mentioned above;

3. Then, we have computed the average and
best  coverage  values  for  each  map  using
each  of  those  optimization  methods
(columns 2 and 3 in Tables II, III, and IV);

4. Next,  the  best  sensor  configuration  is
selected for each map based on best cov-
erage;

5.

Finally, for each best sensor configuration,
the best and average coverage values were
computed on the ground truth (columns 4
and 5 in Tables II, III, and IV).

It should be mentioned that in order to be able
to  compare  the  obtained  results  from  the  experi-
ments,  we  applied  the  same  sensing  range  for  all
sensors. The sensing area for each sensor was con-
sidered  to  be  a  crisp  circle.  In  addition,  the  same
algorithms were used for the determination of visi-
ble  and  nonvisible  pixels  and  the  coverage  values
for all the optimization methods. The performance
of each method has also been evaluated by defining
the  same  function  for  computing  the  viewshed
inside the study area. Table I presents the configu-
rations which have been used for the experiments.
The results for CMA-ES have been reported in
Table II, SA in Table III, and enhanced VORonoi-
based in Table IV.

The  goal  of  the  comparison  between  the  three
algorithms is not to determine which algorithm out-
performs  the  other  methods;  our  objective  in  this
investigation  is  to  discover  the  sensitivity  of  opti-
mization algorithms to the quality of input datasets.
Results  presented  in  Figure  10  show  that  all  three

Figure  10:  Comparison  of  the  average  coverage  val-
ues  obtained  from  three  optimization  methods  with-
respect to the variation of the input map resolutions.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 11: Best sensor configuration over a map with 10 cm resolution (a) CMA-ES, (b) SA, and (c) enhanced
VORonoi-based.

301

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

with 10 cm resolution by using three optimization
methods.  The  sensor  positions  that  are  obtained
from  CMA-ES  give  52.50%  coverage  over  the
study  area,  while  sensor  configurations  obtained
from SA and enhanced VOR methods give 47.12%
and 45.64% coverage respectively. The sensors have
been positioned in almost the same places in all three
algorithms with a few differences, which means all
algorithms have located almost the same positions to
place sensors with different input data quality. 

Figure  12  depicts  the  sensitivity  of  optimiza-
tion methods with respect to the accuracy of input
data.  To  do  so,  we  calculated  the  differences
between the averages of coverage for each map and
the coverage evaluated by applying the best config-
uration of the sensor positions of all runs obtained
from each map over the ground truth data. 

Figure  12:  Comparison  of  differences  between  aver-
age  coverage  obtained  from  different  optimization
methods over different map resolutions and best cov-
erage  obtained  from  different  algorithms  and  map
resolutions over ground truth dataset.

As illustrated in Figure 12, best coverage eval-
uated over 10 cm resolution map by using the best
sensor configuration results has been influenced by
the  input  data  quality  (resolution).  To  investigate
this impact more accurately, we have compared the
average of coverage for each map and the average
of  coverage  evaluated  over  the  ground  truth  data
for all runs. Figure 13 shows sensitivity of different
optimization algorithms with respect to the accura-
cy of input datasets. We can see from the figure that
as  the  resolution  of  the  maps  becomes  higher  the
difference between the sensitivity of the optimiza-
tion algorithms becomes smaller. We also observe
that there is a peak in all curves at 200 cm resolu-
tion for all the optimization methods. As discussed
earlier, this behaviour is related to the worst cover-
age in that resolution, which does not exist in the
evaluated coverage of ground truth data.

Table V  and  Figure  14  show  the  results  of  the
one-way  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  for  three
methods  over  maps  with  different  resolutions.  The
one-way  ANOVA  is  a  technique  to  compare  the
means of samples to test whether those samples in
two or more groups are drawn from the same popu-
lation or not. The ANOVA produces a F-statistic, the
ratio of the variance calculated among the means to
the variance within the samples. If the group means
are  drawn  from  the  same  population,  the  variance
between the group means should be lower than the
variance  of  the  samples.  A  higher  ratio,  therefore,
implies that the samples were drawn from different
populations [Hogg and Ledolter 1987]. In this study,
we  used ANOVA  to  determine  to  what  extent  our
evaluations  of  coverage  over  maps  with  different
resolutions differ from each other. If we assume that
all  optimization  methods  should  report  the  same
coverage by using different resolution maps from the
same  study  area,  the  F-statistic  value  allows  us  to
determine to what extent coverage values are similar.
In  this  case  study,  given  that  we  have  5  groups  (5
maps with different resolutions) and 32 samples per
groups (32 runs for each map), the maximum F-sta-
tistics F(x,y), with x=4 (5-1) and y=128 (32×(5-1))
for a probability level of 0.05 which allows us to test
whether  the  results  have  a  95%  chance  of  coming
from  the  same  statistical  population,  would  be
F(4,128)=2.44.  So,  a  greater  F-statistic  refers  to  a
higher sensitivity to the quality of the input dataset
and vice versa. Table V indicates that the differences
in the F-statistics results obtained by varying the res-
olution is significant for all methods, which confirms
the sensitivity of all methods to the quality of input
datasets. The lowest F-statistic 5.44 in Table V was
obtained  for  SA,  which  indicates  that  the  average
coverage  values  from  SA  have  more  likely  been

Figure 13: Comparison of differences between average
coverage values obtained from original maps and the
ground truth for three optimization methods.

302

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

obtained from the same populations, and therefore,
SA, is less sensitive. The highest F-statistic is 229.6
for VOR, which is thus more sensitive to the quality
of  input  data.  The  reason  is  that  SA  uses  small
absolute  displacement  to  determine  the  optimum
positions, which is not related to the resolution. The
box  plots  of  the  different  map  resolutions  for  each
method in Fig. 14 indicate that the standard devia-
tions with VOR are lower when compared to CMA-
ES  and  SA,  which  indicates  that  results  obtained
from VOR algorithm are coherent in each run for the
same  map  resolution.  The  reason  is  that  VOR  is  a
deterministic  algorithm  that  uses  the  geometric
structure of the environment, which is not changed
by changing the initial sensor positions. So, applying
the algorithm with different initial starting positions
for  sensors  has  less  impact  on  the  final  results.
Conversely,  SA  is  a  highly  stochastic  algorithm,
which  returns  the  highest  standard  deviation  in  the
results for different runs on the same map resolution.
CMA-ES is in-between these two algorithms, being
more  stable  than  SA,  but  still  gives  results  with  a
higher standard deviation than VOR since it is also a
stochastic optimization algorithm.

Conclusions

A  survey  on  spatial  data  quality  in  3D  city
models was conducted and a list of the most rele-
vant  elements  of  data  quality  for  3D  models  was

Table V: F-statistic results from one-way ANOVA test.

Optimization Methods ANOVA F-statistic

CMA-ES
SA
VOR

23.78
5.44
229.6

discussed. The impact of 3D data quality on sensor
placement has been determined by investigating its
impact  on  viewshed  and  line-of-sight.  Positional
accuracy and completeness were introduced as two
important  elements  in  sensor  network  deployment.
Raster and vector representations of spatial data and
their  impact  on  the  sensor  network  optimization
algorithms were discussed. To examine the impact of
3D data quality on a sensor network placement and
its coverage, a comparison of the sensitivity between
three optimization algorithms on the quality of input
data  was  carried  out.  The  algorithms  which  were
used in this investigation were both global and local
methods with the novelty of integration of 3D mod-
els. The impact of data quality on final coverage and
sensitivity  of  each  method  was  studied  by  using
different  maps  with  different  quality  as  input  data.
Map  resolutions  were  ranging  from  500  to  50  cm
and  a  map  of  10  cm  resolution  considered  as  the
ground truth data.

The  results  show  that  all  three  methods  are
quite stable when the resolution of the input maps
are changed. The SA algorithm, it is less sensitive
compared to others, however the deviation is high-
er in the final coverage results. VOR has less devi-
ation but it is a little more sensitive to the quality of
input  data.  In  terms  of  final  coverage,  CMA-ES
performed better than both SA and enhanced VOR
algorithms. 

This  research  is  not  exhaustive  in  terms  of
studying the sensitivity of optimization algorithms
with  respect  to  all  the  data  quality  criteria.  The
research is however significant in terms of propos-
ing a methodology for the assessment of the sensi-
tivity of an optimization method with respect to the
quality of spatial 3D models (ex. 3D city models).
Throughout  the  paper,  we  have  defined  and  illus-
trated  the  impact  of  some  of  the  3D  data  quality
elements on the estimation of sensor network cov-
erage. And finally, we have carried out some exper-
imentation  with  three  most  reliable  optimization

(b)
Figure  14:  Box  plot  of  one-way ANOVA  test  for  different  map  resolutions  for:  (a)  CMA-ES;  (b)  SA;  (c) VOR
methods

(a)

(c)

303

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

algorithms to illustrate more concretely the impact
of the quality of 3D city models on the estimation
of  coverage  in  urban  areas.  Further  investigations
are required to define and analyse the impact of the
spatial data quality for each quality criterion on the
estimation of the spatial coverage of a given sensor
network.  It  would  be  also  interesting  to  carry  out
new experimentation on the quality assessment of
3D datasets with higher LODs and their impact on
the sensor networks optimization results.

Acknowledgments

This  research  was  supported  by  the  project
entitled  Integrating  developmental  genetic  pro-
gramming and terrain analysis techniques in GIS-
based  sensor  placement  systems funded  by  the
Canadian  GEOIDE  Network  of  Centres  of
Excellence,  MDA  Systems  Ltd  and  DRDC
Valcartier.  We  also  thank  Annette  Schwerdtfeger
for the proofreading of this paper.

References

Ahmed,  N.,  S.S.  Kanhere  and  S.  Jha.  2005.  The  holes
problem in wireless sensor networks: A survey. ACM
SIGMOBILE Review, 9(2).

Akbarzadeh,  V.,  C.  Gagné,  M.  Parizeau  and  M.A.
Mostafavi.  2011.  Black-box  optimization  of  sensor
placement  with  elevation  maps  and  probabilistic
sensing models, in Proc. Of the IEEE International
symposium  on  robotic  and  sensors  environment
(ROSE 2011).

Akbarzadeh, V., A. Ko, C. Gagné and M. Parizeau. 2010.
Topography-Aware 
Deployment
Optimization  with  CMA-ES,  in  Proc.  of  Parallel
Problem  Solving  from  Nature (PPSN  2010),
Springer.

Sensor 

Argany,  M.,  M.A.  Mostafavi  and  F.  Karimipour.  2010.
Voronoi-based Approaches for Geosensor Networks
Coverage  Determination  and  Optimisation:  A
Survey, in Proc. ISVD 2010, Quebec City.

Argany,  M.,  M.A.  Mostafavi,  F.  Karimipour  and  C.
Gagné. 2011. A GIS Based Wireless Sensor Network
Coverage  Estimation  and  Optimization: A  Voronoi
Aproach. Journal of Transaction on Computational
Science XIV, LNCS 6970, 151-172, Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg.

Aziz, N.A., K. Aziz and W.Z.W. Ismail. 2009. Coverage
strategies  for  wireless  sensor  networks,  World
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology,
vol. 50, 145-150.

Bédard, Y. and D. Valliére. 1995. Qualité des données à
référence spatiale dans un contexte gouvernemental,
technical report, Quebec City, Laval University.

Bharathidasan, A. and S. Madria. 2003. Sensor networks:
an overview, IEEE Potentials, vol. 22, pp. 20–23.
Devillers, R. and R. Jeansoulin. 2006. Spatial data quali-
ty:  concepts,  book  chapter,  Fudumentals  of  Spatial
Data Quality, ISTE, 31-42.

Ghosh A. and S.K. Das. 2008. Coverage and connectivi-
ty  issues  in  wireless  sensor  networks:  a  survey,
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 4, 303–33.
Gröger, G., T.H. Kolbe, C. Nagel and K.H. Häfele. 2012.
OGC  City  Geography  Markup  Language
(CityGML) Encoding Standard, OGC, USA.

Hansen, N. and A. Ostermeier. 2001. Completely deran-
domized  self-adaptation  in  evolution  strategies.
Evolutionary Computation, 9(2), 159-195.

Hogg, R.V., and J. Ledolter. 1987. Engineering Statistics.

New York: MacMillan.

Huang, C.F. and Y.C. Tseng. 2005. A survey of solutions
to  the  coverage  problems  in  wireless  sensor  net-
works, J. Internet Tech., 6(1), 1-8.

Kirkpatrick,  S.,  C.D.  Gelatt  and  M.P.  Vecchi.  1983.
Optimization  by  simulated  annealing.  Science,
220(4598):671.

Kresse,  W.  and  K.  Fadaie.  2004.  ISO  Standards  for
Geographic  Information  (first  ed),  Springer,
Heidelberg (322pp.).

Ledoux,  H.  and  M.  Meijers.  2009.  Extruding  building
footprints to create topologically consistent 3D city
models. In A. Krek, M. Rumor, S. Zlatanova, and E.
Fendel,  editors,  Urban  and  Regional  Data
Management, UDMS Annual, CRC Press, 39-48.
Niewiadomska-szynkiewicz,  E.  and  M.  Marks.  2009.
Optimization  schemes  forwireless  sensor  network
localization, Int. J. Appl. Math. Comput. Sci., 19(2),
291–302.

Nittel,  S.  2009.  A  survey  of  geosensor  networks:
advances  in  dynamic  environmental  monitoring,
Sensors Journal, vol. 9, 5664-5678.

Megerian,  S.,  F.  Koushanfar,  M.  Potkonjak  and  M.B.
Srivastava.  2005.  Worst  and  best-case  coverage  in
sensor networks, IEEE Transaction on mobile com-
puting, 4(1).

Meguerdichian,  S.,  F.  Koushanfar,  G.  Qu  and  M.
Potkonjak. 2001. Exposure in wireless ad-hoc sensor
network, Proc. IEEE MOBICOM ’01, 139-150.
Mostafavi,  M.A.,  G.  Edwards  and  R.  Jeansoulin.  2004.
Ontology-based  method  for  quality  assessment  of
spatial  data  bases.  in:  Proceedings  of  ISSDQ’04,
GeoInfo Series, Bruck/Leitha, Austria, 49-66.
Oort, V.P. 2006. Spatial data quality: from description to
application,  PhD Thesis, Wageningen: Wageningen
Universiteit.

Romoozi,  M.,  and  H.  Ebrahimpour-komleh.  2010.  A
positioning  method  in  wireless  sensor  networks
using  genetic  algorithms,  International  Journal  of
Digital Content Technology and its Applications vol.
4, 174-179.

Walter, V. 2007. Quality Control of 3D Geospatial Data,
Photogrammetric  Week  ’07,  Stuttgart  University,
315-324.

Wang, R. Y. and D.M. Strong. 1996. Beyond Accuracy:
What data quality means to data consumers. Journal
of Management Information System, 12(4), 5-33.

304

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.G   E   O   M   A   T   I   C   A

Wang, Y.  C.  and Y.C. Tseng.  2008.  Distributed  deploy-
ment  schemes  for  mobile  wireless  sensor  networks
to ensure multilevel coverage. IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed System, 19(9), 1280-1294.

Authors

Meysam  Argany received  the  B.Sc.  degree  in
surveying and geomatics engineering and the M.Sc.
degree (with the first rank among all graduate stu-
dents)  in  remote  sensing  from  the  Faculty  of
Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in
2004 and 2007, respectively. He is currently working
toward  the  Ph.D.  degree  in  the  Geographic
Information System (GIS) under the supervision of
Dr. Mostafavi and Dr. Gagné at the Département des
Sciences  Géomatiques,  Faculté  de  Foresterie,  de
Géographie  et  de  Géomatique,  Université  Laval,
Québec,  QC,  Canada.  He  was  a  Remote  Sensing
Specialist  at  Mahab  Consulting  Engineers,  Tehran,
Iran  and  a  Research  Assistant  with  the  Remote
Sensing  Laboratory,  Geomatics  Department,
University  of  Tehran,  Tehran,  Iran.  His  current
research interests are modeling, analysis, and opti-
mization of algorithms for deployment and coverage
analysis  of  geosensor  networks.  Mr.  Argany  is  a
member  of  the  Canadian  GEOmatics  for  Informed
DEcisions  Network  of  Centres  of  Excellence
(GEOIDE).

(REGARD) 

Dr.  Mir  Abolfazl  Mostafavi,  is  associate  pro-
fessor at the Department of geomatics, Laval uni-
versity.  He  is  Scientific  Director  of  Centre  for
Research  in  Geomatics  (CRG)  since  2010  and
Director  of  the  Mobile  Geospatial  Augmented
at  Laval
Reality  Laboratory 
University.  Currenlty,  he  leads  an  international
working  group  on  Semantic  Interoperability  and
Ontology  for  Geospatial  Information  within  the
International  Society  of  Photogrammetry  and
Remote Sensing (ICWG II/IV). His reserach activi-
ties  are  mainly  focused  on  spatial  data  modeling
and representation dynamic GIS, spatial ontologies,
semantic interoperability, semantic sensor web, spa-
tial data quality and uncertainity, geosimulation and
geospatial  virtual  and  augmented  reality.  He  has
organized  several  international  conferences  and
workshops.  His  original  contributions  were  publi-
ched in several international journals and confere-
neces in the field of geospatial scienecs. 

of  Electrical 

Vahab  Akbarzadeh is  a  PhD  candidate  in  the
Department 
and  Computer
Engineering  at  Université  Laval  (Canada).  He
received his B.Sc. (2006) in Computer Engineering
and  M.Sc.  (2009)  in  Computer  Science  from
Shahid  Beheshti  University  (Iran)  and  Ryerson
University  (Canada),  respectively.  During  his  stu-
dies,  he  has  received  several  prestigious  scholar-
ships  including:  Alexander  Graham  Bell  Canada
Graduate  Scholarship,  Sun  Microsystems  of
Canada Scholarship in Computational Sciences and
Engineering,  and  Ryerson  University’s  Graduate
Teaching  Assistant  Award  of  Excellence.  Since
2011,  he  has  been  a  reviewer  for  the  IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement
journal. His research interests include smart sensor
networks, machine learning, and numerical optimi-
zation methods.

Christian Gagné received the B.Ing. degree in
computer  engineering  and  the  M.Sc.  and  Ph.D.
degrees  in  electrical  engineering  from  Université
Laval,  Quebec,  QC,  Canada,  in  2000,  2003,  and
2005,  respectively.  In  2005–2006,  he  was  a
Postdoctoral  Fellow  with  INRIA  Saclay–Île-de-
France,  Orsay,  France,  and  with  the  University  of
Lausanne,  Lausanne,  Switzerland.  In  2006–2007,
he was a Consultant with Informatique WGZ Inc.
In  2007–2008,  he  was  a  Research  Analyst  with
MacDonald,  Dettwiler  and  Associates  Ltd.  Since
2008, he has been an Assistant Professor with the
Département  de  Génie  Électrique  et  de  Génie
Informatique, Université Laval. His research inter-
ests  are  the  engineering  of  distributed  intelligent
systems,  particularly  systems  involving  machine
learning and evolutionary computation.

Reda  Yaagoubi,  is  Assistant  Professor  in
Geomatics  Department,  Faculty  of  Environmental
Design at King AbdulAziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia. He holds a Ph.D. degree in Geomatics from
Laval University in Quebec City, Canada (2011), a
Master  of  Science  in  Physical  Geography  (Remote
Sensing)  from  University  of  Monreal,  Montreal,
Canada  (2005),  and  also  an  Engineering  degree  in
Surveying  form  College  of  Geomatics  and
Surveying  Engineering—IAV  Hassan  II,  Rabat,
Morocco  (2003).  His  main  research  interests  are
Cognitive  Geomatics,  Spatial  Cognition,  Remote
Sensing and LiDAR, Web Mapping, spatial database
modeling and 3D Modeling. !

305

Geomatica 2012.66:291-305.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by GLASGOW UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on 09/10/18. For personal use only.