Tronsacfions in GfS.  1996, \Id  1,  no  1,  p. 25 

Biophysical aggregations of a forested landscape 
using an ecological diagnostic system 

JOSEPH C COUGHLAN AND STEVEN W RUNNING 

Joseph C Coughlan  Johnson Controls World Services,  NASA Ames Research Center, 
Moffett Field, California, USA 94035.  e-mail: jcoughlan@gaia.arc.nasa.gov 

Steven W Running  School of Forestry, University of Montana, Missoula, Montana, USA  59812. 
e-mail: swr@ntsg.umt.edu 

Introduction 

Ecosystem models are used  to quantify effccrs of possible 
climatic and  anthropogenic  perturbations  on  biospheric 
mass  and energy fluxcs at regional s d e s  (Running 1990; 
Shugart  1990;  Woodward  1990;  Wickland  1991).  A 
common  modelling strategy is  to  divide the large  study 
area into homogeneous segments and execute the process 
model  on  each  segment  (Potter  1996).  Using  this 
approach, regional simulations  of carbon, nitrogen, and 
water budgets have been generated for grasslands, forests, 
and  mixed  crop-forcst  landscapes  (Abboa  ct  al  1986; 
b n e r  and  Meentemcyer  1989;  Running  et  a l   1989; 
Burkc  er  al  1990).  One  problem  identified  by  these 
studies was  selecting an  appropriate spatial resolution to 
represent  the landscape  For example,  Running  et  al 
(1989) represented forest LcafArea I n d a  (W) ofa 1200 
k m 2  study region in  1200 cells using the Advanced Very 
(AVHRR)  (1.1 km). 
High  Resolution  Radiometer 
However,  1.3 million cells would  have been  generated if 
the Thematic  Mapper  (TM) (30  m)  had  been  used  to 
sample forest  W. A  coarser  spatial  resolution  reduces 
computational  complexity  but  may  oversimplify 
significant features existing at a finer scale (Running et al 
1989; O'Neill  er al  1989; Burke et al  1990; Rastetter er al 

1992; Band  1993; Pierce and  Running  1995). An  ideal 
landscape representation would use knowledge about the 
system  and  model 
to  maintain  essential  spatial 
information  and  reduce  unnecessary  and  redundant 
information (O'Neill  et al  1986). 

Spatial data have been analysed and classified using 
numerical  methods  and  knowledge-based  (KB) systems. 
Tong  et  al  (1987)  and  Argialas  and  Harlow  (1990) 
reviewed the advantages and limitations of numerid and 
KB  systems  for  interpreting specrnl images.  Numerical 
classification  merhods  use  mathematical  techniques  to 
maximize  within  group  similarity  and  bcrwcen  group 
differences. An  ecologically relevant example is Davis and 
Dozier's  (1 990) m u d  information analysis which uses  a 
numerical method to integrate topographic, geologic, and 
summarized  climatic-hydrologic  data  for  predicting 
vegetation  cover  rypes.  One  common  artribure  of 
numerical methods  is  the lack of  a subject context.  Data 
groupings  are  nor  formed  from  predetermined  system 
principles and have  no inherent meaning  unless assigned 
one  by  a  human  a p e r t   (Lochle  1986;  Coughlan  and 
Running  1989; Argialas and Harlow 1990). 

Knowledge-based methob grot-lp spatial data using 
a  simple  reasoning  scheme  to  construct  concepts  that 
group  spatial  data  into  similar  classes  (Duda  and 

1361-1682/96/0001-0025 

8 Parson Profcrriod Limited  1996 

25 

f  C Coughlun and  5 W Running 

ShortlXc  1983).  KB  system  have  performed landscape 
feature  recognition  and  pattern  classification  using 
predetermined 
spectral  and  spatial  characteristics 
(Goodenough  et  a l   1987;  Wharton  1987;  M&wn 
1987;  Mollcr-Jcnsen  1990;  Ton  et  al  1991).  Fcw 
geographic KB systems have  vied to  use  the underlying 
causes of observed landscape patterns as criteria for their 
classification.  Classification  criteria  use  observable 
features whereas many ecological phenomena thar explain 
observable  partems  and  underlying  procascs  arc  not 
direcdy observable from individual data themes (Forman 
and Godron 1981). 

Coughlan  and  Running  (1989)  first  proposed 
using climate-soil-vegetation equilibrium  theory in a KB 
system to aggregate large  geographic data sen into fewcr 
rcpresenraavc  landtypes.  Thc landtypes  arc defined  in 
terms of the factors which limit fbmt evapotranspiration 
and  the  intensity of the limitation, as determined  by the 
strength  of  evidence  used  to  make  the  classification. 
Homogeneous  land  units  are  formed  by  clustering 
identical, adjacent landrypes and an ecosystem simulation 
modd can usc the homogeneous land units in placc of the 
original  data.  What  distinguishes  the  KB  classification 
 of the KB 
from numerical-based methods is that by h
idcntifjmg  and  roughly  quantifying  the  hydrologic 
equilibrium,  the  landtypes  represent  an  a  ptiori 
T h e  KB  landtypes do 
determined  water  stress &cnt. 
to  have 
not  require  post-processing 
ecological  relevance.  T h e  same  hydrologic  equilibrium 
theory  is  already  designed  into  the  ecosystem  model 
(Running  and  Coughlan  1988). 
FOREST-BGC 
Simulated  plant  water  sucss is  a critical model  w i a b k  
summarizing  the  hydrologic  equilibrium  concept  for  a 
growing season, and it can be used  to compare and link a 
KB to the ecosystem modd. 

interpretation 

e

Our objectives  are  to  1)  generate  and  test  the 
properties  of  the  KB  landrypes  using  simulated  water 
stress data  from FOREST-BGC,  2) compare water SUMS 
classifications  using  the  KB  landtypes  to  a  sranbrd 
overlay 
geographic 
classification,  and  3)  determine  if  the  KE3  mimics 
important 
comparing 
intermediare variables in  FOREST-BGC  to inferred  KB 
concepts. 

information 

ecosystem 

processes 

system 

(GIS) 

by 

Engineering ecological knowledge 

Hydrologic equilibrium theory 
Woodward  (1986)  observed  that  W  and  vegetation 
structure  can be  determined  by  an  annual  hydrologic 
budget on  a global scale.  Leaf Area Index was  set  to  thc 
maximum amount supporcable under conditions defined 
with  synoptic  meteorological  data,  from  a  set  of 
representative stations,  and  corresponding  transpiration 

26 

rates calculated with the Penman-Monrcith  equation. In 
wcstcrn M o n w  Ncmani and Running (I 989) simulated 
a  s i m i l a r   equilibrium  between vcgmrion,  climax,  and 
soils using  the  FOREST-BGC ecosystem  modd.  They 
summarized the W-soil-cliiate equilibrium as a family 
of climate curves specific to wcstun Montana that d a t e  
Soil Water Holding Capacity (SWHC) to maximum site 
W  (Figure  1).  The  climate  curves  represent  climatic 
efficiency, a ratio of Acnul Evapotranspiration (AEn to 
Potential Evapotranspiration (PET). 

Hydrologic  quilibrium  theory can  define factors 
limiting and subsquendy controlling forest transpiration 
such  that mitigating the most limiting ficror will increase 
transpiration.  In  a  dry climate  likc the  inter-mounuin 
region, forens  primarily use  soil water  held  from  spring 
snowmelt  to  supply  the  majority  of  their  summer 
transpiration  needs.  The  n a n d   state  is  one  where 
!jWHC  Limics  Transpiration  (SWLT).  As 
the  other 
a t t u n e ,   W  Limits  Tnerpiration  (LAILT)  when  the 
current  leaf  surface  a r a  cannot  deplete  available  soil 
water. W limitations indicate disturbance. 

Knowladge-based dtsign 
CoughIan and  Running (1989)  proposed arprcssing the 
hydrological equilibrium in a KB to infer site conditions 
as dacribcd by GIS data ALL dqpostic inference is based 
on predetermined  principles built  into their  KB as rules 

Figure 1. Graph of LAI-saii-climatc equilibrium in western 
Montana (Ncmani and Running 1989). The curves represent 
diffcrcnt climatic cfficicncicr (AETIPET). The grid  represents 
discrctc catcgoricr for uraring GIS classes. 

defining  cause-and-cffm  relationships.  Rules  contain 
variables and the variables arc assigned symbolic (ordinal) 
values.  For  example,  a  rule  variable  defining  site  air 
temperature,  AIRTEMP  can  be  assigned  the  symbolic 
value COOL, NORMAL, or WARM. 

A  KB  queries an accernal  source to  obtain  input 
data  which  are  converted 
into  symbolic  values 
(Hayes-Roth ct al1983). In a primitive apcn system the 
translation  from number to symbol can be  accomplished 
using  discrete  intervals.  For  example,  in  Montana 
elevations below  1000  m  are  classified  WARM; above 
1000 m and below 2000 m are classified NORMAL; and 
above 2000  m are classified COOL. A  1400 m elevation 
translates to AIR TEMPERATURE = NORMAL. 

During  the  diagnostic  process  KB  rules  chain 
together  so 
that  one  rule  becomes  the  prrcursor  to 
another.  In Equation  (1) two  rules chain  together. T h e  
first rule reads: if the air temperature is warm.  then infer 
that  the snowmelt rate is  Fast.  T h e  s a n d  rule then uses 
the  fast  snowmelt  rate  to  infer  that  seasonal  soil water 
content  is  low.  The  snowmelt rate  is  an  intermediate 
concept bciig moddled  to maintain  mechanistic links to 
the ecological system. 

IF  AlRTEMP  = WARM THEN  SNOWMELT = FAST 

111 

IF  SNOWMELT = FAST MEN SOILWATER  = LOW 

A compound  rule connects w o  or more concepts 
with the conjunctions andor  or,  indicating a relationship 
between the  two concepts (Equation  2). T h e  compound 
rule in Equation 2 will execute only if both conditions are 
U U C .  

IF  AIRTEMP  = WARM AND SNOWMELT  = FAST 

1-21 

MEN SOILWATER = LOW 

Fuzzy logic 
Tiulslating numbers to  symbols with  discrete categories 
may  not be  appropriate for  a  problem  that  has w y i n g  
degrees of certainty that  any given  answer  is  m e  (Duda 
and Shordiffe 1983; Schumudccr 1984). Fuzcy set theory 
has been  used  to  represent  the  ~ n ~ c ~ a i n t y  
and  it  is  a 
viable method for representing ecological conditions and 
gradients  on a  landscape  scale  (Roberts  1986;  1989a; 
1989b). 

First proposed by  Zadeh (1965), h y  logic is  now 
a  common  method  for  represenfig  ‘grey  areas’  in 
reasoning (Schumucker 1984; Kandel  1986; L a s h  et al 
1989). Funy logic indicates the degree ofccrcainry that a 
value is  representative. Fuzzy logic becomes non-intuitive 
when  it  is  possible  that  one  variable  can  have  several 
concurrent  values.  Each  value  is  correct  and  each  is 
independent of the other values and need not s u m  to  1 .O 
or any other predefined total. 

The  suengrh,  or certainty,  for  a  particular  value 

- 0  I 

loo0 

1200 

1400 

1600 

1800 

2000 

Elemtion (m) 

-COOL 

-NORMAL 

*WARM 

Figurr 2. Air rcmperaturr  is inferred from dcvation (m) and 
G i c d  into COOL, NORMAL, and WARM symbolic d u a  
using ach fiuzy function. 

assignment is quantified  by a fuzzy number ranging from 
0.0  to  1.0,  with  0.0  indicating  no  relationship between 
numeric and symbolic value  and  1.0 indicating a  perfect 
relationship. In Figurc 2, site air temperature  is fuzzified 
into  three values:  COOL, NORMAL,  and WARM.  A 
1400  m  elevation translates  into  three values:  COOL 
(O.O), WARM ( O S ) ,   and  NORMAL  (1.0).  Rules  that 
contain AIR TEMPERATURE = NORMAL still execute 
but now rules with AIR TEMPERATURE = WARM also 
execute, though with less  strength. Multiple  answers  are 
now possible and each is weighted by its fuzzy number. 

T h e  most  complicated  aspect  in  representing 
the 
in  expert  systems  revolves  around 
cenainty 
mathematical methods  for combining  and  tracing  fuzzy 
values  through  the  KB  (Duda  and  Shorrliffc  1983; 
Henkind and Harrison 1989; Laskey et al  1989). There is 
no conclusive method.  Fuzzy logic defines some standard 
operations,  but  KB  systems  often  modify  them  for 
domain  specific  circumstances  (Schumucker  1984; 
Kandel 1986). This ad hoc approach is a criticism of fuzzy 
KB  systems (Henkind and  Harrison  1989; Laskcy  et  al 
1989). 

T h e  two most  common  fUay  number  operations 
are  modifications of the logical and and  or (Schumucker 
1984): 

M D  = MIN(FznX,FznY] 

OR  = MAX[FznX.FmY] 

131 

27 

f C Gwghlan and  5 W Running 

Where  FvlX  and  FznY  are  fuzzy  numbers  being 
combined  into  a  new  due. Equations  (1)  and  (2) are 
rewritten  using  f...y numbers  to  demonstrate how  the 
condition’s  fuzzy  number  is  u a n s f d   to  fuzufy  the 
conclusion: 

IF AIRTEMP  = WARM  (0.5) THEN  SNOWMELT  = FAST 10.5) 
IF  SNOWMELT  = FAST 10.5) WEN  SOILWATER  = LOW  10.5) 

14) 

In Equation  (4), simple rule chaining carries AIRTEMP’S 
0.5 value through to SOILWATER 

For Equation  (3, andcarries the minimum  of the 
two fuzzy  numbers,  a  0.5,  because  both conditions  are 
required  and  0.5  is  the  smallest value,  and  or takes  the 
maximum of both conditions as follows: 

IF  AIRTEMP  = WARM  I I  .O) AND  SNOWMELT  = FAST 10  5) 

151 

THEN  SOILWATER  = LOW  (0.5) 

IF  AIRTEMP - WARM  ( 1  .O) OR  SNOWMELT = FAST 10.5) 

THEN  SOILWATER  = LOW  [ 1 .O) 

Schumucker 
combinations  to build more complicated rules. 

(1984)  presents  many  more  fuzzy 

Fuey numbers  can  also  weight  rules  to  quan* 

their relative imporrancc when  rules  are not all equal in 
strength.  Rules would be inappropriately considered in a 
fuzziied conclusion without a measure of rule strength in 
thcse instances. Equation (6) is a rule that is not as strong 
as other previous rulcs b e c a w  its asserred value is always 
diminished  by 50%: 

IF ASPECT  = SOUlH (0.75) THEN A J R W  = WARM 10.75) X  [0.5] 16) 

AJRTEMP = WARM 10.375) 

T h e  highest  fizzy  number  possible  for  r u l e  6  is 
0.50.  Weighing  rules  is  necessary  when  competing 
diagnoses  are not  c q d  in  relevance.  For aample,  site 
aspect  influences air temperature  but  to  a  lesser degree 
than site elevation. We  can infer that south-hcig aspects 
are warmer than  nod-ficing aspects, but when  the site 
elevation is high, the sire air temperature is predominately 
cool. Elevation is  more relevant than aspect, thus aspect 
rules are diminished in strength to normalize their relative 
importance  to elevation-based rules. 

Inference engine design 
KB  rules  are  executed  by  an  inference  engine  which  is 
available in  the  computer  language PROLOG  (Bodand 
Internationd  1986).  W h e n  given  a  goal,  PROLOG 
searches a KB  to return the first correct answer it finds, or, 
if  none  is  present,  it  returns a  failure  message.  The 
problem  with  the  default  search  engine  is  that  the  first 
correct answer is nor necessarily the best, so a condition is 
set  that  any  answer  returned must  have  a fuay number 
above a threshold value, say 0.9. It is possible that there is 
no answer at thar highest certainty level so  the search will 
eventually fail. The  criteria  are lowered,  for  example to 

28 

0.8, only if the search fails. The search then b q p  again. 
E v c n d y   the  engine  will  find  an  answer  since  the 
threshold will c v e n d y  rcvh m. Any lllswc~ acceding 
the  threshold  is  +ccepablc.  At  a  threshold  of 0.8.  b r  
example, the systemwill return the fimvlswcrwith a f u q  
value at or above 0.8.  Thur is  the possibility of &ding  a 
non-optim;rl solution bur it is guaranteed to be  reasonable 
ifthc threshold is sct hrgh and dccrrvcd by s m a l l  amounts. 

Methods 

-ys 
A  simulation  mod&ng  system  was  wd  to  genuate 
hydrologic  equilibrium  results  for  comparison  to  the 
infcrred KB equilibrium dassa. The  Rqonal Ecosystem 
Simulation  System  (RESSys) m l d  &om  the  regional 
simulaaon mcrhods first described in Running et al (1989) 
and  further derailed  in  Coughlan and  Dungan  (1996). 
RESSys  incorporates  both  the  data  flow  and  data 
processing necessary to exccutc an  ecosystem and climate 
(Figure 3). RESSys incorporates 
model in a spatial d
 
thrre sets of data 1) LAI to quantify vegetation biomass, 2) 
SWHC to calculate site water balance, and 3) topographic 
of RESSys is 
data dcfhng site micro-climate. T h e  p& 
that a point lcvel simulation modd can be  applied o w  a 
region using five spatial variables while holding the rest of 
the model paramcrus constant (Figure 3). The five spatial 
variables arc W, SWHC, elevation, aspm, and slope, and 
these  variables  account  for  all  spatial  variation  in  the 
simulations. 

g

FOREST-BGC 

is  a  process-level  ecosystem 
simulation model embedded in RESSys thar calculates the 
cychg  of carbon,  water, and  nitrogen  through form 
ecosystems (Running and  Gughlan  1988; Running  and 
Gower  1991).  The  key  advancement  for  regional 
applications made  by  FOREST-BGC involves  the  llse of 
LAI  to quantify forat biomass b c u w  this variable can be 
obtained  from  satellite  imagery.  FOREST-BGC  ueats 
precipitation, canopy interception- evaporation, snowpack 
accumulation, soil water + and  oudlow  at  a daily 
rime step. Tms extract soil water and transpire it based on 
daily micro-mcreorological conditions. 

FOREST-BGC  drives  canopy  and  ecosystem 
processes  with  daily  mereorologid  data  including: 
maximum  and  minimum  air  t e m p e r a m ,   s h o m v e  
radiarion,  dew  point,  and  precipitation.  MTCLIM,  a 
dimate mapolarion model, calculates rcmote site micro- 
d i a t e  as  influenced  by  topographic  and  forest  coyer 
variations  within  mountainous  terrain  (Running  R  al 
1987).  MTCLIM  takes observed  daily  base  station 
precipitation and  maximum and  minimum  temperatures 
and  generates  adjusted  air  temperatures,  dew  point, 
shortwave radiation, and precipitation for any remote site 
(Hunguford  et  al  1989).  MTCLIM  net&  remote  sire 

Figurc 3. The dau flow 
dugram for the Regional 
Ecosystem Simulation 
sysrcm (RESSys). 
Legends in the right 
column indicate the data's 
cumnr sure. Dan k 
d from ia source 
through diffcrcnt 
nvlcformations and 
eventual entry into the 
ecosystem model.  EDiS 
is listed in  the data 
strum in  in proposed 
posidon, reducing the 
Lrgc GIS data xts for the 
simulation mod&.  ED6 
is composed of &a 
separate knowledge base 
sections, SWLT, MLT, 
and Climate. 

elevation, aspect,  gradient,  and  LAI to  calculate  spatial 
micrdimatic variations within a catchment. 

conifen.  Deciduous shrubs  arc  common in  the  riparian 
zones of both catchments. 

study arras 
T h e  study  areas arc M catchments located in  western 
Montana  along a  precipitation  grad~ent h m  the  m e r  
no&  near  Glacier National Park, M T  to the dryer south 
near Missoula, MT. T h e  dimate of both ueac is influenced 
by warm,  wet Pacific air masses interacting with the Rocky 
Mountains. The wtt srudy xea, Soup Creek and smaller, 
adjacent  Napa  Creek,  receive  roughly 
the 
precipitation (1 150 mm) as rhc drier study area, Elk Crcek 
(550 mm). A large pomon of precipitation falls as snow at 
high elevations and in qd amounts of rain and snow in 
the valleys of both carchments. A greater propomon (60%) 
of precipitation falls in  the winter and spring with a drier 
summer  and  autumn.  In  addition  to  the  meso-sale 
prccipitauon @en[  beween  the  catchments, elevation 
induces  a  precipitation  gradient  within  the  catchments 
with  the  higher  elevations  receiving  at  least  twice the 
precipitation of the valleys. 

twice 

Both  SoupNapa  (collectively called  Soup  Creek) 
and Elk Creek catchmenrs are approximated 17 km2, and 
drain from east  to west.  Elk  Creek is  a h@Iy segmented 
fluvial  catchment  that  drains  an  eastern  highland region. 
Soup Creek is  a glaciated catchment curving to  the south- 
east. Recent  disturbances in  the  catchments indude clear 
cuts and old burn areas, all of vhich are regenerating with 

GIS data layers 
T h e  spatial  inputs  required by  RESSP  (LAI, SWHC, 
elevation, aspect,  and  gradient) were represented  as  a 
30  m  rrsolution  raster data layer,  and a RESSys  database 
was  created  with  approximately  20000  records  per 
catchment.  LAI was  computed  from  LANDSAT  TM 
satellite ;..p..V at 30 m  rccoludon using the  regression 
mcrhods in Nemvli et al(l993). Spanner a al(1990) and 
Ncrmni a al  (1 993) found h the  regression  technique 
overestimates  LAI's  for  deciduous  canopies  likc  those 
found in the riparian mnes of both Soup and Elk (=reeks. 
USDA  Soil  Conservation  Service  soil  series  maps 
(1:24  000)  were  digidzcd  using  PC  ARC/INFO  and 
rrgisterai to  the  Digital Elevation Model  (DEM)  before 
king rasterized  to  a  30m resolution. Soil wter  holding 
capacity was  calculated using porosity derived from mean 
particle size as estimated from mapped soil texture values 
(un water  per  m  soil).  RESSys  assumes  a  unifbrm  soil 
depth of  1 m for calculating site water volume. 

Catchment topography  was  derived  from  30  m 
resolution DEMs.  Aspm  and  @em 
were  calculated 
within  RESSys  from  these  DFMs  using  techniques 
described by  Moorc  et  al  (1991). Elk  Creek's DEM  has 
to  south  suiping  which  produced  small, 
some  no& 
artificial topographic features. 

29 

f f &&I!UR 

and  S W Running 

Ecosystem simulaaons 
T h e  FOREST-BGC  and  MTCLIM  mod&  in  RESSys 
were parameterized h r  both  ~ t c h m e n t c  using methob 
described by Band et al (1 99 1) and Nemani et al (1 993). 
T h e  only parameter diffircnces  between the  simulations 
for  the  two  catchments  m e  latitude and  their separate 
climatic  data  files  h r  1988. Daily  meteorological data 
were collected in each catchment,  and gaps  in  the  Soup 
Creek  data  set caused  by  quipment  failure were  N e d  
with  extrapolated meteorological station  data  from the 
Swan River Ranger Station louted approximately 12 km 
away.  Uninterrupted  meteorological data  from  the  local 
Lubrecht Flume SNOTEL station was used for Elk Creek 
(USDA Soil Conservation SeMcc 1985). Simulations on 
approximately 20  000 raster  CelL were acccuted on each 
catchment and annual mults for each record were saved. 

stress 

Intcgratedprrdawn kafwatm potential (ace) 
FOREST-BGC  calculates  plant  physiology  variables 
including  predawn leaf  water  potential,  an  indicator  of 
daily plant  water sucss with  increasingly negative values 
indicating  greater  plant 
(Larchcr  1980). 
FOREST-BGC averaged simulated plant water stress h r  
days with  a  daily average air temperature abovc freezing. 
Myers (1 988) proposed  integrating predawn water stress 
over time  (auc) as an indicator  of long term plant stress. 
Seasonal  water sucss, as measured  by  nw, is  used  as an 
equilibrium measure indicating whether soil water or LAI 
limits  transpiration.  A  Soil Water  Limits Tispiration 
(SWLT) site will have high water s t r ~ s  (high negative auc 
values) while  a  Leaf Area  Index  Limits  Transpiration 
( W L T )  sire will have low water suess (low negative auc 
VaUCS). 

Ecological Diagnostic System (EDiS) 
The hydrologic quilibrium KB and inference engine are 
collectively  called  the  Ecological  Diagnostic  System 
(EDiS).  EDiS  was  coded  in  Turbo  PROLOG  V2.0 
(Borland International  1986) and was  compiled for  fast 
arccution speed The basic KB svucnuc is s
in 
Figure 4  which lists all  KB predicates and  the data  flow 
from  GIS  variables  to  the  diagnostic  conclusion.  The 
SWLT diagnosis has a  deeper hierarchical stmcturc and 
encompasses more rules than the LAILT diagnosis. 

d

d

 

EDiSH KB incorporates general knowledge and the 
results  from  sensitivity  testing  (Duda  and  Shorcliffc 
1983). A  RESSys  sensitivity  r a t  was  conducted  for  a 
range of elevation, W, and SWHC common in  western 
Montana  (Running et  al  1989) and results were used to 
construct  the  KB.  Fuzzy  functions  were  generated  for 
SWHC, W, elevation,  aspect,  and  gradient  based  on 
observations of simulated  uuc.  General knowledge about 
micro-climate  and  hydrology  was  abstracted  from 
MTCLIM  where  elevation changes  air  temperatures by 

30 

8°C across the elevation range in the KB wfiile aspat only 
2°C &om south to north slopes. 
changes air tern- 
In  F i g ~ u r  2, both general  knowledge  about  how 
elevation  changes  air  temperature  and  specific 
information  o n   W/soil  relationships  learnt  from 
sensitivity testing were gnphed. The WARM and COOL 
curves (Figure 2 )   were  defined  using  gcnenl  mitre 
climatological principles.  The  NORMAL  curve  was 
derived  from  a  sensitivity  analysis  conducted  with 
meteorological station data collected at 1400 m elevation 
and is strongest around that elevation. 

EDiS  was  executed  on both  the  Elk  Creek  and 
Soup Creek databases without  any KB adjustments. The 
SWLT and W L T  diagnoses can be run independently or 
in  combination  (SWLT-WLT)  for  which  both  the 
SWLT and W L T  components make a diagnosis and the 
strongest  value  is  selected  for  each  land  unit.  Each 
catchment  record  was  classified  into  a  EDiS  landtype 
b a d  on  a  diagnosis ( m T ,  M L T ,  or SWLT-LAILT) 
and its fuzzy certainty value associated with  the dmgnosis 
(0.0 to  1.0). Three EDiS classifications corresponding to 
the  diagnosis  names  were  generated  and  both  the 
diagnosis and its fuzzy number were recorded. 

KB testing 

Mechanistic KB test 
To  insure  that  EDiS  is  generating  ccologidy  sensible 
results, a mechanistic rest was designed to compare EDiS's 
internal  snowpack  calculation  to  FOREST-BGC's  snow 
model. This test  focuses on a n  important  facet of fomt 
hydrology,  snowpack  dynamics  (Waring  and  Franklin 
1979; Trocndlc  and  King  1985). EDiS  represents 
snowpack persistence  as an internal  KB  concept  to hclp 
determine site water availability and soil water limitations 
(Figure  4).  If  EDIS  is  reasoning  properly,  the  hzzy 
snowpack  concept  in  EDiS  should  correspond 
to 
simulated  snowpack  dynamics  in  FOREST-BGC's  new 
snowmelt  sub-model  (Coughlan  and  Running  1996) 
which uses site radiation and air temperature  to compute 
melt rata. 

is 

Snow  accumulation  and  melt 

indirectly 
controlled  by  elevation  and  aspm,  so  a  data  set  with 
lOOOm,  1500m and  2000m elevations  and  aspects 
ranging  from  north  (ao) to  south  (180°), using  22.5" 
increments  was  created  to  test  snowpack persistence. A 
stecp gradient  of  25" was  used  for all  aspects to  get  the 
maximum  differentiation  between  north  and  south 
slopes.  T h e  snowpack  variable  in  FOREST-BGC  was 
monitored  and  the  date  the  snowpack  disappeared  for 
greater than  five consecutive days defined  the simulated 
snowpack  persistence.  EDiS  generates 
snowpack 
persistence as a concept with  filay LONG and SHORT 
valua.  The comparison was  made by graphing results for 

Figure 4. The EDiS knowledge base hicnrchy and data flow 
d* 
F.ach  node on  the tree is a concept represented by PROLOG 
prediata or conccpn. The first number (v) indicates the r o d  
number of classes defined for ach concept. The Kcond number 
(r)  indicates the number of predicate rules defining thcrc 
dwa. The underlined concepts indicate where dan  enters 
fmm the GIS daubvc Information mova up from the 
underlined conccpu to the mot, ‘CLrrlfY’, which produce a 
dizgnoris (i.c SOIL 0.4). Bold-faced p d a r a  uc referenced 
in  the t a t  and illustrated in graph. 

on  two  Y  axes,  one with  the 
all elevations  and  asp- 
FOREST-BGC’s depletion date and the second with  the 
EDiS’s fuzzy snowpack value. 

GIs ovcrkzy  comparison 
for 
One common  procedure used  to segment Ian+ 
regional ecosystem  simulations  is  based  on overlays  of 
individual  data  layers  (Running ct al  1989; Burke et  al 
1990; Pierce  and  Running  1995) so  a  comparison 
berwecn this method and EDiS is warranted. GIS overlay 
classes  were  generated fiom  the  five  digirized GIS  data 
layers  (Figure  3). Each data  layer  was  categorized into 
value dasscs  before being overlaid. LAI and SWHC were 
divided  into  five  categories  each as shown  in  Figure  1. 
Elevation  was  simplified  into  four  zona  (c12OO m, 
1200-1 600 m, 1600-2000 m, > 2000 m) and aspect into 

two  classes  (north  and  south  exposures). The  hillslope 
was  represented  by  two  classes  (flat  and  25” 
&cnt 
sloping  surfaces).  There  are  400  possible 
class 
combinations. Each  land  record in  both the Soup Creek 
and Eu( C&  databases was classified into one of the GIS 
classes and afterwards empty dasses were deleted. 

StatiZriElrl udysis 
The hydrologic equilibrium properties of EDiS landrypes 
and GIS land classes were compared to one another using 
sratisticd  tests  on REsSys  computed  (uvc) as defined by 
MFK  (1988). The aruibutes tested were the cohesiveness 
of the segmented landscape units, the distiicrncss of each 
land unit class from one another, and whether there is an 
hydrologic  equilibrium  order  between 
the  EDiS 
landrypes. 

test 

performs 

non-parametric 

Landscape  cohesiveness was  rncasurcd  using the 
F-statistic, a ratio of  avc variance within  landrypes to  the 
variance berwcen landrypes. The modified  Kruskal-Wallis 
(K-W) 
painvise 
comparisons  between  a l l   classes and  identifies  whether 
classes  arc unique  or redundant  (Conover  1971).  The 
Jonckeere-Terpstra  U-T)  non-paramerric  test  detects 
hydrologic equilibrium order along a water stress gradient 
(Daniel 1990). SWLT should be more water stressed than 
M L T ,  so the  mean uuc  per  class  should  increase with 
higher SWLT. The J-T test compares auc for all landrypes 

31 

f  C C w g h f a n a n d S  WRunning 

checking not only for distinctness as K-W does but also 
for order. T h e  null hypothesis is  that there is no order for 
the entire population of h. 

T h e  J o n & - T a p m   non-paramcmc  t a t  is limited 
in  that  it  reports  o v d  order  while  missing  smaller 
disorders  existing within a  larger  ordered series  (Daniel 
1990). To find smaller disorders in the EDiS dvsication 
of uvr,  the J-T  non-paramcmc  test  was run  pairwisc on 
adjacent groups of EDiS dwec to chcdc for perfect order. 

Results and discussion 

Landscape images 
Classified landxapa were draped over catchment DEMs 
for a 3-D penpccrivc in Plates 1 to 4. All four images use 
a  numeric  legend  representing landrypes which  are  a h  
arranged  along  a  water  stress  gradient.  The  SWLT 
diagnosis (Plate  1)  has uncertain  sites (< 0.5) labelled as 
less water stressed, while the high confidence WLT land 
unit  classes (>= 0.5)  are interpreted as high stressed sites. 
The combined  diagnosis, SWLT-LWT  in  Plate 2 ws 
the WLT and W L T  dwes to anchor opposite ends of 
the same water stress  gradient. Dark blue is the most LAI 
limited  (1.0)  and  red the  most  soil  water  limited (1.0). 
The centre of the water sness @cnt, 
shown as 0.0, are 
sites where neither the W L T  nor SWLT rules wcrc able 
to infer a classification. 

Elk  Crrek 
Predominant  featsues visible in Elk Crack are the s u e a m  
network, an cast-wcst elevation gradient, and north-south 
facing  hillslopa  (Plates  1  and  2).  T h e  most  striking 
fearure  is  the  suong  SWLT  diagnosis  for  the  crcek’s 
riparian  zone.  The  reasons  for  the  surprisingly suong 
SWLT diagnosis near  a  creek  are  twofold,  1) deciduous 
riparian  species appear  ‘greener’ to  the  satellite because 
deaduous  canopy  reflectance appears as an  i n c o r r d y  
high conifer  W  (Peterson  et  al  1987;  Spanner  et  al 
1990). and 2) the soil data layer lacks the stream ncrwork 
and  subsequent  water  availability is  not  known. Both 
deficiencies are in the data layers and not the KB method 
itself.  These  C ~ ~ O I - S  will  confound  RESSys  simulation 
results in a similar manner. Extracting the strcam ncrwork 
from the DEh4 (Band 1986) and using ic as an overlay to 
identii anomalous SWHC  and  W would  correct  the 
problem (Coughlan and Dungan  1996). 

The predominate elevation gradient in Plates  1 and 
2  runs from the highlands in the cast  (back of image) to 
the  outlet  in  the west  (front  of image). This perspective 
places  water  sursscd  sites  in  the  foreground,  or lower 
elevations, and explains why the higher elevations in the 
back are darker. These darker areas are cooler, wetter, and 
lcss water  stressed  (Running and  Nemani  1984).  The 
general  r u l e   affecting  both  Plates  1  and  2  is  that  the 

32 

warmer,  lower  elevations  are  drier  because  their 
than  in  higher 
snowpacks  arc smaller  and  melt  fist- 
elevations. 

Hillslopes  are  secondary  topographic  features 
determining the mat and location of SWLT and W L T  
dassa. Throughout Plates  1 and  2,  SWLT was  asserted 
stronger on the south slopcs than  the north slopes duc to 
higher  radiation  loading  on  south  dopa  and soil Iaya 
diEcrcnces bcmecn hillslopcs. EDiS can integrate aspm- 
gradient with  elevation to  infer snowpack duration,  but 
EDiS  weghtr  aspect-&cnt 
half  as much  as elevation 
(Equation 6). This means that for a k d  elevation a stcep 
north  exposure  has  a  longer  lasting  snowpack  than  its 
south slope counterpart, and has more available soil water 
(Guy and Coltharp 1967).  In cases whur elevaaon and 
aspect conflict, elevation dominates although its influence 
is  decreased  by  subtracting  the  a s p m t  weighted  (;lw 
number.  Aspect  parterns  are  most  prominent  in  the 
the  EDiS  sees 
mid-elevations 
(Plate  2)  where 
mid-elevations as inconclusive evidence for inferring fast 
or  slow snowmelt  rates so  aspm-gradicnt  rules  become 
decisive. 

Thur arc  1- 

partems  due  to  LAI and  soil 
variations.  The  bright  linear  paKCmS  running  up  and 
down the north facing hillslope in  Plate 2 coincide with 
high  W patches  found  in  gullies. They are  detectable 
because the hillslope was  represented with a uniform soil 
water  holding  capacity and W is  the  spatially varying 
layer causing the striping. On the opposing, low elevation 
south  slope, then arc dark spots indicating  small forcst 
openings with low W and lower uanspiration  amounts. 
The  south  hillslope  also  has  a  low  soil water  capacity 
patch  (5 un) running along the northern  ridge. The soil 
band is  bright  in  both Plates  1 and 2 and indicates high 
SWLT  due  to  the  soil’s  ancmely  low  water  holding 
Capacity. 

Other f c a m  in  Elk  Cratk indude  non-forested 
marshes in the highlands which a p p a r  as blank spots and 
an old burn area is visible as a W L T  patch. No diagnosis 
or simulations were  made for the  non-forested  marshes. 
The burn area crosses a ridge and was segmented by EDiS 
into a no&  and south patch (Plate 2) because of inferred 
differences between transpiration limitations  berween  the 
two slopes and their soils. E v e n d y  the bum area’s W 
will  increase  to  environmental  potential  and  the  LAI 
limited diagnoses will shift to SWLT. 

Soup Cwrk 
Soup Creek is a glaciated and curved catchment with tall, 
steep  north  and south slopes rcaching up  from the creek 
to high ridge lines. The LAILT diagnosis (Plate 3) is weak 
in the warmer, lower elevations and on sou&  slopes with 
thick,  mature  forest canopies.  I t   gains  strength  with 
elevation, and there are strong LAILT limitations  on the 

I 

I 

Plate  1.  The Soil Water Limits Transpiration (SWLT) diagnosis for 
Elk Creek with  bright  red  indicating inferred water stress severity. 
Objects in  the  front appear larger than those in  the back The Elk 
Creek srream network  appears as a strased object in  the image. The 
burn  area in the back is a low stressed area and a  marsh appears as a 
black area. 

Plate 2.  Combined Soil Water Limits Transpiration  (SWLT')  and 
M A r e a  Index  Limits Transpiration  (WLT) diagnosis for Elk 
Creek with  the stronger of the  LWO  diagnoses s i g n e d  to each cell. 
The image has the same physical orienration  as Plate  1. The extreme 
ends of the legend indicate strong evidence of W L T  or SWLT and 
uncertainty  is  located in  che centre of the legend. 

Plate 3.  Leaf Area Index Limits Transpiration (LAILT) diagnosis for 
Soup and Napa  Creeks. Dark areas are water stressed and light areas, 
such as clear cuts, are  W L T .  Steep ridges arc labelled as LAI limited 
but are probably climatic limited. 

Plate 4. Combined Soil Water Limits Transpiration  (SWLT) and 
Lcaf Area Index  Limicr Tianspirauon ( W L T )  diagnosis for Soup 
Creek.  Red and dark blue  indicate strong SWLT and LAILT arcas 
while green-blue  indicates weak evidence and uncertainty in  the 
diagnosis. The red band running along Soup Creek is predominantly 
a soil-induced  feature. The dark spots in  the valley bottom  are clear 
cuts. Ridges in  upper elevations appear as M I L T  areas. 

Biophpicaf ugpgatimr of a forested kmdscape 

ridges  towards  the  back  of  the  image. A  more stressed 
SWLT band runs along the length of Soup Creck p d d  
to the creek (Plate 3) and indicates both a soil and micro- 
climate  boundary  of  warming  tunperanrres  and  fvter 
melting snowpacks. Aspect-&cnt 
differences arc not as 
pronounced as in Elk Creek but dear cuts are evident in 
the image as dark patches along the s u e a m .  

EDiS  classified both  catchments without  any site- 
adjustments  but  dear  difFcrcnces  berwetn  the 
s+c 
Soup Creek and Elk Creek diagnoses were visible (Plates 
2 and 4). Soup Creek contains stronger evidence for both 
the  SWLT  and  W L T  diagnoses.  Soup's  database  has 
higher LAIs and higher soil water holding capacities. Soup 
Creek's  SWLT classification was  strong in places without 
disturbance  due  to  high  W  values,  and,  where 
disturbances existed, the  diagnosis  was  strongly  W L T .  
Clear cuts appeared as dark W L T  areas along the valley 
in Plates 3 and 4 because their low W ' s  superimposed on 
high SWHG were a sure indication of disturbance. Clear 
 found  in Elk 
curs were not  as visible for the lower W
Creek  Soup  Creek's  riparian  zone  was  not  as  visibly 
stressed as Eu( Creek's riparian zone because Soup Creek's 
riparian vegetation  did  nor  s p e c d y  contrast  with  the 
surrounding dense forest and Soup Creek's  soils are not as 
shallow as in Elk Creek. Parts of the Soup Creek riparian 
zone are visible as light patches dissecting the large dear 
cuts. 

s

The difference in  shape between Soup  Creek and 
Elk  Creek  contributed  to  differences  in  the  spatial 
panerns.  Soup  Creek's  north  and  south  slopcs am large 
and  steep  making  inferred  snowmelt  on  the  hillslope 
bocrom  different  from  that  at  the  top.  Elk  Creek's 
progrcssivdy higher elevations are punctuated  by  a series 

of  smaller  hillslopes  that  arc  shorter  and  appear 
homogeneous.  Soup  Creek's  long  and  steep  hillslopa 
highlight  elevation  &ccu  on  it's  two  main,  opposing 
hillslopes. 

There arc also diffuences between the .%IT  and 
LAILT diagnoses which i n t e r n  with the unique futures 
in each catchment. The SWLT is a complex +osis 
that 
uses several intermediate  concepts which  are sensitive to 
the topography, soils, and LAI found  in ELk  Creek. T h e  
soil diagnosis had very speufic rules that overrode general 
rules  when  there was  evidence  that  the  topographically 
varying micro-dimate  in Elk Creek could &ax  mil water 
limitations. The WLT diagnosis uses only a few general 
rules  (Figure  4)  which  consider 
the  equilibrium 
SWHC-LAI  ratios  graphed  in  Figure  1. These  gneral 
rules  properly  identified  all  heavily  forested  and 
disturbance arcu but they did not recognize cold weather 
limitations  (Larchcr  1980). Soup  Creek's  extreme  LAI 
differences  bemeen  disturbed  and  forest  arcas  were 
dctmed  by  simple  rules.  Soup  Creek's  ridge  lines were 
questionably  diagnosed  as  W L T  due  to  the  lack  of 
specific rules idcntifjmg ridgcs and the less  accurate  soils 
database (Sharma and Luxmore 1979). EUc Creek's  ridges 
are warmer but were mapped with a lower SWHC so that 
the  same  classification  pattern  was  not  observed. 
Correcting EDiS  rquircs  m o w n g  the  soils data layer 
for elevation and gradient effects and adding climate rules 
to the LAILT diagnosis. 

Figure 5. Simulated snowpack pcrsistcncc and infcncd 
pcrsisrcnce graphed f o r  thrcc dcvations across a range of vpccrs 
all with a 25'  gradient. Negative fuzzy  numbcrs indicate 
SHORT persistence and positive indicate LONG  pcnincncc. 

01 June 

02 M o y  

02 April 

03 Morch 

\- 

..................................................... 

P- 

01 February 

North 

East 

South 

West 

4 . 1  (Slow)  + 1000 rn-Sirn 
a lo00 rn-Fuzzy 

+ 1500 rndirn 
1500 rn-fuzzy 
-E- 

33 

............................................................... 

Q. 

........................................................ 

....................................................... \--=-.d 

-f- 2000 mSim 
+ 2000mFuny 

.................................................... 

....................... 

- -  

3.0 

f f Coughfan and S W Running 

to  verify 

if  similar 

Mechanistic behaviour 
EDiS's fuzzy snowpack persistence variable was compared 
to the analogous snowpack depletion date predictions by 
FOREST-BGC 
internal  and 
mechanistidy relevant wiabla for both models are in 
agreement.  In  Figure  5,  fupy  snowpack  persistence 
mimics  FOREST-BGC's  snowpack  persistence  fix  all 
thrce elevation zones and across a range of aspects in each 
zone. Aspm had  its greatest influence at mid-elevations 
where clewion evidence was wak As elevation changed 
to high or low values, it became more relevant to the fuzzy 
persistence concept and overrode the cffccts of sire aspect. 
FOREST-BGC results confirm that elevation is the most 
important  topographic  variable  determining  snowpack 
dynamics  and  that  a s p m   is  of  secondary  importance. 
EDiS  followed  FOREST-BGC's  mechanistic  results 
which supports the belief that EDiS's  observed landscape 
classifications are mechanistically based. 

Biophysical properties 
Three  statistical  tests  were  conducted  to  compare 
classification  properties  for  the  traditional  GIS  land 
classes and the three EDiS landscape classifications bared 
on  SWLT,  LAILT,  and  mT-LAILT.  FOREST-BGC's 
avc is  the measurement used to tat GIS land classes and 
EDiS landtypes. The first starktical test detects landscape 
cohesiveness, the  second  compara  water  svc(s b e w c n  
landrypes,  while  the  third  applia  only  to  EDiS.  and 
determines  if  the  I  pn'on'  ordered  EDiS  landrypes 
organized the raster data along a water sucss gradient. 

Coksivmss 
A  cohesive lanbape is  built  from representative groups 
which  contain  similv  data.  Landscape  cohesiveness  is 
measured by  the  F-ratio,  an  analysis of  variance within 
and between  the dvsa of each dwificaaon. A random 
organkiion will  have an F near  1.0 becaw the wirhin 
and bcrwcen group vuivlcc is equal. The F-ratios for the 
GIS overlays indicate that they arc nor random groupings 
of simulated water surss (Table 1). 

GIS classes reduced the landscape into 116 and 53 
dvsa  respectively  for  the  Soup  Creek  and  ELk Cmk 
catchments. The number  of GIS land  classes was greater 
for  Soup Gcck  because that  database  has  a  wider data 
rang for the five input GIS data layers. The GIS F-ratios 
indicate that GIS overlays arc a viable method to partition 
landsupe data into reprcsentative categories. 

All  EDiS  landscapes  have  a  higher F-ratio  than 
their  GIS  counterparts.  EDiS  F-ratios  are  twice  to  10 
times  larger  than  GIS  F-ratios  (Table 1).  EDiSs larger 
F-ratios arc a partial consequent of the EDiS  landscapes 
having  fcwcr  p u p s  and  thus a  smaller  denominator 
when  calculating the  F-statistic  (Table  l),  however,  the 
larger number of GIS land classes is a consequence of the 
GIS overlay method. 

Thue arc also some interesting MC~C~CCS 

bcnvcen 
each of the  three EDiS diagnostic landscapes in Table 1. 
The highesr F-ratio for Soup Crrdc was obtained  for the 
LAILT diagnosis while  Elk  Geek  has  a  higher F  for  its 
m T  diagnosis. FOREST-BGC  simulations  show that 
Elk Creek is  a more water-suased  catchment  than  Soup 

Table 1. Non-ccntral 
F-sadstia measuring 
thc partitioning of 

water - for EDiS 

and GIS landscapes. 
T h e  three EDiS 
landscap al.c  the (1) 
Soil Waar Limits 
Transpiration  (SWLT) 
dLgnosis, (2) L c a f h  
I n d a  Limia 
Transpiration  (WLT) 
diagnosis and (3) 
SWLT-WLT 
combined. A higher F 
i n d i u m  a bcrter 
organizarion of the 
data into hydrologic 
equilibrium  dysa. 

34 

Creek and the SWLT diagnosis represents the water stress 
h e r  than  the  LAILT  dqposis.  Soup  Creek  has  less 
water  stress  while  showing  distinct  dear  cuts.  The 
diagnosis  focusing  on  disturbances  is  LAILT.  EDiS 
recognized the distinct features for both  catchment arcas 
and, without modification, classified them accordingly. 

Discinctnrss 
The K-W non-parametric test  involves a large number of 
pairwise comparisons, and the results in Table 2 arc shown 
as a percentage of unique  comparisons per classification. 
Of the 116 GIS dues in Soup Creek, 86.5% (p=0.90) of 
their paiinvise comparisons WUT  between distinct classes. 
In  Ek Creek 53 classes or 65.7%  (p=0.90) wcrc  unique 
pairwise  comparisons. The  wider  distribution  of  data 
values  in  Soup  Creek's  database  accounts for  the  berrcr 
mults by the GIS method. 

EDiS generated fewer  and more distinct landrypes 
than  the GIS  method.  Elk Creek's SWLT diagnosis had 
no  redundant  classes  (p=0.90). In Soup Creek the three 
diagnoses were almost all distinct from one another accept 
for one landtype containing  1 cell  out of  18  000. Afcer 
removing  the  single  cell  landtype,  the  remaining 
landrypes would all be unique. 

Orah 
T h e  third  test pertains to  the landtypes and whether they 
were ordered along a hypothesized water  stress  gradient. 
The EDiS landrypes are ordinal, with diagnosis strength 
indicating water  stress severity. The predetermined water 
stress  gradient  is  illustrated  in  the  four  image legends 
(Plates 1 to 4) and that is the ordered hypothesis tested by 

Biophysicof oggrcgations of a farated krndscape 

the J-T non-paramcaic  tcst in Table 3. Unlikc EDiS,  the 
GIS overlays have no p d c t e r m i n d  order and cannot be 
tested along any grdent. 

T h e  J-T non-puuneuic  tat indicated  an overall 
order within all EDiS diagnoses (p=0.95) (Table  3). The 
combined SWLT-LAILT dugnosis is  ordered  along one 
continuous water stress grad~cnt which is an indication of 
balance and consistency betwcen the SWLT  and WLT 
KB  rules  within EDiS.  Both SWLT  and  WLT  arc 
separate  sections  of  the  KB  (Figure  4)  and  no 
normalization was  used to combine the diagnoses. 

The  J-T  non-parametric  test  does  not  detect 
perfect order and does not fail if there is local disorder in 
a set. Locll disorder was discovcrcd by running J-T non- 
panmctric  tats  on  sequential  landtypes  (for  example, 
1<2, 2<3, 3 ~ 4 ,  44, etc.).  Disorder  was  found  in  Ek 
Geck's SWLT diagnosis, with landtype 0.3 being out of 
order with respect to m e .  SWLT Iandtypc 0.3 was  greater 
than  landtypc 0.4  and stltisridy not smaller than 0.5. 
All  other SWLT landtypes were ordered and masked the 
effect of disordered unit 0.3. The J-T non-parunctric  test 
indicates that  the  landtypes  arc arranged  along  a  water 
stress gradient but the order is not perfect. 

The local disorder  was  removed by clumping  the 
landrypes into larger mcta-groups as listed in Table 3. The 
J-T test on all pairings of mcra-groups found perfect order 
at the higher, coarser level of organization (p=0.95). The 
local disorder in EDiS may be due to a lack of precision 
in  the  KB  at a diagnostic  resolution of  0.1. T h e  coarser 
resolution is less precise, masking small m r s  but blurring 
the  precision  of  the  answers  and  reducing  landtypes. 
Kochcn  (1979)  describes  blurring  as  an  appropriate 

Table 2. Kruskal-Wdi~ 
(K-W)  non-parametric 
test for uniqucncs 
bcnvccn EDiS 
land- 
and GIS bins 
(p=O.OSO).  Lvldscapcr 
should have high 
perccnngcs of unique 
duscr. o v e n l l  the KB 
landscapes have more 
distinct land unia than 
the GIS bins. 

35 

Table 3. Jonckccrc-Tcrpsrra  (J-T) non-pamnmic tar analysis 
of the Soil Water Limirs Transpiration (!WLn and L u f h  
I n d a  Limiu Transpiration (LAILT) and combined SWLT- 
W L T  landscapes for landtype order dong a water nrcs 
gradient. R m r  to Plates 1 to 4 for landtype order. T h e  SXKT- 
W L T  rncrga the m u  individual landscapes along the m e
 
stm gradient. Mctagroups am aggrckaonr of sequential 
landtypes in the four plates. All tests arc significant m p-0.95. 

reasoning  technique  to  cope  with  imprecision  or 
conflicting  information.  The  mm-test  was  a  blurring 
technique  that  provided  greater accuracy at  the  cost  of 
precision. 

Conclusions 

Riser  et  al  (1983) proposed  that  Artificial  Intdligence 
methods  could  use  ecological  concepts  to  identi+ 
is  a 
landscape  features  and  patterns,  and  EDiS 
demonstration  of  that  idea.  This  study  acmplifies  a 
method for automating the interpretation of large spatial 
data sets as described  by  Campbell and  G o m p  (1990). 
The  ecological  KB  builds  a  detailed  abstraction  of 
ecological activity which is inelfa modd (Startield 1990). 
It  evaluates  physical evidence inferring physical process 
and  interactions  similar  to  a  procest-based  ecosystem 
modd, FOREST-BGC. The landscape is  aggregated  into 
a 
landtypes which represent a plant water suess &cnt. 
physiological variable summacizi the plant’s response to 
its environment. The pancrns in EDiSi diagnostic images 
identi$  known landscape features and can be aplained in 
physiological terms. 

EDiS  generated  unique  classes  for  mu  different 
watersheds  and  organized 
the  classes  along  a 
predetermined  Water  stress  gradient  representing  the 
limiting  factors.  EDiS  outperformed  GIS-based  classes. 
However, the GIS method did generate distinct classes.  A 
KB  model  also  provides  a  platform  for  formalizing 

36 

perceived  relationships  between  GIS  data  layers,  an 
inference which  would  be  useful for  fLm  applications 
where a complex mathematical model  might  be  replaced 
by  a  computationally  more  efficient  diagnostic  KB 
(Starfidd et al  1989). 

T h e  decision whechcr to build or use a KB method 
can be determined  by the cost of interpreting the results 
against the cost of building the method. EDiS and K B s  in 
general  have  benefits  which  can  justify  their  high 
construction  costs.  Decisions about  which  variables are 
important  and how they interact, arc made up front as a 
hypotheses in the KB.  KB-derived classes arc constructed 
from process-based reasoning and can aplicitly represent 
a process or state, such as EDiS arranging landtypes along 
a predetermined Water stress gradient. Although empirial 
and GIS overlay methods segment landscapes with  much 
less  &on,  their  results  have  no  inherent  ecological 
meaning and require post-procasing  interpretation. T h e  
human  interpretation  and  a p c m s e   required  at  the 
badc-cnd each rime the numerical method is  used  can  bc 
apcnsivc. A KB classifier requires chc input only once at 
the beginning when the KB is built. 

Figure  3  shows EDiS  as a  preprocessor  for  the 
ccosysrcm model in RESSys. The final objective for EDiS, 
reducing large landscapes into  ecological  land  unia  for 
executing  ecosystem  simulations,  has  not  been  tested 
EDiS  has reduced  both catchments  from 20  000  land 
units (cells)  into  as  few  as  11  and  a  maximum  of  21 
landtypes.  Euh  landrypc  is  distinct,  and  they  o a r  a 
promising  method  fbr  defining  the geographical  units 
used  in  ecosystem  simulations.  Simulations  on  the 
landrypec arc needed  to dctenninc how good  a surrogate 
they are  for the  raster  data. Also,  each EDiS  landtype 
identifies  a  unique  ecological  condition  but  nor  an 
individual geographically connected  area.  We  are in  the 
process of selecting an algorithm to dump the landtypes 
into geographically disrina areas. We are also interested in 
other  landscape  reduction  methods  based  on  Bands 

(1986) topographic hillslope methods and simpler spatial 
aggregation  methods.  Finally,  we  need  to  formalizc 
statistical  procedures  to  compare  different  landscape 
aggregations  from  EDiS  and  other  proposed  data 
reduction methods. 

References 

Abbon M B, Bathum J C, Cunge J A,  O'Connd P E and 
Rasmussen J  1986  An  introduction  to  the 
European  hydrological  sysrem-systtme  hydro- 
logique  europtcn, 
'SHE', 
1:  History  and 
philosophy  of  a  physically-based,  distributed 
modelling system. Journal of  Hydrology. 87 (1-2): 
45-59 

Argdas D P and Harlow C A 1990 Computaaonal image 
interpretation  models.  An  oveMew  and  a 
perspective.  Photogrammetric  Enginem'ng  and 
Remote Sensing56 (6): 871-86 

Band L E  1986 Topographic partition  of watersheds with 
digital elmtion models.  W a w  Rrsouzes Research 
22 (1):  15-24 

Band  L E  1993 Effect of landsurfice  representations on 
forest  water  and  carbon  budgets.  Journal  of 
Hydrolgy 150 (2-4): 749-72 

Band  L E,  Running S W,  Pererson D  L,  Cougfilan J  C, 
Lammers  R, Dungan  J  and  Ncmani  R  1991 
Forest ecosystem processes at the watershed scale: 
Basis for a distributed model. Ecohgical Modelling 
56 (1-4):  171-96 

Borland  International  1986  Turbo  PROLOG.  SCOKS 

Valley, Borland International 

Burke I, Schimel D S, Yonkcr C M, Panon W J, Joyce LA 
and Laurenroth W K  1990 Regional modeling of 
grassland biogcochunistry  using GIS.  Landscape 
Ecology 4 (1): 45-54 

Campbell W J  and  Cromp  R  F  1990  Evolution  of  an 
system. 
intelligent 
information 
Photogrnmmmir Enginerring and Remote  Sensing 
56 (6): 867-70 

fusion 

Conover W J  197 1  Practical Nonparamrmk Statistics. New 

York, Wdey 

Coughlan J  C and  Dungan J  L 1996 Combining remote 
sensing  and  forest  ecosystem  modeling:  An 
example  using  the  Regional  HydroEcological 
Simulation  System  (RHESSys). In Gholz  H  L, 
Nakane K and Shinoda H  (eds) The Use ofRnnote 
Sensing in  the  Modrling  of  Forest  Productivity at 
the  Stand  to  the  Globe.  Dordrecht, 
Scales  )om 
Kluwer Academic Publishers 

Biqohysicai ugg'csarions  OF a forested Iondxape 

Coughlan J  C and Running S W 1989 An a p e n  system 
to  aggregate  biophysical  attributes  of  a  forested 
landscape  within  a  geographic  information 
system.  Amjicial  Inteliigence  Applications  in 
Natural Rcroum Management 3 (4): 3 5 4 3  
Coughlan J C and Running S W [forthcomingl  Regional 
Ecosystem  Simulation:  A  general  model  for 
simulation  snow  accumulation  and  melt  in 
mountainous terrain. Lundrcrpe E c o b  1 1  

Daniel W W  1990 Applied Nonparammir  Statistics, 2nd 
edition.  Boston,  PWS-KENT  Publishing 

Company 

Davis  F  and  Dozier  J  1990  Information  analysis  of  a 
spatial database for ecological land dassifiution. 
Photogrmnrncm'c Enginem'ng and  Remote  Sensing 
56 (5): 605-13 

Dud?  R  0 and  Shortliffe  E  H  1983  Expert  systems 

research. Science220  (4594): 261-8 

Forman  R  T  T  and  Godron  M  1981  Patches  and 
structural  components  for  a  landscape  ecology. 
Bioscience 3 1  (1 0): 7 3 3 4 0  

Gary H L and Coltharp G B 1967 Snow accumulation and 
vegetation  dirappcamncc by  q e r t  and  vegetation 
vpc  in  the  Santa  Fc  Basin,  Nnu  Mexico.  FOK 
Collins, USDA - Forest SeMcc Rocky Mountain 
Forest  and  Range  Experiment  Station  Research 
Note No. RM-93 

Goodenough D  G, Goldberg M, Plunkat G  and 7Aek J 
1987  An  cxperr  system  for  remote  sensing. 
Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Enginem 
Eansactions in  Gcoscience~ and Rnnote Scnsing 25 
(3): 349-59 

Hayes-Roth  F,  Waterman  D  A  and  Lcnat  D  B  1983 
Building  Erpert  Systems.  Reading,  Addison- 
Wesley 

Henkind S J and Harrison M C 1989 An analysis of four 
uncertainty  calculi.  Institute  of  Ebctricd  and 
Electronics Enginem Eatasactions in Systems, Man- 
machine Int4aces and Cybmrnia 18 (5): 700-14 
Hungcrford  R  D,  Ncmani  R  R,  Running  S  W  and 
Coughlan  J  C  1989  MTCLIM  - A  Mountain 
Microclimate Simulation Moa!d  Ogden,  USDA - 
Forest  SeMcc  Intermountain  Research  Station 
Research Paper No. 414: 1-52 

Kandel  A  1986  Fuzzy  Mathematical  Zchniquc~ with 
Applications. Reading, Addison-Wesley 
Kesner B T and Meentemeyer V  1989 A regional analysis 
of  total  nitrogen  in  an  agricultural  landscape. 
Landscape Eiology 2 (3): 151-63 

37 

f  C Coughian a n d  S W Running 

Kochcn  M  1979  Enhancement  of  coping  through 

blurring. Fuzq, Sm and $stems  2 (1):  37-52 

Larchcr W 1980 Plynolopral Plant , ! G o b ,  2nd edition. 

New York,  Springer-Vdag 

Iaskey  K  B,  Cohen  M S  and  Martin  A  W  1989 
Representing  and  eliciting  knowledge  about 
uncertain evidence and its implications. I ~ t ' t u t r  
of Ekcirical and E k m n i a  Enginem  Tmnzam'ons 
in  Systems,  Man-machine 
Intgaces  and 
Cybernetics 19 (3): 536-45 

Loehle C 1986 Applying artificial intdigence techniques 
to  ecological modding.  ,!Gobgird Modelling  38 
(3-4): 191-212 

McKeown D M Jr 1987 The role of vdficial intelligence 
in  the  integration  of remotely  sensed  data  with 
geographic  information  systems.  Institute  of 
Ekcttical and Ekctronia Enginem  Tmnsactions in 
Geoscienca and Remote Senring 25  (3): 330-47 

Moller-Jensen L  1990  Knowledgcbved classification of 
an  urban  area  using  texture  and  context 
imagery. 
information 
Photogrammmic Enginem'ng and Remote  Srnsing 
56 (6): 899-904 

in  LANDSAT-TM 

Moore  I  D, Grayson  R B and Ldson A R 1991 Digid 
terrain  modelling:  A  review  of  hydrologic 
geomorphologic,  and  biological  applications. 
Hydrologic Rocma 5  (1):  3-30 

Myers  B  J  1988  Water  SKCSS 

integral-a  link between 
short-term  stress  and  long-term  growth.  Tnr 
Physiohgy4  (4): 315-23 

Nunani R R and Running S W 1989 Testing a theoretical 
dimate-soil-leaf  area hydrologic  equilibrium  of 
forests  using  satellire  data  and  ccmystcm 
simulation. Agricuhral and Forat Meteorology 44 
( 3 4 ) :  245-60 

Ncmani  R R Band L E, Running S W and Pctuson D L 
1993 Forest ecosystem processes at the watershed 
s d e :   Sensitiviry  to  remotely  sensed  leaf  area 
i n d a  estimates.  Intonational  Journal  of  Rnnotr 
Senring 14  (13): 2519-34 

O'Neill  R V, DeAngdis D L, Waide J B and Allen T F H 
1986  A  Hierarchical  Concept  of  Ecosystems. 
Princeton New Jersey, Princeton Univeniry Press 
O'Neill  R  V,  Johnson  J  and  King  A  W  1989  A 
hierarchid  framework  for  the  analysis  of  scale. 
Ladcape Ecology 3 (3-4): 193-205 

Peterson  D  L,  Spanner M  A,  Running S W and Teuber 
K  B  1987  Relationship  of  Thematic  Mapper 
Simulator  data  to  leaf area  index  of  temperate 
coniferous forests. Remote Sm'ng of Environment 
22 (3): 32-1 

38 

Pierce  L  L  and  Running  S  W  1995  The  effects  of 
aggmpring  sub-grid  land  surfvc  variation  on 
estirmta of  net  prknary  production. 
+scale 
Lanrircape Ecology 10: 239-53 

Potter C S  [forthcoming] Estimation of the seasonal cyde 
of  grecnhoutc  gas  fluxcs  from  the  terrestrial 
biosphere:  Status  and  challenge  for  more 
mechanistic  understanding.  World  Rtsource 
RNinu 

Rasrettcr E B,  King A W,  Cosby B J, Hornberger  G  M, 
O'Neill  R V  and  Hobbic J  E  1992 Aggregating 
fine-scale  ecological  knowledge 
to  model 
coarser-scale amibutes  of  ecosystem.  Ecologicul 
Applications 2 (1):  55-70 

RisscrGP,KarrJRandFormanRTT 1984Landrupe 
Ecology.  Directions  and  Approaches.  Illinois 
N a n d  History Survey Special Publication No. 2 
Robcm  D W  1986 Ordination on the basis of fuzzy  set 

theory.  Vqctatio 66 (3): 123-31 

Roberts  D  W  19891 Analysis  of  forest  succession with 
fuzzy  graph  theory.  Eiolopcal Modcllng 45  (4): 
26 1-74 
D  W  1989b  Fuey  systems  vcgetarion  theory. 
Vgectlllio 83 (1-2): 71-80 

Rob- 

Running  S  W  1990  Estimating  terrestrial  primary 
productiviry  by  combining  remote  sensing and 
ccosystcm simulation. In Hobbs R J and Mooncy 
H A (A) Rnnote Sm'ng o f B i q k  Eunrrioning. 
New York, Springer-Verlag 65-86 

Running S W and CoughIan J  C  1988 A p c n l  model 
of  forest  ecosystem  processes  for  regional 
applications  I.  Hydrologic  balance,  canopy  gas 
exchange  and  primary  production  processes. 
,!Gohgical Mo&Uing42  (2): 125-54 

Running  S  W and Gowcr S T 1991  FOREST-BGC, A 
general  modd  of  forest  ecosystem processes for 
regional  applications  11.  Dynamic  carbon  and 
nitrogen budgets.  Tme Phynoba 9: 147-60 

Running  S W and N& 

R R  1984 Topographic and 
microdimate control of simulated photosynthesis 
and transpiration in coniferous trees. In T m e r  H 
and  Tranquillini  W  (cds)  Establishment  and 
Tending  of  Subalpine  Forest:  Research  and 
Management. New York, Springer-Verlag 
Running  S  W,  Nemani  R R and Hunguford R D  1987 
b p o l a r i o n  of  synoptic meteorological data  in 
mountainous  terrain  and  its  use  for  simulating 
forest  evapotranspiration  and  photosynthesis. 
Canadiun  Jovnul  of  Forest  Research  17  (6): 
472-83 

Biophysicuf uggregzrtims &a forested londxupe 

Running S W,  Peterson D L, Band L E,  Pons D  F,  Pierce 
L  L  and  Spanner M  A  1989 Mapping  regional 
forest  evapotranspiration  and  photosynthesis by 
coupling satditc dam with ecosystem Simulation. 
.&ohgy7 (4): 1090-101 

Tong L.  Richards J A and Swain P H  1987 Probabilistic 
and  evidential approaches for  multi-source  data 
analysis.  Institute  of  Ekctrical  and  ELemonim 
Enginem  Transactions in  Geoscimes and  h o t c  
.Swing25  (3): 283-93 

Schumucker  K  J  1984  Fuzzy  Sets,  NaturaI  Language 
Computations,  and  Risk  Anahsis.  Rockvillc, 
Computer Science Press 

Troendle C A and King R  M  1985 The effect  of timber 
harvest  on  the  Fool  Creek  watershed,  30  years 
later  Waur Rrsourccs Rrseamb 21  (1 2): 19 I5-22 

Sharma M L and Luxmore R J  1979 Soil spatial variability 
and its consequences on simulated water balance. 
W a w  &sources  &seamb  15 (6): 1567-73 
Shugart  H  H  1990  Using  ecosystem  models  to  assess 
pot.endal consqucnces of global climatic change. 
Trmdr in Ecological Evolution 5  (9): 303-7 
Spanner M  A, Pierce L L,  Running S W and Peterson D 
L  1990  T h e  seasonality  of  AVHRR  data  of 
temperate  coniferous  forests:  relationship  with 
leaf area inda. Rnnote Sensing of Envimnmmt 33 
(2): 97-1  12 

Starfield  A  M  1990  Qualirative,  rule-based  modeling. 

Bioscimcc 40 (8): 60 1 - 4  

Starfield  A  M,  Farm  B  P  and  Taylor  R  H  1989  A 
rule-based ecological  modd for the management 
of  an  estuarine  lake.  ErologicaI  Modelling  46 
(1-2): 107-19 

Ton  J, 

Stidden J  and Jain  A  K  1991  Knowlcdgc-based 
segmentation  of  LANDSAT  images.  Inrtimte  of 
Electrical and E&ctronics Enginem Transactions in 
Geoscienccs and Rnnote Senring 29 (2): 222-32 

USDA  Soil Conservation  Service  1985  SNOTEL ~ynnn 

coopmtor  um manual.  Podand,  USDA  Soil 
Conservation Service 

Waring R H and Franklin J  F  1979 Evergreen coniferous 
forests  of  the  pacific  northwest.  Science  204 
(4400):  1380-6 

Wharron  S  W  1987  A  spectral-knowledge-based 
approach  for  urban  land-cover  discrimination. 
Institute  of  Ekm'cal  and  Ucrtronics  Enginem 
Zanslrrtions in Geoscirncer and Rrmote Senring 25 
(3): 272-83 

Wickland  D  1991  Mission  to  Planet  Earth:  The 

ecological perspective. EEology 72 (6): 1923-33 

Woodward  F  I  1990  Global  change:  Translating  plant 

ecophysiological responses to  ecosystems. T d  
in Ecology and Evolrttion 5  (9): 308-1  1 

Woodward  F  I  1986  Ckmate  and  Plant  Dimibution 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 

Zadeh L A  1965 Fuzzy sen Information and Control8 (3): 

338-53 

39 

