International Journal of Geographical Information
Science

ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Information strategies for Geographical
Information Systems

PAUL H. J. HENDRIKS

To cite this article: PAUL H. J. HENDRIKS (1998) Information strategies for Geographical
Information Systems, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12:6, 621-639,
DOI: 10.1080/136588198241707

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/136588198241707

Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 114

View related articles 

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

Download by: [Universität Osnabrueck]

Date: 27 February 2016, At: 11:28

int. j. geographical information science, 1998, vol. 12, no. 6, 621± 639

Research Article

Information strategies for Geographical Information Systems

PAUL H. J. HENDRIKS
University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen Business School, PO Box 9108,6500 HK
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
email: P.Hendriks@bw.kun .nl

(Received 26 July 1997; accepted 17 November 1997 )

Abstract. Recently, several publications have appeared that relate to the strategic
dimension of GIS: how can GIS be aligned with business strategies, what strategic
opportunities does GIS o(cid:128) er? In the broad range of elements identi® ed in these
® nd quite di(cid:128) erent connotations of the
discussions the critical observer will
concept of `information strategy’. This article aims to provide an integrative
framework that identi® es and relates the individual elements in the strategic GIS
discussions. The main stages in the framework as proposed here are the identi® ca-
tion of the GIS challenge, positioning GIS within the organization and positioning
the organization in relation to GIS.

1. Introduction

interest echoes

Information Systems (GIS). This

Recent years have shown a growing interest in organizational issues relating to
Geographical
the increased
awareness that GIS is more than a distinctive technology, more than merely hard-
ware, software and dataware. It is now widely accepted that many di(cid:128) erent factors
in¯ uence the successful introduction and deployment of GIS in an organization,
whether commercial, government or non-pro® t. A core issue in discussing informa-
tion technology from an organizational point of view is the question of how well
information systems have been integrated within the operation of the organization
as a whole. To explore the notion of the integration of IT a useful metaphor is that
of the construction of a two-way bridge. On the one hand, the use of information
technology should be integrated within the overall strategy of the organization using
the technology or planning to use it (this goal is commonly identi® ed as `strategic
alignment’). On the other hand, IT may be seen as a vehicle to attain strategic
bene® ts (a goal usually marked `strategic opportunities’). It should also be stressed
that the two goals of strategic alignment and strategic opportunities are not isolated
focus areas. To strive for strategic bene® ts from the use of IT will change the overall
strategies of the organization. It simultaneously implies that the strategic use of IT
is to be ® rmly embedded within the overall organizational strategy. Similarly, ® tting
IT into the overall organizational strategies cannot be a purely deductive or top-
down exercise since this may prevent the recognition of new opportunities IT may
o(cid:128) er. The metaphor of building a two-way bridge thus de® nes the ® eld of information
its concern is to integrate IT within the organizational strategies and
strategy:
simultaneously, and related to this, to identify possible strategic bene® ts of IT use.
We may then ask how well the conception of GIS in relation to information
strategies has been recognized and developed. This question refers to the way the

1365± 8816/98 $12´00 Ñ

1998 Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 622

P. H. J. Hendriks

GIS literature deals with the nuts and bolts of the two-way bridge identi® ed before.
A scan of the literature shows a growing awareness of the need for GIS to be linked
to organizational strategies as an essential condition for a successful introduction of
GIS in organizations (e.g., the `Chorley report’, Worrall 1991, Masser and Campbell
1995 ). This awareness has been boosted by the growing interest in business applica-
tions of GIS (resulting in conferences such as the US `Business Geographics
Conference’ and the European `GIS for Business’ conference, and in collections of
papers such as Castle 1993, Masser et al. 1996, Longley and Clarke 1995 ). Recently,
also several monographs relating to management issues of GIS have been published
(Grimshaw 1994, Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, Huxhold and Levinsohn 1995,
Campbell and Masser 1995, Masser 1997) and all these include discussions on
strategic matters in relation to GIS use. Various journals (most notably `business
oriented’ journals such as Geo Info Systems and GIS World) have paid attention to
strategic aspects of GIS implementations. GIS has been discussed as a vehicle for
Business Process Redesign and Business Process Re-engineering ( U(cid:128) er 1995, Strand
1995, Speed 1993, Meehan 1995). Important elements relating to the subject of
information strategies have been addressed in the publications mentioned. These
include the potential for GIS in strategic applications, the connection of GIS adoption
to user needs, the linking of GIS to overall organizational strategies, and the manage-
ment of GIS implementation and use.

The two-way bridge for GIS is, so-to-speak, under construction and people have
started crossing it in both directions. This does not imply that the notion of an
`information strategy’ is surrounded by nothing but clarity, on the contrary. The
variety of issues labelled `strategic’ is bewildering. One will, for instance, ® nd mention
of `strategies’ in quite di(cid:128) erent subjects such as `competitive strategies’, `database
management strategies’, or `implementation strategies’. This heterogeneity introduces
the need to ® nd an e(cid:128) ective and workable way of sorting the individual strategic
issues, and to establish how they relate to each other. The objective of this article is
to explore an integration framework for linking GIS and information strategies that
can provide this perspective. The goals of exploring such a framework are twofold.
In the ® rst place the framework should identify and position the issues which should
be addressed when considering the strategic value of GIS. It should thereby provide
the rationale for linking and ordering the individual issues. A central element here
is the identi® cation of those issues that can provide the criteria for others and should
be addressed ® rst. The ® rst goal is, therefore, of a normative nature, the framework
should shed light on how the strategic exercise regarding GIS is to be performed.
The second goal is that the framework may serve to classify the various contributions
in the ® eld. This second goal is primarily of a descriptive nature. It should be helpful
in assessing the `state-of-the-art’ in strategic GIS thinking. To arrive at an integrated
framework for GIS and information strategies the next two sections will discuss the
de® nition of the concepts of strategic management in general and information strat-
egies in particular. Next, a framework for introducing GIS into the information
strategies is presented, a framework that centres on de® ning GIS within the organiza-
tional context and positioning GIS applications in the organization. Three vital
building blocks of this framework are then further developed in three consecutive
sections. The ® nal section stresses that de® ning and rethinking information strategies
for GIS should be an ongoing e(cid:128) ort.

2. W hat is `strategic management’?

The word `strategies’ is a source of confusion. Part of this confusion is caused by
the fact that the term is used in a variety of contexts. For instance, the ® re department

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

623

may identify giving priority to saving lives as its strategy and then uses ’strategy’ as
an `approved line of action’; or `strategic’ may be used as opposed to `tactical’ and
`operational’, which usually refers to a (rather clumsy) classi® cation of decisions. In
this article the most relevant context is that of strategic management. Historically
the emergence of the concept of strategic management can be seen as the reaction
in the 1960s and 1970s to the failure of rigid, mathematical concepts of long-range
planning that have their origin at the beginning of the twentieth century. The concept
of strategy identi® ed the need to think in a holistic way about an enterprise, instead
of focusing on isolated functions, such as marketing, production, ® nance. This con-
cern is, for instance, re¯ ected in the work of Andrews and Christensen (Christensen
and Andrews 1965, Andrews 1971), Anso(cid:128)
( 1965) and Chandler ( 1962 ). Three
elements may be recognized in the work of these pioneers of strategic thinking that
to this day are recognized as crucial for a valid conception of strategic management.
The ® rst element is the need of strategic management to deal with uncertainties of
the future. The second element is the `holistic’ character of strategic thinking, the
need to conceive an organization as a `whole’. The third element, which establishes
the link between the ® rst two, is the need to explicitly consider the relation between
an organization and its (economic) environment. The most notable contributions to
the development of tools for assessing the mutual relation between the organization
and its environment were made by Michael Porter ( 1979, 1980, 1985 a, 1987 ). He
introduced his well known Five Forces model to provide focus points for scanning
the environment: threats of new entrants, bargaining power of suppliers, rivalry
among competitors, the threat of substitute products and services, and bargaining
power of buyers. Porter ( 1980, 1985 a) identi® ed three generic strategies to deal with
these competitive forces: cost leadership, di(cid:128) erentiation and niche marketing. Several
authors have expanded upon Porter’s work on generic competitive strategies, and
have come up with other, more extensive lists ( Racko(cid:128) , Wiseman, and Parsons: see
Robson 1994, pp. 118± 122).

Considerable consensus seems to exist regarding the object of strategic manage-
ment, the consideration of the long-term relation between the ® rm and its economic
environment. No such consensus, however, occurs about which model is most e(cid:128) ective
for strategic management. Three main classes of models may be discerned: linear,
adaptive and interpretive models. The ® rst strategic models were of a linear nature
(Chandler 1962, Drucker 1974, Glueck 1976, 1980). Strategic management, in their
view, had to deal with `the determination of the basic long-term goals of an enterprise,
and the adoption of courses of action and the allocation of resources necessary for
for this approach is the
carrying out these goals’
(Chandler 1962, p. 13). Typical
strat-
sequence: strategic analysisÐ
egy evaluation (see ® gure 1). Several authors have stressed that the establishment of
such a sequence will reduce the ¯ exibility of organizations and may, therefore, be
counterproductive. They stressed the need for adaptiveness (Galbraith and Schendel
1983, Mintzberg 1978, 1987, Mintzberg and Quinn 1991 ). In their view strategic
management should be `concerned with the development of a viable match between
the opportunities and risks present in the external environment and the organization’s
capabilities and resources for exploiting those opportunities’ ( Hofer 1973, p. 3). Instead
of focusing on ends and means, advocates of the adaptive model promote thinking
about aligning organization and environment. The third set of models criticizes the
top-down nature of the ® rst two. They stress the need of motivated workers as the
basis of any successful strategy. These models are called `interpretive’ given their focus

strategy implementationÐ

strategy formulationÐ

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 624

P. H. J. Hendriks

Figure 1. Main stages in the strategic planning approach (the linear model of strategic
management ).

on the use of orienting metaphors constructed for conceptualizing and guiding indi-
vidual attitudes of organizational participants (Pettigrew 1977, Cha(cid:128) ee 1984, 1985).
One further element in the discussions regarding strategic management should
be mentioned, as this can act as a stepping stone for the main concern of this article,
positioning GIS within the business strategy. Which strategy is chosen clearly should
have its implications for the operations of the organization. This awareness leads to
what is commonly called f unctional strategy as opposed to competitive strategy. The
latter then refers to the external environment of the ® rm, the former to the operating
policies at the functional level. At the level of functional strategy a major concern is
to establish how, for instance, manufacturing, ® nance and information systems can
support the competitive strategy. The subject of information strategies, which is the
main focus of this article, can be elaborated from both viewpoints, that of competitive
strategy and the viewpoint of functional strategy. Both viewpoints will be assessed
in the following sections.

Figure 2 is an attempt to identify the key elements of the strategy discussion. In
summary we can say that a certain consensus exists regarding the areas of concern
for strategic management (the upper half of the ® gure). On the other hand hardly
any unanimity exists on how any of these areas should be addressed ( the lower half
of the ® gure). An interesting illustration of this fact is that one of the early gurus of
strategic management, Henry Mintzberg, recently published a book called `T he rise
and fall of strategic planning ’ (Mintzberg 1994). In this book he denounces at one
stroke most of the models that came out of this ¯ ow of strategic planning thinking
that he himself helped on its way. What Mintzberg opposes, is not so much the
concept of strategic planning as such, but rather the engineering-type approaches
that somehow seem to go back to the earlier long-range planning in their attempts
to make an exact science of the planning process. For our discussion here there is
no need to enter these disputes, it may su(cid:129) ce to identify strategic management at
the generic level by it being aimed at de® ning an organization in relation to its
environment (or matching its functional strategy with its competitive strategy) in
such a way that it may be best prepared for the uncertain-future.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

625

Figure 2. Core issues in discussions on strategic management.

3. W hat are `information strategies’?

the potential of

information technology were by Acko(cid:128)

Given the important role of information within organizations the concept of
strategic management quickly led to the identi® cation of information strategies as a
major component in the overall strategic exercises. As indicated in the previous
section information strategies can both be conceived as a form of functional strategies,
and as a major subsidiary for the competitive strategy. The underlying goal of
information strategies is to consider how information technology may help the
organization (re) de® ne its relation with its environment. In other words, if informa-
tion strategies are considered functional strategies, it should also be assessed how
information technology may support or shape the competitive strategy. Early estab-
lishments of
( 1967 ),
Blumenthal ( 1969 ), Gibson and Nolan ( 1974) and McFarlan ( 1974 ). Since then, an
ever increasing ¯ ow of ideas on an ever increasing variety of related subjects has
been produced. These include: discussions of conceptual foundations of information
strategies ( Waema and Walsham 1990, Earl 1989 a), the connection between organiza-
tional structure and the need for information processing (Galbraith 1974), the concept
of the information infrastructure ( Zachman 1987, Sowa and Zachman 1992), methods
of information systems planning ( King 1978, Martin 1982, Scott Morton 1991 ), stage
models of information technology adoption ( Nolan 1973, Gibson and Nolan 1974,
information strategy projects
Nolan and Koot 1992 ), case studies of successful
(Copeland and McKenney 1988, Earl and Feeny 1996), and discussion of the strategic
value of information technology (McFarlan 1974, 1984, Porter and Millar 1985,
Porter 1985 b). The concept of information strategy has now been clearly established,
and has been the subject of a whole series of standard textbooks ( Davis and Olson
1985, Earl 1989 b, Cash et al. 1992, Robson 1994 ). A bibliographic analysis of the
® eld for the period 1970± 1993 came up with more than 2500 scienti® c publications,
with a distinct increase in the period after 1985 ( Poel 1995; the search was performed

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 626

P. H. J. Hendriks

with the keywords `information management’, `information resource management’,
`strategic planning and information policy’). The increase in attention did not lead
to more convergence in ideas than in the ® eld of strategic management, on the
contrary. `Despite the wide research interest in IS planning over many years, there
is no consensus on the meaning of its major terms. Over a decade ago, the situation
was so ill-de® ned that it was described as a `semantics jungle’ and it is probably
worse now due to the addition of even more terms’ ( Fitzgerald 1993 ).

Given this smorgasbord of issues addressed under the heading of `information
strategies’, it is ® rst necessary to introduce some order. For this purpose, six general
questions are identi® ed and these are then narrowed down to three main areas of
strategic concern. These six general questions are `what’, `why’, `how’, `by whom’,
`when’ and `where’. `What’ and `why’ refer to the selection of application areas of
information technology and to the criteria for this selection. `How’ to use IT relates
to technology driven aspects: the choice of suppliers of technology, the problems of
standards, of communication networks, etc. The `by whom’, `when’ and `where’-
questions point to the need of translating the technology to be used into tasks for
departments and individuals. Following Earl ( 1989 b, 1996) we identify the three
areas of concern re¯ ected in these basic questions as follows:

the `what’ and `why’ questions relate to the application of information systems
( IS), they can therefore be said to refer to IS strategies; their basic concern is
building the two-way bridge between organizational goals and strategic
application of the technology identi® ed in the introductory section;
the `how’ questions refer to the technological conditions that have to be met
to be able to use the information systems that are available in one way or
another to be e(cid:128) ective; given the nature of these conditions that refer to the
particularities of the information technology ( IT), we may relate the `how’
questions to IT strategies; their basic concern is to consider how to achieve
the availability of the technology;
the `by whom’, `when’ and `where’ questions relate to the identi® cation of tasks
and task coordination by departments and individuals (note that this is the
core de® nition of the concept of `organization’); matters of concern when
addressing these questions relate, for instance, to the role of end users versus
specialists, to the matter of which tasks call
for centralization, which for
decentralization, to matters of training and ongoing research in the ® eld, HRM-
issues, etc.; the issues here all refer to what is called information management
( IM), the strategic concern may therefore be labelled IM strategies.

This separation of the object of information strategies into three subareas may
lead to the assumption that the issues addressed in each of them have no bearing
on the other subareas. This is clearly not so, information strategies should consider
how all aspects of dealing with information may serve better to equip the organization
for the future. To stress this need for coordination between the identi® ed areas we
may therefore identify a fourth area of concern for information strategies:

the integration of IS, IT and IM strategies, in other words, integration of the
de® nition of the information systems, their technological availability, and
organizational issues concerning their use.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 E
E
E
E
Information strategies

627

4. How about GIS?

How does GIS ® t into these four domains of strategic information planning?
Before answering this question, one ® rst has to consider how GIS should be de® ned
in the context of information strategies. Of central importance is where the boundaries
of GIS as a system are drawn. De® nitions of GIS may vary from broad to narrow.
Relatively narrow de® nitions come about when GIS is described in terms of the
technology used to represent and analyse the combination of spatial and attribute
data using digital maps (examples are given in Maguire 1991, pp. 10± 11); broader
de® nitions extend the notion of the information system beyond the limits of the
technology to include all those elements that would justify spatial data to be called
spatial information. Examples of this broader type of de® nition can be found in De
Man ( 1988, p. 250), Grimshaw ( 1994, p. 26), Huxhold and Levinsohn ( 1995, p. 5 (cid:128) .)
or Carter ( 1989, quoted in Maguire 1991, p. 11): `GIS is an institutional entity
re¯ ecting an organizational structure that integrates technology with a database,
expertise and continuing ® nancial support over time.’ For our discussion here it may
su(cid:129) ce to establish that Geographical Information Systems are de® ned by the fact
that they are computer programs to facilitate the collection, manipulation, storage,
retrieval, analysis, display, and communication of geographic information,
i.e.,
`information about locations, processes, relationships, and patterns on the Earth’s
surface’ ( NCGIA 1995, section C: 7). An essential element in the discussion is the
question what is `information’. A usual approach to answering this question is by
di(cid:128) erentiating information and data, and by identifying two discriminating character-
istics ( Earl 1989 b, Robson 1994). The ® rst is the fact that data have to be interpreted
if they are to be informative (this is where analysis may step in). The second
di(cid:128) erentiating property is that the interpreted or transformed data have to be useful
for a given purpose (not just any spatial analysis will, therefore, turn spatial data
into spatial information, but only those analytical interpretations or transformations
that may help make spatial data useful for answering a given research or action
purpose). Any attempt to establish whether it is justi® ed to call a GIS an information
system rather than a database or analysis system, therefore, refers to criteria outside
the technology (cf. the broader de® nition), in the goals for using the spatial data or
performing the spatial analysis. Any organization planning for GIS should, therefore,
consider the general de® nitions of what GIS is (database, analysis, visualization), in
terms of what function these systems may have within the speci® c organization. GIS
may, for instance, be confronted with the need for visualization of speci® c operations,
or it may be evaluated as a tool for integrating the data needs of the organization
(Maguire and Baumgartner 1995, pp. 49± 50). The three step approach to information
planning for GIS that will be presented below may provide the guidelines to do so.
That is to say: the strategic planning exercise as described here can be seen as an
essential ® nal step towards an organization speci® c de® nition of GIS.

When considering the role of GIS for information strategies, the challenge is to
try to identify in what respect the peculiarities of GIS may provide us with pegs to
direct the formulation of speci® c information strategies for GIS. We may look for
these pegs in all four strategic domains. For instance, in the second domain, that of
IT strategies:

in some situations (not all!) GIS requires large databases and may in these
situations suggest bene® ts of data sharing (see various contributions in Onsrud
and Rushton 1995, Obermeyer and Pinto 1994);

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 E
628

P. H. J. Hendriks

the technology changes rapidly which reduces the chances for elaborate user
requirements analysis.

Or in the third domain, that of IM strategies:

E GIS requires speci® c knowledge to prevent misuse and thus calls for profes-
sionals and speci® c attention to ongoing training (discussions on new profes-
sions created by GIS ® t in here; see, for instance, Obermeyer 1994, Obermeyer
and Pinto 1994 );
if the spatial component is not too close to the core competencies, it may call
for outsourcing (see, for instance, Nixdorf 1995);
the complexity of both GIS technology and data needs may put speci® c burdens
on cost accounting methods (see,
for instance, Korte 1996, Smith and
Tomlinson 1992, Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, ch. 6 );
the call for professionals is also intimated by the change rate in the technology;
the size and complexity of the technology may generateÐ perhaps dangerousÐ
trends toward centralization.

How to address these matters is clearly dependent on why and how an organiza-
tion sees bene® ts in GIS usage, which refers to the ® rst domain, that of IS strategies.
That is: all choices to be made in the ® elds of IT and IM strategies for GIS can only
be justi® ed given decisions made as to the IS strategies. It may be noted that in
discussions regarding strategic issues in a GIS context the realm of IS strategies has
attracted less attention than the other realms (the most substantial exceptions to
this assertionÐ
the proverbial `exceptions to the rule’ are the contributions by
Grimshaw 1994, and Huxhold and Levinsohn 1995). This relative negligence is
unfortunate enough, since the content of other GIS related strategies (including, for
instance, implementation strategies) depends on the criteria de® ned by the IS strat-
egies. In fact, in some occasions the outcomes of later stages of strategy building are
mistaken for IS strategies. The most common mistake is to talk about GIS strategies
and actually assess matters regarding IT strategies for GIS. The `GIS strategies’ of
Wickey et al. ( 1996 ), for instance, are actually IT strategies for GIS. Most of what
Arono(cid:128) (1989, chapter 8) alludes to as `implementing a GIS’ refers to IT strategies.
This also holds, to a somewhat lesser degree, for Bernhardsen ( 1992, chapter 11),
who mixes matters of IT strategy with some isolated issues that belong to the third
domain, that of IM strategies. Obermeyer and Pinto ( 1994 ) concentrate, as relates
to strategic issues, almost completely on this third realm, that of IM strategies. Their
book has a separate chapter on `GIS and the strategic planning process’, but this
chapter does not examine how GIS should be integrated into strategic planning.
Instead it addresses the use of GIS as a toolbox for the strategic planner.

Given the central importance of IS strategies and given the relative undervalu-
ation of them by GIS authors we will concentrate on this domain. In order to do
so, we should start by asking ourselves how GIS strategies should be de® ned.
Speci® cs of GIS strategies will in some way relate to the spatial nature of the data
and analysis supported by GIS. More precisely the leading question should be this:
does space o(cid:128) er a usef ul conceptualiz ation or ordering principle when considering the
information household of an organization ? In other words: may the organization’s
information system gain f rom exploring and stressing the spatial elements in its processes
or products, or f rom using spatial concepts to better understand the non-spatial nature
of its processes or products (the latter is usually referred to as `spatialization’, see

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 E
E
E
E
Information strategies

629

Kuhn 1992 )? In the terminology of Huxhold and Levinsohn ( 1995, p. 5 (cid:128) .), answering
this question amounts to de® ning the `GIS paradigm’
for the organization, i.e.,
demarcating the `conceptual foundation for using geographic information that pro-
vides a common base of reference or focus . . . ’. Formulating information strategies
for GIS, therefore, starts from a search for the possible application of spatial concepts.
Several types of scans of the organization should provide the ammunition in this
search process: the scan of the objectives of an organization, of the tasks performed
to reach these objectives, and of the processes of which these tasks are elements.

In conclusion: given the description of the basic strategic concerns relating to
information technology, information strategies for GIS primarily fall within the ® rst
group, the group of IS strategies. It is on this group that we will concentrate. The
distinction between the four ® elds of information strategies indicates the incom-
pleteness of the discussion here, IT strategies, IM strategies and the integration of
these with IS strategies will not be explicitly addressed.

5. Ex ploring a GIS strategy in three steps

How can we make GIS part of the organization’s information strategies? We will
propose a three step framework (see ® gure 3) that is intended to serve two purposes
at the same time. The framework can act as an organizer to order the wide variety
of subjects that have been recognized as relevant for (G)IS-strategies. And, secondly,
it may be read as a sequential set of guidelines to be followed when an organization
actually sets out de® ning its information strategy for GIS.

1. Identify the challenge of GIS: the case for GIS has to be made, that is to say,
reasons have to be recognized at the level of the management of the organiza-
tion why and how a change in or towards GIS usage may be e(cid:128) ective;

2. Position GIS with respect to the organization : the organization has to be
analysed in order to identify where and how GIS may meet the challenges as
they were discerned in the ® rst step;

3. Position the organization with respect to GIS: the outcomes of the exercise in
the ® rst two steps have to be combined and interpreted for the formulation

Figure 3.

Information strategies for GIS in three steps.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 630

P. H. J. Hendriks

of a strategic GIS plan; the choices to be made here primarily relate to ® nding
an adequate way of describing the nature of
the organization and its
environment.

These three steps will now be elaborated.

6. Step 1: Identify the challenge of GIS

The question information strategies are intended to answer is how the organiza-
tion as a whole may bene® t from (changes in) the use of GIS. What is needed,
therefore, is what Maguire and Baumgartner ( 1995, p. 49) describe as a `GIS vision’.
Such a vision corresponds to what was identi® ed before as the `why’-question: there
should be reasons at the level of the whole organization for the usage of GIS and
these have to be identi® ed. This is, partially, elaborated by what Grimshaw ( 1994,
p. 45 ) describes as fundamental issues of management concern when developing an
information strategy: an organization should ask itself why it should change and
where the opportunities are. Huxhold and Levinsohn ( 1995, p. 65± 67) also mention
the need for a strategic GIS vision, which, in their de® nition, has the object of setting
`the general direction and ambitions for GIS development’. They mention two
motivations for trying to come up with a GIS vision, it may help `build commitment
for the GIS’ and it may be functional in `aligning the GIS with other aspects of the
organization’. It should, however, be stressed that this de® nition only draws half the
picture. It identi® es the need for strategic alignment, but disregards the realm of
strategic opportunities (also compare their diagram concerning the scope of GIS
bene® ts on p. 53). More generally, we may describe building a GIS vision as the
explicit consideration of the challenge of GIS. Three approaches may be taken for
the identi® cation of this challenge:

(b)

(a) Creating awareness of the challenge by comparison to other companies who
decided to use GIS, either since these were successful, or because they failed and
therefore set a bad example. As an example of the latter we may refer to Masip
( 1995, p. 56), who sketches the threats of a non-organization-wide approach to
GIS planning: loss of con® dence because of duration of the project, chasm
between functionality needed and functionality provided, refusal of intended
users to work with the system, con¯ icts between departments intended to share
spatial information.
Identifying opportuniti es in the technology for re-establishing the organization
in relation to its environment. Various frameworks are available to guide these
exercises, the already mentioned Porter’s Five Forces model is one of these
( Porter 1980; other frameworks are, for instance, strategy set transformation
designed by King 1978, Porter and Millar’s 1985 information intensity matrix,
Porter’s value chain and value system analysis; see Robson 1994, ch. 5, for an
overview). As an example we may refer to Maguire and Baumgartner ( 1995,
ll
p. 49) whose four so-called `GIS vision themes’ are opportunities that may ®
in the GIS challenge: GIS as the remedy for ® xing problems with conventional
technology, GIS as an integration mechanism for existing databases, GIS as a
means for improving day-to-day organizational processes, GIS as the informa-
tion foundation for enhancing the enterprise capability. Another example of a
method for identifying strategic opportunities for GIS is Grimshaw’s adaptation
of Porter and Millar’s information intensity matrix (Grimshaw 1994, p. 49).
(c) Providing insight into the characteristics of the organization and its sector in

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

631

relation to GIS usage: how important is information ( IS/IT) in the current and
future process and product of the ( type of ) organization? A useful framework
here is McFarlan and McKenney’s strategic importance matrix (see Robson
1994, p. 107 ) that links current importance of IS to future importance.

7. Step 2: Position GIS with respect to the organization

The core of the strategic analysis process is to identify where in the organization
GIS may be helpful in strengthening the relation with its environment (this refers to
the `what’ component of GIS strategies). Several approaches to this analysis for GIS
have been proposed (see Maynard and Pierce 1990, Maguire and Baumgartner 1995,
Grimshaw 1994). These, however, seem to su(cid:128) er from two shortcomings. First, they
tend too rashly to identify the goal of an information strategy with either linking
the use of GIS to overall organizational goals ( for instance, Masser and Campbell
1995, Obermeyer and Pinto 1994, ch.8 ), user requirements ( for instance, Clarke
1991), or identifying areas of potential strategic bene® ts to be gained by using GIS
(for instance, Grimshaw 1994 ). Either of these would imply that the two-way bridge
between IT and the organization using IT as identi® ed in the ® rst section is being
crossed only in one direction. Second, they identify areas of potential bene® t from
GIS in terms of successful examples of GIS application within organizations ( for
instance, market analysis or route planning). Although such examples may provide
useful mental support, the strategic exercise requires the focus to be shifted a full
180 degrees. Starting point should not be the technology, but should rather be some
model of elements or aspects of the organization. Only then we may hope to get an
integral view of problem solving and opportunities generating capabilities of GIS.
To bypass these shortcomings we propose an approach that can be outlined in the
following three questions:

1. W hat to look for? The pegs for stressing the spatial content and for spatializ-
ation, that we described as the guiding light of GIS strategy formulation, may
be looked for in three domains: in the objects used in the production of
products or services, translated into spatial data; in the production processes
themselves,
translated into types of spatial analysis or applications (see
Maguire 1995, for a discussion of spatial analysis in GIS for business purposes);
and in the communication processes, translated into communication networks
(the triptych data-application-network refers to the original three `columns’ of
Zachman’s information architecture; see Zachman 1987, Sowa and Zachman
1992 );

2. How to look? A mix of methods (referred to as the eclectic method, orÐ

by
as the multiple method ) will be identi® ed in order to avoid the

Earl 1996 Ð
risk of focusing on isolated strategic issues;

3. W here to look? Two distinct areas should be considered: products and
processes. For illustration purposes a scan of the processes from an organ-
izational perspective will be presented using a speci® c model of elements of an
organization, the value chain model ( Porter and Millar 1985).

The answers to the second and third question will now be elaborated. The goal

of the strategic exercises should be the integrated survey of three ® elds:

E The identi® cation of overall organizational goals and potentials for GIS in
attaining these objectives. Methods that identify the plans and goals of the

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 632

P. H. J. Hendriks

organization and translate these into information consequences may be called
analytical methods. Among these are Bullen and Rockart’s critical success
factors (CSF’s), strategic set transformation (King, see Robson 1994), and
Porter’s Five Forces model ( Porter 1980 ). When applied to GIS strategies
analytical methods can be said to aim at answering the question how identifying
and stressing the spatial component in the information consequences may
prove fruitful in relation to mission and goals (Arono(cid:128) 1989, p. 252 identi® es
the use of a top-down approach to introducing GIS, but only in a rather
limited sense, viz. the dispersion of awareness of GIS from the management
level down).

E The identi® cation of data needs and data usage within the organization ( both
historical and in the foreseeable future) and potentials for GIS in supporting
these. Methods that take the current practices in the information system of the
organization as a starting point and aim at establishing the useful application
of GIS from there, may be called evaluative methods. The various well-known
methods for user requirements assessment and system development methodolo-
gies fall within this class (see Earl 1989 b, ch. 4; within a GIS context: Clarke
1991, Huxhold and Levinsohn 1995, ch. 5). For GIS strategies these methods
should reveal the actual use of spatial concepts and methods in the every day
routines. Several examples are available of the application of evaluative
methods to GIS (for instance, Huxhold 1991, pp. 234± 241, Bromley and
Coulson 1991, Arono(cid:128) 1989, pp. 254± 255).

E The exploration of ® elds where the application of GIS may result in strategic
bene® ts for the organization. Methods that try to ® nd new directions in the
use of IT in general and GIS more speci® cally, also including a scan for
possible strategic bene® ts, can be said to be creative methods. Given the nature
of their objective, these methods are often of a less formal nature and many of
them could also be described as `conceptual frameworks’. When applied to the
formulation of a GIS strategy these methods should help consider using spatial
concepts for rethinking the products or processes of the organization.

Next question is where to look for objects, processes and communication. As indi-
cated before this pertains to the products of the organization as well as to the various
elements in the transformation process. We will consider both elements in turn.

The product of many organizations consists of or contains spatial knowledge or
spatial data (as is, for instance, the case for most consulting ® rms who specialize in
environmental
issues, or for most public services). If this is the case it may be
worthwhile for that organization to consider delivering their products partially in a
GIS-like format (for instance, in the form of a macro program to be plugged into a
standard GIS, or a spatial database, perhaps accompanied by an ArcView type of
interface).

The main problem when setting out to examine the processes with spatial concepts
in mind is to ® nd an adequate way to represent the organizational perspective, i.e.,
an adequate window on the tasks and coordination of tasks that are the basic
elements of these processes. To illustrate how such an exercise may be conceived a
presentation is given of the application of Porter’s value chain model for this purpose
( Porter and Millar 1985). The value chain is a system of interconnected activities
that together make up the viability of the organization. The model puts these
activities into two main classes, primary and supporting activities, and these are

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

633

Figure 4. GIS in the value chain.

subdivided into a total of nine activity classes (identi® ed below; see also ® gure 4).
Originally the model was conceived as a means to track the value adding process,
but it has also been shown to be a powerful tool in a variety of ways, for instance,
for evaluating the information intensity of the organization, for assessing the strategic
impact of IT usage, and for relating the organization to its environment (the so-called
`value system’). An organization can use the model to assess for every link in the
chain how e(cid:128) ective and e(cid:129) cient GIS is or may be exploited. The nine value
links have to be scanned for their spatial content or potential, given the three
classes of questions/models: relation to mission and goals of the organization, actual
information content, areas of potential strategic advantage.

To illustrate what this exercise may result in, we will go over each of the nine

groups of activities in the value chain to consider how GIS may ® t in there:

7.1. Primary activities:

1. Inbound logistics: the receival, storage and dissemination of the inputs for
producing the product or service. The organization may scan its internal
infrastructure to see if tracking of products and parts could gain from being
explicitly considered in the light of their spatial nature. Successful applications
of GIS usage have, for instance, been reported for optimization and monitoring
of warehouse usage;

2. Operations: the transformation process, also identi® ed as `throughput’. Is the
nature of the product or service of a spatial nature (as will, for instance, be
the case for many services rendered by governmental organizations)? If this is
the case, GIS may be useful for the actual production. The organization may
also consider if the spatial content of the product can be enhanced by using
GIS;

3. Outbound logistics or physical distribution: the activities performed to get the
output ( product or service) to the customer. Distribution clearly by its nature
is a topological activity. The question to be asked is how important the
e(cid:129) cient and e(cid:128) ective use of this aspect is or can be made, a question that an
increasing number of organizations led to the usage of GIS, for instance, for
in combination with GPS), route planning (see
¯ eet management

(e.g.,

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 634

P. H. J. Hendriks

the discussion on car navigation systems by White 1991 ), timely delivery
assessment (see,
issue of GIS Europe on GIS in
transportation, `GIS on the road’, October 1994; Beroggi 1995 );

for instance, the special

4. Sales and marketing: the activities to facilitate the delivery of products and
services to potential customers and those to induce the customers to acquire
the products/services, such as advertising, tendering, selection of distribution
channels. Insight in the market is very likely to bene® t from a spatial perspect-
ive, various successful GIS applications in this ® eld have been reported. An
organization could, for instance, consider performing market analysis, competi-
tion analysis, target marketing with explicit attention for the spatial component
(for geo-marketing in a GIS context, see, for instance, Birkin 1995, Sanchis
and Garcia 1995; especially in this ® eld there is a rapidly growing body of
literature identifying the speci® c spatial component in marketing);

5. Services and after sales: the processes that aim to maintain or enhance the
value of the products and services once delivered. The investigation of this
class should reveal if the after-sales trajectory could be managed with more
explicit attention for its spatial dimension (see Swift 1995 ). Examples are
known of using GIS in this class, for instance, for maintenance forecasting,
dealer network review, registration and dispatch of customer complaints (see
Grimshaw 1994, p. 183 (cid:128) .).

7.2. Support activities:

1. Administration and infrastructure: all tasks that relate to the general manage-
ment of the organization. Do the management tasks themselves relate to
spatial activities or insights? GIS has been identi® ed as potentially useful for
these tasks in several areas, for instance, as a tool for strategic planning
(Obermeyer and Pinto 1995, pp. 144± 147), as a means for asset management
(e.g., Epstein 1995, Driscoll 1994; a very successful area of GIS application in
this realm is the management of their distribution networks by utility compan-
ies; other companies for whom their physical network is their most vital asset,
such as telephone and telecommunication ® rms, are still very hesitant in
discovering the potentials of GIS, see, Mitchell 1995 ), as a decision support
tool for site selection (for instance, for expanding restaurant chains; see Laudon
and Laudon 1996, pp. 260± 262, Reid 1993), etc.;

2. Human resource management: the management of the `human capital’, i.e.,
the personnel of the organization. Is the location of personnel to be hired or
already employed a relevant management issue? GIS may particularly be
useful here if the organization aims at maintaining a ¯ exible workforce, for
instance, by hiring employees for individual projects given location of project
and workers. Similar situations may occur in the management of agents, dealer
networks, and the like;

3. Product/technology development: all activities aimed at development and
innovation in the technology used, processes and products of the organization.
This class of activities aims at reconsidering the content of all ® ve primary
activity classes. GIS may both be useful for performing the relevant research
(for instance, analysis of competitors; simulation modelling of dispersion
of new products), as well as for examining how the process in the activity

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

635

classes and the product/service they produce may be changed by introducing
GIS;

4. Procurement: support of the procurement of the input for the primary activit-
ies, including raw materials and o(cid:129) ce equipment. These activities form the
antipole of physical distribution. The scan of them may be performed along
similar lines. GIS may prove to be useful, for instance, for supply management
(Grimshaw 1994, pp. 185± 187), or, again, for ¯ eet management and route
planning.

8. Step 3: Position the organization with respect to GIS

The analysis in step 2 should shed light on the GIS potential for the organization.
If we adopt the approach using the value chain as a vehicle for assuring a company-
wide perspective as indicated in the previous section, this speci® c type of model may
be seen as providing the ¯ ashlight for the operation. Insight into GIS potentials is
then gathered by ®
lling in the GIS data, GIS application and GIS communication
areas in the 27 cells of the value chain analysis matrix ( 27=9 activity classes times
3 classes of methods). The ® nal step amounts to combining the outcomes of this
analysis and confronting these with the characteristics of the organization. This step
should consider the conditions for the implementation trajectory without actually
planning it. This step may also be described as considering the `institutional feasibility’
( Huxhold and Levinsohn 1995, pp. 67± 74). This third step will only brie¯ y be
touched upon here. If the second step has resulted in identifying potential areas of
GIS application or expansion, it has to be established where the functional and data
needs overlap. But, even more important within the framework of strategic planning,
the choice options have to be identi® ed in terms of the importance of GIS for the
organization in relation to its environment and the viability of the implied changes.
If, for instance, the organization has a weak tradition in IT usage, implementation
should follow a less steep path; the establishment of priorities may be directed by
the assessment of the strategic information value within the relevant sector. A more
elaborate listing of factors to be considered may be found in Huxhold and Levinsohn
( 1995, p. 57 (cid:128) .). They develop a useful approach for relating the characteristics of
potential GIS applications to the peculiarities of the organization that they coin as
`situational analysis’. Among the key factors that such a situational analysis will
address, they list `management philosophy and style’, `available resources’, and `imple-
mentation success risk/uncertainty’. Another useful
framework in line with the
approach sketched in the previous section is to consider the organization’s value
chain in combination with the value chains of its sector, thereby creating a value
system ( Porter and Millar 1985). Several other frameworks have also been proposed
to provide guidance. These include analysis models to assess strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats (or SWOT models; we already mentioned Porter’s Five
Forces model ). They also include various `stages of growth’ models ( best known are
the versions of Gibson and Nolan and McKenney and McFarlan: see Earl 1989 b;
these models also seem to have gained some popularity in the GIS community, see
for instance Grimshaw 1994, ch.3 ), and many others.

9. Information strategies for GIS: the ongoing challenge

The discussion has explored four realms of strategic planning for GIS, those of
IS strategies, IT strategies, IM strategies and the integration of the other three. Next,
it has focused on the development of IS strategies for GIS, since these may be

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 636

P. H. J. Hendriks

considered to lead the others. For an organization to decide whether to embark on
a GIS adventure or to change its course when already using GIS is no easy undertak-
ing. Our aim has been to describe a framework that may provide a useful structuring
of the preparations called for when contemplating such an adventure. These prepara-
tions may be seen as the elements of a strategy formulation process. The advantage
of the approach to this process taken in the article is twofold. First, it allows a crisp
distinction between `information strategies’ and other organizational, non-strategic
concerns regarding information systems. Secondly, it results in a systematic and
ordered way of identifying and relating the various individual focus points that may
be relevant when GIS is discussed at the strategic level. The basic challenge in the
strategy formulation process is to make an educated selection of the available
methods, some of which have been sketched here, given the speci® c situation of the
organization and to ® nd an appropriate integration of the outcomes of these methods.
It should be stressed that the methods that should provide guidance in this strategic
undertaking, and the models that may help decide which combination of methods
is most useful for a given organization, are of a heuristic nature. No automated
lled in
prescription lists for information strategies are available that can be simply ®
and then run by themselves. Perhaps the most important element of any strategic
operation is that its relevance lies not primarily in the results it produces but in the
mental processes it should trigger. As Grimshaw ( 1994, p. 63) puts it: `The ® nal
product of a strategy is less important than setting in motion a healthy debate that
becomes a continuous process’. In this sense we may say that introducing a strategic
focus into information systems thinking is characterized by a state of `trying to get
there’ rather than by a state of `having arrived’.

Acknowledgments

A ® rst version of this article was written during a stay at the National Center
for Geographic Information and Analysis ( NCGIA) at Santa Barbara, USA. The
support of the people at the NCGIA before, during and after this stay is gratefully
acknowledged. Thanks are also due to Dirk Vriens, who teaches Information
Management at
( University of Nijmegen, The
Netherlands), for helpful discussions and constructive comments on earlier versions
of the article. The author also wishes to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
useful comments.

the Nijmegen Business School

References
Ackoff, R. L., 1967, Management mis-information systems. Management Science, 4, 147± 156.
Andrews, K. R., 1971, T he Concept of Corporate Strategy ( Homewood: Irwin).
Ansoff, H. I., 1965, Corporate Strategy (New York: Wiley).
Aronoff, S., 1989, Geographic Information Systems: A Management Perspective (Ottawa: WDL

Bernhardsen, T., 1992, Geographic Information Systems (Arendal: Viak IT/Norwegian

Publications).

Mapping Authority).

Business
pp. 104± 149.

McGraw-Hill ).

Beroggi, G. E. G., 1995, On the move: monitoring and routing freight with satellite systems

and GIS. GIS Europe, 4, 24± 26.

Birkin, M., 1995, Customer targeting, geodemographics and lifestyle approaches. GIS for
International ),

(Cambridge: GeoInformation

Service Planning

and

Blumenthal, S. C., 1969, MIS: A Framework for Planning and Development (New York:

Bromley, R., and Coulson, M., 1991, GIS in British local government: the bene® ts to resource

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

637

management and planning. In Spatial Analysis and Spatial Policy Using Geographic
Information Systems, edited by L. Worrall ( London: Bellhaven), pp. 38± 61.

Campbell, H., and Masser, I., 1995, GIS and Organizations: How E(cid:128) ective are GIS in Practice?

Cash, J. I., McFarlan, F. W., and McKenney, J. L., 1992, Corporate Information Systems

Castle, G. H., editor, 1993, Pro® ting f rom a Geographic Information System ( Fort Collins:

Chaffee, E. E., 1984, Successful strategic management in small private colleges. Journal of

( London: Taylor & Francis).

Management (Homewood: Irwin) .

GIS World Book).

Higher Education, 55, 212± 241.

Chaffee, E. E., 1985, Three models of strategy. Academy of Management Review, 1, 89± 96.
Chandler, A. D., 1962, Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the Industrial

Christensen, C. R., and Andrews, K. R., 1965, Business Policy: T ext and Cases

Enterprise (Cambridge: MIT Press).

( Homewood: Irwin).

Clarke, A. L., 1991, GIS speci® cation, evaluation and implementation. In Geographical
Information Systems: Principles and Applications, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F.
Goodchild and D. W. Rhind (London: Longman), pp. 477± 488.
Copeland, D. G., and McKenney, J. L., 1988, Airline reservation systems:
history. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 12, 353± 370.

lessons from

Davis, G. B., and Olson, M. H., 1985, Management Information Systems (2nd edition) (New

York: McGraw-Hill ).

de Man, W. H. E., 1988, Establishing a geographical information system in relation to its
use; a process of strategic choices. International Journal for Geographical Information
Systems, 2, 245± 261.

Driscoll, R. S., 1994, Remote Sensing/GIS Enhances Plant Management. GIS W orld, 7,

Drucker, P., 1974, Management: T asks, Responsibilities, and Practices ( New York: Harper

Earl, M. J., 1989 a, Information ManagementÐ
Earl, M. J., 1989 b, Management

T he Strategic Dimension (Oxford: Clarendon).
strategies for Information T echnology (New York:

60± 61.

and Row).

Prentice-Hall ).

Earl, M. J., 1996, Integrating IS and the organization: a framework of organizational ® t. In
Information Management: T he Organizational Dimension, edited by M. J. Earl (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), pp. 485± 502.

Earl, M. J., and Feeny, D. F., 1996, Information systems in global business: evidence from
European multinationals. In Information Management: T he Organizational Dimension,
edited by M. J. Earl (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 77± 100.

Epstein, M., 1995, The business bene® ts of GIS in asset management. In GIS for Business:
Discovering the Missing Piece in Y our Business Strategy (Cambridge: GeoInformation
International ), pp. 191± 195.

Fitzgerald, E. P., 1993, Success measures for information systems strategic planning. Journal

of Strategic Information Systems, 2, 335± 350.

Galbraith, J. W., 1974, Organization design: an information processing view. Interfaces,

Galbraith, C., and Schendel, D., 1983, An empirical analysis of strategy types. Strategic

Gibson, C. F., and Nolan, R. L., 1974, Managing the four stages of EDP growth. Harvard

Glueck, W. F., 1976, Business Policy: Strategy Formulation and Management Action (New

5, 28± 36.

Management Journal, 4, 153± 173.

Business Review, 52, 76± 88.

York: McGraw-Hill ).

Glueck, W. F., 1980, Strategic Management and Business Policy (New York: McGraw-Hill ).
Grimshaw, D. J., 1994, Bringing Geographical Information Systems into Business ( Harlow:

Hamel, G., and Prahalad, C. K., 1994, Competing for the Future (Boston: Harvard Business

Longman).

School Press).

Hofer, C. W., 1973, Some preliminary research on patterns of strategic behavior. In Academy

of Management Proceedings (Seattle: Academy of Management ), pp. 46± 59.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 638

P. H. J. Hendriks

Huxhold, W. E., 1991, An Introduction to Urban Geographic Information Systems (Oxford:

Huxhold, W. E., and Levinsohn, A. G., 1995, Managing Geographic Information Projects

Oxford University Press).

( New York: Oxford University Press).

Information Systems Quarterly, 2, 27± 37.

King, W. R., 1978, Strategic planning for management information systems. Management

Korte, G., 1996, Weighing GIS bene® ts with ® nancial analysis. GIS W orld, 9, 48± 53.
Kuhn, W., 1992, Paradigms of GIS use. In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on

Spatial Data Handling (Columbia: International Geographical Union), pp. 91± 103.

Laudon, K. C., and Laudon, J. P., 1996, Management Information Systems; Organization and

T echnology ( 4th edition) ( Englewood Cli(cid:128) s: Prentice Hall ).

Longley, P., and Clarke, G., editors, 1995, GIS for Business and Service Planning (Cambridge:

GeoInformation International ).

Maguire, D. J., 1991, An overview and de® nition of GIS. In Geographical Information Systems:
Principles and Applications, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild and D. W.
Rhind (London: Longman) pp. 9± 20.

Maguire, D. J., 1995, Implementing spatial analysis and GIS applications for business and
service planning. In GIS for Business and Service Planning, edited by P. Longley and
G. Clarke (Cambridge: GeoInformation International ), pp. 171± 191.

Maguire, D. J., and Baumgartner, R., 1995, Planning your business GIS. In GIS for Business:
Discovering the Missing Piece in Y our Business Strategy (Cambridge: GeoInformation
International ), pp. 48± 51.

Martin, J., 1982, Strategic Data-planni ng Methodologie s ( Englewood Cli(cid:128) s: Prentice Hall ).
Masip, R., 1995, GIS: a strategic approach to the business goals of the organisation. In GIS
for Business: Discovering the Missing Piece in Y our Business Strategy (Cambridge:
GeoInformation International ) pp. 55± 58.

Masser, I., 1997, Governments and GIS ( London: Taylor & Francis).
Masser, I., and Campbell, H., 1995, Geographical information systems in organizations:
some conditions for their e(cid:128) ective utilization. In T he Added V alue of Geographical
Information Systems in Public and Environmental Health edited by M. J. C. De Lepper,
H. J. Scholten and R. M. Stern ( Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 287± 297.

Masser, I., Campbell, H., and Craglia, M., editors, 1996, GIS Di(cid:128) usion; T he Adoption and
Use of Geographical Information Systems in L ocal Government in Europe (London:
Taylor & Francis).

Maynard, J. C., and Pearce, N. J., 1990, GIS as part of a corporate IT strategy: a practical
approach. In Proceedings of the First European Conference on Geographical Information
Systems ( EGIS `90) (Amsterdam: EGIS), pp. 729± 736.

McFarlan, W. F., 1974, Portfolio approach to information systems. Harvard Business Review,

McFarlan, W. F., 1984, Information technology changes the way you compete. Harvard

52, 142± 150.

Business Review, 62, 98± 103.

Meehan, W. J., 1995, Process Reengineering using GIS; an AM/FM example. ESRI White

Paper Series, January 1995 (Redlands: Environmental Systems Research Institute).

Mintzberg, H., 1978, Patterns in strategy formation. Management Science, 24, 934± 948.
Mintzberg, H., 1987, Crafting strategy. Harvard Business Review, 65, 66± 75.
Mintzberg, H., 1994, T he Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning ( New York: Prentice Hall ).
Mintzberg, H., and Quinn, J. B., 1991, T he Strategy Process; Concepts, Contexts, Cases

( Englewood Cli(cid:128) s: Prentice Hall ).

Mitchell, M., 1995, Business bene® ts: the case for GIS. GIS Europe, 4, 34± 36.
NCGIA, 1995, Advancing Geographic Information Science; A Proposal to NSF by NCGIA
(Santa Barbara: National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis).

Nixdorf, P., 1995, Operation scheduling and outsourcingÐ

the keywords for successful data
acquisition in GIS projects. In GIS for Business: Discovering the Missing Piece in Your
Business Strategy (Cambridge: GeoInformation International ), pp. 102± 106.
Nolan, R. L., 1973, The plight of the EDP manager. Harvard Business Review, 51, 143± 152.
Nolan, R. L., and Koot, W. J. D., 1992, De actualiteit van de Nolan fasentheory. Holland

Management Review, 31, 77± 88 (in Dutch: `The topicality of Nolan’s stages theory’).

Obermeyer, N. J., 1994, GIS: a new profession? Professional Geographer, 46, 498± 503.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 Information strategies

639

Obermeyer, N. J., and Pinto, J. K., 1994, Managing Geographic Information Systems (New

Onsrud, H. J., and Rushton, G., 1995, Sharing Geographic Information ( New Brunswick:

York and London: Guilford Press).

Rutgers State University of New Jersey).

Management and Organization, 7, 78± 87.

Pettigrew, A., 1977, Strategy formulation as a political process. International Studies of

Poel, K. G. van der, 1995, T heory and Practice of Information Strategy (Tilburg: Tilburg

Porter, M. E., 1979, How competitive forces shape strategy. Harvard Business Review,

Porter, M. E., 1980, Competitive strategy; T echniques for analyzing industries and companies

Porter, M. E., 1985 a, Competitive Advantage; Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance

Porter, M. E., 1985 b, Technology and competitive advantage; T he journal of business strategy,

Porter, M. E., 1987, From competitive advantage to corporate strategy. Harvard Business

University Press).

57, 137± 145.

( New York: Free Press).

( New York: Free Press).

5, 60± 78.

Review, 65, 43± 59.

Porter, M. E., 1990, T he Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York: Free Press).
Porter, M. E., and Millar, V. E., 1985, How information gives you competitive advantage.

Prahalad, C. K., and Hamel, G., 1990, The core competence of the corporation. Harvard

Harvard Business Review, 63, 149± 160.

Business Review, 68, 79± 91.

Reid, H. G., 1993, Retail trade. In Pro® ting f rom a Geographic Information System, edited by

G. H. Castle (Fort Collins: GIS World Book), pp. 131± 151.

Robson, W., 1994, Strategic Management and Information Systems; An Integrated Approach

( London: Pitman).

Sanchis, B. M., and Garcia, J. P., 1995, Geographic Information Systems and business
planning: the new age of GIS. In GIS for Business: Discovering the Missing Piece in
Y our Business Strategy (Cambridge: GeoInformation International ), pp. 123± 126.

Scott Morton, M. S., 1991, T he Corporation of the 1990s, Information T echnology and

Organizational T ransformation (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Smith, D., and Tomlinson, R., 1992, Assessing costs and bene® ts of geographical information
for

International Journal

systems: methodological and implementation issues.
Geographical Information Systems, 6, 247± 256.

Sowa, J. F., and Zachman, J. A., 1992, Extending and formalizing the framework for

information systems architecture. IBM Systems Journal, 31, 590± 616.
Speed, V., 1993, GIS opens enterprise wide information options. GIS World, 7, 42± 45.
Strand, E. J., 1995, GIS plays a role in business process re-engineering. GIS W orld, 8, 34± 36.
Swift, K., 1995, Orange’s intelligent coverage map: how orange use a low-cost application
to maintain a high level of customer service. In GIS for Business: Discovering the
Missing Piece in Y our Business Strategy (Cambridge: GeoInformation International ),
pp. 196± 199.

Uffer, M., 1995, Business Information strategies based on GIS technology. In GIS for Business:
Discovering the Missing Piece in Y our Business Strategy (Cambridge: GeoInformation
International ), pp. 33± 36.

Waema, T. M., and Walsham, G., 1990, Information systems

strategy formulation.

Information, and Management, 18, 29± 39.

White, M., 1991, Car navigation systems. In Geographical Information Systems: Principles and
Applications, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild and D. W. Rhind (London:
Longman), pp. 115± 125.

Wickey, K., Anderson, D., and Teselle, G., 1996, NRCS revises its GIS strategy. GIS W orld,

Worrall, L., editor, 1991, Spatial Analysis and Spatial Policy Using Geographic Information

Zachman, J. A., 1987, A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Systems

9, 60± 63.

Systems ( London: Bellhaven).

Journal, 3, 267± 289.

Downloaded by [Universität Osnabrueck] at 11:28 27 February 2016 