This article was downloaded by: [Ams/Girona*barri Lib]
On: 14 October 2014, At: 02:41
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Georeferencing locality descriptions
and computing associated uncertainty
using a probabilistic approach
Q. Guo a , Y. Liu a b & J. Wieczorek c
a School of Engineering , University of California Merced , PO Box
2039, Merced, CA 95344, USA
b Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographic Information
Systems , Peking University , Beijing 100871, PR China
c Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 3101 Valley Life Sciences
Building , University of California , Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Published online: 19 Aug 2008.

To cite this article: Q. Guo , Y. Liu & J. Wieczorek (2008) Georeferencing locality descriptions
and computing associated uncertainty using a probabilistic approach, International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 22:10, 1067-1090, DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851420

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701851420

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 10, October 2008, 1067–1090

Research Article

Georeferencing locality descriptions and computing associated
uncertainty using a probabilistic approach

Q. GUO*{, Y. LIU{{ and J. WIECZOREK§
{School of Engineering, University of California Merced, PO Box 2039, Merced, CA
95344, USA
{Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, PR China
§Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 3101 Valley Life Sciences Building, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

(Received 17 November 2007; in final form 17 November 2007 )

Locality information for specimens of geological, biological, and cultural objects
is traditionally stored as textual descriptions. With an increasing demand for
natural and cultural information, the lack of spatially explicit descriptions has
become a major barrier to the management and analysis of these data using
geographic information systems. In this paper, we propose a method to
georeference descriptive data, using an uncertainty field model to represent the
distribution of a locality based on two types of uncertainties: uncertainty of
reference objects, and the uncertainty of spatial relationships. We propose
probability distributions for each known form of these two types of uncertainties
and present a probabilistic method to georeference localities based on the
integration of different uncertainty sources.

Keywords: Geographical information system; Spatial positioning; Georeferencing;
Probability; Uncertainty; Textual descriptions

1.

Introduction

It has been estimated that there are more than 2500 million specimens in natural
history collections (Duckworth et al. 1993). With the increasing interest
in
understanding changes in environmental, biological, and cultural resources due to
human disturbance and climate change, specimen collections have become ever
more important, since they can provide baseline information on the environment
and the factors driving change. Before the advent of geographical information
systems (GISs) and global positioning systems (GPSs), occurrence information for
most specimens was stored as textual descriptions without explicit geographic
coordinates. This is a major obstacle for managing and analysing specimen data in a
GIS. For example, at the beginning of the ‘Mammal Networked Information
System’ Project (MaNIS 2001), which consists of a growing distributed database
network of mammal collections data, 97.8% of the 296 737 distinct digitized
collecting localities from the 17 participating collections had no coordinates.
Descriptive localities have numerous sources of imprecision and other kinds of
uncertainty (Wieczorek et al. 2004). Assessing and recording these uncertainties

*Corresponding author. Email: qguo@ucmerced.edu

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851420

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1068

Q. Guo et al.

that

collected

specimens

during the georeferencing process is arguably as important as determining
coordinates for the locality, because only with the uncertainty can one determine
if the location information is suitable for a particular analysis. Many efforts have
been made to study the positional accuracy of spatial data (Goodchild and Hunter
1997, Leung and Yan 1998, Veregin 2000, Van Niel and McVicar 2002, Bonner et al.
2003). These studies try to assess the difference between test data and higher-
accuracy ‘true data’. These methods cannot be directly applied to estimate
uncertainty while georeferencing specimen localities, however, because it
is
impossible to acquire higher accuracy ‘true’ spatial data for the millions of
historically
georeferencing.
Consequently, several practical georeferencing methods have been proposed. For
example, a common approach is to use a bounding box (a rectangle) to encompass
the locality being georeferenced. Recently, Wieczorek et al. (2004) proposed an
alternative, point-radius method, which describes each locality as a circle where the
radius represents the maximum error. One major advantage of this method over the
bounding box is that the uncertainties can be readily combined into one attribute
that
the bounding box
method requires contributions to uncertainty to be calculated independently in
each of the two dimensions. Since the point-radius method describes a locality as a
this method has difficulty in dealing with some more complicated
circle,
shapes and tends to overestimate the uncertainty in order to encompass completely
the area in which the collection occurred. Therefore, in this research, we developed a
new georeferencing method based on probability distributions of error sources that
takes into consideration the shape of the locality being described.

independent of geographic

location, whereas

retrospective

need

is

1.1 Related work on uncertainty in georeferencing

Uncertainty is an inherent attribute of geographic information (Goodchild 2001).
Shi (1998) believes that there are four aspects of uncertainty in GIS: positional,
attribute, topological, and temporal. Positional uncertainty is the focus of this study
on retrospective georeferencing based on textual descriptions.

It is possible that a textual description could contain errors, for example,
‘50 miles north of Merced’ might mistakenly be recorded as ‘5 miles north of
Merced’. In this research, we make the initial assumption that descriptions
are correctly recorded in their textual form. During or after georeferencing,
this assumption can be partially tested; some original errors may be detectable
through spatial validation by testing for spatial consistency in the description, and
through environmental outlier detection using statistical methods with related GIS
layers.

In addition to measurement errors, recording errors, and the positional
uncertainties associated with quantitative georeferencing (e.g. precision) uncertain-
ties from the descriptive references to locations are inevitable and challenging to
quantify. Referencing a named place (e.g. Yosemite National Park) is a typical
example of qualitative georeferencing; it is an efficient way to communicate location
information in everyday life, despite its inexact and sometimes ambiguous nature
(Longley et al. 2005), In addition to named places alone, locality descriptions often
combine place names and spatial relationships. For example, the description ‘5
kilometres north of Merced (CA) on Highway 99’, includes two named places
‘Merced, CA’ and ‘Highway 99’, one metric relationship instance ‘5 kilometres’, and
one direction relationship ‘north’. Compared with quantitative geographic

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1069

Table 1. Commonly encountered classes of locality descriptions based on occurrences in
specimen records in the MaNIS project.

Locality
type

Description

Example

Frequency
(%)

F
FOH

P
NF
FS
FOO
FH
J

FO
BF

Feature
Offset from a feature (or a path)

Springfield
10 km N of Kuala Lumpur

at a heading

Path or linear feature
Near a feature or path
Subdivision of a feature or path N part of Mono Lake
Orthogonal offsets from a feature 1 miles N, 3 miles W of Fairview
Heading from a feature, no offset W of Tucson
Junction

Hwy. 1
Big Bay vicinity

Confluence of Labarge Creek
& South Labarge Creek

Offset from a feature, no heading 5 km outside Calgary
Between features or paths

Between Point Reyes and Inverness

51.0
18.2

8.6
6.2
7.2
5.2
3.2
0.8

0.4
0.2

coordinates, qualitative locality descriptions bear additional uncertainties that need
to be addressed during the georeferencing process.

The most common types of georeferencible locality descriptions encountered in
specimen records in the MaNIS project are shown in table 1. In Wieczorek et al.
(2004), six factors were identified as contributing to the uncertainty of a
georeferenced locality description and grouped into two categories:

Uncertainty of the referenced object:

1. extent of the locality;
2. unknown datum;
3.
4. map accuracy.

imprecision in coordinate measurements;

Uncertainty of the spatial relationship:

5.
6.

imprecision in distance measurements;
imprecision in direction measurements.

Note that place name ambiguity (e.g. Springfield) is not in the list; in the absence
of a definitive reference object,
the locality references were considered too
ambiguous for quantitative georeferencing. In practice, this problem is sometimes
relatively easy to address with related evidence that suggests which of multiple
possible reference objects to use. For example, an expedition would generally
produce records from the same region, which could be used to isolate an appropriate
named place.

One of the major challenges in calculating uncertainty for a locality is that
many of
the uncertainties in the above-mentioned list can affect a given
description. An error-propagation method is necessary to deal with two or
more uncertainty sources. Traditionally, the deterministic error propagation rule
(Thapa and Bossler 1992) applies when the errors are in the form of standard
errors. Standard error is not applicable to georeference locality descriptions
retrospectively because there is no way to reconstruct a meaningful standard
error without ‘true’ original data. In principle, one could construct patterns of
error for specific locality types by accumulating sufficient locality descriptions of

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1070

Q. Guo et al.

type that also had associated coordinates. Unfortunately,

that
there are no
systematic rules for how places with coordinates should be described. As a result,
coordinates associated with a locality may be for the nearest reference object rather
than the actual place. Without the original recorder of the data, we have no way to
determine what data are ‘true’. Because of this interesting situation, the point-radius
method (Wieczorek et al. 2004) estimates the maximum uncertainty Umax taking into
consideration the interaction of all uncertainty sources P uiz P ud, where u is the
uncertainty for independent (i) or dependent (d) sources of error. The point-radius
method provides a liberal, but overestimated representation of
the locality
uncertainty.

There are two ways in which to reduce the overestimation and provide a
potentially more specific and therefore more useful georeference. First, the point-
radius method uses a circle to describe the possible distribution of a locality,
which, in reality, is often irregular in shape. For example, the least bounding
shape that satisfies the description ‘five kilometres north of a point feature A’ is an
arc rather than the circular region circumscribing that arc as prescribed by the point-
radius method. In order to be more specific, therefore, we propose to develop a
‘shape method’ that has the potential to produce refined quantitative spatial
descriptions of qualitative textual
locality descriptions. The second way to
improve upon the point-radius method is related to the fact that the point-
radius method presents no means to distinguish any of the points within the circle as
being any more or less likely to be a part of the locality; nor does the method
take into account the probability distribution of different uncertainty sources.
the probability that an event occurred at any given
More often than not,
point within the circle given by the point-radius method will not be uniformly
distributed in the circle because uncertainties
sources have
different probability distributions. With the point-radius method, for example,
points within 45u of north from points in A are considered to be ‘north of A’. In
reality, the further away from actual north a point lies, the less likely it would
have been described as ‘north’. We recognize that
these improvements are
complicated to implement without the aid of digital maps and specialized GIS
software. This study describes the methods and software we developed to overcome
this difficulty.

from different

2. Conceptual framework for probabilistic georeferencing

2.1 Uncertainty field, reference object, and target object

In order to develop a probabilistic georeferencing approach, we first introduce the
concept of the uncertainty field to represent the localities and their associated
uncertainties. Field and object models have been widely accepted as two alternative
approaches for conceptualizing and modelling geographic phenomena (Goodchild
1992). The field model
is more suitable for determining uncertainty in the
georeferencing process than the object model because the uncertainty boundaries
are not crisp, and the probabilities may vary within the boundaries (Goodchild
1989, Couclelis 1996). For convenience of information storage, Tøssebro and
Nyga˚ rd (2002) proposed a discretization approach for uncertain features. If the
uncertainty associated with a feature cannot be modelled in a deterministic way, as
is the case for the georeferencing process, the raster model is a more appropriate way
to represent the spatial variance in uncertainty. We can populate the region of the

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1071

uncertainty field with probability values and use these to generate an estimated
shape as an implementation of the ‘shape method’ described by Wieczorek et al.
(2004).

Most locality descriptions are based on at least one specific named place, which acts
as the Reference Object (RO) for positioning a locality. The RO may be a point, linear,
or areal feature, such as a junction, highway, or city. For simplicity, these objects are
sometimes represented using a circle (Wieczorek et al. 2004) or a bounding box (Hill
2006), by which the actual shape of RO is circumscribed. The final shape containing
the described locality is called the Target Object (TO). The objective of the
georeferencing process is to estimate the TO based on the positions, shapes, and
uncertainty of its ROs and spatial relationships.

2.2 Error propagation

There are two major error propagation approaches to calculate uncertainty from
multiple sources: the analytical approach and the numerical approach (Burrough
and McDonnell 1998). The square root of the sum of the squared errors is a
commonly used analytical approach to model errors resulting from different
uncertainty sources (Thapa and Bossler 1992). This approach requires the errors to
be represented as standard deviations (or standard errors) and to follow a normal
distribution. However, in the retrospective georeferencing process, the errors often
do not conform to normal distributions or cannot be represented as standard errors
(Wieczorek et al. 2004). Therefore, we opt to use a numerical approach, applying the
Monte Carlo method, to calculate a locality’s uncertainty using the following steps:

1. Develop probability distribution functions for each uncertainty source.
2. Choose a starting-point in the reference object (this can be done randomly or

systematically—with enough simulations the result will be similar).

3. Use the probability distribution function of each uncertainty source to
generate the contribution to the location of the resulting point in the target
object for this simulation.
Increment the count of simulation results for the raster cell corresponding to
the point resulting from step 3.

4.

5. Repeat the simulations (steps 2–4) many times to produce an uncertainty field

for the target object.

2.3 Probability distributions of uncertainties

We use uncertainty fields to represent the probabilistic spatial distribution of TOs.
For localities confined to a two-dimensional surface, the uncertainty field z of a TO
can be defined as a two-dimensional probability density function (PDF):

The probability of the TO inside a region R is ÐÐ
R

p x, y
ð

Þdx dy. Across the entire

domain D of the PDF p(x, y), the probability is 1 as given by the following equation:

z~p x, y
ð

Þ

p x, y
ð

Þdx dy~1

ðð

D

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1072

Q. Guo et al.

For an uncertainty field, we can define a representative point OR as:

OR~ xR, yR
ð

Þ~

p x, y
ð

Þx dx dy,

p x, y
ð

Þy dx dy

ð3Þ

ðð

0

@

D

ðð

D

1

A

In some cases, the probability density at OR may be 0. There are three methods for
the uncertainty measurement: maximum error, mean error, and a region with
probability P.

2.3.1 Maximum error. Centring at OR, a circular region covering all non-zero
positions can be found. The radius of this circle is the maximum uncertainty:

Umax~max dist x, y
f

ð

ð

Þ, xR, yR

ð

Þ

Þjp x, y
ð

Þw0

g

where dist is a function to calculate the Euclidean distance between two points.

2.3.2 Mean error. Mean error is the weighted average value of the distances
between all non-zero positions and OR:

Umean~

dist x, y
ð
ð

Þ, xR, yR

ð

Þ

Þp x, y
ð

Þdx dy

ðð

D

where dist is a function to calculate the Euclidean distance between two points.

2.3.3 Region with probability P. It is possible to determine a region RP of
minimum area in an uncertainty field within which the position of the TO is
distributed with a given probability P. The probability densities of every point inside
RP should be greater than or equal to the probability densities of the points outside
RP. The following two conditions should be satisfied for such a minimum area
region RP:

p x, y
ð

Þdx dy~P

ðð

Rp

V x1, y1

ð

Þ [ RP, V x2, y2

ð

Þ =[ RP, p x1, y1

ð

Þ§p x2, y2
ð

Þ

RP need not be singly bounded, and there is no guarantee that there is a unique
region satisfying these conditions. It is difficult to calculate RP analytically for a
continuous field, but if the field is represented in a raster format, RP can be obtained
by sorting the probability density values of all pixels, then summing the top
probability pixel values iteratively until the net probability is greater than or equal
to P.

the uncertainty of

Many factors (e.g. coordinate precision, map accuracy, datum) can contribute
to the uncertainty of the reference object. We can use the probabilistic approach
to determine
error
propagation. Assuming a point RO has n (n may be infinite) possible positions
with probabilities qi (1(i(n), an uncertainty field for the TO can be obtained
from each of these starting positions. The probability of a field is qipi(x, y), where
pi(x, y) is the ith field associated with the ith possible position of the RO. By
summing these n fields using equation (8), the uncertainty field of the TO can be
obtained:

the RO and take

into account

ð4Þ

ð5Þ

ð6Þ

ð7Þ

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1073

Figure 1. Summing uncertainty fields to represent probability.

p x, y
ð

qipi x, y
ð

Þ

n

Þ~ X
i~1

ð8Þ

ð9Þ

Figure 1 shows such an overlay operation including two uncertainty fields. In the
result field, the probability density at (x0, y0) is q1p1(x0, y0) + q2p2(x0, y0). If there are
infinite possible positions for the RO, equation (8) becomes:

p x, y
ð

Þ~

q u, v
ð

Þp x, y, u, v

ð

Þdu dv

ðð

D

where D is the distribution range of the RO.

3.

Implementation of the probabilistic georeferencing approach

In the previous section, we presented a theoretical framework for the probabilistic
georeferencing approach by introducing the uncertainty field, which provides an
approach for georeferencing a locality and estimating the uncertainty. In the
following discussion, we will present the detailed derivation and implementation of
the proposed method. We use the specific example of a ‘distance at a heading’ (e.g.
‘10 km E of Berkeley’)
to better explain and demonstrate the probabilistic
referencing method. We choose the ‘distance at a heading’ case because: (1) it is
represented in a large proportion (18.2%) of all locality descriptions and (2) it is one
of the most complicated cases, as it can be affected by all six different uncertainty
sources. In section 3.1, we will first investigate the uncertainty sources of a reference
object and establish the uncertainty field (F1) of the starting-point. Then, the
uncertainty field (F2) associated with the spatial relationship will be discussed in
section 3.2. Finally, the uncertainty field of the TO will be obtained by integrating F1
and F2 using corresponding operations on the uncertainty field.

3.1 Uncertainty associated with the reference object

Four major uncertainty sources contribute to the uncertainty of the reference
object:
coordinate precision, and unknown
datum. Detailed discussions of these uncertainty sources are given in the following
sections.

extent, map accuracy,

spatial

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1074

Q. Guo et al.

3.1.1 Uncertainty due to spatial extent. Though often represented as points in
gazetteers, reference objects in reality have a non-point spatial extent, and the point
of reference may be located at any position inside the reference object. In the
example ‘10 km N of Merced city, CA’, the reference object (i.e. the starting-point) is
the city of Merced within California. As is usually the case with descriptions of this
type, the exact point of reference within Merced is not specified in this description; it
could be the centre of Merced, the post office, the courthouse, some intersection, the
northern border, or any other location in the city. Without further documentation,
it is impossible to determine what the author really meant when the textual locality
was written, and we therefore model the starting-point by assuming a uniform
distribution within the bounds of the city of Merced. Note that, in most cases, it
would be best to use the areal region of Merced from the time the locality
description was written, but this kind of information can be difficult to obtain.
Usually, a recent spatial representation of a RO is a reasonable approximation,
especially for a populated place, since it is likely to contain the region of the RO at
the time of recording, and the resulting TO will simply be an overestimation. It is a
good idea to be cognizant of this problem and check that any particular case is not
an exception. Note that if we do have documentation (metadata, field notes)
suggesting a specific starting-point, then that point can be used as the RO and the
spatial extent uncertainty can be reduced or non-existent. In general, the uniform
PDF of the RO A is:

pe x, y
ð

Þ~

(cid:1)

1=S Að Þ, x, y
0, x, y
ð

ð
Þ =[ A

Þ [ A

where S(A) is the area of A, and (x,y) is a point with coordinates x and y in two-
dimensional Euclidean space R2. If the shape of the RO cannot be determined (e.g.
we may not be able to find the boundary, historical or otherwise, for a small town),
we can still use some simplified measurements such as an estimated radius for the
RO. In this case, the PDF of starting-point in the reference object is expressed as:

pe x, y, u, v

ð

Þ~

(

1(cid:2)pS2, dist x, y
ð
ð
0, dist x, y
Þ, u, v
ð
ð
ð

ÞƒS
Þ, u, v
Þ
ð
ÞwS

Þ

where (u, v) is the coordinate of the central point of the RO and S is the radius of the
RO as in figure 2.

ð10Þ

ð11Þ

Figure 2. Spatial distribution of an RO estimated by a radius S from a central location.
Every possible starting-point within the extent of the RO maps to a point in the TO.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1075

Though we will focus on the simplified case of a point RO for demonstration
purposes in the following section, the methods developed in this paper are suitable
for any arbitrary shape by rasterizing the probability distribution, and have been
implemented in the software described in section 4.

3.1.2 Uncertainty due to map accuracy. Maps have an inherent and sometimes
specified level of accuracy. Generally, a large-scale map has greater accuracy than a
the United States
small-scale map. According to the mapping standard of
Geological Survey (USGS 1947),
‘for maps on publication scales larger than
1:20 000, not more than 10 percent of the points tested shall be in error by more than
1/30 inch, measured on the publication scale; for maps on publication scales of
1:20 000 or smaller, 1/50 inch’. This specification does not give an analytical
representation of the error distribution associated with map scale. Let E be the
maximum uncertainty caused by the map accuracy at a given scale. For a 1:40 000
map, E would be 800 inches (i.e. 20.32 m). The probability distribution of a point
derived from the map could be modelled as a circle with the radius E. The PDF of
uncertainty due to map accuracy can be defined as a function of (u,v).

pa u, v
ð

Þ~

(

(cid:3)

1(cid:2)pE2, dist u, v
(cid:3)
0, dist u, v
ð

ð
Þ, ox, oy

(cid:4)
Þ, ox, oy
(cid:4)wE
(cid:4)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:4)ƒE

where (ox, oy) is the coordinate based on the locality description. When combining
the uncertainty from the spatial extent
(equation (11)) and map accuracy
(equation (12)), the PDF of the starting-point can be expressed as:

p x, y
ð

Þ~

pe x, y, u, v

ð

Þpa u, v
ð

Þdu dv

ðð

D

where the integral domain is actually a circle defined as:

(cid:3)
dist u, v
ð

(cid:3)

Þ, ox, oy

(cid:4)

(cid:4)ƒE

Finally, we obtain the PDF of the starting-point as:

p x, y
ð

Þ~

8
>>><
>>>:

j

(cid:3)

ð
3 EzS
ð
ð

(cid:3)
3
Þ , dist x, y
ð
2p E2zS2z E2{S2
j
Þ{dist x, y
Þ
Þ
Þ
ð
ð
Þ, ox, oy
ð
2p E2zS2z E2{S2
Þ{ E{S
Þ EzS
ð
ð
j
j
j
(cid:4)wEzS
(cid:3)
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
Þ, ox, oy
0, dist x, y

ð

ð

j

Þ, ox, oy

(cid:4)

(cid:4)ƒ E{S
j

j

Þ , E{S
j

(cid:3)
jvdist x, y
ð

(cid:3)

Þ, ox, oy

(cid:4)

(cid:4)ƒEzS

ð15Þ

A two-dimensional PDF can be discretized and stored in raster format to be
managed in an information system. In this paper, we choose the raster model to
store a two-dimensional PDF. Suppose a cell covers a square region C; the value v of
this cell is:

where p(x, y) is the PDF and the pixel values vary in the interval [0,1]. For a raster
field, the constraints given by equation (2) can be expressed as:

ð12Þ

ð13Þ

ð14Þ

ð16Þ

ð17Þ

v~

p x, y
ð

Þds

ðð

C

X

p i, j
ð

Þ~1

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1076

Q. Guo et al.

where p(i,j) is the pixel value at the ith row and jth column in the raster data. Let 2S
be the spatial extent of the reference object, and let E be the maximum error due to
the map accuracy. Based on the discretized raster data, the PDF defined in
equation (15) can be seen in figure 3.

3.1.3 Uncertainty due to coordinate precision. In Wieczorek et al.
(2004),
uncertainty due to the imprecision with which the original coordinates were
recorded was estimated as follows:

uncertainty~

q

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
lat uncertainty2zlong uncertainty2

ð18Þ

where

and

lat uncertainty~p|R| coordinate precision

ð

Þ=180:0

long uncertainty~p|X | coordinate precision

ð

Þ=180:0

where R is the radius of curvature of the meridian at the given latitude, X is the
distance from the point to the polar axis, orthogonal to the polar axis, and
coordinate precision is the precision with which the coordinates were recorded.
Detailed calculations on R and X can be found in Wieczorek et al. (2004). Using
equation (18), the maximum uncertainty due to coordinate precision is assumed to
be due to rounding error and therefore is the same in all directions (in coordinate
space). Suppose a locality, such as ‘30.1uN, 124.2uW’, is recorded in decimal latitude
and longitude to 0.1u of precision, the true latitude lies in the interval [lat 20.05, lat
+ 0.05), and the true longitude lies between [long 20.05, long + 0.05), where lat and
long are the geographic coordinates of the locality. Thus, the PDF of the true
position, based on precision alone, is uniformly distributed in a quadrangle with
four vertices: (lat 20.05, long 20.05), (lat 20.05, long + 0.05), (lat + 0.05, long

Figure 3. Probability distribution of the starting-point considering the uncertainty of spatial
extent and map accuracy.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1077

20.05), and (lat + 0.05, long + 0.05). Figure 4(a) demonstrates the uncertainty of a
locality (2120u, 38u) with 1u precision overlaying the county boundaries of the state
of California. Note that because actual distances represented by 1u in latitude and
longitude usually differ at any given point on the Earth, the shape of the uncertainty
region caused by the latitude and longitude precision will not be a square in most
projections. In practice, ROs defined by coordinate of low precision are of little
utility and are generally discarded in favour of better sources; therefore, the latitude
and longitude precisions are usually relatively high, and we can use a rectangle as the
approximation of the possible distribution range of the true position. Figure 4(b)
shows the PDF of the starting-point by combining the three sources of uncertainty:
spatial extent of the RO, map accuracy, and coordinate precision.

3.1.4 Uncertainty due to unknown datum. A missing datum reference introduces a
complicated ambiguity, which varies geographically (Welch and Homsey 1997). A
simple example of the complications can be demonstrated for the USA. Since many
currently available maps of North America are based on the North American
Datum of 1927 (NAD27) or North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83),
if a
geographic coordinate record lacks datum information, the true datum could
reasonably be either of them. Therefore, an error may be generated if we wrongly
assign a datum to a locality with a missing datum. Wieczorek et al. (2004) point out
that the uncertainty from not knowing which of these datums was used to determine
the coordinates varies in the contiguous USA up to 104 m. In our current example,
there are only two possible outcomes: either we assign the correct datum or we
assign the wrong datum. We are not likely to have a reason to prefer one possibility
to another, and so we would assign a probability of 0.5 to each point. Figure 5
illustrates the probability distribution of the starting-point of the RO by combining
the four uncertainty factors, spatial extent of the RO, map accuracy, coordinate
precisions, and datum. Note that
figure 5 is exaggerated for demonstration
purposes. In reality, the errors caused by unknown datum are often much smaller
than errors caused by other sources, which would make the two quadrangles in

Figure 4.
uncertainty of RO (spatial extent of RO, map accuracy, and coordinate precision).

(a) Uncertainty from coordinate precision (b) Combining three sources of

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1078

Q. Guo et al.

Figure 5. Probability distribution of the starting-point when combining four uncertainty
sources (spatial extent of RO, map accuracy, coordinate precision, and datum).

figure 5 overlap each other more closely. Moreover, the orientation of these two
positions with respect to each other will be location-dependent.

3.2 Uncertainty due to spatial relationships

In addition to the reference object, spatial relationships used in the locality
description are also important sources of the TO’s uncertainty. The uncertainty
caused by spatial relationships includes two factors: (1) uncertainty of direction and
(2) uncertainty of distance.

Dutta (1991) and Du et al. (2004) described the vagueness of cardinal direction
relationships and qualitative distance relationships. Topological relationships,
although they are theoretically determinate (Egenhofer and Herring 1991, Randell
et al. 1992), may be uncertain (Mark and Egenhofer 1994) in the context of natural
language description. Egenhofer and Shariff (1998) propose quantitative indices to
discriminate further between the topological relationships belonging to the same
category, such as ‘overlap’. Precision of distance relationships will also lead to
uncertainty in georeferencing a locality. In most locality descriptions, distances are
recorded with few or no significant digits to the right of the decimal, or even with
fractions (Wieczorek et al. 2004). In the description ‘9 km N of Bakersfield’, the true
distance might be an arbitrary value in [8.5, 9.5) due to the rounding operation or
due to human estimation, which we take to have the same effect. Note, however,
that ‘500 miles North of Merced’ may not represent the same precision as ‘5 miles
North of Merced’. The first case might have 100 miles’ uncertainty, while the latter
only has 1 mile’s uncertainty (half a mile to either side of 5 miles). Detailed
discussion on how to treat precision can be found in Worboys Clementini (2001) and
Wieczorek et al. (2004).

3.2.1 Uncertainty of direction. As shown in table 1, direction relationships play an
role in locality descriptions. Much research has been done on
important

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1079

representing and reasoning about direction relationships (Frank 1991, Freksa 1992,
Montello and Frank 1996, Goyal and Egenhofer 2001, Skiadopoulos et al. 2004) as
well as positioning based on direction (Clementini et al. 1997, Dehak et al. 2005). In
addition to the work presented by these authors, Wieczorek et al. (2004) identified a
complicating issue that must be considered in dealing with textual
locality
descriptions—whether a direction should be taken ‘by air’ and ‘by road’
should be distinguished during the georeferencing process. In the example ‘10 miles
north of Merced’, if there is further evidence to suggest that the original textual
description meant ‘10 miles north of Merced by road’ (or if the locality were to
explicitly state that the directions are by road), then we would not use the
probabilistic direction distribution. Instead, we would use the road as a constraint
on the directional component of the locality. The same treatment would apply to
descriptions that state, imply, or have further evidence to suggest a direction by any
type of path, such as a river. In the case of ‘by air’, we do need to take into
consideration direction uncertainty. For example, ‘north’ may not mean ‘due north’,
but might rather mean ‘roughly north as opposed to east’. Wieczorek et al. (2004)
describe north of the RO with a direction imprecision (e.g. 45u) where the actual
locality lies anywhere in the region bounded by the given direction + /2 the
direction imprecision. One solution for a PDF is to make the distribution uniform
the TO could be unevenly
within the region just described. Alternatively,
distributed, reflecting a greater likelihood that, for example, any point due north
of a RO would be more likely to be called north than any points further away to
either side. For this study, we developed a conceptual PDF associated with cardinal
directions based on the eight-sector partition scheme (i.e. N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W,
and NW):

p~

8
><

>:

pmax, avp=16
2{16a=p
ð
0, awp=8

Þpmax, p=16ƒaƒp=8

ð19Þ

where a is the angle between that direction and the central axis of the corresponding
cone, and pmax is a constant depending on the search domain. Once the
search domain is determined, pmax can be computed using equation (2) to ensure
that the sum of the PDF is 1. Figure 6 illustrates an example PDF for ‘north’. Note
that the search domain is an important concept in georeferencing; auxiliary
information associated with the locality description can sometimes constrain the
TO. For example, it would be unreasonable to locate any part of the TO of a locality
for an endemic California species inside Washington State based on the expression
‘north of San Francisco’. Normally, an explicit distance is used in a locality
description to constrain the search domain, such as in the example ‘10 miles north of
Merced’.

3.2.2 Uncertainty of distance. The distribution range of the TO resulting from the
distance relationship uncertainty is an arc or band. If the distance uncertainty is due
to measurement error, the error band model proposed by Tong et al. (2003) is
suitable. Though direction relationships or distance relationships alone can provide
only rough constraints on the target object, their combination can provide a more
refined estimate (Clementini et al. 1997). Consequently, the uncertainty field can be
obtained for a given starting-point (figure 7) based on the product of two associated
uncertainty fields.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1080

Q. Guo et al.

Figure 6. Probabilistic distribution of the direction relationship using the direction ‘north’
as an example.

4. Case study and software implementation

Suppose we are trying to georeference the locality description ‘5.0 km NE of Colfax,
CA’ using the probabilistic shape method. We have been given the coordinates
2120.95, 39.10 for Colfax from a 1:24 000 map without datum information, and
from satellite imagery we can see that 1 km from that point seems to be the limit of
the extent of the town. A summary of the essential
information needed for
georeferencing follows:

N Geographic coordinate: longitude52120.95, latitude539.10.
N Coordinate precision: 0.01u;

the error associated with this coordinate
information is 1408 m (measured using the diagonal of the quadrangle shown
in figure 4(a)).

N Spatial extent of the RO: 2 km (i.e. radius51000 m).

Figure 7. Uncertainty field derived from an uncertain direction relationship (east) and an
uncertain distance relationship.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach
N Map scale and associated uncertainty: 1:24 000 and 12 m.
N Datum: unknown; assuming the possible datums could be NAD27 or NAD 83,
the distance between the real positions of the point (2120.95, 39.10) in these
two datums is 92 m using NADCON (National Geodetic Survey 1992).

1081

N Direction: north-east.
N Distance and distance precision: 5000 m and 100 m.

Following section 3.1, the probability distribution of the starting-point is shown in
figure 8(a). Meanwhile, figure 8(b) illustrates the probability distribution of the TO
based on the distribution of the RO, the spatial relationship between them, and the
associated precision of the relationship. The spatial distribution looks like a ‘bean’
with a diffuse boundary.

Figure 8 is based on calculations using the following projection parameters:
‘Projection name5Albers; False_Easting50.00; False_Northing524000000.00;

Figure 8. Probability distribution of reference object (a) with extent, coordinate, and datum
uncertainty, (b) shown in relation to the target object taking into account distance and
direction uncertainty, and (c) showing various derivative shapes to express the uncertainty.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1082

Q. Guo et al.

Central_Meridian52120.00; Standard_Parallel_1534.00; Standard_Parallel_25
40.50; Geographic Coordinate System5GCS_North_American_1927’. The resolu-
tion of the raster data is 5.26 m. According to equations (4) and (5), the maximum
error is 3.705 km (43.125 km2 area), and the mean error is 1.213 km (4.622 km2 area)
(figure 8(c)). The area of the 0.95 probability region is 10.234 km2, while the whole
non-zero probability region (i.e. 1.0 probability region) is 16.795 km2. If the
maximum uncertainty is calculated using the method proposed by Wieczorek et al.
(2004) with the same parameters, the result is 4.618 km (66.996 km2 area). Clearly,
the method developed in this paper leads to a smaller uncertainty associated with the
TO.

The six uncertainty sources play different roles for determining the probability
distribution of a TO. In this case study, the uncertainty resulting from the distance
relationship depends on the distance precision (0.1 km), which affects the width of
the ‘bean’. Meanwhile, the uncertainty resulting from the direction relationship
affects the length of the arc of the ‘bean’, which also increases with increasing
distance from the RO. The coordinate precision and spatial extent of the RO result
in the diffuse boundary of the ‘bean’ and contribute both to its length and to its
width. Compared with the other four sources, the uncertainties resulting from an
unknown datum and from map accuracy based on scale in this case study are small.
Since they are usually less than 100 m in practice, their effect only becomes
pronounced if the RO is relatively small.

4.1 Toolbox for georeferencing and estimating associated uncertainty

In order to facilitate the use of the proposed method, we developed a software
toolbox to georeference localities and estimate the associated uncertainties. The
program was developed based on C + + . The georeferencing steps are as follows:

1. Load reference maps: One can use one or more reference maps in ESRI shape
format to position a locality in the toolbox. Features in the maps can be
points, lines, and polygons (e.g. administrative units, rivers, roads, cities).
These features are used as the reference objects to determine the final shapes
of the target objects.

2. Select or enter necessary parameters: The toolbox also provides functions to
retrieve important parameters automatically from the reference maps, such as
the map scale and spatial extent of a RO. However, if a parameter does not
exist, users are required to set them during the georeferencing process. A
dialogue box has been designed to help users enter the necessary parameters
for georeferencing (figure 9). In the dialogue box, users can select an RO based
on the reference maps by querying the name or geographic coordinates. In
addition, users need to enter the associated spatial relationship and other
related parameters to calculate the position of the TO. As mentioned in
section 3.1.1, if a linear or areal feature is selected using its name, then the
shape method is employed, and the starting-point is assumed to be uniformly
distributed within the feature. If the shape of the reference object (e.g. the
boundary of a city) is not available, then the extent of the reference object (i.e.
the radius) is needed to derive the geographic coordinate of a locality and its
uncertainty.

3. Calculate associated uncertainties: After all the parameters have been entered
into the program, the probability distribution of the target point will be

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1083

Figure 9. Dialogue box for entering information necessary to georeference a locality
description.

generated and presented as shown in figure 10(a). Figure 10(b) depicts the
uncertainty field and the uncertainty measures based on the description ‘20
miles E of Hayfork, Trinity County, California’. Users can select from among
various units to represent uncertainties.

5. Discussion

Two major differences can be identified between the point-radius method in
Wieczorek et al. (2004) and the probabilistic method proposed in this paper. First,

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1084

Q. Guo et al.

Figure 10. Uncertainty field and the associated measures for the locality ‘20 miles E of
Hayfork, Trinity County, California’: (a) probability distribution of the target object; (b) the
target object summary showing location, and maximum and mean errors.

the former uses circles to represent both ROs and the maximum uncertainty of TOs.
Because the method determines a maximum uncertainty, it often exaggerates the
uncertainty, as demonstrated in the case study. Second, the TO is assumed to be
uniformly distributed in a circle in the point-radius method, while the probabilistic

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1085

method show the differences in likelihood of occurrence across the TO. Table 2
provides a comparison between these two methods based on the common locality
types listed in table 1.

As shown in table 2, the probabilistic method will result in smaller uncertainties in
most of the cases that have been described for both methods. In addition, the
probabilistic method can handle cases such as NF, FS, FH, FO, and BF that were
not described by Wieczorek et al. (2004) for the point-radius method. In the case of
F (i.e. feature), if the feature is a point, the point-radius and probabilistic methods
will have the same result; however, if the feature is a region, the latter method will
maintain the original shape, while the former method will simplify the shape into a
point with a radius. In the real world, no features are points—they all have spatial
extent. Therefore, unless the feature is a circle, the probabilistic method will provide
a smaller uncertainty estimate than the point-radius method. The point-radius
method does have some advantages compared with the probabilistic method. For
example, because additional steps are needed to calculate the probabilistic
distribution as well as to store the full shapes of both the TOs and ROs in raster
format, the point-radius method will outperform the probabilistic method from
both computational and storage perspectives. Yet with ever-increasing computa-
tional power and inexpensive storage, these concerns about the probabilistic method
will become less important.

study,

researchers have demonstrated that documentation of

The importance of spatial uncertainty in GIS analysis and environmental
modelling is well recognized, and results reported that do not
include the
consideration of uncertainty could be of limited use (Fisher 1999). Although the
analysis of georeferencing uncertainty in ecological studies is beyond the scope of
this
locality
uncertainty for museum collection data is important for their studies (Rowe 2005,
Waltari et al. 2007). There are two major applications of the locality uncertainty.
The first is to filter out from analyses those data having large uncertainties and aid
in selecting data according to fitness for a specific application. For example, Waltari
et al. (2007) used the locality uncertainty to select species occurrence data that have
geographic uncertainty less than 15 km to reconstruct Pleistocene refugia. The
second major use of locality uncertainty is to incorporate the locality uncertainty
directly into environmental modelling to understand the sensitiveness of locality
uncertainty on model results. For example, Rowe (2005) evaluated the impact of the
locality uncertainty on the analysis of patterns of species richness and species range
overlap along elevation gradients, and found that failing to assess spatial errors
would result in misleading estimates of species richness and community composi-
tion. In general, a smaller locality uncertainty will result in smaller uncertainty in
modelling results. However, this may not always be true or significant enough to be
noticed because the importance of locality uncertainty also depends on specific
models in use, characteristics of spatial data, and the questions that need to be
addressed. For example, in studying the relationship between species distribution
and environment, if the environmental layers are relatively homogeneous, then a
slight difference in uncertainty measurements may not be as important as for those
highly heterogeneous areas.

Although this study primarily focuses on georeferencing locality description and
estimating uncertainty for the museum collection data, the proposed probabilistic
method is also suitable to other geographic applications. One example could be
geographic information retrieval (GIR) techniques, which parse a variety of textual

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Table 2. Comparisons between the point-radius method (PRM) and the probabilistic method (PM) for different locality types.

Locality type

Description

Comparison

Point-radius method

Probabilistic method

Demonstration figures

F

Feature

Same if the RO is a point, or better result
from PM if the RO is a region since the shape
is maintained

FOH

Offset from a feature (or a path)
at a heading

Result is better constrained by PM

P

Path or linear feature

Similar to areal cases of ‘F’ locality type;
result is usually much better constrained by
PM

NF

Near a feature or path

Original PRM does not handle this case

NA

FS

Subdivision of a feature or a path

Original PRM does not handle this case

NA

1
0
8
6

Q

.

G
u
o

e
t

a
l
.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Locality type

Description

Comparison

Point-radius method

Probabilistic method

FOO

Orthogonal offsets from a feature

Result is better constrained by PM

Table 2. (Continued.)

Demonstration figures

FH

Heading from a feature, no offset

Original PRM does not handle this case

NA

Junction

Same result

J

FO

Offset from a feature, no heading

Result is usually much better constrained by
PM

BF

Between features or paths

Original PRM does not handle this case

NA

G
e
o
r
e
f
e
r
e
n
c
i
n
g

u
s
i
n
g

a

p
r
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
s
t
i
c

a
p
p
r
o
a
c
h

1
0
8
7

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1088

Q. Guo et al.

information (e.g. Web documents) to retrieve references to locations and assign
geographic coordinates to them (Jones et al. 2003). Although these coordinates
provide the basis for search and retrieval engines, published research does not use
estimates of the spatial uncertainty of the textual locality information. Uncertainty
sources described in this paper may not be the same as those faced by GIR studies;
however, the probabilistic method based on uncertainty source distributions to
describe both ROs and TOs could provide useful guidance for GIR techniques in
estimating locality uncertainty from textual documents.

6. Conclusions

There is increasing demand for techniques to integrate spatial information from
sources that are traditionally qualitative in nature, especially among natural history
collections, which have a legacy of written descriptions of habitat, environment,
observations, occurrences, and collections. Also, increasingly, the value of data
quality documentation in the form of measures of data uncertainty is being
recognized. Wieczorek et al. (2004) developed a point-radius method to estimate the
maximum uncertainty associated with a locality description by summing the
maximum errors from all uncertainty sources. The point-radius method provides a
relatively easy and practical solution for georeferencing localities and estimating
uncertainties. However, this method tends to overestimate the uncertainty, since it is
essentially additive and does not consider the probability distribution for each
uncertainty source. In this study, we introduced the uncertainty field, a two-
dimensional PDF, to represent both the reference and target objects. We then
created the probability distributions for uncertainty sources normally encountered
during the georeferencing process. The spatial distribution of the target object can
be computed and visualized by discretizing the uncertainty field into a raster form.
Using the ‘distance at a heading’ as a case study, the results indicated that the
proposed method provides a much more constrained, and hopefully, therefore, a
more realistic and useful uncertainty estimate than the point-radius method.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Goodchild, Dr. Hill, and the reviewers for their constructive
comments that helped strengthen the paper. This research is partially supported
by the BioGeomancer Project
funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation.

References
BONNER, M.R., HAN, D., NIE, J., ROGERSON, P., VENA, J.E. and FREUDENHEIM, A.L., 2003,
Positional accuracy of geocoded addresses in epidemiologic research. Epidemiology,
14, pp. 408–412.

BURROUGH, P.A. and MCDONNELL, R.A., 1998, Principles of Geographical Information

Systems (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

CLEMENTINI, E., FELICE, P. and HERNA´ NDEZ, D., 1997, Qualitative representation of

positional information. Artificial Intelligence, 95, pp. 317–356.

COUCLELIS, H., 1996, Towards an operational typology of geographic entities with ill-defined
boundaries. In Geographic Objects with Indeterminate Boundaries, P.A. Burrough
and A.U. Frank (Eds), pp. 45–55 (London: Taylor & Francis, 1996).

DEHAK, S.M.R., BLOCH, I. and MAIˆTRE, H., 2005, Spatial reasoning with incomplete
information on relative positioning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 27, pp. 1473–1484.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

1089

DU, S., WANG, Q. and YANG, Y., 2004, Fuzzy description of fuzzy direction relations and
their similarities. In Proceedings of 12th International Conference on Geoinformatics—
Geospatial Information Research: Bridging the Pacific and Atlantic, pp. 496–502.

DUCKWORTH, W.D., GENOWAYS, H.H. and ROSE, C.L., 1993, Preserving Natural Science
Collections: Chronicle of Our Environmental Heritage (Washington, DC: National
Institute for the Conservation of Cultural Property).

DUTTA, S., 1991, Approximate spatial reasoning: Integrating qualitative and quantitative
constraints. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 5, pp. 307–330.
EGENHOFER, M.J. and HERRING, J., 1991, Categorizing binary topological relations between
regions, lines and points in geographic databases. In Technical Report, Department of
Surveying Engineering, University of Maine, Orono, ME.

EGENHOFER, M.J. and SHARIFF, A.R., 1998, Metric details for natural-language spatial

relations. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 16, pp. 295–321.

FISHER, P.F., 1999, Models of uncertainty in spatial data. In Geographical Information
Systems, P.A. Longley, M.F. Goodchild, D.J. Maguire and D.W. Rhind (Eds) (New
York: Wiley), pp. 191–205.

FRANK, A.U., 1991, Qualitative spatial reasoning about cardinal directions. In Proceedings of
the 7th Austrian Conference on Artificial Intelligence, D. Mark and D. White (Eds)
(Baltimore, MD: Morgan Kaufmann), pp. 157–167.

FREKSA, C., 1992, Using orientation information for qualitative spatial reasoning. In
Proceedings of the International Conference GIS-From Space to Territory: Theories
and Methods of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Space, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 639 (Berlin: Springer), pp. 162–178.

GOODCHILD, M.F., 1989, Modeling error in objects and field. In Accuracy of Spatial
Databases, M.F. Goodchild and S. Gopal (Eds), pp. 107–114 (London: Taylor &
Francis).

GOODCHILD, M.F., 1992, Geographical data modeling. Computers & Geosciences, 18, pp.

401–408.

GOODCHILD, M.F., 2001, A geographer looks at spatial information theory. In Proceedings of
COSIT 2001, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2205 (Berlin: Springer), pp.
1–13.

GOODCHILD, M.F. and HUNTER, G.J., 1997, A simple positional accuracy measure for linear
features. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 11, pp. 299–306.
GOYAL, R. and EGENHOFER, M.J., 2001, Similarity of cardinal directions. In Advances in
Spatial and Temporal Databases, C.S. Jensen, M. Schneider, B. Seeger and V.J.
Tsotras (Eds), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2121 (Berlin: Springer), pp.
36–55.

HILL, L.L., 2006, Georeferencing—The Geographic Associations of Information (Cambridge,

MA: MIT Press).

JONES, C.B., ABDELMOTY, A.I. and FU, G., 2003, Maintaining ontologies for geographical
information retrieval on the web. In Proceedings of ODBASE’03, LNCS 2888, pp.
934–951.

LEUNG, Y. and YAN, J.P., 1998, A locational error model for spatial features. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, 12, pp. 607–620.

LONGLEY, P.A., GOODCHILD, M.F., MAGUIRE, D.J. and RHIND, D.W., 2005, Geographic

Information Systems and Science, Second Edition (New York: Wiley).

MANIS (Mammal Networked Information System), 2001, rev. 16 Apr 2007. Available online

at: http://manisnet.org (accessed 16 November 2007).

MARK, D.M. and EGENHOFER, M.J., 1994, Modeling spatial relations between lines and
regions: combining formal mathematical models and human subjects testing.
Cartography and Geographical Information Systems, 21, pp. 195–212.

MONTELLO, D.R. and FRANK, A.U., 1996, Modeling Directional Knowledge and Reasoning in
Environmental Space: Testing Qualitative Metrics. The Construction of Cognitive
Maps, J. Portugali (Eds), pp. 321–344 (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic).

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 1090

Georeferencing using a probabilistic approach

NATIONAL GEODETIC SURVEY, 1992, NADCON—Version 2.1, http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/

PC_PROD/NADCON/ (accessed 16 March 2008).

RANDELL, D.A., CUI, Z. and COHN, A.G., 1992, A spatial logic based on regions and
connection. In Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Proceedings of
the Third International Conference (KR’92), pp. 165–176.

ROWE, R.J., 2005, Elevational gradient analyses and the use of historical museum specimens:

a cautionary tale. Journal of Biogeography, 32, pp. 1883–1897.

SHI, W., 1998, A generic statistical approach for modelling error of geometric features in GIS.

International Journal of Geographic Information Science, 12, pp. 131–143.

SKIADOPOULOS, S., GIANNOUKOS, C., VASSILIADIS, P., SELLIS, T. and KOUBARAKIS, M., 2004,
Computing and handling cardinal direction information. In Proceedings of EDBT
2004, E. Bertino, S. Christodoulakis, D. Plexousakis, V. Christophides, M.
Koubarakis, K. Bohm and E. Ferrari (Eds), Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 2992 (Berlin: Springer), pp. 329–347.

THAPA, K. and BOSSLER, J., 1992, Accuracy of spatial data used in geographic information-
systems. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 58, pp. 835–841.
TONG, X., SHI, W. and LIU, D., 2003, An error model of circular curve features in GIS. In
Proceedings of the 11th ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems, pp. 141–146.

TØSSEBRO, E. and NYGA˚ RD, M., 2002, An advanced discrete model for uncertain spatial data.
In Proceedings of WAIM 2002, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2419 (Berlin:
Springer), pp. 37–51.

USGS (United States Geological Survey), 1947, United States National Map Accuracy
http://rockyweb.cr.usgs.gov/nmpstds/acrodocs/nmas/NMAS647.PDF

Standards,
(accessed 2 March 2008).

VAN NIEL, T.G. and MCVICAR, T.R., 2002, Experimental evaluation of positional accuracy
estimates from a linear network using point- and line-based testing methods.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 16, pp. 455–473.
VEREGIN, H., 2000, Quantifying positional error induced by line simplification. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14, pp. 113–130.

WALTARI, E., HIJMANS, R.J., PETERSON, A.T., A´ RPA´ D S. NYA´ RI, PERKINS S.L. and
ROBERT, P.G., 2007, Locating Pleistocene refugia: comparing phylogeographic and
ecological niche model predictions. PLoS ONE, 2: e563. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0000563.

WELCH, R. and HOMSEY, A., 1997, Datum shifts for UTM coordinates. Photogrammetic

Engineering and Remote Sensing, 63, pp. 371–375.

WIECZOREK, J., GUO, Q. and HIJMANS, R.J., 2004, The point-radius method for
associated uncertainty.

georeferencing
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 18, pp. 745–767.
WORBOYS, M.F. and CLEMENTINI, E., 2001, Integration of imperfect spatial information.

locality descriptions

and calculating

Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 12, pp. 61–80.

Downloaded by [Ams/Girona*barri Lib] at 02:41 14 October 2014 